6427 S109431 99845078 9954
DOOMES-DAY: OR, A TREATISE OF THE RESURRECTION of the BODY. Delivered in 22. Sermons on 1. Cor. 15. Whereunto are added 7. other Sermons, on 1. Cor. 16. BY The late Learned and Iudicious Divine, MARTIN DAY, Doctor in Divinity, Chaplaine in Ordinarie to his Majestie, and sometimes Rector of S. Faiths, LONDON. Matth. 22.31. Have you not read what God hath spoken to you, touching the Resurrection of the Dead? LONDON, Printed by T. H. and M. F. for Nathanael Butter, and are to be sold at the signe of the Pide Bull neere Saint Austins gate. 1636.
To the Right Reverend Father in God, and his most Ho. Lord, JOSEPH, By the Divine Providence, Lord Bishop of EXCESTER. MY LORD, REligious spirits are usu∣ally Indulgent Pa∣trons to Orphanes: They imitate in this Act him who sayd, I will bee a Father to the Fatherlesse. I doubt not but that I shall finde your Honour of this generous disposition to these printed Posthumes of Doctor
Dayes licensed by Authority, and now seeking to your Lordship for protection. I have adventured to present these papers comming to my hands to your Honour, hoping the childe wilbe wel liked for his Fathers sake, who was wel known unto, and entirely beloved of your Hon. in his primitive time in Cambridge, as also while hee was our Pastor heere, & continued it towards him in his charge in your Lo. Dio∣cesse, even untill his dissolution: how∣ever I have done this to shew my rea∣dines upon any occasion of service to your Lordship. Thus craving your favour to shelter and fence this worke from open depravers, and to continue your love to the Authors memory, I humbly take leave, being Your Lordships Servant, NATH. BUTTER.
To the Readers. YOu cannot expect that these Sermons should have such ex∣act politenesse and neat dres∣sing as if the Authour had li∣ved to revise them. Yet you may discover Dr Dayes spirit, expression, method and matter, to speake in all of them: praesentemque refert concio quaeque patrem. I would wish you then to read them without any prejudicate opinion, as thy are exercises (whose Authour was famous in his time) and which cannot chuse but yeeld you matter of coun∣sell and comfort. You have but few Authours in English upon this Epistle, and fewer upon these subjects. Lose by reading of them you can∣not, gaine you may. I doubt not but they will proove beneficiall to the whole Church, for whose sake I have published them. Thus wishing you to gather hony out of these, where it may be had, I rest, Yours N. B.
1 COR. 15.29. What shall they doe that are baptised over the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why therefore are they baptised over the dead? THis gratious Apostle, the blessed organ and instrument of the holy Ghost; doth so wondrously dispute his cause, and contrive his arguments, for the main∣taining of this holy article of our faith, the resurrection of the body: that as Saint Chrysostome saith,Chrysost. in locum. he leaves nothing unfetched either from God or men; for in five or sixe verses before the text, he disputes from the omnipo∣tencie of God; in raising Christ his Sonne. He hath dis∣coursed also, of Christs kingdome; and of the delive∣ry of the kingdome of his mediation: and of the end of all things, the perfect consummation of all; that God may governe, and be all in all. Now he descends to a lower kinde of sphere: to ar∣guments taken from the actions of men, and presi∣dents here below upon the earth. And he saith that
there were certaine men in the world, that were bap∣tised for dead, that is, they are baptised in a certaine hope of the resurrection of the dead: whose labour is lost, and their faith frustrate, and to no purpose; if they have not the end of that whereof they now make profession here. So some expound it. But that is to bring us backe into the same labyrinth we were in before:Verse 14. for he saith before, that our hope is vaine, and our Preaching vaine, if there be no resurrection. Therefore waving that opinion; I take it that the A∣postle speakes of some other more peculiar and par∣ticular cause, that is, concerning the state of the Church of God in persecution; wherin men despairing of helpe in this world, despairing of any life or con∣tentment; they did come and offer themselves in a voluntary martyrdome, and tooke the baptisme of death, that is, they were baptised to this purpose: being wil∣ling to offer themselves as dead men, to persecution for the Gospell sake, which they would not have done, unlesse they had beene certainly assured of the resurrection of the body. Other sences there be, but I must proceed in or∣der from one to another: and labour to finde out the likeliest, for in truth there are innumerable ma∣ny; and the place is very difficult. Onely two things we are most sure of in this argument and discourse, here set downe to our hand. First, that whatsoever this baptising over the dead was, (and therein is all the difficultie) yet it was a thing that was publike, notorious, and knowne to the Corinthians, it was a matter that was not obscure to them, although it be to us. For the Apostle speakes not to them in clouds, but by way of familiar and e∣vident
example: thereby to winne their judgements to this conclusion, concerning the bodies resurrection. Secondly, another thing is, that whatsoever this baptisme was; yet certainly it was a thing of much force, it was a great argument to prove that which the Apostle intended. For it is not his manner to deale weakely in proving and disputing: but he useth all the strength of the holy Ghost, as Chrysostome saith,Chrysost. that is, as much strength, and demonstration, and e∣vidence of the spirit, as a man can be capable of. And so upon this ground we must gather, that that opini∣on is most likely, and to be imbraced, that maketh most for the resurrection of the body. And if there be any sence of more force then other, or any sence more pertinent than other, to prove that maine con∣clusion: certainely that is the sence which the Apo∣stle intends. For all those that be of lesser weight, and smaller moment; they are besides the Apostles pur∣pose. Questionlesse if there be any vigour or power, in any more than another; we must imagine that that is it the Apostle aymed at, and that he would have us to ayme at. All the doubt comes out of the ambiguitie of this one word Baptisme. While some take this baptisme for the sacramentall washing; others againe take it for a ceremoniall washing: either such as were in the Law among the legall ceremonies; or such as were knowne in the common course of life, the washing of the bodies and corpes of the dead, when they were layd forth for the Coffin. Concerning these words for the dead: there is also some doubt, some expounding it for sinne: some for sinners; and some, for them that are naturally dead:
that is, when the spirit in the common course of na∣ture is separated from the body. But in all this dis∣course, if we can but gaine the true and most perfect sence; we have sufficiently handled this text; for, We must first consider what the words meane, And then how the words prove, and argue. For if we finde once but the true signification, we shall then finde the perfect demonstration and proofe that ariseth from them. First, then, the Church hath taken it, as though the Apostle alluded to a grosse errour of the Cerinthians and Montanists: and as Saint Chrysostome saith of the Marcionits, which out of these words, have gathered a ridiculous kinde of baptising of young Christians. And they said, when there was any Catechumeni, (that is, those that were not baptised, but were yet in their principles, and in their catechisme:) for then they baptised none, for the most part, till they were come to yeares of discretion, that themselves were able to make profession of their owne faith. Now if any of these were taken away by death (up∣on the sudden, or by any casualty) which had inten∣ded to be baptised at the appointed season, which was Easter: in this case, they were to substitute and ap∣point some friend that was alive, to answer for the dead man: and to be baptised for him. And then in a kinde of stage-playing, they laid the dead childe, or the dead man, upon a forme, or upon a table, or on a bed: and the substitute or appointed friend, was to goe un∣der the bed or table; and to answer to those questions that the Priest did usually make, to the partie bap∣tised. The first question was, whether he would be baptised
or no? and if the dead man could not, his friend was to say; yea. The second question was, whether he beleeved or no? the partie was to answer affirmatively for the dead man, to that also. The third question was,Chrysost. whether he renounced the Divell and all his workes? and he was to answer to that too. So saith Chrysostom, this is a ridiculous thing, that every Christian should laugh at in his minde, to see their folly: yet there is some shew of argument to be drawne from it: for that out of mens follies, God can ordaine strength. And this proves, that they had a conceit of the resurrection: or else they would never have descended to such vaine and ridiculous fantasies. Afterwards, that the Church of God tooke up this custome: yea, such as were not heretiques, but were brought up in the Church; yet they thought it as pos∣sible for one man to be baptised for another, as for one man to be helped by anothers prayers: but this hath no shew of consequence in it. For the one, we have a command and a promise: for the other, we have neither. Besides, prayer is ge∣nerall for all; but the receiving of the Sacrament is per∣sonall, for one, for him alone that receives it. So that one cannot be baptised for another. Yet some in the Church mistaking this text of Scripture, thought that when any that intended to be baptised, were taken a∣way before the due time; they might appoint some that was his friend, that had first beene baptised for himselfe. And they thought this was profitable to him that was deceased, But these are but mockeries of the Sacrament, and questionlesse, it is a thing that
the Apostle alludes not to. For the Apostle would ne∣ver have indured this errour in the Corinthians; or if he had, yet it proves nothing. It doth not follow, that because foolish men abuse the Sacrament to a hope of the resurrection, that therefore there shall be a resurrection. For foolish actions have no probation, there is no force in that which is without reason. And seeing the Apostle is curious, to rebuke them for les∣ser matters: as concerning meate offered to Idols, and women being uncovered in the Church; which seeme to be matters of lesse moment; yet he particularly re∣proves thē; much more would he have rebuked this, and not have suffered such a gangrene of errour, to eate into the body of the Church, as this was, that makes a mockerie of the Sacrament. Therefore seeing it hath no force to prove, and because it is likely that the A∣postle would not suffer such a thing to be extant there: nor is there mention any where in his Epistles, of such an errour that was crept into Corinth. There∣fore we reject the exposition, although some other of the Fathers, thinke, that out of their common abuse, the Apostle makes a good use, and drawes an argu∣ment, as in some cases it is necessary. It is lawfull, sometimes, to draw arguments from the follies and dreames of the heathen; so our Divines doe out of Pla∣to, and out of the historie of Err, who (they say) af∣ter his death lived, and was seen again of his friends: and the storie of Epimenides, he that slept so many yeares, and revived againe. But the Apostle useth not to insist upon such arguments; he drawes something indeed from Menander, and from Epimenides; but it is matter of common knowledge and experience, that no man could gaine-say. And so I come to the second o∣pinion.
What shall they doe that are baptised for the dead? That is, it was a custome (for the first 500. yeares, almost) that those that were baptised into the name of Christ, they thought good to deferre it till the lat∣ter end of their life, and so when they lay sicke up∣on their death bed, they called for baptisme. For, they thought (according to the errour of Novatian) that when a man had once received baptisme, and had tasted of that heavenly gift, as the Apostle speakes, Heb. 6. if they then fell into sinne,Heb. 6.6. there was no Sacra∣ment for them, nor no hope to be reconciled to God, which is the cut-throat of all faith and repentance; but they being carried thus, by naturall reason, thought that after they were baptised, and had made defiance of the world, the flesh, and the divell; and then fell backe and relapsed into sinne; they thought there was no pardon for them. And because they knew their owne weakenesse and infirmitie, that they could not so renounce the world, the flesh, and the divell, but that they were oft intangled with them, or with some of them: therefore unlesse they should bring upon their soules an inevitable necessitie of damnation, they thought it good not to meddle with that Sacrament, till they were past the necessity of sinning, which when that is, no man knowes. For unlesse the grace of God subdue our affections; as long as a man lives, the power of sinning is not past: But they imagined, that old age would bring a cessation, and a supersedeas of all offences: and that then, they might better serve God, and with more quietnesse, according to their profession. Therefore they deferred baptisme to
their last age; and then they were baptised. And in this errour, we see what great men lived. As Valen∣tinian the Emperour, whom S. Ambrose commends highly in his funerall oration. For he purposed to be baptised when he came home, but he was intercep∣ted by death.Austin. And Nebridius, S. Austins great friend, was not baptised till he was old: and S. Austin him∣selfe was not baptised till his mans estate. This er∣rour, God confuted by the death of Valentinian, and other great spirits: which although they were per∣swaded of the truth of religion, yet they put off God, and would not take his time, but have a time of their owne choosing, and therefore God gave them no time; as Ambrose saith of the Emperour; he wanted not the grace of baptisme, because he had the faith of bap∣tisme. He yeelded his consent unto the truth, and al∣though he went away unbaptised, yet he was truely baptised: as one who in his heart yeelded to the faith, and promises of Christ. And if we should take it thus, this is the sence of S. Paul in these words; what shall they doe that are baptised for dead? that is, when they are ready to die, and goe out of the world; if there be no resurrection? his argument followes, that that which they did so late, they would not doe it at all: that which they did by constraint, putting it off to the last time of their life; they would not doe it at all, except it were for the hope of the resurrecti∣on; so that if there be no resurrection, there is a maine frustration, and a meere delusion of these men; that suffer themselves so farre to be overgone with dead∣ly sicknesse, as that they looke every houre for death: and yet then they take upon them the baptisme
of life, as a certaine pawne and pledge of the com∣mon resurrection. This sounds somewhat like a truth: but yet it is likely that the Apostle would have condemned this, as well as the other: being as ridiculous, because this is injurious to God, and to the Sacrament, and perni∣cious to mens owne soules; to tempt God whether he will give them a time of their owne choosing: to put off the Sacrament, that should be imbraced upon all opportunities: to refuse it when God offers it, which we should take thankfully and chearefully. No doubt but the Apostle would have confuted this er∣rour, as the former: and not have suffered the Co∣rinthians to have beene so tardy in a point of salvati∣on. Wherefore I take this opinion not to be accor∣ding to the Apostles minde: for as I sayd, that opini∣on is most probable and most agreeable to S. Pauls meaning, that proves the strongest, but this proves nothing; that because a man that is driven to it, in extremity at the time of his death, to doe an action; that therefore that action should bee of force; that may be done in amazement and feare, or by the in∣stigation of others; a man (it may be) is not lead to it by his owne will, so much as by the perswasion of another: and there is no reason that a man should ground upon such a weake stay, to inferre such a strong conclusion. The third opinion, What shall they doe that are bap∣tised for the dead? that is, for the forgivenesse of sins, which are dead workes. For so indeed the Lord seems to signifie, when he saith, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: and also the Apostle, when he saith, ye were dead in sinnes and trespasses. It is true our
Saviour Christ, includes in that speech, both them that were dead naturally, and them that were dead spi∣ritually. For in one place, he saith, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: speaking of naturall death. In another place, let the dead bury their dead: speaking of them that were dead spiritually, and so we may ap∣ply it: that those that are baptised for dead, that is for remission of sinnes; wherein, the body, and soule are dead: and for the quickening and reviving of them by spirituall grace. But this is too farre off: for the Apostles meaning is not here to speake of a thing that is common, (that being common to all beleevers, to be baptised, for the remission of sinnes) but he speakes of some peculiar baptisme, that was not common to all in generall, but belonged to some in particular. Besides, the Apostle speakes not here of the spiritu∣all resurrection, but of the corporall, he speakes not of the rising from sinne to grace, although it be true that they that are baptised, are baptised for the remission of sinnes, yet it is not proper here; for the Apostle speaks of the resurrection of the flesh: the spirituall is allegori∣call: which is from the death of sinne, to the life of grace, by repentance. Therefore that proves nothing, and is not likely to be S. Pauls minde: for he purpo∣sed not to spend his time in trifles, but to bring the validity of his arguments, directly to conclude the cause. Another opinion there is, that hath many great and substantiall followers. They that are baptised for the dead, that is, that are baptised into the death of Christ Iesus, to be planted with him into the similitude of his death. And this hath Chrysostome, Theodoret, Aquinas, Calvin, and many other great Divines;
for the Authors and followers of it. And that you may see that it hath some similitude of reason in it, looke in Rom. 6.4.5.Rom. 6.4.5. Doe you not know, saith the Apo∣stle, that they that are baptised into Christ, are baptised into his death? therefore we are buried together with him in baptisme. It is true, that every man that makes profession of the faith of Christs baptisme, among the rest of the articles that he professeth, he must beleeve in Christ that was dead, and buried, that he was crucified, and that he descended into hell, and that he rose againe the third day, &c. And he professeth also, that he is rea∣dy to dye for Christ, when he shall be called to it, and till that time come, that he will dye spiritually in his heart and in his will to worldly affections: which he knowes, that Christ never had in him, or had any liking to them, but utterly abhorred them. There∣fore this being the symbol and badge of our professi∣on; it seemes from hence, that every man that is bap∣tised, may be said to be baptised for dead: that is, for a dead Christ, in whom he trusts, which was dead, but now is alive: and behold he is alive for evermore.Apoc. 1.18. He is baptised for dead; that is, to the world and the flesh; that he may live for ever unto God. Chrysostome proves this by an argument, that hee thinkes fit and convenient for the purpose: for, saith he, whether of the two is easier, to raise the body from death, or to raise the soule from sinne? no doubt, saith hee, it is an easier matter to raise the dead body from the grave, than to raise a soule that is dead in sinnes and trespasses, to newnesse of life. And behold, saith he, in the Romans, the Apostle proves the one by the other, that although we thinke it ea∣sier,
yet he intimates, that that which we thinke to be easier, is harder: and that which seems more hard and difficult, is more easily atchieved and effected by the hand of God. And he proves it out of Matth. 9.5.Mat. 9.5. where our Lord discoursing with the Pharisees, when they had said, who can forgive sinnes? he askes them whether it were easier to say to the sicke of the Pal∣sie, take up thy bed and walke, or to say, thy sinnes are for∣given thee? where our Lord clearely gives us to un∣derstand, that it is a harder matter, and a more po∣werfull thing, to say, thy sinnes are forgiven thee, then to give limbs to him to walke, and to take up his bed and goe his way. For sicknesses are the punishments of sinne; and the Lord removing that once, he takes away the cause, which is greater than the effect. But although this be followed, with so many, so great, and so worthy Interpreters, yet (me thinkes) it hath no congruity with the purpose of the Apostle in this place, for (as I said before) the Apostles meaning is not here, to instruct us in the renovation of the soule, of newnesse of life, in holinesse and sanctification: but to tell us of the resurrection of the flesh; that is his chiefe argument, the maine point he insisteth pre∣cisely upon. Therefore to say to be baptised for dead, is to be baptised for the name of a dead Christ: it is too farre fetched, and I cannot see how it can be brought in. Therefore (without prejudice to these glorious and goodly writers) we proceed to further exami∣nation of these words. There be some others, that cannot indure what hath beene said before, but they must devise trickes of their owne. They say Saint Paul alludes to the Leviticall Law, Numb. 19.Numb. 19. when a man had touched
any dead carkasse, he was to be cleansed before the e∣ven: but suppose, say they, that the man dyed by ca∣sualty, before night, before he could come to the Priest, before he could have gotten the matter of his purification, what was then to be done? Then, say they, his neighbour was to be cleansed for him: and so they fall upon an opinion before named. But what is their purpose? certainly to bring in prayer for the dead, because they thinke that as there was baptisme for the dead, so there should be prayer for the dead. And if the one fall to be so, the other must needs be so too. For I rather thinke that there should be pray∣er for the dead, than that there should be baptising for them; to speake in a sacramentall sence. They doe it, to bring in their superstitions of holy-water, and sprink∣ling the graves and sepulchers, and coffins of dead per∣sons: thereby to make them more pure before God; and that which is more ridiculous, that the Priest should undertake in times past (and it may be now too, in our times) when he was sent for to a sicke bo∣dy to give him the host, and that the party were dead before he came, he in the presence of the com∣pany, was to eate it, for him that was deceased: and thought that that would be availeable to him, for the forgivenesse of his sinnes, and for the receiving him into heaven. These things have no ground nor war∣rant: neither in this Epistle, nor in the old Law: There is no such thing that there was any such purification by a proxie; but it was alway done in a mans owne per∣son: and there was no frind admitted in any such action. Therefore in that devise, they make one lye to salve another: as their custome is, in other of their proceedings.
Further, there is yet another opinion, that saith, that baptising for the dead, it is meant of those that came, and offered themselves voluntarily to afflictions and persecution. And this is more neare the point, for indeed in the Scripture, it is a most usuall and common saying, to call afflictions by the name of baptisme. So Math. 20.Math. 20. Mark. 9.Mar. 9. when the sonnes of Zebede come to our Lord and desire a boone of him; requesting that one of them might sit at his right hand, and the other at his left in his kingdome: Christ answers them againe, that they knew not what they asked. And he proceeds further; saith he, Can ye drinke of that Cup whereof I shall drinke, and can ye be baptised with the baptisme that I shall be baptised withall? and they answer againe, they could. Christ tels them again, that indeed they should drinke of that cup, and be baptised with that baptisme; but to sit at his right hand, and at his left, &c. where we may see, he speakes of the bap∣tisme of fire and trouble, and persecution. That which is intended in those words, the same also by compari∣son, may be taught here, and interpreted in this place. They that are baptised for dead, that is, those that scorned their lives, that cared not for them: those that were ready to drinke the cup of Christ, that were ready to throw themselves into danger, for the glory of their Lord, and Master. To what end are they thus forward, if there be no resurrection from the dead? There be many things that favour this interpreta∣tion, as the sequell that followes in the next words. Where the Apostle saith, why are we in danger or jeopar∣die every houre, if the dead rise not? as if he would bring the argument from abroad, home to himselfe; and then the sence of the place is this. To what pur∣pose
doe men adventure their lives, and cast themselves into apparant danger of death, except they have a certaine hope of the resurrection to life: and that that God that takes away their life now, can give it them againe, with advantage in the world to come? This is true, but whether it be fully proper or no, to rest in this baptisme, as absolute; I thinke it lyes not in any mans power by any strong and full au∣thority to determine. It is true, our Lord saith, Luke 10.Luke 10. I have a baptisme to be baptised with, and how am I pained till it be past! Where he meanes in the same sence, the baptisme of affliction. For a man in afflicti∣on, is as it were a dead man: a man in prison, as though he were in the bottome of the water in another ele∣ment, when there is persecution and trouble on eve∣ry side. But yet there is another opinion, which shall be the last that at this time I will trouble you withall; that is, of Beza,Beza. and others that hold with him: that all this that is spoken of baptisme here; is not meant of any sacramentall washing; but as the word is often used, for a legall washing and purifying; common and ordinary, at the carrying forth of the dead, as in Heb. 9.Heb. 9. there are many washings, and the word is thus used in divers places in the Gospell. As where Christ saith, the Scribes and Pharisees, when they come from the mar∣ket, they baptised their hands, and they baptised their Cups and their Platters, and Dishes. It is the same word there, and it signifieth to dip, to wash, and make cleane. And so it was a custome among Christians, they used when they layd their dead bodies forth, to wash them and annoynt them. And all this was done, as a certaine assurance and signe of the resur∣rection.
So the body of our Lord Iesus, was imbal∣med by Ioseph of Arimathea, and Nichodemus: and should have beene more fully embalmed, upon that which we call our sunday morning; but that the wo¦men received relation of his resurrection, before they came to the grave. This custome was used in Egypt, as we see in the Scriptures: and in expresse words, Acts 9. Dorcas or Tabitha, when she was dead, shee was washed and layd in an upper roome. And it seemes this custome was used by prophane men themselves, in most Countries: as the Poet speakes of Tarquynus, when he was dead being slaine, for his foule acts and tyrannizing parts, a good woman, saith he, took him, and in devotion, washed his body, and annoyn∣ted him according to the solemnity of funerals. So the substance of the argument (as Beza thinkes) is this; that all this expense about these corses, carry∣ing them to their graves in pompe, that we cast them not out as beasts unburied, but commit them to the bowels of our mother earth, to lye there in certaine hope of the resurrection. All the charge and cost that we bestow for them, our washing of their bodies, that we suffer them not to carry any pollu∣tion or staine with them: all this is done in hope of the resurrection. And this we would not doe, except we had a hope of the resurrection, but would cast them away, without any care. But we have a stately sumptuous care of their obsequies, and proceedings in this businesse: therefore we have a certaine hope of the resurrection. TertullianTertul. saith, if you aske me the fashion of my life, and how I eate and drinke; and how I wash my selfe in my bath: I wash my selfe in such a bath as is convenient for the health of my
body, and I look for another bath, when I am dead: alluding to the custome that was then among Chri∣stians; which was received from the Iewes or He∣brewes; that had great skill in it, and wrote it in bookes, and put it into their Thalmud, where there is a great long Chapter to this purpose, how the fu∣nerals of men should be solemnized. And of a truth there is some force of an argument, from the customs and manners of the people of God: to prove the cer∣tainty of our common faith in the resurrection. But I am perswaded S. Paul did not greatly care for these fashions: because they were but weake, for though they prove something, yet men might object and say, what doe you tell us of idle customes, that be∣cause men are carried by their friends with weeping and lamentation to their graves; and those that be of greaer ranke with pompe and solemnity: because they doe thus, shall we therefore beleeve that there is a resurrection? because this argument may suffer the traverse, therefore it is not full, although it prove something, as CalvinCalvin. saith well, because death seemes to be the last extirpation, and extinguishing, and rooting out of men, therefore it hath beene the wisedome of men, and the nature of faith, to devise life in death, and to represent life by death. For men that have friends, that are men of respect, and are a∣ble to have it so, are carried to their graves with more pompe and magnificence, than ever was done to them in all their life. Because they would over∣come death, and make their scaffold of joy and de∣light in the height of death, more then before in their life time, to out-worke the feare of death in those that are living, and to give assured hope of
those that are dead, therefore it was profitable for the Church to invent these things, and the Church approves of it. And then the Apostles argument is, to what end are all these solemnities for the dead? to what end is this cost? to what end is this pompe? in cele∣brating their funerals? but as so many arguments of the resurrection? And they tell us plainely, that except we hoped to see the man againe in glory in the world to come: we would not trouble our selves a∣bout these things, but cast him away as a thing of nothing. But by this we shew our esteeme of them, that we account them to be those, whose lives are layd up with God in Christ. To conclude this, because I have beene too trou∣blesome to you in it;Chrysost. August. I thinke that the fittest, and the best sence, is that of Saint Chrysostome and Saint Au∣stine: who though they lived in severall parts of the world, yet with one spirit they agree upon it: What then shall they doe that are baptised for the dead? say they, what is all this mortifying to the world? what is this continuall expectation of death in the world? what is all this preparation for the world to come? which is in the opinion of worldly men, nothing but a meere death: They thinke that men that live thus, are as dead coarses, that have no society of mankinde: those that are of retired life, and conversation, they are accounted dead men; that man that is a man of ab∣stinence, that is a man of feare and trembling; that is a man that betakes himselfe to God, and neglects the world; that addicts himselfe to a pure straine of devo∣tion;Luk 2.36. that like Hanna the daughter of Phanuell, is in the Temple day and night, praying, and praysing God: these men are civilly dead men: these that are baptised
to this kinde of holinesse, that make this profession of the Sonne of God; that live a strict course of life; that use abstinence from the world, and the delights therein; that they may be vacant for God alone: they are dead men alive, or living men dead: or men twise dead; for so the world esteemes of them. Now then, what shall their profession and under∣takings come to, if there be no resurrection? shall we say that these are deluded men? that they are decei∣ved? farre be it from us! farre be it to thinke that God will deceive them, or put them besides their end! Therefore they shall be partakers of that they looke for; they shall have a most blessed and copi∣ous reward in heaven; their labour is not lost in the Lord; there is no part of their labour,, but it shall be fruitfull and glorious in the Lord. And if there be no resurrection, why are they baptised for dead? that is, why are they taken for dead men, that live not out their time; as other men doe; in jollity, in mirth, and bravery of the world; as it hath beene, and is a Proverbe among heathens; while we live, let us live. As if to use a sober carriage, were a kinde of death; for men to refraine from the delights and pleasures of this world: therefore while they live, they will have a life of it; and spend their time in mirth. But the children of God have another promise. Whether this be the true sence of S. Paul, or that of the cup of persecution: they are almost both coinci∣dent, and one of these certainely is Saint Pauls rea∣son. For he speakes of some singular persons: all were not ready to offer themselves for Christ; but hee speakes of a singular company, that were different from the common sort of men. Certainly wee must
take it in one of these two sences. And for that of Beza, though it be true, and have some force in it; yet Saint Paul seldome insists upon the weake acti∣ons of men. It is true, that which men doe publiquely, it comes to have the nature of a law in it: and this hath beene a publique thing in all nations; to honour the going of their friends out of the world: therefore Saint Paul might have drawne a good argument from that; if he used such in other places. But be∣cause we finde not that, therefore we cannot settle upon this. His manner is not to fashion himselfe to the world, or to the actions of men; to draw things of such weight as these: especially from heathen and simple men, that did that which it may be they had no reason for. And besides, it is no argument to prove the resurrection, from the dead: although a childe of God understand, and God hath put into their hearts, good affections: because these vessels, these parties, are not dead, but sleepe; therefore God teach∣eth them to honour the ashes of his Saints, because they have hope in Christ; but to say that the world and all mankinde dreames of a resurrection, because they honour their friends departed; this doth not argue. For they may doe it to their friends, out of love, or out of fondnesse: or for fashion, to shew their gallantry, or the like. I will not contradict that learned man; but yet I thinke, that which is most agreeable here to Saint Pauls great spirit, is that opinion about the cup of affliction. Those that gave themselves freely to persecution, to stoning, to sword, to banishment, to affliction, (as the Apostle speaks in another place) men that are alway working upon their owne passions and lusts: this I take to be
the proper sence. To what end doe these men ma∣cerate their bodies, and trouble themselves by mor∣tification, and by yeelding themselves to persecu∣tion and sword; if they be not fulfilled with a live∣ly hope of the resurrection? In that sence, the argument thence drawne, teach∣eth us thus much. That whatsoever action or presi∣dent Gods children and Saints have given in this world; they are all of them of singular and excel∣lent use, to prove the glory of God in this article of the resurrection. I say the president of Gods Saints in for∣mer times, and of those in our times, that are before our eyes: they are arguments invincible, and we should not offer to cast any scruple against the po∣wer and validity of them. There be a company of men, that will follow none but themselves, under pretence of following none but Christ: whereas, in∣deed, they follow none lesse than Christ: in presu∣ming to follow him alone, without any other, they follow none at all. Christ is then followed, when he is followed in his members, as well as in himselfe: therefore the Apostle bids us be followers of him, as he is of Christ. It is true, the point of proofe and imita∣tion, it rests not in man as he is man, but as he is a follower of God. So farre we must take the force of the argument, as it hath a higher reference and relation unto God; which is the Prince of reason, and the ground of all demonstration. Therefore he that neglects and condemnes the presidents of Martyrs in former times; or of the ancient Fathers, or our precedent Fathers, that lived in the dayes of persecu∣tion; that suffered fire and banishment from their Country, for Christ: he that cals these things idle
fopperies, or weake infirmities without any ground or reason, or that they were deceptions of stubborne flesh, that dyed for the maintenance of erronious o∣pinions: he that speakes thus blasphemously against the honour of Gods holy presidents, he pluckes the argument out of Saint Pauls hand, and makes it no∣thing worth. For so might the Corinthians have an∣swered the Apostles argument; that they would not be ruled by any man but by Christ: they would have none over them, but Christ: they would have no president, but God: they would have no direction, but Gods wayes: and as for men, they are but men; and to be no further followed, then they follow God. But Saint Paul he raiseth a mighty argument from them: and so in other places he saith: Ob∣serve, and walke as you have seene us walke, and ob∣serve them that are as lights before you, that are as lights shining in a darke generation. The children of God are borne for example; and either they winne men by their rare, and excellent accommodation to God; or else they stop their mouthes for ever, that they shall have nothing to say at the day of judge∣ment: because they have had such examples before them: and had no hearts to follow them. All the presidents of Gods Saints in former times, if they be followed; they further our salvation: but if they be neglected, they shall fall heavy upon us to our con∣demnation. All things that were done before, were done for our learning, and for our sakes: as (whatsoever was written before time,Rom. 15.4. was written for our learning) to confirme and strengthen us, and build us up in our most holy faith. Let us glory in this; let us study the history of the Martyrs that have beene before
us. After this manner Christ comforted his Apostles; saying, Rejoyce and be glad in that day,Math. 5.12. for great is your reward. Why should they rejoyce? because so they persecuted the Prophets before you: so the exam∣ple of those that have beene before us, are convin∣cing arguments to us. The God of glory and peace, that hath given us so many rare examples before us; give us power to follow them, Amen. FINIS. 1 COR. 15.29.30. What shall they doe that are baptised for the dead, if altogether the dead rise not, why are they baptised over the dead? and why are we in danger and jeopardy every houre? THis is one of Saint Pauls difficult and hard places, which Saint Peter puts us in minde of, 2 Pet. 3.16.2 Pet. 3.16. saith he, In Pauls Epistles there are certaine things that are hard to be understood: which the reprobates doe wrest as they doe the rest of the Scriptures, to their owne damnati∣on. But this Text, which is so difficult and hard; may be best explained and expounded by the context: by the sence that followes after.August. Saint Austin gives us a Rule; when saith he, I finde the Scriptures darke and
obscure, then I looke to the scope and purpose, and drift of them; and surely, it seemes, that these latter words which I have now read to you, Wherefore are we in jeopardy and danger, every day and every houre? are an exposition of the former. Wherein, he translates the argument from the common passion of the Church, to his owne personall sufferings; and those that were the first and principall, in persecutions and troubles; and he concludes, that they were mad men that would un∣dergoe such misery, except they hoped for some∣thing: unlesse they had a certaine hope of reward, and recompence, in those bodies, in which they suffered: For it is the body that suffers here; the soule cannot be martyred, but the body. Therefore the A∣postle saith, Every man shall receive in their bodies, ac∣cording as they have done in their bodies,2 Cor. 5.10. whether it be good or evill. Now for a man to undertake such great hazard and danger, to be alway in jeopardy, to be every houre in perill: it is as bad as to be utterly consumed. A man were better to be utterly dis∣patched, than to be alway hanging in suspence: for men to be still in anxiety, to leade their lives in ex∣tremity and trouble, to have nothing to comfort them here, nor to have any expectation in the world to come, of the common resurrection: there were no madnesse comparable to this. But because in these things, we must not be pre∣sumptuous; but must take them, as the spirit of God hath suggested, and dictated them to other men; therefore I will not build certainly upon this sence, although I thinke it to be the most true, and naturall consequent that can be. But we will consider also, what the spirit of God hath spoken otherwise.
This gift of interpretation, is not acknowledged, nor understood among simple men; although it be the greatest gift of all other. For a man cannot tell what to build on, he cannot tell what to thinke, he knowes not what to say, or what to conclude on. If he ground upon a false interpretation,Ierome in Gal. 1. as Saint Ierome saith upon Galath. 1. (upon these words, I mervaile that you are gone to another Gospell) saith he, what makes this another Gospell? false glosses, and interpretations: by giving a false sence of the Scriptures: that which in it selfe is the pure Gospell of Christ, may be made the Gos∣pell of man; nay, that which is worse, the Gospell of the divell: so Saint Ierome.Chrysost. And Saint Chrysostome dis∣coursing upon the same argument, saith he, If Christ himselfe shall not interpret the word which is obscure and darke in it selfe, I shall neither gather the doctrine, nor settle the conclusion: so that the gift of interpretation, is of all others, the chiefe and prime foundation of di∣vinity. Therefore, observing the great variety of the ancient Fathers in the Church of God; I must of ne∣cessity abandon all kinde of darke and obscure speech: and all that savours of affected language or eloquence; yea, and speake plainely as Saint Austin saith. It is a farre better thing that the Grammarian, or that the Criticke should reprehend us, then that the people should not understand us. In the divers sences of this Text, I touched some: others remaine, which I will conclude as briefly as I can: and then come to the other argument, taken from his particular, Why doe we thus? Why doe we live in danger and jeopardie every houre?
What shall they doe that are baptised for the dead? The first opinion was, that the Text is to be under∣stood according to the letter: to be baptised for dead men. This opinion is followed by many great and learned men: and by Musculus, which I wonder at, for he was a most rare instrument of light to the Church of God, throughout all the Scriptures; and yet he thinkes this to be a good and a true constru∣ction. That as Christ Iesus commended the fact of the unrighteous and unjust Steward, although he did not commend the fact, yet his wisedome is commen∣ded: so the Apostles purpose is to shew that though it were a vaine thing for them to baptise the dead in the person of the quicke, (to baptise them by a proxey) yet it argued that which the Apostle would inferre, that they had a hope of the resurrection, or else they would never have done it. But because this hath beene condemned by the Fathers as hereticall and foolish; therefore I wave that opinion, as not being the Apostles meaning. A second opinion was, concerning those that did put off their baptisme till their death: as the fashion was in the first 4 or 500. yeares after Christ. The third, what shall they doe that are baptised for the dead? that is, that are baptised into a dead Christ. This is followed by a great number of worthy Di∣vines: Chrysostome, Theophilact, Oecumenius, Theodo∣ret, and Calvine. Another opinion, What shall they doe that are bapti∣sed for the dead? that is, from the dead: so the word sig∣nifieth sometimes; and so LutherLuther. saith, that in the
primitive times they baptised their children in the Church yards, where the dead bodies were buried; and were wont to stand upon the grave of the dead man, and say, This man shall rise againe, I beleeve it, and I take the Sacrament upon it, and here I am baptised. If wee could finde such a custome in the Church, this were a cleare evidence; but there is no history that makes this appeare unto us. Notwithstanding, if there had beene such a custome as that, (it being something su∣perstitious) it could not greatly inferre the argu∣ment: and there is no reason, to thinke they should be baptised upon the graves of the dead; seeing the custome seemed to be contrary to baptise them in their Baptisteria, or Fonts which were in little houses neere their Churches: in which there was no bury∣ing of the dead for divers hundred yeares after Christ: that is, not till the Fonts were brought into the Churches: till when, they buried in the Church yards, and in the Cloysters below. Yet notwith∣standing, this might be true in some places: as in the Church of Asia, and in the parts upon the Euxine sea; where they never baptised any, but at the time of Easter, and Whitsuntide: and then they baptised them upon the graves of the dead, to assure them, that the dead that were contained in those graves, and tur∣ned to dust, should rise againe; which they would now verifie, by taking the Sacrament of baptisme up∣on it. Therefore I give this interpretation the autho∣rity it deserves: and take it as a true glosse on the Text: but yet it is not the fulnesse of the great things the Apostle here intended. The next opinion was, they that are baptised for the dead, that is, dead to the world; civilly dead; that betake
themselves to the study of mortification; and will not live in those pleasures and delights, which the world accounts the onely life. Those kinde of pleasures and epicurious delights, which worldly men take to be the life of life; the Saints of God detest, and abhorre them: and in baptisme they doe renounce them: the pompes and vanities of the wicked world: and make themselves dead men to the world, that they may live unto God. And so they may be said to be baptised for dead. This is a true exposition; yet I thinke it is not full: because all are thus baptised; there are none baptised, but with this condition: and as I said before, this Text implies some speciall, peculiar thing, which pertaines to some men in particular, and not to all in generall. If it had pertained to all, the Apostle would have said, Why are we all baptised for dead? But he speakes of a certaine number of men, and what shall they doe? those few eminent men, that are baptised for dead, if the dead rise not? Concerning the other opinion of Beza,Beza. that Bap∣tizati here must be taken for Loti, for washing; as they used in funerall pompe to carry their dead out of the world: I confesse that may be admitted too, be∣cause those that spend their time and cost, in sending forth their dead in burying of them; they would not doe it, but that they testified thereby, that they have a certaine hope of the resurrection of the dead. But yet me thinkes, this cannot be the full sence; for it fol∣lowes not, because that all nations carry forth their dead with pompe, that therefore the dead shall rise a∣gaine: there is no force in this argument; for they may doe it out of love; or they may doe it, because it is the common fashion, and custome: or they may
doe it out of superstition: because they thinke there is a kinde of commerce betweene the dead and the li∣ving. Therefore, To conclude all, I hold that by baptising for dead, is meant those that are baptised in the cup of bloud, in the cup of affliction and persecution for Christ: accor∣ding as Christ saith himselfe, I have a baptisme to bee baptised with, Luk. 12.Luke 12.50. And as he saith to the sonnes of Zebedee, Can you be baptised with the baptisme that I shall be baptised with, and drinke of the cup that I shall drinke of? which baptisme, is affliction. And this the Apostle proves by the sequell of the Text: for as I said, there is no way to understand the Scriptures, but to consider that which goes before, and that which comes after: and to marke what he saith in the words following. Why doe we suffer, why are we in jeopardy every houre? As if he should have said, my reason why there is a certainty of the resurrection, is this: because both the Church in generall, and we in particular, and speciall; are in danger and jeopardy every day; and we would not be so mad, as to take dangers unto us, without some reason: unlesse we looked for something, and expe∣cted some recompence. Therefore certainely, unlesse we will under-value all the actions of Gods Saints, and all the sufferings of his Martyrs: except we will say they did it in a madnesse, and in a fury; and that it was superstition, (which we cannot doe without blasphemy) we must confesse, that it is a pregnant proofe, and a forcible argument of the resurrection from the dead. For, indeed, there is nothing that doth so well conclude it, as those that suffer for it, as the sufferings of those that professe it. And one
maine cause of persecution, is the doctrine of the re∣surrection: as the Apostle saith, Acts 23.6.Acts 23.6. For the hope of the resurrection am I judged and accused, and called in question this day. The divell and his compli∣ces, seeke to impugne it, it being the highest and strongest tower of our faith; for there is nothing whereby the mindes and consciences of Gods chil∣dren, are stablished, but in the expectation of the promises, propounded in the Gospel: which are none at all, if they be not to the body. For all the service of God, is performed with these our bodies: and if these vessels, these bodies, shall lye rotting and unregar∣ded; all the service of God shall be voyd of recom∣pence and respect: because those parts that were u∣sed to Gods service, shall have nothing for their ser∣vice. Now the God of heaven is the best Master that can be; he will suffer no man to serve him for no∣thing:Iob 1.9. as the divell confessed of Iob, Doth Iob feare God for nothing? The Apostle therefore brings the argument from the common passion that was abroad in the Church; to that which was particular in himselfe. And he saith, we also our selves, we whom you know: there be many in the world that you know not, which have suffered for Christ: but we whom you see, and converse with; why are we subject to danger every day? and not onely suffer them with an averse disposition, but we take them of our owne will, upon our selves: we seeke for them, for the glory of Christ, and for the propagation of the Gos∣pell, and either we shall have a reward and recom∣pence for this, or else we are of all men most mad, that will undertake such dangers, without any re∣ward and recompence. To proceed in order, First here we are to consider the manner of his pro∣position
in question wise; Why doe we suffer?Division into foure parts. and be∣fore, Why are they baptised for dead? Secondly, the subject of the proposition,  and we also. Thirdly, the predicate, we are in jeopardie, in dan∣ger, and it is the worst life in the world, to live in danger: as it is the best life, to be secure. Fourthly, the extent of it: not for an houre, or for a short time, but every houre, every moment; there is no minute of our lives, but we are in jeopardie. Lastly, the force of the argument, how this proves: because there have beene many heretiques in times past, that have suffered themselves to be in danger, in affliction, and oppression for falshood. How proves this then, that to be in danger for the Resurrection, is an argument that there shall be a Resurrection? be∣cause that many for falshoods, have beene in dan∣ger: these be the passages of this Text, of which briefly, and in order. First, concerning the manner of his proposall:1 The manner. He doth it by way of question. It serves to stirre up our dulnesse to understand these things, that be plaine; and implies, that we have lost our time, unlesse we palpably discerne these matters here propounded. For those things that are propounded by way of question, (saith IsidoreIsidore.) are more effectuall: and exprobrate and upbraid men for the dulnesse of their spirits, if they doe not conceive those things that are plaine and obvious to the world. Why doe we thus? As if he should have said, You spectators that looke upon our passions, you are sence∣lesse, if you knew not the end why we doe thus. So he ar∣gues from the end and scope of the thing: which is the chiefe and principall argument that can be. For all
things worke for some end; all men suffer for some end; there is no action that a man doth, but it tends to some end and purpose; and unlesse we be the most sencelesse people of all others, we will worke for some end too. And to what end doe we thus trouble our selves, if there be no hope of a resurrection? So when we reade the Scriptures, we should observe the manner of this phrase. It teacheth us much; and we should checke our owne dulnesse and infirmitie, that the spirit of God must rouse us up by questions, and in∣terrogations, and not onely propound the simple and plaine truth; but must give us certaine crosse pro∣positions, to teach us that we cannot rayse our selves, untill we be raised of God: and to make us more sen∣sible after, he followes us with a multitude of que∣stions. 2 The subiect.Now for the subiect of the proposition,  and we also. First, the Holy Ghost would teach us here, that the Apostle, and those that adhered to him, they did con∣forme themselves to the presidents of ancient times. And we also, that is, the Prophets before us, suffered for the testimony of the truth: for the doctrine of the Messias: some of them were sawne in pieces with sawes; some of them were killed with the sword: some of them were banished: some slaine be∣tweene the Temple and the Altar. Ierusalem was full of bloud, in former times, and all for the profession of the Messia, the Lord Iesus; and for the hope of the Resurrection conceived by him. And we also follow them. This is the sweet harmony of Gods Church; it still consists of unisons, and still they follow in the
direction and union of one spirit, to speake the same thing, to teach the same thing, to suffer for the same thing. And we also doe it. The Church of Christ seekes for no delicacies; but it treads in the steps of her an∣cestors: and looke what they have given for exam∣ple before, they follow in it diligently after. If there were any kinde of worldly wisedome in this; that men should see and discover the heresies, and lyes, and errours of former times; it were mad∣nesse for the latter times to embrace them. But saith the Apostle, we doe so too. If our fore-fathers had been in errors, & had maintained lies: we that live in these times (me thinkes) should be admonished and advi∣sed; by processe of time, and the great meanes that we have to discover them. For if we should yet live in their errours, our errour would be greater than theirs: because we have more helpe than they: and we have the advantage of time to see and contradict them. But behold, saith the Apostle, we are so farre from contradicting of them; that looke in what steps they have gone before, we trace after them, and fol∣low with an even pace, may we goe beyond them, and transcend their perfections. If they suffered something, we suffer more: if they were driven to some extremities; we are acquainted with more. The glory of Christs Church is this, that still there is a succession of Martyrs and professors, , and we also doe thus. In matters of the world, and the devises of Phi∣losophie; you shall have no man so valiant, as to suf∣fer for another mans opinion: although in heresies, and schismes, it hath beene so, (the cause of which I shall shew afterwards) yet among the Philosophers,
so many men, so many mindes; every man against his fellow. As in the confusion of Babel, or in the de∣struction of Madian, their own swords were against one another. But in the schoole of Christ, the doctrine is pure and cleare; the parties are zealous, and unani∣mous: they goe together,  and we also tread in the steps of our fore-fathers. This is one thing the Holy Ghost would teach us. There are some other things that the Fathers have related to us,  and we also. That is, (saith Am∣broseAmbrose.) we that are well instructed and illuminated, because he would make that good in his exposition, which he had said before. As I told you that the A∣postle would prove the resurrection of the dead, from an ill custome of them that were baptised for the dead, by a proxey; so Ambrose makes  and we also. As if the Apostle should say; What doe you tell us of the foolish superstitions, of the Cerinthyans of the Manichees and Montanists, and others, afterward (which the A∣postle foresaw would be) What doe you tell us of those foolish people, that baptise over the dead? that is to say, the living for the dead? What doe you tell us of these, that are in a grosse errour? But I tell you we that are not erro∣nious, but know what we say, and what we doe; we that are illuminated from the Almighty, we that are ortho∣doxe: we suffer afflictons and persecutions. We also. Ambrose to defend his former opinion, makes this kinde of exposition of , but as the former was weake, so this is much weaker. Therefore I let that passe: as being not the  here spoken of. Saint Chrysostome, Oecumenius, and Theophylact, ex∣pound  and we also, as a gradation or height of the argument: bringing it from profession to passion. As if
he should have said, What doe you speake of them that are baptised for the dead? that is, into the death of Christ. For that was their opinion; that baptising for the dead, was into the death of Christ for remission of sinnes, and for the resurrection of the bodies, that are dead in sinne. So then the sence should be this; Why doe we also suf∣fer? As if hee should say, they that are baptised to the death of Christ, and to the faith of the resurrecti∣on; they doe onely affirme it by word, but we af∣firme it by deed, by passion, by suffering. And it is a stronger argument, that is taken from deeds, then that which is taken from words. It is an easier matter to make profession, then to enter into passion. Now, be∣hold, they that are baptised into the death of Christ, they make profession in words, that they beleeve this flesh shall rise againe: but it may be they will not stand to it, when they are put to the tryall of afflicti∣ons for the defence of it. But you see we doe: There∣fore, as the tryall from deeds and actions, is better then that in word and profession: so the argument is cleare when he saith, Why doe we travell, or are in jeo∣pardy every day? I confesse this is the sentence of a grave, learned, and a holy Father: and 'tis true that he saith, but yet I take that truth to be most proper, that I spake of before; concerning the argument drawne from the sufferings of the Church: and that the Apostle doth speake of all the passions of the Mar∣tyrs, of all the Prophets and blessed men, witnesses of Christ, that have beene in the world to this very day. And although they did excellently in their times and places, yet now the sufferings of Christ are made most glorious: and they never came to that height and pitch of excellencie and perfection, till the
Apostles times. Therefore to conclude this point. We may learne here, that the Apostle is not vain-glorious, to take all the praise to himselfe; but he communicates the glory with his brethren: and saith, and we also. It is true, that he boasts of his owne afflictions,2 Cor. 11.23. &c. 2 Cor. 11. where he speakes of perils a∣mong false brethren, of perils by sea, of perils by land: and of innumerable dangers, greater than other men had; because then he was driven to it: his ene∣mies forced him by their detraction. But when he is left to himselfe, he communicates the glory of his passion, to his fellow Apostles: and saith in the plurall number, We also suffex. This should teach all men humility: to thinke when they conceit highest of themselves, that there are other men as great as they. As the Poet saith, there are a kinde of men that will be Domine fac to∣tum, the chiefe in all matters: such men that take to themselves the glory and praise of businesse, the whole act must be theirs, though there be no such matter. As though they had trod the Wine-presse a∣lone, and not Christ: as though they had borne the burden, in the heate of the sunne by day; and in the cold by night. These the Apostle speakes of; when he saith, they measure themselves by themselves, 2 Cor. 10.2 Cor. 10.12. These kinde of Bragadocio's, are confronted by the spirit of God in every place. What art thou, be∣side a member of Christ? and What hast thou, that thou hast not received? and what canst thou doe, more than another man? and why is not another man as good as thou? Let men be ashamed to take the glory of things to themselves; but let them communicate it with the Church: and say in the plurall number,
, And we also. The Apostle, although he best de∣serve to take the glory to himselfe, single: yet he will not exclude the other: he takes in his Collegi∣ans: all of that livery with him; and saith, We also are in danger. Lastly, for this point, in that he saith, and we also: we must labour to prove this, by our owne lives, and examine how this comes to us. The Saints before, suffered for the profession of Christ: we must looke to put our  to it: to make our selves participants, and to say, and we also. But how doe we participate with them? we see they suffered afflictions for Christ: but we are volup∣tuous, riotous, and wicked. Here is a faire  and we too. They gave their lives from the world to God: and for other things, they cared not. We care for nothing, but this life present, and the pampe∣ring of our bellies, the very source of damnation. Here is a goodly , a goodly imitation. Yet we must imitate them, if we will be saved: our fore-elders were honest, pure, and sincere; a man might trust them; upon their word: but we are false, and fraudulent, cozening creatures: here is a goody  and we too. Our forefathers were given to hospitality, to doe good: but the men of our times, coop them∣selves up in corners; and keepe all to themselves, to spend upon their bellies, and upon their backes. Here is a faire  and we too. We imitate well! this is a left-hand imitation. Our fathers scorned to give any thing for Church-livings, or Ecclesiasticall promotions: they tooke it to be (as it is) a monstrous and mortall sinne. But men now care not which way they come by any thing: whether by God or the
divell; it is no matter, so they have it. Here is a good∣ly  and we too. Let us either labour to be sonnes of the faithfull, in our sufferings, and in the manner of our conversa∣tions; or we shall never come to the happinesse of their condition. It is to no purpose, for men to dreame of a stately seate in heaven: when they live damnable and base lives upon earth. So much for that point, the subject of the proposition. 3 The Predicate.Now for the predicate, We are in danger, The word  in the Greeke, is very elegant, to move sorrow and griefe. For so, (certainly) all danger and jeopardy doth, as the Poet saith, Death it selfe, is not so terrible, as the feare in the staying and long delaying of it. The apprehension of danger, moves continuall feare; and continuall feare must needs make a continuall slavery. As the Poet saith, It is impossible for a man to live in freedome, in liberty, and in feare too; for that is a part of servitude, and of slavery. Now therefore this jeopardy the Apostle speakes of; it was the apprehen∣sion of danger from false brethren, from persecutors, from the tyrants of the time, of perill from the sea, of perill from the land. Whatsoever could hold him in matter of feare, this is the danger he speakes of; that he was in ieopardy of, &c. For a man to have his life hang before him,Deut. 28.66. as the Lord saith, Deut. 28. If you will not obey my will and commandements, I will make your lives hang in doubt before you: that is, you shall be in suspence, you shall not know when you shall live, and when you shall dye; thus God threatneth the wicked, but when the godly in a voluntary pro∣fession, take this anxious life, to hang alwaies in sus∣pence: we must imagine what a mighty perturbati∣on
it is. There is no persecution in the world, like that, when a man is prolonged in the feare of ano∣ther: when he is held still in doubting and suspence. A man were better to fall at once, than alway to hang thus; he had better be dispatched, than to live still in trouble, in misery and torment; and there is no such hanging to the soule, as feare; still represen∣ting the evill, and no end of the evill. Behold the state of the primitive children of God. The Church of God upon earth, is still in jeopardie: there is nothing safe and secure, although they have, indeed, a secu∣rity from God, that is better than all: the security of conscience, the peace and quiet of heart and minde: yet in respect of the world there is nothing secure; but they are ever moving. The children of darkenesse, are alway working against the issue of light; to make their lives nothing but a meere jeopardy. What these perils were, the Apostle in another place, ex∣plaines. I cannot now insist upon them: but come to the extent, which is the next part which followes. They were without intermission ,4 The Extent. Every houre: this is that which makes it more miserable. In all the diseases and troubles of this life, there be some lucida intervalla; some kinde of good fits, some tempers, that doe comfort and make up some kinde of strength to nature; for those breaches which the distemper afterwards breeds. So there is no ague, that alway holds a man; except it quickly dispatch him: but there is some kinde of intervall; there is some interim and space betweene one fit and ano∣ther: there is seldome in the world such a plague, that still lyes as a heavy burden upon mens shoul∣ders. But the children of God are sure to have it so:
not onely to have dangers, but to have one upon an∣other:Psal. 42.7. one deepe cals upon another, because of the noyse of the water pipes, as the Prophet speakes; they shall have feares without, and terrours within: the end of one evill, is but the beginning of another succeeding evill. Behold then your calling: that whereunto you are called, saith Saint Chrysostome: we are set out for the purpose: not onely to be vexed in this world, but to be vexed continually. That we cannot eate our meate, nor drinke our drinke, without vexation. The Lord mingles our bread with teares,Psalm. 80.5. and our drinke with weeping. It is the property of the wicked to feed with∣out feare: but even in our feeding and repast, we are possest with feares and terrours. Iude 12.And saith Saint Bernard, Know thy portion: know thy portion,Math. 10.25. Oh Christian, in the Crosse of Christ: it was his case, and it must be thine: it is enough for the servant to be as his Master: it is no reason he should be above his Master. This  Every houre; is that which God re∣quires at our hands: if we doe good for him, we must doe it every houre: if we suffer ill for his sake, we must suffer every houre. The Crowne of all our actions, and of all our obedience, is this perseve∣rance and continuance. Every houre. It is not for an houre, or for some few houres of a day: but all the time of our life, we must be under the Crosse, and have the hand of God to pound and bray, and beat upon us, to get out those sweet smelling spices of patience and godlinesse, which the holy Ghost hath infused into us. This is the tryall of a Christian, to be every houre in ieopardy; and to be more constant in suffering, than his adversaries can be in tormenting:
to be so compleat in that panoplia, the Armour of the spirit of God, that so long as the world can strike, he can indure the stroke: and be greater at length, than all his temptations. It is the miserable condition of all our services; they be not lasting. We are weary of well-doing:Galat. 6.9. when we are in prayer, we are weary before we can raise our selves to any kinde of zeale in our hearts: we have done before we begin. When we are in medi∣tation, it is a wearinesse to flesh and bloud. When we are doing of good deeds to Christ in his poor mem∣bers, we are weary; and say come no more, I have done so much and so much for you already. These are the cut-throats of obedience. This noysomnesse, and tediousnesse, and faintnesse of ours, deprives us of all hope of re∣ward. Therefore the Apostle saith, Gal. 6. Be not wea∣ry of well-doing, for we shall receive in time,Galat. 6.9. if we faint not: he that gives every houre and moment, to the service of God, shall have an eternall houre: that is, of blessednesse, and continuance of felicity in the power of God Almighty. But, as I said, it is with this condition, If we faint not, we shall receive. Im∣plying, that if we faint, we shall not receive: all our precedent benefits, all our good deeds that we have done in former time, if we hold not on, they have no place or acceptance with God. Perseverance is the Crowne of the graces of God: to be every houre, every momēt of time, addicted to the glory of God: it is the glory of Gods servants: It is to no purpose, to give a poore creature a small piece of money, or some little meanes, to helpe him, if afterward, see∣ing him in the same case, and being as able to helpe him, we leave him. For his life still continues, and
as long as life, and occasion continues, so long must our charity continue: or else it is to no purpose. It were in vaine for a woman to nurse a childe, a quar∣ter or halfe a yeare, if she doe it not till it be brought to some reasonable age and strength: that it be able to helpe it selfe. It is better not to begin a thing, than not to finish it after it is begun: for a man to lay a foundation of a house, and not to be able to build it up, is to make himselfe a meere mockery to the common people:Luke 14.30. to say, This man began to build, and was not able to finish it, as our Saviour saith: so in the matters of God; whether we doe good, or suffer ill for his name: it must either be continually done, or else it is not done at all.Luke 9.62. To looke backe, when we have laid our hand to the Plow, is to loose our re∣ward. He is a bad debtor that payes his debts by halves: he is a bad servant that will doe but halfe his service: that will not give account for the whole time, his Master hath conferred on him, and put him in trust withall. So they must needs be accoun∣ted base sufferers, and runnagate Souldiers; that when they have once put their hand to the action, for feare of danger, flye backe. The Lord takes up no such Souldiers. Therefore let us pay God his service, with a full hand, for so his gifts deserve. The blessings of God are so infinite, that they deserve not a perfunctory service: a kinde of time-service; to be now up, and now downe: but as the blessings of God be eternall upon the soule of man, so the service and the affecti∣ons of man, should be eternall to God againe. This little short life that we have, is our eternitie: the e∣ternity which God hath, is unspeakable without
end. As God hath promised us life eternall, ioy eternall, blessednesse eternall: so let us labour, that all that we doe, may be as much as in us lies, eternall. Let our prayers be eternall, our devotion eternall, our patience eternall, our charity eternall. There is nothing tending to the praise of God, that should be for a short time: but as his blessings and promises are eternall, so we should stretch and extend our selves as much as may be, to make our services eternall. The glory of a Christian, is constancie and perseverance: he hath con∣stancy against the number of the dangers that come: and perseverance against the continuance of them. This was the glory of the Apostle, when he saith, that he was in ieopardy every houre: we wrastle with great difficulties: the dangers are great, and many: there∣in we shew our constancie. Againe, we know they be long and durable: or else we might the better beare them. Every moment we are oppressed; every houre of our life, it waites upon us, as a heavy bur∣then upon our shoulders. And yet we suffer still; we are in danger every houre, and therein we shew our perseverance. But I will conclude in a word with the use and force of this argument. For it hath beene still the reason that heretiques have taken to themselves,  to abuse the force of the Apostles disputation. The divell hath fitted the world, with such seduced men to suffer, and to suffer for a lye. Now then the argument can have no just, nor no ne∣cessary consequēce: that because men suffer every hour, therefore there shall be a resurrection. For then, he∣retiques may object and say, because they suffer for this erroneous conceit, that therefore it is no con∣ceit: but there is such a thing. Certainly, as Tertul∣lian
saith, Not onely the true orthodoxe faith of Christi∣ans, is increased by the Martyrs bloud, but also heretiques are increased by their Martyrs. There was never any heresie so bad, but it had some to testifie it with their bloud: the divell hath his Martyrs, as well as Christ. But we must understand, the difference must be taken, partly from the cause, And partly from the persons that give the testimo∣ny. For it is the cause that makes the Martyr, and the foundation of the cause, is to be fetched from the word of God. The word of God teacheth a man for what cause he should suffer, and for what he should not suffer. And the cause of the Apostles sufferings, were grounded on the word of God: the Lord Iesus told them that they should suffer many things for his name.Iohn 15.21. And as it was the lot of the Prophets, in former time, to suffer, so it was their portion to take their course: and to suffer for the truth: and they were defended by the apparant word of God, fetched from all antiquity. The cause was good, for which they suffered: and the cause makes the Martyr, and the witnessing to the cause. The witnessing to a lye, can no way make a falshood true; all the lyers in the world, cannot doe it, but witnesse must be given to the truth; as the Apostles witnessed to the verity of Christ. Because Christ the (prime Martyr) hath set to his hand, that these things are true, Ioh. 3. He is the true witnesse that hath sealed it with his bloud:Ioh. 3.32.33. and hath confirmed it by his miracles, and by the approbati∣on of all the world. This is one difference. It is true, men may labour to bolster out bad causes, by their obstinate spirits: but what is that to this? Our cause is judged; we have the words of Scripture for it.
And although heresies (in all times) have been bred out of the Scriptures; yet they are meere wrestings, and sophistries, dreames, cavillations, and coacted things of their owne devising. But this, was a cause: that was throughly proved by the word revealed. And (as I said) the word of God tels us for what cause a man should suffer: and for what not: when he should live secure, and when in ieopardy. That is one reason. Secondly, from the persons.Popish Traytors. Although it be true that Antichrist will come and dye, as Martyrs doe: yet we must observe, they either doe it to maintain factions, that have been formerly begun, or to get a name to themselves; or else they seeke to flye from the danger, if they can make an escape.Acts 5.41. But the A∣postles were in danger, willingly; they yeelded them∣selves to it with gladnesse of heart: and reioyced in afflictions, and tribulations. But for the other, they breake prisons, they lye and equivocate, to save their lives: doe any thing to rid themselves from the dan∣ger. The Apostles and Martyrs (as simple sacrifices) gave themselves to God, in meere devotion to be dis∣posed at his pleasure, to rest upon his will; to be as sheep for the slaughter, when he called for them. They sought not to flye from their enemies, or by equivo∣cation and lies, to get away: but rejoyced in their per∣secutions, and sang even in prison. And although S. Paul made an escape,Acts 16.25. 2 Cor. 11.33. and were let downe in a basket from a window; yet that was but to reserve himselfe for further times: for at last he meant to give up himselfe as a sacrifice to Christ. Therefore the argu∣ment is strong, that we must confirme our selves from the passion of the Saints, before; and take no
limit of the voluptuous delights of the world. These are not the way to heaven. The course that we hold now a dayes, in our con∣versing one with another: in merriments, in eating and drinking, and idle complements; they are no wayes to give us comfort at the houre of death, at the day of judgement: but our comfort must be ta∣ken from the sufferings of the Church: from the passi∣on of the blessed Saints before: from the noble army of Martyrs, from that cloud of witnesses: from those that have sealed the truth of Christ with their bloud: that have indured jeopardy: that have imbraced dan∣ger all the hours of their life. These are they, whose steps we must follow, and insist in: those worthy presidents before us. And as farre as we conform our selves to these; so much comfort we shall have, when we suffer with them that suffer, to be confor∣med to the passion of Christ: that we may also be conformed to his glory.Luke 22.28.30 For if we suffer with him, we shall also raigne with him, as our Lord Iesus saith: which the Lord grant unto us for his sake, Amen. FINIS.
1 COR. 15.31. I dye daily by the rejoycing that I have in Christ Iesus our Lord. THe frequent reading, studying, and conversing in the Scriptures; is like the dressing of an armour, or the cleansing of a fountaine; for an ar∣mour, the more it is furbushed, the brighter it lookes: and the Spring or Fountaine, the more it is scoured, the clearer the water runnes: so the holy field of the Scriptures, the more it is tilled with diligence and frequencie, the more faire and goodly fruit it brings forth. The precious pearle of the truth, oft times is so hid, in the ambiguity of words, (words of equivocation; that is, words that may be taken in divers sences) that unlesse a man looke very narrowly to them, and observe well the passages of them, he is in dan∣ger to be drawne into some errour. This most diffi¦cult portion of Scripture, that we have taken in hand, begins now to appeare, by our continuance, and dwelling upon it. The truth, the pearle which before lay hid in the casket, begins to shw forth his owne lustre. As IeromeIerome. saith, Truth oft times lyes hid in the ditch of words; so the ambiguity of one word here,
hath puzled the faire and cleare stream of the truth: that without much searching of the Scripture, we had not found it out. But by our frequency and di∣ligence, I hope we have found in the end the proper sence and full meaning of the Text: for one Scrip∣ture whets and cleares another. Now the Apostle brings the passion of the Martyrs to his owne particular instance, and saith; as the common ordinary number of Saints were baptised in bloud; so the Colledge of the Apostles much more; and he himselfe most of all. This I conclude to be the sence of the Text: and of those difficult words, verse 29. of baptising for the dead. It is that which the Apostle renders here, and in the verse before going in other termes. For first, in verse 29. he cals it baptising for the dead. In verse 30. he cals it Ieopardy every houre, and now in this verse he saith, I dye daily. All the three phrases have but one sence and signification: onely distinguishing the persons, from whom he drawes the argument. For the thing is all one, the state of Christs Church here on earth; is alway like it selfe: in this life, alwayes in an afflicted condition. So then, his argument first in verse 29. (which is a great graund argument to prove the Resurrection) he takes it from the passions and sufferings of the Mar∣tyrs, and professors of Christ: and it holds in all these three verses, and that which followeth. In the first of the three, he brings the argument ge∣nerall. In the second, particular. In the third, he brings it personall. First generall, verse 29. his argument is drawn thus.
If there be no resurrection of the dead, why should any man be so mad, as to be baptised in bloud for the testimo∣ny thereof? that is, to forsake Father and Mother, & Land & Country, and Life, and al for the witnesse of the Gospell, which chiefly stands in the hope of the resurrection: for this is the baptisme that Christ speakes of, when he saith, Can ye be bapti sed with the baptisme that I shall be baptised with? and can ye drinke of the cup that I shall drinke of? that is, the baptisme of teares, of affliction, the baptisme of bloud, for the testimony of the truth. And so he drawes his argu∣ment from the common example of the Martyrs, in their sufferings: implying, that they were madde men, if they would suffer in confidence of a bad cause; to lose the best thing in this world, for a lye. Therefore their sufferings are a plaine argument, a strong and perfect subscription and consent, to this maine point of our faith, the Resurrection of the dead: that for which the Saints in all the world, the Pro∣phets before Christ, the Apostles after Christ; have beene baptised. For, as Iames, the brother of Iohn,Acts 12. who was killed with the sword: Stephen, the first Martyr: and all that were slaine in the first generall persecution: the Apostle drawes his argument thence: that if there were no Resurrection, then they had laid downe their lives in vaine: but they had not laid them downe in vaine; therefore there shall be a Re∣surrection. This is the scope of that argument. In the second place, he comes to the Colledge of the Apostles, in verse 30. and saith, Why doe we live in ieo∣pardy every houre? that is, why doe we live in dan∣ger of death, in perill all our life long: to dye, as it were, every houre: and to be baptised for the dead?
As a man that is under water (as it was the custome in baptising) he is as it were lost, so long as he is there, he is a dead man: and although, perhaps he may get up againe, and lift up his head; yet as long as he is in that element, it being not the element of our life, he is a lost man. So they that betake them∣selves to the profession of the Gospell, they are bapti∣sed; they are under water; they are throwne over board; they are cast away out of the ship of the world, and made away to plaine destruction, to ig∣nominy, to basenesse, to poverty, and every kinde of persecution, that their enemies hand can make o∣ver them; they are baptised for dead, because they are in danger all the day long, in all the passages of their life; they are in jeopardy of death, and deepely dren∣ched in the conceit and feare of death: which is worse than death it selfe. Now (in the third place) in this verse, he comes to the personall proofe of the poynt; and that which is usuall with all the Martyrs in generall, with the Col∣ledge of Apostles in particular, he applies in his owne personall instance, and saith, I dye daily. I protest (and it is no meane protestation) if you will not beleeve my word, yet take my oath; I set my seale to it, and sweare: and I sweare by the Lord Iesus, by the rejoy∣cing that I have in our Lord Iesus Christ, I dye daily. This is the summe of the words. Now you per∣ceive the argument, we will proceed on. The grea∣test thing in such passages, is to finde out the sence: the matter will be evident enough. In other places, the matter is deepe, and the sence is evident: but in this, and in passages of like nature, it is contrary. To proceed in order.
Here, first, we are to consider the marvellous strange assertion that the Apostle makes:Division into two parts. 1 The Assertion 2 The Probation where he saith, I dye daily: he dyeth, and yet he liveth: and he dieth daily. There was no part of his life, but still the shadow of death overwhelmed him, which is the miserablest thing in the world, to dye after death; and still to be dying: it is the worst kinde of death, and yet the Apostle saith, he dyed daily. It is an asserti∣on, that the Saint of God pronounceth for himself: for there is no man that can understand him, but he that takes delight in these meditations: he that hath part in the kingdome of Christ, knowes what this meanes. For experience teacheth this, and not speculation: or any argument that reason can afford. Secondly, we are to consider the probation of this: because it is a strange paradox (as LutherLuther. saith) What dost thou meane, Paul, to contradict thy selfe, and all common sence and reason? Doe I not see thee walke? Doe I not see thee eate and drink? Doe I not heare thee preach, and yet art thou dead? I see no signe of a dead man in thee. Therefore the Apostle makes it good by an oath, and saith, I protest by the reioycing that I have in Christ Iesus our Lord, I dye daily. Where first we are to consider the manner of his inference: it is by way of oath: And then, the thing he sweares by; by the reioycing that I have in Christ. A dead man, and yet rejoyce? it is a very strange mixture. Thirdly, we are to consider the ground of his re∣ioycing, where it is placed. In Iesus Christ our Lord. Fourthly, to consider the force of this argument, and how we may preserve and keepe the strength of this argument, alway unavoydable; to be able to
say, and to sweare, and lay to pawne, and gage, this Rejoycing that we have in Christ: when we finde this confidence in our selves. 1 Part. The Assertion.First, touching that marvellous assertion of the A∣postle: I dye daily. If an ordinary sinfull man had spoken this, it had beene no newes: but that it should come from a most sanctified vessell of the holy Ghost; a chosen vessell: one, that for his life, was unblameable; and for all learning, and the graces of the spirit, incomparable: that he should utter this, it is a very strange mer∣vaile. Indeed a reprobate, a man that followes his owne lusts; that lives not to God, but to himselfe: he may truely say I dye daily. For the Lord makes his life to be hanged before him, as a perpetuall signe of death: that as the children of God are said to have the earnest of the spirit, and of the kingdome of hea∣ven: so the servants of sinne, may be said to receive the earnest of hell. So many passages of his life as there be, they are as so many flakes of hell, burning before him; and doe assure him, that at the last he shall be tumbled and divolved into the damnation of the divell, and his Angels. That gnawing worrne of conscience, makes his life a continuall death. But that the Saints of God should be thus troubled too; it is this, that moves the wonder. And yet the Apo∣stle here saith, nay, and sweares it too; that not one∣ly wicked men, are troubled and galled with the conscience of sinne; that they are alway in death, (because they are the sonnes of death, and study that which tends to death) but he that had the fruit of life; he, that had the spirit of God and of Christ in him:Gal. 2.20. nay, that had Christ himselfe (as he saith) It is
no longer I that live, but Christ liveth in me: that he should he subject to this death, and to this frequen∣cie of death: that there was never a day came over his head, but a new death was presented to him: It seemeth strange. The reason of this we must fetch out of the rest of his writings, for there he hath set downe the summe of every thing, that we are to conceive of this my∣stery. The first reason or meanes of this death, it was that he carried the divell about him, as Gregory Nazian∣zen saith in his 32.Nazianzen Orat. 32. Oration to the Bishops at Constan∣tinople, when he was to leave the place. Saith he, Even as it was with Paul,2 Cor. 12.7. so doe I carry the divell about me, alluding to that place, 2 Cor. 12. where the A∣postle complaines of the messenger, and instrument of Sathan, that was sent to buffet him, continually, that he could not be at peace and quiet for him: and he prayed to the Lord thrice, against it, but the Lord answered him, My grace is sufficient for thee.Rom. 7 23. This was it that made him to say, I protest by the rejoycing that I have in our Lord Iesus Christ, I dye daily. For my life is such a kinde of condition, as wherein the flesh, and the spirit are continually conflicting toge∣ther: good and evill, righteousnesse and sinne; are alway countermanding one another. A good con∣science, and an evill conscience; sorrow, and joy, heaven and hell, God and the divell, are continu∣ally in an agony and combate. This conflict that I sustaine betweene the flesh and the spirit, is that which makes me dye daily: and makes me cry out, Oh wretched and miserable man that I am,Rom. 7.24. who shall deli∣ver me from this body of death? that is, from the sting
of the law in my members: whereby I am carryed in contradiction to the good spirit of God. And so (as Nazianzen saith) he did carry Sathan about him, nay within him also. For the reliques of sinne, (which he cals the messenger of Sathan) the instrument of the divell, the remainders of corruption, were in him: yea, and are in all the sonnes of God. For there was none ever without them, but that Sonne of God, that came to take away the sinnes of the world. The second reason why the Apostle said he dyed daily, was because the divell bare him outwardly, by envy and trouble, and persecution, he carried him on his shoulders: he was the beast that he was set on. And no marvell, for if the divell could make our Lord sit on his backe, Math. 4.Mat. 4. and that our Lord Iesus rode upon the divell, as a man would ride up∣on a horse: if he were so impudent as to set himselfe under our Lord, and carry him about to the pinacle of the Temple, and to the mountaine, then well may he come to the shoulders (nay to the very bowels) of his members. If he did so to the head, he will doe to the members much more.Acts 17.4.12. Thus he still carried Paul wheresoever he came, by the envy of the world, by the malice of the Iewes and Gentiles, as upon the oc∣casion of those devout and religious womens belee∣ving; whereupon they raised persecution against him: and that wheresoever he came, there was ey∣ther stoning or fire and faggot, or banishment; some mischiefe intended. Treason by false brethren; treason by his opposers, or treason, of those that were best trusted of him; every where he was inclosed with perill. This was the divell without him, as some of the Fathers imagine,2 Cor. 12 7. from that place, 2 Cor. 12. that
messenger of Sathan, there sent to buffet him. They say, it was not so much any inward thing he speakes of. But I yeeld not to this: for I suppose it was some∣what inward.Rom. 7.23. But the Fathers say he meanes ano∣ther matter; he speakes of men, and of the malice of men that would not suffer the Gospell to passe in the world: and that for this, he saith he dyed daily: by the perpetuall hand of those murtherers. I cannot goe any where, but the malice of men persecutes and followes me, so that I cannot rest: and if they could trap me once in their snare, and make a prey of me, I were surely theirs, and then I were gone: the feare of this makes me dye daily. Thirdly, another cause that made the Apostle dye daily, was the opposition that hee had by Idolaters, wheresoever he came; Idolaters still laboured to put downe the Gospell. As we see at Athens, Acts 17.Acts 17.16. The Text saith, His spirit was sore troubled when hee saw the City given to idolatry: And so likewise when he came to Ephesus, they cry,Acts 19.28. Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Diana the Idoll of Ephesus, had like to have cost him his life. Therefore the vexation of his spirit, to see men fall down to stocks and stones, and to forget that loyalty they ought to God:Rom. 1.25. To worship the creature, in stead of the Creator: This made him teare his cloathes, and ready to teare his flesh: for the vexation of his spirit, to see whole Cities so given over. Fourthly, another cause of this daily death of the Apostle; it was the opposition that he had by Witches, and Sorcerers: wheresoever he came (almost) the di∣vell would still set some Witch in the place: so in Acts 16.17.Acts 16.17. when he comes to Lidia, there Sathan
had entred into a woman: and she having the divell in her,Ʋerse 18. uttered these words of Paul and Silas: These are the men that teach the way of truth: but the Apostle understanding that the divell spake that for some co∣zening, for the hinderance of the Gospell: the Text saith, he grew into vexation and trouble of spirit, and commanded the divell to come out of her: An∣other time he comes to Paulus house;Acts 13.8. and there Ely∣mas the sorcerer opposeth him: whereupon being moved with griefe, he growes to those high termes, that he never spake the like language but onely there,Verse 10. Thou full of all subtilty, thou childe of the divell, wlt thou not cease to pervert the right wayes of God? these things, therefore, occasioned him new pangs; and brought his death on; multiplied his sorrowes, and made him say as he doth here, in the vexation of his spirit, I dye daily. For these Idolaters, for these opposers; for the inward troubles from his own flesh; for outward troubles from his own corrupt nation; these things so every where beset him, that hee could make no evasion or escape. Therefore hee sweares, By the rejoycing I have in Iesus Christ our Lord, I dye daily. But the chiefe and maine thing that made the A∣postle dye daily, (to dye upon the nest as it were) it was the care of the Churches,2 Cor. 11.28 29 2 Cor. 11. the great com∣passion he had, that great Armado of cares and busi∣nesse, and toyle that lay upon him. As he saith, The trouble and care of all the Churches lyes upon me: Who is weake, and I am not burthened? who is offended, and I burne not? The griefe that he conceived to see men back-sliders, to see how hardly men were brought to it; and how ill they lived in their profession, that
they lived not answerable to their calling in Christ: to see men fall from grace, to this world, as he saith of Demas, He hath forsaken me,2 Tim. 4.10. and imbraced this present world: these strange alterations and turnings in the Church of God, did so vexe and trouble, and grieve his spirit, that he could take no rest or repose in any thing in the world, but was as a dead man, free among the dead: and he cryes out here, I protest by the reioycing I have in our Lord Iesus Christ, I dye daily. I dye daily. This is a great aggravation of the miserie. To dye, is the bane of nature; the horrible of horribles: which none of us all can indure to heare of: the least ap∣proach of it casts us into infinite feares and hor∣rour: but to dye daily, to know no end of death, no period to determine it, but to be in the continuall act of dying: here is the height of all the patience of the Saints. As they dye, so they dye daily: there is no time that shines perfectly cleare to them, but all is in cloudes and disasters and misfortunes here, I dye daily. Every day brings its burthen with it: that as we begge our daily bread, so there is a daily death: and we have not such assurance of our daily bread, as we have of our daily death. Men often by fasting, pull downe themselves, and keepe downe their bo∣dies, that they eate not their bread: but there is no day, but a Christian tasts of death. Though hee have no taste of bread, or any rellish of victuals; yet hee shall be sure to taste of death. I dye daily, as though my life were of steele, and
my bones of marble; as though this short threed of mine, were of Adamant; so thy terrours worke up∣on me. Like a moath that frets a garment, and leaves nothing but flockes and dust, and ruine of the good∣liest garment: so the terrors of God, the terrours of conscience, the terrours of the world; the discontents, and feares, the malice of the divell, the malice of some false brethren, and the falling away of others: these things did so worke upon him, and so vexe him, that they did even bring him to nothing; that there was no houre, but it was full of distraction and perturbation. I protest, by the rejoycing I have in Christ Iesus our Lord, I dye daily. This daily death is the generall condition of Gods Saints. Saint Paul suffered it not alone, but he left it also as our inheritance; he dyed daily: and we may say, who doth not dye daily? He that knowes Christ, and hath a will to follow him, he shall finde his life (in this life) to be a continuall death wrastling with him, and tyrannizing over him: as Iob saith, My soule rather desires strangling,Iob 7.15. than to live as I doe: Saint Paul had his death: and the ministers of the Gospell, now have their death; and though they live in a time of peace and plenty, yet they want not their death to gnaw on them. The envy of men, the malice and slander, and villanous reports; whereby they de∣fame and disgrace their brethren, to the pit of hell: the non-proficiencie of men; their scorning of the word: these are as death to a man that is sensible of God or of his government. The Apostle seemes to
make all the day, being divided into two parts, to be a continuall dying. The day, is either naturall or artificiall, and both these are full of deaths, the day naturall is that we worke in, and sleepe in: the day artificiall, is that onely which we worke in, in the common course of nature: and in both these there were deaths to the blessed Apostle: In the day time, the time of worke; I dye daily, in all the passages of my life, in all the practises and exercises of religion: whether it be Prayer, Meditation, or Teaching, and admonishing the people. In all these exercises, I dye daily. In my prayers I dye with coldnesse and dulnesse: I have not zeale to wing my affections to God. In my preaching, I dye with weakenesse and neg∣lect: I cannot set forth that glorious word as I ought to doe. In my Meditations, I dye with sluggishnesse and lazinesse, that I cannot hold on my beginnings in that course. In my Meate and drinke, and other refreshings, I dye: I am eyther too excessive, or else too superstiti∣ously vaine and fearefull. Nay, in that very time of the day, wherein nature brings rest and repose; in the time of night, when I should sleepe and rest, I dye: in my very sleepe. That is full of startling dreames, and fearefull phantasies, and perturbations to vexe my soule, so that every day I dye: whether it be in that part of the day, which is for worke, or that which is for rest: every where, I dye. When the Sunne shines, it is as a blazing starre, that opens the day to mischiefe and discomfort.
When the Moone appeares, it is as a Commet or can∣dle to waken me to distracted thoughts. The Stars are as so many clouds that drowne me in darkenesse. My houres are as Iobs messengers, that bring mee sad reports, one after another. Every minute is like the bodrags in the heart and braine of a man, that are still accrewing fearefull shewes and signes of evill. So that I protest by the re∣joycing I have in the Lord Iesus, I dye daily. 2 Part. The Proofe.Now I come to the second poynt, which is the proofe of this. For there is no man that would be∣leeve it; because flesh and bloud cannot understand how a man should be dead and yet alive. As the Poet saith, As long as a man liveth, whatsoever happen to him, he is well; breake a hand or a foot of him; breake his bones, and let him have life, he is indifferent well. But the children of God, doe not judge so of these things. For life is not to live meerely, but to be in a good e∣state: to be in a healthy condition: therefore seeing the Apostle lived, and had his being among men: he being not now layd in his grave, but conversing in our common element; why then doth he say hee died daily? Why even because of troubles, and of cares. It is true: but because men would not beleeve, how he should have such cares,1 By way of an Oath. and how they should be the cut-throat of his life: therefore, now he interposeth his bond, and it is a firme bond, his oath: which though it be but an imperfect argument, yet is it taken of godly men, for the strongest argument that is in Rebus humanis. For things that are uncer∣taine, are determined by the oath of an honest man;
and men take it for the most certaine truth that can be, because an oath is a bond that gives testimony to the truth. So the Apostle in this, and in other pla∣ces, useth a strange kinde of reasoning, drawn from the contrary, and we are to beleeve him upon his Word. It is true, his friends, and those that are sanctified, will easily beleeve him: but those that are without, that are yet to bee wonne: they are hardly to be perswaded. Therefore for their infirmity, and for the weakenesse of the Corinthians, he puts his oath to it, and sweares it is true, I protest by the reioycing I have in Christ Iesus our Lord, I dye daily. Now you see the nature of the ar∣gument: and if we consider it well, it will appeare that the wisedome of God, in the state of his children, which is so farre above mans reach and reason; that the Angels themselves can scarcely make a delivery of it. For marke, he had said before, I dye daily: and now he proves it by another thing cleane contrary: by his rejoycing daily. By the reioycing that I have in Christ Iesus, continually; by that reioycing, that is al∣way with me: by that reioycing I dye daily. A strange thing! that a man should have feare and care; and yet be ioyfull too, at the same time: to dye, and yet to re∣ioyce, or boast at the same instant, for so the word signi∣fieth; to boast in the apprehension of a good thing: to ioy in a singular measure, for Ioy is the apprehen∣sion of a singular good, in a singular measure: that these two should be put together; to say I reioyce daily, and I dye daily: this is a wonder, which the Lord hath hid from flesh and bloud: which he hath not manifested to the great ones of the world, but to his little despicable ones, even those that take de∣light in the kingdome of Christ. By the reioycing I have
in Christ Iesus our Lord, I dye daily. There is some variety in the reading of these words. Some reade it, by your reioycing: and so that which I must honour, our last translation hath it in the Margine, by your reioycing: some reade it, or re∣ioycing. But there is no great difference, for the sence comes all to one. So Saint Ierome, Saint Augustine, Saint Chrysostome, and Theophilact: they read it, by your reioycing. But then on the other side, there are a number of the Fathers that reade it, our reioycing, as Basile upon Psal. 14. Athanasius; and of later Writers, Luther and Calvin. Onely Beza holds with the Ancients, and saith, your reioycing; making, notwithstanding, no difference in the Text, or in the sence: for (saith he) the Apostles meaning is, by the reioycing that I have of you: and by the reioycing that you have of me; and saith Saint Chrysostome, he calleth the proficiency of the Corinthians, his reioycing; as he saith, 1 Thes. 2. What is our crowne,1 Thes. 2.19. and our reioycing, and our glory? are not ye? And he answers his owne question, and saith, yes! Ye are our crowne, and our reioycing, in the day of the Lord. This I take to be the more fitte and the more lively, and fuller, our reioycing; rather than to reade it yours: although it bee true, it is the common Reioycing of Gods children: they have all the same spirit and the same joyes: yet a man may not lawfully sweare, by that which is in another man; but a man may sweare for himselfe. Thus Saint Paul, although he knew that the Corin∣thians were forward and full of the gifts of the holy Ghost, and of ioy: yet he had no reason to be so con∣fident in them, as to sweare by their reioycing. Be∣cause
a man knowes not what is in his neighbour, he is not certaine: he may iudge the best, but he knowes nothing certainly, and he were a mad man there∣fore, that would sweare for that which he knowes not, therefore the Apostle makes this oath: not of the ioy or gloriation, or boasting, that was in the Corinthi∣ans; but the boasting and gloriation of his owne spirit, in the presence of Christ Iesus. This I take to be the sence, although it be true that the Apostle gloried much in his passions and sufferings at Corinth: and he gloryed too for the preaching and successe of the Go∣spell: this was matter of great gloriation, and boa∣sting, yet it was the inward comfort and testimony of his conscience, that made him sweare, by his reioycing in Christ. Others goe about to put it off with a kinde of As∣severation onely;. Vide Bezae An∣notat. in locum. that is another reading which Saint Ambrose followes, and the vulgar Bibles, and so the common translations at this day; though they touch upon this, and in a manner are weary of the other. As if the Apostle should say, for your glory sake. But those that know the Greeke tongue, they know that , being not written with letters, but like a halfe circle: it is easily brought to be like the word , and so the Scripture may be read promi∣scuously, with eyther of them in this place. But this is against the tenent of all the Fathers of the Church: which have still thought this to be an oath. As Saint Austin writing to Hillary in his 89.Aug ad Hilla. ep. 89. Et lib. 3. de Trin. E∣pistle, he proves it lawfull for a Christian man to sweare, because the Apostle writes by an oath. And in his third Booke of the Trinity, he saith, The Apo∣stle did not feare to confirme the certainty of his salvation
by swearing; for (saith he) by the confidence that I have in Christ Iesus, I dye daily. Among the Greekes, none doubted of it, but those that were simple and un∣learned. Therefore (I say) this was an oath: and so the strongest confirmation that can be. 2 The thing he sweares by. Esay 45.23.But how doth Saint Paul sweare, by that which is not God? It is not lawfull to sweare by any thing, but the name of God: as the Lord saith, Every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confesse me, and sweare by my name.Heb. 6.13. It is true, that when God sweares, having no greater to sweare by, he sweares by himselfe: and when man sweares, he must alway sweare by a greater. For that is the end of an oath, to protest an unknowne truth, by the presence and countenance of a greater person then himselfe, and one which can∣not lye. Therefore it is unlawfull for a Christian to sweare by any name, but the name of God: and that not often, much lesse alway, or in frivolous causes: for this our Lord Christ condemnes, when hee saith, sweare not at all;Math 5.34. that is, not often; nor out of passion. But as an oath is a speciall service of God; so it is to be taken upon speciall occasions: but now we are bound to sweare by no name, but the name of God: and reioy∣cing in Christ, is not Christ himselfe. Wherefore then doth the Apostle sweare, by his reioycing in Christ? We must understand, that to sweare by any imme∣diate fruit of the spirit of God, by any thing that flowes immediately from God to us; it is all one, as to sweare by the name of God it selfe. This is so individuall and inseparable a thing (the comfort, namely, and the joy of Christ hath brought into the world) that it is as inseparable from the spirit, as the
shadow from the body. Therefore, as a man may sweare by the shadow, that there is a body: and swearing the one, he intimates the other, and con∣cludes the other: so the Apostle here, he sweares by this fruit of the holy Ghost, which is ioy and peace: even the peace of God which passeth all understanding: which he found in his heart by the meanes of Christ Iesus, who maketh our ioy to be full, who is the fountaine of ioy; swearing by this, he sweares by the chiefe iewell of salvation: which is the penny that Christ had given him as an earnest, as a pawne and gage of his love. Out of this that he saith Our reioycing, observe (I beseech you) the wondrous temper of a Christian: how he is composed of strange, extreame contraries; of death and life, of sorrow and joy, of peace and war. There is nothing in the world that can be imagined so contrary, as be the severall parts of a Christian mans constitution. Upon this ground, the holy Apo∣stle goeth, 2 Cor 4.2 Cor. 4.8. &c. where he makes the definition of a Christian, after the same manner. Saith he, we are indeed oppressed and persecuted; but yet not crushed altogether: we are as men dead, and yet behold we live; poore, and yet making many rich, as having nothing, and yet we possesse all things. This is that marvellous mix∣ture, that God hath appointed his children to come to: that they should be conformable to the sufferings of Christ, and so be in death, and yet that they should revive againe by the spirit of God: and so no man be lesse in death, being alway in life: and ha∣ving the certaine pledge and pawne of life eternall. As for the men of this world, the sonnes of flesh and bloud; when they thinke themselves most lively;
then are they most deepely in death: every thing worketh against them, the stormes of Gods wrath at∣tend them, and worke upon their consciences (at some time or other) such fearefull deaths, as out of which they can make no evasion or escape. But with the children of God, it is contrary: when they are in the middest of death, they are in the height of life.2 Cor. 4.16. As the Apostle saith, Although our outward man dye daily, and is corrupted; yet the inward man is renew∣ed and revived by the spirit of Christ. So in all the pas∣sages of their life, where death seemes to have the greatest sway and predominancie: even there, is life abundantly over death: and the roote of life, shall at length eate out the fruit of death. And although death make a flourish for a time, upon the Saints of God; yet because there is a root of life, it shall still grow and bud, and bring forth at length: that death may be swallowed up into victory.1 Cor. 15.54. In all things, the chil∣dren of God have full contentment in this life: al∣though they be in the middest of death. This is the great miracle that God doth in the world: Every holy man is a wonder: every good man is a miracle, like the children of Israel,Exod. 14.22. that walked through the deepe, where there was never way knowne before: like the three children in the furnace,Dan. 3.25. that walked in the mid∣dest of the fire, as if they had beene in a pleasant Me∣dow: like the Israelites, and all their cattell that pas∣sed over Iordan:Acts 16.25. like Paul and Sylas, singing at mid∣night in chaines and fetters in prison. A miraculous spectacle to God and men! which drawes the eyes of Angs to the contemplation of it. For in sicknesse, a Christian is full of the saving health of God. In perse∣cution, he is full of quiet and contentment of the holy
Ghost. In prison, he is full of Psalmes and spirituall Songs, as were Paul and Sylas. When he is bound in shackles, he is free, and expedite, and loose. As the Apostle saith in another place, though I be bound,2 Tim. 2.9. yet the word of God is not bound: the Gospell of Christ is not bound. In all things he is a breathing miracle of the power of God: that sounds unto us as so many silver Trumpets; the omnipotencie of God, that makes such a correspondence and proportion betweene life and death, that makes death and life dwell together in one body: and yet hee will evacuate death by the power of life, that life may surmount, and death may be put under; that at the last, death may be debased, and life may be advanced. And in that he saith, Our reioycing, or your reioy∣cing: For it is not materiall whether way it is read, for it is a common ioy. If I reade it, yours, I have it; if mine, you have it; for it is a common ioy in our com∣mon Saviour. This is that which all of us confesse, when we make our prayers to God: we call him our Father, and we call the Saviour of the world, our Saviour, and so we may call the spirit our comforter; because this common veyne of joy, it flowes and runnes in∣to all the parts of Christs mysticall body: in all the parts of the world. The communion of Saints is taught us here. Christ is alike to every one. Our reioycing: mine in Asia, yours in Europe; mine in Ephesus, yours in Corinth; mine on this side the sea, yours beyond the sea. My reioycing, or our reioycing in our common Lord and Saviour. It is ours, because Christ is ours; because he is the Lilly of the field,Cant. 2.1. and the Lilly of the valley; he is the Lilly of the field, not of the garden: a
garden is a private place, reserved for the particular owner of it: but he is the flowre of the field, that all passengers may take him up, and smell to his sweet∣nesse. He is the Lilly of the valley, who conveyes grace and sweetnesse, and beauty, and maiesty, to all that approach him. He rules in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes; because his vertue may be e∣qually diffused: as lines from the center to the circum∣ference, all concurring together in the center. So all nations and people in the world, have seene the salva∣tion of God: because they have met together in the center; our Lord Iesus Christ. By our reioycing in Christ Iesus our Lord. 3 The ground of this reioycing.Here is the ground and foundation, Christ Iesus our Lord. Christ is that fountaine, from whence all streames. If the old man worke death, the new man shall worke life, and we have put off the old man, that we may put on the new; that is, that wee might be more invested with the one, and lesse with the o∣ther. By our reioycing in the Lord Iesus. This common sunne, which is the ioy of the world, is sometimes ours, and sometimes not ours. When it riseth to us, it sets in another place, to another world of people. The Antipodes have not the sunne when we have it; and againe, when they have it, we want it: because of day and night, and intercourse of times. For the sunne compassing the globe of the earth, must (of ne∣cessity) by interposing the shadow, make this diffe∣rence, so that the Sunne is not alway ours, although it be the light of the world. But the Sunne of righte∣ousnesse is alway ours, he is alway above our horizon:
alway beneath our horizon to the Antipodes; as well as to us: and to as many as the Lord shall call, that Lord, is the same he is: the bright morning starre; that was yesterday, to day, and for ever the same.Heb. 13.8. Apoc. 1.8. He is Al∣pha and Omega. By the reioycing that I have in Christ Iesus our Lord. And herein wee are to observe the causes of this joy, for first he is Iesus, and then he is Christ, and then he is our Lord: all this makes up the fulnesse of our joy. If he were not Iesus, he could not worke this mi∣racle in our frayle tabernacles. For as he is God, he is called Iesus: as he is man, he is called Christ. He is called Iesus, because hee is a Saviour: now man cannot save. He is called Christ, because he was an∣noynted: and God cannot be annoynted. It is the pro∣perty of a man, to receive annoynting from a higher thing. This makes the fulnesse of our ioy, for being Iesus, he is able to conferre upon us streames of joy, being the omnipotent fountaine of life; all that we re∣ceive being from him: from him we receive grace for grace, as it is Ioh. 1.Ioh. 1.16. he being the fulnesse of joy from God the Father; at whose birth the Angels sang, Glory to God on high, ioy on earth, to men good will;Luke 2.14. It followes, therefore, that hee is able to worke joy in the spirits of men: that he can give light in darke∣nesse. There is nothing difficult to him, but his spi∣rit can make all things lightsome, he can make a man reioyce in tribulation and affliction, as he is Iesus. And then Christ: that is, annoynted:Psal. 45.7. for hee is an∣noynted with the oyle of gladnesse above his fellowes. And
what is that annoynting, but the oyle of ioy and glad∣nesse? that is, that great fulnesse of ioy, wherewith he is annoynted: that it should not stay upon the head of Aaron or his beard;Psal. 133.2. but should runne downe to the skirts of his cloathing: that all the body of the Priest, should be filled with joy. As our Saviour saith to his Disciples, that when they came to a house,Luke 10.5. they were to salute it, and to say, Peace be to this house. When Christ comes once to a man, hee brings joy: he is that annoynted one; he takes of that oyle of gladnesse, and gives it to his fellowes: that is, to the followers of his salvation. Lastly, he is our Lord. Therefore he is a good Ma∣ster, and wisheth well to his servants: he hath a horne of oyle, and he poures it out: that Amalthean horne of ioy and comfort, and consolation for all the elect of God. And hee is willing to doe it for us, because we ac∣knowledge him to be our Lord. Therefore we must examine our selves by this, whom wee acknow∣ledge to be our Lord. And we shall soone see the rea∣son, why we want this joy: if a man be under the divell, and acknowledge him to be his Lord, he hath nothing to give him but misery and terrour, and dis∣comfort, sorrow and distresse; a man can receive nothing else there, because he serves a bad Master; but if thy Master be Christ, the annoynted of God; he shall bring thee ioy and peace of conscience: and then, certainly, it will manifest it selfe. It will appeare in thy countenance, in thy words, in thy patience in suffe∣ring with Gods Saints: it will appeare in all the pas∣sages of a mans life, that men may perceive, that the oyle of grace is poured out upon him, and is infused into him: and it opens it selfe plainely and manifest∣ly,
in every thing that passeth from him, that is in∣dued with the spirit of God. Let us therefore labour (which is the last poynt of the Text, to preserve the force of this argument:4 The force of the Agument. that we may be sure of our salvation, and of our reioycing in Christ. And (if need be) to protest and sweare it; to lay it to pledge, as a man doth his lands and estate. When he would make a thing certaine, he infeoffes a man in those things that are most neare and deare to him: the best things that he hath. So the best thing that the Apostle had, it was his reioycing in Christ; his comfort of conscience; the peace of God: which farre transcended his passions, and sweetned his afflictions, and made him reioyce in tribulation (that comfort of Christ) that hee had within in his spirit, and from abroad by the proficiency of his Schollars, to see them grow up in the feare of God, in the knowledge of Christ; in the profession of the faith: this is the reioycing the Apostle speakes of. I would that we all had this reioycing: espeeially those that stand in the Apostles place, that they would  follow his steps: to have their reioycing in this one Lord and master, to have no ioy in the world, or in men, in goods and profits, in pleasures, honours, or in preferments; which the world usually buyes and sels. To have no reioycing in these, but as they bee men that belong to God; so let them reioyce onely in God. And there is all the poynt of gloriation. Therefore let not the rich man boast in his riches,Ier. 9.23. or the strong man in his strength: but let him that reioyceth, reioyce in the Lord; for it is he that executes iudgement and iu∣stice, and that sheweth mercy to those that reioyce in him; as the Lord speakes.
Againe, this must teach us to mingle these two together: as the holy Apostle doth, Reioycing and death: we must labour by the study of pleasing Al∣mighty God, to keepe this sweet temper in us. Wee are sure of the one, but we must labour for the other. I wonder not, when I heare thee say (as the Apostle doth here) I dye daily, for every man doth so: there is not the most sensuall man, but he hath a touch of death every day, eyther by sensible misery, or by the touch of conscience: by bringing of his sinnes to his view. That is incident to nature, and a consequent of sinne, to dye. But what is thy reioycing? what com∣fort hast thou in Christ? This is that we should de∣sire, and call upon God continually for: even to make this temper and mixture in us, for the one is as ne∣cessarie as the other: and God is as ready to give the one, as our nature is ready to draw the other upon it selfe. And this must be by this one meanes, the making Iesus Christ thy Lord; knowing no other Lord besides him; no, nor none against him, nor none with him; but that he may have the prehemi∣nence, and be all in all: as he is to his children in the world, and shall be for ever in another world. So thou must make him all thy ayme, all that thou desi∣rest, all thy gloriation; because thou must, or canst desire nothing, but it is seated in him. To conclude with the time, here is a modell of a christian mans estate: death and life, sorrow and ioy: he is composed of such strange differences, as the understanding of man cannot attaine unto. But yet, assuredly, the Lord is never so heavy to him in iudg∣ment, but he is withall rich in mercy: sorrow of heart shall never so surround him, but he shall have the
ioy of the holy Ghost to survive him. As Saint Augu∣stineAugustine. saith upon that place of Paul, Redeeme the time, because the dayes are evill, I (saith he) it is true, the time in this world is evill: but all the dayes that are in Christ, are good dayes; all the dayes of the Lord, are good; all the dayes of sinne are evill. Let us sell them then: he that redeemes; parts with one thing, to get ano∣ther. Let us sell these evill dayes in this world, that we may get those good dayes, in the grace of Christ. And as Saint GregoryGregory. saith, Good Iesus! hee that hath thee, looseth nothing: and though he be in the midst of death, yet he shall be recompenced with life, although hee be in the midst, and swallowed up with sorrow and deepe pangs of conscience, yet thy spirit is there to remove that sorrow; for though sorrow indureth for a night, yet ioy commeth in the morning, Psal. 30.Psal. 30.5. And in thy light wee shall see light; thy wrath indures for the twinckling of an eye, but in thy pleasure, there is life for evermore. This is the blessed state that every Christian is called unto; and the Lord make it every one of our portions, for Iesus Christs sake, Amen. FINIS.
1 COR. 15.32. If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, after the man∣ner of men; what doth it availe me, if there be no resur∣rection from the dead? THis is now the conclusion of that argu∣ment, which Saint Paul draws from his owne person. For drawing his principall argument from the suffe∣rings of the Church, to prove the resurrection of the dead: he begins, first with the generall, and then he descends to the particular; and last of all, he comes to the personall. First, the generall was verse 29. What shall they doe that are baptised for the dead? Then in the next verse, he comes to the Colledge of the Apostles, and saith, We also are in ieopardy every day. And for his owne particular, he protests he dyes dai∣ly; in the verse before the Text. And now he comes to explaine this; how it should be taken: saith he, If I have fought with beasts at E∣phesus after the manner of men. Because he had spo∣ken of a thing unlikely and unusuall, and unwonted: and therefore it might be offensive to Atticke eares, (such as were at Corinth) to say that he lived, and
yet was dead; therefore now he tempers his speech, and mitigates it by this exposition, when he saith, He received the sentence of death against himselfe: for hee was cast to beasts to fight with them: eyther indeed, according to the letter; as it was a kinde of punish∣ment and torment, that the Pagan persecutors assig∣ned the Christians unto: or by way of metaphore; as many and most of the Fathers of the Church inter∣pret it. But how ever, the force of the argument is all one. For whether he were cast to beasts, and suffered to take his weapons; and to defend himselfe: and so by the mercy of God, to escape without hurt from them; or whether he meane by fighting with beasts, beastly minded men; as the phrase of Scripture of∣ten insinuates: the strength of the argument is all one. For often times, a man were better bee cast unto beasts, then to men, there being more mercy, and lesse fury in the pawes of the very beasts, than in the working braines of men, and the malicious convey∣ances that they have in the world. So whether wee take it for beasts, literally, or for men that were beasts, metaphorically: the force of the argument is equall. For, saith he, if there were no hope of the Resurre∣ction, then I would doe as the world doth: and I would say, as they say; I would accommodate my selfe to all mens humours. I would be so farre from casting my selfe into such dangers, as to sight with beasts, or with beastly men; as that I would seeke to recover my owne, which I had once, being a Phari∣sie. I would live a quiet and peaceable life among my brethren, as I did then: when I was rather rea∣dy to doe others hurt, than to suffer any. I would much rather choose that state of life, than thus to be
plagued and plunged, and drowned in misery; if there were not a hope of a Resurrection; but the vi∣gour and life of that hope, duls all the pangs in this world, and sweetens the cup of affliction, which else would eate out my very intrayles. If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, what avayleth it, if the dead rise not? Why should I cast my selfe into these dangers? why should I indure them any longer? why should I not at the first grapling with the troubles of this life, betake my selfe to that more sure and easie con∣dition? But because the Church before mee, hath done thus, therefore I follow her steps. I see what Iohn Baptist hath suffered: I see what Iames the bro∣ther of Iohn hath indured. I see what the Innocents have undergone. I see what the blessed Martyr Ste∣phen hath suffered. All these, in great tranquillity of spirit have yeelded their soules to God. And the Prophets, in former time, I see they have suffered for the same profession, that I now have taken upon me: for their doctrine was the same; they all poyn∣ted to Christ; they all preached the doctrine of the Resurrection, therfore as the Church in generall hath gone before, and all the Colledge of Apostles in parti∣cular have traced after: I also will personally insist in their steps,2 Tim. 1.12. and follow too. I know whom I have be∣leeved, I have laid up my trust in his hand, that will not deceive me, therefore I am assured there shall be a Resurrection of this flesh, of this body, that hath suffered so many torments for the cause of Christ:
it shall be againe invested with so many notes of glory and happinesse, as it hath indured miseries and torments: and that according to the multitude of my sorrowes, so shall my consolations abound in Christ. This I take to be the summe and sence of this Text. But it is intricate to consider the many sences that are given of it: which notwithstanding, we may not neglect any of them, for then wee shall slight the grace of God, which hath alway beene various in his Church. We ought therefore, to view every thing, to prove all things, as the Apostle saith,1 Thes. 5.21. and keepe that which is best and most firme and sollid.Augustne. As Saint Au∣stin saith, God would have his Scriptures to bee hard and difficult, and full of divers sences; because hee would have no idle fellowes to come unto it: be∣cause he would rouse up the diligence of his chil∣dren. The Lord doth not take away the proper sence of the Scriptures, from them that are studious and diligent, and carefull: but onely hee shuts up the sence from negligent and carelesse men, but he opens it againe to those that knocke, as Christ saith, Knocke, and it shall be opened unto you. Therefore, first we are to consider the great and maine difficulty of the Text; in the interpreting of those two words, which are diversly taken:Exposition of the words. First, what it is the Apostle meanes, when he saith, He fought with beasts. Secondly, what it is hee saith, , after men, or after the manner of men. And though the di∣vers editions and translations, have reconciled them to our hand; yet there is nothing so authenticall, but a man may give another exposition as good, and as
full of authority as that. And then after the expositi∣on, we are to come to The description of this trouble, Division.1 What it was, and 2 Where it was. What it was, that it was such a kinde of trouble, as was to death, and to very destruction in the judg∣ment of man, as it appeares plainely by this, and by that in 2 Cor. 1.8. where the Apostle makes a relati∣on of it.2 Cor. 1.8. And then where it was, at Ephesus, the most inge∣nious place in the world, where the divell had set his throne in the greatest triumph. As it is said, Rev. 2 I know thy dwelling,Apoc. 2.13. where Sathans throne is: there was Dyana's temple, the most famous Idoll in the world; the throne of Sathan,Acts 19.35. was there more conspicuously, then any where else: therefore it was most like∣ly, that there should be the greatest persecution, where men were most of all corrupted and infected with Idolatry. And then lastly, to gather the force of the argu∣ment: if there be no Resurrection, what doth it profit me, that I have fought with beasts at Ephesus? As if he should have said, he is a mad man, and a foole, that will cast himselfe into danger without profit. The great adventurers of the world, they still propose to themselves ends of profit, to what good, to what end, things may be: it is that which sets all mens wits on worke: it is that which commands the lives and labours of men to farre and forraine Countries; and he that workes without an end, without appa∣rant profit; he is of all men the most franticke: ther∣fore so must I be, saith the Apostle, if there be no
Resurrection. To what profit is it, that I have fought with beasts? If there be not some profit, but that I have exposed my selfe to danger, onely to get me a name: I were of all others the most furious and mad: but God forbid, that the Church before me, or the Apostles with me, or I my selfe should bee thus deluded; to throw our selves into hazard, & to have no profit: to have no meanes to comfort our selves after our trouble, to have nothing for our labour: God forbid we should be so insensate. Therefore, because we doe thus, and are assured of Gods pro∣mise, that we shall have a reward, and an abundant recompence: therefore as sure as God liveth, we shall not loose our labour, there shall be a Resurrection: for so the Apostles argument is framed. If there be no Resurrection, then why doe I take this paines? and if I take this paines for no profit, then I and the rest of the faithfull that suffer, are mad and furious men; but we are not mad nor furious, but are indued with the spirit of God, and we know what we doe: wee know, whom we have trusted,2 Tim. 1.12. and therefore wee are certaine of an abundant recompence. This is the summe and ground of the argument: and these are the branches of the Text. Of these in order, as the spirit of God shall assist me. And first for that the Apostle saith, If I have fought with beasts. A great many sound Divines, hold it true in the letter: that Saint Paul was obiected to beasts, and was constrained to fight with them, for the saving of his life. You shall understand, that among the severall tor∣ments the Church of God was subject unto by perse∣cutors; this was one kinde: to make the people sport,
by setting two or three of the Saints of God upon a stage; where there were so many Panthers, Leopards, Lyons, or Beares; and there they were to tugge for their lives. We see in the Churches History, this hath beene alway one kinde of their persecution. We see it also of ancient time. In the time of Daniel, King Darius,Dan. 6.16. upon the instigation of his Lords, cast Dani∣el into the Denne: and it is said the Lyons were fa∣mished a long time before, that they should devoure him suddenly, as they iudged: but we know the issue of it, the Lyons (by the mercy of God) were so cou∣chant, to Daniel, that he had no harme. But when his accusers came, they were so rampant, as that they crushed the bones of them, their wives and children, be∣fore they came to the ground.Ignatius Epist. 12 ad Romanos. Saint Ignatius when hee heard the voyce of the Leopard, that was to devoure him; in the height of his spirit, he gave God thanks. Now, saith he, I shall be ground as fine flowre, by the teeth of the Leopard; that I may become fine manchet for God. I shall become bread for Gods owne Table. Sylvanus Bishop of Emesa,Nicephorus Hist. l. 7. c. 16. and divers others of Gods Saints, have passed this way into heaven: even by being objected unto beasts. But Saint Paul, certainly, was not in this manner to bee cast naked and bound as a prey unto the beasts, for that was for condemned men: but Saint Paul was not cast as a condemned man to death, to be torne in pieces: but as a man condemned onely to tryall, ad certamen, to make sport to the people. So there were certaine mercenary fellowes (hirelings) that for money, would adventure their skinnes and lives, and tugge with the Beares: as there was of late amongst us. So the Court of persecutors, when they
had sitten against any of the Saints of God, as it came in their minde to make them a spectacle, and to give sport to the people, they appoynted such a one to be cast to the beasts, not to bee bound hand and foot, and torne in pieces without resistance, but to make use of his weapon, and of the cunning he had: and if it were possible, to make an evasion. In this sort, they say Paul was cast, and objected to the beasts. We see also in Tertullians time,Tertul. it was the com∣mon, exclamation still against the Christians. If the yeere were too hot, or if it were too dry, or if there were barrennesse or any inundation upon the ground, they put it still upon Christians, and their word was, Cast the Christians to the Lyons.Christianum ad Leones. This may well be: this interpretation may well stand, that Saint Paul in this kinde, was objected to the very beasts, to fight for his life. He was not cast to them, as one bound and naked to be torne in pieces of them: but as one that was put to a venture, ad certamen; either by miracle to bee delivered by his fortitude and skill, or else to be devoured. Thus we reade of di∣vers in former time;Q. Curtius. Alexander the great caused Ly∣simachus his deare friend, to be cast to the Lyon: and he by his valour overcame the Lyon, and slew him: and made himselfe after a free man, and better ac∣cepted into favour with Alexander. In this sort some imagine that Saint Paul was rescued and delivered by the power of God Almighty, from the mouth of the Lyon. As he saith, 2 Tim. 4.2 Tim 4.17. God hath delivered me from the mouth of the Lyon, even the Lyon (lite∣rally) to whom he was exposed at his abode at Ephe∣sus, for he was there almost three yeeres. This ex∣position no man can possibly finde fault with, it being
naturall and easie, and as long as the literall sence is easie, and without absurdity may be admitted; we ought not to flye to metaphors. But yet there is some thing, that the contrary side of Divines hold against it. As first, if there had beene such a thing, that Paul had beene cast to beasts at Ephesus, to fight for his life: Saint Luke the great Chronicler of Pauls actions, would not have omitted it, but hee speakes nothing of it, therefore there was no such thing. For, it seemes, that he that takes upon him to write the Hi∣story of a man, must of necessity set down the chiefe and most rare and eminent passages of his life: and what greater and more glorious relation could there be, than that Saint Paul should fight for his life at Ephesus, even with beasts: and that he should by the mercy of God, be delivered, as Daniel was from the Lyons in the denne. Therefore seeing Saint Luke hath buried it in deepe silence, and mentions nothing lesse, therefore it argueth, it must not bee thus understood, that Saint Paul was thus cast unto beasts. But this is easily put off. For wee know that Saint Luke, although he were a diligent writer of the acti∣ons of Saint Paul, yet hee pretermits many things which Saint Paul himselfe in the Catalogue of his owne passions relates,2 Cor. 11.24.25 2 Cor. 11. for we have not in Luke, many passages that are there. As his being a day and a night in the deepe sea, with some others; but onely a briefe and short narration: so that this may well be among those things that Saint Luke left unwritten, as referring us more fully to the narrati∣on of Saint Paul himselfe, who was the best witnesse
of his owne travailes. Another obiection Beza hath: surely, saith hee,  Saint Paul was not cast naked,eza. and bound as a prey to the beasts: for then (saith he) it had beene unlaw∣full for Saint Luke, not to have taken notice of such a wondrous miracle as that. Therefore if hee were cast to them, it must be as a man to fight for his life: and surely (saith he) he came not there to fight with beasts, for that would have taken from his re∣putation; hee would have beene thought to bee a sword-player, to venture and expose his life to fight with beasts, to please and satisfie men. For this ex∣ercise was called venation; and condemned by the Cannon law. A man may not for money, or for pleasing of the people, come upon a Stage to encounter with beasts, but to account it as a bloudy, furious, and barbarous specta∣cle to be abhord and abstained. But this also hath no weight in it.  For a man can∣not say, that Saint Paul came unto it with his will; but he was thrust on, and forced to it: and I cannot imagine, why a man should be lesse reputed of, or how it should bring any shame to his profession, when he suffers wrong. Indeed when he offers wrong, and thrusts him∣selfe into such actions, then it is true: but when he is thrust upon it, that he cannot avoyd it; in this, there is no matter of disreputation. The last objection against this opinion, is of them  that say, that those that were objected to beasts, were alway cast to them for a prey. But that is not so. For all Civilians agree,  that there were two sorts of them that were cast to beasts. There were some that were condemned, accor∣ding
to the quality of their offence, (as they thought) to be torne in pieces: and in that sort Saint Paul was not cast to the beasts. Some againe were cast to them to try masteries; and so (they say) Paul was cast among them, to strive and struggle with them: to see whether God would favour his cause or no: whether he were of a magnanimous spirit, or whether he would yeeld and shrinke, when he saw the beast come neare him, from his faith or no. We cannot imagine that Saint Paul did this, seeking to please the people: to make himselfe a barbarous spectacle to them: or that he did it to tempt God, by offering his life to the beasts: but he was throwne unto them, and compelled to it. And it was no disgrace for him, then to yeeld to it, being forced by the superiour powers. So Calvin, Luther, and Beza, are indifferent. But many of the Ancients, directly expound it according to the letter: as that these beasts, must be understood to be some kinde of Tygers, Leopards, or Lyons: such things Saint Paul was exposed unto, to try the constancy of his faith; to try his prowesse and valour; to see whether God would deliver him or no. I confesse the number of the Authors are so great, and their au∣thority and gifts so excellent, as that I cannot deny but that this may be the true sence of this place. But yet I rather incline to the other; which Saint Chrysostome, Saint Augustine, Saint Cyrill, Tertullian, and divers other Fathers, doe warrant to us as the best, and most proper sence. Namely, that Paul fought with beasts at Ephesus, that is, with beastly men; men of beastly conditions. And there is but one thing difficult in it; that is, that the Apostle should forget
that lenity of spirit in which he useth to speake, and that Christ teacheth all men that they should not give an ill or a rayling word. Whereas there can∣not be a worse word given to a man, than to call him beast. Our Lord and Saviour Christ saith, that he that cals his brother Racha,Math 5.22. he that cals his brother foole, shall be in danger of hell fire. Now he that cals a man foole, speakes farre more moderately and mo∣destly, than he that cals a man a beast. For to call a man foole, is still to call him man: for there is no∣thing can be a foole, but man or woman: for it fals not within the compasse of beasts, to bee wise or foo∣lish: but still when one is called foole, hee is kept in the condition of a man: but when a man cals a man beast, he is out of the element and latitude of men: and compared to a more base and degenerate crea∣ture. But for this we must understand, that our Lord Christ speakes there of the common talke and discourse among Christians; and not of that Apostolicall autho∣rity, not of that magisteriall reproofe that is in the Church, and must be to the worlds end. For every man may not speake alike: a private man must not speake as the Magistrate doth: nor every man must not speake as the Minister may speake, in reproo∣ving sinne, and revealing the will of God. And here we must conceive, that this that the Apostle speaks, it was by Gods spirit dictating it unto him: he was the Prophet of God, put in that place; & he spake it not from himselfe, but from a greater. Therefore to pitch upon this exposition.
If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus. That is, with men that had the faces of men, but the condition of beasts. For this is the common phrase and language of people: when a man transcends others in bruitishnesse and cruelty, in a base conversation; they say he hath put on the beast, he hath left humanity, and is turned beast. For it is mens carriage and conditi∣ons, that distinguisheth them from beasts. So we see the Scripture hath this peculiar phrase: when the Pro∣phet speakes,Isa. 56.10. Isa. 56. of Prophets that would not Preach, or that preached for gaine; he cals them dumb dogs:Phil. 3.2. and the Apostle Paul saith, Beware of dogges, whereby is meant such kinde of men, as are prophane as Esau: those that returne to their vomit of sinne, to their former concupiscence: and contemne and scorne all holy things:Math. 7.6. yea, and our Lord Christ saith, Give not holy things to dogges; that is, to doggish men: so the Prophet David often prayes unto God, to de∣liver his soule from the Lyon, from the Vnicorne, from the Dogge, from the Wolfe. And so Saint Paul calleth Nero,2 Tim. 4.17. Lyon, 2 Tim. 4. The Lord hath delivered me from the mouth of the Lyon: that is, from the Em∣perour Nero:Luke 13.32. so our Lord Christ called Herod, Foxe. Tell that Foxe (saith he) I worke to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfect. There is nothing more usuall in the Scriptures than this: therefore I will not insist to prove or illustrate it any further. It is an excellent thing which ChrysologusChrysologus. saith. The Scriptures of God make no more account of a man to be a man, after he fals to bruitish conditions, but re∣putes him in his ranke among beasts, as he is; a beast
of the field, a beast for the slaughter. The Scripture cals them divels, in the fashion and habite, and outward forme of men: so our Saviour Christ tels us, Iohn 8.Ioh. 8. of a generation of Vipers; of a genealogy of divels; Ye are of your father the divell, saith he; which wee know is not to be understood according to the let∣ter; but is to be referred to the absurd conditions of men. Of which also the Apostle speakes, 2 Thes. 3.2.2 Thes. 3.2. Pray to God for us (saith the Apostle) for what pur∣pose? That we may be delivered from absurd men, men that have no nature in them, that have no common straine of humanity in them, but are altogether de∣generated and metamorphosed into beasts: pray for us to be delivered from them. So that place being compared with this, it is cleere, If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus; that is, with men of bruitish natures; men that cannot be contampred with at all; men of no society, but are given over to their fury and madnesse; that have no more mercy in them, than bruit beasts; and must be let goe to their fury, as a beast that doth what mischiefe it can, without any limitation or respect. To passe from this poynt. We see what base dejection sinne hath brought on us, we that thought to be equall to God,  as God saith, Behold Adam is become as one of us,Gen. 3.22. we are now become as the beasts that perish,Psal. 59.20. as the Prophet David saith, Man being in honour, understood it not, but it be∣come like the beasts that perish.Gen. 3.21. And as man fell to bee like a beast, so God clad him in the skinne of a beast. Our first great grandfather Adam, had the skinnes of beasts for his garments: to signifie, that as they were turned beasts, so God gave them an outward
habite and vesture, to shew them what inwardly they were become. This should teach us, still to have our eye on that wofull calamity that sinne hath brought upon us: to pray to the Lord, to take these barbarous trickes from us, and to teach us the true civility of his Saints: even that honourable con∣versation, that makes of beasts, men, and of men, An∣gels: and not of men, beasts; and of beasts, divels: as our condition is by nature.2 Tim. 3.13. The wicked prosper from worse to worse, as the Apostle saith. It is a strange phrase, that they should prosper from worse to worse; and yet it is true, for the prosperity of the wicked is to his greater destruction. It is the grace of God, that exalts a man, from a beast to be a man: and from the state of a man, to the state of an Angell. And it is the basenesse of nature, that brings a man from being a man, to be a beast, and makes him to creepe or to goe on all foure, to whom the Lord hath given an upright positure, and an erected countenance. So much for the first poynt of interpretation: I have been too long in it, I will conclude the rest more briefe∣ly. Second poynt.Secondly, , according to men, or after the manner of men. This is more intricate than the former: and as I said, wee ought not to misprize what the Church hath taught us, but as dutifull chil∣dren, to see the variety of the gifts of God, as they have flowed in the whole body of the Church, from time to time. This saith Beza,Beza. According to men, it signifieth no more, but according to the fashion of men: as men use to fight with beasts, to get the victory, and to get themselves glory and reputation in the world: what profit shall I have by this, if there be
no Resurrection. So Beza thinks; following the opi∣nion of Ambrose and of divers others before him.S. Ambrose. But, me thinkes, this concludes and inferres nothing. For a man might thus object against this; suppose he went to fight with beasts, as commonly men doe; it is the condition of men to looke for the same re∣ward that others have; and the same glory that o∣ther men atchieve: these men fought with beasts daily, and they looked for their reward; but yet they thought not of the resurrection of the body: they drea∣med not of such a thing as the bodies rising, therefore the Apostle denyes, that he went after the manner of men; for vaine-glory, or for an idle applause of the people, or for any worldly gaine; he had no such project: but he did it onely for the hope of the Re∣surrection. This exposition, though there be some∣what in it, is not close: it is not the proper sence which the most and best follow. AnselmeAnselme. hath another sence of it, If I have fought with beasts after the manner of men, or according to men: that is, saith he, if my passions and sufferings were seene with the eyes of men, all men that had looked upon me at Ephesus, how I was troubled with those wicked men there; they would have thought I had rather fought with beasts, in humane shape, then men , according to mens iudge∣ment, they would rather have seemed beasts than men; so that I call them not beasts simply my selfe, but in the judgement of them that are my beholders and spectators, that see my sufferings: to see with what kinde of wits I was incumbred, they would have judged them beasts, and not men. This is too farre off: because the Apostle useth not this phrase in
that sence, elsewhere in any of his Writings. Thirdly, If I have fought with beasts after the man∣ner of men; that is, if I have fought to death; so Theo∣doret and Theophilact.Theodoret. Theophilact. As those men that used to fight with beasts, they fought to death still: for the man∣ner was, when they sent a malefactor, or a man that was condemned ad certamen, to the stage, to fight with the beast; if perhaps he came away the con∣querour, and slew the beast, yet then the Executio∣ner or Hang-man, was either by sword, or with a halter to strangle him, and to make an end of him: so that still he that fought with beasts, hee fought to death; for if he fought not to death with the beast, yet he came to his death by man, because the Iudge had doomed him to dye: and though he gaue him leave to use his weapon, to take armes, and to defend him∣selfe; yet when that expectation failed, they did not fayle to take away his life another way; so that then the Apostles meaning must be, If he fought with beasts as men used to doe, to fight to death, that have death every way: if they be cast naked, and bound, it is to death, for they are torne in pieces: if they be armed against the beast, and prevaile over him, and be not killed by him, yet the law after tooke hold of them, so that still they fought unto death. This expo∣sition seemeth to be favoured by that in 2 Cor. 1.8.2 Cor. 1.8. where the Apostle saith, We tooke the sentence of death against our selves; that is, there was no way with us but one; there was nothing but death presented to us, the gastly face of destruction and desolation: he speakes there as it is likely of this persecution. But as I said before, they fought not alway to death, but some times for tryall: and besides, if Saint Paul
had fought to death, he could not after that, have related this to us. Therefore I come to the last opinion, and as I take it the best: because of some reverend translations, (to whom I incline more than to any thing which hath beene done in the Church, these many yeeres) which understand the end of it to be this. After the manner of men, that is, to speake after the manner of men; according as it is the Apostles phrase in many other places, and a mans meaning may be the best knowne by his stile: by observing his speech else∣where, a man may trace him the better afterward; one place helpes to cleare another. Now this in the Writings of Saint Paul, is a common speech, after the manner of men, Rom. 3.5. Rom. 6.19.Rom 3.5. . I speake as a man. And Rom 6.19. . J speake after the man∣ner of men. and in di∣vers other places: I speake after the manner of men; and although here be not the word , yet here is the same , which is the same forme and phrase he useth there: and so the Apostles meaning is this; you know men have a forme of speech, to call malitious and cruell men, beasts; and according to that forme I speake, for my Lord and Saviour other∣wise would not give me leave to speake so out of my owne spleene, out of my owne passion, to call men beasts, for they are all my brethren; and all must be imbraced in the bowels of love, and in long suffering and patience. I must labour to bring them in, and call them home: if they be bruitish already, I must seeke to make them men: to reduce them backe againe. But especially I speake according to the custome of men, for your sakes; for your weake∣nesse, for your better understanding: that you may know the greatnesse of my trouble which I sustai∣ned
at Ephesus. I speake after the manner of men, as they use to call wicked men beasts, so give me leave also to call these: who have made themselves so by their malice and persecution. 2 Where the place was?Concerning the place, it was at Ephesus; and when this persecution was, there is great dissention among Writers: some thinke it to be that persecution that Saint Luke mentions,Acts 19.24. Acts 19. Paul being at Ephesus, and preaching against Idolatry, there riseth up De∣metrius the silver Smith, and all the trade comes with him; he being as it were the Master of his Company, he brings his livery after him: a whole army of di∣vellish beasts were raised against Paul. Demetrius be∣ing the principall man that led all the heard after him, and so the whole forrest was in a tumult and uproare.Tertul. Beza. So Tertullian and Beza after him, with di∣vers other of the Fathers. But certainly, this cannot be so: for we reade that Saint Luke sets it downe di∣rectly; that Saint Paul as soone as he had received that affront at Corinth, that great danger when So∣sthenes was beaten, and that Gallio cared for none of these things:Acts 18.17. he after a while, quitted the Citie, and went from Ephesus to Macedonia;Acts 18.18.19. and it is certaine when Saint Paul wrote this, he was at Ephesus, and saith he will stay there till Pentecost,1 Cor. 16.8. as he saith, Cap. 16.8. Therefore it cannot be that hee speakes of that sedition, that Demetrius raysed against him, that being the last period of his stay at Ephesus: he went thence presently upon it, he knew that Christ gave him a commission, when they persecuted and beate him away,Math. 10.14. to shake the dust off his feete against them. Therefore this cannot be admitted. Another Company, expound it thus: that it was the
trouble that happened to him from the sonnes of Sceva, Acts 19.16.Acts 19.16. And the sonnes of Sceva cast out divels in the name of Iesus whom Paul preached. There were seven sonnes of Sceva, and they tooke upon them to cast out divels; and the manner of their conjuration was this, We adiure you by IESVS,Acts 19.13. whom Paul preacheth, to come forth.Verse 14. Now the divell reply∣ed, Iesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye? and so he ranne upon them, and prevailed against them, and tare and rent them. Hereupon some thinke, the sons of Sceva raised persecution against him of envy, be∣cause they suffered that great hurt by the divell. But this is more uncertaine then the former. It cannot be thus: for we know that the sonnes of Sceva invo∣cated the name of Christ, and nominated Christ, whom Paul preacheth: wherein they shewed them∣selves rather friends and allies to Paul, then enemies: and so we have a direct rule, and Canon of Christ,Math. 10. Matth. 10. his Disciples tell him, We saw one casting out divels in thy name, and we forbade him: saith Christ to them, Forbid him not, for he that is with mee, is not against me. Where Christ gave them to under∣stand, that as long as any man, although hee were not of their company and Colledge, yet as long as he profest the name of Christ, and did their miracles in his name, they were with him, and not against him: and though the sonnes of Sceva miscarried, in their desire of lucre, and that they did not their miracles for the good of the Church: yet they pretended friendship to Saint Paul, rather then any adverse dis∣position. Therefore I say this cannot be. But we must understand it, of the totall troubles that hee found at Ephesus; which hee expresseth,
2 Cor. 1.8.2 Cor. 1.8. Brethren, saith he, I would not have you ignorant of the pressures and troubles that wee sustained in Asia: how we were pressed and urged above strength, that we even despaired of life in our owne selves. This desperate life he was cast into, by the malice of the men of Ephesus that studied Idolatry, and for their Idoll Diana: and would therefore have beate downe and destroyed Paul, and the doctrine of Christ. This sedition that they moved against him, he cals fighting with beasts. And so wee must take the sence to be this, that seeing you know that at Ephesus I had such a world of adverse powers a∣gainst me; that I was pressed above measure, urged and crushed even to death: that I received the sentence of condemnation against my selfe:2 Cor. 1.9. that I thought there was no way for me, but to bee devoured, as with the teeth and fury of so many wilde beasts. If you have heard of it, or if you know it, you may ima∣gine that I have some reason to undergoe these troubles. For I brought them upon mine owne head; I might have avoyded them if I would, but I would not doe it, because of that abundant reward and consolation of Christ, which shall raise this my body. So that all the teeth of beasts shall not offer me more wrong and injury in tearing it; then Christ shall give it honour and glory, in saving it after it hath beene thus deformed, and so he shall give ho∣nour to that part which most lacked, which hath most suffered here.1 Cor. 12.24. For this cause, I am thus ready to un∣dergoe these dangers, and to encounter againe with beast after beast, as they shall bee singled out against me: that drinking of that cup of affliction here, I may receive that eternall cup of thanksgiving in the
world to come. This should teach us, (to conclude all in a word) that we ought not to despise the passions of Gods children.  It is a great misery that the world is usu∣ally blinded withall. Whatsoever a man suffers, they thinke he suffers it as a guilty person, they take him as a malefactor: and it is enough that hee is in misery, to prove him also to bee in fault. By this meanes, there should no substantiall argument bee drawne from the martyrdome of Gods Saints: for of all men, (to flesh and bloud, and common sence) they are most miserable and wretched, and pronoun∣ced guilty at every tribunall: and are accounted the malefactors of the world, the plagues of the earth; such as brought barrennesse upon the earth, and o∣ther plagues from God; because men were not en∣lightened by the spirit of grace, therefore they fell to the condemnation of the righteous, which is the greatest plague in the world, to condemne the righ∣teous: for woe to them that call light, darkenesse, and darkenesse, light.Esay. 5.20. Let us, therefore, have speciall regard, when we see troubles fall upon men, to keepe an upright heart to discerne the cause, and the person by the cause, and not the cause by the person. Otherwise it will not follow, that because Saint Paul suffered these plagues for the Resurrection, that therefore there shall be a Resurrection: but God forbid, that a∣ny man should conclude such a peremptory sentence against Gods children, as to account them furious or mad men. And the reason is plaine: because God protesteth to avenge his Saints. Let the bloud of thy Saints which the heathens have shed in thy sight,Psal. 79.11. be a∣venged:
and he protesteth for his people in Egypt; I have seene. I have seene the afflictions of my people in Egypt. And he that gathers the teares of his children, the teares of his Saints into his bottle, (as if to make a speciall drinke and receipt of them) much more doth he gather the drops of bloud of his Saints,Psal. 56.8. that they spend for his sake, and the Gospells. And if he that gives a cup of cold water,Math. 10.42. in the name of a Prophet, it shall be rewarded: much more shall hee be abun∣dantly recompenced, that gives not a cup of cold water, but a chalice of his owne warme bloud; of his dearest bloud, for the maintenance of the truth, that he hath received, and that is inspired into him by the holy Ghost: he that doth it not onely in the name of a Prophet, but in the name of the Prince of the Prophets; Christ Iesus; who is able to give that abun∣dant recompence he hath promised. Let us alway take it to heart, and hold it as a strong argument, e∣ven the Churches sufferings. Because the Church in former times, hath liv'd in this holy faith, because the Church hath bin content to dye for it: & because the Churches in former times have mortified thēselves to the world, and lived as men of another world, to keep themselves pure & undefiled in this world. Let the presidents of these men, bee undoubted rules for us to guide our feete and steps by, as infallible, and unerrant rules; let us follow with unrepealable af∣fections in that blessed truth,Application. which hath beene re∣vealed to us from time to time. The last thing I noted to you was the Application. As it was in Saint Pauls time, so it hath beene in the time of all Christians: we have alway beasts in rhe world. These kinde of beasts, the true Christians and
professors of the Gospell, must be exposed to them. A man may finde Ephesus every where: and as much in this Citie, as in any place in the world, where our beasts be of divers natures. Some are horned beasts. Some are beasts, that devoure with their teeth. Some are beasts, that kicke with the heele. Some are beasts, that hisse and snarle: and with a secret kinde of poyson destroy men. For the one sort, David saith they set their hornes on high; I said to the fooles, deale not so madly,Psal. 75.4.5. and to the ungodly, set not your hornes on high. Proud crea∣tures are compared in the Scriptures,Psalm. 22.12. Amos 4.1 to Buls of Ba∣shan. There be also Kyne of Bashan: for there bee horned creatures of both sexes. Saint Paul was much plagued with women in three or foure places, in the Acts, the women still raised persecution. When men had more modesty, and more grace; then comes Ieze∣bel and Herodias, and raiseth persecution: and al∣though it be not now in that kinde, as it was then, yet they doe it n a semblable way: now adayes they will disgrace one Preacher, and set up another: com∣paring one man with another: perswading men to withdraw the naturall allowance and maintenance due to the Ministers, and so they bring Saint Paul to that extreme necessity, that if any man should judge the case, he would say he were conversant with beasts, rather then men. There are another kinde of beasts, that bite with their teeth. David tels us of them too: that as there are buls of Bashan, and Kine of Bashan, and Vnicornes; so there are Lyons, and Tygers, and Beares, and Wolves, and Dogges; with such kinde of beasts, this
Forrest is full too, which have most virulent and poysonous teeth, and lay on their fangs where it pleaseth them, without all respect either of place or person, or any kinde of humane reference. And they bite even to death and destruction: they will bite a man out of his fortunes, out of his fame, out of his contentment: bite him out of his neighbours, out of his servants, out of his children; there is no place where this dogges tooth is not gressant and playing masteries. As for the other, that be altogether for the heele to kick,Psal. 32.9. and spurne; the Prophet David saith, Psal. 32. Be not like the horse and Mule, whose mouth must be held with bit and bridle, lest they fall upon thee: These Cam∣mels, these Horses and Mules, are as frequent, as the rest of the beasts of the desert be: and they will in∣sult and turne upon every body. There is no man can escape them, but they will now and then give him a dash with the heele, before hee be aware of them. And for those other that are in lurking holes, and murmure and grumble, and like Serpents doe but only hisse: our world is also replenished with them, like fiery Serpents in the wildernesse, that would creepe upon a mans legs, before hee knew where he was: and on a sudden, sting him. Such kinde of beasts, all the Ministers of God must resolve to fight withall: and al Christian men.2 Tim. 3.12. Al that wil live godly in Christ Iesus, (saith the Apostle) must suffer persecution: and they must be persecuted from such kinde of beasts as these, but he that is the God of men and Angels, hee shall one day, either turne these beasts into men, or else destroy them as beasts. In the meane time, our prayer
must be with David, Psal, 3.7.Psal. 3.7. Lord, breake the hornes of the ungodly, strike the iaw bones of thine enemies, breake their teeth asunder, breake the teeth of the ungod∣ly, and send them downe their throat, that they may be able to doe no more mischiefe. These, and the like prayers, the Prophet hath in the high spirit of revelation: whereby it was assured him, that they would not be better. But we must pray unto God to amend them: that it would please God to turne their faces againe, and to make him that is beastly, to re∣member humanity: and to come home againe to himselfe, and know the doctrine of the Gospell of Christ: and so settle himselfe in Christian Charity and love, as Saint Paul teacheth: and labour to bee a member of that body, and to keepe within the com∣passe of the Church; and no more to be extravagant from the Common-wealth of Israell. That hee may have the promise of God here, and the per∣formance of them in the life to come. Which the Lord grant unto us, Amen. FINIS.
1 COR. 15.32.33. Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. Be not deceived, evill words corrupt good manners. IT was a true saying of Saint Augu∣stine;August. take away once the faith and assurance of the Resurrection, and take away all the care of religion. Therefore this poynt being well proved, it brings in all the rest: and if this poynt be left weake and naked, all the rest, of necessity must shake and totter, as being imper∣fect. Therefore this holy vessell, this blessed Apostle Saint Paul (whom Chrysostome cals the eye of truth,Chrysost. and the sunne of the world, under Christ Iesus) he la∣bours by all meanes (as Tertullian saith) with all the strength of the Holy Ghost (that is so much as any man could be capable of) to make cleare this poynt of our faith, the certainty of the Resurrection: to lay this fundamentall stone, this corner stone, that the rest of the house and body of Religion may be built up∣on it. And to the end he may doe it, hee leaves no stone unrolled: but takes an argument from every thing: yea, even from his adversaries: from the E∣picures; from the common fashion of the blinde world. The childe of God gaynes every where: and
he mends and betters his wisedome, out of the folly of the evill world. Here now, the Apostle takes upon him the person of another man: and speakes as the phanaticall and beastly people of this life would speake. Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. A thing which we know the Apostle was farre from. But yet not∣withstanding, he shewes that it had some force of an argument in it: if so be there were no Resurrection. For if a man must dye as a beast, I see no reason why a man may not live so too: yea, and take his full contentment in these things, as having no hap∣pinesse after this life, because hee hath his portion here. So Saint Chrysostome saith well:Chrysost. The Apostle speakes here, as a man that were an actor in a Come∣dy, that puts upon him the person of another man, the habite of another: where a beggerly fellow, oft times, comes forth in the habite of a Noble man: and contrariwise, a Noble man or a King, in the habite of a hermite; and so they passe some in∣telligible matter to the company, under those di∣vers representations. So the Apostle here, after he had used arguments drawne from common sence and reason; and from the inconvenience that might follow by admitting the contrary; Now here hee puts upon himselfe the person of an Epicure: and he proves out of that (as being a strong argument) the certainty of the Resurrection. For (saith he) if this Epicurious life may be justly condemned, as the ba∣sest and most bruitish life in the world, so that their madnesse is hated of all men: It followes then, that there is a hope of the godly, that they shall rise a∣gaine in their bodies; or else we would give way to
their madnesse. For the madnesse and fury of these men, hath some wisedome and reason in it: except wee set downe this poynt for certaine, that there shall be a Resurrection. For what should a man doe, that hath nothing to looke for after this life, but take his time while he is here? And so wee, that know the Epicures to be a most detestable sect; we make them sensible and reasonable; if wee yeeld once to any doubt of the Resurrection. They are now no more fooles and mad men; but wise, to take that opportunity which flies from us: which wee deny our selves, and care not for, and they enjoy. Namely, eating, and drinking; that is, all carnall de∣lights and satisfactions of nature, that may give con∣tent: which in the meane time we want: so they have something, and we nothing: and if our trust were onely here, if our hope were onely for this life, they were in better case then we, a better sort of men then we. Therefore I would say as they say, if there were no Resurrection, I would hold with their base and damnable conclusion. Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. But because you know how bruitish this is, that it is hissed out of all the schooles of common reason: you know that the Philosophers that saw nothing but by the light of nature, they damned these vile and sensuall positions. Therefore I beseech you that are Christians, be not deceived in these things: for evill words corrupt good manners; that is, when any motion tending to this purpose, comes into your hearts; or when you heare it with your eares, from other men, to deny the Resurrecti∣on, and to give assurance of happinesse in the things of this life; take heed, be not deceived; the Philoso∣phers
could not be deceived by the Epicures; there∣fore much more should you that are Christians, take heed: for he that denyes the Resurrection, is an Epi∣cure: there can be no greater Epicure in the world, than he that denyes the Resurrection, and there is no man more beastly and filthy, than hee that hopes for happinesse here in this life: such men are the ve∣ry sinkes of sinne, and the dregges of damnation. This is the scope of the place. To proceed in order. First we are to consider the connexion and joynting of these, with the words before.Division into the Connexion and the Argu∣ment. Secondly, the argument which the Apostle pro∣pounds: which hath two parts in it: First, there is a poyson. Secondly, a counterpoyson: a remedy or antidote a∣gainst this poyson. The poyson is contained in these words; (for the best are fayne to worke with poyson sometimes, and the more infectious the disease is, the more poyson they use: now the Apostle to worke this poyson of theirs, into physicke he brings a counter poyson.) The poyson, I say, is in these words, Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. The antidote, in these words; Be not deceived, evill words corrupt good manners. In the first, the pestilent heart he brings not in, in his owne person, but in the person of an Epicure: where we are to consider, First, their profession, and then The reason of their profession: First, their profession is this; Let us eate and drinke; The reason that is alleadged, is as beastly and as
brutish as the other: for we shall dye to morrow. There∣fore let us eate and drinke, to day; the beastliest con∣clusion that can be in this world. For they that have but till to morrow to live, had need to bethinke themselves to day: and not to drinke and swill, and play the beast; which is a fearefull corrupting of mans nature and understanding. Then for the Antidote, that the Apostle gives a∣gainst it, First he saith by way of caution: be not deceived: he gives a generall caution, take heed, be not decei∣ved and drawne away from the hope of heaven and salvation, by the base charmes of these Syrene songs, Be not deceived. Secondly, hee gives a demonstration, why they ought to beware and take heed: For evill words, cor∣rupt good manners: and it is a thing that wee should chiefly seeke and take heed to, that our good man∣ners be not corrupted. But evill words corrupt good manners: there is no such gangrene, as evill words are, to the good manners of men: therefore we ought to avoyd and detest them: for if they be evill words, they will corrupt good manners: these are evill words, therefore we ought to take heed of them; so the A∣postle argues in these words: certainly, these are e∣vill words: and evill words corrupt good manners; and good manners, are the virginity of the soule: and wee should keepe that inviolable. Therefore, for our life, we must strive to avoyd these evill words, as the language of the divell, and not of men. Be not decei∣ved, evill words corrupt good manners. These are the branches of the Text. You must understand, that some of the Fathers
reade the Text otherwise: for looke on the words, and you shall see how the divers poyntings, makes di∣versitie of lections; for whereas presently before the Text, the Apostle had said, If the dead rise not againe: some of the Fathers refer those words to this part of the sentence now read: If the dead rise not againe, let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. And in∣deed it may as well be referred this way, as the o∣ther: for it is taken from the common tenent of the Chapter; If there be no resurrection: which is still to be repeated upon every severall argument. But our common reading is this, If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, what a∣vaileth it, if the dead rise not? Now Chrysostome,Chrysost. Theophylact. and Theophilact reade it thus. If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what doth it profit me? and there they make a stop. If the dead rise not, let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. But this, as you see, is not greatly materiall, onely I must note it for the ho∣nour of the Church of God: to see the variety of that gift of interpretation: for (as I have often told you) there is no gift more excellent in the Church, then the gift of proper interpretation; to know the sence of the Scriptures, and to be able to deduce it to the right parts; it is the greatest divinity that can be. Al∣though the common people understand nothing, but that which concernes manners, (that which al∣lureth them to good, and feares and affrights them from their sinnes) yet the especiall divinity is, in the matter of interpretation. But which way soever wee reade it, eyther as a thing spoken with an high sto∣macke, with an indignation; Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye:
Or if we take it as a consequent; if there be no Re∣surrection, (as Saint Chrysostome saith,) Let us eate and drinke for to morrow we shall dye: the Argument is still one and the same. But we follow the common expo∣sition, which all Translations follow: that the words are spoken from a high stomacke, the Apostle speakes in a holy impatience; What should I doe fighting with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, if there be no resurrection? If there were no Resurrection, I would rather follow my cups as the Epicures; I would know the things that belong to the pleasures of the world, I would make me friends of all men; I would offend no man in matters of faith and profession: therefore it is onely the conscience to the doctrine of the faith of the Resurrection, that bindes me to resist all men, and to encounter with the beasts of the field; to take whatsoever fals unto me by the provi∣dence of God, rather than to betray this one poynt of my faith; (which is the chiefe of all) the Resurre∣ction of the body. For the sentence that he brings in, in the person of the Epicure speaking; it is taken out of Isa. 22.13.Isa. 22.13. It was the voyce of those obstinate and rebellious people the Iewes, in the time of that Prophet, saith Isay, here is nothing but feasting insteed of fasting; killing of sheepe, and slaying of Oxen. When they should have considered the judgement of God upon their neckes, they fell to pleasures: and were so farre from repenting and turning to God by contri∣tion, that they devised preparation for their bellies to satisfie their lusts: Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. A base and detestable speech, which the holy Ghost notes against those obstinate
Iewes: that when the Prophet would bring them to a serious consideration of their miserable estate, then being returned from Babylon, and that all was wa∣sted round about them, and they had nothing left but a poore ruined Citie: yet notwithstanding they would not bee wonne to God, but would fall still to their pleasures, and drowne themselves in the cups of excesse, that so they might drinke downe their sorrow, as the wicked wretches of the world doe, that have no other comfort in misery and af∣fliction, but to drinke and seeke to be merry; to worke out the crosses and judgements of God, by some worldly jollity. Thus did Caius Marius: Plu∣tarchPlutarch. saith of him, that being a man of great afflicti∣on and misery in his latter dayes, when hee saw there was no way for him to escape the hands of Scilla, he tooke the advantage of his absence, and gave himselfe to drinking, and excessive courses, to forget his misery, and so indeed hee shortened his dayes. And it is wondrous and remarkable, that the Prophet saith in that place, These things (saith he) are entred into the eares of the Lord of hoasts, and they are most abhominable in his sight, and whereas you say,Esay 22.13. Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. As I live, saith the Lord, you shall dye indeed; the plague shall not be taken from you, till you be all consumed, till you be all dead under the stroke of it. It is the just judgement of God upon obstinate sin∣ners, that resolve to make merry when God cals to mourning: that kicke against the pricke, and strive a∣gainst the hand of the Almighty: that thinke to drowne the memory of Gods judgements in their cups at their tables. The Lord shall worke the con∣trary
upon such a man; and he shall finde that he hath done himselfe no good by this: but hath brought upon himselfe his owne just confusion. For so it befell these; they dyed, indeed, and this plague was not removed from them, till they were all con∣sumed. So we see by this now, that the world is no changling. The blessed Prophet Isay lived almost 700. yeeres before Saint Paul, and in his time there was such a damned crew as this, that uttered this speech against heaven, against reason, against the hand of God, and against their owne consciences. Af∣terwards, when Saint Paul came into the stage of this world, he findes a company of wicked men, iust like the former. By this we see, that the world is ever drowned in iniquity, it is alway like it selfe in evill, till the hand of God renew, reforme, and regenerate our spirits; it is impossible but that flesh should speake of flesh, and should savour the things of the world, and not the things of God, that it may be carried with a full swing after its owne impie∣ties, grow worse and worse, and never leave sin∣ning, till at last it sinke in sinne, and the pit close her mouth upon it. Let us therefore be warie, in following the tract of our forefathers. If they were naught, we have no reason to insist in their steps: except it be in good, except it be according to the wayes of God, accor∣ding to the holy pathes of the Almighty. For it fol∣lowes not, that because sinne hath beene predomi∣nant in all ages, that therefore we should use it now. It followes not, that because women have prancked themselves in pride, and made themselves the Idols
of the world; that therefore the daughters of Sarah should doe it now. It followes not, that because drunkennesse hath beene a common vice hereto∣fore, that therefore men should hunt and follow af∣ter it now. We have no reason to follow our anci∣ents in ill customes: except wee will chuse to perish in those ill customes. Therefore the Apostle bringeth an ancient stale sinne, and useth the same sentence: Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. To eate and drinke, are the most essentiall necessaries of our nature, the supporters of our being: and there is no life, but the Lord hath appointed it to be su∣stained by these two proppes, Eating and Drinking. Eating, to supply the dryer and more sollid part of the body: and drinking, to moysten, to bee a coach and conveyance for the meate that we eate: to be a cooling and refrigeration of the heate of the body. And in both of them, God hath set his blessing: that by eating and drinking, the life of man should bee preserved and prolonged: in some to forty, in some to fifty, in some, longer by many yeares, by the blessing of the Almighty. Therefore, to eate and drinke, so farre as to recreate the body, to refresh the spirits, to strengthen us in our functions and callings; to incourage us to give thankes to God, who is our fee∣der: eating and drinking be as necessary as living. But the eating and drinking here intended and spo∣ken of, Let us eate to surfetting, let us drinke to drun∣kennesse; let us eate and drinke to excesse: to study these things onely for satiety and gurmandizing, and that fulnesse that may confound nature, and drowne the spirits of men, and not build them up in the feare of God, and in thankfulnesse to him: this is that they meane here; Let us eate so, as that we may over-eate;
let us drinke so, as that we may drowne our understan∣dings in drinke. When men cannot tell how to use the gifts of God moderately, they cannot eate as o∣ther men eate, but as monsters: they cannot drinke as moderate men drinke, but as spunges that devoure all within their compasse: that their bodies, many times, are so full of ballast; that the whole ship is lost even in the harbour: it is not able to hold all the wa∣ter, but sinkes under the burden, and is made a spe∣ctacle of misery to God, to Angels, and to men, to in∣sult over. This brutish eating and drinking, savours of bestia∣lity. Eating and drinking, it is the meere felicity of the beast in this world. As Cornelius Tacitus saith well: some men are like beasts, and goe no further; if you give them a little fodder, they will lye slum∣bering, and be idle, and take no further care: such are those people,Psal. 17.14. Tertul. whose belly God fils with his hid trea∣sure: those whose belly is their God, as Tertullian right∣ly describes them. Their stomacke is their Altar. Their belly is their God. Their Priest is their Cooke. Their holy Ghost is the smell of their meate. Their graces of the spirit, are their sauces. Their Kitchin, is their Church and Temple. And that Aculiculus (the most filthy part of al the body) is their great and admired Idoll. As the same Father goeth on. Thou saist thou hast faith, hope, and charity. Thy faith is boyling in the kitchin. Thy charity is in thy Caldron or pot. Thy hope is in those divers dishes brought to thy
table. Thus Tertullian hath described the condition of these kinde of brutish men. And we see that in ancient times, (before men had the knowledge of Almighty God) they placed a great happinesse in this one poynt, of eating and drinking, to make them∣selves bruit beasts without understanding, as Saint Peter cals them, 2 Pet. 2.12.2 Pet. 2.12. unreasonable brutish beasts. Insomuch, as one great King among them, when he dyed, commanded this Epitaph to be set upon his tombe: This I have, that I have eaten and drunken: all the rest is lost: that I have; all the rest, is left and forsaken:Tully. Aristotle. which as Tully saith well out of Aristotle, what other thing then this, could have beene set upon the tombe of an Oxe or bruit beast: to say I have nothing else, but that I have eaten, but that I have consumed and driven into my paunch, and so into the draught, that I have, and no posses∣sion else? But Christians have another language: those things we have, that we have learned out of Gods word; the wisedome that we have gotten of hea∣ven, and heavenly things: these things we have left us, when our life leaves us: and nothing remaines, but the portion of these. Those that have read any thing of the Poets, they know what was the common language of seduced nature. When God left them to their owne dregges, (miserable poore creatures) they had no further aymes and intents, then these transitory and peri∣shing things, the filling of their bellies: whose belly is their God, whose end is damnation; as the Apostle saith, Phil. 3.18.Phil. 3.18. Whose glory is their shame, and such was the glory of all the heathen. Another of them said, Eate, drinke, and play: for
after death there is no pleasure,Ede, bibe, lude, post mrtem nulla voluptas. Horac. there is nothing remains. Another comes in with his vye; and saith, The Sun, indeed, may rise and set, and rise againe; but when our night comes once, (the night of death) we sleepe for ever: and there we lye, and there is no more to be heard of us. Another of them saith, We must ease our youth, and take the benefit of it, as a flower: because it runnes away with a swift foot. And another saith, use thy pleasures now; for thou knowest not whether ever they will come againe: thou knowest not whether ever after, thou shalt have opportu∣nity to enioy them. Thus this beastly congregation of brutish swinish people, they apprehended with the greatest industry that could be, these vile pleasures of eating and drinking: as though there were a neces∣sity of pleasures in this life; and that the greatest plea∣sure consisted in the palate, in consuming of meate and drinke. According as this wicked crew which the Apostle speakes of here, said, Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. There is no wise man would ever give himselfe to this most bestiall fashion, were it but for the ill consequents of it: for to say the truth, there is no∣thing makes a man lesse like a man, then to be a great drinker; especially to be a great eater: such be∣ing the very monsters of mankinde. Nature is content with little; and those that exceed that measure, are hated, and ridiculous to all men. To see, what mis∣chiefe it brings to the body, to this little frame of the world! To see, what intollerable dammage accrewes by it to the understandings of men! What grosse heavinesse it brings upon the body!
How it takes away all nimblenesse and agility! How it takes away all the powers of the spirits! How it confounds the memory! How it drownes every part of reasonable dis∣course! How it makes a man a swadde, and deformes that proportion and comely figure that God hath impo∣sed upon him! Every man knowes these things, by common and wofull experience: and yet these wretches cry out, Let us eate and drinke: As if they should have said, Let us become fooles: Let us make our selves mad: Let us drowne our understandings: Let us disfigure our selves, that men may not know us to be men: for nothing makes a man lesse discerned to be that which once he was, then exces∣sive eating and drinking. Let us so eate and drinke, therefore, that we may eate and drinke in heaven; let us not so set our selves upon our bellies, as to become sonnes of Belial. Let us take our bread here, as an earnest of that bread we shall have in heaven. Let us sit at our tables so here, as a representation of the 12. Tables, on which the 12 Apostles shall iudge the 12 Tribes of Israel.Luke 22.30. Christ saith, They shall sit upon 12 Tables, and eate and drinke with him in the Kingdome of God. It should teach us to eate and drinke these temporall things, with conscience, with remembrance, with prefigurati∣on, and signification of those eternall meates & drinks, which we shall have in the kingdome of heaven, by the mercy God. For although it is true, wee shall not eate and drinke there; yet because this life con∣sists
in eating and drinking; the holy Ghost hath set us downe the modell of the life to come, with such ioyes and delights, as may be compared, nay, which farre transcend eating and drinking; but can by no meanes better be expressed to us, than by these of eating and drinking. For to eate and to drinke, and to reigne, and to reioyce, and to dance and sing; there are no such things in heaven: but we cannot understand the ioy in heaven, while we are here upon earth; except it be set forth to us by these foyles. Therefore the Lord condescends to our capacity, and tels us of eating and drinking in heaven. Let us therfore, eate so here, as that we may maintaine a hope of heaven: Let not our tables be made a snare here:Rom. 11.9. that which God hath appointed for our sustentation, let it not turne to our confusion. God hath not appoynted meate and drinke to overthrow us, but to refresh us: to make us fitter for his service, and more able to the workes of our calling: let us therefore disclaime and abhorre this brutish acclamation which these wicked wretches make, that have no portion but their belly; that are altogether for the gut; and let us repute them among the basest of beasts: but let us so eate, as those that shall receive eternall food in the kingdome of God. So much for the first poynt, the poyson propounded. Now we are to see the cause that these men al∣leadge for themselves,2 Poynt. Reason alledgd. To morrow wee shall dye. why they should eate and drinke. For the wretched understanding of men is so depraved and corrupted by the judgement of God, that they will drinke poyson upon reason: these Epicures alleadge reason for their brutish course: and their reason is, because
To morrow we shall dye. This was a close mockery; for when Isay told them in his time, they should dye by the judgement of God for their wickednesse: they mocked God in the Prophet. As if they should say, he tels us we shall dye, he still threatens judgement, and we know not how soone we may be taken out of this world: ther∣fore as long as we live, let us have a time of it; and while we live, let us live: since our time is short, let us take the benefit of that time we have: and so make it our happinesse. See the wondrous stroke of Gods hand, in blind∣ing the understanding of man! We are subject (God knowes) to the whole hand of God: and sinne workes shame and confusion every where. But there is no plague like this, when a mans braine is smitten; when his understanding is disturbed; when he draws false and base conclusions out of Idle and foolish pre∣mises: then comes the wracke and ruine of the poor creature. There is nothing so wretched and miserable in the world, as a mad man. And in the body of Christianity, there are none so mad, as those men that argue after a contrary manner; which upon strange premises, bring in unnaturall conclusions. For, I beseech you, cōsider; doth it follow, because to mor∣row we shall dye, that therefore we should feast & ioviall it out to day? nay cleane contrary. It followes, rather, thou shouldest throw thy selfe downe in spirit, and humble thy soule with fasting and prayer: and in all the parts of humiliation to God, to crave pardon for thy sinnes; and so to prepare thee a way to everla∣sting glory. How can thy meate be digested, when
thou must dye to morrow? what man is so stout hear∣ted, that if he knew he should dye to morrow, would feast to day? can such a man swallow down his morsels with pleasure? can he put over his drink with delight? can he have any taste or rellish in these things, that is destinated a dying man? It is a wret∣ched and divellish conclusion. And yet God gives o∣ver the wicked & wretched world, to draw poysonful sences, and wicked conclusions, out of cleane contra∣ry premyses. What is that thou sayest (saith Saint Austine) To morrow we shall dye, let us eate and drinke? saith he, thou hast terrified mee, indeed, but thou hast not deceived me. Thou hast terrified me, be∣cause thou sayest to morrow I shall dye: and perhaps so I may. The frailty of my nature is such, that I may dye to night before to morrow. Yet thou hast not deceived me: for if I shall dye to morrow (as thou sayest) I will fast to day certainly:Augustine. so Saint Austine concludes: and so would all reason conclude, even a naturall man: for as PlutarchPlutarch. saith, there is no man, that if the Emperour should send him word that he should prepare himselfe; and that after three dayes he should dye: there is no man would be so brutish, as to spend that time with Whores, or in Tavernes and Alehouses, and places of pleasure: but rather betake himselfe to his study and private meditati∣ons; to sorrow and anguish: he would spend his time so, as might savour something of a Philoso∣pher. This the children of God have ever done. When Hezekias was told by the Prophet,2 King 20.1. Set thy house in order, for thou shalt dye, we see what was his course: He turned his face to the wall, and wept, and prayed to
God: and desired him to remember the faithfulnesse of his heart: he poures out his soule before the Lord. Here is the true disposition of a gratious man. It is also the act of a reasonable man: for reason teacheth men this, although they be not illuminated, nor have grace from above. But then, you will say, how followes the argument of the Apostle, where he saith, Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye? Be not deceived, &c. The reason followeth, thus: because these men to whom the Apostle speakes, had a certaine know∣ledge of the Resurrection: they knew there was a better life: and although the Philosopher knew it not, yet he knew that there was a greater meanes to make men at peace with God; by a moderate life, ra∣ther than by an excessive course: and yet the Apo¦stles argument is true. For suppose there were no Resurrection, for the good or for the bad, but that all should dye in a brutish manner as the beasts doe: then it were true, this would follow, Let us eate and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. That is, let us have some thing in this life, before we goe, for we shall have nothing after: let us take the pleasures and benefits of this life, while it lasteth. The last thing to be noted out of this poynt, is this, that it hath beene alway a received and com∣mon tenent of the world, that all men must dye. And though this rabblement were brutish and damnable in uttering these speeches to make so bad a use of the shortnesse of their life (which they should have imployed to better purposes, and have redeemed the time, death so fast comming on) yet this bruit company were better than another generation that
are in the world, who perswade themselves, that they are immortall. There are a sort of wicked men, whose hornes are growne great; the mighty pushers of the world, that imagine they shall never dye: and upon confidence that they are immortall, they will doe what they list in the world: not by ea∣ting and drinking (for they might be tolerated in these things) but they take away the meate and drinke from the poore children of God: they take a∣way their meanes and their liberties, take away their good name; yea, they take away their lives: and all upon a confidence of remaining here for ever; that no death, nor no change can assayle them. These are the great Gyants of the world, that trouble us farre worse than the Epicures doe, even our mighty neigh∣bours, our bloudy malicious adversaries; our gree∣dy enemies: who will shew the latitude of their power, in avenging themselves: that by their sinfull doings and wicked practises, fill the world with cla∣mours, with indignation and blasphemy, and make men doubt whether there be a God or no in the world. These are they, that upon pretence of im∣mortality, that they shall never be shaken; they con∣found all things, Churches, Temples, Widdowes hou∣ses; whatsoever comes within their fangs, they lay hold on, and greedily apprehend it, to the over∣throw of the condition of Gods people in the world, and onely live by the bloud of other men. These are they that build their houses in sacriledge;Amos 2.6. that sell the poore for old shooes; these are they that grinde the faces of Gods people:Esay 3.15. that ioyne house to house, and land to land; and like unsatiable beasts are still feeding on the bloud.Esay 5.8. It were well if
they would onely say, Let us eate and drinke: but they must eate and drinke the bloud of Gods people, and feed upon the living Temples of the holy Ghost. A strange & wofull thing! yet thus do al our gripple miscreant Vsurers, our great biting Extortioners: that in stead of doing justice in their place, thinke that God hath set them up, that they might pull all men downe, and tread upon their neckes: and that they might make their advantage of the havocke of the Church of God. These are worse than the company here mentioned: for they doe nothing but eate and drinke, and are harmelesse in comparison of these beasts of the forrest, that destroy all that is before them: and the steppes of their feet must be upon the necks of Gods people: this plague the Church is worse troubled with, then with the Epicures them∣selves. I should now come to the Antidote which the A∣postle gives: (but the time is upon expiration) Be not deceived; and afterwards to the speech the Apostle ci∣teth out of the Poet, for the proofe of his exhortati∣on: Evill words corrupt good manners. Be not deceived. As if he should have said,The Antidote. although their words are faire and plausible to flesh and bloud, yet they will meerely deceive you: and there is no man that by his will would be deceived. There is nothing that grieves a man more, than to see himselfe decei∣ved, though it be but in a trifle; if it be but in a Iigg or common Iergan; if it be but in one of his riddles, or doubtfull speeches: a man thinkes himselfe
greatly disparaged, if he finde himselfe deceived. But especially if it be in a matter of moment; if it concerne him much, then it grieves and vexeth him extreamely: that either his wits should not serve him to finde out the fallacie, or that by his foolish∣nesse and too much credulity, he should give him∣selfe to be made a prey to his enemies and adversa∣ries to catch him. There is nothing that a wise man delights in more, than to apprehend the truth: and there is nothing for which hee is more sorry, than to be deluded with lies and errour. For as truth is the light of the soule, so errour is the death of the soule: the depravation of all sence and understanding. It is a damnable meere nothing: Errour being taken from a word that signifieth going out of the way. As we know a traveller that goeth a long way that he knoweth not, there is nothing more troublesome to him, than when he findes himselfe out of his way; and to goe backe againe, and recover his former tract; it may be it is neither easie nor possible; and to go forward, the further he goeth, the grosser errours he runs into. Much more (beloved) is it in poynt of religion. To erre in humane things, it is a smaller matter, and is soone corrected: but to erre in divine matters, that concerne the soules health; it is a fear∣full by-sliding, a wofull outwaying: it brings a man to downefals, and to precipices of soule and body both together. It drawes the ruine of the whole man af∣ter it. Therefore, saith the Apostle, Be not deceived; goe not out of the way; but such words as these, drive you out of the way, they tell you lyes, they leade you into the broad way, and you must seeke the narrow way: for although the broad way have better
passage at the first, yet there is nothing but bram∣bles and downefals at the conclusion. The wayes that God hath chalked out to us in his word, and by common sence and reason; from these we must not erre: because we know not whether ever God will give us that mercy, to call us into them againe, or no. So let me say to you, as the Apostle saith here: Be not deceived. Looke to your judgements, looke to your affections; they are alway ready to deceive: they are alway ministring matter of errour and sedu∣ction: they are meere seducers: he that guides with∣out God, he is no guide but a misguider: and he that leades without God, he is no leader, but a misleader. Take heed what thou thinkest, lest thy thoughts de∣ceive thee; take heed what thou speakest, lest thy words intangle thee: take heed what thou doest, lest thy bad practise and evill conditions, at the last bring thee into by-wayes and pitfals of destruction; that thou canst make no deliverance of thine owne soule. And then, againe, the Apostle would teach us this: that these very necessary things, give us occasion of much errour. Who would thinke that a man should erre in these? these are the plainest wayes that any man can take. For what way can a man take to save his life, but by eating and drinking in convenient time and season? And yet there is errour in these things too. Now then, God be mercifull to us for all the rest: if such grosse errours be incident to the ne∣cessaries of our life, what shall we say to the superflu∣ities of it? if our meate and drinke be snares and pit∣fals, to drive us out of the way of life eternall; what
is our money? what is our malice? what is our quar∣relling? what our proud and haughty conceits against other men? what are all our superfluities, that wee give our selves to in this life, but meere hels and di∣stractions, and professions of our owne damnation? We are subject to erre in things necessary; for what so necessary as eating and drinking? and if we erre in these things necessary, much more in our superflui∣ties; much more in our garish apparell; in our haugh∣ty countenance; in our ambitious carriage of our selves in the world; in hunting after preferments and honours; we may ruinate and breake our neckes for ever there: for these are superfluities. It is not needfull to goe garishly, it is not needfull to have haughty supercilious lookes above our brethren: be∣hold, we may be damned in things necessary, much more in our superfluities. Therefore, be not deceived. There is errour in the very meate and drinke we take,Rom. 11.9. as the Apostle saith, Let their table be made a snare. If our table be made a snare, what are the rest of our affaires? what are our shops, what are our great bagges put to usury? what is our bribing and feeing? what is our lawing with our brethren? what is our slandering and see∣king the states and lives of others? what gins are these? If our table be a snare, what are these riches of mammon? the professed weapons of the divell, flagges of defiance to all charity: these are snares indeed: a man that walkes in these, he goes in the middest of snares, so the Prophet Hosea saith, Ye walk in the middest of snares: that is, they still intangle o∣thers and themselves. For there is no man that can slander his brother, but first he indangereth his
owne soule to the divell. There is no man that per∣secutes his brother, but first he himselfe is reiected of God. So he thinkes he is onely a snare to other men; and yet he is intangled in his owne devices: God makes that net which he hath devised, to insnare himselfe in: even that net he set to intrap others. We see what a care we should have of these meane things; meate and drinke: there is great matter of errour in them, we may be deceived by them, and so led in by-wayes, that we never come againe in∣to the way of salvation. Now it remaines, to come to the proofe and demon∣stration of this, which the Apostle brings out of a Poet: for the words following are the verse of a Poet. The Apostle is so far from being ashamed to name a Poet, as that he doth it three or four times in his writings: to teach, us that there is use of humane secular lear∣ning, in matters of divinity. But this I must refer to the next time. FINIS.
1 COR. 15.33. Be not yee deceived, evill words corrupt good manners. THese words are a counter-poyson against the former suggestion, pretended in the person of an Epicure, Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye. Those words are full of infection: and therefore they are in a figure brought in by Saint Paul, as serving his turne: to prove, that if there were no Resurrection of the bo∣dy, then he accounts the Epicures good and sensible men, to take their time While they might have it. For he that lookes for no portion after this life, there is no reason but he should take it some where: and therefore he must have it in this life. But, now, because all men abhorre the doctrine of the Epi∣cures, that the prime and chiefe good should be in plea∣sures, (in eating and drinking) therefore the Apostle puts it in, onely by way of scorne. Yet shewing, that the Corinthians were more senselesse than those Epicures; because it is to no purpose for a man to ab∣dicate himselfe from the pleasures of the word, if there be no hope of a Resurrection. But because it might be offensive to Christian eares, to bring in that
poysonous speech of the Epicures, he now quali∣fies it, and gives an antidote against it, in these words: Be not deceived, evill words corrupt good manners. And every man should have a speciall care of his manners, they being the glory of a man. And these words that are spoken in disgrace of the Resurrection, by drawing men to enjoy the pleasures of this pre∣sent life, as though there were no life after this: all words that tend to this purpose, are venemous spee∣ches, infectious language, and corrupt the faith of men, corrupt the hope, and corrupt the whole life of a man. For none are of a more corrupt life, then those that thinke there is no life after this: and thereupon, give themselves liberty, and let loose the reynes to all kinde of impiety, lasciviousnesse and loosenesse: even because they have no hope in God, concerning those things that are reposed for the righteous, in Iesus Christ. So that here is first to be considered,Division into the Apostles purpose, and his reason. the Apostles Purpose: that he would not have us be seduced. Be not deceived, that is, we must use all meanes to keepe us from the contagion and infection of these kinde of discourses. And then he gives a reason out of the Poet Menan∣der. For, saith he, all these speeches are evill words: and all evill words corrupt good manners: they take a∣way the purity of life; whereby humane society is maintained. Wherein we are to consider, First, how it is that he citeth the verse of a Poet, a prophane heathen man? To signifie the lawfulnesse
of that, when time and occasion require. Secondly, what is the matter and substance of that verse. Wherein he puts two great adversaries and Antagonists together: Good manners, and Evill words. And he sheweth that there is a certaine action pas∣seth betweene them: and the one gets the victory, and is prevalent over the other. For although good manners be extreamely contrary to evill words; yet by reason that we are borne weake, by reason that we are borne in sinne, and in naturall uncleanenesse and corruption: it comes to passe, therefore, that evill words applying themselves to that evill leaven that is in us; they bring in this monstrous effect of Cor∣ruption: then the which, there cannot be a greater deficiencie. For corruption is the destruction of the state of the creature. And herein we are to consider, 1 What are manners: and what are good manners. 2 What is conference: and what is bad conference. 3 What is corruption: and how it is rooted, and wrought upon good manners, and how good manners should be carefully maintained. To speake of these in order: as God shall give assistance. 1 Part. The Purpose.First we are to note the Purpose of the Apostle here: which Saint Austin, against the Donatists, was faine to make a large exposition of. For they thought where the Apostle saith, Be not deceived, be not sedu∣ced, that he meant, get you from your Country, get you from your Citie, and runne into some other Country; for among them you shall be deceived: have no conversation with them therefore. And by this meanes, they brought in that fantasticall novell
of the world, That every Church thought it selfe the onely Church, and every nation, thought it selfe bet¦ter than another nation: and every man, thought himselfe better than his fellow. The most luciferous pride that can be imagined, for if that once be suffe∣red, there can be no charity; there can be no kinde of conversing one with another: nor there can be no form nor face of the Church of God, being nothing but a meer body, of a schismaticall cōpany: being nothing but a lump of sand, which the winde drives to & fro: whereas the Church should be as a rocke, or as the solid earth: which is not easily dissolved. It must be a great storme, a great earth-quake, that must breake off a piece of a rocke; or that can scatter the earth, that is fast knit and compacted together.Aug. Saint Au∣stin therefore, to take from them this weapon wher∣in they gloried; he tels them the sence of the Apostle: that his meaning is not, that they should make an outward separation, but a spirituall. He doth not cease (saith he) to bid you separate in a spirituall manner: for he bids you to take heed, that your mindes be not wrought upon by these kinde of witchcrafts: to beleeve, and to give consent unto the things that they speake. For the Apostle feares not your living together, in one Citie, or in one house; but he feares your consent: therefore he saith he would have you separate in your spirits: that is, to take heed that you be not deceived; that you doe not misbeleeve: for those that beleeved the Resurrection, and those that did not beleeve it, they were two great factions in Corinth; and the Apostle would have them separate: not in place, but in manners. Evill words corrupt good manners.
And you should labour to keepe the manners of your holy faith, (which is the Queene of manners) keepe that unspotted. Therefore the Apostles mea∣ning is, that men should separate themselves in man∣ners, one from another: not in changing and altering their houses or their Cities; but not to consent to a sin∣ner, to doe as he doth: nor consent to an hereticke; to thinke as he thinkes: not to consent to any man, that is mistaken;Augustine. to be erroneous, as he is; so Saint Austin truely expounds the Text. How be it BernardBernard. writing to certaine Ladies and Virgins, that were Nuns; saith he, it is true, if you lived in the open plaine places of the world, you ought not to leave your Country, for the contagion of the company of wicked men, but because God hath provided for you Cells, and Nunneries, and Mo∣nasteries, to live alone; therefore I wish you to make use of them, for they are best secured, that are with∣in the walls: secluded from the sinfull schismaticall company of the world. Upon the authority of these Fathers, therefore, we ground this sence of the Text. The Apostle wisheth, that whatsoever suspition there may be of opinions, and doctrines in the world, (ei∣ther already prevalent, or else likely to prevaile) to hold our selves upon our tenents assured us out of the Word: & not to suffer our selves to be carried out of the right way, either to the right hand or to the left. For the word is taken here, from the errour of a man in his way. Goe not out of the way; be not de∣ceived; you know what the way of God is, and there∣fore woe be to you, if you follow your owne waies: much more, if you follow the divels wayes; by-waies of errour, that leade to nothing but destruction.
There is no man that would erre by his good will: it is a great deale of lost labour; a great deale of trouble, and a great deale of danger: a man must ei∣ther come backe againe, which he cannot doe with∣out much sorrow and griefe, or else he must goe forward, and thrust himselfe into further danger. As those that use to travell, know: a man were bet∣ter creepe in the right way, than to gallop in a by-way, out of the way. So it is here, in the way of manners. It is a way of the fairest tract, and the best beaten, of al others; and the walking in it, is of greatest conse∣quence: for either it ends in joy and happinesse, and contentment, to him that prosecutes it, and holds on in it; or to him that lagges in it, eternall desertion, and forsaking of God. To teach us to walke in this way,  untill such time as we come to the period and end of it: which is the salvation of our soules, for that is the maine intention of this way. Therefore, as there is a way, so there is a quo and ad quem, to be considered: and the ad quem that is set forth unto us, in the word of the Almighty God; it is the happy end of our blessed travell, when we shall attaine the promises; and come from travel∣lers, to be comprehenders. Therefore, as the way of manners is the most considerable, and the best-way; so it stands us upon, to have care of that way, above all others; that we be not overtaken with errours and grosse mistakings, or if so it come to passe (as men are men, and so they must needs erre;) there is none free from errour, but God;) it fals out, ma∣ny wayes, that men (now and then are) driven out of their way, by contrary probabilities of by-waies, which sometimes seeme fayrer than the right way)
then the next way is to make their errour short; by comming againe into the right way: for he that is out of his way, the further he goeth, the more foole he shewes himselfe: and if he come quickly into the way againe, he loseth the lesse time, and the lesse la∣bour. All errours, and foolish actions, the lesse time they continue, the more honourable they are: but when they are protracted and drawne long, then they grow to be a second nature, and come to the height of wickednesse. As the Poet saith, Salvation it selfe, cannot save that family, that throwes it selfe in∣to downefals and precipices. Therefore erre not, or if you doe (as you are but men) come backe presently. I call you backe now, you are in an errour, you doubt of the Resurrection. This is a grosse error, ther∣fore take heed of it, and come out of it as soone as you can: recover the losse, and the distance of your way, and enter into the way that I set you: and I as∣sure you at the last, you shall come to life everlasting, which is the end of all our travell. Now then the Apostle would teach us further, that we are apt to erre in the lawfull pleasures of this life: we wander much by eating & drinking. But there are divers things wherein men wander worse, than in eating and drinking. For eating and drinking, be the necessities of nature: and though there be a great many occasions of errour and stumbling in them, to those whose table is made a snare to them: yet there are divers other things, that are farre worse than these. As for example, in the profession of merchan∣dize: when men have no conscience to wrong men of their substance, of their lands, of their livings, upon certaine trickes and devices. If our table cause
us to erre, if our meate and drinke cause us to goe out of the way: what doth our buying and selling then? what doth our sutes in law? what doe all these slan∣derous base creatures, that get their living onely by doing mischiefe? what are those idle courses, wher∣by men wrong and injure one another: and that by a profession? what doe those bloudy and vile actions of men, that set themselves to such a height of re∣venge, that they are not satisfied, till they have the very life of their brethren? These things are farre worse than eating and drinking, when men can never satisfie their malice, nor suffer the divell to tumble them farre enough into these mischiefes, when they will still be eating and drinking; but it must be the life and bloud of the children of God. These men erre more grosly and damnably, then the other, by this vile and canniball behaviour. Therefore we ought to suspect these things, and call to God for mercy: a man can hardly trade in these things, but he shall be erronious; yea, and a farre greater wanderer, than any drunkard or Epi∣cure. A man cannot set himselfe to doe mischiefe, to the life of another; to undermine another mans e∣state: but he shall be a farre more exorbitant sin∣ner, than any that upon naturall pleasures and de∣lights, forget them selves. So much for the first part. I come now to the sentence it selfe. Evill words corrupt good manners. Therefore take heed,2 Part. The Reason. be not deceived with those evill words. This verse is a saying of a Poet: a man that knew not God, nor had any glimpse of the
Gospell of God, or of Christ. An ancient Poet, that li∣ved about 300. yeares before Paul, and as Euripides after him, so this before him was famous in those Comedies and Stages: as being the father of good man∣ners. Those Grecians having no better. Indeed, he is full of rich sentences, touching the life and manners, and conversations of men. Among which, the Apostle maketh choyce of this one: which is in Menander, divers times. As, in the Comedy called Thais: and a∣gaine he hath it in his Bucolicks, saith he; By conver∣sing with evill men, thou thy selfe at length shalt evade and come forth, as evill as they. EuripidesEuripides. also, is full of these divine sentences. We see the Apostle scornes not their sayings: but brings them into the garden of God, and makes a kinde of flower of them there, plants them there, as we see he doth also, in divers other places,Acts 17.28. Acts 17. when he would speake to the Philosophers in their owne kinde, he tels them those things that they worshipped as Gods, they were no Gods, but made with mens hands, stocks and stones that have no efficient power in them. For (saith he) We are the workmanship of God, and so he quoteth the hemystike of the Poet Aratus:Aratus. We are his generation; and in Titus, he quoteth Epimenides;Epimenides. the Poet of Creete or Candie: whereof the Apostle wrote, One of their owne Prophets: he cals the Poet a Prophet: be∣cause as Saint IeromeSaint Ierome. saith, such kinde of people as the Cretians were, they deserved such Prophets as those scorners and mockers: that speake of drunken∣nesse, and for drunkennesse, as the Prophet Hosea saith: Now he saith, the testimonie of that Poet was true: and he quotes it, The Cretians are alway lyers, e∣vill beasts,Tit. 1.12. slow bellies, Tit. 1. These three the holy
Apostle Saint Paul quoteth, which were prophane heathen men, all of them. To note unto us, that all truth comes of God: and we ought not to despise the truth, wheresoever it is spo∣ken. For we see our Lord Iesus himselfe, he dignifies Socrates and Plato with two sentences.Socrates. Plato. Math. 7.12. For where our Lord saith, That which you would have others doe to you, doe ye so to them; and that which you would not have others doe to you, doe not to them: This is the Law and the Prophets. This golden sentence, is the sen∣tence of Socrates, mentioned by Plato, which not∣withstanding, our Saviour Christ honoureth with his owne mouth: and makes the sentence his owne. To shew unto the world, that all truth is from him, as he cals himselfe, The way, the truth, and the life.Iohn 14.6. And then that other saying, where Christ saith,Luke 4.23. You will say unto mee this Proverbe, Physitian heale thy selfe, which is taken out of Plato:Plato. being an ancient vulgar thing, as this was that Paul here citeth. So that we must not yeeld to the opinion of those men,1 The lawfulnesse of using humane learning in divinity. that thinke there is nothing to be uttered in Sermons, but Scripture. This hath beene a great meanes to bring in idlenesse, negligence, and igno∣rance into the Church of God. Such simple people, understand not what perfection God requires to be in him that is truely called a man of God; he must be like Moses.Acts 7.22. It is said That Moses was taught in all the learning of the Egyptians. And so Saint Paul wisheth, that the man of God may be perfect: that he may be made up as a full and perfect number in Arithme∣tique, that he may be fitted to every good worke; which he cannot be, except he can speake to a Poet, after the manner of a Poet; and to a Philosopher, in the
language of a Philosopher, unlesse he can accōmodate himselfe to the party with whom he deales, it is im∣possible he should be a fit and compleat man in the service of God. Now the Apostle shewes us a rule here; that those things that are vulgarly knowne, and of common use; they make a better and deeper impression in the mindes of men. Therefore they are most of all to be translated, and exhibited in speeches and Sermons to the people of God. The reason is, (as I said before) because all truth is from God: whatsoever these heathen men had, it was a glimmering from God. Rom. 2.15.And also because the Apostle tels us, Rom. 2. That the Heathens had the Law of God written in their hearts, their thoughts eyther accusing or excusing them: so that it followes then, we cannot reject or cast off their sayings, because they stand as matters of grea∣ter condemnation, or matters of greater perswasion, then other speeches: for marke how our Lord Christ concludes, out of the heathen: Woe be to thee Chora∣zin,Matth. 11.21. and woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if those workes which thou hast seene, had beene done in Tyre and Sy∣don, they had repented long agoe. Behold how he ar∣gues from the heathens: so by the heathens actions, we shall have greater condemnation; then by those presi∣dents we have in our owne Schooles: for if the hea∣thens doe thus, it is a double shame for Christians, not to attaine their perfection. So when our Lord saith to Ierusalem, that if the mighty workes that he had done in her, had beene done in Sodome and Gomorrah, they had repented long agoe in sackcloth and ashes. He confutes Ierusa∣lem, by a strong and mighty argument taken from
the heathen. Therefore the deeds and sayings of the heathen, are also to be noted, and remembred of us: because they containe much matter of profit, to set forth the truth and glory of Gods word by. As Saint BasileBasile. saith in his Oration to the young man Proceli∣us. There is (saith he) great matter of good, that ly∣eth in the writings of the Poets and Philosophers: and every man cannot gather all the good. As we see by experience, when a man crops a flower from the earth, he can get nothing out of it, but the sweet∣nesse of the smell, or the delightfulnesse of the co∣lour: but when the diligent Bee comes, he will make more of it: he will extract honey, which is as it were the very spittle of the starres. So when simple car∣nall minded men, reade the Poets, and the Philoso∣phers, they gather nothing but delight and pleasure: but when the diligent Bee comes, a wise man, a seri∣ous considerate man, he drawes honey out of them. As Gregory Nazianzen saith,Greg. Naz. speaking concerning the same argument; saith he: As a man that comes into a garden of Roses, into a Rose-yard, he seeth goodly Roses, and goes to plucke a Rose, but in the meane time he labours to shun the prickle: so in reading of Poets and Philosophers, we should plucke the rose, but shun the thorne or prickle; alway take the best, and leave that which is harmefull. For there is a mixture of these: as the rose growes in the middest of thorns; so the doctrine of the Poets is mixed with barbarisme, superstition, and corruption. Let us separate the drosse from the gold; refuse the one, and take the other. To conclude this point; because I know every man doth not apprehend it well. It is true indeed, there is a great disorder in
the quotation of humane learning in Sermons, in quo∣ting of Poetry, and Philosophy: and hath beene al∣waies. Therefore, I doe not in all poynts confirme it, onely that it may be it is certaine, and that it must be in the Church, because arguments drawn from the heathen, are used by Christ and all his Apostles, yet there must be some cautions used in it. Cautions for use of humane Learning, in Sermons.First, they must be few, not many: for it is a most heterogeneal thing, for a man in preaching a whole houre, to speake nothing but humane learning: for  he comes not there to be a Philosopher, an Orator, or to be a Poet, but to convert and winne soules. Ther∣fore his chiefe time, and the principall part of his speech, must be the word of God, exhortations out of Scripture, and instructions to life and good manners, so that too many of these are condemned. Secondly, they must be those things that are cleare and plaine, and faire, and that are commonly knowne: such as every man is acquainted with. As this, here, was a Proverbe in every mans mouth: It was a thing notorious, no man could doubt of it. Therefore they offend against this rule, that fetch, and hooke in they know not how, nor no man knows by what medium, they bring in such sentences: but to continue and stuffe up their speeches, they bring in long and exorbitant sentences, and heape them up to∣gether, for ostentation. Lastly, they must not be things of affectation, but such as come naturally, as we speake, by way of com∣mon proverbe; for proverbs make a great impression in mens mindes; common sentences, sententious ut∣terances, are most powerfull. So to conclude this poynt.
It is necessary for the Preacher (as Musculus and Calvin, and divers other Writers conclude) to know a great deale more, then the Bible: to know more, then the study of the principles of Religion: they must be such men, as that no man may except against them for their ignorance and blindenesse: for they must have a taste of all things, and be able to draw out of their treasurie, those things that concerne the glory of the kingdome of God. And because the hea∣thens had a kinde of over-running (as when the Con∣duit is full, the water runnes at waste) so when Gods people were full of light, and knowledge, some went over to the heathens, for they have read and heard of our bookes. Therefore truth, (which is the pearle or Iewell of God, which is scattered) we ought to gather it together againe. It was lawfull for the Israelitish women, to weare the Iewels of the Egyptian wo∣men. It was lawfull for the children of Israell to pos∣sesse the lands and goods, and Vineyards of the inha∣bitants of Canaan. So let us take this Iewell of God, his truth, from these men that are unworthy to pos∣sesse it, (as pearles are often found in the basest and filthiest places) let us take it and put it into Gods Iewell-house, where it hath its proper and naturall consistence. Now for the substance of the sentence:2 The substance of the verse, and the two Anta∣gonists. it is be∣tweene two great Antagonists and adversaries, good manners, and evill words: and which gets the victory over other; evill words corrupt good manners: that is, they put them downe, and so get the victory; that they have no place or abiding any more in a man: so that it cannot be knowne where they were. The word manners,First Antagonist Good manners. although it be well under∣stood,
yet we may adde something to give further light to it. It signifieth a certaine habite in a man, that is acquired with long labour and diligence, and exercise: by which a man hath gotten it to him∣selfe. For there is no man borne with good manners: but he is borne as a beast, (as AristotleAristotle. saith) a little childe is more harsh & untractable, than a beast: a man were better keep and bring up a young Lyon, he may doe it with lesse labour, then to bring up a childe. For because God will punish sinne in the first reliques of it; therefore to shew the misery and deformity of it, he suffers in children, the way of impatience and harshnesse: that it is the great and wondrous mercy of God, that ever they should come to perfection; and that they should have nurses to beare with them, to humour them, and follow them in all the wayes of their corruption. So that manners are not naturall, unlesse it be brutish manners: but those here spoken of, are not gotten but with a great deale of dili∣gence. What a stirre have we to over-master that filth and corruption that is in our children! with stripes, with putting them to schoole; with exhortations; with all the meanes in the world, and all too little, to beate out of them that naturall corruption, and that pestilent humour that is crept into them by originall traduction of sinne. But now the Lord hath given to the education of parents, and to those of discretion by long custome; to be guardians and guides to these little ones: that the rudenesse of their nature, and the barbarousnesse of their affections, might be mollified. As the wilde ground; the husbandman, by long tillage of it; and the wilde Vine, by pruning and cutting of
it: at the last he brings the wilde ground to be good soyle, and the wilde Vine to be a fruitfull one: so the Lord hath given a blessing upon the gift of education: that at last he makes these wilde oats to be good corne, in the harvest of God: and he settles good manners, where there was nothing but furious brutishnesse. And when they are so setled, by long labour, by feare of punishments, by hope of rewards, and by such meanes as doth cultivate the ground of God: al∣though it be long before they be brought to this, (for there is much warre betweene these two adver∣saries in the Text) when these good manners and thus settled: then they are called , sitting:, is Sedes, Indoles & Mos. taken from a word which signifieth to sit, and keepe residence. For being thus ingrafted, and keeping residence, they are not easily wrought out againe, for they come to be (as it were) a second nature: the law of manners, is not easily changed, as Saint BasileBasile. saith, because they were first imprinted, when the minde of the childe was tender; therefore the impression goeth the dee∣per, and continues the longer. When the Lord settles the power of his grace, in a man; it is not easie for the divell to deface that im∣pression: and he shall never doe it utterly. Although there be divers actions that may deface it in shew, and for the present time: but the Apostle here speaks in another respect, although hee may extend his speech to the manners of grace, among the Corinthi∣ans. But these things that he speaketh of (common profession, common religion taught) they were brought unto them by God, who is the husband man, as Christ saith, Ioh. 15. I am the true Vine,Ioh. 15 1. and my Fa∣ther is the husbandman. This culture, whereby by
diligent labour they were brought from the harsh Idolatry of the heathen, to know Christ: to come to the knowledge of his faith, of his life, of his death, of his miracles, of the benefits they received by the communion of his body and bloud, of his blessed Resur∣rection, and the promise of the reuniting of our bo∣dies, and of the returne of our spirits: these were manners that grace had taught them; besides the common profession of Religion, for a man may make a profession of religion, and yet have no grace. Now if these manners remaine in a man, he is past the dan∣ger of all the pawes of Sathan. The divell shall not be able to plucke up these plants,Math. 15.13. which our heaven∣ly Father hath planted, as our Saviour Christ saith. But if we goe no further then common reason and profession, and content our selves with the outward forme of religion: then comes that to passe here spo∣ken of, that evill words corrupt good manners, and though good manners be setled of themselves, and keepe their residence strongly: yet the mightinesse of our enemy is such, that he will pull them out, ex∣cept they have a deeper impression by the spirit of God made in us. Now we come to the other adversary, which is Evill words Second Anta∣gonist, Evill words.The manners are called good; and the language ill; not according to the estimation of men, but accor∣ding to the sheckle of the Sanctuary, the ballance of the Sanctuary: it is that that maketh good to be good, and evill to be evill. For many languages among men are accounted good, that are base and evill: and
many manners are accounted evill, that are perfect and good. Therefore, if we will examine what manners are good, we must not repaire to the Courts of men, to the fashions of men: for sometime they are accounted most unmannerly amongst them, that are the best mortified and sanctified men of all others. Nor when we come to examine what are evill words, what is wicked discourse and speech; we must not measure it by mans iudgement: but accor∣ding to the Rule and Canon, and square of the word of God. It is that that judgeth men, to be good or ill. It is to be observed, that the word here hath a great elegancie in it. For . signifieth such manners as are of great use and profit. And so, indeed, from all kinde of goodnesse; from all honest parts; there is great profit, profit for a mans selfe; profit to his body; profit to his soule; profit to his state; profit to his neigh∣bour by his example: so good manners be , things of use and profit: whereas the actions of ungodly, wic∣ked men, they are unprofitable. As the Apostle saith, Have no fellowship with the unprofitable workes of darke∣nesse. This language, here, this ill language:Ephes. 5.11. it is cal∣led Caba, taken from a word used in warre:Quaere. The Greeke word here is , and in∣ded , signifieth feare∣full, cowardly, sloahfull. the Caba∣ly, they are flying away still, and running backe: so in evill, there is nothing but trembling and feare, and running backe, and want of security: a man knowes not where to lurke safe; therefore he turnes him this way and that way, and runs before any man perse∣cute him, as the Prophet saith. We see the quality, now, of these Adversaries. Now we come a little to their fight, how they meete together, and who overcomes.
Corrupt good manners. Good manners being well settled in us; and com∣ming to be a second nature,Thid poynt, the action be∣twixt Evill words, and good manners: they corrupt them. (as it were) the spirit of God being our guardian: they become impregnable against the divell. But if they have a small and slacke guard, and are intrenched onely within the bounds of reason, and common religion, or a perfunctory profession: then Sathan is powerfull; and the examples of the world are bewitching; and a mans owne flesh, his owne selfe, is false to himselfe: and in a moment or short time, they make such a battery and assault upon him, that all the whole Fort is yeelded to the divell; and so evill words corrupt good manners. If good words could amend evill manners, it were excellent: and so sometimes they doe, by the bles∣sing of God. But on the other side, there is a feare∣full losse: which is frequent and common: for wher∣as, once good manners mend evill, a thousand times, ill manners, corrupt good: for we have a divellish dispo∣sition in us, till the Lord worke it out by his spirit and this divell is so false, that if we want corruption, ra∣ther then we will not be corrupted, we will corrupt our selves, and turne divels to our owne soules. For what else are these common and daily fashions, that are used in the world, but a voluntary seeking after corruption?Psal. 4.2. as the Prophet saith, Psalm. 4. How long will ye seeke after lyes? All these devices, whereby we pamper this flesh of ours, they are meer huntings after corruption, that though corruption flee from us, yet we runne after it, and overtake it. This pride, and prancking of these poore tabernacles we carry about
us; which are nothing but dust and ashes. These extraordinary eatings and drinkings, These high surfettings, These great and mighty spendings: What are these, but very voluntary running a whoring after our owne inventions; and a seeking to be corrupted? And because we thinke there is nothing without us, to corrupt us; therefore we will have it within us, rather than we will want it.Bern. 1 Tim. 6.9. Saint Bernard speaking of that place of the Apostle, Those that will be rich, fall into divers snares. oh (saith Bernard) our rich men, if they had heard him; they would have wished they had had more snares: and thinke them∣selves miserable, because they have not. So al∣though they goe to hell, they care not: if they can but make themselves heavy laden with this thick clay,Habac. 2.6. as the Prophet speakes; They care for nothing else. The like corruption is upon all men, and especially in these dayes: there was never more corruption of manners, than in this last and sinfull age of the world, of which the Lord foretold, and we by lamentable experience finde it: corruption growes so strongly e∣very day. The word Corruption, signifieth in the best and most common notion, to bring a thing to wormes: to bring it to lice; as the body of Herod, by the stroke of the Angell for his proud speech, was brought to Vermine and Lice in a moment. So all things that are corrupted, they grow to a mouldring out; of which mouldering, there growes wormes: if the matter be vegetable, or had any life in it, corruption being in it selfe a meere alteration, to a not being, from a being. As generation makes a thing to be, that
was not before: so SalvianusSalvianus. saith, those things that be corrupted, are not themselves any longer, after they be corrupted. So consequently, in the manners of men, when they be corrupted, there is such an alteration and change, that a man cannot say that this is the man. We see by wofull experience, how quicke corruption is, that in a short time, a man can∣not know one to be the same. A youth that hath beene educated in the feare of God, for fourteene or fifteene yeares, and is well grounded and settled in the schooles: send him into another part of the world, but one halfe yeare; and many times all the frame and building of his former education, will be utterly ruinate: and the party so corrupted, that a man would wonder at the beastli∣nesse and strangenesse of such a fatall change. From hence come those frequent complaints, eve∣ry where in the Church of God: there are so many blasts of adverse winde; so many examples of filthi∣nesse in the world: that they change every thing, and take away the glosse, and beauty, and perfection of it; and instead of the Image of God, they imbrace the pi∣cture of the divell: and it is done before a man is a∣ware, so quickly are we deceived, and so soone brought to destruction.Bern. As Saint Bernard saith well of such. What art thou come to now? what a Saint hast thou beene in time past, and what a divell art thou now turned too? thou begunnest, farre better than thou endest; and the first time, the first part of thy graces, were more excellent than thy latter times are. Oh what a great change there is? how unlike is this man, to that childe? being a man to thy selfe now, when thou wast a childe: nothing is more
fearfull then this. Let our gold and silver corrupt; let our garments corrupt; let theeves breake through and steale them; let all things without us corrupt. But let us keepe our manners, pure; they are our best and choicest treasure, that should sit in our mindes, and keepe their residence in the Court of heaven; in the soule, and conscience. God forbid, that they should be corrupted; or if they be, let us labour to returne presently to grace: wherby corruption may be amended, and a reparation made, by the Spirit of God. Evill words corrupt good manners. Where naturall corruption is, it comes alway from  a kinde of heat; from a strange outward heat: all corruption, whether it be of fruits, or the corruption of mens bodies, or any other thing; it comes with a certaine outward heat: which frightens the naturall heat, and overcomes it, and so works all to a beastly and monstrous disease: and so to a meere nothing, at last. Corruption. is made in the tenderest things; those  that are more solid, receive lesse corruption, and en∣dure longest. As stones and trees; because of the hard∣nesse, and firmnesse of their natures, they remaine longer uncorrupted: and perhaps there be some stones, that never knew what corruption meanes, but those things that are most tender, are most subject to corruption: because the Ayre (which is the mother of life, and death, the mother of generation, and cor∣ruption) where it is able to disperse the dimensions of it, it works corruption: as it gave beginning, so it
works an end. It is the plague of God, upon every sonne of Adam, that the same ayre that gave him life, it works also his dissolution. In corruption we may observe, that the finer the thing is, the worse it is corrupted: the nature of things that are most finely modulated, when they come to be corrupted, they have the vilest stench and corrupti∣on, of all other: there is nothing that is made so ex∣actly, as the body of a man: yet being dead, there is no stench like unto it; alway, the corruption of the best things, is the worst: Thus it is also in this spirituall corruption. The manners which the grace of God, and good e∣ducation hath planted in man (the wilde naturall dispo∣sition being rooted out, and the grace of God being planted in, and grafted) there it keeps its seat, and residence: and as long as it is free from externall, and outward danger, it is well enough; but when there comes an outward heat; and the ayre to worke upon it (that is, temptations from abroad; temptations from the devill; bad examples in the world) this outward heat, it works upon the substance of the inward stocke; and before a man can thinke of it, entreth and pier∣ceth;Ionah 4 7. and corruption makes way (as the cankerworme in Ionas gourd) that though it was greene and fresh in the morning, yet it was down, and withered be∣fore night. Againe, as the tenderest things, soonest corrupt, so men of the best wits, of the best judgements; men that have the greatest memories; men of the most dexteri∣ous spirits; their mindes (by Gods just judgement) are most subject to sinne, and grosse corruption. Every man doth not serve the devill, with like affection,
and with like spirit. Some know how to serve him, after one manner; and some after another: weaker things, are subject to lesse corruption: but the finest, and the tenderest things; are soonest corrupted. As the fairest, and goodliest flowers, are soonest blasted and withered. To conclude this point; When these things in men, are corrupted; it is the  worst corruption, that can be. When the understanding is corrupted, as the Apostle speaks, To the cleane,Tit. 1.15. all things are cleane: but to the uncleane, all things are pol∣luted and corrupted; even their understandings. When a mans braine is tainted, when his understanding is corrupted: it is most pestilent. When he takes lyes for truth; when he follows errours, instead of the Ora∣cles of God. This is not the condition of a man, well educated by grace. Therefore, I beseech you, let us say with the Apostle, Evill words corrupt good man∣ners: and let us take heed of all ill manners, and ill speeches, which is the next, and the maine thing, that I should come unto. I shall speake but a word of it. The word signifieth not onely a passing, flying word; but a setled discourse of a company, and societie of men: a kinde of league, that men have together: for the words that are flying, and passing away, they may be rejected and cast away. Every wicked man that speaks ill, and wickedly, he is not presently ap∣prehended, or liked of: but if a man still keepe on, and make his discourse of it; if he make it his disputation, and argues the case: now the danger comes, there is nothing worse then such ill words, to corrupt good manners. Our first parents Adam and Eve, were corrupted so, even by evill words. The serpent offered them no
violence; but onely spake an evill word: and so hee conveighed that poyson. He did not offer according to the power that the devill, the wicked Angels had, to hurt their bodies: he offered them no injury by force: but he spake the word, and so entred into Eve (into that grace and justice, that was originally in he) and corrupted it in a moment. Behold, how soone one sparke of fire, kindles a whole stacke of corne! how one scabbed sheepe, infects all the flocke? It is infinite to see, how corruption grows, and spreads it selfe, like a tetter: that it is seldome or never restrained and limited, except the Spirit of God use a mighty hand in it. And as it was at the first, so it is now: as Saint Austin saith,Aug. Thou killest not thy brother by the sword, or by a violent hand; as Cain killed Abel: but thou doest as bad, thou speakest a bad word; thou givest him bad counsell; thou givest him an ill exam∣ple; and that is worse then to kill with the sword: for the sword goes but to a mans bodie; but evill words, they go to the heart, to the soule: and alway the in∣fection the deeper it is, and the nearer the heart; the more dangerous, and the worse it is. Evill words, cor∣rupt good manners. If evill words corrupt good manners, What do evill books then? for as long as the word is but spoken, it is but winde; that goes and comes, there is no great regard to be had of it, it is a lighter matter; and he is a perfect man, that never slides, and stumbles in his words: every man will give a man leave, to tosse, and roll himselfe in his words: and will take it, when it comes to his owne turne
againe. But evill books, lascivious wicked books, that are set forth; when they are exhibited they remaine, and hold on. Therefore, certainly, if they shall be damned, that speake ill words, which tend to the sub∣version of good manners, and to the corruptions of Gods children: if they shall be damned ipso facto (as all must confesse) it follows then, those that study damnable books, abusive things; whereby the good manners of the children of God are cast into hazard: these shall receive double damnation. If bare evill words are so dangerous, what are they, when they are set out to the full: when the devill will not walke only in bare words, lest he prove foolish, and contemp∣tible: but he will strout it out in action; with a lively voyce; with a goodly faire cōplexion; in stately habite; in all pompe and gallantry of apparrell: when thus men in a goodly feature, act it for the devill (for they do nothing but set the devils poyson in a faire glasse, or cup, and give it people to make themselves drunke of it) it must needs be more venemous poyson, and more pestilent mischiefe, that comes to the soule by reading, these books; then by other things. The Philosophers tell us of a filthy kinde of creature (differing from all other creatures) which ingenders at the eare; the conception of the female is at the eare, and the generating of the male, is at the eare too. Though this may be a fiction (as it may be true for we are ignorant of divers things in the body of na∣ture) yet it is true here; there is no man that is a childe of the devill, but he suffers him to ingender at his eare: by hearing ill words, and rotten communica∣tion.Colos. 3.8. Let no filthy communication come out of your mouthes, saith the Apostle: for this breeds embryos
for the devill, it breeds brats of perdition, and confu∣sion; and so foulely corrupts the good manners of men, that a man cannot tell whether the footsteps of God are left there or no. Lastly, if evill words corrupt good manners; what do ill manners, then? They are farre more attractive then evill words; and more poysonous; they must needs be more hurtfull, to good manners: for they are directly contrary. Betweene words and manners, a man would thinke there were small opposition: for the one, is setled; the other, flitting: the one, being grafted; the other, moveable. As for evill manners, they are more ingrafted, and setled; then good man∣ners. For there is no good man, so good; as a bad man is bad. Therefore, when a man sees ill examples, then comes a fearfull corruption, presently. When a man sees another drunke before his face, it is a grea∣ter invitation to him, then when he heares a word spoken in the commendation of drunkennes. When a man seeth another do a thing that is ungodly and wicked, he is animated to it more, then if hee onely heard of it, or were counselled to it. Let us take heed: for our times are not onely full of evil words, for the corrupting of our good manners; but also full of evill examples; of base manners, that destroyes almost humane societie: that onely among a few, there is a reservation of the good seed of the Gospell; among the rest it is scattered, even among many that make a greater profession of it then o∣thers. Therefore let us conclude, that seeing evill words corrupt good manners; much more do evill books, evill writings, evill shews, and playes, and theatricall pomps:
and most of all, evill manners. Let us take heed, therefore; and if we cannot command our mouthes, from evill speeches (corruption running so through the generation of men, that none can free himselfe) yet let us take heed that we do nothing before o∣thers, that may give ill example: for that is a great infection to their souls. I should now come to the kindes of ill words: for the Apostle excepts none. And although a man can∣not take notice, of all the kindes of them; yet the speecies of all, the chiefe, and common kindes, our Religion, and common understanding, will suggest unto us, namely, what is good, and what is bad, the conscience is ruled by the word; and the word of God, shews what they are: the word shews every thing, that is hid in darknesse. First therefore, when men will give others ill  counsell, not to put up wrongs. Many will say, If it were my case I would follow it, and not put up this wrong: when they will incite a man to vengeance, against his brother. These are ill words, for they corrupt good manners, the good manners of patience: and there is no sweeter manners, in a childe of God, then for a man to forgive another, as he would bee forgiven. It is that vertue, wherein every Christian should possesse his soule. And this patience, the devill goes about to corrupt, by this meanes.Luk. 21.19. Therefore let us take heed of these ill words. Againe, those words that make for pride, as flat∣tery  (the most pestilent engine of the devill) these words corrupt good manners; even the good manners of modesty: and makes a man so insolent, that he knows not himselfe. They so puffe him up to destruction,
that he prooves nothing but a bladder, instead of a man: a meere monster to men. There is nothing more ridiculous, then a proud supercilious man. Ther∣fore, the words of flattery, are to be weighed in the ballance of the sanctuary: that they may be knowne, and detested. These be corrupt words, as can be: for they worke upon the good manners of humilitie; which is the grace of graces: they trouble, and mo∣lest that, and make a man forget both God, and him∣selfe. These evill words are to be shunned and hated: which are too common in these times: for no man can indure that a man should tell him his owne; that he should tell him the truth, but he shall be account∣ed an enemie for it. But those that can soothe men up, with words smooth as oyle, they shall be best welcome: but such clawbacks, and flatterers, are care∣fully to be avoided. Thirdly, Evill words corrupt good manners: There∣fore words that tend to scandall, words of informa∣tion, and detrction, these corrupt the good manners of love: which is the noblest grace that Gods childe hath. When friends shall continue in love and con∣cord, many yeares together; and a fellow shall come and worke them at oddes, by carrying a tale of this man to the other, and of the other to him: these words are no sooner drunke in, but poyson is taken; the parties corrupted, instantly, and those that were intimate friends, fall to be deadly and mortall enemies. Take heed of these, and account them in the num∣ber of evill words: for they corrupt the good manners whereby the Disciples of Christ are knowne. For by this,Ioh. 13.35. saith Christ, shall all men know, that they are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
Fourthly, Evill words corrupt good manners, there∣fore  all words that tend to lasciviousnesse (that idle talke that is used at Tables, concerning the love of women, concerning the order of that blessing, that God hath appointed for the multiplying of mankind) these are common evils: every man gives himselfe libertie, to talke and jest of such things. But these jests, are evill words. And whatsoever colour of phrase and figure, they seeke; as figge-leaves to cover this nakednesse before men; yet it appeares through and through, in the sight of God: who cannot en∣dure that such idle words should come frō those, that should work out their salvation with fear and trembling.Phil. 2.12. Let us take heed of these idle jests; wherein men and women strive, who shall go formost, and who shall go out of the way furthest: but when they will come in againe, God knows. Lastly, Evill words corrupt good manners: therefore those words that tend to idlenesse of life; or that  make men idle for the life to come (which are chiefly intended here) all these are damnable insti∣gations, and suggestions of the devill. As when a man shall say, Take thy time; Enjoy thy pleasure; Pay no debts; Live upon that thou hast; Provide for thy self, Break, and be bankrupt. Have no care of these things: for thou mayest safely crave pardon of God for this sinne, as for thy other. God forgives sinnes, and therefore will remit this. This is a damnable corrup∣tion of good manners: it corrupts the good manners of justice, and equity, even that justice and true dealing that should be betweene brethren: which is the life of all societie, and that which keepes the world together. These devils are to be shunned, as
the very roarings from hell. And especially those idle jests that concerne the Scriptures, and matters of this nature, that we now speake of: when men, like bruit beasts, will take up∣on them to jest out of the booke of God. Such as can prompt themselves with more Scripture, to make jests, and fooleries; then they can remember upon their death-bed, to give them comfort. These that in their cups, can abuse God, and his booke, to his face: they are the first-borne of the devill: even such as ei∣ther wrest the Scriptures to a bad sence; or else make jests of it, to an idle purpose, for vanitie and foolerie. These jesters with the Word of God, are the greatest corrupters of good manners: for they take away the feare of God, which is the great good manners of a Christian: and they take away the authoritie of the Scriptures, by which we are all bound to the Lord. So likewise, for all matters of disputation. Hee that speaks before weake mindes, that much may stagger their faith: this is a corrupting of good man∣ners. In our time, it is the fashion; we will dispute of all religions, when wee meete: and one is for this matter, and another for that; and there is a sort of poore things about us, and they heare all, but know not who to hold with: as having not discretion to make a difference of things. But he that makes the greatest clamour, and that hath most voices, shall carry it away. By this meanes, they kill the good manners of people: and take away that orthodoxe faith that should be in men. It is a wondrous thing to observe, how the Devill labours to make these kinde of disputations! When a man is resolved for the truth, yet (saith he) it is no matter; heare what
these men can say; they bring some colour of ar∣guments for it; they do it with a good wit: heare them: I wish thee not to yeeld; onely see their rea∣sons. By this meanes, we have lost within this short time, an infinite company of Protestants. The ve∣nome hath beene so strong, that they have not been able to work it out: and so they have been brought into grosse heresie and Apostasie, and fallen quite a∣way, by this meanes. Let us take heed of this: these strike at the maine; they undermine the very foundation: other things, may more easily be mended. For when a man shall suffer shipwracke in his understanding, and in his ap∣prehension of God: It is a thousand to one, if ever such a one be recovered. So (to conclude this present point) vile speeches in a mans mouth, concerning the Resurrection; is a damnable thing. For this is the maine end, of all our profession: this is the hope, and fruit, the harvest of Religion; the resurrection of the body: and if that be called in question, or made a jest of; or the majesty of it touched:Luther. there must needs be a great concussion and shaking of the whole house and frame of Reli∣gion. Therefore those base words used in former time, which Luther saith were used among the Sax¦ons.Saxons. They had a grosse proverbe amongst drunken fellows. Sirra (saith one to his fellow drunkard) doest thou thinke that I have not another companion within me, to this outward companion: that is, a soule to this body? And his fellow would answer, Yes: Why then (saith he againe) I perswade my self that they will dye together, as friends; and the one shall not out-live the other. We two spend our time, in
drinking, and good-fellowship; and it is hard if my friend within, be not better then my friend without. But (as Luther saith) if the devill should have come from hell, he could not have spoken worser. I am loath to speake these things; lest men take hold of it: but we must open them to the children of God: that they may know, and beware of these evill words. There is another company of drunkards, that when they are met at their pots, they will talke of the Resurrection: whether they shall know their friends, in the other world, and discourse concern∣ing the bloud of Gods children, that hath beene let out by physicke; and concerning the haires of their head, which they have lost. Such strange devices men have, to mocke out the kingdome of God, and the glorious relation of the Resurrection. There is another company, and they will not be buried in the Church, by reason of the tumult that will be at the Resurrection: lest they should be over∣whelmed with the weight of them. These beastly things, these dialects of hell, if Christians admit them into their eares; they are in danger of damnation by it: but if they take them into their mouthes, they are in danger of double and treble damnation. Let us know the holy things of God, let us use these holy and glorious mysteries, with honour and reve∣rence: and let us not meddle with them, but with humilitie, and prayer, and great affection. For these words, that go about to make these holy things pro∣phane, and to make these pearles fit for swine: they are degenerating, corrupting, base words: and a true Christian, should wish as the Poet in the Comedie,
when he heard that which pleased him not, I would to God, that this man were dumbe, or that I were deafe: that either he could not speake, or that I could not heare these beastly things, that ruine the state of the soule, and abuse the apprehension of the majestie of God, to loosenesse, and to beastlinesse. FINIS.
1 COR. 15.34. Drunkards, awake justly, and sinne not: for divers have not the knowledge of God. I speake this to your shame. Or as the words signifie: Awake from your drunkennesse justly, and sinne not: for many (certain of you, some of you) have an ignorance concerning God. I speake this for reproofe. AFter the Apostle had shewed the great danger that comes by pestilent discourses, and communication; and had given them charge concerning it, take heed, be not deceived: hee now concludes all that point, and makes way to another; which is the most notable demonstration, the most gracious remonstrance, of the manner, and order of the Resurrection. And so he gives (as it were) a barre unto them, to stop their eares against all contrary speech, and discourse. For those that wil be content, to entertaine discourse contrary to the doctrine of the sGospell, they are seldome or never brought to bee chollers to the Gospell. Sathan ever sharpens the wits, and whets the tongues of men, to rise up in confuta∣torie speeches: that tend to the disgrace and calling in question of the truth: and if men will but lend their eares to it, the Lord will give them over in just judgement, that they shall be insnared, and intangled
with it. Therefore as PlutarchPlutarch. saith well, concerning yong mens reading of the writings of Poets, and lasci∣vious poems, that they should be well armed, that they should arme themselves with Amphitedes: (which was a certaine fence for the eares) Those that were wrastlers, and fought with the club, they were armed with these Amphitedes: which were made of some hard matter, that so they might keepe the blow from their eares; that upon the sudden they might not be stounded, and dazelled, and struck downe, but might stand the longer in the fight. Therefore they had these Amphitedes about their eares, when they fought at the club. And (saith Plu∣tarch) these ought every yong man to take, as a spe∣ciall munition against evill speeches. For there is no blow (either with staffe or club) that afflicts the bo∣dy, or so stounds the braine of a man, as evill and wicked speeches infect the soule. Therefore the best way is, to deeme such speeches base and impious: to turne the eares from them, and to give no audience to them. For there is nothing in them, but mischiefe; the mouthes of wicked men being nothing, but as the rawe graves, as the Prophet saith:Psal. 5.9. Their throat is an open sepulchre: that as the grave where a corps hath been lately buried, being newly raved in, there will a filthy vapour & stench exhale and come forth, to the danger of all the standers by: so the throats of evill men, their wicked speeches, are as a raw grave & sepul∣chre: which when it begins to be opened, let all the company runne away, as fast as they can: for there is a deadly stench, that will infect them. Their throat is an open sepulcher, they breathe out the blasts of death, of filthinesse, and corruption.
And now he proceeds further, and tels them, that if they enter into the substance of the things which those men speake; they are meere idle dreames of a drunken man: their speech and communication is the most sencelesse of all other. Therefore he saith, A∣wake ye drunkards to justice, or righteousnesse. Shew∣ing, that all those words that are any way against God, and his power, and glory in the Resurrection; what discourse soever it be, that cals that in question: it is nothing else but as Saint BasilBasil. cals it, the meere dreame of a drunken man. It is an idle thing, for any man to hearken to a drunkards speech (especially that which he speaks betweene sleeping and waking) so it is much more idle to hearken to these evill spee∣ches, and discourses of these blasphemous mouthes. Now because the Church of Corinth hath beene infected with this cup, and hath taken so much of it, that many of them are drunke with it: Therefore I will you (saith the Apostle) to wake now while God hath given you time, and opportunitie: while by my ministerie, and the rest that shall succeed me; hee gives you summons, and cals you to wake out of this drunken humour, from these wicked speeches, that tend to sensualitie, and carnalitie. Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye: and what shall be∣come of us when we are dead? These evill speeches, are the dregs of hell, and the lees of this deadly wine: you have taken in abundance to your selves; there∣fore as soone as you can, awake. And so wake, as you may stand up to righteousnesse, and follow that, and walke therein, for ever hereafter: for there is diffe∣rence in them that are waked out of sleepe. Some are awaked with lesse noyse: the creaking
of a doore, the least noyse in a chamber, will wake some. Such are those, that are of tender hearts in Gods Church: the least advertisement and admonition will bring them home. Others are profoundly and deadly asleepe: such as are spoken of here, drunken men; that are more vio∣lently asleepe then others: they cannot bee drawne from it, without extremitie; they cannot be waked, without calling, without jogging, or pinching, and whatsoever meanes can be used to recover them: yea when they are awaked, except they bee taken when their sleepe is mellow; they grow into desperate furie and madnesse. And some, when they are awaked, they go not to their worke; they set not to action: but like the foo∣lish sluggard in the Proverbes, they cry,Prov. 6.10. A little more sleepe, a little more folding of the hands: a little more turning and tossing, as Saint Austin saith,Aug. A little more sleepe, a little more slumber; and I will rise now, and now: but now, and now, have no measure nor bounds in them. Now because there is such diffe∣rence in mens wakings, the Apostle sets downe the manner, how they should wake. Awake sufficiently: not so as to returne to sleepe againe. The sleepe natu∣rall, must be iterated and repeated; men cannot al∣way wake: but they must have some time to revive, and refresh their spirits, with the vicissitude & change of sleepe. But the spirituall waking, is of another na∣ture: it must be undertaken upon such conditions, and performed so; as that we never returne (by our good wils) unto sleepe, or if our naturall infirmitie carry us so farre, yet never to snort, and slumber in sinne any more: but to wake to righteousnesse, and to
do that which is good, in the sight of the Lord. And then, because it might be somewhat doubt∣full, what this is that he saith, Awake justly to righte∣ousnesse; he expounds himselfe in the next words, Sinne not.Psal. 4.4. A phrase common among the Hebrews, Psal. 4. Commune with your owne hearts, and be still, and sinne not. So here he tels what he meanes, when he saith, Awake justly, that is, give not your selves to sinne, and corruption, for that is the beginning of all these mischiefes. Sinne, is like Cyrces cups that in∣veigles, and drownes men in slumber; that they never rise againe, without the wondrous mercy of God. Therefore take heed you fall not into it, because that brings all other evils: it is that which brings the corruption of good words, and good manners, and you fall into them, because you have no care of your conversation. That is the first part of the Text. Then in the second, he begins to deale more neare∣ly with them, and tels them of their proper faults: that they were ignorant in things concerning God, that they knew not God, which is the maine object of all our knowledge. For those that know not God, or know him but by halves, that call in question the omnipo∣tencie of God, concerning the raising of our bodies: they are meerly ignorant of God. He that doubts of Gods power, concerning the raising of the dead, hee were as good know nothing of God: for he limits, and straightens the hand of God, and makes him infe∣riour to himselfe, and inferiour to his word. For his power, is greater then his will, and his will is revealed in his Word, and his Word tels us, that he will do it. Therefore, certainly, he can do it, because he can do
more then he will do. Therefore, he that cals in que∣stion these things, he were as good to have no sence or taste of God at all. He knows not God, he denies the prime and chiefe thing that is in God: and therefore he knows him not. And so it is with some of you; you have an ignorance concerning God: because you call in question his power, in this mighty benefit, the resur∣rection of our bodies. And then, lastly, he concludeth, with mildnesse and sharpnesse; and mingleth both together: I speake this to your shame. As if he should have said, partly I am ashamed, that I have spent so much time, and so much labour among you: and yet still you are in such waverings as these, and are no better perswaded in the omnipotent power of God. But as I speake this to your shame, so I would not have you despaire: but onely to take shame of your fault, and so be brought to Repentance. I speake it not to bring you to a confusion eternall; but to a healthy confusion: a confusion that brings conversion; that con∣version may bring salvation by the mercy of God. I speak it not to overthrow you; but to waken you that have beene intoxicate in a deepe sleepe, by the wicked communication of these men. This I take to be the sence of the Text. To proceed in order. There are three parts.Division into 3. Parts. First a counsell or exhortation. Then a serious expostulation.1. An exhorta∣tion. 2. An expostu∣lation. 3. An Increpa∣tion. And lastly, a forcible dealing, by way of Incre∣pation, whereby he doth as it were by an holy vio∣lence, compell them to enter into the wayes of God: and to be reclaimed from their sinnes. The first is contained in these words, Awake to
righteousnesse, and sinne not, 1 delivered. And that, First, in figure, and then, In plaine speech. The figure in these words, Awake to righteousnesse. The plaine words follow, And sinne not. The one interprets the other. In the figure, there are two things. 1 There is an Act, to awake out of wine; awake out of drinke, for so the word signifieth. Then secondly, there is the tearme and manner, whereto they must wake. Awake to justice, awake to perfection: not as men halfe asleep, and halfe awake; to turne on the other side, and take a nappe: but to wake fully, and freely. It is such a waking, as a man may be expedite to worke in the function of his life: whereunto all waking men are disposed. Then in the plaine words or exposition; hee shews likewise two things. 1 First, that sinne is the mother of all errour, of all grosse, and base communication. 2 Secondly, that by the grace of God (if we work with the grace of God) we shall not sinne, that is, we shall not sinne in that grosse manner, as these crea∣tures do. Although all men be sinners, yet if we will tender the grace of God that is in us; we shall so live as that we shall not sinne, according to that phrase of Scripture, which is afterwards to be expounded, namely, not with a full consent; not with a high hand; not to continue in sinne, not to despaire in sinne: but we shall know, that if we do sinne, we have a Media∣tour of our reconciliation; we have a Mediator which is God and Man Christ Iesus,1. Tim. 2.5. 1. Iob. 1.1, 2. who is the propitiation for our sinnes. Then in the second part, in the exposition, there are
two things to be considered. First, he tels them of their fault, (). It is a word that we cannot well utter in English, nor in Latine: it is hard to be exprest in both languages, to be ignorant of God. And then, because he would not offend all the company, for a fews sake; he saith, Some of you have not the knowledge of God. And then, lastly, the Application of all to them: he saith, he speakes it to their shame, that is, either he was ashamed to spend so much time, and labour to so little profit: or he spake it to their shame, as the com∣mon Text reades it, I speake it to your shame. But yet it is such a speech, as is not uttered in a virulent manner; to cast them away; to make them despaire: but to bring them home, that they might know what they ought to do for the time to come. These are the branches of the Text. Of every one of these, as the Lord shall give assistance: and but a word of eve∣ry one, because they are common obvious things. First, it is to be observed,1. Part. The Exhortati∣on, Awake, &c. that the Apostle invites them, and cals upon them for waking: and for such a waking, as if he should speake to a sort of drun∣kards, that were drowned in wine and drunkennesse; which is as base a kinde of sleepe, as can be. For all sleepe naturall, of it selfe is justly accounted a meere losse of time; the brother of death; the field of danger: a thing that hath no profit in it; that spends one part of our life to no purpose. And yet we cannot live with∣out it; for the repairing, and re-edifying, and build∣ing up of our bodies againe; that were consumed, and wasted before with daily labour. Now if the naturall sleepe be a loosing of time, a loosing of our spirits, and
a subjecting of us to danger; much more, then, is it in the sleepe of sinne: that poysonous sleepe that comes by excesse and drunkennesse. These, of all other, are most dangerous; and most hard for a man to bee rouzed out of. It is a common thing in Scripture, to compare sin∣ners to sleepers, and sinne to sleepe. There are divers sleepes related in the Scriptures. The sleepe corporall, of the body: and spirituall, of the soule. The sleepe corporall of the body, is either naturall, or violent. Naturall sleepe is that, when the strength of man is weakened, and abated, and his spirits are againe re∣newed, by a gracious mist, and dew, that is cast upon the body: whereby the naturall spirits, the vitall spirits, and the animall spirits, are refreshed, and raised againe to their worke. Violent sleepe, is either by drunkennesse, or disease. When nature is overwhelmed by drunkennesse, or by disease. As by Lethargies, or palsies; which all worke unto death: which is also called sleepe. For our Lord Christ saith, We go to Lazarus who sleepeth. And those that dye in the Lord, they sleepe. This is naturall sleepe. The spirituall sleepe, the sleepe that fals upon the spirit of man, it is of two sorts in Scripture. The one is celestiall, and good. The other is infernall; for hell, and hellish pur∣poses. Cant. 2.7.The first is that sleepe of the Church: I charge you oh daughters of Ierusalem by the roes, and by the hyndes, that ye wake not my beloved untill she please: that is,
in the meditation of holy things; It is a divine rapture? whereby the Saints of God have communion, and are made one spirit with the Lord.Cant. 5.1. This is called in Scripture, a sleepe: I sleepe, but my heart waketh. But that which the Apostle speaks of here, is an in∣fernall sleepe, that tends to a sleepe of damnation. As sleepie diseases nourish death in men, and there is no more assured signe that a man shall dye, then when he is continually sleeping, that he cannot rouse up his spirits to action: so these infernall sleeps, these sleepes of sinne, they give a certaine evident prognostication, that such a man shall be for ever damned in hell. They have slept their sleepe, saith the Prophet: that is,Psal. 76 5. they are gone to their everlasting sleepe, to hell, where their sleepe is not a refreshing, and refection, as ours is; but a continuall terrour, with gastly dreames, and apparitions: that they were better not to have any being, then to be in that fearfull manner. Therefore, the Apostle would teach us, that the consideration of that infernall sleepe, should worke us from this sleepe of sinne: which unlesse we be awaked from, we shall be like those in a Lethargie; even in death, and extreamly unable for any living actions. Sinne is compared to sleepe, for many plaine rea∣sons. I need not name them. First, as when sleepe is on men, they know not what they do, or what they say: many idle words passe from them, that they are not sensible of. So a sinner, whatsoever he doth, all is sinne: yet he knows not what he doth. Therefore our Lord Christ upon the Crosse, prayes, Father forgive them,Luk 22.34. they know not what they do. Secondly, sleepe exposeth a man to any danger.
He that lyes sleeping, cannot defend himselfe: the least childe that comes, may cut his threat. So a man that lives in sinne, is exposed to all dangers; that on every side waite upon him. He is in danger of God; he is in danger of Man; in danger of the devill; in danger of his owne humours, and constitution; in danger of every beast; of every thing that comes neare him: the least spider that is, may confound, and destroy, and poyson him. There is nothing so exposed to danger, as a sleeping man: much more as a sleeping sinner. Therefore the wise man compares him to a man that is asleepe. But where? upon the top of a mast of a ship,Prov. 23.34. in a storme of weather: which losses the ship to and fro, and he being asleepe there, it is a thousand to one, if he be not shaken over into the Sea. So a man that lives in sinne, he is asleepe in the middest of his enemies; in the tents of those that hate him. There is no securitie, for a man that lives in sinne, wheresoever he goes, danger dogges him; and he is exposed to the striking hand of God, in eve∣ry place. Thirdly, sleepe and sinne, are compared together in the Scriptures: because neither of them have any signification of life. A sleeper is bound in all his sen∣ces: there is nothing remaines in him, but a little breathing, and a few wilde affections, in raging dreames, and deepe phantasies. So it is with a sinner: whatsoever he doth, is unpleasing to God. His words are unsavoury; his works are ungodly, his example e∣very where detestable: himselfe odious to God; odious to men; odious to his owne soule. The Scripture could not finde a fitter comparison, to describe the infir∣mitie of the soule by (which is sinne) then sleepe.
And yet it is so much the more wondrous, be∣cause the Apostle saith, it is not simplie a sleepe, but a drunken sleepe. There is a great addition to it, in that for the sleepe naturall, is farre more easily to be re∣covered: it reviveth and refresheth the body; it leaves a sweet and easie touch and tincture behinde it. But those fals and mischiefes that a drunkard gets in his sleepe, he cannot so easily cast them off: but they sticke to him, many dayes after. And that fa∣cilitie that a man hath, in rising from his sleepe, it is not found in a sinner: except the Lord worke won∣drously. It is an easie thing, to worke a man out of sleepe, but it is an hard thing, to awake a man out of his sinne. Awake thou that sleepest,Ephes. 5.14. stand up from the dead: bestirre thy selfe, a small matter will not do it. But by this it seemes,  that there is in man free-will of himselfe, to convert himselfe, because the Apostle saith, Awake, and stand up thou that sleepest, and recover thy selfe againe; to thy owne minde, and to thy former actions. Is it in the power of man, to waken at the voyce of man? that as he cast him∣selfe into sleepe, and into sinne; so to awaken himselfe when he pleaseth? Verily no;  it must be the great God that must do it: all the power in heaven, and earth, cannot waken a sleeping sinner, untill God blow the trumpet. Tis God that gives his beloved sleepe. And as it is he alone,Psal. 127.2. that gives the sleepe naturall, so much more it is he, that gives the waking. It is a great blessing of God, to bring a man that is out of this world (as it were) by dreames and phansies; to bring him backe to li∣ving actions. For a man that is sleeping, is in another
element, in another world; and they are farre from true life, that are asleepe, saith Plinie.Plinie. And certainly, every life is a kinde of watching; and therefore sleepe must needs be a kinde of dying: it is the brother of death, as the Poet saith. Therefore the same Poet well signified it, out of that glimmering he had from the Scriptures, that God is the author both of mans waking, and also of his sleeping. For they make Mercurie to have a certaine rodde which was given him of Iu∣piter; whereby he had power to cast asleepe whom he would, and to waken others that were a sleepe, when he would,Hom. ult. l. as HomerHomer. saith. The meaning of this little learning they had in Divinitie, was this, that it lay in the hand of God (for Mercury was one of the prime, and chiefe gods among them) when he would to give change of sleeping, and waking; and that none else could do it: no not in naturall things. But much more in the spirituall sleep is it impossible, for any man to waken a sinner: but he must be roused by the great God, that permitted him in justice to fall asleepe: but in the multitude of his mercie, hee takes the paines to awaken him againe. But how is this done? We reade in Scripture, of three chiefe, and prin∣cipall wayes, whereby God awakeneth sinners. The first is, with a voyce. And then, with certaine pinchings. And lastly, with high clamours and cries. The voyce is as that which came to Samuel. When Samuel was asleepe,1. Sam. 3.4. the voyce of the Lord comes, and called, Samuel, Samuel: whereupon Sa∣muel riseth, and goeth to Ely, being now beginning to slumber, the voyce of the Lord rowseth him. Thus
God deales with men, that have tender hearts, and flexible mindes: that come in at the first call of the Lord, and returne home. Such a man was David; who is called a man after Gods owne heart.1. Sam. 13.14. Not be∣cause he had no sinne; but because his heart was as waxe, flexible unto God; without any purpose to de∣fend any sinne, or to continue in any sinne. Secondly, another way whereby God wakeneth sinners. When he cannot do it with a still voyce, then he useth jogging, and pinching. As those that will not be awaked with speaking, or with calling easily on them; we use to jogge them, and to rubbe them, and sometime to give them a pinch: that by that meanes at least, they may be brought unto watchfulnesse. Thus God doth, when he sends calamities, and ad∣versities: when hee pincheth a man in his fortunes; when he pincheth a man in his estate; when he pinch∣eth a man in his good name. And these are stronger voyces, then the former: when he toucheth the bo∣dy, and flesh of a man, as Sathan said concerning Iob, Touch his flesh, and thou shalt see what is in him:Job 1.11. so God seeth especially what is in a man, when he comes thus neere him: then he begins to seeke the Lord; then he begins to waken from that dulnesse, and slumber that he hath contracted by his sinnes: and he returnes with full strength of spirit, and affection to God; that he may not againe fall from him. So that adversities are to be accounted, as so many pinches, and touches from the Lord: and when adversities be∣fall us, in any part of our estate; let us acknow∣ledge, This is, because I am asleepe; the Lord now sends this, to rowse me. Let me hearken to the voyce of him that calleth me; and that will bring me out
of this sleepie humour, to my right sences againe. Lastly, another way whereby God awakeneth sin∣ners, is by strong cryes and clamours. When adver∣sities will not work; then the Lord gives a man over to great and extreame persecutions of his own soule: so that the conscience cryes out; and the inward heart of a man misgives against himselfe; that he is filled with feare and horrour; that his bones waxe old with the disquiet of his heart,Psal. 32.3. and by reason of his roaring: that he is troubled in soule and spirit, as the Prophet David saith, that he hath no part of sanitie or health in his members,Psal 38.5. but all is turned to stench and cor∣ruption, by reason of his foolishnesse. This is that migh∣ty clamour that God raiseth in the heart of a man; and makes an allarum bell to sound, to ring him home to God by force; because gentle meanes will not serve the turne. As for foolish men, when they looke upon these pinches in the world; they consi∣der them as casuall matters: a worldly man considers them, as matters of fortune, as accidentall things which he might have avoyded, if he had beene care∣full. But now when the conscience of a man is trou∣bled,Prov. 18.14. a troubled spirit who can beare? Then these in∣ward clamours of the heart, appeare outwardly in the countenance, in the gestures and behaviours of a mans body. As we see in Ahab himselfe, the cla∣mour of the murther of Naboth, it so rung in his eares; that it made him hang downe his head like a bulrush,1 King. 21.27.29. and to go clad in sackcloth: it made him so humble himselfe, that God yeelded for that feigned repentance much pittie, and commiseration in this life. So much for the action, Do you awake. It is true it is Almighty God, that must waken us: and if we be
not wakened by him, we for ever slumber unto death. For he that alway sleepes, shall never rise againe: it being the brother of death. Therefore, as that fellow said, when he killed a sleeping man, and came to an∣swer the fact before the Emperour, saith he, I found him dead, and I left him dead: he thought it a suffici∣ent satisfaction that hee was asleepe, and therefore dead. I say, therefore, although God must raise us by his owne power, and it belongs to him onely to raise us: yet when we have received the power of grace, we can then heare the call of God, and under∣stand when he summons us: and then we have power, to rowse up our selves. Not of our selves, for all our power is from him: yet wee have not received the grace of God so in vaine, as that it should not worke. For grace is of a working nature: when it is once in∣grafted, and received. Therefore, let us take heed, that we receive not the grace of God in vaine: but let us cooperate with it;2. Cor. 6.1. and let us give that regiment and government to the graces of the spirit, that we have received in the full extent, and latitude of it. By this meanes, wee shall be capable of this instruction and exhortation; when he saith, Awake you. A man must not say, it lyes not in my power to awake, it is God that must wa∣ken me: let God worke it if he will: and if he will not, it is not my fault; because I cannot do it. This is absurd blasphemy. For we have received a talent of God, and if we will use it, wee may bring it to his will; and make it some way answerable to his com∣mand. Therefore awake, God hath done his part, he hath called thee; he hath pinched thee; he hath raised
clamours, and cryes in thy conscience: therefore hear∣ken to his voyce, resist it not, hearken to him that calleth from on high, and awake thou that sleepest, and stand up from the dead; and Christ shall give thee light. Now follows the manner how wee must awake, and the tearme whereto. Awake sufficiently: which I take to bee the best sence. It is true, as Saint Chrysostome and BezaBeza. saith, A man were better be asleepe still,Chrysost. then to watch to wic∣kednesse: therefore the Apostle bids them wake to righteousnesse, or else to sleepe still. As CatoCato. was wont to say to his servants. Either do some thing (some businesse) or sleepe againe. So it is in the house of God; a man were better not to be awaked, then to spend his time idlely; or to spend his time in mis∣chiefe and wickednesse: there shall bee lesse condem∣nation to a slumbring sinner, then to an active sinner, that runnes on in the functions of wickednesse, and toyles himselfe in the divels service: there is none desperate as he. Therefore, as Beza saith, Awake un∣to righteousnesse, that is the true watching. A man a∣wakes indeed, when he awakes to worke; when hee wakes to do the actions of a living man: and so you, you shall bee truly raised from the sleepe of sinne, when you do the worke of righteousnesse. For this is the tearme whereto God hath called you: not to drowsinesse, to a slumbering lethargie; but to nimble∣nesse of spirit, to be active in your operations. But I take it, the most true and sensible exposition is, that which Saint BasilBasil. gives, , Awake worthi∣ly: that is, Awake sufficiently, competently: to wake
so, as a man never intends to returne to sleep againe. As Saint Austin saith upon that place,Aug. Awake thou that sleepest, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Behold (saith he) it is not enough for a man to wake, but he must stand up, and do the actions of an holy life. It is true (saith S. Austin) I see thou are rowsed and wakened, but yet thou art drowsie, thou art rubbing thine eyes; thou hast not yet quite overcome, and mastred thy sleepe: but I tell thee, God will have thee shake off all this sleepe, and drowsinesse; and so to awaken, as Christ awakened from death: he once left the grave, never to return, and come there any more. For in that he dyed, hee dyed once for sinne: but in that he liveth, he liveth ever to God. Then, therefore, a man is risen justly; when there is no part of drowsinesse remaines in him: when he is not like those sleepie creatures, that rise in their sleepe, and go about their businesse, and go to bed againe: and when they have done all, know not of it. There is a kinde of kell or skinne wanting in the braine, wherein memory should be retentive: there∣fore they do many things in their sleepe. But God would have men so waken, as that there should no portion of this drowsinesse rest in them. This doctrine is very necessarie. For there is much sleepe carries them away, that are most watchfull: there is infinite heavinesse, and slumber waits upon them. God is in his children, in one part; and the de∣vill in another part; that they now speake well, anon they do ill: many make profession of the Gospell, and yet shew no pittie to the poore; nor exercise charitie where they see occasion. These men are awaked: and they be doing and stirring; but it is not
justly, as God would have them. When once a man leaves that way, and habite, which hee had before; and hath a new spirit of life put into him: he is then all for action, and for working in the wayes of God. Now I come to the Exposition.Exposition. And sinne not. Here the Apostle expounds what he meanes by wa∣king. Where first, the Apostle gives us to understand, that the cause of all foolish, and idle speech, and com∣munication (as those hee speakes of before, Let us eate, and drinke, for to morrow we shall dye) the cause of these idle discourses, it is meerly an inherent habite of sinne: so that corruption is the plague, that causeth evill speeches, and behaviour; and the one as a pesti∣lent serpent brings forth the other. It is sinne that breeds monstrous opinions; it is sinne that breeds all the heresies in the world: they have no other mo∣ther. As Saint AmbroseAmbrose. saith, those that make ship∣wracke of a good life; it is no marvell, if they make shipwracke of a good faith. They that give them∣selves to base manners, they are given over by the judgement of God, to erronious opinions. For as Saint Chrysostome saith,Chrysost. a wicked life is a corrupt fountaine: from whence comes nothing but mud and dirt and froth,Ag. and as Saint Austin saith well, A man having knowledge once to do the will of God, and yet will not do it according to his knowledge: it is impossi∣ble he should retaine his knowledge: he that knows what is acceptable in the sight of God, and yet from a stubbornnesse of minde, will not follow his know∣ledge; the Lord shall bring that judgement upon him, that he shall lose that power, that he shall not be able to know what is right, and what is wrong. Take the talent from that unprofitable servant,Mat. 25.28. and give
it to him that hath ten talents.Matth. 6.23. If the light in a man be darknesse, how great is that darknesse? from him that hath not shall be taken even that which he hath: It is a fearfull and terrible sentence: let us all tremble under the blast of it, for it concernes every man. As long as he lives in sinne, it is the greatest miracle in the world, that he is not drowned in it. To keepe a true faith, with a bad life, it is meerly impossible: There∣fore sinne not. For that there is all this false and idle communication, that there is this base conversation; these evill speeches, these distrustfull languages, con∣cerning God, and concerning the Resurrection: the cause of it is this inveterate sinfulnesse: If God punish men with giddinesse of braine, and blinde their un∣derstandings, that the light in him be darknesse; it is a fearfull stroke: yet this comes from sinne; there∣fore he joynes both together, and injoynes them, saying, Sinne not. But how (saith the Apostle) sinne not?Ob. Doth he not know they were men? would he have them of An∣gelicall natures? Doth not the Apostle Saint Iohn say, If we, that is, if we that are Apostles,1. Joh. 1.8. if we say that wee have no sinne, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: And if the Physitian require of his Patient a thing that he cannot possibly do (as to tell him that is diseased, that hee must fetch such an hearbe from the East-Indies to cure him) it were a meere trouble and delusion, and the way to make him desperate. Therefore, what doth the Apostle meane, when he saith, Sinne not? Why all men are sinners, and stand
in need of the glory of God; and a man must pray as duly for the forgivenesse of his sinnes, as for his daily bread: they follow both as necessarily, the one upon the other, as it is possible two benefits can do. But to sinne in Scripture, is taken in these sences chiefly. First men are said to sinne, that study sinne, that hunt after sinne, that seeke it: many men are so given to the devill in the world, that if hee do not seeke them, they will seeke him. The Apostle bids us take heed of that, it is a terrible thing, when a man hath a carefull minde to serve Sathan, and to leave and forsake the living God. The nature of Gods children may be overtaken with infirmities; but they do not study for it. Secondly, they are said to sinne, that go on in sinne: so Saint Iohn saith, the childe of God doth not sinne; because they premise it not before hand, and they call themselves to account, and to judgement for it after: they judge themselves for their sinne. There is no man, nor no barre in the world, can devise that punishment for the childe of God, that he doth inflict upon himselfe: he is his owne judge, and his owne executioner. Therefore he makes no profession of his sinne, but is ashamed, and hides his head upon every remembrance of his sinne. Therefore he is said nor to sinne, by the speciall grace of God, that covers his sinne; because he cannot indure it. As Saint BasilBasil. saith, If thy sinne please thee not, it shall never hur thee. Lastly, they are said to sin, that sin to desperatiō, tha care not for pardon; that disclaime the mercy of God;
that say their sinne is so great that it cannot bee forgi∣ven, like Cain and Iudas: that will none of Gods com∣passion; that reject his favour, and will not subject themselves to his censure: but are ready to say, thus I have done, and I see not how it can be amended: and God will not forgive it; and therefore they will go forward, and make a bad cause desperate. This is the height of sinne. These things (we see) it lyes in the power of grace, to keepe us from: that we sinne not, that is, by the grace of God wee may so com∣mand our spirits, as that we shall not study and hunt after sinne; nor we shall not sinne with a high hand; nor sinne to desperation: but if we sinne, we do not as the reprobates of the world, that cast away all hope, and resist, and blaspheme God:1. Joh. 2.1, 2. but wee have a Media¦tour and propitiation for our sinnes, the man Christ Iesus. Now for that which he objects unto them, he tels them, They knew not God; and hee speakes it to their shame. It is a wondrous thing, that the Corinthians that were so illuminated, and had such knowledge, as the Apostle saith, Chap. 1. that they had all knowledge,1. Cor. 1.5. and all grace, and all strength: and yet now hee comes and begins at the very foundation, and taxeth them, that they knew not God himselfe. But we must know, in that he said before they had all knowledge, and all faith, and all grace; it is spoken of the better part; and the better part, deno∣minates the whole. As when there is an heape of wheat and chaffe together; wee call it an heape of wheat: because the understanding of a man, takes no notice of that which is the riffe raffe; but of that
which is good, and commendable. So Saint Paul, be∣cause many of them were illuminated; hee gives them a title exceeding, and saith, they had all know∣ledge, and all learning, and abundance of all grace. In the meane time, he meddles not with these that were the worst, and the poorest; that were fallen from their knowledge, and had blinded themselves in sin∣fulnesse. He saith therefore: Some of you have not the knowledge of God. Where we are to consider, First, that he that doth not yeeld unto God in all the parts of his Word, he doth not know God: he that knows not God, as he would be knowne, he knows him not at all. A man were as good to make no profes∣sion of God, as not to give him the full extent of his owne declaration. Whatsoever it hath pleased God to promise to them that belong unto him; he will certainly performe it:2 Cor. 1.20. he cannot lye, all his promises are Yea and Amen, in Christ Iesus. Therefore, those know God, that know him to be al-sufficient, and true of his promise: and they that know him otherwise, and know him not that way; they know him no way. So that it is not for any man, to take to himselfe a singular dexteritie of knowledge; except he yeeld un∣to the written word of God. Many men take upon them, to be the onely wittie men, to be singular in all sciences, and that the knowledge of all belongs to them: and yet they know nothing. Why? because they doubt of the prime and chiefe things: they make a doubt, whether Christ be the Mediatour of interces∣sion, as he is of satisfaction, or no? they make a que∣stion,
whether we may pray to Saints and Angels, or no? they call in question, how the body of Christ is determined in the Sacrament; and this article of the Resurrection of the dead, they make it a disputable case. When men will thus dispute, and jangle away their faith, they corrupt their knowledge: and when they thinke they know all things, they are meere ig∣noramus; that are not seene at all in these things. And no marvell, for God saith, the things that hee hath laid up for his children, they passe the mindes of these men: They are such as eare hath not heard,1. Cor. 2.9. nor eye hath seene, nor hath ever entred into the heart of man to conceive. Flesh and bloud will speake of the things belonging to it selfe; it cannot attaine fur∣ther. These earthly mansions can take in no more, then is vouchsafed them: and no more then they use well, when they have received it. But when men will blinde themselves, they fall into absurdi∣ties: from better to worse; and from worse, to worst of all. Let us take heed how wee bragge of knowledge.  In our Church (by the blessing of God) we have had as great light, as any part of the world; none com∣parable: but when we begin by our base manners, and evill lives, to fall from the service of God, to our pleasures; there is nothing so blindes our understand∣ings; nothing casts such mists, and vapours into the world, as this: and at last, it resolves into a meere sencelesnesse. That he that when he was an apprentise, when he was a yong man, understood the grounds of Religion; and was able to give a reason of his faith: now when he comes to be an old man, he is growne a meere butterflie, of a laborious silkworme. Hee is
growne a very bruit; meerly sencelesse, by reason of the cares and pleasures of this world. For when a man fals into sinne, it breeds an oblivion of God: and from that, it brings a man to a meere ignorance of him. Therefore, if we know God, let us follow him as our guide. It is to no purpose, for us to have a guide, and to know him; if we go one way, and he go another: but herein is our wisedome, to follow our guide, to yeeld to his blessed word; to hope, and put confidence in his promises for our guidance and dire∣ction: and to disclaime, and forsake our selves, and all things else,Col. 3.11. that we may be onely his who is all in all. Secondly, observe, when the Apostle layes this imputation upon them, he restrains it, and saith, Some of you. Men should be carefull, how they cast aspersions: a Church, especially, upon a whole Church, as Corinth was. We must speake so, that offence may not bee taken; that we do not lay the fault of a few upon all. A man must not be so base, that because two or three of a profession live ill; to say that therefore all do so; because some few are ill neighbours, that therefore all the street is so. No: but we must lay the fault to the right owner; every person must answer for him∣selfe. The Church is still to be presumed, to know God. In this Congregation (although there were fewer understanding people, then there are) yet he that should say, All this people were without the know∣ledge of God, were blasphemie. There is no Congrega∣tion of the people of God, but they know God; and they feare God; and love God: and though some do not so, yet the better part do: the select number that
God hath, where his word is preached; they both know him, and feare him. Still therefore, we are to comprehend the Church in this, that she knows God; and that she loves God. And as the Church universall, so in particular Churches; in parishionall Churches; in every company and neighbourhood of men; we are to imagine that some know God, and feare him: though some do neither. Therefore let us labour to make much of,  and to keepe this admonition, and reprehension: that the chil∣dren of God that do well, may not bee discouraged: and that others may not bee permitted to do evill, nor suffered to go on in their foolishnesse. But that there may be a difference made, and yet no particular set down. For here the Apostle doth not name them: but he leaves it to their owne breasts to consider of. He chargeth them not maliciously, to make them scandalous to the world; for that way hee might have made them desperate: but he leaves them to God that knows them. The Lord knows, that all are not alike among you: that there is a company among you, that are of the same profession, that are not equall to the rest in the knowledge and feare of God. But he doth not name them, because he would leave them to repentance, to commune with their owne hearts:Psal. 4 4. that every one might examine his owne conscience, whe∣ther he were the man or no. And lastly, he concludes all, with which I will consider. I speake this to your shame. That is, I desire not any way to destroy you, but to
build you up: whatsoever I can do, or whatsoever I am appointed to do in the Lords worke, it must be to edification, and not to destruction. There is a cer∣taine shamefastnesse, whereby a man is wonne to God: It is an excellent beauty in a man or woman, to be modestly shamefast; to blush at that which is unseeme∣ly; to be afraid of that which is unhonest: The fore∣head being the seat of shame, and the cheekes, the testimony. What is received from the Rainbow a∣bove, appeares in colours beneath: and is reflected on the lower clouds: These testifie, for God, of the tem∣per of the heart and affections. God hath put a law of difference within men, whereby they are able to dis∣cerne betweene good and evill. And this shamefast∣nesse if it were well mannaged, it would bring a man (by the grace of God) to loath sinne; and to be circumspect of his wayes. But wee take a course in the world, to overwhelme this shamefastnesse; and to make this modest shamefastnesse meere clownishnesse. There is no man so farre from brave and Courtly behaviour, as a blusher: those that have shamefast affections, those that have a divine touch and tincture of holinesse in their face; there are none accounted so base as these. And men, now, will prescribe cer∣taine ages; how long men may be ashamed: and after that, they thinke it is a shame to bee ashamed. It is true, that it is a shame for a man to do that, which is shamefull; but never to be ashamed for it; for as long as there is shame in man, there is hope of grace; there is hope of conversion, that he will turne: it shewes that he cannot endure the burthen of that, that is shamefull. A man that blushes, would faine be out of the roome, where he is; he would faine quit the com∣pany;
he would not heare such things as he he areth; nor see such objects as he seeth: for a man is loath to bee noted, for one that is conscious in any kinde. Therefore, the grace of God seconding this naturall affection; if wee bee carefull to maintaine it in our selves; it would bring us to a happy condition: to be one spirit with the Lord. For so we are, when wee hate that which hee hates; and when wee love that which he loves; when we would not have that in our selves, or in our friend, or in our company, which od likes not of. It is a gracious complexion, which is to be maintained and cherished: the grace of God would bring it to this perfection, if it were maintain∣ed in us. But this impudent looke, this base behavi∣our, and such as the devill hath devised to take away shame from men: it is this that hath brought men from all their glory; and made them to fall (as bruit beasts) into all manner of sinne, without shame or conscience. I speake this to your shame. And I hope there is shame and grace left in you, that you will not despaire: for I speake it, to winne you, not to destroy you. Let this shamefastnesse put you in minde, what you ought to have beene; and make you ashamed of what you are, in respect of what you should be: and so let it be a meanes to re∣duce you. As the wise man saith, there is a certaine shame and confusion of face, that brings a man to the grace of God Almighty, namely, when he is ashamed of himselfe, and his courses; and opens his wants, and confesseth his sinnes unto God; that he is not able to
indure his wants: There is another shame unto ruine: when men do that which is evill, and harden their foreheads; and have sinnowie and steely necks: such as are without feare or compunction. As the Lord speakes of his people, that they had made their faces of brasse,Jsa. 48.4. and their necks of steele. When there is such a fearful conclusion as this, it makes a man or woman the sonne or daughter of shame and confusion. Therefore let us intreat the Lord God, to worke these naturall affections in us, and to sanctifie them to us: and they will teach us many things. These n¦turall affections of feare, and joy, and sorrow, and shame; these naturall things being in us: if God rule them, if God sit on them, and ride upon the asse; they will carry him into Ierusalem, by the mercy of God. Let us take heed, that we maintaine these things; that we may have the knowledge of good and evill, shining in our consciences; that accordingly we may beare it in our countenance. For when a sinner is asha∣med; he comes naked, and confesseth his fault before God and his brethren: and entreats the mercy of the one, and the love of the other; that God may take away his afflicting hand; and that his shame here, may keepe him from eternall shame in the world to come. Which the Lord grant. FINIS.
1 COR. 15.35. But some man will say, how are the dead raised? with what kinde of bodies do they come? Foole, that which thou sowest is not made alive, except it dye. THis is the question of an idle and igno∣rant man, to which the Apostle frames an answer, Foole, that which thou sow∣est, &c. Here begins that marvellous part of this Chapter. Which containes a plaine declaration of the rising of the dead, from naturall arguments. So that all the body of nature, doth preach a resurre∣ction to us: and there is no one change or vicissitude in the things of this world, but it hath some steppe of this doctrine in it. This is that, which the Apostle declares throughout, to the end of the Chapter. And (as Austin saith) all the frame of nature doth make open proclamation of the certaintie of this doctrine;Aug. if we attend to the voyce of nature. For it is seene in the falling, and rising of the Sunne. In the descending, and ascending of the starres. It is seene in the intercourse of Summer and Win∣ter. It is seene in the vicissitude of day and night. It is set forth in the continuall intercourse of gene∣ration and corruption in the world.
And especially it is seene in this one thing, in the seed that is sowne in the ground. For a man in his garden, may observe the certaintie of the Resurre∣ction; in his field, in the hope of his harvest: he may see that God is able to do as much for his body, as he doth for those seeds that he commits to the ground. As S. Chrysostome saith well;Chrysost. there is a twofold kinde of sowing, or semination. 1 One of seed. 2 Another of bodies. All men sow seed, so God sowes bodies; and the Church-yards are called Gods acre, in some countries, because there is sowne that seed, that God preserves to eternall life; hee is able to bring them from the bosome of the earth: and we must trust, and credit him with it, to bring them from dust to be invested with glory; and to be made conformable to the body of his Sonne. Therefore, here the holy Apostle out of arguments drawne and observed from nature; out of the com∣mon course, that men are acquainted with daily: he brings a very forcible remonstrance, to prove the necessity of the Resurrection. And that he may do it with the more force, and emphasis, he brings it by way of prosopopeia: making a man to speak and move questions, and then to give himselfe the answer. He brings in a simple man, an ignorant man; either disgracing the doctrine of the Resurrection: or else being simple and ignorant; desiring to know what the truth of it were. And he moves two questions. The one, touching the Resurrection in generall: as though it were impossible the dead should rise.
The other, touching the manner and qualitie of their bodies; if the dead should rise, how, with what bodies shall they come? To which questions, he returns a twofold answer. The first, more bitter, by way of reprehension. The second, of demonstration, shewing the reasons why, and the manner how, they shall come. For the first, Thou foole (saith he) that which thou sowest, it is not quickened, except it dye. Doth not thy selfe teach thy selfe, that there must needs be a rai∣sing of these dead bodies of ours? because God hath used thee, as an instrument to make a kinde of Re∣surrection. For when thou committest thy seed to the ground, God gives it a body at his pleasure: but thou takest paines, and usest the meanes to effect it, that it may come to passe. That now which thou doest to thy corne, will not God do to his corne? Are we not all the seeds of God? are we not all the corne of the Almighty? hath thy ground by thy diligence and culture, better abilitie, and power, to bring forth a new eare of corne, then the earth, to yeeld up thy body by Gods worke, and blessing upon it? So he an∣swers the first question. The second answer is in the next words; concern∣ing the manner, and qualitie of the bodies, when they are raised. As they shall come bodies, so they shall be bodies: but with certaine qualifications, otherwise qualified then they are now. In the prosopopeia, in the questions that hee makes; and in the answer that the Apostle returnes to them in the next verse, we are to observe: First that he speaks indefinitely:Division: into 1. A question. bringing in a simple ignorant man, moving questions: arguing, and disputing
and talking against the resurrection. 2. The matter of it. 3. The answer. in the matter, 2 questions. 1. Of the gene∣rality.Secondly, he notes to us the matter of his questi∣ons, what he demands. And there are two questions. One is, concerning the generalitie of this maine Article, How can the dead rise? how can they be raised againe? 2. of the forme of the bodies raised.The second is, concerning the forme and disposition of their bodies, when they be raised. Suppose there shall be such a thing, as the raising of the dead; yet with what kinde of bodies shall they come? 3. In the An∣swer we have 1. A reprehen∣sion.And then in the answer we are to consider: First, a reprehension of this boldnesse: for medling with Gods mysteries too much, for medling too farre. Foole. So that to move questions, is not alwayes a signe of wit, and great learning. Though questions may be moved in a sober manner, when men do it for satisfaction; but to multiply question upon que∣stion (to no purpose) this is grosse follie: and rather makes men giddie in their understandings, then gives them any instruction. Therefore he cals him foole. 2. A demon∣stration.And then he demonstrates it out of the actions, that men are every day conversant in: That which thou sowest. I will shew thee out of thine owne field, out of thy plot of ground; that this is not incredible: but that there shall be a resurrection. Why? because that which thou sowest must first dye, that it may live after. For it is never quickened, untill the corne come to a very jellie; and be turned to nothing but corruption, and rottennesse, and putrefaction in the earth: and then it pleaseth God to raise it. Therefore as the corne in the ground first dyes, that after it may live: so Gods corne must dye, there must be a passage to a temporall death, that God may raise it thence,
unto eternall life. Of these briefly, and in order.1. part. The Question. First concerning the questionist in this place; the partie that moves the question. You must first note, that the Apostle will not lay the imputation upon the Corinthians; because he would not too much offend them. Hee doth not charge them, that they should be so long taught in the schoole of Christ; and yet be so little edified, as to move such idle questions as these. For hee takes it as a thing confessed among them: and although (indeed) many denyed it; yet he will not cast it upon them every where: but hee labours to keepe himselfe peaceable, and quiet with them; that so he might worke the better upon them. Therefore he brings in a man at large: he supposeth such a man in the world; one that understood no∣thing of the power of God, nor yeelded unto it: he supposeth him to speake such a word as this, How are the dead raised, &c. And this (as Saint Chrysostome saith) teacheth us that we should not be personall or particular,  Chrysost. in our reprehensions. When we are to deale with Gods peo∣ple, in a publicke place; we must not deale so perso∣nally, and particularly, that any may thinke them∣selves pointed at. For by that meanes, they may be made incorrigible: but such things must be supposed, in the person of a stranger: there must be a kinde of compassing, a kinde of wheeling about; as we see Na∣than did, when he came to David. Now what the minde of this man should be, that moves this question; whether he came with a minde to cavill, or whether hee came as one that would faine be instructed in the mysteries of Religion, as one
that would faine understand this mystery to the full: this we cannot easily determine. It may well bee taken either way. But I thinke it fittest, to take it in the best sence: to judge the best of a thing, that is doubtfull. If he came as one to cavill, then he was such one as the Sadduces, that came to Christ, Matth. 22. they inveyed against this point of our faith,Matth. 22.28. the Resurre∣ction; and they brought an argument against it, from a woman, that had seven husbands: and they aske him whose wife she should be in the resurrection, for se∣ven had her to wife. Such kinde of grosse cavils, served the turne to blinde their eyes; because they could not understand the glorious state of the Saints at the Resurrection.Act. 17.32. So the like wee have, Acts 17. when the Apostle comes to the Philosophers at A∣thens, and tels them of the doctrine of the Resurrecti∣on: they begin presently to laugh it out, as a thing meerly absurd, and that could not be any way be∣leeved. As Saint BasilBasil. saith, to this day (saith he, and hee lived foure hundred yeares after Christ) when I preach to the Grecians, the doctrine of the Resurrection, they cast forth a broad, and loud laugh∣ter: because it seemes to them a matter altogether incredible. So that if the partie whom the Apostle supposeth here, came with the minde of a caviller; we must know that the world was never free from them. Yet these must not dismay, but strengthen us; for the finding out of answers and arguments to stop the mouthes of such cavilling spirits, as those are. But I rather follow the other; that they are the words of a man that was simple and ignorant; and
would faine be instructed, and see how these things were. And then this teacheth us further;  that we ought still to make our doctrine and the Articles of our faith so plaine as we can: that if it be possible, the manner it selfe may be declared. It is true, it is a dan∣gerous thing to aske questions, where God hath set no resolution. Zacharie was stricken dumbe for ask∣ing how he could be the father of Iohn Baptist,Luk 1.18. be∣cause he and his wife were stricken in age. And yet sometimes it is not unlawfull so to question: as Nico∣demus asketh Christ saying, How can these things be?Joh 3 4. being desirous to be informed. And the Virgin Mary when the Angel Gabriel tels her shee should bee the mother of God, the Saviour of the world; she desires to know the manner: How can these things bee;Luk. 1.34. seeing I know not a man? So that if men come with a consci∣ence, that desires to know the truth, and come not in mockery, to disgrace the word of God, to cast mists on it, that so they may make it incredible to other peo∣ple, as it is to themselves: I say, if they come with humble mindes, it is lawfull to aske questions, even concerning the manner how these things shall be? For although the Apostle call him foole, for his la∣bour, yet the reason is not simplie, because he askes the question, but because he askes it with a kinde of doubting and distrust: because he thought it impos∣sible, that it could not be; and therefore he askes in a kinde of gybing. As Sarah when the Angel tels her she should have a childe, shee laughs, and saith, How shall my lord and I fall to lust that are old?Gen 18.12. So jest∣ing out that which was spoken. Now because there was such a smacke of ingratitude and infidelitie, in
this question: therefore the Apostle finds fault with him, and returns him the foole for his labour. 2. Part. The matter of the question.But now for the matter that is moved. The que∣stion propounded, is first, about the generality of the Resurrection, and the possibility thereof. And secondly, about the qualitie of the bodies, that shall rise. These are the two questions here mo∣ved. 1 The generality and pssibility of the Resurrection.Concerning the first. It hath alway beene the maine and principall project of the devill, so to blun∣der our faith in this point; as to make it to bee thought a meere dreame and fable: even the glorious Resurrection. And to that purpose, he hath heaped up a number of questions, one upon another; even to overwhelme the clearnesse of this truth, and to make us runne wilde in this labyrinth; there being such diversities of questions in it, and so intricate, as that men might make no evasion out of it. There is nothing that hath beene more loaded with questions, then this point. As how the dead shall rise? In what place they shall rise?Rndezvu. where their randevouse shall be, where they shall all meete together? in what time they shall come? in what time of the world? in wht yeare of the world? how long this Resurrection shal be in the accomplishing? whether many dayes, or in one day, or in the twinckling of an eye as the Scripture speakes? to what purpose it shall be done? after what manner men shall live, when they are risen? In what sexe they shall rise? These, and such like questions, the Schoolmen themselves have beene too too busie to treate upon: and Sathan hath by this meanes en∣tred into the understandings and consciences of many men, to make them either deny, or very deeply to
doubt, whether these things shall be so or no. Therefore, it must bee a warning to us,  not to meddle; nor to be asking questions in those things, that are not revealed: but to rest in those things that God hath opened unto us. For it is impossible for us (in any great measure) to know the things here, that are reserved for a better life.1. Cor. 2 9. Those things that eye hath not seene, nor eare hath heard, nor hath ever entred into the heart of man to conceive. Can any man tell, how he lived in his mothers wombe? Can any man tell how he lived the first yeare, when he was a babe in the world? he may see, and judge of it, by the ex∣perience that he takes from others: but to speake it of his owne person, it is impossible. So much more impossible is it, for a man to reach to those things that are above. A man goes beyond himselfe, and beside himselfe; and turnes foole when he looks into those things, that God would keepe secret; that he would never have us see, till we come to that life of vision: till we come to see face to face. It is enough, that the Lord hath said there shall be a life: but what kinde of life it shall bee, or what actions wee shall be im∣ployed in; other then the praising and glorifying of God, we cannot determine. Therefore, let us learne to extend this point, as in all other things, to come with modesty. For if men will still be moving of que∣stions, and never make an end: the Apostle calls it doting about questions.1 Tim. 6.4. He that is not content (saith he) with these things, but will teach other things; he is sicke about questions: he labours of a great sick∣nesse, the sicknesse of the soule, which is the greatest sicknesse that can be. And so about the matter of Baptisme, that we are now to celebrate; the devill
doth plie doubting spirits with many questions. As how is it possible that water should wash away sinne: That a tincture and touch of water should do this▪ what is the grace that God conferres in Baptisme? whether it be an inherent thing in the soule? whe∣ther it be a habite that can be removed, or not remo∣ved? whether it be necessarily effected by the collation of Baptisme, or no? Such things should not trouble us; but we ought to follow the ordinance of God: and to know that hee that hath promised, is able to performe it; hee that became a sacrifice for man∣kinde, and was a sweet smelling savour unto God, for the sinne of man, he alone was able; and had power and authoritie to ordaine a Sacrament; and to blesse it, with all those gracious appendices, to make it a passage unto life, the seale of glory. And therefore he hath given us his Word; and we cannot seeke fur∣ther. We know that a Prince can make a Knight of the Garter, by sending his George: though it bee a Prince in France, or in another Countrey, and he ne∣ver saw the man, nor came neare him; yet by send∣ing his Garter, he is invested into that Order. So much more the great God of heaven and earth, when he sends us these badges and symbols: even the two Sa∣craments, Baptisme and the Lords Supper. These are the seales and signes of our investing into this holy order; and we cannot miscarrie in our faith in this: we are sure these signes are never frustrate, but they put us into that honour, and they possesse us of that or∣der, which our Prince hath sent unto us. And as a Prince that sends a pardon to a malefactour; or that sends a letter of grace, and honour, and advancement: we know that those letters are still efficacious, and
have their worke upon the person to whom they are sent. Much more is the letter of Baptisme pow∣erfull, which is sent from God: which is turned from a letter, to a working instrument. It is not idle, and fruitlesse, but is alwayes working to eternall life: and it puts them into honour; that he that was a meane man before, is now advanced to high dignitie: it follows upon him, he is as sure of it in his person (by meanes of that letter and conveyance) as men are of any possessions in the world. So that this honour that God gives to Christians by Baptisme, it is true and per∣manent: it is inherent, it is really conferred upon him. Therefore we are not to move doubts and questions upon it; but in our holy faith to follow our holy God: and to know that he is able to do whatsoever hee will,Psal. 135.6. both in heaven, and earth, and in the sea, and in all deepe places. And for the conferring of grace, it is certaine, that by the prayers of the people, by the faith of the Church, and the faith of the parents, there is a mea∣sure of grace conferred in Baptisme too: That is, those three Cardinall vertues, those three principall stems (faith, hope, and charitie) though they do not yet worke, and appeare in the childe (because it is weake, and must come to age first) yet as reason lyes hidde in the childe, for divers moneths (and perhaps for divers yeares, before it shew it selfe by speech and conversing) so these graces are actually, and really in the childe, although they do not worke till God give them their fulnesse, and growth, as the Lord hath ap∣pointed to every thing its owne time and operation. So much for the first question, that is, about the Re∣surrection in generall.
2 The quaities of the resurrection.The second is, concerning the qualities of the bo∣dies raised. And herein the nature of man troubleth it selfe, more then in all the rest. So curious, and so sickish to know, what correspondence there sh ll be be∣tweene man, and man? to know in what kinde of sta∣ture they shall rise in? what colour they shall have? what imployment they shall be ra sed for? whether a childe shall rise as a childe? whether an old man, shall rse in his old age? whether crooked, and defor∣med men, shall rise crooked, and deformed▪ whether a Prince, shall rise in the qualitie of a Prince? and a prvate man, as a private man? S ch foolsh things, the weake minde of man doats upon: The qualitie and manner, being of all other things the most hard to be conceived. It is an easier matter, to perswade a man of the substance of the thing, that there shall be a Resurrection; then to perswade him of the dif∣ference, and of the qualities of men at the Resurrecti∣on. What? sexes, againe; male and female: and so as the Sadduces thought, man and w fe? and conse∣quently, a new love, and concordance, and generation of the world? Thus the foolish heart of man con∣ceives. To this, then, let us give that answer (to our selves, and to all others that dare meddle with these hid∣den matters) which the Apostle gives: for wee can give no better, Foole, thou thinkest it is a great part of wit, to devise these things; but they are such as languish the soule: they are fearfull decayes, and de∣facings of the image of God.Chrysost. For (saith Saint Chry∣sostome) such a desire of questioning, shall never be stayed any where; it multiplies, and rebounds still on a man: and at last overwhelmes him. Therefore
the onely wisedome is, for men to betake them to principles, and fundamentall doctrines: which are the nely things that God would have us to build on. As for these curiosities, they shall once appeare; but not yet: God hath kept them for another world. We see the Lord is marvellous, in concealing of his works in materiall corporall things. What a while was it, before America was found out? and when PlatoPlato. said there was another world as bigge as Af∣frica, the world laught at him. And when other Philosophers affirmed it, still they were laught at for their labour. And Pope Vitellius deposed a Bishop, because in his conference he said there were such a people as the Antipodes. We see then, how long the world was in grosse ignorance, in things that are created, in things that are obvious, and common to sence. We know by experience, that it is but the other day, since halfe the world was found out: nay it is certaine, that some part of the world lyes still hidde. So secret doth God keepe his riches; that when men have gotten all they can, that they should know, that there is more behinde still: so to fill the desires of men, and to draw their affections unto him. As it is thus in these corporall things, which are with lesse labour found out; still there is an infinitum, a kinde of infinite labour and toyle in it; that they are not found out but by the hand of God. So many golden mines in the earth that are undisco∣vered; so many precious things, that are not yet re∣vealed. Much more must it needs be, in those holy secrets; those gracious things in heaven (in the glori∣ous Court above) when the footstoole is so infinite and
secret.Psal. 77.19. Aug. As the Psalmist saith, his footsteps are not knowne. Saith Saint Austin well, If the steppes of his feet be not knowne, how then shall the counsels of his head be discovered? Therefore in these things, wee must settle our selves; and returne the foole upon our owne soules, when we meddle with these deepe and secret matters, wee know not a great number of things that are created: the hearbes that are under our feet; we know not the difference of them: wee know not the qualities of them, nor their natures and operations; and shall we then mount up into heaven, to see what is done there before our time? The Lord will give it us in time, if wee keepe our selves within the limits of modestie, and restraine our selves within that compasse which hee hath commanded us. Secondly, we learne out of this, in that the Apostle cals him foole, and cals these things foolish: there∣fore we should not affect these things, and give our selves over to them. We learne what to judge of all curious Divinitie and dscourses: that it is rather a part of folly, then any shew and remonstrance of wisedome. And by this reason, a great number of Students and Scholars in this Land, spend their time meerly in folly.1. Tim. 6.10. As the Apostle saith, It is science falsely so called: they studie and imploy themselves, that they may be madde with reason: that is, by fol∣lowing a kinde of sublime reason (as they thinke) they fall from reason, and loose themselves. Like the Philosopher, that so long conversed, about the my∣sterie of the Sunne, that at the last he made a questi∣on, whether ever there were a Sunne or no? he knew not whether the light came from the Sunne, or from
any super-illuminating cause, or no. The Lord blindes men that are too quicke sighted, to search into things that hee hath not provided for them. Such things there be indeed, as Saint Austin saith,Aug. there are cer∣taine idle delicacies and dainties: but they are not for us; they are for no man to know, that would worke out his salvation with feare and trembling.Phil. 2.12. Lastly, in that he cals him foole or madde man; we see how lawfull and how necessary it is, some∣times to use the authoritie of the Spirit: to use the majestie of the Spirit in the Gospell; to call them fooles, that speake foolish things. And although Christ forbid us to do it, in our particular and pri∣vate talke; and he that cals his brother foole,Mat. 5.22. is in dan∣ger of hell fire: yet it is one thing what a common Christian may do, upon a little sleight cause; and it is another thing, what the Magistrate, or what the Minister of the Word may do; upon an urgent occa∣sion.Gal. 3.1. Wee see Saint Paul cals the Galathians madde men, and foolish men: and this questionist, here, hee cals him foole.Luk. 12.20. Yea our Lord Christ cals the rich man foole: Thou foole, this night shall they take away thy soul.Mat. 3.7. And Saint Iohn Baptist; Oh generation of vipers. So that there is left in the Church, a power, and authori∣ty, which must be used when there is occasion, to draw the sword against contumacious rebels, which will not be reclaimed by other meanes. As Saint AmbroseAmbrose. saith, the preacher of the Word must be like unto the Bee: he must have both a sting, and honey. And Saint Chrysostome upon this place, saith he,Chrysost. he gives him a sharpe tearme; but hee passeth by him quickly: hee gives him, indeed, a poore title, but yet it is a fit one. He was afraid, lest hee should cut him
too deepe; therefore hee would not stand too long upon him: lest he should make him runne away. For as a wise man will easily endure such a word as this, from the mouth of a wiser: so a man when he is fol∣lowed, and baited too farre, he will kicke against the pricks, and be ready altogether to cast off the repre∣hension. Now we come to the demonstration. That which thou sowest, &c. 2 The demonstra∣tion.Here is the substance of the Answer to the first question: the answer to the second, follows in the next verse. The Lord of his great goodnesse, and mercie, hath made the possibilitie of his owne truth apparant un∣to us, in all the common actions of nature. What more usuall? what more ordinarie? what more ne∣cessarie, then the sowing of seed? Now the seeds man, if he do but mark what he doth, when he imployes himselfe; he shall easily perceive that God teacheth him, out of his owne trade, what he is to thinke of this great mystery. To sow the corne in the ground, we know that to flesh, and bloud, and common sence, it is a meere losse of it: and if wee had not seene it done before, wee should conclude so. Therefore, there are some men, that are celebrated as famous in the Poets, for inventing this, the casting of the seed into the ground: from whence people thought there was no returning. Indeed that conceit might be, in barbarous rude Nations; but it is certaine, that this doctrine was taught unto Adam in Paradise: and hath beene transmitted to all his posteritie. Yet
there are some Nations, that to this day do not know the common necessity of sowing; nor use it not: they understand not the mystery, the Lord hath so farre blinded them. So it is in this sowing of the body. In all judgement of flesh and bloud, when the body is put downe into the grave (into the coffin, into the earth) it seemes to be gone for ever: and it goes from worse to worse, till it come to dust and ashes, the prime principles of our creation. We ought to com∣pare therefore, these things together: and we shall see how wondrous God is in the one; and learne thereby how glorious he will be in the other. The seed that is sowne, it is quickened, and hath life (that vegetable life, th t things of like nature have) to grow againe, and to bee greater; to feed it selfe, and to feed us also. For God hath made the seed, of a singular piercing qualitie: that the lesser it is, the more power it hath. Therefore the mustard-seed (which is the least graine) whn it comes up, it grows to be a great tree. For in these small things, God sets forth his power (oft times) more gloriously, then in greater matters. And the corne grows thus: because it hath a double end For (as you know) it is made af∣ter a kinde of a long fshion, with two ends: out of which co es the moysture, and juyce, which is the life and soule of the seed. For if those ends should be cut or bitten off, the seed could never rise againe. Therefore the Ants and psmires (those creatures that hoard up corne against the Winter when they carrie it into their holes, where they lay it; they are carefull to bite off both ends of the corne, to snappe them off. For they understand by nature, that if they should let them alone; the corne would sprout,
and so they could not live on it. God hath given them this instinct, to know that out of the two ends, comes the soule, and life, and juyce: as being in those ends brought to a point, out of which the life worketh. This, now, the husbandman easily under∣stands. But the mystery concerning the body, he doth not understand so well: but yet he must make the argu∣ment from his field, to Gods field; from his hand, to Gods hand, from the blessing upon the corne, to the blessing upon the body: and then he shall see, that the argument will follow clearly. Is it possible that the Lord should have such a care and providence of a poore dead corne that fals into the earth; that hee should raise it againe, with a new colour, and in great abundance: and multiply it that it grows from one state to another: from a blade, to an eare; and from thence, to full corne in the eare? Is it possible the Lord shall thus proportion and suite his power, to a graine of corne that fals into the ground; and will he neglect the temples of the holy Ghost? will he neglect the image of God? the body, upon which he hath drawne the line∣aments of Christ; and for which he hath made a pro∣mise, that hee will conforme it unto his body? If God be carefull for the fowls of heaven, and for the lillies of the field;Mat 6.30. much more will hee be carefull for us, oh we of little faith: Therefore the bodies of the Saint: are so precious in Gods sight; that all the corne in the world doth not amount to that summe, as one of those bodies. For God gave the body of his Sonne, to redeeme the body of the meanest of his: and shall we doubt, but that he that is so rich in glory, upon the weake dead body of the corne, will be much more glo∣rious,
and powerfull in raising up these roots of life a∣gaine? which though they seeme to bee dead, are breeding of immortality, by the power of him that is able by his mighty power, to subdue all things to him∣selfe. Saint Chrysostome askes the question, saith he, why did not the Apostle rather runne to the same argu∣ment, that hee alledgeth to the Philippians? to the omnipotencie of God,Phil. 3.21. rather then to take this argu∣ment: For when he treats there, with the Philoso∣phers, Phil. 3. concerning this argument, he proves it from that maine point, because God can do all things, therefore he will do this. From whence wee looke for the Saviour, who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like his glorious body: according to his mighty power, &c. But (saith he) the Apostle here to these, thought this the best teaching. Hence we may learne,  that it is a singular kinde of teaching; when a man can instruct his scholler by the trade that he is frequently exercised in; which hee is most familiar with. That teaching is most operative and working, the most impressive teaching that can be. So our Lord Iesus teacheth his disciples that were fishermen, out of their owne trade: Come,Mat. 4.19. and I will make you fishers of men. So when he speaks to the common people, to the multitude; hee teacheth the plough-man by a plough-man.Matth. 13.3. A sower went forth to sowe seed, and some fell on the high way, and some fell on thorny ground: and some on good ground. So Saint Paul, Act. 17. he teacheth the Athenians (which is a strange doctrine) by their owne idols,Act. 7.23. Ye men of A∣thens, I see ye are too much given to superstition, and idolatrie: for as I came by one of your altars, I see it
written there, To the unknowne God. So our Saviour Christ teacheth men to make them friends of the un∣righteous mammon:Luk. 16.9. by the common lucre and gaine which was gotten among the Publicanes. And in S. Iohn Baptist, every man hath a lesson out of his owne trade: he said to the souldiers, do thus; and to the Publicans,Luk. 3. do thus: still he teacheth them out of their owne particular calling, and actions. To teach us, to labour, and desire in this manner: every one to bee taught out of those things, that are common and ob∣vious daily to us; for therein, is the greatest power of perswasion. He that is conversant about the fire, in fire-works, and especially such as worke in glasse-houses: where if he cannot see a cleare picture of hell, he is a very sencelesse man, and very bruitish in his understanding.Psal. 107.23. He that goes downe to the sea in ships, and exerciseth his businesse in great waters: if he can∣not see a wondrous act of Gods providence, in his preservation; he understandeth nothing. He that is a Student, and doth not see in his books, and the dif∣ficulties of learning and remembring: if he do not see the infinite and admirable blessing of the Almighty, in saving his wits and memory; and in raising him from one degree of learning to another: hee under∣stands nothing. In our ordinarie meats and drinks, he that seeth not God, seeth nothing: hee hath his feeding and preservation from him; and therein hee hath a signe of his everlasting refreshment and pre∣servation. Let us therefore scorne no Art; nor thinke basely of any kinde of labour and good exercise: because there is matter of good doctrine lyeth, in the poorest profession that can be. That which thou sowest, I will
prove out of thine owne actions, out of thy owne trade; this doctrine that I teach. Thou that pro∣poundest this question, thou art not more simple then a plough-man: and I will prove it unto thee from thence, by the poorest labour in the earth; for the man that tils the ground, he is of lesse account, then an Artizan: yet even the very plough-man shall prove and make good, that this doctrine that I teach, is probable, and possible. And why? because That which thou sowest, is first dead: and then it is quickened againe. Concerning the dying of the corne, the Philoso∣phers make a distinction: because they knew not this doctrine of the Resurrection. They thought when the habite was gone, when the privation had put out the habite: that it could never come backe againe. Therefore they thought that the corne had ever life in it. But the Scripture tels us, that it is dead: that is, it is dead to us, which are the judges of life and death. For who can tell what is dead, and what is a∣live in the creature; but he that is Lord of the crea∣ture? Therefore, though it have a kinde of action, though it have a kinde of life, lurking in it; yet to our sence, it is to no purpose: it is of no use, it is a meere jellie, that is good neither for man nor beast. Therefore it is dead. So our Lord Christ saith, Ioh. 12.24. Verily (saith he, comparing himselfe to the wheat-corne) the corne of wheat (saith hee) except it fall into the ground and dye, it remains alone, and brings forth nothing, but is single still; but when it fals into the ground, when it is buried, and dyes in the earth;
then it brings forth much fruit. So the Sonne of Man, if he should live still in the world, and not dye; hee should remaine alone; hee should do no good; hee should be a single Christ; no man could be saved by him: but if he dye, and rise againe, hee shall raise a mighty harvest unto God. So we see the truth of this doctrine manifested, against the Philosophers. That the corne is simplie dead; it is demonstrated hence: because the corne of God, which is farre bet∣ter then the common corne; it dyes; the bodies of men are truly dead: yea the body of that wheat corne, the Sonne of God himselfe, was dead. It is idle, therefore, for them to imagine, that it hath a perfection to it selfe, though it be corrupted to us. For it is certaine, that all these things dye, the corne dyeth; man dyeth; the Sonne of God dyed; according to that part of his humane nature, which was mortall. Therefore hee compares himselfe to a wheat corne: to shew the great and sweet convenience betweene him which is the head, and we that are his members; how it is fi∣gured in these parcels of nature. First, the Lord hath made the corne of the earth, to feed man; and hath given a gracious abundance unto it, that it comes forth in a goodly beautie, and with strange varietie. And then he teacheth us, that the bodies of men shall rise so too; which are much more deare then corne. And lastly, he hath given us a patterne in his owne body, being cast into the earth; which else should have remained single: but being once interred, and rising againe, brings forth abundance of fruit. This we may see in the bread of this life; and in the bread of heaven, how they both worke to give us an assurance of the Resurrection. The bread of this
life, is corne; the bread of heaven, is Christ: he is the Mannah that came downe from heaven:Job. 6.58. and these breads (the bread of the body, and the bread of the soule) make up the conclusion as a certaine thing; that that which is nourished by both these breads, shall follow the qualitie of them. The body of man, is nourished with the one; and the soule of man, with the other. Therefore the substance of the man must rise, because the bodily bread riseth; and the spirituall bread riseth; and we feed of them; and according to that which a man feeds on, he is conformed. As the Philosopher saith, man is nourished of that thing, whereof he consists: and he consists of that, whereby he is nourished. And further we may observe in the phrase, hee doth not say, that the corne liveth, but it is enlivened: as Saint Chrysostome,Chrysost. and Saint BasilBasil. observe. Be∣cause hee would give us to note, that all is in the power of God, that worketh all in all. Therefore he saith, It is quickened. It signifieth a passion or suffer∣ing, and to be wrought upon, from a higher cause. It is quickened, it is enlivened from a higher superior power. So that the growing of the corne, is not meerly from the influence of the Sunne, or of the Moone: no nor from the goodnesse of the soyle, nor from the diligence of the husbandman; nor from any naturall inherent qualitie: but God gives it a body; God gives it life. And if his eye of providence be so watchfull, in these particular cases; in things of this small qualitie: much more will he be watchfull, in that great worke, wherein he hath bound himselfe by a promise; and if that be too little, he hath sworne it; we have his oath, that it shall be so. He hath given us to know in
his Word,1. Cor 3.6. that it is not in Paul that plants, nor in Apollo that waters, but God that gives the increase: that is, there is nothing that can bring forth fruit, no not a tree, except the Lord give the increase. All the second causes are nothing; it is God that works all, as the Psalmist saith.Psal. 127.1, 2. It is to no purpose for men to rise early, or to go to bed late, and to eate the bread of carefulnesse. It is in vaine for the watchmen to watch the Citie, except the Lord keepe it. The Apostle doth not say, It doth not live, except it dye: but he saith, It is not quickened, it is not enlivened: still hee reflects upon God; and yeelds unto him the praise and glory of all things: for from him onely comes the blessing and in∣crease. And lastly, to conclude with the time, hee saith that after the corne is dead, it is quickened againe; it is enlivened againe: so it shall be with the bodies of men after they be dead; but hee saith, except it first bee dead, it cannot be alive: so that dying is the necessa∣ry reason of living. It is a condition absolute: if wee must live, we must of necessity dye first. This must teach us, that there is no exemption and priviledge from death: if we look to be of their number, that shall come to life. Men cannot possi∣bly be clad over this body, with glory: this body is not capable of the garment of glory, except either it be brought to a change, as they shall be that live at the comming of Christ: or else it dye, and be rai∣sed againe: It is impossible that the robe of glory, should cover this body of ours, as it is. This should comfort us against death, that because we shall dye first, therefore wee shall be quickened againe: it hath the force of a cause or condition in it:
it cannot bee otherwise. Because the corne dyes, therefore it lives: and the reason that it lives, is be∣cause it first dyes. There is no hope of recoverie of life, except first there bee a passage through death. Hence we have exceeding comfort, against the sor∣rows of death. Those things that seeme to argue cleane contrary against us, they make most for us. For because there be such unlikelihoods of the Resur∣rection, therefore we shall rise: because we shall be dead, therefore we shall be alive: because we shall be closed within the grave as in a prison, therefore we shall be inlarged: because we are brought to dust and ashes, therefore we shall bee brought to glory, and to a heavenly condition: because wee are brought to stinke and putrefaction, therefore we shall come to be a sweet smelling savour unto God: because the corne is brought unto a jelly, therefore it comes to be a goodly blade to an eare; and to bring forth in some thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundred fold, according to the mighty working of God. So likewise,  it serves in the troubles and miseries of this life, which are the presages and fore-runners of this death. For the heavier the hand of God is in any sort upon a man, the more occasion is given him, to worke himselfe to a certaintie of Gods favour. Be∣cause thefore the Saints of God groane, and labour, and travaile under pressures, and burthens; therefore they shall have a certaine redemption, and a speedie and glorious deliverance. For as the Apostle saith, we are not onely content to suffer persecution, and affliction; but we rejoyce in them. For God so swee∣tens them, and takes off the edge of all our af∣flictions in this world: he so tempers and mitigates
them; that when we thinke they strike most against us, they make most for us. This is the sweet blessing of God Almighty; because the corne dyeth first, there∣fore it shall live: because the body is brought to base∣nesse, and tearmes of putrefaction; therefore the voyce of God shall raise it. For the mercie of God useth to take a hint of our mise∣ry: that as our miseries abound, so his mercy towards us might abound much more.
1 COR. 15.36. That which thou sowest, is not that body that shall be; but bare corne; as perhaps of wheat, or some other of the rest: but God giveth it a body, according as he pleaseth: and to everie seed his owne proper bodie. Thus another copie reades it. And what sowest thou? thou sowest not that body that shall be, but a bare graine; as perhaps of wheat, or some thing like: but God giveth unto it a bodie, ac∣cording as he pleaseth; and to every seed his owne proper body. I Am sorrie that I shall trouble you with this inarticulate voyce, this poore creaking soundHe was hoarse with a cold. especially in this great audience, and in regard of this weightie argument. And chiefly it grieves me, because I would faine have spoken a word, in the furtherance and helping forward of the suite forThere was a Briefe for a collection, for a monastery at Ierusalem. Ierusalem, and for the priesthood in Golgo∣tha. It is certaine, there is no Christian man that can seriously remember the state of Ierusalem; without teares, and much compassion: and whatsoever may be pretended and said against it; the very love to the place where Christ wrought our Redemption, will
overquell all that can be said or surmised. As Saint ChrysostomeChrysost. saith, concerning Rome, because Saint Paul, and Saint Peter suffered there: and at Rome there was kept Saint Peters chaire, and Saint Pauls chaire, saith Saint Chrysostome. If I had health and opportunitie, to go from my charge at Antioch; I would travell by sea and land, to view those noble Reliques, of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul: I would fall downe before them; I would embrace them, I would kisse those holy chaires. Thus was Saint Chry∣sostome wrapped in the consideration of the poore chaires of the two Apostles, Saint Peter, and Saint Paul. Now if the chaires of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul were thus amiable, as to draw a man above a thousand miles out of his owne countrey; in great reverence to see, and to worship before them: what should the monument of the grave and sepulchre of our blessed Lord Christ? how should it affect us? It may be thought, now, to be superstition: for we are growne now so farre from all sensible and visible things, we are growne so spirituall; that we account any outward apparant glory, a part of superstition. But certainly, those Christians that lived long before us; many thousand great Princes and Nobles (the wor∣thies of the world) if they were alive at this day, to see what great thraldome and slavery that noble place is brought unto: If they could not regaine it with their swords, they would weepe out their eyes for griefe and anger. Therefore, to give a little almes to such a glorious place: if it be but for the names sake; if it be but for the mention sake: the very name Ierusalem is enough, to draw an understanding Chri∣stian to some mercie. For the Lord hath drowned it
in his deepe anger;Jer. 19.8. Isa. 13.14. and hath made it a hissing unto all Nations, and a place for zijms and Ims, a walke for Owles and Ostriches: and yet notwithstanding there shall come a glory upon it in the end of the world that shall make it ten times greater then ever it was. I cannot tell, whether it shall be by a worldly trans∣plantation, but I am sure it shall be by the apparition of the Sonne of God, when he shall come to judgement. Therefore,1. Cor. 16.3. as Saint Paul desires them for the Saints of Ierusalem; so the very love of the place, ought to raise up an affection in all those,Joel 3.2. that look for Christs appearing in that noble valley; where the persons of men must be doomed in the day of the Lord. I leave it to your Christian consideration, and presse it no fur∣ther. The Text read unto you, is the Answer to the se∣cond question made before, in the person of an un∣skilfull man: which was either one that was a cavil∣ler, or else one that was a learner; and would gladly be resolved in that particular, and therefore he askes, With what kinde of bodies men should rise? Whereunto the Apostle now answereth: retaining his former si∣militude taken from corne, and things that grow upon the earth. And this is the most fit and commodious, for the illustration of this great mystery of the Resur∣rection. In summe, he saith thus much: That the bo∣dies of the Saints that shall rise againe at the last day, they shall be so much different from the bodies that the same Saints have now; as we see the difference in those things that sprout and grow out of the earth, from that which is cast into it. As there is infinite difference betweene a small kernell, and a great tree; as there is infinite difference betweene a small corne,
and a goodly stemme or stalke of corne: or (perhaps) two or three upon one root; as there is great diffe∣rence in these; so there shall be betweene our bodies now, and at the Resurrection. As TertullianTertull. saith, they shall be changed, not by abolition, and destructi∣on, to come to nothing: nor by alteration, so as that they shall not be the same bodies, but another instead of this body: not by substitution, but by ampliation, by inlarging, by being made greater, and more glori∣ous. And saith Saint Chrysostome,Chrysost. they shall be made more brightsome, and faire, more excellent, and per∣fect in every kinde of perfection. OrigenOrigen. had this for one of his grosse heresies, for which he is said to de∣ny the Resurrection: notwithstanding hee denyed it not; but he had a conceit, that the bodies of men and women should rise; and then after that they should dye againe: and another Resurrection should come after that; and another after that: and in every Re∣surrection they should bee lesse and lesse, untill they were brought to nothing. Thus in effect he denyed it. But the truth is, by the doctrine of the Scriptures, and of the Apostles, that the Resurrection shall make our bodies nothing lesser; but greater: and it is cer∣taine, that the stature and proportion of those that shall be raised to glory in the life to come: shall bee infinitely more great, then that which they have now,Numb. 13.33. they shall be like gyants in respect of grasse∣hoppers: according to their speech, that went to spie out the land of Promise. We see now in this small stature that we have in this world, what a goodly sight it is to see a tall proper man: they be as it were the gyants of the earth, the glory of the world: they be the chiefe copies of Gods great and wondrous
power, and there is that state and majestie in their bo∣dies, which is not to be found in the persons of little men. As also we see, that those countries which na∣turally bring forth such tall and mighty men; they have great priviledges and presidents of honour given unto them: that God hath done by them mighty and marvellous works in the world. Therefore, the glory of manhood consists now, in a strait, and tall procerity, in a goodly proportion of limbes, and bignesse of body. In which regard Saul was commended, that hee was higher then all the people by the head and shoulders. And so in Homer,1. Sam. 9.1. Homer. great men have still this commendation, they are men that are eminent a∣bove their fellows, that are of such a proportion. I say then, if it be the glory of humanity; if it be the glory of manhood, not to be dwarfish and small; but to bee of a goodly stature in this world: we must imagine that God will bring us to all perfection, in the other world: he will bring all his Saints to a goodly big∣nesse, to a comely tallnesse, and proportion; as a little corne of wheat, brings a goodly tall and beautifull eare of corne, out of a small graine that is cast into the ground. Therefore there is no diminution to bee imagined; as if the body should grow lesse and lesse; till it come to nothing; but there shall bee a great ampliation: the Lord extending and driving out the body, drawing it to the full lineaments, and to the per∣fect length. So the Apostles similitude inferres, against Origen; and those that maintained his opinion. Now these things are very plaine, in the open ex∣perience of nature, but because we see not the things signified by them, which we are to beleeve; there∣fore they are held to flesh and bloud incredible: to a
man that is not acquainted with the field, that is not seene and experimented in this kinde: he would think it impossible that out of such a poore principle as a graine of corne, there should come such a deale of grace and beauty, as that verdure of colour: and such a flower and leafe of grasse, as the flagge of it: that there should come so much straw to support it; and that there should be such a structure in the knops of it: that there should be such abundance in the treasure of it. We should thinke these things meerly impossible, but that common use, and experience makes us cease to wonder. And if we could see that which is spiri∣tuall, as we do this that is outward; we should as well be induced to subscribe, and consent to it. But in the outward thing in the world, we see the sowing, and the mowing: we see the sowing, and the reaping; the seed time, and the harvest: Therefore by much ex∣perience, we are taught to beleeve it without doubting. But for that which is spirituall (for the Resurrection) we see onely the time of sowing; but wee cannot live to see the time of mowing in this world. For the bodies are sowne, and the seed lyes rotting in the ground; some five thousand yeares, some lesse, but all a long time: yet it pleaseth God to bring as it were the dew of heaven upon them, to raise them from their graves unto the harvest. Then that truth which we now beleeve, shall appeare as plainly; as that which we apprehend by sence. The thing which the Apostle would teach us here, I will but summarily touch at (because all this spech except it were better uttered; is meerly un∣profitable,In regard of his extream cold. and unpleasant also) I will therefore cut off all superfluity: and onely touch that which is
meerly necessary, and elementarily pointed at. First, the Apostle tels us, what is mans part. And then, what is Gods part, in the matter of sow∣ing: and so we must apply it to the Resurrection. For that is the Apostles purpose; as being a parabolicall doctrine, from a similitude, and therefore he rests not in the outward letter, but referres and reduceth us to the purpose and intent of it: which is to prove the truth of the Resurrection. Now the part that man doth, he speaks of it,Division into 1. Mans Part. 2. Gods Part. first negatively, what he doth not sowe. And then affirma∣tively, what is sowne. Negatively, what he doth not sowe: he soweth not that that shall be. And then he shews affirmatively, what he doth sowe: a bare graine, a bare corne, devoyd of such or∣naments as God afterwards gives unto it. Then in the next part what God doth: he gives it a body, to every seed the same body. The same body in essence and substance: but so changed, and bettered, and altered, that a man would thinke it were impos∣sible to bring out of such a foundation, such a kinde of conclusion. And because the Lord is wondrous in all his works; therefore he gives to every seed its owne pe∣culiar body: although there bee many changes and differences, yet it comes to it selfe againe, to that it was before; and it runnes (as it were) in a kinde of a circle: he gives it its owne body. And the way, and manner, and reason of all this, is, As he pleaseth. For he doth whatsoever it pleaseth him, in all the works of nature, and in all the works of grace.
1. Part. Mans part handled, first negatively 2. Affirmative∣ly.Concerning the first point, it is said, the sower soweth not that body that shall be. Which wee know to be true: for hee soweth neither an eare; nor hee soweth not a flagge; neither soweth he a hawne, nor a straw; nor a knot in the straw; hee soweth none of these;1 Negatively: what man sows not. Not that body that shall be. yet notwithstanding hee soweth that which hath all these in it potentially; in the power of it (by the blessing of God) it is able to bring forth all these. This is the wondrous act of Gods hand, that out of a blacke beane, or out of a browne corne of wheat; that the Lord should bring a new flower, a greene livery, the next Spring: and that he should give it such a dew in the earth, that it should come with such leaves and flagges about it: that in many places, they are faine to let their cattell eate it twice or thrice over, for feare of too much rancknesse. Not that the corne is indangered, but onely they take away the super∣fluity of it: so that still there remaines a profit, out of that poore dry thing, that seemed unsufficient to affoord any moysture. This is the wondrous hand of God. And it teacheth us, that it hath pleased him to hide for his chosen children, such treasures of heavenly fur∣niture; and such possibility of bringing forth rare a∣bundance; that although the hunger-bitten beast of death, or sicknesse, or affliction, or trouble, or persecu∣tion, in the world; bite upon it, and eate it severall times: yet the corne grows still. According to the conceit of the Greeke Poet, of the goat that was eating and gnawing the vine: hee brings in the vine thus speaking to the goat:Apud Sueton. Although thou eat me to the root, yet I will rise againe, and bring forth so much fruit as shall make wine to cast upon thy carkasse, when thou shalt
be offered in sacrifice. This is that glorious worke of the Lord which he cals corpus futurum the body that shall be: which the Lord shall bring from divers changes. As from putrifying in the earth, to sprout and to take root downward: & then to shoot upward. For so the Lord guides the thing, as the blessed Prophet Isaiah saith, Isa. 28. the Lord gives the plough-man wisedome in his heart, to do these things; the Lord contrives the worke by his owne blessing; that first it takes root downward, and layes a foundation: and as Saint Chrysostome saith,Chrysost. looke what the foun∣dation is in houses which men build, the same is the root in vegetable things, that grow upon the earth: they worke themselves a foundation to stand on. The divers branches that wee see a tree to have, it hath roots answerable; it is a tree beneath the ground, as well as above ground: or else it could not stand against those blasts and stormes that come from the ayre. So it is in the corne: it hath an extensive varie∣tie, a great number of little branches, and roots, that stretch themselves in the earth, to make it firme, and solid beneath; it were impossible else, but it should be broken in peeces, with every winde, and storme, and raine. And then when God hath given it power to worke that way, to make the foundation downward; then it shoots upward, and begins like a tender greene grasse, that peepes out of the earth. And that grasse is soone after covered with such a deale of grassie substance of flagges and leaves, and in the middest of that flaggie part, there ariseth that that must be the care: the choise of all, which God builds up by a strange Art, and makes it consist (because it is to
rise to some height) of certaine knots; that every knot may be as it were a post or pillar to support the eare of corne: and therefore as they bee nearer the earth, so the thicker, and greater they be. That the flagges that are about it, should come in to feed it; and make the substance of the fruit: that there should come of one corne, thirty or forty: it is the won∣drous act of God, called Corpus futurum, The body that is to come. 2 Mans part affir∣matively. What he sowethThe next thing on mans part is affirmatively, what he soweth: bare corne, that hath none of these things to see too; saith Tertullian, it hath not any garment of it selfe; it hath not any leaves to cloath is about: it hath not a foundation of any root; it hath not any fence of a hawne, or huske, to defend it from the fowls of the ayre; or to keepe off the injurie of the adversaries, the beasts of the field: it hath no tall and comely proportion; but is as a dead forlorn: thing, that is given for lost in nature. But when it riseth againe, it comes up with the greatest interest that can be. There is no usury in the world, no in∣terest in the earth, comparable to that that comes of the earth. Though mens gaines (oft times) be cruel, and bloudy: yet notwithstanding it never makes such a noble in come as this, that a man should finde an hundred for one. For so wee reade in the Scriptures, of Isaac, that the Lord gave him in one yeare an hundred fold,Gen. 26.12. he received an hundred for one, that he sowed that yeare; whereby he was made admirable, and honoured of all the countrey. This is now, that glorious hand, that is called the body that shall be. And so it is, in the rising of the bodies of men. For it is to no purpose for us to stand in the straw of the simili∣tude;
but wee must rise up to the corne; to the thing that is purposed: the doctrine of the Resurrection. The best man in the world, when he dyes, he must bee sowne in the ground: his body is sowne as a bare seed, as a bare graine: it is divested of all the goodlinesse it had before, when it lived, and flourished in this world. It had then many faire blossomes, it had a goodly eare, a tall stately position, and positure, above many of his fellows. It was indewed as the highest topped corne in the field of God; with riches, with honour, with strength, and beauty, and wisedome: and moreover, with spirituall graces. But what are all these, when a man must come to lye downe in the grave? when he must be cast into the furrows of the earth? when all these flowers and feathers must be plucked off? then he must forget his owne honour, he must depose, and lay aside his riches being not able to carrie them with him.Iob 1.21. For naked we came in∣to this world, and naked we shall returne. It is the com∣mon sentence of all the graine of the earth, and as the Apostle saith, certainly,1. Tim. 6.7. as we brought nothing into the world, so we shall carrie nothing out of it: for bare corne, naked corne, must be sowed. This must humble us, and teach us;  that all the while men live in pompe, and glory, and are compas∣sed about with varietie of plentie, and apparrell; now the corne is in the flourish; now the tree is in the spring; or rather in the goodliest time of the yeare: but there will a Winter come, that will dash downe the leaves of the tree, and make the fruit to fall off: and will bring it to a dry sticke againe, and make it as bare, as ever it was goodly and flourishing before, bare corne.
Secondly, observe what this fruit is: not the spi∣rit, but the body. This is the great mercie, and bles∣sing of God; that although the body be never so na∣ked, yet the promise of the Resurrection is made unto that. For the spirit needs no Resurrection, the spirit cannot rise: for it never falleth. And as Saint Chry∣sostome saith, the Resurrection must be, of that which fals but the spirit never fell otherwise then by sinne: and it is not otherwise raised, then by repentance, a spirituall kinde of resurrection. But the Apostle med∣dles not with that here; but he cals it the resurrection of the body: and he shews that this comfort the body hath, that although it be never so poore, and never so bare, though it bee cast into the furrows of the earth, never so forlorne, and forsaken, and be strip∣ped of all the glorious weedes that it had before: yet it hath a promise, that it shall resume unto it its for∣mer glory: nay, a farre greater glory: a glory that shall indure for ever. Indeed the corne when it comes out of the earth againe, it flourisheth for a time; and then afterward is resolved into the old corne againe, and becomes like it selfe: all the green∣nesse, and goodlines of it, with two or three moneths drying Sunne, fades away: or with the blast of a tem∣pest, it perisheth. But these bodies when they shall be raised againe, God shall give them that singular beautie that he intends to bring them to: hee shall give them that durability, that duration, that no winde shall weather-beat them; no Sunne shall scorch them: the Sunne shall not hurt them by day,Psal. 121.6. nor the Moone by night: for the Lord is their protection, and their can∣dle for evermore. 2. Part. Gods part.I come now to the second part of the Text, which
is Gods part. He denyes it to man, and saith, that he doth not sow that which shall be; but he saith, God gives it a body: that is, that body that God meanes to give it, man doth not sowe actually. How comes it then? By the hand of him that guides, and governs all things: he gives to every seed a body, as he pleaseth: and to every seed, his owne proper body. Where first the Apostle would reduce the glory of all the action of this creation, to God: all the ope∣ration in this great worke, it is of God. And to make us to settle onely in that, he useth a phrase, that is most sweet and gentle: when he saith, God gives it a body. He doth not say, God creates, and makes it a body, for those are works of labour: we understand and conceive alwayes by those works, something that is painfull, and hard to be gotten. And although God take no paines in the worke of creation; yet it is so propounded to us, as a matter of great difficultie. Therefore he tooke sixe dayes to make the world in, to raise our intentions to understand the greatnesse of the worke, and the order that God tooke: it was not a confusion; therefore hee did not all things at once, as he might have done; but in succession of time. But (I say) those words when they are used in Scripture, they are spoken still in the sence, and no∣tion of labour. But the word giving, is alway taken in another sence; as a matter of facilitie, and easinesse: to shew both the quicknesse, and facilitie, and also the goodnesse of the giver. So in this, that hee saith that God gives it a body, he shews, that it is a customarie thing, for him out of his hidden treasures; still to draw forth, and to poure downe his benefits upon
mankinde, with chearfulnesse, and good will: his minde is set to do it; not onely to his friends, but to his enemies;Mat. 5.45. for he makes his Sunne to shine, and his raine to fall upon the just, and unjust: and hee makes that corne to grow; even the corne of Infidels, as well as Christians. So great is his goodnesse to mankinde! And withall, in that he saith, God gives it a body: It should teach us, alway to receive these creatures, as gifts from God: as earnests of Gods love unto us. A man that useth these temporall things, either hee must make them assurances of things eternall: or else he must abuse them. And being the gifts of God, of whom we receive every thing: therefore they must be used to the honour of God, which is the donour. Our bread, and food, and all the parts of our main∣tenance, as they spring and issue from him, so they should be returned to him with a retribution of thank∣fulnesse, and a gracious conversation. God gives it a body, and to every seed his owne body. This is the maine point, with which the Apostle in∣tends to comfort the present body, that is afflicted in this world. For there were certaine Heretiques, that said there was one body, that fel, and another body, that rose: that there was one body, that rotted, and corrupted in the grave: and instead of that, God gave another bo∣dy. And so there was a kinde of mutation or substi∣tution: to let one body dye, but another to be raised out of the ashes: as the Phoenix is said to rise out of the ashes of her mother. But it is not so, saith the A∣postle. There is no substitution; there is onely (by the blessing of God) a restitution of the same thing, unto a higher, and a better, and a more beautifull estate. There is not one body that dyes, and another body that is raised: for then there could be no resur∣rection;
For what kinde of victory can this be said to be, over death; if the same thing that was foyled and conquered, be not conquerour againe, by the pow∣erfull hand of God? Therefore Christ is so carefull to prove this point unto us; that it was the same body of Christ that rose, that suffered upon the crosse: hee was so carefull (I say) that wee should know this, that he ordained it so; that Thomas should be so di∣strustfull, that he should gage his wounds,Joh. 20.27. and finde the print of the nayles: that he might looke on them, that he might touch them, and handle them: that he might see that it was the same identicall body, that he had before he went to the grave. For he foresaw, that there would such a doctrine of devils arise, in the latter end of the world: to say that Christ both in his body personall, and in his body mysticall, that there was a mutation of bodies, that one body should dye, and a∣nother rise in the place of it. But against this, the Apostle saith, He gives to every seed his owne body. In the body of nature, the corne doth oftentimes so de∣generate; that wheat will turne to barley, and barley to oates: the better corne, will turne to worser; by reason of the badnesse, and hungrinesse of the ground: or by reason of the weaknesse of the seed, or the un∣seasonablenesse of the times: or the indiligence of the husbandman. These things oft times cause these mutations. But in this seed (our bodies) it is impossi∣ble: for the body shall never grow worse and worse, by degeneration; but it shall bee brought by the power of God, to that high perfection, that it shall still be infinitely better, and yet still it selfe: it shall still be the selfe same in essence, though not in qualities. It shall be the same in substance, and nature, but not
the same in eminencie of grace and glory. It shall be the same in being, but not the same in seeming, or in circumstance. And so Saint Chrysostome saith, It is the same, and not the same: it is the same, as touch∣ing the fundamentall essence of it, and it is not the same concerning the augmentation, and the rare qualities, that God shall impose upon it, and invest it withall, And so I say, it is that comfortable doctrine to this flesh of ours, that there shall not be any other flesh glorified for it: but that this flesh, that hath suffered martyrdome, this flesh, that hath suffered hunger, and thirst, sicknesse, and persecution in the world: this flesh, that hath suffered for Christ: this flesh, and no other but this; shall receive the crowne of glory, ac∣cording to the manifold evils it hath indured. Otherwise, there could be no true consolation in this life: seeing the spirit also shall have larger in∣dowments. The soule of man, the wit shall be greater; and the memory greater; and all the parts and facul∣ties shall be more excellent in the soule. Now these being not visible parts; therefore they are not that which shall rise. For it is that which is visible, which belongs to the Resurrection: the glory of the soule, cannot be manifest; it is still hidden, and inherent in the inner-man. But this glory that shall be at the Re∣surrection, it shall be manifest: and there is no ma∣nifestation made, but to the eye, and the outward sen∣ces. Therefore here comes the comfort, to every poore distressed body, that the same that suffers, and is miserable, afflicted, and tormented in this world: the very same body, shall receive abundance of joy, and comfort, and glory, and beautie, in the day of the Lord. The poore creple, that goes double; that moves
every mans heart to pittie, to see him in the streets; he shall rise with a glorious, and goodly body: being incorporate into Christ by faith, he shall receive a bo∣dy full of ample complements, and blessed perfe∣ctions. To every seed his owne body. If it be the same body, how then is it a new body?Ob. and how then in the Scripture is it called a glorious body; which makes it different? This (I told you) shall be by addition of certaine accidents of glory, that shall acrew unto it: which cannot be separated (as accidents may be from their subject) but they indure with it continually. And that consists: 1. Partly, in that goodly proportion, that I spake of before; wherein all men shall be raised in one size: Not as they are now, where there is great difference; but all shall be of one stature, and perfe∣ction. And therein they shall more resemble the Image of God, then if they should be made in greater variety. 2. Secondly, another qualitie wherewith they shall be indowed, is the clearnesse and brightnesse of those bodies. For although they shall not be trans∣parent, and translucent (which is no property of a true body) yet they shall be so full of light, and glorious∣nesse, as the Lord Iesus his body were, when he was transfigured in mount Tabor: his garments did so shine, that no Dyer or Fuller in the earth was able to make such a tincture, or to give such a colour, and glosse,Mat. 17. as the garments of our Lord had. Much more then
was his countenance glorious and shining. And if in the old Law,Exod. 34.30.33 the glory of Moses face were so great, that the Iewes could not endure to looke upon him, but he was faine to take a veile and cover his face, when hee read the Law; that so they might heare what he spake without astonishment: much more shall the glory of the bodies of the Saints be, at that day. They shall be all lightsome, they shall shine like the starres in the firmament: they being often com∣pared in the Scriptures, to the starres which cannot be numbred. Thirdly, another qualitie wherein they shall be like unto the corne. The corne, that seemed to bee a dead graine; yet after comes to have an excellent greene colour, and live: so these bodies shall exceed in proportion of beauty. There is great difference, now: some are faire, and some are foule creatures: and those that are the faire ones of the world, they thinke themselves onely happie: and those that are deformed, they thinke they had better beene un∣borne, then to live in the world: Indeed it is a mat∣ter of great dejection, and scorne to a naturall man; to have a poore deformed body. Therefore the Lord shall so alter all things in that day, that every man shall have equall beauty. The glorious Saints in hea∣ven, their perfection is one and the same perfection: they shall have a common perfection, like the Angels that waite before the Lord: and the Seraphins, that have the selfe same perfection and beautie, shining upon them all: although it be not sensible to us, but is seene onely among themselves. Fourthly, all this glosse, stature, and goodlinesse that they shall have, except it have also strength and
vigour, it is little worth: Therefore God shall give them that too. That as the corne riseth with an high stalke, to a goodly stemme, and hath knops to under∣proppe, and support and keepe it up; whereupon it is builded: so the Lord saith,Rev. 3.12. he that heares the word of God, he will make him a pillar in the house of his Father; that is, he shall have the strength, and glory, and the fortitude of the great men of God: that hee shall be able to do any thing, that God shall assigne him to, with great dexterity. And all this, with a further grace of incorruption; for the seed that is sowne, although it come up with a faire glosse for a time; yet it presently corrupts, and is brought unto a drie straw and stubble: and that which is greene now, to morrow it is cast into the fire. But the Lord shall give unto this glorious glosse, whereunto he shall bring the bodies of his Saints, he shall give them an incorruptible crowne.1. Pet. 1.18. It is a crowne that is incorruptible, an inheritance immortall; that ne∣ver hath any change. The best beauty in this world∣ly glory, a fit of an Ague will change it; and long sicknesse will turne the fairest rose into an ashy coale: there is nothing so subject to change, and alteration, as the glosse of beauty. But that strength and beauty, and goodlinesse of the creature, after the resurrecti∣on, shall be supported by that ever mighty power of Almighty God; so that there shall bee no old age, to draw wrinckles in the face of his Saints: there shall be no sicknesse, to make them wither; there shall be no griefe of heart, no discontent of minde, to make an alteration in the outward man, there shall be nothing to make a change, because God shall crowne them in heaven, with incorruption.
And lastly, the Lord shall give them another qua∣lity, which shall be the rarest of all the rest. And that is, a strange agility and nimblenesse of body: that they shall be able to move upward or downward, as it shall please them. While we are here in this life, we have heavy bodies: a man must walke upon his owne foundation, hee must have the scaffold of the earth under him. But if hee presume any further, and offer to go any higher; with Daedalus, and with Icarus, he shall be cast into the sea: hee exposeth himselfe unto danger, and his waxen wings will be fired by the beames of the Sunne. But then at that day, though our bodies (in all things substantiall) shall be like these, and shall still bee true bodies: yet the glory of them shall be so great, and the strength and power that the spirit shall have over this flesh, shall be so absolute; as to command it which way it pleaseth. When we move now; either we go forward or back∣ward, or side-wayes or else downward; but upward we cannot: but then, the Lord shall give us ability to move upward too. And this is that the Apostle saith: we shall be taken, we shall bee snatched up, to meete the Lord in the clouds:1. Thes. 4.17. there shall bee such a mightie power and prevalencie, in the spirit of man, to rule and command the body. The Lord hath given us instances of it, in some things in the Gospell.Mat. 14 26.29 Our Lord himselfe, walked upon the water: and not onely he himselfe, but he gave Peter power to walke with him. And this was a signe of that he meanes to do; at the day of the Resurre∣ction. As their bodies then walked, and were sustain∣ed by the power of God in the ayre, and was able to make that which is fluent, and soft, and yeelding
in it selfe, to make it a sollid pavement like unto the stones to walke upon: the same power shall also worke in our bodies that agilitie, which is in the Ea∣gle. So the Prophet speaks, yea our Lord compares us where he saith, Where the body is,Mat. 24.28. thither will the Eagles resort; which is meant not onely of a spiritu∣all flight by faith; but also of the bodies assumption. And this our Lord confirmed by the Ascention of his owne body:Iob. 14.2. for he went before to prepare a place for us, that beleeve in him. Now we know that his body ascended to heaven: it had the power to move upward, as well as any other way. We have exam∣ples of it also, in Henoch and Elias, which were both translated: Elias carried in a fierie Car to heaven.2. King. 2.11. And all this with eternitie and immortalitie; that there shall not any thing of it passe away: there shall be no expectation of death; there shall be no feare of change. This is the greatest thing of all, when God shall give fulnesse of glory, to have also full secu∣rity. For whatsoever glory men have in this world; so long as they know that there is a worme hat can gnaw it; or that it is possible for them to be outed; this glory is nothing: because it is glory, that may be no glory. Such is the state of these worldly things: that there is nothing so great, but it is subject to be brought from that greatnesse. But the Lord shall give this glory for ever and ever, as himselfe is: he that is eternall in himselfe, he is eternall to all those that he shall make his followers and companions, in that bles∣sed kingdome. For they also shall receive that part of eternitie, as farre as they are capable. It is this safetie and securitie, that makes this blessing amiable: and for that the Lord hath given us an example for secu∣ritie,
in Scripture: where for forty yeares together in the wildernesse the Lord so provided; that there was no mans cloaths that were rent, or worne: not so much as the soale of his shoe impaired by that long and tedious travell. We see also they had securitie of food continually: it never ceased to follow them; but in convenient time, was still administred to them. Therefore it follows, that God that can do these things for garments, for these ragges that we weare upon our bodies: he meanes much more to do it, to the bodies themselves. As Christ saith, Is not the body better then rayment?Mat. 6.25. then garments? Seeing therefore, that he did it unto garments, that are of farre lesse worth; will hee not do it unto the bodies themselves? He that kept their garments 40. yeares without wearing (and yet what weares so soone as a garment) he was able to have done it for eternity, if it had pleased him. But God gave them that for an instance; to shew that these things belong in a higher nature, and degree, and measure to the setting forth of the lif ternall: and were to foreshew, and to be an earnest of that infinite glory, which God hath reposed for them that wait for the comming of his Sonne. Which the Lord worke for us all. &c.
1 COR. 15.39. All flesh is not the same flesh; but there is one flesh of man, there is another flesh of beasts; another of fishes, and another of fowls. THere is nothing more plain and easie, then the sence of these words; they are knowne to every man by expe∣rience. And yet it is very hard to finde out the intent and reason, why they were uttered. Divers men have diversly com∣mented upon them. For some think (as Tertullian,Tertull. & others that follow him) that the Apostle speaks not as he seemeth to do, of the flesh of beasts, and of the flesh of men, and of fishes, and birds: but by an alle∣gorie comprehends some other thing, concerning the diversitie and degrees of men. And so he inter∣prets. The flesh of men, that is, of holy, and just, and good men. There is one flesh of men, that is, of holy men: for they are properly to be called men. A man so farre forth as he is unholy, so farre forth he comes short of a man: and those are onely truly and really men, that be good. And then by the flesh of beasts, he saith the Apostle meanes the flesh of beastly heathen men: the flesh of Ethnicks; of those that do not beleeve in God; those
that do not beleeve in Christ the Saviour of the world. He saith, such are beasts, for they differ not world. He saith, such are beasts, for they differ not from beasts: neither in their sence, nor in their con∣versation. Then for the third, there is another flesh of fishes; he saith by fishes are meant those that are baptised, and regenerate by water: the fishes of our Lord Iesus Christ,Mat. 4.19. whereof he said to his disciples, I will make you fishers of men. And in many places in Scripture, men are compared to fishes; by reason of the laver of regeneration. Lastly, he saith there is another flesh of fowls or birds: and he saith by those are meant the bodies of the Martyrs, that have dyed for the testimony of Christ. Those are like unto birds, that flye from this world;Psal. 55.6. that take unto themselves the wings of a dove and flye away to be at rest: that separate themselves from the world, and worldly things; that forsake father, and mother, and countrey, and land, and goods, and life it selfe, to be for Christ, and for his profes∣sion. So TertullianTertull. makes the sence to be this: that in the Resurrection, some shall rise as good and perfect men; and some shall be as beasts: that is, in great ug∣linesse and deformitie: and some shall rise as fishes: that is, with the benefit of their baptisme: and some with their glory and crowne of martyrdome, as the birds and fowls of the aire. But in this exposition, there is a great deale more wit then soundnesse: for we must not indure, to ex∣pound Scripture in this manner. It is a dangerous thing for a man to build allegories: to ground upon idle conceits; to destroy the letter withall. For the letter of the Scripture must stand: and if there be any pos∣sible
construction to keepe it, it must bee kept and maintained. If not, we are to abhorre niceties: and then to expound it by way of similie and allegorie; but never till then. Others expound it, as if the Apostle meant it of the different degrees of joy in heaven: whereof we shall have more occasion to speak (if God permit) when we come to speake of the difference of starres, One starre differeth from another in glory. Divers men have diversly distracted the sence of this Scripture; while they thinke the Apostle speakes of the diffe∣rent flesh of men: because that beasts, and fishes, and fowls; they are things that belong not to the Resur∣rection: and what then, should they do in this argu∣ment? But I take it the best and true sence is, that the A∣postle takes it according to the letter; and out of that, he draws an argument, to perswade us of the glorious bodies that shall be in the Resurrection. For in the si∣militude that went immediately before, he teacheth us how we shall finde the doctrine of the Resurrecti∣on, in our gardens, in our fields, in the things that we sowe, and admit into the ground. Now he riseth to a higher argument; and teacheth us how we should find it in our flesh; in this flesh that we carry about us: for that is the principall thing that is here spoken of. It is the flesh, that must rise againe: and if wee can find an argument so neare home, in this our flesh; it is certainly a plausible and delightfull argument: and the Apostle tels us, that if we come from our fields, and our gardens; if we come home to our selves, and looke upon this flesh of ours; we shall see in that a most lively representation of the glorious Resurre∣ction.
And whereas all the whole bodie of living creatures, is nothing else but flesh; although it be di∣versly, and with a strange varietie distinguished: the same God that can make such varietie in the selfe same thing; that can make one flesh to be washy and waterish, as the flesh of fish: another to be ayrie, and spiritly, as the flesh of birds: another to be sullen, and drowsie, as the flesh of beasts: another to be temperate and meane, as the flesh of men: the Lord that works this difference, in this fraile subject; much more in the Resurrection, can hee worke a diversitie in the forme and shape, and in the colour, and representation in the flesh, that shall be then glorified. To proceed in order. Division into 3. parts. 1 The Resurre∣ction proved from flesh. 2 A fourefold diversity of that flesh. 3 How this pe∣swades the Re∣surrection. First, he would have us to consider, that the flesh it selfe affords an argument of the Resurrection; and he riseth from things sowne in the earth, to flesh, that moves in the world: and that in what part soever they are; whether in the ayre, or in the water, or up∣on the earth. And then he tels us, that that flesh is not all one; but there is a diversitie. And he makes the diversity foure fold; as the flesh of men, the flesh of beasts, the flesh of fishes; and the flesh of birds. Thirdly, we are to consider the use of this argu∣ment; how it inferres and perswades the soules of men, that there is a likelihood, and certaintie of the resurrection. 1. Part. Argument of the Resurrection raised from flesh: and raised higher and higherConcerning the first, the Apostles method is most singular and excellent: he proceeds in his arguments from things that are lesse perfect, to those that are of greater perfection. All the seeds that be abundant in the earth, they argue (indeed) the mighty hand of
God, in their power and varietie; and in their growth, and successe: but yet flesh is a farre more constant bo∣dy then they be. Now if the Resurrection do appeare in things that grow upon the earth; much more doth it appeare in things sensible; in things that have life. For the vegetables, although they argue somewhat; yet the argument is obscure, as their life is obscure: but the sensibles, those things that stirre, and move; they are farre more cleare preachers of the Resurrection, then the other can be. The flesh (as MethodiusMethodius; saith) it is nothing but the middle way, betweene incorruption and corruption: the flesh is neither corruption nor incorruption of it selfe; but the middle way betweene both. For the flesh was so created at the first, by the hand of God; that if man had not purchased corruption by sinne, if he had not brought in the sting of sinne, to rot it, it had never putrified: but had continued in that good∣linesse and beautie wherein the Lord created it. But now by reason of the sinne of man, there is entred a worme into the flesh (which is a necessitie of dying) which is alway gnawing upon it; and decreasing and abating of it, till it bring it to the tearmes of corrup∣tion. And yet the Lord suspends the action for a time, and gives the flesh a certaine flourish in this world; in some, to twenty yeares; in some to forty; in some to a great many more: but the flower cannot last long; the flesh may live when the glosse is gone. So this body of flesh, wherein God hath set his glory more a great deale, then in plants and trees, and things that grow out of the ground: it doth affoord us a stronger, and more forcible argument, that the bodies shall rise in a glorious qualitie, when the day
of judgement shall come. There, where God hath now taken more paines, and hath shewed his hand most glorious; there hee intends hereafter to bee more glorious. Now the resurrection of the flesh, is that which we beleeve; the resurrection of this flesh that is of men: and chiefly of them that beleeve in Iesus Christ, how the Lord hath set his hand upon this flesh; his workmanship appeares to be wonderfull. How he hath laid the foundation of it in the bones. How he hath brought the flesh over it, to be a co∣vering and veile for the soule. How he hath inlivened it, that wheresoever there is flesh, there is life: and hath put the soule in it to dwell in the cabinet of the flesh. How he hath divided and distinguished the parts, in their severall joynts: in their severall uses, and pro∣portions. How he hath watred it with bloud and veines; and with juyce and moysture, every where. How he hath inflamed it with arteries. How he hath made it sensible with sinews. How he hath extended and stretched it out, with muscles. How he hath covered all, with a faire and beauti∣full skinne. How he hath fenced some parts with haire; as in men: and with divers other fences more thicke and solid: as in the diversitie of beasts: with feathers, as in fowls: with skales, as in fishes: and yet all to live after one manner, that there is none of these can live but they have veines, and arteries, and sinews, and a braine, which is the place of sence; and a heart, which is the place of life; and a liver, which is the
place of concoction: and they have bloud, whereby they live. That the Lord (I say) should set such a wondrous hand upon flesh now; it argues he will do greater mat∣ters for it hereafter. For he would not be so liberall of his grace and providence upon it here; except he intended further glory for it hereafter. Indeed, in the trees, and plants, and fruits, that grow upon the earth; there is a glorious and sweet lustre, and great variety: but being compared unto flesh, it is nothing. And therefore in the Scriptures, the flesh is made the subject of the promises; and manhood it selfe, is tear∣med by the name of flesh: as being that habitation or house, that God meanes to raise againe, when it is fallen downe; to rebuild it up, better then ever it was before. For the flesh must fall, as the flower of the field; although it continue longer then the flower of the field: but the Lord shall raile it unto everlasting glory. So then, this must teach us in the generall;  that as oft as we looke upon our flesh, or upon the flesh of others: we ought still to possesse our mindes with holy meditations, of the glory that shall be revealed upon that flesh: to thinke of the resurrection of that flesh. As the Lord hath built it wondrously, and beau∣tified it to singular purpose in this world; so when it is ruinated, he shall rebuild it to a farre greater beau∣ty; that shall never fade away; but shall have a con∣stant being, as he himselfe is for ever. It should teach us also, to have a care of this flesh,  that God hath so graced; and that we do not disgrace it, and betray it to the divell: that we do not subject it to damnable purposes; that we do not swell it with
drunkennesse; that we do not spoyle it, with filthinesse; that we do not distract it, with worldly cares; that we do not any way abuse, and imbezell that substance that God meanes to grace; that he hath set his image, and stampe upon here; and that hereafter meanes to better this his workmanship: let not us prophane that, which God hath made holy. So much for the first point; that the Apostles argument goes greater and higher: the further wee go in nature, still the more insight we have, in the worke of the Lord, and in the certaintie of the promises. Therefore the Apostle ri∣seth from things that grow in the earth; from vege∣tables, to things that live, and move: and there hee shews the resurrection more clearly. 2. Part. The fourefold diversity of flesh.Then the second thing to bee considered is this, that the Apostle saith, that all flesh is not one flesh: For there is dversitie of it. It is true, all flesh agrees in the generall; they all live with a soule: all men, and beasts, and fishes, and birds, they all have a soule, and live in one manner by their bloud, and by digestion of meat, which turnes into bloud and nourishment. So in the generall, all flesh is one; but in their severall kindes they are so varied, that there is scarce any proportion one with another, when we go to the particular differences of them. For (saith hee) al∣though they be one in the maine; yet they be diffe∣rent in their specialties. The first, and chiefest that he names, is the flesh of men: And then after that, the flesh of beasts: Thirdly, the flesh of fishes: Fourthly, of birds and fowls of the heaven. For indeed, according to their different motion, the
diversitie of their flesh may be conceived. That the motion of men should be upon the earth; and yet by reason of an heavenly aspect his counte∣nance should bee erected unto heaven: where his thoughts ought to be continually. That the beasts should have a prone dejected mo∣tion, looking alway toward the earth: and as it were groveling there. That the fishes should glide in the watery element: being as it were not of our world, but of another countrey. That the fowls should mount up in that spirit, and vigour, that God hath given them, by reason of a wing, and a feather: whereby they leave the seat wherein we must live, and betake themselves unto the upper region. By this variety of their motion, we may necessarily gather this: that there is a great va∣riety in their natures. For there is nothing more ar∣gueth the varietie of a thing, then the ordinary mo∣tion of it, to observe how it is moved. The Apostle puts no other difference, that might be conceived (as the flesh of serpents, &c.) because that may be referred to some of these; it may be referred unto beasts, or unto fishes: but he contents himselfe with these foure, as comprehending in them all the world of flesh, which God created. And in the first ranke, in the prime place, he saith there is one flesh of men, whereon the Lord hath stamped his own image, and hath made it the good∣liest of all flesh: setting such an admirable beautie in it, and indowing some flesh with such excellent wisedome and judgement, and that which is the chiefe of all, setting the stampe of holinesse upon it, which
is the onely ornament of the flesh, and of the spirit also: that there is nothing that can compare with man. I meane no visible thing in the world, can en∣ter into any tearms of comparison, with that glorious image of God. Such a goodly aspect to heaven. Such a majestie and power in behaviour. Such an erect upright and tall stature. Such a goodly complection, and proportion, in the parts of the body. Such an admirable dexteritie, in all his actions. Such valour, such wisedome, such constancie, that in the flesh of men there dwels the strength of God. But above this, there is nothing in the world that makes this flesh so glorious, as that the onely Sonne of God hath married himselfe unto it: to grace this flesh, and to bring it to the highest perfection; the second person in the Trinitie was incarnate: and the Word be∣came flesh, and dwelt amongst us. This is the meanes, whereby our flesh hath attained this great perfection. And although the Angels do farre surpasse us, in some kinde of abilities, (as they have more under∣standing, and better experience, and are stronger, and swifter, and more nimble in their motion) yet not∣withstanding, because they are not sensible but in∣tellectuall creatures; and are onely to be perceived by the eye of reason, and of argument, and not by the eye of the body; which is the most delightfull kinde of apprehension. Therefore the Angels themselves cannot compare with the flesh of men: since it is now graced, and beautified by the Sonne of God, which was incarnate, and took our flesh upon him.
There is one flesh of men. And this flesh of men although it be one, yet it dif∣fers in the severall individuals. To see how won∣drously God hath set varietie upon this flesh, that there is one kinde of colour in one, and another kinde of colour in another. There is the flesh of Moores and Maroccoes; and the flesh of those that are faire, and well coloured: such infinite varietie, as would asto∣nish a man to consider of it: yea even of those that be of the best, of the most likeliest and goodly beauty: there is variety in them too. There is one kinde of flesh in children, and another kinde of flesh in strong men: and another kinde of flesh in old folke: the flesh of children, is puffed up and swelled; and is not brought to the proportion: by reason of the abun∣dance of juyce, and humours, in their bodies. The flesh of yong men is brought to some perfe∣ction, and hath that grace and flower that it can at∣taine to possibly, in this life. The flesh of old age is so withered and decayed, that a man cannot almost tell, that this was ever that babe, or that yong man. Thus the Lord worketh wondrously, in one, and the selfe same flesh: and not onely in a distance of time, that altereth and worketh such a change, in these things: but in a very instant almost. So that take the goodliest body in the world, that is now flourishing and heal∣thy, and let it fall into a desperate sicknesse: it will alter and change the flesh so wonderfully; it will so mortalize it, as we may say that there is no man, al∣most, can know it to be the same. The finger of God works admirably, in the selfe same flesh. This in∣ferres
the argument of the Apostle: that that God that can worke his own will in such a strange difference, in the same flesh here in this life, he will much more worke a gracious, and glorious difference when this life is ended, upon that flesh, which he determines to crowne with glory. For the second sort of flesh here spoken of, the flesh of beasts: the word signifieth not all beasts; but those beasts that are for use to men. The word signi∣fieth helping: because they are helpfull to the life of man. It is true the argument goeth along, as well unto wilde beasts, and those that have no helpe in them, as to the other: but the Apostle properly in∣sists upon these, because the mercy of God is most wonderfull in these: the Lord hath given variety of flesh among the beasts, infinitely too. That those beasts that are for the sustentation of man, should have the sweetest flesh, the sweetest hu∣mours and breathing; and be wholsome and good: so farre differing from the other, that those beasts that be not for our use, for the helpe of our life; many of them are very noysome, so extreamely noysome, that a man cannot abide to be with them: many of them being so abhominable, that a man runnes, and flies at the very smell, a great way off: which is no small blessing of God, nor no little wonder; neither should it be in our eyes, a matter of small moment: but we should consider it duely, that the Lord hath given to those creatures that we stand in most need of, the most temperate, and the most sweetly compo∣sed flesh: and because we are to feed upon that which is cleane, and not on that which is uncleane; he hath made therefore, the difference of cleannesse and
uncleannesse, according to the nature and constitu∣tion of the beasts. Some, he hath made for the feed∣ing of man; some, for varietie, and some (perhaps) to exercise his patience, and courage, in the rooting them out. And the flesh of beasts that is fit for the use of man, to see in what a wondrous difference the Lord hath made it! So that one should have one relish, and taste, and another another; notwithstanding they feed all upon grasse, upon the same food: even because he would have us to have choice, that we should not al∣way feed upon the same thing. We see the taste of the creatures that we have about us at home; and the taste of those that we hunt for abroad in the field; they are all pleasant: but yet marvellous different. This the good God doth, in the flesh of the creature, working there the foundation of use, and of life, and nourishment, according as hee is purposed to helpe mankinde by the meanes of it. And how marvel∣lously hath he set forth his glory, even in that, to give them all a prone aspect looking to the ground; and in covering some of them with most profitable woolls, for the benefit, and cloathing of mankinde: some of them, he hath covered with skinnes, of most singular benefit; sweet and operative: as in outlandish parts. To see how he hath garnished them, in the diversitie of their munition! what fences they have! that some of them defend themselves with their heels; some with their hornes, some with their teeth! How the blessed God hath wrought these won∣drous things, it is not to be sleightly regarded; but to be deeply considered. For, in truth, a man that looks upon them, shall be forced to say with the
Prophet, When I see the worke of thy fingers, sheepe and oxen, and all cattell: I am faine to say, Oh Lord God how wondrous is thy name, throughout all the world! The third kinde of flesh that he speaks of here, is that which seemes least of al to be flesh: that is fishes. And herein God is more infinite then in all the rest. For set all men together, even all birds, and beasts; and they cannot make the halfe number of fishes, which are in the vast and wide Ocean: and if wee compare their quantities, the difference, there, is won∣derfull. That the fishes should mount, and rise in quantitie, from the least drop, to a great whale; which is the mightiest of all the creatures. The Lord saith to Iob (as it were boasting of his worke) Diddest thou ever see the Whale?Iob 41. Didst thou ever see the goodly pro∣portion that he hath? and the carelesnesse and contempt that he hath of thee, and of all the weapons that thou canst bring against him? I say in that vast element the wonders of God appeare more, then upon the face of the earth. What shoales, what millions; what mighty armies of fishes; every yeare passe, and re∣passe the sea, and keepe their seasons and times! that rather then men shall want, they come and offer themselves in their seasons, to be meat for man: that as some kinde of birds flie unto us, at certaine times in the yeare; so also at certaine seasons, the fishes of the Sea do swimme unto us. For God hath given the Sea that qualitie, that invites them, hee makes the South sea so hot, that the fishes are faine to come and refresh themselves in the North: and every where where they come, they fill the shores with plentie. And to this kinde of creature, God hath given a flesh that is waterish; like to the element where it lives. And withall, he hath given it the blessing, to
be fit for the use, and food of man: and that in admi∣rable delicacie, and great variety. For whereas there is not of all the beasts and birds upon the earth (set them all together) not forty kinde of severall dishes (for there are but foureteene kinde of beasts that are fit for meat, and but twenty five or twenty sixe of birds, and no more) there are of severall kindes of fishes, very neare two hundred, that are wholsome, and good for the food and use of man. And this food it is not ordinarie; but to some bodies, and in som-Countries, it is a great deale more nourishing, and fae¦miliar, and good, then either that of beasts or birds. Therefore the Lord hath glorified himselfe in this creature, wondrously: by the miracle of the two fishes, he wrought that upon the fish; that we do not reade in the Gospell, hee wrought upon flesh.Luk 9.16. For in that Countrey, as their fish was most delicate, so their meat most ordinarily was fish. His Apostles were fishermen; and his last apparition to them, was in giving them a dish of broyled fish upon the shore, where a fire was kindled: and the fish was laid upon it, no man knew how. It was a dish, which the Lord gave them: they found the fire, & the broyled fish upon it, by a mira∣culous act of Christs hand: that as he commanded the fish to have money in its mouth; so hee commanded preparation to be made, by the ministery of Angels, for his Apostles dinner in that place. The last flesh he speakes of, is the flesh of fowls or birds: and that is another wonder indeed, and of great varietie. For the water and the ayre, they differ but in their thicknesse, and thinnesse: the ayre, is a thinne water; and the water, is a thicke ayre; and so the motion of the fishes, and the motion of the birds, do differ accordingly. For the fishes do move with
that speed, that they may be said to flye in the wa∣ter: and the birds do flye with that facilitie, that they may be said to swimme in the ayre: they are wondrous things, that the Lord hath wrought in these two elements. But there is nothing that comes to that height of excellencie (for naturall motion) as the birds: which can be in any place. They can rest upon the waters, as many of them do: they can rest upon the land, and yet they can travell in the ayre: and in a short space of time, they can overcome a great journey. To see that a massie heavy body, should be carried up with the helpe of a feather, of a wing, and hang in the ayre! that if a man should see them, that had never seene it before; hee would thinke they should all breake their necks: and that it were impossible for them to be free from danger. And yet the Lord hath given them such a poyse, and such a measure, that though they bee made with round bodies, yet their spirits are so thinne, and fierie, and nimble; that they can sustaine themselves even in the clouds, and soare aloft for many houres toge∣ther. This argueth, also, the power that shall be in the bodies, that shall be raised from the dead. For they shall have that abilitie, and power, to soare about Christ;Mat. 24.28. to flocke about him, as the Eagles about the body. And this flesh of birds, to see in what a won∣drous varietie it is, is strange! For the cleannesse, and uncleannesse of them. For their severall kinds. For their forme, and figure, and proportion. For their quantitie. For their colours. For their feathers, in some goodly, and glorious: in
others for necessitie: in others their feathers are like the streames of a flagge, rather then feathers. Of those (I meane) that are heavier bodies, and cannot mount aloft. The great God is wondrous, in all these things; and we ought not to looke upon them, with an idle eye: but to make it a Sabbath dayes exercise, to instruct our selves in these varieties, and to praise, and blesse God, where we see any step of his greatnesse. I will conclude in a word.3. Part. How this varie∣ty of fleshes, proves the resur∣rection. Now we come to the use of all this. It is true, there is one kinde of flesh of men, another of beasts, another of fishes; and another of birds: but what is that to the purpose? how doth this prove, that there shall be a resurrection? The Lord hath made all these things, that be in the world; to be types and paternes of better things, that are reserved for another world: therefore, if he have set a glorious varietie here, much more will he do it there: even those things that wee account here, to be the best of things; they shall be so farre short, of that which shall be then revealed, as that the best things that are now, shall come short (by farre) of the worst that shall be then. Wee can di∣stinguish among the beasts, which are best, and which are worst: and among the fishes and fowls, and in the parts of our bodies; all are not so beautifull, as the eye: there are some parts of lesse, and worse respect: and in the beauty, and colour, and complexion, of the faces of men, and women, there are better, and worse. Some are exceeding goodly; some are extreamly deformed: and we make a difference alway, betweene that which is worst, and that which is best, in every kinde. So the Apostle argues thus. God shall so alter and
change the things that remaine for a better life; hee shall so alter them to a betterment, and perfection, that the best things that are here, shall not compare with the worst thing that shall be there. Looke how farre the most excellent beautie excels them that are most deformed in face: looke how farre the best bodie excels the worst, the most crooked, and impo∣tent body: looke how farre the best wit, and the best sence, and judgement, excels the naturall foole: looke how farre the strongest man, excels the wea∣kest childe: so farre the bodies that shall bee raised up in that glorious day, shall excell the best, and the brightest bodies, that are here in this world. For (saith he) as God hath made severall sorts of flesh, now; and hath given a bestnesse, and a worstnesse in them; that there is great difference (and it is well knowne to us how they differ) so in the Resurrecti∣on, there shall be nothing there, the worst shall be more glorious then the best, and most noble per∣fections that are here. And so I thinke it to bee true, as the Fathers imagine; that it is spoken of the difference that shall bee: but it cannot bee di∣rectly prooved by Scripture, as Peter MartyrPeter Mart. saith. Although it be true, that there shall be some infe∣riour unto others, there; yet we must not rest up∣on it, nor make comparisons of it. There is no∣thing that shall be so bad, in that kingdome; but it exceeds all the best things that are in this. There is nothing that shall bee so meane, in that life; but it shall exceed the most glorious things, in this life. This I take to bee the purpose and meaning of the Apostle, in bringing in this difference: to shew, that if there be a difference here; much more shall there
be there. There is as much difference, betweene the body that dyes here; and the body that shall rise then (being compared together) as there is be∣tweene fish and flesh; as much difference, as is be∣tweene one part and member, and another. All of them are indeed flesh; but yet there is one kinde of vigour, and one kinde of use, and life, and motion in the one; and another kind in the other: and so it shall be at the Resurrection. To conclude, the summe of all is this,  that wee prepare our selves in a continuall expectation: with blessed Iob, looking for our change:Iob 14.14. to depend upon the Lord God; to trust in him, that is able to set his Image, in a farre more glorious stampe, then he did before: that can renew his broad seale; and out of one peece of elementarie dust, can raise such won∣drous matters, as are here spoken of. What is the most beautifull body in the world? what is the good∣liest flesh? what is the fairest colour, in comparison, but a bag of dust? and yet how marvellously hath God wrought upon this dust! out of a poore meane ground, to draw such a lively colour; such an excel∣lent picture, upon nothing but dust? It is a strange thing, so to fortifie it with comely bones; to fill it eve∣ry where (every concavitie of it) with a faire beauty of flesh; to adorne it with such a goodly glosse, and colour, like the flourishing flowers of the field; to con∣tinue it thus for twenty or thirty yeares, in this faire glosse, and goodly composure: this is the most won∣drous act of God! Teaching us,  that there is a further matter that re∣maines: that he that hath wrought upon dust in this manner now; his hand is not shortened, but hee can
worke upon the dust that shall be raised out of the grave againe; hee can draw the lines upon it, and breathe upon it, as he saith by his holy Prophet: Heare the word of the Lord ye dry bones:Ezek. 37.4.8.10 and it is said, the bones gathered together, and the Lord breathed into them the breath of life, and they stood up. The Lord is able to do these things; and certainly, these colours, and this flesh, that we carry in this world; they are as earnest penies of that glorious flesh, that shall be collated and confirmed upon us, when this life shall be ended. Onely, as we looke for these things; so let us sanctifie our selves to the Lord God: let us keepe our selves unblameable in the wayes of the Lord: let us reconcile our selves by true and unfeigned re∣pentance;Iam. 1.27. let us keepe our selves unspotted of the world: that this flesh may not be tainted, with the pollutions of sinne; but that it may be preserved for that use, which it was appointed for: even to be a temple and tabernacle for the Holy Ghost: for so it shall be sure, to have this blessed change put upon it. There is as much difference betweene that which is now, and that which shall be; as there is difference betweene any parts of the body naturall: as much difference, as there is betweene unsensible and sensible creatures: as there is betweene men, and beasts: as much difference as there is betweene the flyer and the swimmer, be∣tweene fish and fowls. Yet still the same flesh shall be the same flesh shall rise, that dyed; but the Lord shall adde unto it,Ambr. he shall ampliate it (saith S. Ambrose) he shall make it better; he shall not destroy the substance, but he shall adde a new qualitie, a new glorious quali∣ty, which shall indure for ever.
1 COR. 40.41. And bodies heavenly, and bodies earthly: but one is the glory of the heavenly, and another that of the earthly: one glory of the Sunne, another glory of the Moone; and another glory of the Starres: for one starre differeth from another in glory. So also is the Resurrection of the body. THis noble and divine order, which the Apostle hath taken for the assurance of our faith, in this grand point of the Resurrection, is noted by all In∣terpreters, to be the glory of that spi∣rit within him; that he could not possible shew a greater evidence of the holy Ghost, then in this man∣ner of proceeding. Therefore TertullianTertull. saith, that Saint Paul did with all the strength of the holy Ghost bend, and imploy himselfe in this Argument. His meaning is, with all the strength of the holy Ghost that Saint Paul was capable of. For otherwise, it cannot be said of any man, that he can use all the strength of the holy Ghost: for the strength and power of the holy Ghost, is more then any man can comprehend. But the order (I say) is so excellent, and divine, that he leaves no part of nature unran∣sacked, and unpierced, for the finding of some argu∣ment, and some evidence, of the Resurrection.
First, he taught us to finde it in our gardens, in our fields, in the things that are sowne: in those things that are under our feet. Then afterward, he riseth somewhat higher: and teacheth us to finde it in our flesh, that we carry a∣bout us: in the flesh of men, in the flesh of beasts; in the flesh of birds, in the flesh of fishes: in which, as there is great varietie; so all this present variety, serves to shew and portend a variety in the world to come, in the bodies that shall rise. And now hee riseth higher: and teacheth us to finde the Resurrection, and the varietie of the bodies that shall be in the Resurrection, from a comparison that he takes from heaven, and heavenly things: that we may see it also above our heads,Psal. 104.1. God hath drawn out the heavens as a curtaine, that it might be full of glorious starres: and every starre, gives a certaine document and lesson of this that he treats of; the certaintie of the Resurrection. So that there is no part of nature voyde, but all proclaime this doctrine of the Resurrection. And he proves, that look what difference there is betweene the bodies that bee in heaven, and those bodies that be here in earth: the same difference there shall be betweene the bodies that shall be then, and the bodies that are now. And although there bee in some bodies that are in this world (as in the bodies of Princes, and the bodies of beautifull men and women) a rare luster and a good∣ly glory; a marvellous feature, and a stampe of Gods Image incomparable: yet in comparison of that which shall be, it is nothing. That body that shall be in the world to come, doth as farre surpasse this whatsoever it bee (suppose it the fairest and most
delicate bodie in the world) as the lightsome starres, do passe the poorest stones on the earth: or any com∣mon forme, and figure in the earth, is not so much transcended by the glory of the starres, as the bodies in the Resurrection do transcend and surmount the glory of any thing that is seene here below: This is the summe of the words. Now that we may proceed in order. First we are to consider,Division into 2. comparisons. how he draws this Ar∣gument from heavenly bodies; and compares them with earthly bodies (wherein he gives the prefer∣ment to the heavenly bodies) in these words: where he saith, There is not the same glory to the one, as to the other; There is one glory of the heavenly, and another of the earthly: That is, there is a farre inferiour glory of the earthly, in comparison of that which is hea∣venly. Then, secondly, he makes a comparison of the heavenly bodies among themselves: that as there is great difference betweene the starres of heaven, and the stones upon the earth; so there is great difference betweene the starres of heaven, one with another: not onely being referred to the earth, which can make no comparison with them: but in comparison one with another, as they are in heaven; some of them being of one magnitude, and some of another: some of them being of one lustre, and some of ano∣ther; there is great difference there also. Some of the Fathers have understood this, of the different state of glory that shall be in heaven. In the first simi∣litude, they say, the glory that shall be revealed up∣on the sonnes of God, shall be as infinitely beyond all the glory that is now; as the glory of the starres
in heaven, excels the glory here on earth. And for the other point of difference in the starres them∣selves; thereby is signified, that the just shall all shine in heaven, as starres, but in a different manner; as the starres do now: One starre differeth from ano∣ther in glory. And so he concludes all this parable and simili∣tude, So is the resurrection of the dead: That is, even as we see these earthly things, to be farre exceeded by the heavenly, in all kinde of beautie, in all kinde of glory; in all kinde of durabilitie; and in all kinde of qualities which are commendable: so the Resurre∣ction shall be. That is, the bodies that shall rise then, shall farre exceed these that are now: as farre as heavenly things exceed earthly things. And even as now, there is a difference betweene starres, that all are not alike in glory; and all have not a like lustre, nor like power and influence: so then in the Resurre∣ction there shall be difference and degrees, every man shall have enough; yet notwithstanding, every man shall not have the same. Of these things briefly, and in order: as it shall please the Lord to give as∣sistance. And first concerning the nature of the Apostles Argument:1. Part, or comparison. hee takes it now from heavenly bodies. The higher a man goes in the body of Nature, the more he learnes, and the better he seeth the worke of him that is the Author of nature, the Creator him∣selfe. There is a great mysterie, great power of in∣struction, in the works of God, Rom. 1. The wise∣dome and majestie of God, is seene in his works. But then is he best seene, when a man doth ascend and rise up the skale: and proceed from lower works, to
higher. For even as he that climbeth to the highest top of an hill, may see the furthest off: so hee that ascends in the works of God, in the disposing of the world; the more he advanceth, the more clearly hee seeth; and the greater revelation is made unto him. All the works of God, they are great masters and teachers unto us: if we will learne any thing. There is nothing so dull, there is nothing so poore, but it is able to teach us. But yet among the rest, there is nothing comparable to the heavens: being the fai∣rest booke, and the goodliest volume; wherein the glory of God is expressed, above all other things. As the Psalmist saith,Psal. 19.3. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shew his handy worke. There is no voyce nor language, in the earth, wherein the speech of heaven is not heard. As there is no angle nor cor∣ner, that is hidde from the light of the Sunne,Vers. 6. and from the heat and power of the Sunne; but he sear∣cheth it out: so there is no man that is indewed with any sence, but he is taught by that heat, and light, the greatnesse of the Almighty, which these earthly things cannot attaine unto. For they be restive, and they be dull; they be contained in their places: they have not that diffused power, and operation, that the Sunne and the starres have to worke every where. Therefore there is no worke of God, more teaching, and instructing, then the booke of the hea∣vens. And therefore Saint Paul now makes his ar∣gument from the stronger, that if our gardens could teach us: and if our seeds could teach us; if our fields could teach us; and if our flesh can teach us (even this flesh that we carry about us) if these could teach
us, (these things that are elementarie and sublunarie) if these have a power of instruction: no doubt then, that golden booke, that rare-volumne that is above, that is written with so many starres (as so many gol∣den letters) and so fairely written,Hab. 2.2. that he that runnes may reade it: no doubt (I say) but this is fuller of discipline; and can much more easily draw the Schollar; as containing in it more familiar precepts, and more moving examples to winne us unto God. His comparison here, is taken in the name of bodies: heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies. By heavenly bo∣dies, is meant the starres: because they are created substances, and not imaginarie things, as the Philoso∣phers would have them in their flattery and foolery: they thought that the great men that deserved well in this world, were turned into starres: and so they imagined Hercules, and Antonius, and Arctophilax; and a great number of toyes, and trifles that they devised: as though the starres were the bodies of men, or that they were persons of a spirituall sub∣stance. But the Lord teacheth us, that they are no earthly bodies; they are things that were created in the first beginning: and they are bodies, which not∣withstanding seeme to be nothing lesse then bodies: they seeme to be spirituall things; to be spirits, ra∣ther then bodies: being of such a swiftnesse, and of that rare operation, and brightnesse. Yet the Lord tels us that they are bodies: that is, that they have a kind of earthlinesse in them, they have a kinde of matter in them. For although they be farre diffe∣rent from these inferiour things, from these inferiour bodies: yet in respect of the first Creator, they are but bodies. For there is but one spirit, there is but
one pure Spirit: which is God himselfe. All things else, have a kinde of dreggie matter in them, which makes them bodies: the bodies which are heavenly, (that is, the starres) are bodies; because they are vi∣sible, because they are circumscribed, because they have figure, and proportion: and they are bodies, be∣cause they are kept within a certaine compasse and limit. Whence it follows, that seeing they are bodies; therefore they are not to be worshipped: as the Hea∣thens used to do, and as the Indian people at this day worship them: but hence we see they ought not to bee worshipped. Why? even because they are but bodies: nay, they are insensible bodies, they have not sence to guide them. So that for all their puritie, and the use they are of to the world; yet in the perfection of life, they are not comparable unto the beasts of the field: for the beasts of the field, that have sence, are more perfect in their kinde, then the Sunne in the firmament:Eatenus. because to have life and sence, is a better kinde of being, then to be without it. The starres are bodies without sence; they are bodies without soules; and they are over-ruled by other things: or else, as they bee bodies, they could not possible rule themselves. Now these goodly bodies, how they should bee carried up and downe every 24. houres: after what manner? whether they flye, as the birds in the ayre: so they in their spheares and orbes: or whether they swimme as the fishes in the sea; as divers men have imagined: a man would thinke, that one of those wayes they must needs be moved: but it is certaine, they do neither of them. For they have a mighty
power that God hath given them: and the Angels exe∣cute this power: and they turne the whole globe over,Psal. 104.2. as the Psalmist saith, where he cals it the cur∣taine of heaven, which is bespangled with stars: and the whole curtaine is turned over together, as an An∣cient or Flagge displayed, that is imbossed with gold, all the whole compasse and circumference is mo∣ved together: or as a woman, when she turnes the rimme of a wheele about; both the circle and the center are moved together, and so all the wheele moveth round together: so the power of the Angels move the celestiall bodies, by the appointment of God; that in twenty foure houres they compasse the whole earth, which is as much in effect, as if a bird should flye fifty times the space of the world in halfe a quarter of an houre. The rarenesse therefore of this motion, and the strangenesse of it, argueth, that God hath set over them some spirituall mover, which wee call their standings, and their Intelligen∣ces; which move them to and fro, in an unspeaka∣ble manner. And for the manner of it, that it should be in such a contrary course, that never a starre should rise to morrow, in the same manner as it doth to day: and that the Sunne should never rise at one and the same point, twice in the yeare; but still varie: and by va∣rying, make the compasse of the yeare, as the Moone makes the compasse of the moneth. For the Sunne hath one motion, whereby hee makes the day: and the Moone another motion, whereby shee makes the night. Againe, there is another motion of the Sunne, whereby hee makes the yeare: and the Moone hath another motion, whereby she makes a moneth. And
so for the rest of these heavenly bodies, some of them fulfill their course, and period, in twelve yeares: some, in five yeares; some, in thirty, some, in a hundred yeares: the Lord having set such a rare guidance in these things, that there is nothing but a man may know it before hand: a man may tell fifty yeares, yea an hundred yeares before hand; when there shall be an eclipse: and the presages of these things are certainly knowne. This argues, that these bodies celestiall, are moved by spirits celestiall. For of them∣selves being but bodies, they could not possible do thus; they could not keepe this exact and swift mo∣tion: nor they could not rowle over of themselves, it is impossible being but bodies, that they should do these things. Now I come to the second point,2. Part, or comparison. wherein the Apostle compares these bodies together, in respect of their glory. There is a great glory indeed, in terre∣striall bodies; there is a great glory in gold and silver: and many men esteeme them more then the starres of heaven. There is a great glory and lustre in jewels, and precious stones; there is a goodly transparent beauty in them, in the lustre that they give. There is a great glory in the beauteous faces of Gods Saints, and in the gorgeous and pompous out-settings of Kings and Princes, in their Courts of state. There is great glory in every part of humane felicitie: but being compared to this glory of the heavenly bodies, they are meere foyles to that. For, saith the Apostle, there is one glory of the heavenly, and another glory of the earthly. That is, there is a farre greater glory of the heavenly, then can bee supposed to bee in the earthly.
For first of all, the glory in the heavenly bodies, is pure; but the glory in the earthly, is mixed: the purer the glory is, and the more it is separate, the more sin∣gular and excellent it is. Now the glory which is in the stars above, is pure in comparison of these earth∣ly things. And although they bee speckled, and spotted in respect of God, and be full of dregges, in comparison with the Angels: yet in relation to earthly things, they are most pure: even puritie it selfe. All these inferiour things, in their glory, they have a mixture. They are mingled of foure things: there is nothing so glorious, but it is composed of the foure elements, even of Earth, Water, Fire, and Ayre, and these elements are never so well glued to∣gether, but they will worke themselves asunder i time: whereas that celestiall beauty is pure without mixture, it is an Essence that is elaborate to the full. God hath brought it to that high perfection, that there is in it no contradiction. In these things that are here below, one Element fighteth against ano∣ther, untill they all come to destruction: the best beauty in the world, at the last, the earth works all the other elements out, and by a melancholy adust humour, it brings the highest spirits, the mightiest strength, and noblest resolution, it dissolves it, and so brings it to its foot, that earth it must be. It turnes all to earth, and ashes: yea the very gold, that seemes to out-vie time, and to last alwayes: yet it comes at last to be consumed by rust. As one said of him that made his gold his god; what a miserable God (saith hee) is that which cannot defend himselfe from rust? and although it weare long, and is the most compact thing in nature: and though it can
indure the fire, and be never the worse; yet it is subject to something, which in time will consume and devoure it, by reason of the mixture of it. For it is made of the foure Elements, and they have that discordance among themselves, that at the last one workes out another. But in the starres, and the glory that is above, there is no enemy, no adversary: but it is a pure glory of it selfe, without any mixture, so farre it doth transcend and exceed all the glory that is in the earth. Againe, it is more excellent in respect of duration. For the glory that is in the earth, is but a blast: but the glory of heavenly things, is the same alway. In these earthly things, there is a change; God changeth them as a garment: but the heavenly things, they continue still: and although they also shall be chan∣ged, and the Lord shall fold them up,Heb. 1.12. because hee onely remaines forever; Yet for any thing that we see, there is no change in them, but they are still as they were before. For in pretious stones and pearles, (which I thinke the Apostle hath some reference unto in this place) he compares the starres to preti∣ous stones, which are the most goodly things in the earth: and those things, wherein God hath set an embleme of the starres, and drawne the picture of heaven: although there be much glory in them; yet some of them are so darke of themselves, that their glory comes unto them by accident; as the Diamond, which of it selfe is blacke: and except by cutting the angles, the lines reflect one upon another, and be multiplied; there is no glory in it. So the light and glory of the Diamond is not of it selfe, but from the light that is above: and is onely by accident, because
of the cutting and proportion of one part with ano∣ther. And so in the rest of these pretious Iewels, and orient pearles in the world, their light is from that light which is above: and onely in reflection of that light. And for their duration, they cannot hold and keepe time with that glory which is in the heavenly bodies. For the light and brightnesse which is in Iew∣els, hath an old age; a time of fading: therefore the Philosopher speakes of an old age of Iewels and pearles, and the reason is, because the naturall power is exhaled by a certaine force: or else (rather I thinke) because that the outward ayre brings a kinde of slough upon it, that duls the Iewell, and makes it that it cannot shew so bright as it was be∣fore. And chiefly, because the vertue and power of it (as in other things) growes to the Center. As wee see in an apple, which is full when it is greene; but when it is kept long, then the pulpe or the flesh of it goes to the core, and leaves the skin withered, and wrinckled, and destitute. So it is in Iemmes and Iew∣els, the power of it inclines inward. As ScaligerScaliger. saith, that he had a load-stone, and other stones, that had so lost the power attractive, that it could not draw, untill he brake it in the midst, and then that part which was inward, had the attractive power which it had before, but the out-side was dulled. But now the glory that is above in the starres, that is not dulled by any of these contraries or adversaries, but it still shines in its own brightnesse and clearenesse: it is not the worse for wearing. Therefore this glo∣ry, it is more excellent, because it is more durable: it is more transcendent; There is one glory of the hea∣venly, and another of the earthly.
And lastly, the glory of things that are in heaven, is that they are full of action, full of life and opera∣tion: but these earthly things are nothing but very idlenesse (as it were) a non-agency: they doe nothing, but are meerely restive, not having power to stirre. The glory of men and women, if they stir and move, they move to their owne destruction: and they are every day more subject to decadency. As for the glory of pearles and Iewels, it must rest in a place, un∣lesse it be carried, it cannot carry and helpe it selfe, nor worke its operation, therefore men must carry them. As the Prophet saith of Idols, that they can∣not stir till the Idolaters carry them: so those Idola∣ters that worship their gold, they must carry it, or else it cannot stir of it selfe. But the glorious bodies that are above, they move in an infinite strange va∣riety, and are of wondrous operation, so that when they meete together, in some poynts, they governe the whole world. It is a strange and terrible thing to imagine, what may be prognosticated and truely foretold, by the meeting, and by the constellation of the starres. There is no great meeting in the world; no great warre; no deluge or inundation of waters, but a wise man may (without any medling with the divell) by the meeting and constellation of the starres, tell when it shall be. So the Lord hath set an infi∣nite glory in these heavenly bodies; he hath given them a perpetuall motion, that they never rest, but they whirle about the earth, in an indefatigable course: they are alway quiet, and yet they never rest: their circular motion being their joy; and all their rest being in their moving and stirring. So that in these regards, the Apostle saith, There is one glory
of the heavenly, and another glory of the earthly. And now he comes and expresseth himselfe what he meanes by this: and speakes to our capacity more plainely then he did before. For (saith hee) there is one glory of the Sunne, and another glory of the Moone, and another glory of the Starres: For one Starre differeth from another in glory. This now is the second part of the comparison: wherein he leaves the earthly things, and medleth no more with them: every man knowes what infinite difference there is there: but now he wisheth us to consider, what great dif∣ference there is in the heavenly things, that seeing God hath made every where a variety, therefore we should not thinke it much, that God should doe so also at the Resurrectiō. For we must not imagine, that those bodies that dyed crooked, shall rise crooked; nor that those bodies that dyed weake, and lame, and yong; shall rise so: but God shall make a great vari∣ety there, because he hath made a wondrous varie∣ty here. There is one glory of the Sunne. I will not shew my infancie, in discoursing of these things: but onely give a touch, and so passe to the hypothesis, where the Apostle saith, so is the resur∣rection. The glory of the Sunne, is the greatest of all the glories in heaven: all the created bodies we see are no∣thing comparable: he is that great Gyant that God hath set in his chamber, which is alway ready to runne his course.Psal. 19.5. The great messenger of the world, which searcheth and vieweth, and giveth intelligence of
all nations: and reports of them to God: from whose heate, there is no nation, nor latitude of people can be hid: his glory is this; That he is both the chiefe, of all the heavenly bodies, and that this glory is his owne too. First, he is the chiefe: you know (as the Philoso∣pher said well) if it were not for the sunne, what∣soever the Moone, and Starres, could doe, we should have a continuall night. For that is that great and mighty lampe of the world, wherein God hath recol∣lected and bound up all the body and bulke of light; and it is of that unspeakeable beautie, and of that rare excellency, that all the stars in heaven, borrow their light from thence, so that it is the chiefest and the greatest. And his owne light it is also: he doth not take it from other starres, as the rest doe derive their light from him: but God tooke that light which he made the fourth day before, (for the light was the first thing that God made for a worke of distinction: it was a chaos and confusion before, but when the light was made the distinction, did appeare) and as a man cannot work without light, so God describes himself unto us: and therfore he made light for himselfe to worke by, although indeed he be light it selfe,1 Tim. 6.16. and dwelleth in that light that none can attaine unto; The Lord (I say) gathered that light which was in the creature before, and put it into the body of the sunne: and so made that light proper and peculiar to the sunne, that he should have a power to diffuse and communicate his light to all the starres in hea∣ven. There is no starre that shines in his owne light; but all the light they have, they borrow it from the
sunne: because that God would bring all the light to one head and principle; as all things doe depend and have their being in one God. And this very beauty of the sunne, (which wee know is the greatest and the goodliest) yet it is not alway alike: but there is a difference in that too. The sunne shines not so bright in the winter, as hee doth in the summer: because his beames in the win∣ter, be not so direct as in the summer, and in the southerne parts of the world, where the sunne is di∣rectly over the verticall poynt, directly over their heads: as they have more heate, so they have a far greater light then we, that have but an oblique or slant, or side way beame, their light is farre more. For according to the nature of the beame, so is the pro∣portion of the light and heate, in the winter lesse: be∣cause the sunne is in a lower circle, and though he be nearer the earth, by his bodily presence, yet he is fur∣ther off by his power and operation: and in summer, when he seemes to be neare, yet he is furthest off in body, but is nearer by his operation: because of the directnesse of his beame. I say the Lord hath made a difference in the beate and light that is in the body of the sunne; that there is one kinde of heate and light in summer, and another kinde in winter. So won∣drous is God, in making of difference, and planting variety in every thing. The second is the glory of the Moone. There is an∣other glory of the Moone. The glory of the Moone, we know how farre it comes short of the first, of the glory of the sunne: for it is neither a full glory, nei∣ther is it her owne glory: but that which it hath, is derived from the body of the sunne: and in the day
time, when the sunne is in his strength, the Moone is like a cloud, if it be then above our horison: and when there is any shadow, by the interposition of the earth: the shadow of the earth doth so drowne her, and so deprive her of the light of the sunne (for the time) that either totally, or in so many parts, she is utterly darkened. And evermore one side of the Moone is blacke, because of the distance of the sunne. For that side which is next to the sunne, is light: and that side which is from the sunne, is as a blacke cloud, and according as it goeth further from the sunne, or comes nearer to him, because her motion is swifter than the sunnes, (for she doth that in a moneth, which the sunne doth in a whole yeare, because he is further off from the earth) accordingly I say, as she comes nearer to him, or goeth further off, so is her light: sometimes she appeares to be halfe light; some∣times full Moone: and sometime againe, nothing at all: because the beames of our eye cannot discerne her, when there is a meeting of the sunne and her body. And yet wee may observe, what a wondrous variety GOD hath given her: that this which is the lowest and the meanest plannet in the heavens, the meanest starre, and the least of all others: although it bee the least, and the black∣est and most unlightsome of all the rest, yet the LORD doth by it as wondrous things, as hee doth by all the starres of heaven: nay he doth some∣thing more by it, then he doth by the sunne it selfe. For all the rising of waters, all the ebbing and flow∣ing of the sea; all the motion of the bloud in the crea∣tures; all the guydance of the braine of man; all the
distemper of lunatiques and frantiques: and whatso∣ever thing almost is in the trees in the vegitables, or in the sencible things, to be guided and governed: they are dependent (directly) upon the regency of the Moone: so that although it have a lesser light, yet because it is nearer, it hath a more wondrous o∣peration. It teacheth us this lesson, that although God have given lesser gifts to some men; that although they be like the Moone, in comparison of others, that are like the sunne: yet because they are nearer home, because they looke to their charge; because they keepe their flocke, because they looke to their fami∣lies that God hath put unto them: even these men that have a weaker light, they doe more good then those that are greater men, that are further off; that are carelesse and negligent: therefore the Moone hath a greater operation, being nearer the earth: although in other respects, it be the weakest and poorest of all the planets. Lastly, there is another glory of the Starres. The stars are not comparable, eyther to the Sunne, or to the Moone:Gen. 1.16. therefore it is said, God made two great lights, the one to rule the day, and the other to rule the night. The meaning is not, because the Moone is greater than any of the starres of heaven, for that it is not: but it is spoken according to the opinion of men, because it seemes to be greater; to be the second to the sunne, and almost as bigge as it; therefore it is called a great light, and because of the great office she hath in guiding the night; and likewise in re∣spect of her use; the benefit of her in the growth of all things, being great; and her guydance also in
the humours of mens bodies. The starres, therefore, are innumerably different: and for their number, numberlesse. And although the Mathematicians de∣scribe them to be no more, but a thousand thou¦sand and two and twenty starres (according to the 48. Images, which they describe in the firmament) yet it is certaine, that there be other starres that are not discerned, which passe all number. All these starres, are sorted out into six magnitudes, even into six differences: not to stand now upon them. In the first magnitude or difference, there are but fifteene starres: seven of them are in the South, and three of them in the North, and five in the Zodiaque. And these are goodly starres, that Navigators com∣mend: and say, that the starres toward the South pole, are more glorious then these which we see; because of their double number. The sixth magnitude, is the least of all, and yet the least starre that is in the heavens, is so great, that it exceeds the earth eighteene times over: yet is it a wondrous thing, that God hath made all these starres, to draw their light from the Sunne. For al∣though they have a proper light of their owne, yet it is so rustie, that it hath no cleare explication of it selfe; till it be enlivened by the light of the Sunne. The starres, therefore, are never eclipsed; because they alway see the Sunne: the Moone is sometime eclipsed; it doth not alway see the Sunne: there is an interposition of the shadow of the earth, that comes betweene her and him; and that interposition, makes her eclipse and lose her light. But where the Apo∣stle saith here, that one starre differeth from another in glory; his meaning is, that one starre is of one mag∣nitude;
and another, of another: and according to their bignesse, is their glory, their shining, and their brightnesse. To teach all men, that they should carry them∣selves according to their magnitude in the world. He that is in the first magnitude, to carry himselfe in a more glorious and brighter lustre, then he that is in the second; and the second, then the third: every man should keepe his magnitude, here upon the earth; for God hath appointed, that the greatest magnitudes should serve for the greatest purposes in this world. One starre differeth from another in glory: that is, as in bignesse and greatnesse, so in use too. Thus much of the bodies, that he nameth. Now we come to the hypothesis. So is it in the resurrection of the dead. This is that which the Apostle intends to proove: first comparatively, with these earthly bodies. Secondly comparatively, with the bodies that are glorious among themselves. In the first sence, he meanes thus. As the Lord hath made severall magnitudes, and great disproportion among the starres; so that one differeth from another in glory: even so, as they differ in their bignesses, so do the bodies at the Resurrection, as they shall bee great and goodlie; bigger then these, so they shall be fuller of glory and excellencie. The Lord shall make this earth, to be heaven: he shall so translate the pro∣perties of things; he shall so amplifie and augment things (farre surpassing the minde of man to ima∣gine, or to comprehend that wondrous picture, that
God shall draw upon this poore carkasse, which now languisheth in this world) that looke what diffe∣rence there is betweene the creeping on the earth; looke what difference there is betweene a worme and an Angell; betweene the pebble stones upon the earth, and the starres in heaven: the Lord shall make the same difference above our expectation, accor∣ding to his promise in the bodies that he shall restore againe at the Resurrection. Therefore his meaning is, do not aske, how they shall rise? do not aske, with what bodies they shall come? For still the Apostle answers that question. For they might object, If the body that shall be raised, shall be glorious; then it shall not be the same: and if it shall be of a spirituall na∣ture; the body shall be destroyed, and shall not be the same. Yes (saith the Apostle) it is the same, even as all earthly bodies, are the same among themselves, in the generall element: and the heavenly bodies (as the starres) are all celestiall bodies; and yet there is a dif∣ference, and one is more glorious then another: So it shall be in the day of the Resurrection. And for that point which our Divines, and which the Fathers stand so much on; indeed it is not safe for us to venture too much into it. For although it be likely, and true (as LutherLuther. saith) that Saint Paul shall have more honour in heaven, then a thousand other Christians (he shall perhaps have more honour then all his persecutors, that were converted by him: he shall have more honour then all his schollars, that followed him) yet these things are spoken but by way of humane conjecture; and cannot bee proved directly by the holy Scriptures. How be it, because it is the common tenent of the Fathers, wee ought
not to finde fault with them,Pro. 22.28. nor to remove the an∣cient bounds and limits, but to follow them in the doctrine they have taught us. Therefore, these things may assure us; that as Saint Paul saith here, one starre differs from another in glory, so wee must ex∣tend it to this sence: That in the day of the Resur∣rection, the sonnes and daughters of God, shall shine in the firmament as starres; they shall all be starres: but yet not of the same magnitude; not of the same beautie and proportion: not of the same excellencie. And to this purpose the Schoole men have devised a distinction in the lawrell crownes, that the Saints of God shall have: and they say, the joy in heaven is either substantiall, or accidentall. 1 Mat. 20 9.The substantiall joy, that is all alike in every man: for when they went into the vineyard, the Lord gave unto every man a penie, and no more. The comforta∣ble vision of God almightie, the fruition of Christ, and all his Saints: that is the substantiall joy, that is the penie. There is another joy, which is accidentall: which is according to the labours of men; according as they have imployed themselves in this world. And there are divers similitudes that set out this, in the Gospell.Mat. 25. As of him that received ten talents, and was made Lord of ten Cities.Mat. 19.29. Of him that sowes plenteously, and reapes plenteously: whereas another soweth spa∣ringly. Of him that offers his bloud for the Lord Iesus Christ, and receives an hundred-fold for it. Of the Dscples that shall be chiefe, and prime in the kingdome of heaven;Mat. 19.28. and sit upon twelve thrones to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel:Luk 6.23. and that promise that the Lord makes, Great shall your reward be in heaven:
There shall be a great reward for you, therefore it seemes there shall not be so great a reward for other men, as for the Apostles. This joy is accidentall: it happens to them, because they have wrought in their callings; because they have beene diligent in their places. So the Schooles say, a man of learning (which is an accidentall thing, for learning comes ac∣cidentally; it is not a thing that is substantiall: a man is ot borne with learning) therefore they say, ac∣cording to the wisedome which a man hath used wel in this world, hee shall be rewarded in heaven in a greater measure. In respect of the substantiall joy, he shall have all one penie with the rest: but in respect of his accidentall joy, honour for his wisedome and learning, and for his almes-deeds, (which is by way of accident) and so according to his workes, he shall have a reward: according to a mans works, so shall his reward be. This I take to be very true: although I cannot well see, how it should bee an infallible ground. But we follow the Fathers direction. Saint Austin, speaking of the puritie of virginity,Aug. of the professed virgins of his time: well, saith he, those that shall come to the common immortalitie hereafter, they shall have a great reward above the rest; because they had something in the flesh, which was not of the flesh: they had something in the flesh which had no use or benefit of the flesh. And in his 146. Epistle, saith he, If God have made all bodies visible; and these visible bodies be so different each from other, in distance of place, in operation, and power, and in evidence: much more must wee thinke he will make a difference at the day of the Resurrection. And although all shall be as starres,
that shall shine in the firmament, yet all shall not have one kinde of glory, and of lustre. Tertull.And Tertullian. How shall there be many mansi∣ons in Gods house? How doth Christ say, In my Fa∣thers house are many mansions; Iob. 14.2. except it bee for the varietie of mens merits. You must not be offended for this word merit; for the Fathers in old time, tooke it not in a proud sence: but for the deeds done in the flesh, whether good or evill. So men should be rewarded, according to their works, or fruits they had done: the Saints shall differ, as one hath had greater works then another, and greater deeds. And Chrysostome brings this argument: that un∣lesse this be granted, that the Saints of God shall have a different portion of glory, in the world to come; and not be all alike: it would make men that beleeve the Resurrection, to be carelesse how they lived in good works: or at least, how they abounded in good works. Because, when a man once seeth sal∣vation, that it is common; and that every man shall have as good a share in it, as he: he will not seek to be better then his fellow: and so, good works, and almes-deeds would grow faint. Therefore it is the best way, to incourage them; and to make them open and inlarge themselves: to make them as capable as they can, that God may fill them. To this purpose the Fathers have a comparison of divers vessels, that are cast into the water, and all are filled; a pottle is filled, and a pint is filled; and yet there is great difference, every one hath as much as it can conteine, but yet the pinte hath not so much as the pottle: so the Saints of God, they shall all be full of joy, and full of glory, but accor∣ding
to their capacitie, the Lord shall fill them. Therefore wee should make our selves large unto God, that God may fill us, to be large handed, and large minded, and large hearted to God, this brings largenesse of glory, and beauty, and makes men principall starres in the firmament. Theophilact brings another reason,Theoph. which presseth better, and urgeth further then this, If we marke it (saith he) we see the damned in hell, have a different torment: therefore the Saints in heaven, shall have a different glory. The other is plaine, by that saying, where our Lord saith,Matth. 11. It shall be easier for Sodome and Gommorrah, then for that Citie which would not receive the Apostles: and it should be easier for Tyre and Sydon, then for Chorazin and Bethsaida: they should have easier torment then those that despised the Gospell. And therefore, seeing there shall be an inequalitie of torment, and that those that are cast away from the sight of God, shall have a divers deformitie, they shall all be deformed, but some more then other: there is more unworthinesse in some bodies, accor∣ding to the qualitie of their sinnes. And so it follows, on the contrary, that the mercie of God shall bee o∣pened and manifested, in a greater measure upon one man, then upon another: according to the qua∣litie of their good conversation & repentance; and the good deeds that they have done in the flesh. Saint AmbroseAmbrose. also, discoursing upon this argu∣ment. Even as (saith he) out of one lumpe, out of one piece and clod of clay, God hath made all things: but yet in a wondrous varietie. For out of the water, he hath taken all the brightnesse that is in this world, the starres of heaven are bright, because
they are taken out of the water: and the brightnesse of jemmes, and pearles is out of the water mingled with earth; and out of the earth, comes all things that are obscure and darke: so the Lord shall make out of this body (out of one lumpe and masse) a won∣drous varietie. At that day he shall make some, as those that bring forth thirty fold; others, as those that bring forth sixtie; and some, as those that bring forth an hundred fold; in an admirable difference: and yet all shall have glory sufficient, and in content∣ment, and be full of glory. The glory shall be full in it selfe: although it shall not be so great as others. And Saint AnselmeAnselme. saith clearly, that there shall be one way for chastitie and puritie to shine, for them that have lived chaste in wedlocke; and another way, for virginitie: there shall bee one way, for a man that gives little out of much: and another way, for him that like the poore widdow, give as it were all that they have: there shall be one way, for him that gives his goods to the poore: and another way for him that gives his life for Christs sake. These shall shine in a different manner. And as AmbroseAmbrose. againe. Even as for the penies sake, there is no man that shall bee driven out of Gods kingdome; but he that can bring the peny, and shew it unto God, and say, Here is thy Image, here is thy superscription, Cesar; know thy owne, and take me for thine owne: for here I bring thee the penie. As he that can bring the penie, shall have heaven; so there be some that have more then the penie: and those shall have varietie of mansions, and goodly places in the paradise of God, they shall be the chiefe and principall.
To conclude all. Let us desire the Lord,  that we may have some place: and if it be never so little, it shall be full enough. The Lord shall fill all those that follow him, as with a river in the pleasures of his house; and to be a doore-keeper in the house of God, in that blessed kingdome: is worth all the tents and riches in this world. Let us not dispute much about these things: but let us rest in that doctrine, which is delivered in the Scriptures; and let us know, that if God admit us to heaven; we can have no meane place; any thing there, is better then all the glory of this world: even the least, and poorest mansion that can be. And that we may have the grea∣test, and the best, and principall place there; there must be an holy ambition for heaven: and for the greatest place in heaven. As the sonnes of Zebede de∣sired that one might sit on the right hand of Christ,Mat. 20.211 and another on the left: let us know how it is to be got∣ten, that so we may be made capable for it. For it is not attained without a high comprehension (there be∣ing no meanes for these straite vessels to keepe and hold such a latitude of honour, they are too great for us) therefore God shall reward us according to our works; and according to the service that we do him. Not for any merit of ours (for that were nothing at all, but hell, and confusion) but for the merits of Christ: upon whom wee layhold by faith. By which means his merits are made ours, and we make him ours: and shall be sure to finde him ours, at that day. Which the Lord grant.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.42. So also in the Resurrection of the dead. It is sowne in corruption, it is raised againe in incorruption; It is sown in dishonour, it is raised again in honour. IN these words the holie Apo∣stle describes unto us, those rare supernaturall qualities, which God will deck the bodies of the Saints withall, in the great day of the Resurrection. Hee hath shewed heretofore by certain parables and similies, that such a thing is likely to be, that it is possible: but now he tells us indeed what it is; And so after that pleasing do∣ctrine that was uttered in similitudes, he comes to a more sad, and solemne, and sentencious kinde of doctrine, and sets it downe in materiall propositions concerning the future state of Gods children. It is true, that to prepare the minds of men, by familiar similies, and examples before their eies, is a part of wondrous art, and great oratorie: for so our Saviour used in the Gospel, still, to draw men by those things that were before them; to teach them, by their
owne trades, and by their proper callings: by that meanes, growing familiar with their understan∣dings; making those things that were hidden, plain and open, by those things that they were most conversant in. But that kind of doctrine is not alway to be followed: because, (as they say) similitudes illustrate, indeed, but they prove nothing; there is a kind of deeper divinity, then that which is from similitude; which our Saviour Christ mingleth with his similitudes, as the Apostle Paul doth here. For now he comes to tell us of those things which we could not have beleeved, except the similitudes be∣fore had prepared us: and had shewed us that they are things possible, that the body that is so corrupt, that it should have a new quality; that it should re∣ceive incorruption, and never corrupt again; that the dead body which is so deformed, should have such a glory, and beauty, that there is no creature, no visible creature which God hath made, can compare with it; that the body that is so weak, and so full of infir∣mity, that it should have such a supernaturall strength, whereby it shall exceed a thousand Samp∣sons in strength and vigour; that the body that is a lump, a meere carnall masse, that it should come to that nimblenesse, and agility, and swiftnesse, that it should become rather a spirit then a bodie, when it is raised. That these things should so happen, it were altogether incredible, if the Lord had not made it probable before, by the things that we fa∣miliarly use: by the corn in our fields; by the flowers in our gardens, by the flesh of the creatures; by the difference of coelestiall, and terrestriall bodies; and by the difference of heavenly bodies among them∣selves.
Now he comes to the generall hypothesis; and makes the reduction of all those similies that went before. So is it in the Resurrection of the dead. So, that is, in all those 4. comparisons which I named before: you may apply all these very well; & understand by them, the nature and the qualities of the bodies that shall be raised up. So is it in the Resurrection of the dead. So, as it is with the corne so, as it is with those divers kinds of flesh; as it is in the difference of the heavenly bodies, cōpared with the earthly; & as the heavenly bodies are mutually different one from another. In the corne, as there is a strange variety in the growth of it, from that which was sowne, it comes to an admirable plenty: so the glory that shall be revealed upon the bodies of the Saints, out of a rotten thing, which was nothing but as an eare of corne, putrifyed and corrupted: out of this, there comes a glorious stalke of incorruption and beautie, that shall remaine for ever. And as it is in the flesh of beasts, and in the flesh of men, & the flesh of fouls, and of fishes: as there is great variety, and some are sweeter then other, and some more sollid, and com∣pact then other; so is it in the Resurrection of the dead, in comparison of this flesh that we have here. This flesh is like unto the flesh of fishes, in respect of that which shall be there. The Lord himselfe shall so perfume it with his glorious unction, that it shall be for ever stedfast, and strong, and able unto all purposes: that it shall be filled with all facul∣ties, and prepared unto all the functions that God shal appoint unto it. So is the Resurrection of the dead. So, that is, in so great a variety, and difference,
from the body that is here present; as the difference is great betweene heaven and earth; betweene the stars that are in heaven, and the stones that lie upon the earth. And so is it in the resurrection. So, as the particular differences are between the heavenly bo∣dies; one star differeth from another in glory: they have not all one magnitude; they are not all of one brightnesse: but according to their severall magni∣tuds, so is their shining & brightnesse. So the Lord shall make the admirable difference, not onely be∣tweene the present bodies that we have here, and the bodies which shall be raised; but likewise be∣tween the bodies themselves: that although all shall be full, yet all shall not have a like measure; but eve∣ry one shall receive, according to their capacitie. So now to come to that part of the Text. You see the substance is thus much, Hee tels us, there shall be some rare qualities, which God shall poure upon this flesh; which it could never attaine to in this life, for that it is still pestered with the contra∣ry. It shall have honour; it shall have strength, it shall have nimblenesse and subtlety: and all this shall be tyed with a golden band of incorruption, which is that that makes all sweet, and full. For, to have good things, and to fall from them, is as good as never to have them: but this incor∣ruption, is the glorious tye of all the rest, the crowne of all, the rest: that the strength there, shall be with∣out corruption, their beauty shall be incorrupt; their agility and subtlety of body shall be incorrupt; all these things shall be for ever; they shall be preser∣ved by the perpetuall influence of Gods mercy, and love upon the creature. This is the height and depth
of this Text. As if the Apostle had said, You won∣der in your selves to consider the great difference that shall be between the bodies that are raised, and the bodies which you have now in this life; I will shew you plainly how it shall be. All the difference ariseth from certaine qualities: for the substance, there is nothing different or contrary in it; but in the quality, is all the difference and contrariety: and I will shew you it by such qualities, as are most con∣trary one to another. For what is more contrary then corruption and incorruption? what is more con∣trary, then honour and dishonour? what is more con∣trary, then weaknesse and power? what is more con∣trary, then naturall and spirituall? and behold, God shall so turne the termes of this present state, in that blessed world; that whereas now, here is nothing but a masse of corruption, then there shall be a glo∣rious peece of incorruption: whereas now, it is com∣passed about with shame and deformity; in death, and in sicknesse, in consumption, and in misery; then there shall be a vessell of honour, that shall be every way shining, and glorious in the sight of God; that where∣as now this body is subject to weaknesse, (all the strongest lives in the world, being full of great weaknesse) then, it shall be a mirrour of strength: it shall have an arme, able to break a bow of steele: that whereas now it is a lumpish creature: then it shall be swift as a soaring eagle; and like unto an Angell of God: for we shall be equall to the Angels of God, in heaven. So then,Division into two parts. 1. A description. 2. A condition. first we have here a Description of the state present, in a metaphoricall word: & the promise of the state to come, in another metaphor like unto it.
And then we have the condition, and severall manner, how these shall be. In the first, two particulars 1. The state present. 2. The state in the life to come Concerning the first, for the state of the body pre∣sent, the Apostle saith, It is sowne. The metaphor for the life to come, is in this; that he saith, It is raised up again. It is sown in corruption, it is raised again in incorruption. Each of these estates, diffe∣renced by foure essentials: and their contraries.And then for the essentiall parts of difference, he makes them foure; wherein the body is sowne, and there are foure contraries, wherein it is raised. For the first, the body is sowne in rottennesse, It is  sowne in corruption. For the second, it is sowne in deformity, and ugly vision, that this corruption cannot lie hid: for then it were more tolerable: but it must come unto the eye of the world; a mans friends must looke upon him, and see the gastly countenance in the dead corps. This the Apostle calls dishonour, there is no∣thing in the world more dishonourable, that is, there is nothing in the world more hatefull to look upon, then the dead body of a man. Thirdly, he saith, It is sown in weaknesse: that is, in such a miserable feeblenesse and desolation, and so deprived of all strength and power, that it is left as a trampling stock for men and beasts. And lastly, he saith, It is sowne a naturall body: that is, nothing but a meer elementary thing: nothing else to the sense of flesh and bloud, and to looke on. These are the wofull parts of this body, that wee have in this present life. But on the contrary; God shall invest it, in stead of corruption, with incorruption, with impassibility, with immortality: and in stead of weaknesse, it shall have
strength: and so of the rest. These are the branches of the Text; of these briefly, and in order, as it shall please God to give assistance. And first for the two metaphors that be used,1 Part. Metaphor of the present life. Chrysost. It is sowne. It is a good observation of St. Chrysostom that the holy Apostle is so confident in the matter, that he useth the termes interchangeably, between the sowing of the corne, and the burying of the dead body. For, (saith he) when he speaks of the sowing of the corne, he useth the phrase which properly belongs to the burying of the dead: and when hee speaks of the burying of the dead, he useth that ma∣ner of speech which belongeth unto the corn. To teach us, that as there is nothing that could have been spoken more fitly; nor no comparison could have been more naturall then this which he taketh from corne; so likewise, that there is nothing more sure and certaine, then that the one shall come to passe as truely, as we daily see the other. For when he speaks of the corn which is cast into the ground, he saith, It is not quickned except it die. To die, be∣longs properly to that which hath life, which hath a sensible life, (although there be a kind of death to in other things) but yet this word is used most pro∣perly, to signifie the life of man, when it passeth from the body. And againe, when he saith, It is quickned; to be quickned, most properly belongs to the highest life, the life of man. So to die, and to be quickned againe from death, are phrases, and termes, that properly belong to the life of man: yet the Apostle useth it here in speaking of the corne, to which it belongs not properly and significantly. And now when he comes to speak of the burying
of the bodies, he useth a phrase which is proper to the corne: and saith, It is sowne, and It is raised up: that is, it is brought forth in that variety as the corn is cloathed with. And the reason, St. Chrysostom saith, is this, Because we are as sure of the one as of the other: and also to shew the fitnesse of the com∣paring of these things. There is no comparison that could have been so fit, therefore he interchangeth the phrases of the one to the other; to shew that it comes all to one, It is sowne. The body of man hath two kinds of sowings in this world. One is, when he is sowne into the esse, into the being of a man: and that is, in the wombe of his mo∣ther, as St. Chrysostom saith: in which sense it is said, that such and such descended from the seed of A∣braham, and from the seed of such progenitors. Another sowing is this which the Apostle speaks of here, which is in the wombe of that great mother, the Earth: which is the common mother, and univer∣sall nurse of all mankind. Now of the first, St. Paul speaks not here: al∣though it be true, indeed, that some Interpreters have turned it that way. For it is certaine, that the prime principles of men are laid in corruption, and the first sation or sowing is a concealed and secret matter, a shamefull action, and sometimes a disho∣nest thing, but the Apostle hath no intention to speak of that: for he speaks here by way of allusion: and saith, So is it in the resurrection of the dead. Therefore I cannot follow those extravagancies, but apply it to the Resurrection. It is certaine the Apostle meanes of that sowing of God, when he sows
the body in the ground: Earth to earth, ashes to ashes, as St. Chrysostom saith:Chrysost. that is the best sowing by far. For the first, is a sowing to misery, and weak∣nesse; to live in troubles, and crosses, and affliction in this world; even as Iob saith,Job 14.1. Man that is borne of a woman, hath but a short time to live, and is full of misery: but this sowing of God, of his children in the grave, (of which this Text, as also this Chapter must be understood) it is a sowing, not to a life of mise∣ry, but to a state of glory. There shall be no trouble after that, but a quiet, and perfect rest, and renova∣tion, when the fulnesse of time shall appeare. So then, It is sowne. Hee useth this word upon purpose, to take from us the feare of death: the feare and trou∣ble of that great monster, and bugg of the world. For as much as to die, is a hopefull thing: as the sowing of the seed is a hopefull action. Sowing, is a word of confidence and expectation: as we see 1 Cor. 9.1 Cor. 9.10, 11. that he that sowes, may sow in hope; and he that reaps, may reap in hope; and he that ears, may eare in hope. All these are words of hope: words that are very full of contentment to the minde: for by that meanes, there is a certaine expectation of gaine and advan∣tage. It is sowne: That is, when a man dies, he is full of hope: there is a blessed hope, that waits and attends upon him, As Iob saith, the just man, the good man hath hope in his death: and the faithfull, with faithfull Abra∣ham, they hope against hope: that when desperation assailes him, then he is strongest, in his hope to God. It is sowne: Therefore is is not cast away; it is not brought
to nothing; it is not destroyed, but it is sowne: it is laid up in a faithfull hand; it is laid up, as a depositum: and not onely so, but it is put forth to Interest, and hath a great Income againe. It is sowne. And it is sowne in a due place; in the field of God, in Gods acre: as in many places in Germany, the Church-yards are called Gods acre. It is not cast into the water, it is not cast into the fire to be burned, nor to the thorns and weeds to choak it: it is not left to be picked by the fowls of heaven: but it is sowne in that place, where God hath purposed it shall repose and rest. Yea, it is given upon tale, and the earth shall restore, and give up her dead: she shall surrender every body, which God hath committed unto her. It is sowne with the diligent hand of the great husbandman, the Lord Almighty: he that casts his seed with judgement, and laies it up with knowledge and great wisdome: Ioh. 15.Joh. 15.1. saith Christ, I am the Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. The Lord therefore takes this seed, and he so layes it up, where it may bring the most profit, and rise with the richest advantage. It is sown in the bosome of the great mother the earth, which is fruitfull, and abounds in plenty: which re∣ceives the first and later raine,Deut 11.14. and sets the vallies thick with corne,Psal. 65.14. that it makes men rejoyce and sing. In such a place is this semination, this sowing: it is sowne by the hand of God, it is sowne in the expecta∣tion of hope & profit. This word the Apostle useth, to allure us to familiarity with that, which of necessity we must undergoe. Men must forgoe this taberna∣cle, but it is grievous to them to think of it: they are perplexed, and distressed, when such melancholy thoughts come in their heads. Let us shake hands
therefore with that, to the which we must needs bow at the last. And let us conceive the goodnesse of God, which follows us, even unto our death, and opens a gate of hope, and makes us prisoners of hope, and gives passage to the performance of those blessed promises wherein we are instructed, and whereto we are called by the lure of the glorious Gospell. So much for that metaphor. Now the other for the body to come,2. The metaphor for the life to come. Chrysost. it is very significant. It is raised up. Saith St. Chrysostom, the Apostle doth not say it grows up of it self, but it is raised up, as being done by another: so indeed, our redemption, it is not wrought by any thing that is inherent in us; but it is an externall action that comes from God: it is the hand of God that works on us, and raiseth us up. It is raised, therefore, by the power of him, that raised Christ from the dead:Rom. 8.11. It is raised by him that raised for us a horne of salvation in the house of his servant David.Luke 1.69. John 11.17. It is raised as Lazarus was raised after he had been foure daies in the grave. It is raised, as a house is raised from the foundation. It is raised, as the Temple of the Lord, out of the prime materialls, and beginnings. It is raised, never to fall downe againe. It is raised, not to relapse againe, but to stand as a goodly monu∣ment for ever. It is raised by the mighty hand of him, that raiseth the poore out of the dust and mire,Psal. 113.7, 8. and makes them equall to the Princes of his people. Therefore in this word, the Apostle would teach us also wherein our hope consists. It is sowne, that is a hopefull action: but after it is sowne, it must be rai∣sed againe: that is a dependant action, which is not in our selves, but from the Lord. Therefore we must
raise our hearts unto God, and returne our devotion, and best affections to him, while we live here; that he may raise these bodies of ours, when they have no power to raise themselves: but when they shall lie in the dust of confusion, he shall raise them up, that they may be living Temples for the holy Ghost, for ever to inhabit. It is necessary, before hand, to raise our spirits unto him, that he may make a requitall unto us at the great day of his Visitation. So much for the metaphors. It is sowne in corruption. Corruption, is the worst change that can be. It is a motion from a being, to a not-being. For as generation is a work of God, whereby something which was not, is brought to have a being; so corruption is a work which God permits to be done, whereby a thing is brought to fall from that being, either to no-being at all, to have no being in our sense; or else to such a base and naughty being, that a man can see no reason why it should ever have been so glorious and so goodly, to come to such a foule disgracefull downfall. Corruption therefore is the destruction of the thing that was made: as in all things we see in the world. In naturall & artificiall things, when a matter is corrupt once, it grows fit for no∣thing: and although there be some kind of liquors, that when they are corrupted, they serve for some use; (as wine when it is corrupt, it turnes to vineger: and although it be not fit to drink, yet it serves to raise the appetite in sauce) and so divers other things doe so corrupt, that notwithstanding they serve for some use: but yet the chiefest and greatest number of things, when they come once to be cor∣rupted, they come as much as to say to nothing, to a
kind of dissolution: for there is nothing that can be turned unto nothing simply, but because the use, and property, and substance is so disgraced, and a contra∣ry thing succeeds a better: it is as if the thing were not at all. Now this corruption, is done two waies: It is effected either by separation of the matter: Or by removing of the forme. The matter and the form, you know, are the chief things of which every body consists: and we see that in death, these things hold exactly. For the forme of man, being his reasonable soule; as long as that is in the body, it is cōpact and free from corruption: and it keeps the beauty in the forme and image of God, in its proper frame and figure. But when the soule is gone, then corruption works, and dissolves the mat∣ter to. Now when the matter is dissolved, or the element is dissolved and corrupted: this is that cor∣ruption which the Apostle speaks of here, when hee saith, The body is sowne in corruption; that is, the prin∣ciples of the body, which consist of bloud, and flesh, and skin, and bones, and colour, and complexion, and proportion, and figure, and frame: all these goe away presently after the soule is gone. And though some hold longer then other, (as being of more sollid parts) yet they continue not long, even but a few yeares: and in some grounds, a few dayes destroy the whole man. This corruption began, when wee began. God (tis true) made the body of man uncor∣rupt, had he persisted in obedience: but as soone as man by his prevarication, by transgression of Gods command, was drawne into sinne; he brought upon him this worme of corruption: which never ceaseth to work upon the powers and faculties of flesh and
bloud, and upon every part, till at the last it work it to an utter nothing, to a very desolation. And this cor∣ruption, if it could be contained, it were well: if it could consist within some termes. For corruption is proper to the body; but yet through the infection of sin, the gangrene hath so poysoned and possessed the whole man, that corruption (by a metaphor) is brought into the soule to: which is the speciall part of man. And when the best things are corrupted, the corruption is most wofull of all.Matth 6.23. If the light that is in thee be darknesse, how great is that darknesse? saith the Lord Iesus. Men in this world are corrupt in body: they are corrupt in soule: they are corrupt in their understandings, in their speeches: they are cor∣rupt in their wayes,Psal. 53.1. as the Prophet saith, Corrupt they are, and become abominable in their doings, there is none that doth good, no not one. They are corrupt in their consciences: the consciences of wicked men, are defiled with hypocrisie, that they stink in the nostrils of God, and men. And to this corruption, every man is subject more or lesse. But the chiefe corruption, intended here, is corruptibility: that is, the rottennes of the parts of the body, when they are once dissol∣ved, and melted, and fall from one another. To con∣clude this point: because we know it by experience, and we beare about us these corrupt bodies: and we are troubled with the signs of corruption every day, if we understand any thing, It should teach us, therefore, not to triumph in any of these worldly things, that puffe up the flesh, and fill the mind with vaine conceits of its owne sufficiency: but rather let us study mortification, such as becomes the children of God: let us weep for our
owne corruptions: for they grow so fast upon us, that they make us odious, even unto our owne selves, when wee come to have a sense of our selves. Againe, it teacheth us this, to take heed how we  patch over this corruptibility as we use to do. What a deale of cost, what a deal of painting, and art, and labour, and time, is spent now adaies to conceal this corruption? Corrupt bodies will not seem to be cor∣rupt, but they will be immortall, and eternall: and those offensive things that be in nature, and that grossenesse and loathsomnesse that lurks in these bo∣dies, we seek by perfumes, and by orient colours, and singular diet, to suppresse them, and obscure them, that they may not appeare. But now the Lord hath put a worm in this flesh: see it, and acknowledge it, and waile over it: make not thy selfe better then thou art: deceive not thy selfe: thou art nothing but dust and ashes, a corrupt creature, a masse of corruption. Why then art thou proud, thou dust and ashes? which art nothing else, but a masse and lump of poore rot∣tennesse and putrifaction. Take heed lest as thy out∣ward man corrupts daily, that the inward man be not corrupted to. For there is no corruption like that: when a man hath a rotten heart, that is the most wofull putrifaction. Take heed, therefore, to thy soule, that though thy outward man be (like it selfe) corrupt,2 Cor. 4.16. yet thy inward-man may be renewed daily in holinesse and righteousnesse, to serve the living God: that thou mayst procure peace to thine own soule. It is sowne in corruption: It is raised againe in Incorruption. Blessed be the God of Incorruption! that although
our bodies of themselves be subject to fade and molder away; yet it is but for a season: for that the Lord hath promised them another state, which is incorrupt. And although wee cannot understand how it shall be, by looking upon these earthly bo∣dies, (for we see every thing comes to nothing, and is dissolved) yet the Lord hath given us a signe of it, in the starres of heaven, which are incorrupt. They are uncorrupt, even in our common sense and expe∣rience: for they be not mixed, as these elementary bodies be; they are not of such a grosse composition: and therefore they stand in the firmament in their state and place, as they have done from the begin∣ning. We have also a sign of it in the Angels, which are uncorrupt also: and in the soule of man that hee carries within him, which is likewise uncorrupt, These are emblems of that incorruption, that God will worke upon our bodies also. It is true, the body that is tainted with sin, & it cannot be otherwise; it must be a slave to corruption, it is bound over to cor∣ruption; it is full of putrifaction, and it must needs say as Iob,Job 17.14. I will say unto rottennesse, thou art my mo∣ther, and to the worm, ye are my sisters, and my daugh∣ters, and my kinsfolke. Yet the Lord hath made in these, spirits, and he will waken these bodies, wher he cleares and frees them from sinne: he will make in them an eternall vigour; and the everlasting in∣fluence of his goodnesse and grace, shall keep that sweetnesse for ever, after that it is once infused into it. And this incorruption shall come to the bodies of the Saints, three waies. First, by the goodnesse of the matter. Secondly, by the singularity of the forme.
Thirdly, by the gracious assistance of the effi∣cient cause. First, for the goodnesse of the matter. The Lord  shall make that a sollid, lively, and vigorous matter, that shall never againe be subject to frailty, as the body was before by sin: that as the Indian or China dishes; the earth and clay that they are made of, is buryed certaine yeares in the ground: that so it may ripen, and be brought to that colour, which after it comes to be capable of. So the blessed God will bu∣ry these corrupt bodies under the ground, to bring them to be a matter fit for his stamp, and image to be set on: which shall not be corrupt, as the former was; but shall remain full of strength and vigour, and full of life and sweetnesse, to indure for ever. And then secondly, for the forme. The forme of  man shall be all one, as it is now, and the matter to: onely it shall be refined: but the soule then shall be of such absolute power over the body, that it shall command it every where. The body shall yeeld a full obedience, and the soule shall command with a full authority, and it shall be so furnished with new abi∣lities, with new knowledge, with new desires, with new Zeale; that it is impossible for any temptations to passe as they doe now. Now, sometimes the soule tempts the body; and sometimes the body tempts the soule: and they doe mutually work each others sub∣version: but there shall be no such contrariety, then: but the body shall be for the soule, and the soule for the spirit, and the spirit for God, that God may be all in all. Therefore, I say, in that blessed world, they cannot sin: men that live in this flesh, cannot but sin: but God shall restore that blessed life, that it shall
not possibly sin, nor conceive of sin: that is, with any inclination to sin. For it is impossible, for any man that is well in his wits, that he should desire to be murthered: it is impossible, for a man that loves his wealth and riches, to desire that a man should rob him: it is impossible, that such thoughts should come into the mind of a man that is well advised, so it is impossible for the soule and body in that new world, that ever they should have any delight to goe from God: For then it were possible for a man to desire to be murthered, or for a man to desire to be robbed of his wealth: for to goe from God, is for a man to lose his treasure, to lose his life, to lose his wealth, to lose all his quiet and contentment: and there is no man that would lose these. Therefore, as these earthly things doe so affect us, that we can∣not abide to be bereft of them: much more then shall God so affect us, that wee shall not indure to think of any separation, or going from him. As the Apostle saith,Rom. 8.38, 39. What shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Iesus? Shall fire, or sword, or hunger, or cold, or nakednesse, or life, or death? nothing shall be able to separate us from the love of God, i Christ Iesus. Thirdly, and lastly, this incorruption shall be in respect of the gracious assistance of the efficient cause. This, indeed, is the cause of causes: this is all in all. For though God make a glorious matter, and habilitate it with an excellent forme: yet, notwith∣standing, if it were not for the continuall influence, and pouring in of that glorious life: every thing that is made, may be marred againe. As St. BasilSt. Basil. saith, Everything created, is convertible, and may be turncal.
The Angels themselves, they live not upon them∣selves; nor they live not upon necessity, but by the will, and grace of God: therefore they are immortall. Nothing hath immortality, properly in it selfe, but God alone, as the Apostle saith, 1 Tim. 6. To God,1 Tim. 6.16. who onely hath immortality. That is, who onely hath im∣mortality of himselfe; and of necessity hath it, and cannot but have it. All others have immortality, by a dependant grace. Here is the chiefe reason of our incorruption, because God shall fill us with the sweet water of his river of incorruption: which shall con∣tinually keepe us in our youth, and in our glory and strength, and in that state that he hath bestowed on us, and the worke that he hath begun, he will finish, and follow it with his continuall assistance. This is the reason, why we shall be incorrupt. For because of sinfull flesh, the Lord permits it here, to fall to its owne condition: and so it comes from better to worse; and from thence, to nothing at all, to dust and ashes. But there, by reason that the Lord shall shew his mercy, and by reason of the infinite delight that man shall take in God againe: there shall be a continuall application of God to man, by a continu∣all influence, (as the Schools speak.) So as it is im∣possible, to think of any entrance of corruption: as that place where the Sun shines continually can never be darke: and that plot of ground, which hath a sweet well ever pouring into it, can never be dry nor thirsty. So it must needs be, where God is al∣waies slowing in his light, and love, and grace: it is impossible there should be any pressing in, or any suspition of corruption to come againe. Therefore concerning these things, the Scripture tells us,
Psal. 36.Psal. 36 9. With thee (saith the Prophet) is the well of life. As if he should have said, thy waters run al∣way sweet,Psal 87.7. and abundantly: all fresh springs are in thee,Psal 23.1. therefore we shall not lack, nor die for thirst, be∣cause we shall have the well of life.Psal. 36.8. And Psal. 36. Thou feedest them with the fulnesse of thy house, and thou givest them pleasures as out of a river. And for this purpose also, even for that we should be assu∣red of this, the Scripture tels us that we shall have, in stead of sorrow, fulnesse of joy: in stead of dark∣nesse in this life, we shall have eternall light: in stead of sicknesse, we shall have his saving health: in stead of death, we shall have life everlasting. And so wee see what this incorruptibility is: it consists in impas∣sibility, that the body shall not be able to suffer from any thing: because God shall be alway flowing into it his goodnesse, and love in Christ Iesus. It shall not be able to suffer from a tempting devill: it shall not suffer from it selfe, nor from any other created na∣ture: it shall not suffer from sicknesse, nor from time: the teeth of time which devoureth all things, shall not be able to set its fangs upon the bodies of the children of God. They shall not suffer from hell, nor from death: there shall be no matter of feare in any thing: they shall not suffer from the flames of fire, it shall not be able to consume those glorious bo∣dies; nor the sharpest sword shall not pierce the least haire of them, but as we see God preserved the three children in the fiery furnace,Dan. 3.27. when it was ex∣traordinary hot, that there was not so much as the smell of the singeing of the fire upon their garments. The blessed God that is able to doe this, in these corrupt bodies; much more will hee doe it, in that
incorruptible condition: when hee shall advance them to that glory, which himselfe will give them, who is the prime author, and patterne of impassibi∣lity. And if the Lions were not able with their teeth, when they were so famished,Dan. 6. to seize upon the body of Daniel, when hee was cast into the dun∣geon: much lesse shall infirmities have power, or any other violence be able to touch the bodies of those that shalbe glorified in the day of Iesus Christ. It shall rise in incorruption. I see the time is past, I will but touch the next point, and leave the rest. It is sowne in dishonour, it is raised againe in ho∣nour. The greatest griefe that a man conceives in his death, is the dishonorable condition that doth ac∣company him: that though he were never so beau∣tifull and beloved before, yet his best and dearest friends will be readie to quit him now: yea they cannot indure his company: so that he must be re∣moved out of sight, as being an odious spectacle to looke upon: as an intolerable neighbour, that is not to be come neere: as one that will infect all the soci∣ety where he is: as a pestilent creature that must be shunned and avoided, that must be shut up close within the ground, where hee may doe no harme, nor be noysome and offensive to those that are above ground. This is the strange dishonour to our nature: that the great Lords and Ladies which have slept before upon their beds of Ivorie;Amos 6.4. which had their goodly Curtaines, and Canopies, and singular arts to give them pleasure and contentment: now being dead, they must be outted from their palaces, and
their goodly-roomes, and be thrust in the bowels of the earth: they must be accounted such kinde of creatures, as with whom there is no cohabitation. Even Abraham himselfe, although he loved Sarah dearly as his owne heart; yet he could not endure her when she was dead: but after a certaine season when he had mourned for her, he was faine to be a sutor to the sonnes of Heth, to sell him as much ground as to bury his dead in,Gen. 23.4. to remove her out of his sight. The best, and the mightiest Monarchs in the world, cannot secure themselves from this disho∣nour. If they die on the sea, they must be cast over∣board: or if they die on land, they must suffer them∣selves to enter into this common misfortune: and although art, and imbalming, and curiosity may doe much; yet divers parts of them, must of necessity be taken & committed to the ground, lest all about them be pestred by them: This is the wofull stroak of nature, the dishonour and deformity, the beastly-fi∣gure of death, which makes a man terrible to all the beholders: so that that goodly countenance should be turned to a gastly skeleton; that those faire cheeks should come to be pale ashes, or as a black charcoale: that those sparkling blazing eyes should become no∣thing, but as a dim and dark peble: and that which is the most fragrant piece of all, (the mouth) to be∣come the most ugly, and odious of all. The Lord hath drawne the pattern of sin in the face of a dead man: and hath made it more sinfull, and more ugly in that one spectacle, then in any thing in the world besides. Thus he that would not rest in the beauty of his creation, that would not maintain the glory of his countenance, and the image of God that hee had
imprinted upon him: hee shall now undergoe the most foule image, and figure that could be devised. There being no beast, no creature that is halfe so ugly: nothing falling so from it self, nothing so un∣like it selfe, there being nothing traversed with such contrary passions, and with such figures, and lines of misery, as the face of a dead man. It is so with all men: and although it appeare lesse in some, then in others, yet leave them a certaine time, and they all at the last become so gastly, that a man that hath a constant minde, and can indure many things; yet he loathes to behold a dead man. This is the dishonour of sinfull flesh: such a basenesse and contempt, that a mans best friends shall run away from him: yea and his dearest beloved, shall stop their noses at him. This should teach us to humble our selves in this disconsolation:  and to adde this to all the honors we have in the world, if we have any, or doe yet looke for any. This dishonour of death, is a cooling card that should make a man moderate in all his proceedings: It should make him fearfull in all his doings: It should make him understand, that he ought not to be puffed up with conceits and pre∣tences of honour: but to qualifie himselfe with this, comparing his dishonour, which the Lord will lay upon sinfull flesh. There is nothing so honourable, but it shall be covered with shame and dishonour at the hour of death, when we shall depart this world. It is sowne in dishonour. Well! although it be thus, yet the Lord hath a help for this againe: it shall be raised after another manner. It shall be raised in honour, in great glory. As disgrace and dishonour is the worst of punish∣ments:
so honour and grace, and glory againe, is the best of preferments. There is nothing so sweet unto us, as that, to be above others, to be beloved of o∣thers, to be admired of others, and to be served of others: this is that sweet breath of life, and that sweet contentment, that shall fill us with marrow and fatnesse. And this, God purposeth to poure up∣on these dishonourable bodies, that die so beastly and deformed, that they are trampled on by the feet of beasts, if they lie abroad: and if it be in the Church, where wee usually bury, the poorest and basest of men tread upon them. I say the Lord shall raise it at that day in such honour, that it shall be like the stars of heaven, it shall be like the Sunne in glory, it shall be like the Angels of God, it shall be like the Sonne of God:Phil. 3.21. for he shall change these vile bodies, and make them like his glorious body, according to his mighty power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. Phil. 3.21. Now by the contrary dishonour, we may see that the honour of the Saints shall consist, 1. In a goodly stature. 2. In a perfect beauty. 3. In a gracious fragrancie. In the stature of the body, there shall be no un∣comelinesse, there shall be no crookednesse, there shall be nothing wanting that can be required: as we use to say of images that are drawne in waxe, that they are compleat; so, likewise, God shall so paint his image in the bodies of his Saints, when they shall rise; that it is not possible to find it so in any thing, but in the Exemplar, in the master-piece, the body of
Christ: there is nothing else that shall be more glo∣rious. As in those happy Countries, where the leaves  are alwaies greene, and the earth is alway budding, and bringing forth: so the bodies of Gods Saints (as St. Austin saith) shall have that greennesse and vi∣gorousnesse of incorruption possesse them totally.St. Augustine. And lastly, that it shall be of a gracious fragrancy,  it is certaine: that that also may be opposed to the stench of these carkasses. The dead body is dishonou∣red in nothing more; then by a caryon-like smell: for thereby it differs nothing from a beast: nay it is far worse then a beast: for there is nothing so putri∣fies, as the body of a man: there is nothing brings forth such ugly things, as that. For out of the brain, comes scorpions and snakes: and out of the flesh, toads and serpents: which is not usuall among the beasts. For some of them bring forth bees, and some wasps: but of Ages, and Eumines, and divers others it is re∣ported, that scorpions and snakes came out of their heads after they were dead, and wreathed about their faces. And we know by wofull experience (of late time) of divers gentlemen that were troubled with such a wofull thing, that they had wormes in their braines, and in their entrailes. I say, therefore, answerable to this: as the miserie is great, to which the body of man is subject, (greater then other creatures, because he is the onely sinner) so at that day, God shall make an aboundant recompence, by pouring upon it the spring of beauty, and sweetnesse, and fragrancie, that they shall be as a garden of spi∣ces, in the nostrills of God and of his Saints. Every Saint shall also be as a glasse to each other; and
every one shall see his fellowes beauty; and they shall reflect one upon another, in the joy and glad∣nesse of the Holy Ghost, to see the wonderous work which God hath wrought upon this piece of frail∣ty. And even as Iacob was as the smell of a field, when he came near his Father; Behold, saith Isaack, I smell the smell of my sonne as the smell of a field,Gen. 27.27. which the Lord hath blessed. There being nothing more delightfull to the sense then a blooming field of new corne, and of sweet grasse, and flowers that rise out of the earth. And therefore the holy man compares his sonne to a field which the Lord hath blessed. Much more shall these be fragrant fields, the Lord blessing them with infinite variety of good∣nesse, and of grace and sweetnesse, that the field of God shall be more pleasant then the fields and gardens of men, and then all the paradises in this world. And as the head of this company is described, Cant. 1.Cant. 1.3, 4. Draw me, and I will run after thee, in the odour of thine anointments: noting unto us the sweet∣nesse that is incorporated in the body of Christ. And as we reade also of St. Paul,Acts 19.12. that by the blessing of God he had napkins and handkerchiefs brought from his body, that were of such sweetnesse, that they were able to cure diseases: so also we may understand, what shall be the variety there, from the sweetnesse that is now in the body, arising from the mixture of the bloud in the veines, which makes a perfect sym∣pathy and harmony. The Lord, at that day, shall make all things much more abundant. As the Church also is described by the sweetnesse of her cloathes, in the Canticles,Cant. 1.14. My Spouse (saith Christ) is as a garden of myrrh or of spices: and her breasts are like
the clusters of grapes, and like the fruit of Engedi: So every man and woman shall be: although here, they be sickly and subject to never so many infirmi∣ties and diseases in this life; yet the Lord shall so al∣ter the bodies of those that serve him here, in that blessed estate, there: that they shall be sure to finde a singular proportion of beauty, of strength, and of fragrancie, that all the just shall be termed the field and paradise, which God hath blessed. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.43. It is sowne in weaknesse, it is raised in power. It is sown a naturall body, it is raised a spirituall body. There is a naturall body, and there is a spirituall body. So it is also written, the first Adam was made a living soul, and the last Adam was made a quickning spirit. [It is sown in weaknesse, it is raised in power.] THe earth is Gods store-house, where∣into he commits his treasure: even the bodies of his Saints, the Temples of his holy Spirit, saith Tertullian.Tertull. God hath made the earth to be as a ware-house, there∣in to lay his commodities: and from thence, to require, & fetch them forth againe. The sowing of these earthly bodies, is manifest to us all: but the raising of the seed that is sowne, and the comming in of the harvest, that is locked up, and hid in the chambers of eternity, in the omnipotency of God. And there is no way for us to have accesse,
and to look into it, but by the eye of faith; where∣by while we live in this flesh; wee have a little pee∣ping (as it were) through the key-hole, to see a glim∣mering of the happinesse, and of the gracious promi∣ses, consigned unto us in Iesus Christ. The things that here are spoken of, (the sowing of the body) are so commonly knowne, as that there is no man that calls that in question. It is sown in dishonour, it is sown in weaknesse, It is sown in misery and mortality: and the Apostle concludes all, It is sown a naturall body: but it is raised againe a spirituall body. And be∣cause hee might seeme to offend some eares, that never heard of that distinction, that there was such a thing as a spirituall body, (for if it be a spirit, then it is no body: and if it be a body, then it is not spiri∣tuall: these things imply a contradiction.) There∣fore the Apostle proves that which he had said; he makes good his distinction, and tels them, There is a naturall body, and a spirituall body. And this hee proves out of the heads of them both, out of the two maine Fountaines of mankinde, the two Adams. The one, working to misery, to sinne, and to corrup∣tion, and destruction: and the other, working to grace, to obedience, and to eternall glory. And hee saith, The first of these was made a living soule, but the second was made and ordained a quickning Spi∣rit. The first, was made to live, to have life him∣selfe; but he could not give life to another: yea and that life that hee had, was but mortall and fraile. But the second Adam, was made to have another kind of life, and to be all spirit, intending spirituall things: and he was not onely able to live in him∣selfe, but to give life to all his followers, & to quicken
all them that belong unto him. Yea although they be dead in their graves, although they be dead in sins, or dead in the damps of conscience: yet hee is made a quickning Spirit, to rouse and to raise them to the happinesse of the children of God. This is the summe of the words read unto you. To proceed in order. There needs no great distribution or division of the Text: because the words are nothing else but the probate of that which the Apostle had spoken before. He proves it by the Scriptures, that there is such a difference, as a naturall body and a spirituall body. The Scripture he brings is in Gen. 2.7.Gen. 2 7. where it is said, The Lord breathed into Adam the breath of life: and so Adam (or man) became a living soule, or a living substance. In the order of the words, there are two miserable properties, that remain to be spoken of touching the bodies of the Saints. Division into two miserable Properties.That they are sown in weaknesse. That they are sown meerly naturall. But the glory that God shall put upon them, shall be in the highest contrary. They shall rise in great strength, and they shall be raised in a spirituall nature in a spirituall quality, and condition. 1 Property. Sowne in weaknesse.Concerning the first, that the body of man is sown in weaknesse: every man seeth, there is nothing more weak and despicable then that: all the whole life of man being nothing but a world of weaknesse: as it is the prerogative of God to be Almighty, so it is the miserable quality of man to be all weaknesse. When he comes first into the world, there is nothing more weak then he: when he growes in the world,
the least fitt of disease, of an ague, any kind of opposi∣tion whatsoever, will defeat him and bring him on his knees, to such a degree of weaknesse and infirmi∣ty, that he shall scarce support, and sustain himself. And even those that are the strongest of men, that are strong to poure in strong drink,Esay 5.22. (as the blessed Pro∣phet I say saith) that spend their time in ryot: those men doe soonest bring upon them this fatall weak∣nesse, and none end so foule as they; because though they seeme to struggle with the infirmities of na∣ture, and to overcome, and transcend them for a time; yet that inherent weaknesse which is in the flesh, rebounds upon them, and works them at last to nothing, to the foulest expiration that can be. Nay, those noble spirits, which as Tiberius was wont to say, that there were some spirits in the world, that account their businesse to be their solace; their businesse and labour, they account it comfort and consolation to them: yet these men pluck, and call upon them∣selves a greater weaknesse then other men: so that the life of man, (whether it be base and degenerous, or whether it be noble and spritely) is nothing else but weaknesse. If a man will doe nothing but sleepe out his time, hee shall be surprised at length with base weaknesse. If hee be vigilant, and use the time that God hath given him to the highest and best pur∣pose, he is still overtaken with weaknesse: and espe∣cially, when the conscience of sin works upon a man; there is nothing so weakens him as that doth.Psal. 39.11. When thou chastisest man for sin, thou makest him like a gar∣ment that is moth-eaten. And as the Prophet David saith, by reason of my sinnes, my bones are rotten and corrupted, and all my ulcers stink; there is no health in
my body,Psal. 22.14, 15. by reason of the sinnes of my soule. My heart within me is like melting waxe, I am broken like a pit∣cher, like a broken vessell, I am like a bottle in the smoak. The conscience that God hath left in man to be his factor, brings a weaknesse incomparable: there is nothing that can be equall unto it. But chiefly, when all these meet together, (as in some they doe) and when old age begins to rivle the face, and to draw the complexion into furrows, which was large∣ly extended unto beauty: and when the tresles, and powers of the body begin to faile, and the last terme and period is at hand, then there is a wofull specta∣cle of weaknesse. Even when a man cannot goe, nor stand upon his supporters, but hee reeles, and falls: when hee cannot taste his food, nor smell, nor finde the least relish of it: when his eyes waxe dim, when he can retaine nothing in his stomack, but he casts it up againe: when hee can hardly speak a word, nor know his best friends; but all the organs of life and sense, are drowned in death. This is that poore weak∣nesse which the Apostle speaks of. It is sown in weak∣nesse. When he is casheerd and deprived of all sense, of all power and motion, and nothing remaines, but a base and desperate imbecility: and such a kind of in∣firmity, as that there is no hope in flesh and bloud, that ever there shall be made any recovery. This is the state of all men. And it must teach us (beloved) to weepe over our weaknesse: to think of it, in the degrees and parts of it. The Lord hath given us many prognosti∣cants of it: every sicknesse, and every qualme, and every distresse of conscience, and whatsoever trou∣bleth us in this world: they be nothing but so many
Kalenders of that great weaknesse, that once shall come, and make an end of us. And therefore, as it is said, Man hath not one death alone, but a number of deaths: and that which takes him away, is called the last death: for he hath many before that. This is the state of sowing the body. But now behold the promise of the great God! he will raise it up in power: the weaker it is sown, the stronger it shall rise: and this weaknesse that we have, it is no argument of discomfort, nor a mean to make us distrust; but it is a surer tye to binde God to per∣formance: and a sure evidence of our deliverance: that as our weaknesse is great, so our strength shall be much more infinite, which shall be wrought by the mighty power of God, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himselfe. It is raised againe in power, or in strength. For it is raised by him, that is the strong God: by him that is El, Eli, Elohim, the God of strength, of might, and of majesty. By that God that loves to make his strength seen in our weaknesse, and to make his glory perfect in our infirmity: by that God that delights to work in contraries, and to bring fire and water out of the same principle: that God hath undertaken to raise up this weak body. There∣fore the Apostle saith, It is raised: speaking in the present tense, as of a thing done: not in the future tense, It shall be. To bring us acquainted with the truth, before it be done; and to make us assured of it, as if it were performed already. We are as sure, in∣deed, to be raised to that glorious strength which God hath promised, as if the deed were done: for it is in the counsell of the great God; in which, those things that hee hath promised, be as if they
were already performed: because he is true that hath promised, and because he is able to keep his promise: he is able to keep his word; for it is his onely prero∣gative to keep his word and his promise for ever. And this is that wondrous comfort that he hath gi∣ven unto us; that if it were possible for the body to have more weaknesse then it hath: if it were possible to be debased worse by infirmity then it is: yet then we had a stronger argument to prove the strength to come, to which the body shall be restored. For the weaknesse which we have, and carry about us, the greater it is, the stronger proofe it makes for Gods infinite mercy, in the deliverance of us. For as we see by experience, that vessels, and barrells of gunpowder laid up in vaults and cells; the more waight is laid upon them, the greater pyles, and masse of building there is over them; the more fu∣riously and strongly they break forth, at the touch and traine of the least fire. So likewise it is certain, that the bodies that are turned into powder & to dust, these powder-bodies, of ours (for at last they must all, all come to pulverell, to dust & powder) these bodies the more weight is upon them, the more earth, the more difficulty, and the greater weaknesse they have, whereby they are compassed and surroun∣ded: it makes way for the more strength to burst out, when the fire of God shall light, and touch up∣on it; when there shall be a re-union of the spirit, a deduction of the soule; when that fire shall light up∣on it, that comes from heaven: then they shall rise in a glorious strength, for the more they have beene held downe by weaknesse, the more they shall be rescued, and ransomed, and restored to a greater vi∣gour.
It is raised in power and strength; and in a strength, that is answerable to the weaknesse: that where the weakness is the greatest, there the strength shall transcend in greatnesse. And what is this strength? It is reduced by the Fathers into foure particu∣lars. First, St. Austin, and St. Chrysostom (and general∣ly  all the Fathers) think,Aug. Chrysost. that the strength that shall be most eminent in the body when it riseth, shall be in the power of motion: which because I have be∣fore spoken of, I will but now touch it. As the top of the flame that is in a dry reed, it runs upon the reed; and you know when such platts of ground are on fire, they set all a fire about them: so the body of man, it shall be able to flye, to run, and to move, as swiftly as the flame doth upon the top of any combustible matter. And as the Sun, and the Stars, and the Angels, and spirits of men doe never sleepe; and yet are still in motion, and are never weary of their motion: so the body that shall be raised, and fitted againe unto the soule, shall be without labour and pain, without weaknesse and wea∣rinesse, and shall never faile nor faint, but shall be able to hold out in an everlasting motion, as the Sunne and the Stars doe in the firmament. In which sense (as LutherLuther. saith) they shall be able to goe ten thousand furlongs in the twinkling of an eye. I name that as a matter of recreation: because his spi∣rit was wondrous cheerfull and merry, in the Notes that he gives tending to that purpose. The second thing wherein this strength shall consist, shall be in the efficacy and power of their
working. So that those that be the weakest things in the world now; that one devill (if he were permit∣ted) were able to wrythe the necks of ten thousand people about: then at that day, God shall give them that strength of body, that they shall be able to en∣counter a whole legion of devils, which shall then have no power over the bodies of men (as now they have) nor shall not be able to possesse them, and to rule them at their pleasure, nor to make monsters of them: but the body of one Saint shall put to flight and fright a whole legion of sathans complices. And this mighty power whereby they work, (that I may a little still proceed in Luthers explication) Saith he, the bodies of the Saints shall be so strong at that day, that they shall be able to remove Churches out of their places, with their finger: they shall be able to play with mighty mountaines, as children play with tennis-balls. His meaning is, that they shall have a mighty and infinite power, to work upon any thing that God shall set them about: or that shall be expedient for them. But these kind of speeches and discourses are explanatorie: and are rather for re∣creation, then for men to subscribe unto: and yet it is most sure, that their working power shall be great and admirable: and although it shall not be infinite, yet it shall be as neare to infinite as can be devised. For whatsoever it shall please God to put in their minds to effect, they shall be able to doe it, and nothing shall make resistance. Thirdly, some other of the Fathers, and of the later Writers,Beza. Calvin. as Beza and Calvin, expound it thus: It is raised againe in power: that is, it is freed from the necessities of nature, which is weaknesse. For the
life of man here in this world, must be sustained by mennes: it must have meat, and drink, and sleep, and rest, and an intercourse and change of things: there must be physick and medicines to cure his dis∣eases. Now at that day, the Lord shall so temper the body, that it shall be able to live without meat and drink: and it shall alway watch without any necessity of sleepe. As St. Austin saith in his 5. Tome, the 13. Book, Chap. 23. Although the bodies of the Saints shall have power to eate and drink in that world, yet they shall not stand in need of it: they may doe it if they will, but they shall have no de∣pendancie upon meat and drink, as now they have in this world. So it shall rise a strong body. That lit∣tle strength that men have now, is maintained by meat and drink (under God,) they have no way else to preserve it: and if a man fast sixe or seaven daies, he must needs die presently; because nature can in∣dure no further abstinence: and besides that old age is comming upon him, although his meat be most delicate; yet notwithstanding the power of digestion so far failes him, that he is notable to concoct it, and transmit it into bloud and nature, as he was wont to doe: and especially if his meat grow coorse, or his fare be abated; then wee know that the best and most singular strength in the world must fade and fail. For, commonly, according as the Commons are, so is the strength: so our life is a meere depen∣dance upon second causes, next under God. God gives meat a power to nourish; and meat by a secondarie meanes, nourisheth: whereby it comes to be assimi∣lated, and made like unto the body: and so we live; and as meat growes worse, or is taken away; so the
body impaires: and when for a long time it is not able to master the meat, and to digest it into the substance of the body: then likewise the life is impai∣red, and falls. But the strength that the bodies of the Saints shall then have, it shall be without these de∣pendances: the children of God shall be able to live, and to keep their strength, and vigour, and fulnesse, and perfection, without any of these helps of second causes: and although they may stoop to them (when they will) for variety; yet they shall have no neces∣sity of them. Aug.Lastly, (as St. Austin saith in his 3. Tome, 13. Book, Chap. 26.) this strength (saith he) that the Apostle speaks of, I take to be specially this: that whereas now of these earthly bodies of ours,Mat. 26.41. the Lord Iesus saith, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak: and the Apostle saith,Rom. 7.19. The good things that I would doe, that I doe not: and the evill things that I would not doe, that doe I: Saith the holy Father, I take the mea∣ning of that place of Scripture to be this: That whereas now the strongest part of man, (the spirit) is willing, but the flesh is weak, and as a dull asse, the Lord shall then prepare it so, that he shall propor∣tion, and fit the horse to his rider: that to the soule, which is the rider and commander of the body, hee shall give a horse of metall, that shall be able to carry it to all actions: whereas now it jades, and tires up∣on every good thing. The spirit (here) is willing, but the flesh is weak: but there shall be so perfect a con∣cord and subjection of the flesh to the spirit, that it shall goe hand in hand, and shall hold pace with the soule: the flesh shall be as willing to doe God ser∣vice, as the spirit: and there shall be that wondrous
transmutation of qualities, that it shall seem rather a flesh made of spirit, then otherwise. For so it fol∣lowes in the Text, It is sowne a naturall body, it is rai∣sed a spirituall body. It is sowne a naturall body,2. Property. Sowne in weaknesse. it is raised a spirituall body. This is the last difference of the 4. and in this is comprehended the summe of all: For hee compre∣hends in the first word [naturall] all defects, and all weaknesses and infirmities: and in the word [spiritu∣all] he comprehends all perfection and augmentation, that God shall give in that day. Saint Austin saith,Aug. Beza. a naturall body is a mortall body. Beza saith, it is a body subject to mutation: a changeable body. A bodie it is, compounded of elements, by a soluble composition; A bodie, that bows to the earth, that goes to the center, according to its owne naturall inclination. A bodie that must at last bee resolved into its principles: and as it is made of Elements, so it must goe to Elemens againe. This is a naturall body: and thus we know it is with every body in the world. For though there must be a change of them, that survive, when the Lord shall come; and that they shall not have this dissolution, that our bodies must have: yet that change that they shall have, shall bee in stead of this dissolution, and who knowes in what kinde it shall bee? and with what paines it shall bee? No doubt it shall bee no great prerogative above us; and al∣though they shall not die, and goe unto the earth as we doe; yet they shall be full of pangs and hor∣rour, as the deaths of common men are. For it is the nature of this body, being animal, and having no better a principle, whereby it lives, then the soule,
to dissolve, and come to its owne principles: dust, to dust: to come to ashes and earth, according to Gods decree, working upon this flesh of ours. It is sowne, therefore, a naturall body: that is, subject to change and corruption. But now see the hand of God on the other side: It is raised a spirituall body. This is that, wherein the Apostle comprehends all the rest; to perswade that there is a spirituall body, all the rest are included in this. It is sowne in corruption, it is raised in incorruption. It is true, if it be spirituall, it must needs be incorrupt: so It is sown in dishonour, it is raised in honour; It is certaine, if it be raised a spirituall body. And so for strength, if it be spirituall, it must needs be strong. Therefore the Apostle concludes all in this, It shall be raised a spiri∣tuall body. But how a spirituall body? Marke! he saith not that the flesh of Gods Saints, the bodies that shall be raised, that they shall be spi∣rits, but spirituall bodies. Still it shall be a body. So that there is no change in the substance, but onely in the qualities and properties.Tertull. Saith Tertullian, the Apostle doth not speak of any change of the sub∣stance of nature, but of the glorious qualities that shall come unto it. Surely (saith hee) there is no∣thing that riseth againe, but that which was sowne; and there is nothing sowne, but that which is dissol∣ved and rotten in the earth: and there is nothing lies rotting in the earth, but flesh: therefore nothing shall rise again, but the flesh. For there was nothing that the sentence of God went upon, but the flesh of Adam, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt returne.
So St. Austin expounding the words, In Tom. 5.Aug. Lib. 13. How shall they be spirituall? Not because they shall cease to be bodies: they are not therefore called spirituall, as though they were turned spi∣rits, and ceased to be bodies; but because they shall subsist with a living and quickning spirit, and be∣cause they shall be made indwellers and inhabitants of heaven, which is the place of spirits: it shall then be the place for the bodies of men. For now it is a strange paradoxe, to say the body of a man should dwell in heaven: and though we know that Christ hath it, by a speciall priviledge; yet there is no man can imagine, how the bodie of a man should dwell in heaven, in those pure skies, in those bright regi∣ons; and that the heavinesse of the body should not praecipitate it downe to the earth, and cast it into the fire, and to dismall events that should consume it. But when the Lord shall change this corruption in∣to incorruption, the bodies of the Saints shall be the onely fit inhabitants of heaven: therefore it is cal∣led spirituall, because it shall dwell in heaven which is the place of spirits: the body shall then be able to inhabit there: therefore it is called spirituall, as be∣ing fit to possesse those mansions, that are destinated properly for spirits. But Chrysostome makes a question here: Saith he,Chrysost. What is this that thou sayest here, blessed Apostle? Dost thou say, that the bodies of the children of God are not spirituall now? are they all meerly animal, now? are they not spirituall? how is it said, that they are Temples of the holy Ghost? if the holy Ghost dwell in them, he makes them spirituall: they are called spirituall men, all the children of God: and if
they be spirituall men, then they have spirituall bo∣dies. But the Father answers himselfe again: It is true, these bodies we carry about us now, by the power of the holy Ghost, are after a sort spirituall: but that body which shall be then, (which he here speaks of) shall be infinitely far more spirituall. This is onely in inchoation, in beginning, in the first fruits: that, shall be in the summe, and substance, and fulnesse of perfection. And St. Bernard, If thou sayest our bo∣dies shall rise againe, thy meaning is not to take a∣way the being of the body; but to give it a new lustre, as the face of Moses, and as in the transfiguration of Iesus.Exod. 34. For as Moses, when God put that brightnesse upon his face, that the people could not look upon it, but he was faine to haye a vaile on his face: his face was still the same, but yet there was a change of glory, there was an accession of brightness, where∣by it seemed a spirit, rather then a common ordina∣ry visage: so the bodies of men that shall be raised, there shall be such an accession, and augmentation of glory, and beauty, and brightnesse, that it shall rather seeme spirituall, then otherwise. And as it was in the Transfiguration of Christ,Mar. 17. his garments shone, that no Dier in the earth could make the like, and his face shone, as the sunne in his strength: the face of Christ was all one, & his garments were the same: he had the same physiognomie, but onely there was a new accession of glory that came unto it. So the bo∣dies of the Saints, they shall be all one, the very same body shall be revived, which hath suffered mi∣sery here; and shall have a new glory put upon it: and that very body shall have strength, that here
was weak, and subject to death. The Lord shall then cloathe it with glory: and although it shall rise a spi∣rituall body, it is not in respect of the change of the substance, but in regard of the augmentation of glory, which shall accrew unto it. It is raised a spirituall body. So much of those two Attributes: of the change from weaknesse to strength, and from naturall to spirituall. Now in the words following, the Apostle comes to prove that such a thing there is as a naturall bo∣dy, and a spirituall body. And this he doth, to pre∣vent objections: partly, lest men should think that he coyned new distinctions and divisions, which is a thing faulty in the Church: and partly, lest men should be drowned in error, by misconceiving his doctrine. For the first. If a man should have said unto him, Where doe you learne this? did you ever heare any man speak such a thing, that there is a spiri∣tuall body? Yes, (saith the Apostle) there is both: there is a naturall body, and there is a spirituall body. I will make the distinction good, and prove it. This teacheth us,  that men ought to be carefull what distinctions they bring into the Church of God: For as the Apostle saith to Timothy,1 Tim. 6.21. and to Titus, Shun novelty of words, and inventions: shun them, they are not to be admitted: they destroy the faith, and puzzle the understandings of all Gods children. Vincentius LirinensisVincentius Lirinensis. saith, That although men ought to speak many things in the Church of God, after a new fashion; yet they ought to speak no new thing at all. Therefore lest they should be of∣fended with this distinction, as though the Apostle
had brought it out of his owne braine, as though it were a new device of his owne hatching: he is for∣ced to make it good, and to prove that there is such a thing, because hee would not be thought an Inven∣ter of new devices, and a maker of new distinctions: which is a plague in the Church of God, throughout all ages. Secondly, another reason was this: because hee would not suffer them to fall into a grosse error, which they might conceive by this doctrine of his. For if it shall be raised a spirituall body, (why then say the heretiques, Apollinarius, Eunomius, and such like) then it is not the same. For it is now a meere naturall body: and what is so contrary, as naturall and spirituall? Animal and spirituall are clean con∣trary: therefore the Scripture still bids us live after the spirit, and distinguisheth betweene the sonnes of the flesh, and the sons of the spirit: there is nothing more contrary then these: now it is impossible, that a thing should be capable of that which is contrary. Therefore (they say) if it shall be a spirituall body, then it shall not be Idem corpus, the same body. Another crew say, If they shall be spirituall bo∣dies, then they are not flesh, and bloud, and bones, as these elementary bodies are, that die, and are commit∣ted to the ground: but it shall be another thing made by God, of a strange composure. Against this, the Apostle tells us, that there is such a distinction of a naturall body, and a spirituall body: and yet none of these monsters follow nei∣ther. For it is the pleasure of the great God, to adde such excellencies to that body which was before dust, and ashes, and mortall: and to draw such lines
upon it, to give it such beauty, and perfection; that it shall seeme rather a spirit, then a body: it shall be so full of quicknesse, and motion, and life, and dexterity, that it shall rather seeme a spirit, then a body; To speak comparatively. Hence we learne, That seeing the Apostle proves his distinction; that it is not lawfull for any man to make of his owne head, of his owne braine, any ge∣nerall principles, or definitions, or divisions, or distri∣butions, concerning the doctrine of the Gospell: but he must shew reason for it. Then, secondly, what reason doth the Apostle give for it? why, It is also written. Hee proves this his doctrine, by the Scriptures: and unlesse he could have proved it out of them, he must have been sub∣ject to the censure of all these heretiques, (that all that they had passed upon him should have gone for good,) except he could have refuted them by the Scriptures. So he tells them that It is written. So that here we have a maine conclusion of our faith to hold to alwaies, and to stick to: that wee must beleeve no man further then the Scriptures. If he will speak his own minde, he may doe it for illustration, or for arguments sake: but to put the de∣vices of his owne head and braine, to goe for points of religion, for matters of faith; it is a damnable thing: he must have no more credit, then the Scrip∣tures will afford him: hee must make no distincti∣ons, and differences, except it be found in the writ∣ten word. If this had been well observed, the Church of God had never come to that miserable distraction
that it hath been in for the space of these thousand yeares: every Intruder still presuming to make his owne devices fundamentall: to avert the points of religion, & to make distinctions, such as man never saw in the Scriptures. As to talk of Purgatory, invo∣cation of Saints, and of other errors, newly sprung up in these later times. Such things as these have no kind of being in the Scriptures: no nor any shew of being; notwithstanding these proud imperious spi∣rits will bring them upon the Church of God, and lay a heavy yoak upon the people of God to beleeve them, as if they were the very oracles of Almightie God himselfe. Wee must take heed of these things. Teach mee as far as thou wilt out of Gods booke: but if thou teach me otherwise, thou art a liar, and no teacher, thou art a seducer, and an imposter, and no pastor; as St. BernardBernard. and also GregorieGregorie. saith. There∣fore this blessed Apostle, he puts downe his proofe: he will have them beleeve him no further, then hee brings Scripture for it. It is written (saith he.) As if he should say, I make not this distinction of a natu∣rall body, and a spirituall body; I have it made to my hand: for it is written. And where is it written? it is a hard thing to find that: all the whole sentence is not to be found any where: but the first part of it is written, that the first Adam was made a living soule: the other part is made up by the spirit of the Apo∣stle, understanding the difference betweene the first and the second Adam: to make up the antithesis of that notable difference, betweene the one and the other. Some of the Fathers doe take it thus: that the whole sentence may seeme to be written: that (oft∣times)
in the Scripture, things are said to be written, and to be done, which are not written, nor done: meaning not in their kinde, but in their effects by some consequence. As St. Chrysostom saith of this:Chrysost. from the reason and event of the thing, it was writ∣ten: because that men did see, every christian knows, that Christ Iesus doth so farre passe and surmount the first Adam, as God surpasseth man; as the soule surpasseth the body: therefore the event and conse∣quent of the thing, makes it as if it were written. For God hath made it good, and so hath set it as a sure writing in the world. And so he gives instance from divers Scriptures in the like things. As in Heb. 12.21.Heb. 12.21. the Apostle saith, (speaking of the terrour of Moses, when he was in the mount, when the Law was given) the terror was so great, that Moses said, I feare exceedingly. Now in the booke of Exodus,Exod. 19. Chap. 19. where those things are related, there is no such thing mentioned, that Moses said any such words: but the Glosse expounds it, That it is cer∣taine upon the deed, upon the teror that Moses con∣ceived, he trembled. It was a thing done, although it were not spoken: he did tremble. So here also, it may be said, Although there be no such words as the second part of this sentence, (that the second A∣dam was made a living spirit,) yet de facto it is true. For all the Church of God knowes and subscribes, that there is a maine difference betweene them. Such other places there are, as that in Isay 7.14.Isay 7.14. A virgin shall conceive and bring forth a sonne, and they shall call his name Emanuell. Now this was ne∣ver done, de facto, (as St. Chrysostom observes,Chrysost.) the people never called him so, they called him Iesus,
not Emmanuel. And although the Angell gave that name to the virgin, yet the people used it not: and yet (saith St. Chrysostom) though it were not done de facto, yet it was done de jure: it was done in right and reason: for that the things themselves do send forth such a voice and testimony, that he was Emma∣nuel, God with us. Therefore these Fathers think the meaning of the Apostle is this, That although it were not written in expresse words; yet by the Spi∣rit of God, and by the demonstration God gave unto the world of Christ, the later part was written (as well) in the mindes of men, by the finger of the Holy Ghost, as the former part was written in Gen. 2. But I take it, the best sense of it is this, (and so the later Divines hold, that the meaning of the Apostle is) to make a comparison: that as it is written, the first Adam was made a living soule; so I averre, that the last Adam was made a quickning spirit. So that the word, It is written, is to be understood of the first part onely, and not of the later: but the other, I averre by the Spirit of God, and by the power of the Gospell. So that there is no man that need doubt of it hereafter, but that there is infinite difference, between the first and the second Adam. To come to the sense of the words: because I have been too troublesome in this, I will be briefe. The first man was made a living soule. As if he should say, he was made in a mutable, changeable manner of perfection: and it was in his owne free will, to have stood, and kept close to God, if he would have been constant. For then he should never have died. But because hee would be trying
conclusions, and fall from his Maker: therefore hee was animal, a living soule, although God made him for another purpose, if he would have kept the place God set him in. Secondly, he was made such an animal, as stood  in need of second causes: hee stood in need of meat, and drink, of rest, and labour, and sleepe, and such things as these. Thirdly, he was made a living soule, not a life-making  soule: living in himselfe, but not giving life unto others. But the Sonne of God was made a quickning Spi∣rit: not onely to have life in himselfe, but to give life unto all his followers. So that Adam took life, but he could not give it. Christ took life, as being man, from the Deity: and he gives it as being God: not onely the life of nature, but the life of grace and glory. And so he became in every thing, a quickning and glorious Spirit. The first Adam was made a living soule. That is, worldly, minding the world, looking to the earth: he was to dig the earth, to delve in the gar∣den; he was made for that purpose, and for other worldly purposes. Toward the center, was his aspect: but Christ was of another making: hee was all for spirit, all for heaven, and heavenly affaires; for the businesse of his Father, for the reclaiming of soules, for the pardoning of sinnes, for the working of mira∣cles, for the gracious concurrence of those sweet principall meetings of mercy and truth, which meet together in him. So that the difference (by this time) appeares manifestly. It is said, Adam was made a living soule; that is, to have life in himselfe,
but not to diffuse, and extend it to any other. Christ Iesus was made the author of life, and of all that we all hope for and pray for: of life eternall, of happinesse and glory. But here are divers questions to be resolved: which I will but propound, and name unto you, and so passe them ouer. First, it may be demanded, (because it is said that Adam was made a living soule, and that Christ was made a quickning spirit) whether Christ were not a living soule, as well as Adam? and whether Adam were not a quickning spirit, as well as Christ? And certainely, these things are true: if we take them in their kinde, they be both true. For Christ was not onely made a quickning spirit, but he had a body, as Adam had, and hee was a living soule, as well as Adam. And Adam was not onely made a dull, and dumpish thing, given unto worldly matters: but he was made a quick, although not a quickning spirit. Therefore for the first, we must understand that it is true, that the Lord Christ was made a li∣ving soule, as well as Adam. For there is a grosse errour of Eunomius,Eunomius. which thought that Christ had no reasonable soule: but that his Divinity was his soule; that it was in stead of a soule: and that hee had no other soul but that. This is a monstrous abortion: for if Christ had not taken our whole nature, hee had not saved our whole nature. Now the best and chief part of our nature, is the soule: and it was the soule (chiefly and principally) that Christ came to save. Therefore it is certaine, that he tooke our soule, as well as hee tooke our flesh: and so was made a li∣ving soule, as well as Adam. And it appears also by
this, in that he had two wills in him, as he had two natures: the nature of God, and the nature of man, united in one person. So likewise he had two wills, the will of God, and the will of man: yet he subjected alway the lower will, unto the higher: Not my will, but thy will be fulfilled: not as I will, but as thou wilt. But the will of his manhood appeared in this; thas as he was a man, he was afraid of death:Mat. 26.42. he desired that the cup might passe from him, he would not have died at that instant: yet as he was alway obedient to God the Father, he desires that the upper will might pre∣vaile; and saith, Not my will, but thine be fulfilled. Let the will of God prevaile, and let the will of man be ruled, and over-ruled. Therefore, as Christ had two wills, so he had two natures: and by consequent, the full nature of God, and man. Or else, if hee had not taken the soule of man, as well as the body, hee could not have delivered the whole nature of man, the principall part whereof is the Soule. But here is the difference; although Christ were made a living soule, as Adam was; yet hee was more than so: hee was not made for that purpose, as an ordinary li∣ving soule; but he had an accession of the glory, and grace, and strength of the Deity, to make this living soule sublimate to perfection: to make it capable of unspeakable mysteries which Adam had but in a poore pittance, in a low condition: hee had a living soule, indeed, well qualified and adorned with inno∣cencie and the power of originall justice, and a power to have life, and grace, and immortalitie, if hee had kept and continued in the commandement; but he had no higher matters, hee had nothing in him, whereby of necessitie he might abstaine from sinne;
but that he might sinne, and be damned for it. But in Christ there was an absolute necessitie of holinesse and perfection, and of all the parts in him, which was not in Adam. For the second Question: whereas it is said, Hee was a quickning spirit, ApollinariusApollinarius. inferred upon this, that he had a phantasticall body, and not a true body. This is as grosse as the former: for if Christ must take upon him our nature, hee must take that which stood in most need of redemption; which is the poore body, which is subject to all miseries and calamities. For how should hee be called The sonne of man, if he had not a body? But as he is called The sonne of God, so he is also called The sonne of man; and hee came to save both parts of man that were downe by reason of sin: he came to take the flesh of man, to be incarnate; and that is it that we so rejoyce and boast of, that Christ was become incarnate, & became man, and tooke our flesh upon him; and in that flesh he hungred, in that flesh he suffered, in that flesh he was buryed, in that flesh he rose againe, in that flesh he ascended into heaven, to make a way by the vaile of his flesh into the Holy-of-holyes,Heb. 10.20. to all that constantly and truly beleeve in him. Thirdly, another Question is moved here; How Adam is said to be corpus animale, seeing God gave him a power of immortalitie: for if it were corpus immortale, then it could not be corpus animale, as saith S. Austin, and that truly: but Adam had corpus immortale, therefore it was not corpus animale; and by consequent, he cannot be so different from Christ as the Apostle makes him here: For, the Apostle brings in the two roots and fountaines of man-kinde;
and he makes the one animall, and the other spiritu∣all. Now (saith St. Austin) I demand if Adam had an immortall body, how was it an animall body? For an animall body is that that is fraile and changeable: an immortall body is that which is unchangeable. And againe, as the holy Father urgeth it further. Cer∣tainely (saith he) we recover in Christ, that which we lost in Adam; and one thing that we recover by Christ, is immortality; therefore we lost immortality in Adam: we lost it in the first Adam, and we reco∣ver it in the second. Now if we lost immortality in Adam, then he lost it for us; he lost it first, as being the foundation of our kinde, and we lost it in him being his posterity. Then certainely, he had it if he lost it: for no man can lost that which he hath not; and therefore Adam having immortality, how should his body be fraile, and mortall, and an animall body? These are things contrary each to other. The Father answers againe. These quirks and devises, make the faith of many men to stagger; and it makes some men to answer it thus. That the bo∣dy of man was changed in Paradise. God made his body a mortall body: but after this, he brought him to the Symbole of life, and gave him a commande∣ment to abstaine from the tree of knowledge of good and evill; which had he done, and had kept that commandement, then should the fruit of the tree of life have so preserved his life, that he should have lived for ever. So these men thinke that the Lord changed the condition and quality of his body in Pa∣radise, in the giving of the command.Aug. But S. Austin answers it better afterwards, I thinke (saith he) that the most safe and proper answer is this; that al∣though
it be true, that we recover immortality by Christ; and that we lost this immortality in Adam: yet we have a farre greater advantage by Christ; we gaine more by Christ, then we lost by Adam. Adam never had this certainty of immortality that we have; he had a kinde of a possibility of it, but it was conditionall. Now conditions make nothing to be, and so this stood upon an if: If thou keep the commandement thou shalt live; and if thou doe not, thou shalt die; therefore a man cannot say that there was any immortality planted in the person of Adam; because it was uncertaine, it was mutable, it was in the freedome of his will, which was change∣able; he was not made in a certaine necessity of obe∣dience, therefore it was conditionall. To conclude all; As the holy Father saith, the body of Adam, although it were meerely naturall, as ours is; yet it was in a farre better condition then ours are: that is, it had no necessity of dying, as ours hath, for our bodies must needs die, but the body of Adam might have beene sublimate, and brought unto the heavenly joyes, without death, which ours cannot be. For it is impossible for flesh and blood to enter into the Kingdome of God.1 Cor. 15.50. Therefore we have no way to come to glory, but by suffering the com∣mon calamity of nature, which is by stooping to the burthen of death. And againe, Adam had in his very person, those seeds that might have prolonged, and continued his life, by the blessing of God, and the Sacrament of the tree of life; whereas we by his sin, have gotten no∣thing but the seeds of death and mortality; working us from one misery, and sicknesse to another, and
from sicknesse to death. And (if the mercy of God intervene not) from the first to the second death; to eternall misery and perplexity. Therefore the diffe∣rence is this; the Lord made him in a better estate then we; for he had no necessity of death, nor no princi∣ple of death; but what by his owne will he contra∣cted: but in us there is a necessity of death, we must die; and yet by the mercy of God in Christ, wee are restored, and renewed; by his intercession and sacri∣fice, unto better things then we lost in Adam. The Lord make us assured of this blessed and glo∣rious estate: that thereby we may be armed against death; against the feare of death, and that thereby we may grow more and more spirituall, that wee may become partakers of that divine grace, which may make us while we live in this world, not to be of the world; but Citizens of that blessed and hea∣venly Ierusalem, which is the mother of us all.Gal. 4.26. To the which the Lord bring us for his infinite goodness, and mercies sake. Amen. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.46, 47. But that is not first which is spirituall, but that which is naturall, and then that which is spirituall. The first man is of the earth, earthly; the second man is the Lord himselfe from heaven. As is the earth∣ly, so are they that are earthly: and as is the hea∣venly, so are they also that are heavenly. IN the former part of this Trea∣tise, the Apostle hath discoursed of the kindes, and degrees of our future happinesse, in the glori∣ous resurrection. Now hee comes to tell us of the causes, and of the order. The substance of these words which I have read unto you, is to give satisfaction to that common curiosity that is in Gods people: whereby they seeke to prevent the time, and to enjoy their happinesse before it be Gods will and pleasure. It is naturall to man (as Cornelius Tacitus saith) to runne before his fortunes:Corn. Tacit. And so
it is among Christians themselves; there is a kinde of harmelesse humour (although when it is too ex∣treame and violent, it is full of sinne; yet it is con∣strued to a good sense that) they desire to be dissol∣ved and to be with Christ, which is best of all: that is to say, not to be dissolved after the fashion of the common death (as S. Paul did) but to have a kinde of light mutation, and change; and so to be translated unto glory. You see in 2 Cor. 5.4.2 Cor. 5.4. where the Apo∣stle tells us, We would not be spoiled of this body. that is, we would not die: but supervestiri, wee would have a garment or vestment of glory and immortality to be put upon this body, without death. As if hee should say, we would have corruption to enter into incorruption; and we would be made capable of hea∣ven, with these bodies unchanged by death. To that the Apostle answers in these words. No (saith he) these things are contrary, (naturall, and spirituall) and it is impossible for a naturall body, to be capable of spirituall qualities; or a spirituall body, of naturall qualities: we must needs leave off the one, before we can take the other; we must lay downe the rags of this flesh, before we can take the garment or vest∣ment of glory, and eternity, in that blessed life that followes. And although we have a great desire to goe unto life, without death; yet wee must morti∣fie that desire: for it is as vaine as nurses wishes. As nurses that wish the most eminent and excellent things to their children; so we delight our selves in this imagination. But the Apostle tells us, that wee must take things in order, for that God hath made all things in order. First, we are to taste of the naturals, and then to be made partakers of the spirituals: so
we cannot be borne into this world, but by nature; and we cannot be borne into our spirituall possession at the first: but first we must have a kinde of natu∣rall life; and by the grace of God, that prepares us unto the life spirituall. So God hath appointed and ordained every thing to goe by succession, that all things should not be done at once, but every thing in its time. For (saith he) that which is spirituall, is not first; but that which is naturall, and then that which is spirituall. And to this purpose hee brings in the two great fountaines, and seminaries of man∣kinde: the one for the life of nature; the other for the life of grace; a man, and a man: both of them being men, but yet being diversly qualified; and both leaving their qualities to those that be their followers. For (saith the Apostle) the causers of all this great difference of naturall and spirituall, be the two Adams; the one was meerely naturall, and was no more but a man. The other, although he were naturall, yet he was spirituall too; he was both God and man. The one wrought unto death, the other wrought unto life; the one was bent and inclined to sinne, the other was full of all grace; the one left an inheritance of misery, the other left great de∣meanes of glory to all those that are his followers. Now as these causes bee contrary in themselves (there being as much difference betweene them, as there is betweene East and West) so wee must ima∣gine the effects to be different too. For if the one did work to hell and damnation, the other wrought to heaven a glorious redemption and salvation for all Gods people; and if the wickednesse of the one were derivable upon his posterity in the flesh, much
more the goodnesse and righteousnesse of the other, is derived unto them that are true beleevers and fol∣lowers of him. The first man was of the earth, earthly: the second man was the Lord from heaven. And as they be, so be their disciples: as is he that is earthly, so are they that are earthly: and as was the heavenly, so are they that are heavenly. They are to follow their masters cue, and to be of the same condition, as their Chieftaine and Soveraigne. The carnall man dies in Adam: the spirituall lives in Christ, even to life everlasting. This is the substance of the words read unto you. Now to proceed in order of the Text. First,Division, into 3. parts. 1. The order of the Propositiō. 2. The compa∣rison betweene the 2. Adams. 3. The confor∣mity of their members. we are to consider the verity and truth of the order of this proposition: how the Apostle in∣tends that that which is spirituall is not first, but that which is naturall: For it seemes, that the best things should be first: and spirituall things, being best; therefore it seemes they should be first: yea it seems to be a disparagement unto things spirituall and heavenly, to come in time after things naturall. But the Apostle saith no: God hath appointed it so, and hee gives no further reason, (as St. Chrysostom ob∣serves) that they may give themselves content in this, that it is Gods will it shall be so; that is a reason sufficient, they need seek no further. Secondly, we are to consider the comparison be∣tweene the two heads, and roots, and fountaines of mankinde: the first man, and the latter man: and they are compared in foure things. The first, is in respect of their order and succession: the first, and the last; or the first, and the second. The second, is in respect of the place of their na∣tivity,
whence they come: the first, from the earth: the second, from heaven. The third, is in the quantity of their difference and excellencie: the first, came as a servant; the se∣cond, came as a Lord: . And though the word servant be not noted in the Text; yet it is to be un∣derstood by this, that he saith, The Lord himselfe Therefore the first came not as a Lord, but as a ser∣vant; but the second came as a Lord in all points: yea as the Lord himselfe, from heaven. Then lastly for their qualities; the one is earthly, the other is heavenly. The third part of the Text, is the conformity of the members that belong to these heads, with their heads. For as there are two great foundations of mankinde, so likewise they have members answera∣ble to them. Those that be of Adam (that is, na∣turall men) they be as their father is; such as the earthly is, so they are that are earthly: and those that be of Christs retinue, they be such as their Master is too. For as is the heavenly, so are they also that are heavenly: which is not meant of the manners and condition of men here in this world: (for the Apostle meddles not with that in all this Chapter) but it is spoken of the bodies that shall be raised at that day: tht as all men be earthly by nature, (the best Saints of God here are in an earthly condition, and must be dissolved into earth:) and as we have that by means of the first Adam from whence wee descend; so from the second Adam wee have a hope, and shall have power to be heavenly in the Resurrection. And as sure as we are mortall here, so sure wee shall be immortall, there. These are the branches of the
Text: of these in order, as the Spirit of God shall give assistance. First,1 Part. The Order na∣turall before spirituall. Chrysost. concerning this that he saith about the Or∣der of the thing that God hath ordained: which is na∣turall before spirituall. Saith St. Chrysostom, he doth not shew for what cause; hee alledgeth no cause of Gods order: To teach us to be content with the dis∣pensation of Almighty God: to shew us, that it is the wisest course that he hath taken: and because also he would shew us, that the Lord doth better our estate, and proceeds from that which is weak, to that which is more perfect. For as in nature, so also in grace, things grow from weak imperfection, unto a light and prime estate: and therefore first and last, doe not alwaies argue excellency and superiority: but often∣times those things that be last, be better then those that be first. Although in Scripture we find (in some cases) that that which is first, is best: (as in the first borne of men, and the first borne of other creatures; in the first moneths, and the first feasts, and the first fruits, and the like) yet this holds not alway: but of∣tentimes those things that be of a later tract, and rank in the world, are of greater perfection: For so doth both Art and nature proceed, and so doth the wisdome of God also. In the beginning of the world, the first thing was a rude matter, a thing without forme: afterward, the Lord brought upon it formes, and bodies of distin∣ction. In the first ages of the world, there was nothing but the law of nature, which men had corrupted. Then there came another light, the law of Moses: and in the later end of the world, there came the
law of grace, the Gospell: which is as much more perfect, and exceeds Moses law, as Moses law re∣newed the law of nature. In the ages of man, the first is weak infancie, which is uncapable & unsensible: but ripenesse is in the after age. In the discpline of Schooles, to be a scholler and a learner, is a long time before to be a teacher: and to be a learner is a matter of imperfection: but to be a teacher, is a matter of growth and ripenesse. In the discipline of Christ, first they were fishers, and afterwards fishers of men: and it is a weaker thing to take fish, then to take men: that came afterward. And so generally (almost) in all the whole body of nature, you shall see the Lord goeth from small beginnings, to great perfection: from the kernell, to the tree: from the seed, to the harvest: from the blade, to full corne in the eare. It is true (indeed) in some things it is contrary: for both the Angels at their first creation, were in their fulnesse, and they needed no increase, except you take that for increase, the grace of confirmation. And likewise, the creatures that were then made, were made in their fulnesse: for there was not a seed made to make a tree, or a kernell to make a tree: nor there was not an egge to bring forth an henne: but the things themselves were made in their full perfecti∣on. But God did not purpose to continue that course any longer: but the making of them once in their perfection, and being turned, & divolved by Adams sinne, into imperfection; it pleased him of his good∣nesse and mercy, to raise these imperfections to rare qualities: and that it should come by degrees, in suc∣cesse of time: that things should not be done in a mo∣ment, but every thing in time: that so wee might
the better meditate and contemplate of his excee∣ding glory. Therefore (to conclude this point) seeing the Lord hath so ordained, that in all things the naturalls be the first: that is, that which is worst: and after∣wards comes the spirituals. It teacheth us,  to yeeld and submit our selves to this blessed order, which God hath instituted; For indeed, it is the onely blessed and gracious way, that we can devise: and therefore wee are to magnifie, and exalt it. For it is not fit for Gods Majesty, to go from better to worse: that is a poore change: that is a change of weaknesse, of simplicity, and folly. But as St. Austin saith, it is a faire course, (a faire kind of change) when a man changeth for the better, and to be more excellent: when he grows still more sin∣gular, when he grows from grace to grace, and from strength to strength, till he come to appeare before God in Syon. This is the course that best beseemes the divine power of the heavenly Majesty: therefore hee would not have men to imagine, that things spiritu∣all are first, which is the best: and afterwards, natu∣rall, which is the worst: the power of God increaseth, the further it goes: it brings us first from elements and rudiments by further degrees, unto a state and height of perfection. This is the course that God only hath sanctified; therefore wee must learne to make it our course, still to make our naturalls first, and and then our spiritualls. It is a shame (saith the Apostle) will you begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh? And saith Tertullian,Gal. 3 3. Tertullian. if a man will be mad, let him be mad in his youth: let him be mad in his first age, (which is the naturall
part) let him spend that in vanity, (although indeed there be no time that should be spent but to the glory of God,) but for the other part, when hee growes spirituall, let him only intend the things of the Spirit of God. Lastly (to conclude) it teacheth us not to be too much strait and rigorous against this order: for wee would have our children meerely spirituall, as soon as they be borne: and wee would bring them to it by force and constraint: We know not the will of God; their naturalls must be passed first; & although there be no time that ought to be naturall, yet there must be a kind of generation, before there be any regeneration: a man must first be borne, before he be re-borne: a man must first be simple, and igno∣rant, and after come to knowledge and holinesse; as it pleaseth God to call men, some at the tenth houre, some at the eleventh, some in the morning, some in the evening of their lives. So the Fathers discourse upon this. But I take it, that the proper meaning is, not to stretch it further than the body. God hath so ap∣pointed man, that first he should have a naturall bo∣dy, and then a spirituall. I take it, the Text hath no further extent. For as in all things in nature, the weaker goe before the stronger, (God hath made that the foundation) and out of the weaknesse of things, he works his owne strength and glory: so the Lord hath appointed these bodies that be natu∣rall, a life naturall; to live in misery; to live in sick∣nesse; and at last, to be swallowed up of death: to come to rottennesse and putrifaction, which is the naturall conclusion of all bodies, that live in this
world. This course, God hath appointed first; and then upon this, God will make his power glorious: to bring the body from dust, and filth, and rottennes, to be spirituall: to bring it to sweetnesse, and glory, and beauty: this is his order. Therefore, first, they are naturall bodies; misera∣ble, and weak, and obnoxious: and then the Lord will supervestire, he will invest them with that glory and incorruption which is promised to us in Christ. So much for that point, the truth of the proposition, and the order. Now for the comparison of the two heads and fountaines: they are laid downe,2. Part. The compari∣son of the two Adams. as the causers of all this. Why is this so, that there is first the natu∣rall, and then the spirituall? because God would have Adam, the naturall man, to come first; and Christ, the Spirituall man, to come last: that the one should be the first of men, the other the last: and that they two, should carry the keyes of these clo∣sets, and treasures; the one of corruption, the other of incorruption. Therefore from them depends all the reason of the former proposition. First, it is to be observed, that hee saith, a man,First, in respect of their order and succession: first and last. and a man. It is spoken of Christ, that hee is a man as well as of Adam: so that they were both men, of the same nature and substance: nay the second Adam was the sonne of the first. For wee see St. Luke in his Genealogie, Luke 3.Luke 3. brings Christ from Adam. Which was the sonne of Adam, which was the sonne of God. So that Manicheus, and Valentinus, and Martianus, have taught us blasphemous doctrines in former times: and so have the Swenck-Feldians, which have received their errour of late. All these
are from hence condemned. For as TertullianTertull. saith, Why is Christ called the second man, except hee were as true a man as the first? therefore of the na∣ture of Adam, was the Lord Christ made, even by deduction of nature, and by a line infallible, to the Virgin Mary. Although by reason of the sanctify∣ing of the bloud, of which his blessed body was to be made: and because that there was no intervention of the help of man, he is not to be ranked in the com∣mon generation of man-kinde: for he was not borne, as they that are borne of women; that is, after the naturall ordinary course; but by the over-shadowing of the holy Ghost. Therefore in this regard, hee is greater, and far above Adam: but concerning the materiall part of his body, which hee tooke of the Virgin, hee was the son of Adam, and so the second man, or the last Adam: not because hee was the last of all men, (Iesus Christ hath been many years since in the flesh) but because he was to put an end to the state of all things; that there should be no new state, after the comming of Christ expected. Before Christ, there was the state of nature, of the law, of the separation of the Iewes and Gentiles; there were divers kinds and degrees: but now he is come, all the former states of nature, and the law, are no more to be recapitulated: and there is no difference be∣tween the Iew and the Gentile,Colos 3.11. bond and free, male and female, but all are one in Christ Iesus. Againe, Christ is called the last Adam, because he saith of himselfe,Revl. 1.8. that hee is Alpha and Omega: he is Alpha in respect of his Deity, and he is Omega in respect of his humanity: and hee is both Alpha and Omega, (both first and last) in regard that hee
is coequall, and coeternall with God the Father. For as he is God, he is Alpha, the beginning of all things created; he is the first borne of all creatures:Colos. 1.15. and as hee is Omega, he is the last conclusion, and end of the Alphabet: that there is no more state, no more sacrifice, no more law, no more new, to be expected in the world. But that which a Christian is to be∣take him to, he must have it in Christ, or not at all: and all other are deceived, that seeke for any other name than that:Acts 4 24. for there is no other name under hea∣ven whereby we may be saved. This is the first diffe∣rence in their order. The second,2. In respect of their places: earth & heaven. is in respect of the places from whence they were descended. The first man is from the earth, earthly: The second man is the Lord himself from heaven, heavenly. The places from whence they come, are earth and heaven: and there is no greater difference can be, in all the things in na∣ture. Wee cannot say that there is any thing more distant, than these two: nor any thing more contra∣ry, than these two: the one being the fountaine of light, the other being the receptacle of darknesse. The one being the spring of all actions, the other being a meerely passive, and dull substance. The one being the cause impressive, the other being the cause receptive. The one being the originall and ful∣nesse of every thing that is good; the other being participant, as much as it is capable of it. For so much as the supreame cause works upon it, so much it is prospered by it. The one being alway moving, and stirring, and whirling about; the other being restive, and not able to stirre out of its place. There is nothing more contrary than heaven and earth:
and such is the deduction of these two prime causes. But how was Adam earthly more then Christ? Christ had a body of the Virgin, and so he was of the bowels of the earth, as well as Adam? And how was Christ more heavenly and spirituall then Adam? had not he a soule, and spirit, as well as Christ? how can these things consist? For the first, you must understand, that the A∣postles meaning is, where hee saith that Adam was from the earth: that is as much as to say, his chiefe powers and abilities were still inclined to the earth: that he was fraile, that hee was made in a conditi∣on to goe back againe to the earth: that was his destiny: and hee had a law imposed upon him, to dig and delve the earth: and therefore he is said, to be of the earth. Not because hee had not a soule from heaven, for hee had a soule from heaven, as well as Christ had: but because he was drawne by his inferiour part, by his body, which was his earth∣ly part: because hee was drawne by that, from the contemplation of heavenly things, and had rather to take an apple with his wife, than to follow the justice and uprightnesse of God: because hee decli∣ned to the earth, and base things, and left the Crea∣tor for a poore creature: and because hee left the unchangeable good, for that which is changeable; therefore he is said to be unconstant, base, and earth∣ly: that is, a simple, poore, base creature: which made himselfe, according to his prime originall; and stu∣died, and gaped after the things of the earth, out of which he was extracted. He had, indeed, better things, if he would have used them: but he was so stupefied, and drawne back to his inferiour part,
that hee was made like unto his first materialls, the earth. But the other, was from heaven: not because he had not a body from the earth, but because to that body was added a glorious divinity: and that his body was not a person, as Adams was. For if the manhood of Christ had been a person, he must have beene lyable (as all persons that are borne) to con∣demnation: but his was not a person, but a nature united to the second person in the Trinity: so that although there be two natures in Christ; yet there is not two, but one person: and the actions that come from any man, they are the actions of his per∣son, of the subject; and not the actions of his nature. For it is a man that speaks, and a man that works; and not the body of a man that speaks, or the soule of man. So, therefore, it comes to passe, that the acti∣ons that come from Christ, they are the actions of his person; not of his humane nature, but of his person: and so they be the actions of God and man. That is, of that person in the Godhead, that took the manhood unto it: and so they are made the actions of an infinite merit, and possibility. Herein, then, is the difference: that although Adam had a soul as well as Christ; yet he had onely a living soule, that could enliven no body but him∣selfe: but the Lord had a Spirit, that is, the Deity it selfe; which is able to give life; which is the foun∣taine of life to all the world. And although Christ had a body from the earth; yet that body was not left unto frailty; but was governed, and sanctified, and glorified by the beatificall vision of God, and by the presence of the incorporate union of the Sonne
of God. So by this comes the difference between them: the one was a man, and nothing else but from the earth: the other was more then a man; God and man; and so he is the Lord from heaven. 3. In respect of their qualities.The third difference is in their quality and condi∣tion, which is noted in this word, hee was a Lord. Therefore Adam came not as a Lord, he came as a servant: he was to serve in all purposes: he came to till the garden, to till the earth: he came to eate, and drink, to beget children: to be the father of a family. Hee came into the world to increase and multiply, as God commanded him;Gen. 1.28. to replenish the earth. These although they be faire courses, and God gave a blessing unto them; yet they be carnall and flesh∣ly; there is no respect of excellencie in these things: they are matters rather of necessity for the present solace in this world, then of glory. But Christ came not for this purpose. He came not to eate and drink, but his meat and drink was to doe the will of his Fa∣ther.Iohn 4 34. He had no generation: all his generation, is a spirituall regeneration; he came to doe God service: these were the things he was exercised in. There∣fore he was the Lord from heaven. This is the high prerogative of Christ. There were many Angels that came from heaven, as well as Christ: but they came not as Lords, but as servants, as fellow ser∣vants,Rev. 22.9. as in Rev. 22. when Iohn would have wor∣shipped the Angel, See thou doe it not, (saith hee) I am thy fellow servant.Heb. 1.14. And in Heb. 1. they are mi∣nistring spirits, that serve for the salvation of those that are elect and chosen, for the inheritance. There∣fore they came not downe as Lords, but as ser∣vants. And although we reade in Scripture of those
that came downe as Lords: as in the apparition to Abraham, Gen. 18. he called the Angell, Lord.Gen. 18.3. And the Captaine of the Lords Army that appeared to Ioshua; though these came in the glory,Ioshuah 5.14. and might of the Lord; yet they were not that Lord, as here it is said, , the Lord that came from heaven. For that Lord, is but one Lord,Heb. 1.2. which is the Sonne of God: to whom the Father hath given the inheri∣tance of all things. Heb. 1.2. hee is the heyre of all things: and the Iewes themselves confesse, Come, let us kill him, this is the heyre,Mark 12.7. and the inheritance shall be ours. Hee, then, is the Lord from heaven. Adam came not as a Lord, nor yet from heaven; but one onely part of him, his soul, without any conjunction of the divine nature; there came a changeable soule into a fraile body: but Christ the Lord from heaven; that is, the Sonne of God, (as being Lord of hell and heaven) invested himself in a strange and wondrous manner, into the body and wombe of a Virgin, and tooke that masse and lump of blood, whereof his blessed body should be compacted; and united it to himselfe, and exercised the power of miracles, and of gracious wonders, and all parts of perfection in that nature: and therefore he hath exalted our nature, high above the Angels nature: for he took not up∣on him the nature of Angels,Heb. 2.16. but he took the seed of Abraham. Lastly, in their qualities they differ; that as the first man came from the earth, and is a servant; so he is earthly: There are two parts of man, as the Philosopher saith; there is the mind, and the under∣standing; that is, the subtile, and divine, and fiery part of man, whereby he is appropincate and drawes
neere unto God, in the similitude of his Image. There is another, and that is the grosse and materiall part,Chrysost. as St. Chrysostom expounds it; that this earthly man is one that is dull, and grosse, and nayled, and tyed to these things that are present: whereas the other,2 Cor. 4.18. is heavenly, and altogether upon the things that are not seene: for the things that are seene, are tempo∣rall, but them that are not seene, are eternall. So then, the one by his condition, was still looking down∣ward: the other was all spirit, and full of vigour, full of life; alway looking upward, still unto heaven: his conversation was also heavenly, having given all his followers power, to have their conversati∣ons there.Phil. 3.20. Phil. 3. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence wee looke for the Lord Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body. So this is the Comparison of these two heads: which (that I may conclude this point) wee must observe very strictly. For by that meanes, we may be both able to keep out all contrary here∣sies, and also to raise our selves to the imitation of our head, to be conformable to him. For this very Text of Scripture, that Christ came downe the Lord from heaven, hath given occasion to a great number of lying spirits, to conclude, that the Lord had no true naturall body, that he had no true flesh: but that he brought his body downe from heaven, and that hee passed as through a pipe, through the Virgin Mary. Because (say they) if Adam and Christ be opposed together, and that Adam brings his body from the earth; then Christ brings his from heaven. It fol∣lowes, therefore, that they are not one kind of body: and by consequent, there must be a kind of celestiall
body appointed for Christ; because it must be di∣rectly opposite to Adams. Now there is no consequence, or sense in this. For the Apostle opposeth not Christ unto Adam, in re∣gard of the substance of his flesh: but in respect of the difference of his qualities. The quality that Adam put upon his flesh, was death, and sicknesse, misery, and deformity; but Christ hath put upon it another kind of quality, another robe, another gar∣ment and vestment of immortality, of grace, and per∣fection, and beauty, and strength, and all kind of abili∣ties: another kind of quality. Therefore hee saith not another substance of flesh: for Christ came of Da∣vid, and David came of Adam; they were all one flesh: but because the one was the fountain of death, and the other the fountaine of life, they must needs work contrary effects. Therefore according to the effects that they work, the Apostle proceeds, that the one works to basenesse and misery; the other to glory, to excellency, to comfort and beauty. But these heretiques will pretend a great number of places of Scripture, and a great many arguments, whereby they doe (as the Apostle saith) deceive,2 Pet. 2 14. and draw aside unstable people, and make them at their wits end, when they are not able to resolve the places they alledge. As first, they say this, that the Lord Iesus did deny his Mother: therefore he had no true flesh. And they prove it out of St. Matthew 12. when hee was teaching the people, they came and told him, that his Mother and his brethren were without,Mat. 12.47, 48, 49. desiring to speak with him; and hee answers them, who is my mother? &c. therefore (say they) Christ de∣nies his mother.
This is false. Christ no where denyed his mother. But that place shewes, that he had more care of the businesse he had in hand; hee had more care of his Fathers commission: of the Kingdome, of the preach∣ing of the Gospell, of forgivenesse of sinnes, of curing diseases, and to doe the rest of the works of our re∣demption: therefore he must not neglect them, and be distracted from them, to goe to inferiour things: so that his mother must give way to those things: he doth not deny his mother, but onely prefers the pra∣ctice of the other things. Againe, they say, Christ cannot be adored if hee have true flesh: or else he can be but halfe adored: But now whole Christ must be adored, therefore he had no true flesh. For if we adore that which is flesh, it is a creature, and so it is idolatry: for whatsoever is given to the creature that way, is Idolatry. There∣fore Christs body was not created, but was a super coe∣lestiall thing, above the order of mankinde. It is true, the flesh of Christ was framed, and wrought above the order of mankinde: and yet so, as that still it was true flesh. And although wee ought to adore whole Christ, yet in the adoring of Christ we doe it to the person. Wee use not to dis∣joyne his natures, but wee adore that God, that was pleased to take upon him man: we adore that blessed person in the Trinity, that for our sake, and for our sal∣vation came downe from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost in the womb of Mary. It is that per∣son we adore. So that wee goe not about with the heretique Nestorius, to make a division of the na∣tures; but we adore whole Christ, God and man: not man alone, but God: not God alone, but man. Many
other shifts and sophismes they have, but these are the chiefest: and indeed they are scarce worth re∣peating: but we must labour to furnish our selves, because we know not what kinde of miscreant here∣sies are like to grow, now in the latter end of the world. Now the conformity follows, in these words,3. Part. The conformity. As the earthly is, so are they that are earthly: and as is the heavenly, so are they that are heavenly. It must needs be, that as the principles are, so the things that are made, and framed of them, must be. All things in nature, are a resemblance of their ori∣ginall: and it cannot possibly be, that they should much swerve from them. For every effect, is in his cause: a thing can draw no other inclination, then that that is drawne from its cause. Therefore as the earthly man is, so must the earthly be. As Adam, (for I will not meddle with other interpretations of the Fathers, because they are not pertinent to this place) therefore, ruleth all in this present life; hee makes all his followers earthly, and mortall: so Christ rules all in the blessed life to come, and makes all things contrary: that is, immortall and glorious, and powerfull. For in Adam, all the world is ruled ac∣cording to the censure of God upon sinne, as God doomed sinne; Earth thou art,Gen. 3.19. and to earth thou shalt returne, (which was the sentence upon Adam, and upon all his posterity.) So we see daily, this sentence fulfilled upon us, and upon ours, upon all our proge∣nitors and successors. It failes upon none: and those that shall be changed at the latter day, it shall be un∣to them as a kind of death: for dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt returne: it is the common voice of
God upon nature. Therefore in this life, wee must looke to be as Adam was; to have no other inheri∣tance then hee hath left us. In the life which is to come, wee shall have an inheritance from the Lord of heaven. It is true, by the grace of the Gospell, and by the faith we have in Christ Iesus, we have some∣thing more then Adam gave unto us; but of that we are not put into possession, to inherit, untill the Lord shall appeare from heaven. For when Christ our life shall appeare, then wee also shall appeare with him in glorie. Colos. 3.4.Colos. 3.4. As is the earthly, so are they that are earthly. Not in respect of their manners, (as some of the Fathers by way of digression have no∣ted upon this place: and St. Chrysostom assents unto it, and St. Augustine also yeelds to it,) but to insist upon the strict tearmes: for we can goe no further, nor we cannot make any better sense of it, that wee are like Adam, in all things in this life. In our birth. In our life. In our inclination. In our declination. In our death. In our grave and sepulchre. In all things wee are like our first parent Adam, which is the father of our nature, as Christ is the father of our state in grace. Therefore, as at the first wee are made by the hand of God as Adam was; wee are made out of a base matter as he was: the Lord made him out of the red earth:Psal. 119.73. so saith David, thy hands have made me and fashioned me: out of such a kind of substance, are we made.
We are like him in our beginning. Adam was  left to a kind of free-will, to goe this way of that way. Which free-will hee had entire, and might have kept it, if he would. In our infancie wee are partly left that way: but custome and corruption lead us another way, for wee are forestalled by inbred corruption, (by sinne) and we are mis-led by the cor∣rupt customes in the world; so that children are cor∣rupted, before they be sensible. Otherwise, children have that in them above men, that they may say, This course I will take, and this course I will not take. For when a man takes a course to be vicious, and to fall into sinne, he cannot be so free, as he that hath a pure mind, which is like unto a white paper, where∣in there is nothing written. For they that fall into evill, they set such blots upon them, that cannot be gotten out without the bloud of Christ. And indeed in the fairest paper, (in the minds of children) there is that corruption, that the bloud of Christ must wash it out: even that originall sinne, though they be free from actuall. Therefore in this, wee are like unto Adam, mutable and changeable. Nay our condition is worse than his; for he had a power not to sin, and we have no power, but to sinne, as long as wee live in this flesh. Thirdly, in the inclination of our mind. As Adam  grew, hee had an inclination to eate and to drink; a necessity of increasing in the world; of steep, and work, and the like: so in these things wee grow, and many men are so set upon these worldly things, that they commonly faile God, and their soules, in other things. And for our declining age, we are like unto him.
Although hee lived in strength a long time, yet at last hee failed of his strength, and of his wit, and at length came to be turned to dust, to nothing. So it is with us: as is the earthly, so are they that are earth∣ly: we must follow his condition; wee cannot avoid it: we must be like unto him. Lastly, as Adam died, and went to his grave from which he was taken: earth to earth, dust to dust. and rotted in the earth, and there he lyeth now, and hath lyen for the space of almost 5000. years in the dust: so the Lord will bring our bodies by the com∣mon sentence which hee hath pronounced against our sins, and the sin of Adam; he will bring them to the same state. For as is the earthly, so are they that are earthly. In their birth, in their life, in their incli∣nation, in their death, in their grave, and in all the parts and passages of this mortall race, they are all alike, each to other. But the Lord, who is to give a new life of grace which begins here, and shall be completed in the life of glory which shall be manifested hereafter, he shall conforme his members unto him, more then Adam doth his. For if we be miserable, because of the first Adam, much more shall we be glorious, be∣cause of Christ, the second Adam. And if a weak cause be able to conforme his members unto him; a stronger cause shall be much more able. Therefore as the misery of man is derived from Adam to his posterity; so the glory and majesty of God shall be de∣rived, and exhibited, and set forth, and fulfilled from Christ, as from a root and fountaine, to all those that follow. For from his fulnesse we have all received, even grace for grace.Iohn 1 16. Therefore he saith, those that
are spirituall, shall be such as he that is spirituall: as Christ is now in his glorious body. For this must be taken of the glorified body of Christ, and not of his mortall body. For he had a mortall body, in which he died: but when it was raised againe, it was a glori∣fied body. And as it was in the Resurrection of Christ, so in the common Resurrection we shall be like unto him, by the power of Christ, that worketh all in all. And if Adam could convey unto us an inheritance of misery, and weaknesse, and declining; much more shall the Lord convey a stronger inheritance of glory and beauty, and of all that wee can desire, and that can fill the heart of man: all which the word of God hath made a promise and tender of. Therefore (as the Apostle saith) comfort your selves in these words:1 Thes 4.18. even in observing the order that God would have: and be content that your na∣turalls may passe away, that your spirituals may suc∣ceed. For we must of necessity be borne, before we can be borne anew of water, and of the holy Ghost. We must be borne first, of the will of flesh and bloud; wee must be borne after, againe, by the sacred laver of re∣generation, not of the will of flesh and bloud,Iohn 1.13. but of the spirit, by the word of God, and by faith in Christ Iesus. And as St. Austin saith, we could not die,Aug. except wee had been the members of Adam: nor wee could not rise againe, except wee were the members of Christ. But these things be so ordained by God, that wee cannot looke for the one, except we be content to taste of the other. The Lord made not the Angels and us, in one condition: they were made in their full perfection at the first; therefore some of them fell from that to be devils: some of
them continuing by the grace of God, and are con∣firmed for ever. But man was not so made, but as a scholler, to come by divers degrees; to grow for∣ward, from rudiments and principles, unto further perfection, that the glory of God might be seen in his successe and course, in his bringing on, and production, that he appointed for man. Therefore wee ought to be contented with the ordinance of God; to rejoyce in it, and to be willing to suffer the cup which God hath put into our hands: even the cup of death, when the Lord shall call for us. And wee ought also to arme our selves with this exceeding comfort, that this is the onely passage and way which God hath made, for that glo∣rious state hereafter. For if there be naturall, there shall be spirituall: and if there be no nature, there shall be no spirit. Therefore this misery and weaknesse, is as it were a doore, and a way unto great∣nesse, and strength, and ability. This is that which the blessed Apostle saith, 2 Cor. 11.2 Cor. 11: When I am weak, then am I strong. A strange contradiction: but his meaning is, that the Lord doth so season our weaknesse and infirmity in this life, that it is an infallible testimony and fore∣runner of that great strength and glory, that shall be revealed in the life to come. The Lord useth to work thus, out of weak causes, to bring more strong effects. And if the causes were strong, God would not use them. For out of weake, and base, and contemptible things: God brings strong and noble effects. As when Gedeon was to fight with the Midianites, and he pretended that his Army was but a few:Judges 7. How many hast thou? saith the Lord;
so many thousand. They are too many, the Lord would not have them all: there were too many; and hee commanded to cut them off to another halfe, and yet there were too many: the Lord would not work with them, they were too strong. At last, hee comes to make choice of them by lapping in the water, and they came to 300. men to fight against as many as the sands on the sea, that covered the earth, as gras-hoppers, as it is said. And now the Lord begins to work with these men; and how doth he work? by weapons? No; but with a few broken pitchers in their hands: and the Lord set the Madi∣anites one upon the neck of his fellow, that they were murtherers each of other, and became as sheepe for the slaughter: the Lord gave them as a prey into their hands. This is the wondrous act of the great God, which is not tyed to meanes; which will not seem to worke with second common causes, but with his owne arme. It is true, these common second causes in the world, hee hath honoured them much, and com∣manded them to be used; but when he comes to effect great things, (such as was the destruction of the Madianites, (such as is the redemption of man by Christ, and such as shall be the Redemption of of our bodies at the Resurrection) then such meanes and causes as seeme to help him forward, hee re∣jects them; and works not by them, but by the cleane contrary. The greater stench the bodies have sustained in the grave; shall worke it unto greater sweetnesse; and the greater weaknesse it had, the greater strength shall accrew unto it;
and wondrous puissance shall God worke unto that part which lacked honour, according to his blessed dispensation in all things. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.49, 50. And as wee have borne the Image of the earthly, so we shall beare also the Image of the heavenly. And this I say (brethren) that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdome of God: neither corruption, can inherit incorruption. TO hope for the time to come, and to have now present possession; is one of the greatest differen∣ces in humane affairs to be ob∣served, saith Chrysologus.Chrysologus. The one is the portion of this life; sperare, to hope in God for the things that are promised: the other, is in that blessed life to come; to have and to hold, and to enjoy the promises which the Apostle as∣sures us of in this place, that we shall have as sure, as we have had the first fruits, and the earnest; so sure we are to enter into the full possession; and to have the performance, of the which God hath made
a tender of, and promised unto us before. The words of the Text, contain that great conso∣lation, which is the onely comfort, and sweetnesse of our life. The Saints of God, are burthened with the image of the earthly man: they are in continu∣all suffering; they endure the plague of Adam, which is sinne every day, and every houre: and there is none that comes of Adams blood, but he is (as it were) borne to death, to misery, and to slavery; which are the proper consequents of sinne. Now the redemption that comes by Christ, it is not yet apparent; it is but yet begunne, it is by faith, it is in hope, it is in spe, but not in Re: and this is the cause of the Saints mourning upon earth. There∣fore to this the Apostle answers; and bids them be content and satisfie themselves; for that which they have not now, they shall have hereafter: therefore they must stay the Lords leysure, and all shall bee for the best. And although hee stay long, yet hee will come full, and make an abundant re∣compence for his delatory absence, with the great∣nesse of those rewards, and precious things that hee brings with him: For, (saith the Apostle) As we have borne the image of the earthly, & as we groane under the burthen of Adam; so we are assured, that we shall beare the image of the heavenly; in the ful∣nesse of joy, in the fulnesse of rest, and holinesse, in the fulnesse of all strength, and perfection, and immortality, and incorruption. And therefore his purpose is, to quiet and content the distressed soules here, in this world, that groane under their misery, with the expectation of that glory, that shall bee revealed.
There is some difficulty in the words: as, what it is that he saith of an image, the image of the earthly, and the image of the heavenly; What it is he speaks of flesh and blood. For the first, we must understand, that he meanes not a vaine shew, a picture, or representation: but the thing it selfe. For we have not the figure, and proportion of Adam alone; but we have all his mi∣sery, and all his sinne: his sinne comes unto us by tradition, it is an inheritance which wee cannot shake off. It is a kinde of portion he hath given us, that we cannot be rid of. So that it is not an image, as we take it in the common sense, for a picture, or an imaginary matter: but a reall substantiall im∣pression, by reason of his sinne, and his breaking of the command. There lies a burthen, a heavy load of plague and misery, upon our whole nature. And so likewise for the other, the image of the heavenly. We are not to imagine it to be any out∣ward light resemblance, but a true, reall conformity to him, whose image we shall beare. We shall be like unto Christ, not in a sleight, transitory fashion, but in a true, and reall change. And that that hee saith of flesh and blood, that they shall not inherit the kingdome of God: we must understand it thus. Not as a thing impossible for God to doe: for flesh and blood doth inherite Gods kingdome. Christ is flesh and blood, and hee is in the kingdome of God. Yea Divines have thought, that the bodies of Enoch, and Elias (that are flesh and blood) are already in the kingdome of God: as those also that arose up with Christ; of which there were diverse that arose to testifie his Resur∣rection.
And Divines think generally, that the bo∣dies of these ascended with Christ into heaven. Now these are flesh and blood, and yet they bee in Gods kingdome. The meaning therefore is not, as though God could not open the kingdome of hea∣ven to flesh and blood; but not to flesh, and blood corrupted with sinne. As long as we are in this life, our flesh is full of sinne; and our blood in the veines of the body, runne with sinne, and as long as they bee so, they bee meere matter of corruption, and therefore they cannot enter into incorruption. Howbeit, Adam in his first creation, was flesh and blood; and yet had hee stood in the state of grace and innocencie, he had entred into heaven, with his body of flesh and blood. So that the meaning is not, as though God could not conferre so great a bene∣fit upon flesh and blood, but because it hath corrupted it selfe. Flesh hath corrupted his owne way, and blood is tainted with sinne, it is tainted, defiled, and polluted blood; it is not such as God made it, but it hath received a tincture from the Divell. In regard of this, it must be dissolved, and brought to rotten∣nesse and corruption, that God may raise it a new seed; and so make it pure, and perfect againe, and make it capable of the heavenly, and blessed inheri∣tance. So that the summe of the words is this: As long as wee be flesh and blood, as long as wee bee in this life (sinfull flesh that we carry about with us) wee must not looke to be translated into heaven. Adam should have been translated into heaven, if hee had lived; and kept that state wherein hee was made Wee desire indeed to bee like him in that; but our
desires, and our hopes must be grounded upon Gods will, & not on our own fancies: and we must expect what the Lords will hath determined. He hath de∣termined, that wee should come to death, before we enter into life: that we should beare the image of the earthly, before we come to the image of the heavenly, and wee cannot have incorruption and glory, poured upon this body that wee carry about with us, by reason of sinne: because it is in sinne. For sinfull flesh and blood, cannot inherit the king∣dome of God. And although when Christ shall come, there shall bee alive many millions of men, that shall not die, as we doe: yet they shall have a change, and there change shall be unto them as death is unto us now. For it is not possible, that any cor∣rupt body should enter into incorruption. This I take to bee the summe and sense of the words read. Now to proceed in order, we are to consider, First the persons; that he saith, as we have borne. Then secondly the matter propounded, of those persons. First, there is a sentence, or proposall.Division into, 1. the Persons. 2. the Matter propounded. Secondly, the explanation of that proposall. The proposall that is made of these persons, is by way of comparison: as wee have borne the image of the earthly, so also wee shall beare the image of the heavenly. The explanation of it, what hee meanes by this image. The Corinthians might aske, and say they doubted of his words: these are obscure things, that the Text saith, The image of the earthly, and the image of the heavenly. My meaning (saith hee) is nothing but this: that flesh and blood cannot inhe∣rit
the Eingdome of God, nor corruption cannot inhe∣rit incorruption: So in the proposall or proposition in the 49. verse, we are to consider these things. First, that God made man to an Image. Secondly, that that Image being defaced and de∣formed, wee are made to another kinde of Image, than we were first intended: for we are made to the image of the earthly. Thirdly, we are to observe the reddition: that as we beare the image of the earthly, so we shall also beare the image of the heavenly. Fourthly, the certainty in the sicut, so, as: accor∣ding to that manner. And this makes us assured of the thing, that this is a ground experimentall: that because wee have the image of the one, therefore wee are assured of the image of the other. For still we are made to an image, that is, for the proposall. In the explanation in the words following, bre∣thren I say unto you, or my meaning is this: Wherein the holy Ghost teacheth us, to speak plainly; and not to wander away in new quaint words, in obscure sentences; but to make the doctrines cleare, that wee take in hand. And then for flesh and bloud, that they are not ca∣pable of heavens kingdome: and for what reason they are not capable. And lastly, the summe of all: corruption, (which is flesh and bloud) cannot enter into incorruption, which is the Kingdome of heaven. For that which he call flesh and bloud in one place, hee renders it againe in another place, by corruption: and that which he called the kingdome of heaven in the for∣mer words, he turnes it in the latter words, incor∣ruption.
So that the Apostles perspicuity and evi∣dence is wondrously to be admired in this place: hee labours to speak of a high matter, a deep profound matter of dignity, so plainly to flesh and bloud. Hee saith, flesh and bloud shall not enter into the Kingdome of God: Not because it is flesh and bloud, but because it is corrupted: and there shall not enter any thing that is corrupt into incorruption, because they are contraries; and one contrarie cannot enter into ano∣ther. It is impossible for a man to be alive, and dead, to be sick and well at one time: there is no difference in the world greater, then the difference of corrup∣tion and incorruption: and because flesh and bloud is corrupted for sinne, it is full of misery and wretched∣nesse by sinne: and the Kingdome of heaven is an un∣corruptible crowne: it is impossible that these should be coincident, and meet and be mingled together. Therefore corruption must be evacuated and rooted out, before incorruption can be attained. Of these things briefly and in order, as God shall give assi∣stance. And first concerning the persons,1. Part. The persons, of whom these things are pro∣pounded. of whom these things are pronounced. It is of Gods Saints. For as I have often told you, this whole Chapter is spoken of, and endited, concerning the Resurrection of the Saints onely. There is (indeed) a resurrection of those that belong not to God, which is a resurrecti∣on to punishment and shame: but the Apostle med∣dles not with that, in this whole Chapter; but speaks only of the Saints resurrection; and he saith, We that have borne the image of the earthly, wee shall also beare the image of the heavenly. We, that is, those that are called of Christ, and sanctified by his holy
Spirit, to these it is, to whom this promise apper∣taines. For every man beares the image of the earth∣ly, good and bad; but every man shall not beare the image of the heavenly, but onely those, for whom it is ordained. The nature of man is not capable of heaven; for if mans nature were capable of heaven, then all men should have it; because all men have the nature of man indefinitely, and equally; but it is the speciall favour of God, that sanctifieth some chosen vessels, and brings them to the knowledge of his grace in Iesus Christ, and gives them an earnest hungring and thirsting after grace. This makes the difference between man and man: so that it belongs still to the Wee: that is, to those that are called and in∣corporated into the body of Christ; to these it is, that these great things belong. Therefore it teacheth us (by the way onely to observe no more of it) to labour to be of this holy company: to be of these that the Apostle takes in the Wee. For to be out of that society, is to be out of all comfort, out of all hope, of all joy. There is none that God intends these goodly things for, (the bearing of the stately image and glory of Christ,) but for those that are in Christ: for those that are baptized into his holy name, for those that seek to resemble him in a holy life, and conversation. As we have borne the image of the earthly. The next thing to be considered is this, that hee speakes of an Image; and first that we are all borne unto an Image. The great God would not make man absolute of himselfe, as having reference to none: but he made him to an image, having respect and relation to a superiour, to a better than himselfe. For
as for himselfe, hee was made fraile and mutable, he was made indifferently inclined to this or that: and unlesse he were susteyned by a superiour power, he was not like to have any continuance in that estate wherein he was made. And therefore God of his great goodnesse made him to an Image: to teach him,  that hee must live dependently; that hee must live according to the image of some superiour, and better thing than him∣selfe: to teach him, that hee is not absolute in his owne power, and gift, to follow his owne will, (for as long as he followeth that, perhaps he followeth the way to the destruction of his owne soule,) but still he must have dependence and reference to the will of a higher commander, the will of him that is above him. It is an argument of mans unsufficiency,  that hee must be made to an image; that he must have a pat∣terne to follow; that hee must not guide himselfe, but live according to the Image and similitude of him that made him; that hee may thereby assure himself of that life, and blessing, and favour, that for∣merly he obtained in the Creation. And what image is this? Surely the best that could be: for when God had thought upon all the images and similitudes in the world, that could be devised, hee made man after the most glorious and perfect image that could be: even the image of himselfe. The Image of God (saith PhiloPhilo.) is a kinde of governing power, to be able to rule and governe, both themselves & others. And to this image was man made, when the Lord said, Let us make man according to our image, and let
him rule. So the ruling power is the proper act and tearme of Gods image: that hee made man able to governe that little body, that little world he carryeth about him; and to governe all the creatures that be∣long unto him. And this Image remaines still, al∣though it be so mightily defaced, and broken in the Saints of God, that they can govern and rule their af∣fections, that they can govern their exorbitant pas∣sions, they can govern their families, governe their children, their friends, and those that belong unto them. A man is knowne by nothing so much to beare Gods Image, as in being a good Governour: to governe in the way of truth, in the light of life: to governe by his good example. This is the true, and perfect Image of the high God. But why are we said to be made after the Image of the earthly man, if we be made according to Gods Image? God is not earthly? and how come we to be made after Adams Image? Adam was made after Gods Image: and wee by the fall of Adam, are made into Adams image. But when he had defaced that power of government, and became a slave to his own desires, (to choose a base, and petty good, in respect of the fountaine of all good, to harken to the devill, and the woman, and to give a deafe eare unto God; when Adam (I say) had thus deformed that prime light, and image, and beauty, that was in him. Now he came to be a forlorne creature, unknowne (almost) unto his Maker; un∣knowne to himselfe, to be (as it were) a dramme of misery, not able to doe that which he was borne to; not able to governe any thing; unable to governe himselfe; but all his passions did altogether exceed
reason. Hee was not able to governe others; but ei∣ther he was too cruell, or too gentle; either he was too fierce and violent in prosecuting vertue, or else too mild and foolish, in sparing of all vice what∣soever. This was the Image that was deformed in Adam; and to this image we are all borne: hee having lost it, we lost it also in him. We were made rulers, es∣pecially of our selves: but now through the fall, we cannot governe so much as that which is within us. Our anger over-tops, and confounds us; our fear amazeth, and astonisheth us; our desires burne, and inflame, and kindle us; our appetites, and whatsoe∣ver is in us, puts us out of order: there is no peere or regiment in the whole house of man, till the grace of God make some compositions and when the grace of God is come in, the disorder continues still. As long as we live in this world, we beare the image of the earthly: that is, of the earthly Adam: which having once lost the fulnesse of Gods Image, he left unto us the base, and deformed image, which he himself had contracted. Those faire lives of divine perfection, were obli∣terate and blinded in him: so that no man could see the proportion of it. And although there be some kind of lineaments, and proportion, that a man might see God in some things; yet they were so obscured and blundered over, as that a man could not discern the Maker: onely some few steps there were in the understanding; a little in the will, and least in the affections; and a poore remainder in his actions. These, indeed, God of his great mercy, tooke not ut∣terly away from Adam; but left some kinde of
reliques in him. But all these cannot help us, but that still we are earthly. For although wee beare some image of God still, (as the wickedest man in the world hath the image of God one way or ano∣ther) yet it is so miserably deformed, that a man cannot know it to be the Image of God; for he shall see such a counter-poyson of the image of the devill, of vice and vanity, and miserable deceit, and delusion; he shall see such a mingling and mixture, such a de∣formity brought upon the image of God, and such contrary colours painted upon it, as wee see in the picture that is rased, sometime there will be an arme or a finger left plaine, and all the rest of the picture, defaced: some part of it remaines, but by that a man knowes not what it is. So the Image of God (that glorious picture of beauty) was altogether soyled, and over-rased, put out, and besmeared by mans sins and transgressions: yet the Lord hath left some sparkes, and some lineaments, as a finger or an arme remaines. This, now, is called the image of the earthly. And though there be some Image of God which is heavenly; yet it is so defaced, that it is cal∣led the image of the earthly. Now wherein stands this Image? You know by experience wherein it is; even in all the parts and passages of this miserable life. So St. Austin saith,Aug. Wee beare the image of the earthly, in being borne into this earth, in the miseries of the world, in the corruptions of our life, in the labouring for our meat and drink, that wee have in our hun∣gring and thirsting; in the necessities of eating and drinking; in being subject to sicknesse, in our decli∣ning & withering away; and in our dying at length,
and our rotting after we are dead. In these things wee beare the image of our Father; and the fairest son and daughter of Adam must needs confesse thus much, that either they are or shall be drowned in basenesse. An ugly physiognomie! and yet it is that which Adam hath engraven upon our sinfull na∣ture. But blessed be God, that saith wee shall have another image. For as he teacheth us to groane, and to be wearie of this, as being a reward, and punish∣ment of sinne; so hee hath given us a lively faith, and hope, that we shall attaine unto another image, that shall rectifie all this, and shall bring upon us a face that shall never decay: not as the face of Adam, that goes and declines from age to age, from sicknes to sicknesse, but the face of Christ, that shall continue one, and the same for ever. The Image, therefore, of the heavenly, must be in a contrary quality. For if the one were in a poore naturall birth, the other is in regeneration: if the one wer weaknesse and infirmitie, the other was in strength, and power of miracles, and high supernatu∣rall abilities: if the one was in sicknesse, the other was in health: if the one was in death, the other was in eternall life: if the one were in corruption and rot∣tennesse, the other was in sweetnesse and fragrancie. This is the Image of the heavenly. And these Ima∣ges (as I said) are not vaine imaginarie pictures, but reall impressions: things that are truely seated in us; and so seated, as never after to be defaced, and re∣moved. The Image of God, it was once changeable; for it was set upon Adam, and it was removed: the Lord
began to set it againe, and to imprint it on Iesus Christ: and thence it was never removed, nor never shall be from his followers, on whom he shall set it. As the Law that was written by Moses, was written in two Tables, twice over. First the Lord gave one Table of stone, which Moses when hee came from the Mount, cast downe in his anger, and broke them: so the Lord tooke the second Table, and wrote upon it the same words, and those stood stedfast and were never altered, nor broken and defaced. So also it is with these two Adams. For the first was made fraile and feeble; and the image of God, and the command that was written in his heart, was bro∣ken in pieces upon the peoples idolatry, upon his owne transgression. But when the Lord renewed his image upon man againe, (which was done in the person of Christ Iesus) that was the second writing of the Table: and when he had written the second time, then God would write no more. For there the glory, and vertue, and power of the Com∣mander, stands for ever: and the beauty, and vigor of that face, is subject to no fading; but it brings it selfe, and all that loue it, to perfection. 4. The cer∣tainty.The next thing to be considered is the certainty of this: for this (indeed) is improbable; and to flesh, and blood impossible: even for a man to say, because he hath been earthly, therefore he shall be heavenly. A man may rather say, because I have beene earthly, therefore I shall not bee heavenly. Yes (saith the Apostle) sicut, As wee have borne the one, so we shall beare the other: As we have borne the image of the earthly, so also wee shall beare the image of the heavenly. This is the wondrous
arguing, which the Spirit of God teacheth us: even to hope against hope, and to reason against reason. For it utterly non-plusseth all reason, to say an earthly thing shall become heavenly: that it shall change the nature. It is impossible to make gold of dirt: yet God can doe it: and hee gives us that assurance; that as sure as wee are borne to the image of the earthly, as sure experience as we have of that, so sure we shall have the image of the heavenly: the one is an ar∣gument and a signe, and a previall disposition to the other. That wee all beare the image of the earthly; every man, in his continuall groaning, and clamour, testifies to God, to himselfe, and to the world. There is no man that lives, without his burthen: and God knowes our burthen, how it is in continuall misery and perplexity, and such kinde of defections, that if God did not sustaine us, a thousand deaths would overtake us, instead of one. And therefore this experience of misery, which wee have by Adam, is a sure signe and token, that God will advance us to the glory of the second Adam. For these two, are dependent each upon other: A man is borne into this world, to be borne againe in a better world: a man dies here, that he may live hereafter: a man is mi∣serable here, that he may be glorious hereafter: hee is a sinner here, that hee may be holy, and righteous hereafter: the things here, are seales and tokens of a blessed and better inheritance. Therefore the Apo∣stle saith, sicut: as sure as we have the one, so sure∣ly we shall have the other. It is a semblance, it is a true and certaine figure and assurance, that as wee carry the badge of Adams mortall flesh, so we shall carry the stamp and image of Christ, in flesh mortall,
and uncorrupt. This is the wondrous wisedome of God, which passeth all the understanding of man: to teach still by contraries. As in that sweet exam∣ple,Iohn 11. Ioh. 11. of Lazarus. God would not work, but by a cleane contradiction. Lazarus was sick; they sent to Christ. Lord he whom thou lovest is sick. The Lord heard it; Let him be sick, let him die too, he stayes the longer, he comes not to him. The next newes was brought, Lazarus was dead. The Lord prevents the newes, and saith, Lazarus our friend sleepeth. He comes unto the house; when hee was come there, hee teacheth and converseth with the people: hee goes not about his work upon the sud∣den. The newes comes, he is dead and buried. Let him lie in his grave a long time, that the glory of God may the more appeare. Let him lie the first, second, and third day; and the Lord comes not. Upon the fourth day, when all men gave him for stinking and desperate, and that there was no hope of any good to bee done upon him: then the Lord comes to work. When Martha his sister, had given over all hope, and told Christ shee knew that hee should rise againe at the resurrection: but for any o∣ther rising, she never dreamed of, or imagined that. Well then! when all things seemed to be senslesse and against reason, and possibility, then the power of God began to work. And because Lazarus was so strongly held by death foure dayes, therefore the stronger was the hand of God upon him, in raysing him from death. That the strength of death might be encountred, and overcome, and countermanded by the higher strength and arme of the Almighty; it now gave way, and made a passage to the arme of
the Lord, to work a mighty deliverance. So still the misery of the child of God, works for good: and all things work for the best to those that love God.Rom. 8.28. Therefore, as we have borne the image of the earth∣ly, so we shall beare the image of the heavenly. This is a great incouragement to us to beare.  Wee are impatient, we cannot endure any thing: but we see that wee must beare, and if wee looke for the image of the heavenly; we must be content to beare the image of the earthly. We must be content to be sick, we must be content to be poore, to be persecu∣ted, to be every way miserable, and wretched. We must be content to be tempted, by the tempting de∣vill, and oft times to be foiled by him; and to bee overcome in sinne, and shamefull actions, and courses. We must be content with the Christian agony, and the bloody sweat that Christ had in the garden at his passion. We must beare these things, it is the image of the earthly: It is the condition of the other life, the bearing of the heavenly. And except wee have the one, we cannot have the other: except we beare the image of the earthly, we shall not beare the image of the heavenly. But here it may be objected, that Infants have not this image. Yes, reason tells us they doe. For in their death, in their sicknesse, in their distractions, and strange convulsions, (to which they are subject) they beare the image of the earthly, although not in so great a measure as men of groweth doe; yet they have for their tender yeares, a fearefull yoake laid upon them; which is mortality, and all the wayes that tend to death. To conclude this first point, the pro∣position.
Let us mingle the one with the other; and beare both. If thou bee troubled in this world, (in any sort) inwardly, or outwardly: If thou be troubled in conscience for sinne; if thou bee troubled with enemies: art thou troubled in thy fortunes, in thy state in the world? art thou troubled with sicknesse of body? remember it is nothing but thine owne image. Thus thou art made, wilt thou deny thine owne face? wilt thou deny thy owne name? wilt thou not take that which thou art borne unto? art thou ashamed of thine inheritance? it is that which thy Father hath left thee: therefore beare it. And withall to comfort thy selfe, beare it with this hope and lively assurance; that thou shalt beare a better image one day. The galley-slaves, that serve the Turks in their galleys; if they could but think, that at seven yeares end, some Christian would come and deliver them; they would be the better affected, and would cheare their mindes, especially if they could be assured of it. If Iacob serve the churle La∣ban seven yeares;Gen. 29. if he think he shall have Rachell at the end of it, hee thinks it but like unto seven dayes, and with patience he comforts himselfe in the Lord, and staies his leisure, and is content that God shall use him unto his hand, as it pleaseth him. This is the true constitution of a pure mind: there∣fore let us sweeten these outward worldly miseries, with the expectation of future joy, and the promi∣ses which God hath made to us in his holy Word. There is no griefe so great, but if wee tie heaven unto the end of it, it is light. As the Apostle saith, This short moment any affliction,Rom. 8.18. is not worthy of the glory that shall bee revealed. Let us put them toge∣ther,
and the one will bee swallowed up in the o∣ther. For as we have borne the image of the earthly; so shall wee beare the image of the heavenly. Oh! when shall that blessed day appeare? So must the Christian man aspire, and hunger, and thirst after the righteousnesse of God, and after his blessed kingdome. Wee mourne (saith the Apostle) as long as we are from Christ, in this body, we would faine see the consummation of the promise. Why, then, there is no meanes but one: that is, by inces∣sant prayer, by continuall clamours to call upon God, to crie unto him for it. The cries and clamours of Gods Saints, must bring Christ from heaven, againe unto earth, to make up the fulnesse of the promise, which he hath condescēded unto in his holy Word. This must be the use we must make of this doctrine. That as wee are patiently to endure, the image of the earthly man, (to endure the misery that sinne hath contracted, and brought upon us) that we al∣so be faithfull, and hopefull to cry, and to call unto God, for the sweet things that are reposed and laid up for us in the glory of the Gospel. So much for the Proposition. Now for the explanation in verse 50.Verse 50. This I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inhe∣rit the kingdome of heaven: neither can corrup∣tion, inherit incorruption. In these words, the Apostle doth prevent those questionings, and objections that simple men might make, against this doctrine. They might say, that he taught in the cloudes; that hee spake so, as that they knew not what hee meant. What doe you meane by the image of the earthly, and the image
of the heavenly? we have heard of no such words, we know no such matter. For this the Apostle tells them, that hee speaks out of the phrase of Scripture, hee speaks it out of Genesis. For hee had said before, that Adam was made a living soule; and that Christ was made a quickening spirit: and so following the course of the creation, he saith there was an image which at the first was heavenly, but it was defaced by mans fault, and so it became earthly, and by consequence, all of Adams blood, were like their progenitor, they all tooke part of the inheritance, (although it were against their will) and they bore the image of the earthly. Now because the Corinthians, and other Readers might perhaps not understand this, (for it is not every mans part to understand the Scripture to the full) the Apostle explaines it; Brethren, I tell you what I say, flesh and blood, corrupted by sinne, cannot inherit the Kingdome of God. When it is cleansed, and purified, it shall; but in this con∣dition of corruption, it is not capable of that incor∣ruption. So that the first thing we are to note here, is the diligence of the Apostle; in the clearing of his do∣ctrine, in the opening of his mind, This I say, bre∣thren, As if he should say, If you understand not what I say, I will expresse my selfe in clearer, and fairer termes. This commends unto us, a memorable and graci∣ous act of Christian charity; still to open it selfe, and to doe as much good by way of expression, and ex∣planation as possible may bee. It is not for a man that is in St. Pauls place, to speake in high termes;
in such phrases, as passe the understanding of the people: but if they chance to doe it, (or be carried away in some high straines of language) they must descend againe, as the Angels ascended, and descen∣ded upon the ladder of Iacob. If they doe ascend to high thoughts and discourses of Divinity, they must descend againe, to meaner speeches: to those phrases, and termes that the people may be capable of. For preaching and teaching, was made for a certaine commutation of mindes, for the changing of mindes. For by teaching, the scholler is made the Master; and he puts upon himselfe the nature and person, of the Master. As one said of another mans booke that he read; hee said hee was become the man himselfe, whose booke he had read. Therefore as (St. Austin saith) all learning is nothing,Aug. but a mingling and mixing of soules and spirits together. It is needfull, and necessary for him that teacheth, to speake so, as that hee may bee understood. For to what end is speech, if it be not perceived? If I be not understood, when I have said all that I can, I have said nothing. If I be understood, when I have said little, I have said sufficient; because another man knowes that which I know; and another is transformed into that which is inherent in me. The Philosophers compare a teacher, and a master to the parents of a childe; and the scholler they liken to the child. As the child beares the image of his father, so the scholler beares the image of his Master much more. It is much more lively in Art, then in nature it can be expressed. Therefore this holy Apostle St. Paul,Gal. 4.19. hee intends to bring foorth children to Christ. My little children of whom I travaile againe,
till Christ be formed in you. He useth that plainnesse of speech, and evidence of language, that thereby he may flow into their hearts and senses and affecti∣ons: that hee may accommodate them to his intelli∣gence; and that he may doe it the better, hee useth this word here, Brethren. This I say brethren. As if he would carry them along, & shew them the thing with his finger, in a familiar sweet spea∣king: not as a high Commander to his Souldiers; nor as a great Prince to his Subjects; nor as the great God to Israell, when he gave the Law, that they could not indure the voice, but said, Let not the Lord speak any more, but Moses, lest we die: But he speaks in the spirit of meeknesse and mildnesse; Brethren, fellow-souldiers, fellow schollers; you that are parta∣kers of the same salvation, come along, and see the doctrine, that I deliver to you. This is that, I say; herein I expresse my selfe. When I said, the image of the earthly, and the image of the heavenly; my meaning is this; that flesh and bloud (which is cor∣rupt) cannot enter into the Kingdome of God, which is uncorrupt. Let us consider what hee saith, when hee saith, Flesh and bloud shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. Hee meanes to expound himselfe: that corrupt flesh and bloud shall not enter. As St. Austin saith, Lib. 6.Aug, de gen lit. Cap. 18. de Gen. ad Literam, Cap. 18. hee meanes that flesh and bloud, that is thus tainted and defiled with sin, shall not inherit the Kingdome of God, the King∣dome of heaven. And why not?
Because it is a place of that purity, and of that perfection, that it cannot indure sinne, or any sinfull neighbour. As soone as the devill sinned, hee was throwne from heaven: there was no place for him there. As soone as Adam transgressed, hee was throwne from Paradise, which was the Type of hea∣ven: there was no more remaining for him there. The blessed eyes of God are so pure, that they can∣not looke upon a defiled thing: and because the Lord will have all the world which is tainted with sin, to be cleare and pure; the element of water came once through it; and because that could not doe it, the element of fire shall come and purge it; and shall make all the goodly stately palaces, all the goodly castles, and the faire groves, and pleasant meadowes in the world, it shall make them all dust and ashes: that the sinne that lodgeth in them, and the corrup∣tion which they have contracted unto them by the transgression of Adam, may be wrought out of them. So pure is the Majesty of God, that he cannot indure any evill thing to approach or come neare unto him. Therefore flesh and bloud, because it is full of sinne. For all the acts of sinne are done in the flesh, and the beginning and proceeding of the acti∣on, begins in the bloud. There is a tainted bloud about the heart of man, wherein all these evill imaginations nestle and hide themselves: there is an impure bloud that runnes through the veynes of man, which fils him full of impiety. So that the blessed God shall never suffer this corrupt bloud to enter into his Kingdome, that can indure no corruption. But he shall cleanse it, and purifie it; hee shall annihilate it, and bring it to no∣thing,
that it may be something for ever. But here may be many things excepted against us. As first, If flesh and bloud shall not inherit the Kingdome of  God, then how are the Saints said to be partakers of the Kingdom? & how have they the first fruits of the Kingdome, in this life? & how are they called the children of the Kingdome? Those that belong to the Kingdome, they are called heyres of the Kingdome, and Co-heyres with Christ: and if they be heyres, and Co-heyres, and fellow-heyres with Christ, and yet be flesh and bloud; how is it true then, that flesh and bloud shall not inherit the Kingdome of God? Secondly, it may be objected of Enoch and Elias, that they never saw death and corruption, (not that corruption which falls upon our nature) and yet it is presumed that their bodies are in heaven: So that flesh and bloud enters into Gods Kingdome: For Enoch and Elias were flesh and bloud: that is, sinfull crea∣tures as well as wee; and yet they be in the King∣dome of God. Thirdly, it may be objected concerning them that shall be alive, at the comming of the Lord: they shall be flesh and bloud as we are; and they shall in a moment of time, be translated to the Kingdome of God: therefore it seemes that flesh and bloud inherits the Kingdome of God. Answers to the 3. Obje∣ctions.For the answer to these. For the first, we must observe, that it is one kind of possession that a man hath spiritually by faith and apprehension: and it is another, to have it in  reall entrance, and in a reall investiture. The Saints of God are called in this life, the sons and daughters of the Kingdome; and they are called heyres of the
Kingdome, and Co-heyres with Christ. But how? it is onely in faith; it is onely in taste; in an earnest of that which shall be fully paid hereafter, as the Apostle saith, Heb. 6.Heb. 6.5. It is impossible that such as have tasted of the heavenly joy, &c. So that wee doe not deny, nor the Apostle doth not say, that flesh and bloud shall not taste of heaven, nor corruption taste of incorruption; for we have it, the children of God, they have the very pledge, and earnest of it, sealed unto them. But how? It is in expectation: For the Lord Iesus tries his servants in their expectation, by their waiting upon him. In the world (it is true) it is one thing to be a Noble-mans, or a Gentlemans heyre, and it is another thing to come to the possession of the land: he is sure of it by his birth, by his primogeniture; he is sure that it shall be his; but he hath it not yet. Hee may live like a poore gentleman, and his father may curbe him, and keepe him in, before he come to en∣joy it; he hath it not for the present. So the Lord, hee suffers those that be his heyres to want, to be trou∣bled and afflicted in the world: hee suffers them to have no better pittance then this. As one saith, I hope for things better hereafter, and therefore I swallow those things that are present here. And then for the second point objected concer∣ning Enoch and Elyas.  There are divers opinions of Divines about it. Some think, that their bodies are not in heaven, but were buried in some place un∣knowne; as wee see in Moses death; and that they shall rise againe at the Resurrection. This (I confesse) hath many grounds, and good reasons to prove it, that it is the prerogative of Christ
alone, to be in heaven. For there is none that hath descended, but the same that hath ascended, which is the son of man which is in heaven.Eph. 4.9, 10. But yet the commō tenent of the Church is other∣wise: whereunto I must yeeld, and subscribe; namely that the bodies of Enoch and Elias, and those that rose at the Resurrection of Christ, be actually with Christ, and keep him company in heaven. And al∣though the ascension of those be not manifest, yet it is agreeable to the analogie of faith, to beleeve it. For to what purpose should the Apostle insist so much upon this,Heb. 11.5. By faith Enoch was translated, if he were not after another maner, dignified, and honou∣red, than ordinary men? And to what purpose is it said, that Elias was carryed to heaven in a whirle∣wind, and a fiery chariot, if the Lord would break his neck upon a rock, and cast him downe againe to the earth? This had been no honour, but a punishment. Therefore, as their raptures are noted in the Scrip∣tures, so the tearms are notable, and such as no man can attaine unto, in the common Resurrection. For the blessed God (which is the God of the married and of the single life) he tooke out of each estate one, to accompany him in his heavenly Kingdome. Enoch was a married man, and figured those in that estate, that should associate and keep Christ company in heaven. Elias was a single man, and he took him to be a symbole, and type of the single life. To teach us, that married and unmarried both, if they be in Christ, are accepted of him, and shall reside, and keep him company in the Kingdome of heaven. And for those that rose at the Resurrection of Christ, it is a constant opinion, and followed of the
best Divines, that those were never admitted to returne to their bodies againe: for that had been to deprive them of a greater benefit, which they had before. Therefore, to answer the argument, If Enoch, and Elias, and those that rose with Christ; I say if they be in heaven, they be flesh and bloud: therefore, flesh and bloud doth inherit heaven; and so by conse∣quence, the Apostles speech doth not alway stand firme, when he saith, Flesh and bloud shall not inhe∣rit the Kingdome of God. Therefore it is possible for flesh and bloud to inherit heaven. For the answer of this we must understand, that Enoch and Elias had a change; and the changing of their bodies was equivalent unto our death. And al∣though they were rapt up in a strange manner, yet all that was mortall in them, all that was corrupt, it was consumed by the strong hand of God. We see the Lord can worke as it pleaseth him, in naturall things. You see how the lightning (sometimes) so alters things that it falls on, that it draws out all the pith of them, all the substance in a moment. We see gold that is cast into a hot fornace, the fire licks it up, and melts it. So we see those earthen pipes that are used too commonly in our mouthes, how soon the fire alters them, and refines them. We see these things in nature. Now wee must imagine, that the mighty power of God can doe much more for the body: so that that which was nothing but mud be∣fore, he can make a pure chrystall glasse of it. It is not impossible for nature (almost) to worke this: for we see men make glasse of sand; and therefore to the operative word of God, there is nothing impossi∣ble.
It is credible, and to be beleeved therefore, that the Lord changed their bodies in their rapture: that whatsoever was corrupt, and base, and dreggie in them, it was wrought out. The same reason is for them, that shall be alive at the comming of the Lord: the Lord shall so work up∣on those bodies which they shall then beare, which shall be corrupt flesh and bloud; the Lord shall work them in an instant to purity, even as the fornace of metallers does; the fornace of those that deale in fire-works. For as the fornace changeth the sub∣stance of the thing that is cast into it, upon the in∣stant, and licks it up, and devoures it, if it be com∣bustible; or if it be not combustible, (as gold or the like) then it turnes, and melts it to better purpose, to a better burnish, to a better hue: so the all-working-hand of God shall doe. Therefore although they be in heaven, yet they are not there without some change of body, not without the destruction of the corrupt part, whereby it was made sinfull. And though the Saints that shall live at the comming of Christ, shall be translated, (and it is true they shall be so) but how? by the mighty power of Gods om∣nipotencie, that shall work them throughly to per∣fection, and shall take away the drosse, and leave nothing but that which is pure, and sit for the glory of God to dwell in, and make his residence there. For it is impossible, that the slaves of miserie should make their residence in the Court of glory: because of the corruption of sinne that is left in them: which must be rooted out, that they may be capable of that blessed condition. To the which the Lord bring us. Amen. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.51. Behold I shew you a mysterie; we shall not all sleepe, but we shall all be changed: in a moment, in the twink∣ling of an eye, by the last trump. THere is almost no part of our Christian faith so generall, but it admits of some particular exception.1 Tim. 1.15. Christ came into the world to save sinners; yet not all sinners; but those that are penitent and converted. So the Rule is, that all men must once die;Heb. 9.27. and that all men that are dead shall rise againe. And yet this is not true of all particulars; for there are some exceptions against this truth: yea there be many thousands of men and women, many millions, that shall neither die nor rise againe. Yea a whole world: the world that shall stand at the comming of Iesus Christ, shall neither die, nor rise again. But these are but a hand∣full in respect of former ages: and therefore some
particular exceptions doe not infringe a generall rule: for if there be some then, that shall not tast of death, yet there is no man doubts, but that the common law of death, is imposed upon all men; and every man must suffer it in his time. And although it be a true Article of our faith, that all flesh that is dead shall rise againe to judgement; yet there are a certaine number which shall be ex∣empted, and which shall be translated after another manner: not by way of Resurrection, but by way of change and mutation. And the Apostle calls this a great mysterie; for indeed, as all the whole doctrine of the Resurrecti∣on is full of mysteries; so this above the rest: to un∣derstand what kinde of change this shall be; to un∣derstand how they that live at Christs comming, shall be priviledged, more than us that lived before them. For it is a great priviledge for a man, never to goe to his grave: and hee that sleeps least in the dust, we account him (in common sense and reason) the happiest; we esteeme him the happiest man, that stayes the shortest time in death. How, therefore, these things should be conceived, it is mysticall, and hidden from our senses. All this, notwithstanding, the Apostle resolves upon it, and saith, although it be a mysterie to us, yet it was not a mysterie to him: for it was revealed by the Spirit of God to him, and he reveals it, and tells it again unto us, that there is a remnant of men that shall survive, when Christ shall come to judgement, which shall not goe to heaven, by that common path that wee goe; they shall not come to see death, as we doe; nor to the putrefaction and filth which is incident to our nature; but they
shall be translated by a kinde of change, which shall be unto them, as our death is to us; and they shall not have a resurrection as our bodies have: they shall not goe under grovnd to rise againe; they shall not be dissolved to be renewed againe. And this is the wondrous mysterie, which is of all most strange: For suppose a child that is both new borne and newly interred, (as there shall be many thousands that shall die two or three dayes before the Resur∣rection) these must now rise very raw out of their graves: the change then that shall now be made upon their bodies that were so newly interred, must needs be a very wonderfull one. It is past the rea∣son of man to conceive, but it is enough that it rests in the power of God; and that he hath revealed it to his Apostles, and Teachers of his Church, by an infal∣lible determination: and that it shall be truely, and really effected upon the persons of them that shall then live: whatsoever wee think, and deeme to the contrary. So now the Apostle begins (partly) to tell us of the great world, that shall be, when Christ shall come: and partly to prove that which hee had said before. As concerning the state of the world, he would have us to consider, that in the latter end the Lord shall come in a moment, and he shall take things as he finds them: and those that are then living, he shall make his own hand glorious upon them, (as he plea∣seth) by a kinde of change and mutation: although not according to the common decree, and course of dying. And for the other, that it is a proofe of that hee had said before; we are to consider the words that
formerly he had said; that corruption shall not inhe∣rit incorruption, nor flesh and bloud shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. Now for that a man may thus object, and say against it, What then shall be∣come of them that live when Christ comes to judg∣ment? are not they flesh and bloud as well as wee? for their bloud shall be corrupted, as well as ours is; and corrupt flesh as well as wee: their flesh shall be tainted with sinne, and with all kinde of transgres∣sion and disobedience, as ours is, and rather worse: for the longer the world stands, the worse it growes: therefore if flesh and bloud shall not inherit the King∣dome of God, and that corrupt flesh and bloud shall not come into incorruption, what shall become of them, that Christ shall finde at his comming? The Apostle answers that. Nay (saith hee) God hath provided another way for them: and that is by mutation and change: So that though they shall be flesh and bloud as wee are, and corrupt flesh and bloud as wee are, (and perhaps worse corrup∣ted than we, because the last times of the world shall be the worst) yet the Lord shall so work by his omnipotent power, as that their corruption shall be refined and wrought out: they shall be molded by the mighty hand of God, and by that fire that shall goe through the world. For as hee hath a visible fire to purifie the elements, and all this visible masse which we see: so he hath another kind of fire, (a spirituall fire) to purge the bodies of men, from their originall and actuall transgressions which they have contra∣cted: the power of God shall so worke, that they shall have some Analogie with our death: which not∣withstanding they shall not die, nor be put into their graves: for that change, shall be unto them instead
of our death. And doe not think your selves so much the worse, that God favours you the lesse, or that he favours them more: because they goe not to their graves as you doe. For the Lord makes you by patience, subject to his holy will; hee gives you that patience, that for his sake you can be content to be deposed, to lay downe your earthly Tabernacles. And you must not vexe and grive at them; for they are never the better for it. For their change is to them as a death: although it be not with the same obsequies, and in the same outward shews; yet in effect it shall be the same. Therefore, that wee are done to dust; and that they never see dust; this is no disparagement to us, nor no great comfort to them: for it shall be all one in effect: the Lord imbalmes the memory of his Saints, and he preserves their dust, and tels the sands of their dust, and hee keeps them in perpetuall re∣cord; so that whatsoever hee poures out hereafter upon another generation, it shall not be a prejudice to those that are now dead. For the Lord goes down with those that sleepe, to the grave: hee descends with them, and preserves them, and keeps them: he numbers their haires, he numbers the members and parts of their bodies. And this is that mysterie, which the Apostle speaks of here, Behold, I shew you a my∣sterie. It is a great mysterie, that any man should live, and not see death: yet the Apostle tells us, that there shall be millions of men that shall live, and yet they shall have no death: many that shall have a mortall, and corrupt and sinfull life as we have; and yet they shall not have any death. It is a great my∣sterie, that all the Saints should not come to life
eternall, by the same meanes: that is, by way of pu∣trefaction and of resurrection; and yet there are mil∣lions, that shall not come to life that way; but by another way of change and mutation. Behold, I tell you a mysterie, we shall not all die, but we shall all be changed. This is the summe of the words. Division into, 1 The time. 2 The manner and meanes.Now the Apostle expresseth, and explaineth himselfe farther, by telling the cause, and the means, how this shall be done; for hee saith, this shall be done, as concerning the time, immediately, in an in∣stant, in the twinckling of an eye. And as concerning the manner and the meanes of it, by the vertue of the last trump. The trump that shall blow. And so the substance of it is this. The Lord shall sound forth his Trumpet, which shall have a power to change the bodies; that as at the first hee spake the word, Let this be made,Gen. 1. and it was made; Let there be light, and there was light; so there shall be another po∣wer in the voice, for the renewing and re-creating of things: as there was a power in the voice then, to create, and make the world, so there shall, in the re-creating, and re making of the world: that shall make a change of all things. And as in the begin∣ning, things that were dark before, were made light: Let there be light, and there was light, of that which was dark before; and that which was con∣fused before, was made orderly and distinct, (which is the greatest extremities that can be, light and darknesse, order and confusion) so likewise there shall be a mighty voice of God, in that sounding sil∣ver Trumpet, that shall then blow, to change the bo∣dies of men, from dark to light some bodies: and shall change their thoughts, from confusion and disorder,
to bee regular, and orderly. The trumpet is the voice of God, the operation of the Almighty, which as it wrought a strange change in the Creation, so it shall worke a stranger, in the recreation, and reno∣vation of the world. These are the parts and par∣cels of the Text. Now to proceed in order, as it shall please God to give assistance. The first thing to bee considered, is that the Church of God in respect of this mystery, which the Apostle speaks of, hath been drawne to diverse readings and expositions of this Text. For they could not see, how it should be true, that the A∣postle saith, All shall bee changed, because they thought it onely belonged to the godly. But it is certaine, that the ungodly shall be changed too; for their bodies that are now corrupt, shall be then un∣corrupt. But how? to sustaine misery, and torment; that they had better not to bee, than to bee in such a case. All the paines of hell shall not so work upon them, to dead them, not to consume them; but they shall bee able to consist in the middest of torment. Now, the least care and trouble in the world, kills a mans heart, and works him off: but then, God shall so change the bodies of the reprobates, that they shall bee able to indure whatsoever torment shall bee laid upon them. But because those men understood not this, they thought the change was to bee taken in a good sense, to belong onely to the godly. Therefore they reade it two severall wayes, differing from ours. For our reading is this, (which is so in the Ori∣ginall according to the Greek copy) Wee shall not all die, but wee shall all bee changed. And so it agrees
(properly) with that which went before. For he gives an answer to a question, that might be made. Why doe you say, that corruption shall not enter in∣to incorruption, nor flesh and blood into the kingdome of heaven? shall not they bee corrupt flesh, that shall live at the comming of Christ to judgement? To this the Apostle saith, Indeed they shall not die, but instead of that death, they shall have a change. So that this is an inference upon the former: and an answer for the removall of an objection. Now (as I said) diverse partes of the Church, reade it two other wayes. The first is this, Wee shall all certainely die, but wee shall not all be changed. For they were carefull still, to appropriate, and bring the change unto Gods people, and inheritance: as though it belon∣ged not to the wicked. Another Reading is this, Wee shall all rise againe, but wee shall not all bee changed: so that still they make the negative upon the change; because they understood not how this thing might bee concei∣ved, to belong to the good and bad, which is the change of the bodies. Now, indeed, in their seve∣rall senses, they be all true. For the first, that saith wee shall not all sleepe. It is true, of the common masse of mankind: but not of every particular body, and of every particular age. For I told you before, that the Lord shall ex∣empt a whole world from the common death which wee suffer. Therefore it is not true in the particu∣lars, that we shall all slepe. For there shall be ma∣ny thousands of men, that shall not sleepe: that is, they shall not die, after the common maner of death.
And then for the second opinion, the second sense that Reades it, We shall all rise againe. That is false, for there are none that shall rise, but those that were dead: and because all shall not die, there∣fore all shall not rise, as I said before in the ope∣ning of the Text. So that this is the proper and true sense of the Text; and it is that also which is in all the Greek Copies,. The other, is onely in some old Latin Copies, and is diversly taken, and mistaken by the Fathers. This, therefore, is the Apostles mea∣ning, We shall not all sleepe; that is, wee shall not all die, after this order, and maner of death: but wee shall all bee changed. Those that bee in their graves shall be changed to incorruption, to immortality, and life: and they that never come to the grave, shall bee changed another way; which shall be sembla∣ble, and answerable unto the death that wee have. So that all shall be changed, yea not onely the godly, to glory, but the reprobate, and wicked shall bee changed to a dureability, to indure the torment, which the justice of God hath allotted to them for their deserts, from all eternity. This Reading, therefore, is that that we must rest in, as being the most proper resolution of the Apostles mind: who giving a reason of that hee had said before, that flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdome of God: No (saith hee) they shall not inherit it, but by a kind of change and mutation, not after the fashion as we doe. God hath reserved for them, another kind of translation: by mutation, not by buriall, and putrefaction as our bodies doe. Now I come to the words. The first thing is this that he saith,
Behold, I shew you a mystery. Mystery, is a word derived from the Hebrew, Mister, or Mistar: and it signifieth, a hidden thing, or else from the Greek word , (as some would have it) of shutting, or closing of the eye; because that all eyes are shut up, and closed to the mysteries of God: and it lies not in the power of any eye, to understand the secrets of the Almighty. Secret things belong unto God,Deut. 29 29. but revealed things, belong unto us, and to our children, saith Moses. The Go∣spel is full of these mysteries: and there is nothing so mysticall and hard to bee understood, as these things, concerning the renewing, and reparation of the world. For the things that bee done, in common experience, be nothing mysticall: but those that we looke to by faith, those things that we apprehend by hope, they are all full of mysteries. But the bles∣sed God, hath revealed them to his Apostles, (to S. Paul, and to the rest) and to the Ministers of his Word. By reading the Scriptures, he hath revealed that, which is farre remote from the sense and un∣derstanding of any mortall, and carnall man. The mysteries of the Kingdome, must bee revealed. Be∣hold I tell you a mystery. The Lord hath told it me, and I must tell it to you againe: it is a thing that I am acquainted with, by the Spirit of God, which hath revealed it to mee. It was once as strange to me, as it is to you, but God hath delivered it to me, that by my ministery it may come unto you. Behold, I shew you a mystery. The word signifieth three things in the Scripture, as Chrysostome noteth. One is, when by an outward visible thing, some
other invisible thing is signified, and represented. So in the Sacraments of Baptisme, and the Lords Supper, where the water in Baptisme, signifieth the precious blood of Christ: and the wine, and bread in the Lords Supper, signifieth the breaking of the body, and the powring forth of the blood of that emmaculate Lamb, that was offered up for us. Thus the Sacraments bee called holy mysteries, hidden, and secret things, which the world cannot under∣stand, because they deride them, because they doe not affect them: but they are onely knowne unto the chosen ones of God. In that sense, the word is not here used: for the Apostle speaks not of a my∣stery here, by any outward thing, to signifie some inward matter, as in the Sacrament. Another way, mystery is taken for a partiall, or halfe esteeme, or conceit of any thing we speake of. So in 1 Cor. 13. the Apostle tels us,1 Cor. 13.12. We see in a dark mystery, wee see in a cloude, wee see in a riddle, in a dreame. Wee understand in part, we know in part. As if hee should say, All that we see in the provi∣dence, and guidance of God, here in this world, is full of mystery; some part of it wee know, and some part wee know not: so that the partiall know∣ledge of man, because it attaines not to fulnesse; it is called seeing in a mystery, seeing in a darke view. But neither in that sense, doth the Apostle use it here in this place. The third sense is (saith St. Chrysostome) when a man speaks something against the common sense, and reason, which the wisedome of man cannot at∣taine unto and reach; nor would never have drea∣med of. And this is it, which the Apostle speaks
of here, Behold, I shew you a mystery; that is, I shew you a matter which you would hardly have conceived with your selves; or that you will scarcely believe, when I tell it to you. I tell you, that there are many men that shall never die, nor never rise againe: and yet they shall have their part of glory, and be accepted, and come to happinesse, as well as you. This paradox which is contrary to common opinion. contrary to common sense; and which is above the common reach, and apprehension of man, the Apostle calls a mystery in this place. And hee hath great reason to put an ecce before it, behold, I tell you, &c. To teach us, that where any thing is mysticall in the Gospel, and in the Scripture, we ought to dou∣ble our files, to double our attention, and to raise our spirits, to hearken to that which is so secret. For it is all our desires, (and it is naturally ingraffed in us) to heare of newes, to heare newes of State, newes of the greatest importance. Wee seeke, we labour, we travaile, and wee sharpen one another, to know what reports there are in the greatest importments. Much more should wee be thus affected in the mat∣ters of God, and of our owne salvation. Therefore the Apostle satisfieth us, and saith, I will tell you, you seeke for it, and you long to know this: you make many doubts, and scruples in your hearts, be∣hold, I will resolve you in one word. The condition of the world that shall bee, when Christ shall come, it shall be farre different from this. It is a mystery to tell you; but it is infallibly true. It hath been re∣vealed unto me, by the Spirit of God, and I will open it to you, the people of God. And the matter of this mystery follows.
We shall not all die, but we shall all be changed. The power and strength of death, working un∣equally upon mankinde, it seemes a great wonder, and a mysterie indeed, how that some should be happier than their fellowes, to be exempted from this common law, (which is a Statute law,Heb. 9 27. and It is appointed for all men once to die.) And how then are these become so happy, to escape the common doome inflicted, for the sin of Adam upon all mankinde? surely to our common sense, they are the happiest of all men: even those that shall live in those dayes. For we love our flesh so well, that wee are loath to commit it to the ground: wee are loath that dust should goe to dust, and ashes to ashes; but still wee would continue, and be the last men upon the earth. And this great ambition, we have so truely, and so radically in us, that a man would give all that he had in this world, not to be taken away, till the world be taken away. It is the greatest comfort of a mans life, to be snatched and hurried away, when the universality goes away. It is a great comfort, to have abundance of company in misery. But for this the holy Ghost hath taught us,  to set∣tle our selves in patience: the Lord hath appointed our severall times. They are never a whit the more happy, because they shall not die; nor we never the more unhappy, because wee shall die; for life and death are all one, to them that are planted in the Lord Iesus Christ. For it is he that is our advantage, he is our hope in death, that wee shall attaine unto everlasting life. And whether we shall come unto it, by the way of resting and rottennesse in the grave, or by a sudden and extemporarie change and muta∣tion;
it ought to seeme all one unto us. It is true, if God should vouchsafe us that bles∣sing, to stand the last men upon the earth, and to be the last generation; it were a thing very plausible, and that which we should desire: but we ought not too much to settle upon it: for the Lord hath made it a mysterie. It is a mysterie when any man dies; It is a mysterie in the generall, and in the particular: it is a mysterie when God calls any man unto him: and wee must not wish, contrary to the will of God; but be content with that portion, that he hath desti∣nated unto us. Our first parents, because they were the authors of sin and transgression, (Adam and Eve) the Lord hath given them the longest time of rotting; they lie longest in their graves, and they dwell in the pavillions, and habitations of death the longest: be∣cause they were the first authors of wrong to us. In the later end of the world, the Lord will incline in mercie, because he hath been long in judgement, (in the judgement of death) he will incline in the latter generations of the world, and give them a taste of his mercy. All things grow lesse by continuance and use; as a raging plague and pestilence, when it comes first in∣to a Citie, it takes away a number of people, three or foure thousand in a weeke: afterward, the Lord allayes that rage, and abates the disease, that there are not so many this week, as there were the week before; nor so many the next week, as there were this. So in this common calamity, as the world growes in yeares, nearer the end of her time; so her children, (that is, the people of God which lie in their
graves) they have lesse time to lie. The first authors of sinne, when Gods anger was fierce and vehement, they are condemned to lie longer in the dust, to inhabit and dwell there. At the last, the plague of God shall begin to slacken and to abate it selfe: and the anger of God shall be mitiga∣ted, and mollified: so that those that live in the last age, they shall have the least time of sleeping in the dust. But in these things, we ought to make no dif∣ference: for the patience that God indues his chil∣dren with, makes up this; whether a man sleepe a thousand yeares, or five thousand, it is all one; be∣cause God seasons their death with a meditation of the Resurrection; and in the meane time, inrich∣eth the soule with the beatificall vision; with the pre∣sence of his Majesty, and with that joy, that cannot be comprehended in the heart of man. We shall not all sleepe. Observe againe, the Apostle speaks in the first per∣son, Wee; he saith We shall not all sleepe; and yet hee is asleep, aswell as other men: how then doth he say, We shall not all sleep? His meaning is, to take upon him the person of the Church of God, in generall; and especially that part of the Church, that shall survive, when Christ shall come. For St. Paul is done to dust, as wee shall be: and there is no difference in that part, that went to the grave. There is no difference, but onely this, that he sleeps in the Lord: hee sleeps a glorious com∣passe; and yet he saith, We shall not al sleep. Vnder∣stand that he speaks still of the ommon state of the Church, and for that part of the Church which hee brings the argument for. For now he brings his ar∣gument,
to answer an accusation or conclusion which might be made against his doctrine. Some might aske him, What shall become of those, that shall be li∣ving at the comming of Christ? Oh (saith he) I am of them: although I die before that time, yet I am of that number. For the members of Christ, are not distinguished by time, but are all one. Abel might have said, Wee; and Adam might have said, Wee, of the last end of the world. This teacheth us, how great the communion of Saints is: that it is not broken by the entercourse of yeares & time; but that it still continues. We shall not all sleep. The blessing of God runs on still with perpe∣tuity; and that which is true to one generation, is firme to another; and that which belongs to one, is common to all. This is that communion of Saints, in the strength of which, the Apostle uttered this phrase, (We shall not all sleep) as he doth oft times in his other Epistles: We shall not doe this, and wee shall not doe that. Although the Apostle be dead and rotten 15. hundred years agoe; yet he saith, We shall not all sleep. But we shall all be changed. Still We, as if he were one of the men. Here he teacheth us another lesson, that the Apo∣stle was a man, that still looked for the day of judge∣ment. He saith, We shall all be changed. It may be, I shall be one of the men; I know not; it may be, the trumpet shall blow while I live; for the Lord hath reserved the time, onely to himselfe; the day of judgement is knowne to no man. Nay the son of man (as hee is man) knowes not when Christ shall come to judgement. Therefoe I prepare my selfe, I look
for my change, as well as another man. As IobIob 14.1. saith, All the dayes of my life will I looke for my change. So the Apostle saith, every man must look for this; that he may be prepared. For (perhaps) I may be the last man; perhaps the trumpet may sound to night before to morrow: for there is no man knowes when the day of doome shall be. It is reser∣ved in the bosome of God alone, and we are alway to looke for his comming, because we know not when he will come; whether at midnight,Marke 13.5. or at the daw∣ning of the day. Therefore wee should alwayes be ready with our lamps lighted, and our loynes girded, that we may be prepared when the Bridegroome commeth to enter into the Kingdome.Mat. 25. Thus the Apo∣stle saith, we shall be changed. He speaks as if hee should be one of them; although long since he were interred in the earth; yet because hee knew not his owne dissolution, or the destruction of the world, when it should be: therefore he had it in perpetuall memorie; Wee shall not all sleepe, but we shall all be changed. And what is this change? : how death is called a sleepe, I have told you heretofore; and I will not repeat it now. We shall be changed: that is, in quality; for so the word signifieth, even an alte∣ring of the quality, not a changing of the substance. For the same body that suffered death for sinne, the same body shall be glorified by the grace and favour of God. As sin came upon it, to doe it to death; so the grace of God shall overflow it, to bring it to life. For where sin hath abounded, grace shall super abound.Rom. 14.20. If therefore the sinne of Adam were able to morti∣fie all to their graves; much more shall the grace
of Christ, be able to quicken all his to life everla∣sting. Therefore, I say, we shall be changed: meaning, as concerning the qualities, not concerning the sub∣stance. For that body which was once the Temple of the holy Ghost, shall never cease to be the Temples of the holy Ghost: and those parts that felt misery by Adams sinne, they shall feele sweetnesse of grace, by the bounty that shall be revealed, through Christ Iesus our Lord. We shall all be changed. This change, how it shall be made, and in what degrees, I have partly spoken of it before. The Apo∣stle delivers it unto us, when hee said, It is sowne in weaknesse, it is raised in strength. It is sown in corrup∣tion, it is raised in incorruption. It is sowne a mortall, or naturall body, but it riseth a spirituall body. It is sown in dishonour, it riseth againe in honour. These are the manners of the change: which having heretofore stood upon, I will not now repeat. The change, therefore, shall be in those foure noble qualities, which the Apostle formerly described unto us. And this change shall be wrought by the omnipo∣tencie of God, upon a matter that wee would think could not indure such a strange operation as that is. But the Lord is able to command light to come out of darknesse, and hath wrought by meane things in the world, the great impressions of his power. Hee therefore, is able to work upon this weak body, and to set upon it the stamp of incorruption, of glory, of immortality, and of strength. Hee is able to doe it, and his power will doe it, according to his gracious promise. We shall all be changed.
All we (saith the Apostle) chiefly, this change shall be upon the Saints of God; but yet it shall not be so restrained to them, but that in part it shall ex∣tend to all men. I told you, in the opening of the Text, that the Reprobates shall have their part in this change: for their bodies shall be made uncorrupt and immortall, but not to glory, and beauty; not to comfort, and consolation, as the bodies of the Saints shall; but to extremity and misery. Like as a brick which lies in the fire continually, and is alway bur∣ning, and yet never consumed; or as that Axbestam, which the Philosopher speaks of, which is not con∣sumed, but is able continually to abide the fire: so the bodies of those that doe ot feare the Lord, and worship him; the earthly tabernacles of theirs, shall be made durable of paine, but not capable of honour and glory. They shall be made capable of no com∣fort, and yet they shall not be spoyled, and consu∣med, by any paine and sorrow that shall lie upon them. This change, therefore,  we must desire the Lord that it may be for the better, and not for the worse. That seeing there shall, and must be a change of these bodies, that it would please the Lord to change us from these frailties and miseries that we now live in, to the blessed joy and hope, which he hath called his children unto. And that wee may be capable of this, we must desire God to make a change of us in this life; for the Lord shall change all things; hee is the changer of us; he is unchangeable himselfe; all things else, he shall change.Psal. 102. Thou shalt change the heavens, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy yeares never faile. So that the Lord
being onely immutable, and the same for ever; it is hee that works the change upon all things. Wee see in the common course of our life, what changes hee works in our ages: hee changes childhood to youth; and that, to manhood; and thence to old age. A strange and various change! In our Climates, there is Winter, and Summer; there is day, and night, there is stormy, and faire weather. Won∣drous changes bee also in matters politique and ci∣vill: he turnes warre, into peace; he changeth peace, into warre: it is he that suffers Nation to rise against Nation; all the changes in the world, come from God. So wee must imagine in our bodies that shall be changed, that all shall be wrought by his owne hand. This must teach us, first to desire God to make a happy change in our soules, before hee make the change in our bodies. For there can never be a com∣fortable change in any mans body, except first there be a precedent, and a president change in the soule. For except the soule be changed from worse to bet∣ter, from wickednesse to holinesse of life; it is im∣possible for a man to looke for a good change of his body, where there is no precedent change in his soule. Therefore, while wee are in this life, wee are to looke for this change. If the Lord change thy soule from sinfulnesse to holinesse, thou maiest bee sure thy body also shall bee changed to happinesse, and immortality, and glory. If thy soule be not changed, but thou art worse, and worse: verily thou shalt have a change in the Resurrection; but it shall bee unto dismalnesse, to fearefulnesse, and to distracti∣on; so that a man had better never have beene
borne, than to be brought to such a wofull change as that. Therefore, a Christian upon this must consi∣der, that as he looks for a change, at that day, in his body; so hee must labour for this change before hand, of his manners, and conditions: even to change his pride into lowlinesse; to turne his filthi∣nesse, into holy obedience. God expects such a change at our hands: and we should make our pray∣er to Almighty God, that he that changeth all things, would take the paines to change us: that in the middest of other things, we might not continue the same desperate men: but bee renewed in the spirit of our mindes, and be changed into another man.Ephes. 4.23. To put off the old man, and his wickednesse, and to put on the new man,Colos. 3.9, 10. which is made according to the image of God, in righteousnesse and holinesse: to change our apparrell, and to put on Christ. This is the true devotion of the Saints, and that which they should spend the time of their life in. Oh thou that changest all things!  thou that changest the bodies of men at the end of the world, after a miraculous manner! I beseech thee change my fortunes; change my state: bring mee out of this wretchednesse, and misery, to a competencie. Especially change my vicious estate, that I may not rot, and corrupt in it; but that I may be brought to holinesse and righteousnesse. Change the hearts of mine enemies, that they may turne to mee: Alter their hearts,Prov. 21.1. thou which haste the hearts of men in thy hand, and turnest them as the rivers of waters; change the hearts of them. Change thine owne countenance, which art angry with mee for my sins. Although thou change not in thy selfe, yet in re∣spect
of me, thou seemest sometimes to be pleased, and sometimes to be angry. When I doe well, thou art pleasant to my conscience: when I doe ill, thou art as a Lion to me.Psal. 18.25, 26. With the godly, thou wilt shew thy selfe godly: with the righteous, thou wilt bee righte∣ous; with the perverse, thou wilt shew thy selfe per∣verse. Therefore, I beseech thee, change this mi∣sery of mine, change it to happinesse; change my sinfull state, to a holy and blessed estate; change my spirit, which is addicted to the world, and worldly things, to spirituall and gracious intentions; that it may intend onely the things that belong to thy glory, and to my owne soules health. God is the God of changing; and though there bee no shadow of changing in him, yet it is hee that makes all the changes that are in us;Iames 1.17. both in this little world, and in the great world about us. Now I come to the last point, a word of it, because the time is past. The time, And the meanes. The time, In the twinckling of an eye. And the meanes, The blowing of a trumpet. Therefore as my Text is short, a moment of time: so I will indeavour to speake of it, in a moment as it were. The Apostle saith, all this shall bee done in a moment, in the twinckling of an eye. This is the greatest wonder of all the rest: the mystery was ne∣ver great, till now: that there should bee such a deale of worke, done in so small a time. A moment, is nothing. The word signifieth an atome, a thing that cannot be cut into quantity: a very punctum, a moe in the Sunne, which no man can cut, or divide
it into pieces; it is a thing that cannot bee distin∣guished. So his meaning is to signifie unto us, the shortest time that can bee. For certainly, wee must needs imagine, that these great things must require some time. For, first of all, when the Lord began to make the world, hee tooke some time; he took sixe dayes, to make a distinction, and division of the work. Therefore also it is likely, that at the later end of the world, the Lord shall take some time; although it shall not be so much, as that was. Secondly, againe it is needfull, that there should be some time; because of the observation that Gods children must make of these actions. For if all things should bee done in a moment, and hurried up in a confusion, the children of God should want a great part of their instruction, and a great part of their comfort. For this is one part of their delight, and comfort, to see how the world shall bee destroyed; to see how the dead shall bee raised; and themselves to see how their bodies shall bee changed, to see how the Iudge shall come. This shall bee a great part of their learning, to understand these things; and without distinction of time, it is impossible, but there would be a confusion wrought: Therefore it is needfull, that there should bee an interpose of time. Therefore the Apostles meaning, is not to bee thus taken: that there shall bee no time in the doing of these things. But his meaning is this; that the time shall be so short, that it shall not bee percei∣ved, or conceived to bee agreeable, to so great an action: The Lord shall doe it so speedily, as if it were in the twinckling of an eye. For the Apostle speaks here, out of an earnest desire, (as hee doth
in other Epistles, when he would set forth a thing to the full) hee speaks in a kinde of holy hyperbole, in a holy excesse; therefore hee saith, it shall bee in the twinckling of an eye, to signifie, that the Lord shall doe it in such a trice, with such quicknesse, as it is past all the understanding of men or Angels; that such a great thing should be done upon such a sudden. So I take the twinckling of an eye to bee understood. So to conclude the point. We learne, that God works upon a sudden when he begins to work. Therefore this shoul comfort us, that no man should despaire of his well-being with God. For God is able to work upon the sud∣den; he requires no time to work in. He calls some men at one houre, and some at an other. A man that hath been a wicked liver all his life time, (per∣haps threescore, perhaps fourescore yeares) hee growes desperate in the sight of his sinnes: and thinks that all time is past for recovery. No, hee is deceived: the Lord can work without time, he re∣quires none. Hast thou so much life in thee, as the twinckling of an eye? hast thou so much time as a moment will answer to? if there be so much, there is hope still. If there be but so much breath, and life in a sinner, that a man may say hee will not die, till hee have twinckled his eye once: if there bee but so much, there is hope of mercy, still, with God. But let us not doate upon this, and thinke upon the twinckling of an eye, or a moment: but let us take every moment to come unto God: For God works in a moment, and which moment hee works in, that we know not. Perhaps this is our moment: God calls us now. Perhaps Gods eyes twinckle now,
for our good. Perhaps they will alwayes stand hereafter, and never any more looke upon us. Let it bee our wisedome therefore, to take our moment of time: wee know not how our time, is laid up in the hands of God: we know not whether God will give us another moment, after this. Let us there∣fore, apprehend this, while we have it: and let the grace of God worke, while it appeares to us; and while the motion of the Spirit offers it, let us im∣brace it, because we know not our owne time. In∣deed in he twinckling of an eye, the Lord receives a sinner, but whether we shall have so much time, as the twinckling of an eye to repent in, wee know not. Let us therefore, take our moment, for there may be a moment of sudden destruction come upon us: and there may bee a time to plague us, before our eye can twinckle. There may come a time to dazle our eyes, to corrupt our understandings, and to infatuate our senses, before we can twinckle our eye. As a man that goes under a rotten house; the house falls, and destroyes him, before hee have time to look. So the judgement of God, like a mighty mountaine, it may fall upon the head of a man, and crush his braines, and work his sudden destruction, before he be sensible of himselfe. Therefore, let us in the feare of God, take all time: and let us tell our moments. The Lord tels our times; hee observes our moments: let us take our times; and seasons. And if we be thus prepared, the Lord can work upon us, in a moment: for he requires no time to work his great works: but he brings them to passe in a moment, in the twinckling of an eye. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.52. In the last trump: for the trump shall blow, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be chan∣ged; for this corruptible, must put on incorruption, and this mortall must put on immortality. IT was a true sentēce of S. IeromIerome. that God hath kept the grea∣test doctrines unto the last times: and the chiefest and most marvailous things, be re∣served for the very last end of the world. How the dead bodies should be raised? How they should be raised in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye? How there should be such a mighty collection over all the world, by the sound of a trumpet? What the trumpet should be? whether one, or many? Who should blow the trumpet? who should sound it?
What should be the sense and signification, which the sound of the trumpet should give? And what should be the effects and operations that should follow after? These are those wonderfull doctrines, and strange mysteries, which God hath reserved to the fulnesse of time, to the very consummation of all things. And although every one of us must be raised by the po∣wer of that trumpet, yet until the time that we heare it with our eares, we shall never be able to compre∣hend it in our senses, it being one of those things that are hard of understanding; and so hard, as per∣haps the very Angell himselfe, that shall be set to blow the trump, doth not yet know what it should be, till he come to undertake his office. Therefore, I pray you, (that I may give you some more light to understand this darke and obscure Text,) let us consider some other places of Scripture, which doe illustrate this. In Mat. 24.25, 26.Mat. 24.25, 26. our Lord Iesus speaking of this same thing, saith, The sonne of man shall send forth his Angels with a trumpet, with a great sound, with a great noise, and they shall gather all the elect from the foure windes, from the one part of the heaven to the other part of it. So that which the Apostle cals here the trumpet that shall blow, and the last trump, our Lord calls it the Angels trumpet: for the Angels shall come in the mighty voice of a trum∣pet, and shall make a collection of Gods people. There is another place also, that something sets forth this, 1 Thes. 4.16.1 Thes. 4.16. where the Apostle saith, The Lord shall come in , in a great noise, in the voice of the Arch-angell. , in the noise
that sea-men make, when they are weighing anchor, or when they are doing any great matter about the ship; they all give a noise together, that their work and labour might meet in one. This is called , or like the noise that Souldiers make, when they goe forth with their Army against the ene∣my: they come with a mighty noise, to terrifie the enemy. In that noise the Lord shall come downe. He shall come downe with the voice of the Arch-angell, and with the trumpet of God shall he descend from heaven, and the dead in Christ shall be raised first. So that out of these two places, wee have some light added to this present place. For Christ tells us, that the trumpet shall be sounded by the voice of an Angell. St Paul saith, there, by an Arch-angell. But the Scripture useth no great difference of those, for the word is used promiscuously, oft times in the Scripture. St. Paul saith, it is the last trump; to shew the difference of that, from some other. But that shall be the last, because there shall be no more newes: there shall be no more message from God to men any more. And the Apostle saith in 2 Thes. 4.16.2 Thes 4 16. he tells us it shall be in , in a certain generall navall acclamation, and crying one to ano∣ther, to help forward the common work. The ge∣nerall salvation must be helped forward by the sides of men. So the Lord expresseth it. Although, indeed, he can doe it by himselfe, hee can doe it by his word, and there is no difficulty, and hardnesse in the matter: yet because the Lord would have us to conceive the mighty power, and work of his right hand, hee sets it downe by this.
As suppose a mighty army of men were setting for∣ward, and exhorting one another to break through the strong holds of the enemy: or as those that are in a ship, when they are about their necessarie af∣faires, stirring up each other to shew themselves men. In stopping of holes and leakes, or in weighing of anchor, or in hoysing up the sailes, which is not the worke of one man to doe, but of all. Therefore the Apostle useth that word, . Here now we begin to come to the manner, how the Resurrection of the dead shall be made: and how the persons shall be summoned. And it shall be, by the voice of a strange and wondrous trumpet, that shall sound over all the world. That as the Roman Emperors used to call their souldiers to fight, by the sound of a trumpet, and after by the drumme, which succeeded the trumpet, and is thought to be equall unto them: so the Lord shall then bring a mighty Armado out of the bowels of the earth, which in the conceit of men were gone: they were given as lost for ever. But the Lord shall then bring forth such an infinite army, as doth exceed the wit, and conceit of man to imagine. For our thousands, we shall have millions, nay for our single persons, we shall have millions at that day. And those that shall survive at the comming of the Lord, they shall be but a handfull, in respect of the mighty ar∣my which the Lord shall raise and remount out of the earth, which shall then pay her tribute, with which the Lord hath intrusted her. Here, therefore, he shewes the manner, how this shall be done; and he shewes the great difference be∣tween the trumpet of God, and the trumpets of men.
For though they be both taken in a simile from war, yet there is infinite difference in thē. The trum∣pet of man, summons and calls onely those, that are living souldiers; it calls the living to be at such an houre, present in the battaile, to follow their colours, and to keep their ranks. But the trumpet of God, cals the dead themselves, by a strange sound. It shall penetrate the bowels of the earth, and shall speak unto dust and ashes which is dissolved to nothing, to rise, and come in presence before the Emperour, to come before God. Againe, there is another marvailous difference. When the trumpets of men sound, then the armies gather together, and kill and murther each other: there is nothing but death and murther, slaughter, vastation and destruction. But the trumpet of God, it calls men to no death, but to life, and sense, and glo∣ry, and abilities. So contrary is the Trumpet of the Lord, to the trvmpet of man! and yet it hath some similitude, and diverse conveniences with it: which that I may in order observe. Division into 6. parts.We will first consider, what this trumpet is. Secondly, why it is called the last trump, in re∣spect  and difference to some other. And thirdly, what this trumpet shall doe, when it shall sound, for the trumpet shall sound. OrigenOrigen. translates it well, the trumpet shall trump: so the Greek words have it. That is, it shall sound after one manner, after the musick that God shall appoint to sound out of such a hollow, long, musicall instru∣ment; and what shall be the effect of it in the sub∣stance and the matter: for it shall be a voice signifi∣cant, that men may understand it.
Fourthly, the effect and operation of it: that so  soone as the trumpet shall sound over the whole world, presently the dead shall rise incorruptible. The very wicked themselves, shall then be incor∣ruptible, as concerning the integrity and perfectnesse of their members: but not as concerning the happi∣nesse and joy, which the children of God shall be possest of. Fiftly, the Apostle shewes us the reason of all  this. For saith hee, it behooves it should be thus: for it must needs be so. It must needs be so, both in respect that it is impossible for this corrupt body, to enter into incorruption, unchanged and because also, that congruity stands with divine justice, that that body which had been before corrupt, should be invested with, and put on incorruption, that eve∣ry man might take, and receive his reward, or pu∣nishment, according as he hath done in this corrupt flesh. Lastly, we are to consider the sweet metaphor in  the word, to put on. Where the Lord shews us, that now wee have the rags of corruption upon our backs; we have this flesh: but instead of that, God will give us that blessed garment, that fine linnen spoken of Rev. 19.Rev. 19.8. that fine silke, that is, the justi∣fication of Christ, which shall be unto us, as the soul is to the body; a perpetuall rich vesture, to keep us from the wrath of God, and to preserve us in eter∣nall happinesse for ever. Of these things briefly, and inorder, as it shall please God to give assistance.1 Part. What Trumpet this is? First, concerning the word here used, a Trumpet. That the word trumpet doth signifie either pro∣perly the instrument musicall, for the gathering of
men together; or metaphorically, something else that doth the like office, every man easily under∣stands. But in which of these senses it is here to be used, it is not easily determined. For it is very like∣ly, that indeed the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that there shall be properly a trumpet, that shall sound: a very materiall trumpet; although, perhaps, it shall not be of the same matter and metall, that ours is of; yet notwithstanding it shall be some kinde of in∣strument, that God shall prepare to make the like sound, as a trumpet doth. And that this is likely to be true, the letter will carry it. The letter must ne∣ver be shunned, except there be some kinde of in∣convenience, that will follow upon the literall ex∣position. For where there is no absurdity or incon∣venience, wee are bound in conscience to expound the Scriptures in a literall sense: and where it in∣cludes any absurdity wee are to leave the literall sense, and to take another which is analogicall. But here, because the letter will carry it; and chiefly, because the Apostle repeats it twice, it is a great argument, that it shall be a true materiall trumpet. For first, the Apostle saith in the verse going before, the last trumpet: and then hee shews the effect of this trumpet, it shall blow, or sound. Our Lord Christ useth the same word in Mat. 24.Mat. 24.31. and St. Paul ex∣presseth the same in 1 Thes. 4.1 Thes 4.16. Therefore it is an argument, that properly and truly it is to be under∣stood a trumpet, as we in our sense doe apprehend it; although the matter, and effects, and use of it, be higher then any trumpet in the world. Againe, another reason is this; When the Law was given in Exod. 19.Exod. 19.16. there was a trumpet with a
high shrill voice, which increased more and more. I demand what that was? Surely it was not made of metall, or any artificiall composition, as those that we have; yet the Lord made it in the clouds, even the sound of a trumpet: he made it more exact, and perfect by his power, than any man can doe by art and invention. Therefore, as then at the promul∣gation of the Law, there was a true distinct noise of a trumpet sounding, that the people perceived, and conceived it to be the voice of a trumpet: so like∣wise, when the new law shall be given; that is, when the fulnesse of all things is come, at the Resurrection of the dead, there shall be a created voice, which shall be loud; and it is likely, that it shall be a true materiall trumpet. Notwithstanding, perhaps, not after the common frame of men: yet it shall be so ordered, as that a man may distinguish it, and say, it is the voice of no other instrument, but of a trumpet. Lastly, it appeares by this, in that the great God is able to make one flash of lightning to shine from the east to the west in a moment; and he is able to make one thunder, to crack about in the ayre, and all the ayre to continue it to the end of the hemi∣sphere. Therefore it is also most probable, that the Lord shall make the noise, and sound of a trumpet to be dispersed and diffused over the face of all the earth; and not onely over the one hemisphere, but over the other also, where our Antipodes lie buried, and doe looke for the Resurrection, as well as we. But although I think this to be the better, and more sound interpretation, because it agrees with the letter, and because also it agrees with other
Scriptures. As that the law was given in Mount Sinai, with the sound of a trumpet; and that the gathering of the people also,Numb. 10.2. the convocating of of them, was by the sound of the two silver trum∣pets. Although these things leade me to imagine, that it shall be a true materiall trumpet that God shall make; that is, of a matter of his: although not of the same matter that mens trumpets are of, but shall be a trumpet made after the wisedome and po∣wer of God: yet the Fathers (most of them) goe another way. They say, it is a metaphoricall trum∣pet, a trumpet by way of allusion. Because great Kings, and Lords, and Princes, have their trumpets goe before them, to signifie their comming: so the Sonne of God, that shall come as a great King, hee shall send his Angels before him, that shall give notice of his comming: and the Angels shall gather all together to the Iudgement seat; and when they are gathered together to the Throne of Iudgment, then the Lord shall come downe; then the Iudge shall come. So they will have the sound of the trumpet to be, before Christ come downe from heaven. And they have thought, that from the top, from the heavens, unto the place where Christ shall sit to judge, (which shall be neare the earth) in all that space, the elect shall be gathered from the foure winds of the earth, they shall be gathered into all that space of the ayre. To understand this the better, we are to remem∣ber what trumpets wee reade of in the Scripture, that hence we may see what shall be the use of this trumpet we now speak of.
There was first a trumpet for counsell, as we may see in Numb. 10.Numb. 10.2. The Lord bade Moses make two silver trumpets, wherewith they might call the people together. And when one of them blowed, that was a token that the Elders should sit in Coun∣sell,  about some matters of necessary concernment, about the Army and people of God: when one trumpet sounded single, it was for matter of counsell. There was another trumpet, which was the trumpet of danger. As when there was any great  mischiefe, any sedition, or uproare in the tents; or when the enemy made an invasion; or when there was any plague, or sudden judgement, then both the trumpets. The two silver trumpets, which Mo∣ses had made, were appointed to be sounded; and then, not onely the Elders, but also all the people were to runne together at that common calamity, to see what the matter was. As if there were fire in any of the Tents, both the trumpets were to sound: and all the people to assemble together. The third trumpet, was the trumpet of banquet∣ting, or of feasting. And that was in the moneth of September especially: in which moneth,Ver. 10. one of the feasts is called, the feast of Trumpets. There is also the feast of Tabernacles, and the feast of Expi∣ration, in the same moneth: yea and all the feasts and banquets that they had, throughout the yeare; they were to celebrate them, by the voice of the trumpet: the trumpet sounding now, in a plaine tune, or plaine accent. The fourth trumpet, was the trumpet of remove∣all, when they were to remove out of their tents.
For alway when the tents were to remove, at the first sound of the trumpet,Verses 5. & 6. the quarter of Iudah rose, and marched forward: At the second sound, the quarter of Ephraim: At the third sound of the trumpet, the quarter of Dan removed. And so these sounds of the trumpet were made, not with a plaine tone, with a common accent, but with a descant. For the word is  out of which word, Tarantara, which is the proper voice of a trumpet, is derived. Therefore the best and most learned Divines, turne those places Tantararizabitis, according to the proper voice of the trumpet, For they were to use descant, and division, and flexure, when they were to remove from place to place. Matth. 6.2.The fifth trumpet, is the trumpet of Manifestati∣on; of which Christ saith, Matth. 6. When thou gi∣vest thine almes, blow not a trumpet, that is, make it not manifest to all the world, neither be arrogant, and vaineglorious of that thou dost: but doe thine almes in secret, let not thy left hand know, what thy right hand doth. So that the trumpet of manifesta∣tion, is a metaphoricall acception; and according to that, the Fathers expound this word here, of a trumpet. Isay 58.1.The sixt trumpet wee reade of, is the trumpet of the Gospel, of which it is said, Isai. 58. Lift vp thy voice like a trumpet; be not silent, but speak aloud: Tell Iacob of his sinnes, and Iudah of her transgressi∣ons. This is that trumpet which hath blowne ever since the ascension of Christ, and shall blow till his descension againe from heaven to Iudgement. The seventh and last, is the trumpet of judge∣ment; the last trump, as the Apostle calls it. Now in
all these trumpets, there is a reference to this one trumpet, which wee are to speake of. For it is cer∣taine, in this great judgement, there is a trumpet of counsell; the Lord himselfe shall enter into counsell with the blessed Persons in the Trinity: hee shall (as it were) enter into counsell about the destruction of the world, about the collection of his Saints, a∣bout the eternall doome, what shall befall them, and how they shall bee. And although the things are counselled of him before, and hee knowes from eversting: yet it shall bee then published, it shall be acted now. As the counsell that a King gives for warre, or other intendments, which way hee may best invade the enemy, and which way hee may best work his owne designes. And so for the trumpet of danger, in warre. Now the Army of God shall bee summoned every where, by his mighty command. He shall gather his chosen, and they shall stand at his right hand; and hee shall collect by his power the reprobates to stand at his left hand: and accordingly hee shall doome those his enemies.Luke 19.27, Bring those mine enemies before me, that would not suffer me to rule over them, and slay them here before my face. And it is the trumpet of feasting too. For there was never such a Supper as that shall bee; the Sup∣per of the Lamb.Apoc. 19.9. Blessed are they that are called to the marriage Supper of the Lamb. I say the bidding to the supper of the Lamb, is nothing else, but the fulnesse of glory, which the Lord shall invest his children with, at his comming to judgement. This trumpet shall call us to that supper; to that banquet, which shall be a continuall feast, to last forever.
And for the trumpet of Tents, the trumpet of Removeall; it is manifest it shall bee so. For there is no such removing in the world, as that shall be. For some men to remove to hell, and other some to remove to heaven: it shall be the greatest kind of progression, that ever was taken. So that this last trumpet, hath an embleme or signification of that also. And for the trumpet of manifestation, we know it is that. The Lord shall manifest at that day who are his; and he shall manifest every thing, tha hath been wrought: were it never so close, and secret, it shall then bee brought to light. And as the face of man, or woman is knowne one of another, by their aspect, now; so then, the thoughts and se∣crets of the hearts shall bee mutually knowne, and understood one by another. That is the light, that shall reveale all things; it is that that shall manifest all things, that is the trumpet of manifestation. As Christ saith,Matth. 6.2. Blow not a trumpet before thine almes, doe not manifest it. The manifestation of things indeed, never comes, till the end of the world: and then, every thing shall bee manifested. Those things that are hidden from the eyes of men, now; either by the policy of men, or by the connivence of God, (as there be many things that are) though now they were never seene by any eye; then they shall be manifest, and laid open. And for the trumpet of the Gospel, this trumpet shall bee truely that: for this trumpet shall bee the fulfilling of all the Gospel. When the Lord shall gather by the last trump, those whom he hath rai∣sed before, by the trumpet of his doctrine; by the
holy trumpet of the Scriptures; by preaching of the Word, by the Sacraments; them that hee hath rowzed by baptisme, and by his gracious admoni∣tions in this world, he shall then bring upon them another sound, which shall tend to the like effect, to the same purpose, to put them into glory, which his voice had raised before unto the holy warre, a∣gainst the devill, and the flesh, and the world, in this life. So that this trumpet that wee here speake of, is the miracle of all miracles: it concludes all that was before it, it comprehends all perfection that may be imagined. It is a voice magnificall, a voice angelical, it is a voice terrible, it is a voice that hath life in it, a voice that shall give life. It shall bee a voice so full of majesty, as that all the world shall be taken with amazement, and astonish∣ment: the best children of God shall not bee with∣out feare, saith St. Cyprian,Cyprian. at that day. And saith St. Chrysostome,Chrysost. Woe is me, when I thinke of that fearefull day. For although we should bee so pre∣pared for it,Rom. 13.11. as that we should lift up our heads be∣cause our salvation drawes nigh, yet saith hee, I would see any Saint of God, that dares looke there, with a confident countenance. For though our justification by Christ, shall give us comfort, yet love and feare, shall bee mixed, and mingled toge∣ther, a filiall feare shall possesse men, in the hea∣ring of the silver trumpet. It must needs therefore, be full of majesty, and terror. As St. Austin saith,Aug. You know, brethren, that a trumpet hath not so much delight in it, as feare, and trembling: having naturally a kinde of musique in it, which makes the body to shake and shiver in the parts of it; and that
most of all separates a man from himselfe. So shall be the voice of this great and mighty thunder, which God shall give, that it shall sound in the man∣ner of this musicall instrument: of this speciall in∣strument, that gave the Law, and that set forth the Prophesies; and that was used at the solemne feasts. It shall be full of majesty, and full of comfort, and joy; and yet it shall bee with feare, and terrour to the best of them that shall heare it. For as the voice of God was so great, when the Law was gi∣ven, that Gods owne people could not endure it; Let not God speake unto us,Exod. 20.19. but let Moses speake: Let not God speake to us any more, for then wee die for feare, the chosen people of God, were faine thus to say. So at that day, those that be the most san∣ctified; although they shall bee full of joy in one respect, that their redemption is consummate in Christ; yet that joy shall consist in a mixture, and mingling of feare. For it is befitting Gods children, as they love him, so to feare him: to feare him in love, and to love him in feare: to yeeld unto him all submission, and reverence, that they may bee re∣conciled, and made one in those contrary passions, feare, and love; which is a sweet union, and recon∣cilement in the contemplation of one, and the selfe same God. To conclude therefore, this point, concerning this trumpet, and what it is, One saith, That the trumpet, is properly a priestly instrument; a holy instrument, for holy purposes. But hee spake this above his clement.Chrysost. St. Chrysostome saith, The pre∣sence of the Lord Iesus Christ, is this trumpet; this silver trumpet, which shall passe through the world.
And St. Theophilact his scholler and follower;Theophil. hee saith, This trumpet is nothing else, but the will of God, the command of God, which shall runne tho∣row the world, as it is said in the Psalme,Psalm. 147.15. the word of God runnes swiftly, and fills all the world. And St. Augustin in his Epistle to Honorius,Aug ad Honoriū. saith he, In the name of a trumpet, the Lord would have us to understand some most evident, and rare thing. And hee saith in his Epistle to Constantius,Aug. ep. ad Con∣stantium. not knowing what to determine of it; In the last trump, that is, that signe which God shall give last to the earth, whatsoever signe that shall be. St. AmbroseAmbros. thinks it is nothing but the comming of the Lord; signified by the noise of a trumpet. As Princes, and great men, and noble men, when they come to a Towne, have it divulged, and manifested before they come, by the sound of a trumpet. So this same sound of this trumpet, here spoken of, is no∣thing else, but the manifestation of the presence of the Sonne of God. GenebrardGenebrard. upon the Canticles saith, The trumpets of God are of two sorts; the one, is paginall, the trumpet of his word; which is written clearly in this life. The trumpet here, is manifested by paginalls, by leaves; that is to say, the holy Scriptures, contained in so many books. But the trumpet at the comming of Christ, it shall not be in pagina, but in praesentia: In the presence of the Sonne, with the voice of the Sonne himselfe. According as it is said, Ioh. 5.Ioh. 5.25. there are many that sleep in their graves, and monuments; that shall heare the voice of the Sonne of God, and shall rise againe. Thus the Fathers seeme to incline to that opi∣nion,
that the voice of the trumpet shall be metapho∣ricall: that it is an allusin and a figurative speech. But howsoever, this it is most certaine, that it shall be a sensible voice which shall be heard: that as St. IeromJerome. saith, they shall heare with their eares, and goe along with their feet, unto the tribunall seat of judgement. The best, therefore, that we can say and conclude of it, is this, (according as wee see but in part,1 Cor. 13 9. we understand but in part, in a darke riddle, while wee live in this world, the Lord shall then create a voice in the aire, an audible voice in the aire, which shall run through all parts and passages of the world, and it shall be so mighty, and so power∣full, as that the dead bodies in the grave shall heare it. Every thing heares, when God speaks. The wa∣ters heard the voice of Christ; the windes heard the voice of Christ; the devils heard his voice, the rocks and stones heard him. So there is an obedientiall po∣wer in every thing created: and it cannot but heare, when God speaks. This is that trumpet: that is, a voice that shall be modulate, and framed whether it shall be to descant, as it is very likely; or to a plain tune. But howsoever, it shall be a voice, and a voice like the sound of a Trumpet, which God shall frame in the body of the ayre. Who shal blow this Trumpet?But who shall blow this trumpet? who shall sound it? Here the curiosity of man, must lay the hand up. on the mouth, and surcease. It is a damnable thing, for a man to enquire into that, which God hath not reveiled. Some of the Fathers have been inch∣ing and questioning about this point, who it shall be? but it is certain, it shall be the voice of an Arch-angell.
Although the voice be properly the voice of the Son of God, yet it is not meet, that the voice should come from him: it is not meet, that the voice should be the immediate voice of the Sonne of God, that should blow in the aire; but as the voice of a Cryer or Herald, when the King comes to a place, is said to be the voice of the King, because he cryes and proclaimes not his owne matters, but the Kings: So the Angell that shall be imployed in this businesse, he is said to utter the voice of God, and the voice of Christ; from whom that which he utters, receives all the efficacy and power. And though it be the voice of an Angell, and by the ministery of an Angell, yet it shall be by the ordi∣nance, and power, and authority of the Son of God, that shall make this voice. Therefore the Fathers resolve upon two, which they think shall sound the trumpet: Michaell or Gabriell. They think Michaell shall sound it, because he is the Prince of Angels: and in the Revelation, Michael & his Angels,Rev. 12.7. fought against the devill and his angels. But this is unlikely; for Michael there, is to be understood of Christ the Sonne of God, that fought with the power of satan upon the crosse. But I rather incline to the other, that it shall be Gabriell the Arch-angell: who was hee onely that brought the newes of Christs first comming, in Luke 1.Luke 1. As hee was used by God, to bring ti∣dings of Christs Incarnation, that he should be borne of a virgin, in his first comming: so it is probable, that he shall be imployed by the same Majesty a∣gaine, to bring newes of the last comming of the Lord, when hee shall come to judgement. Concer∣ning
these things, I will not be too inquisitive; neither would I have you to be too curious: for an Angell, or an Arch-angell it must be, for the word is so. 2 Part. Why called the last trump.I come now to the next thing, Why is it called the last trump? for if hee call it the last trump, it hath reference to some others that were before it. And so it is true: for those that were before, were figures of this last trump: those seaven kinde of trumpets:Theoph. Oecumenius. Rev. 8. & 9. and especially, as Theophilact and Oecu∣menius observe, St Paul hath reference to Rev. 8. there are seaven trumpets, and they all sounded: and presently there came vialls of wrath upon the world, presently upon the sound of those trum∣pets. So St. Paul tells us, that there shall come trum∣pets betweene the time that he wrote and spake these things; and betweene the last trump that shall sound, there shall be other trumpets then this. That is, those seaven before spoken of, which in the time of the Romane Empire, the Lord uttered him∣selfe by expressing his will in them; and also in the time of the Christian Empire. And indeed, in the time of all Christian Kings, these trumpets have blowne; and indeed these sil∣ver trumpets blow daily, if wee could understand what were the right meaning of them, and what the newes of them were. And if there doe not one of these trumpets blow now, a man cannot tell what to determine, when there are such common com∣bustions in the world; when there are such warres and rumours of wars; and such risings of one Prince against another; when there is such common effu∣sion of christian bloud. Certainly this is a rare
shrill trumpet, which should be wisely, by the cau∣telous and diligent hearing of every christian soul∣dier observed, to prepare them for the battaile, to prepare them for the day of the Lord, because it cannot be long, before the last trump blow. These trumpets, indeed, goe before, but they are signes that the last trump is comming after; and per∣haps it shall come at the heeles, and overtake the former, before we be aware.Aug. For as St. Austin saith well, the Trumpet useth not to sound at midnight, but in the morning, and at the evening: so (saith he) the Lords trumpet sounded in the morning, when he gave the law, at the promulgation of the law, at the building of the Tabernacle, at the dedication of the Temple, it sounded in the morning of the world. And now it sounds at the evening, at the later end of the world; it begins now to sound, if men will open their eares to entertaine it. But for the other trumpet, (saith he) it may well be, that the last trump of all shall sound at midnight, that when men are quiet and secure, and give themselves to profound sleepe, that then the Lord may take them napping: that as they have been carelesse and negligent in his wayes before, so God shall take the advantage, and come upon them upon the Sabbath day, and up∣on the Sabbath day at night, when men use quie∣test, and with greatest repose, to lay themselves to rest. It is the last trump. And why is it called the last trump? Because God will have no more messages to man. When the trumpet hath sounded, there shall be no more newes, nor no more intercourse between God and man. Till that trumpet sound, there is a daily
intercourse betweene heaven and earth: the Lord sends us newes by his word, he sends us newes by his Sacraments, by his punishments and afflictions, by his blessings and fatherly preservations. The world is full of his gracious trumpets, which are ever soun∣ding, either to make us better, and to bring us from sinne; or else to discourage and harden us, if wee goe on in our ill doings. Still there is an entercourse betweene God and man; but when the last trump shall blow, all such entercourse shall cease: Those that have done well shall goe into life,Mat. 25.46. and shall have the perfect vision of God, without any more newes or message from God to them: and those that have done ill shall goe into everlasting fire, and shall have a continuall privation, and absence of God, without any hope of seeing his face any more. This is called the last trump, because that after the trumpet hath blowne, there shall be no more change, in the dea∣lings and affaires betweene heaven and earth. I see the time almost past. 3 Part. What sound the trumpet shall give?I come therefore to the next thing, what the trumpet shall sound? For if the voice shall be sensi∣ble, then it must needs have some signification, and must utter something, that men must understand. For it is not enough to say, that it is a voice of a trumpet, an inarticulate, and generall sound, and no word: for it cannnot be so. And though the trum∣pet of God shall sound, it shall not be so dull, but it shall have a more sweet and significant impression; to teach men what they have to doe. Therefore the Fathers have gone so farre, as to expresse what words the Trumpet shall sound. St. Ierome,Jerome. and some of the Fathers with him, say, the words that the
trumpet shall sound, shall be, Arise ye dead and come to judgement. Therefore, saith hee, I am so possest with this, I am so possest with the assurance of this, that to what place soever I goe, if I goe to my stu∣dy, if I walke, if I eate, or drinke, if I lie downe to sleepe, whatsoever I encline my selfe to, me thinks I ever heare in my eares, the voice of the trumpet sounding, Arise yee dead and come to judgement. But the holy Father may seeme to speake, rather out of a high straine of fervent zeale by allusion, than of any certainty that the trumpet shall so sound. TheophilactTheophilact. saith, the trumpet shall sound to this effect, Draw neare, for the Iudge is at hand, the Iudge is before the doore, prepare your selves. As Isay saith, The voice of a cryer,Esay 40.3. Prepare you the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. This in∣deed is more agreeable to the Scriptures. Iohn Baptist that prepared the way before Christ, he was a type and figure of the Angell Gabriel, that shall found the trumpet to prepare the way of the Lord: and shall give a sensible and significant note, what hee would have men to doe. But this it is sufficient for us to point at, because wee know not the certainty of it. It shall be such a voice, as shall give sufficient warning: it shall be a voice, that shall be sensibly perceived: the intendment of it shall runne over all reasonable eares: there is none shall be so deafe, or so dull, but they shall heare and apprehend the meaning of it. But what word it is, whether it shall be articulate or no, it is not left for us to enquire after. Howbeit wee honour the invention of the holy Fathers, because they tend something to the recti∣fying
of manners, and for the stirring up of mens affections for this purpose. 4 Part. The effect.Now followes the effect and operation of it: when the trumpet shall blow The dead shall rise incorruptible. This is that wondrous effect that the trumpet of God hath: this is the great difference between the trumpet of God, and the trumpets of men. For they worke death and destruction when they blow, and sound to the warres: but this trumpet of God shall sound to life and immortality. But this shall not be in the power of the instrument, but it shall have this force by the power of God, and from the power of Christ, unto whom God hath given all judge∣ment and power, to raise and to change the quick and the dead. But what is this that he saith, The dead shall rise incorruptible? Some think it is onely meant of the Saints, be∣cause all this discourse of the Resurrection, as BezaBeza. and some other Divines observe, is restrained to the Saints. But the former part of the Apostles discourse, is more large: and so also may this be taken; that not onely the bodies of the Saints shall be incorrupt, but also the bodies of the wicked. But how? Saith St. Austin, they shall be in the fulnesse of perfection, of the parts, and members; they shall all rise incorruptible; they shall have bodies that shall never be obnoxious to corruption and destruction, but shall last and indure in the fire for ever. They shall have a braine, and a wit, that shall never be dissolved; they shall have a memory, that shall ne∣ver
forget their wickednesse, and sinnes that they have done, and the blasphemies they have com∣mitted against God, and the abominable actions they have done in the tabernacle of this flesh. They shall have the proportion also of men and women, in their true frame, and proper stature; and not as being lame, or blind, or the like, as perhaps some of them died; But they shall be raised in the fulnesse and perfection of their members, and parts: how∣beit it shall be so, as it may most dispose them to eternall torments, that they may be able to indure; that is all the reason why God raiseth them uncor∣ruptible, that they may be able to indure the corrup∣ting causes. For those causes that seeme to corrupt any thing in the world, as sorrow, and feare, and malice, and vexation, and torture of the flesh, which a man would think in time, would bring any thing to an end: yet they shall not be able to corrupt them. Therefore saith St. Austin,Aug. though they shall be raised incorruptible, yet after a sort, they shall be corrupted by the paine and torment which they shall indure. But how? Not to be brought to a worstnesse or destruction, but they shall have an eternall life to suffer misery. Let us labour therefore,  and desire of God Al∣mighty, to worke our incorruption, to be not an in∣corruption to misery, but to glorie: and that he would so worke us to himselfe, as that wee may be in a continuall fruition and possession of his sweet and gracious presence, not to be molested and tormen∣led with the absence of God, with the losse of heaven, and the joyes thereof, which the damned spirits thinke, if they had but a moment to live and repent
them againe, they would regaine the things they have lost. And they cry out damnation to them∣selves, that they were so foolish to lose the time which might have been so imployed, as that they might have been made masters of heaven, and pos∣sessors thereof. The dead shall rise incorruptible. And we shall be changed. That is, wee, all those that belong unto Christ. Where we may observe, the Apostle still useth the wee: although the Apostle himselfe were not chan∣ged, but after the manner of the common change, by death. But the Apostle doth this, partly, as I told you the last time, because of the common commu∣nion of the Church of God: whereas every man may say wee: every man may take his neighbour with him: we have all one head, and we are all members of one body. And chiefly the Apostle so speaks, be∣cause he thought the day was neare approaching, and he prepared himselfe every where. He thought that the time, and the day wherein hee wrote this, wherein he spake this, he thought that might have beene the last day, and therefore that hee might have beene one of the number; and therefore hee saith wee. Now this change (as I said before) is commonly taken for the better: but it is true also of the Repro∣bate. After that manner of change wee speake of, they shall be changed from a state mutable, to im∣mutability: that which they are when they rise, they are for ever. They are not so now, for they follow the change of nature; they are subject to mutability, and variety; seaven years make a great alteration in a mans life; and in the best life in the
world, more years makes a greater impression. But the Lord shall then raise them to a setled state, to a state of incorruption; and whether they have glory, or whether they have misery, it shall be without change, it shall be in a kind of eternity, as the Lord himselfe is eternall. I should now come to the Reason which includes all; and to the sweet metaphor, where the Apostle expres∣seth himselfe in these words, We must put on. But I must reserve it till the next time. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.53. For this corruptible, must put on incorruption; and this mortall, must put on immortality. When this corrup∣tible, shall have put on incorruption; and this mor∣tall, shall have put on immortality: then shall be ful∣filled the speech, that is written, Death is swallowed up into victory. 5. Part. The Reason.IN these words the Apostle renders a Reason of that for∣mer change & mutation, which shall befall the Saints of God. For this whole doctrine of the Resurrection, it must be so ex∣pounded of the Saints especi∣ally: howbeit it may be also further extended, even to the wicked and the repro∣bates. For they shall have a kinde of change; as be∣ing made from mortall, immortall; and from corrupt, to be incorrupt: although it shall be for their pu∣nishment, and for their greater ignominie; yet it shall
be true immortality, and a true incorruption that they shall receive; But as Beza, and the later, and best Divines hold, it is fittest for us to tye these things, and to understand them of that sanctified company, to whom the Lord hath promised, and will also vouchsafe, a glorious Resurrection. They must, therefore, as it is said before, be all changed: and they must be changed presently upon the sound of the trumpet, by the power of Almighty God: of which things, I will now make no repetition. Now because it might be questioned, what need wee be changed? wee desire rather to goe to God. In this body, we desire super-vestiri, to be over-clad rather with the glory of the Almighty, then to be naked, and to be stripped of this flesh, that we have here. We would goe to Christ, but wee would not goe the same way to Christ, that Christ came to us: for he came to us by death, but wee would goe to him still without death. Therefore this the Apostle resolves us; and teacheth us that which he said be∣fore in part, That flesh and bloud shall not inherite the Kingdome of God: that is, corrupt flesh, and bloud; by reason of the corruption that is in it, by reason of the tainture of sinne, it is subject to change, and mu∣tability. For it is impossible, till it be reformed, till it be cast into the earth, and mouldered to dust; and that it be prepared by the hand of God in the ground: untill then, it is uncapable of heaven. So here hee saith in the affirmative, Oportet, it must needs be so; it must needs be, that this mortall, must put on immortality, and this corruption, must put on in∣corruption. So when hee hath given his resolution, that such a thing must needs be; then he lifts them
up to the expectation of the time, when this glori∣ous change shall be made. He tells them that it shall be, and whensoever it shall come to passe (as cer∣tainly it must be fulfilled) then shall also be fulfil∣led that glorious saying in the Scriptures, (where∣with he confirmes himselfe and his authority, and is not content to speake, as an Apostle onely, out of his owne Apostolicall power, which he had received from Christ: but hee also fetcheth, some ground and help besides his testimony, from the Prophets that were before him) then, saith hee, shall be ful∣filled that happy word, that glorious word, spoken of by Isay as the most, and best Divines think, or by Hosea as some others think. And the word is this, Death is swallowed up into victory, that there is no∣thing left now in the tents of Christs holy Church, but the voyce of triumphs and trophees over death: and consequently, over hell, over sinne, over sick∣nesse, over all infirmities and discontent whatsoever: For if Death be swallowed up in victory; the rest are much more swallowed up. For that is the greatest, and the last enemie of all: and if that be confounded, the rest must needs perish with it. There shall then be such a compleat victory, as that looke whatso∣ever a man casts his eye on; hee shall see nothing but victory, and conquest, and glory, and life, and righteousnesse, and holinesse; in stead of this wicked∣nesse, and misery, and distemper, and accidents where∣to we are subject in this life. Then shall be fulfilled. So he notes unto us the goodly, and glorious time, in which the Saints shall have their full con∣summation and blisse. Then; then it shall be fulfilled,
which is now prophesied, and promised: It shall be made up then, which is now but expected: It shall then be fulfilled in all, which is now accomplished but in one: the Lord Iesus hath it alone in one. Now it is in the first fruits, then it shall be in the whole Harvest: then it shall be made good to the whole Church, which is now only performed to the head of the Church: that Death is swallowed up into victory. This I take to be the sense of the words. To proceed in order, First, we are to consider it as the words lye: and not as the logicall rule would carrie us. For logically, we have, A subject, A predicate, And a Vinculum or Copulate. The subject, is corruption: This corruptible. The predicate, is a certaine change it must have: this corruptible must take, and put on incorruption. And the copulate, is the oportet, it must needs be so: and this mortall must put on immortality. And then after that, there is a blessed comfort that the Church of God shall receive. In the meane time shee receives it, as being certaine that it shall be: but then she shall receive it, as a full payment at that time. That Scripture which said, Death is swal∣lowed up into victory; It shall then be utterly accom∣plished. Wherein we are to consider, First, that the Apostle confirmes and strengthens himselfe by Scripture: by that which is written. Secondly, where it is written. Thirdly, the substance, and matter that is writ∣ten: That Death is swallowed up into victory. Where
againe we are to consider three termes. First, what that is that is swallowed? Death, and all evill and mischiefe. Secondly, the terme to which it is swallowed or consumed? to victory. Thirdly, the efficient cause, who swallowes it, and what it is that swallowes Death? that must needs be understood the death of the Sonne of God: the death of Christ swallowes up the death of men, into an ab∣solute victory. And then the answer to that question, How is Death swallowed up in victory: seeing it every day swallowes us up, and consumes us; how then is Death swallowed up himselfe? And that is to be an∣swered in these words; because the time is not yet come, When this corruption shall put on incorruption, and this mortall shall put on immortality, then shall be fulfilled this saying. Every thing is in its own time: when all things are done, that should bee done; when all things are accomplished, that the Lord shall send before: then that shall come after. But we have it now, onely in hope; we have it, onely in the first fruits: we have it in some part, we have it in the head: then, we shall have it in all the mem∣bers. We have it in some few, that were raised with Christ to be witnesses of his Resurrection, and they are pawnes for all the rest. When this corruption hath put on incorruption, and this mortall, &c. Of these parts briefly, and in order, as it shall please God to give assistance. And first, to follow the order of the words. He saith, this corruptible, and this mortall: speaking of the bodies of men. For the soule of man, is neither
corruptible nor mortall: as heretofore wee have touched; Therefore those that understand these things of the Resurrection of the spirit; of the Re∣surrection of the soule, from vice to newnesse of life; they are extremely mistaken: and they abuse the word of grace which is here propounded unto us. For the Apostle speakes of that part which is corrupt and mortall; that the glory of God shall be shewed upon it: and he saith, this very body; this Identicall thing; this Idem numero; not another body in stead of this; but this, which is now so corrupt. The body shall remaine the same, although the accidents, and qualities, shall be rare, and glorious, which shall ac∣crew unto it: yet it shall be one, and the selfe same body. As S. Chrysostome saith,Chrysost. the selfe same it shall be, in the selfe same inches and quantity: although the qualities shall be altred, and it shall have graci∣ous indowments; yet they shall be the same substance, they shall be the same bodies. And againe, it is to be observed that hee useth two words together, hee repeates it: This corrup∣tible must put on incorruption, and this mortall must put on immortality. And this hee doth, not without very good reason. For it is no vaine repetition of the same thing twice over, it is not S. Pauls purpose nor his custome, so to doe: but hee notes in us two certaine infirmities, which the Lord shall stay, and stanch at that day, by that glorious vesture and gar∣ment of incorruption and immortality, which he shall put upon us. First then, our body is corrupt: that is, changing from one forme to another; it cannot continue in the same stay. And secondly, it is mor∣tall: that is, subject to utter destruction, to be alto∣gether
without any forme. The first is the muta∣bility which the matter, whereof we consist, cannot endure. You understand that in all things that are made, there are two great principles: the matter, and the forme, besides the privation. The matter is so infinitly capable, and desirous of new formes, that it cannot endure long to stay in one state; still the matter desires a new forme to come upon it; as being weary of that which it hath borne before. We see it in all things in nature. And though God worke his owne will, and his gracious wonders by that; yet notwithstanding it shewes the variety, and disposition of the matter, which is still capable, and hath an appetite after a new forme; and desires to be changed. In the fruits of the earth; The seed would not continue so a seed; but when it is cast into the ground, it comes to sprout and to spring; and from thence it comes to be a little tree, and so a greater: and then it comes to grow backward, it comes downe againe, and comes to be a dead thing. We see it in our selves. First, there is the matter of our nature; then wee doe not so continue, but it be∣comes an embrio, then it comes from that forme, to be a childe; and when it is weary of that, it comes higher. So God brings things to perfection, and then back againe to imperfection. I speake onely of the variety in the materiall cause: which as the Philoso∣pher speaks, is the devourer of formes: it is ever de∣siring a new forme to be set upon it. So God teacheth us by this, that the very appetite of the matter, shall carrie us to the certainty of a new forme; which shal be set upon us in that blessed day: because that this corruptible matter is ever changeable, and changing
formes. It is certaine, that God shall then stop the appetite of the matter; and give it a forme which shall never be changed, and that it shall never de∣sire to change. Here, nature never stayes, nor is ne∣ver content with any forme: but wee come from our prime matter, to childhood; from childhood wee passe along to youth; and youth sends us to middle age; middle age brings us to dotage; and dotage sends us to our graves. And there wee cease not neither: but still wee seeke for a new forme; the matter still would have a new coate. None of these content us; but wee desire of God a forme that never may be changed. This corruption must put on incorruption; and this mortall must put on immortality. The other condition of our nature is, that as it cannot endure to be in the same kinde; but still seeks new fashions, and new formes: so at length it comes to that forme, that seemes to extinguish it utterly, as if it had never beene; which brings matter, and forme, and all, to nothing, as a man would think: the goodliest temper; the stateliest comely body; the best and freshest countenance; the best brued bloud, and the sweetest colour: these which are the mate∣rialls of man, it brings them all at length to a hand∣full of dust; that a man would think that now the matter had quite lost its forme, and that it should ne∣ver desire a further forme. For it is mortalized, it is brought to nothing, it is brought to stench, and cor∣ruption: and it seemes to be drowned there, & there is no hope that ever it shall rise againe. But yet still the appetite works: for the matter works still to the God of nature; and desires of him a new forme, to give it a new garment. And the Apostle saith, that
God shall heare that matter, and hee shall regard the cries of it, and shall graunt the petition that this dust shall make unto him: and he shall give it a new vestment; which shall be of such a fashion, as it shall never desire any more to change, and put off again. For this corruption must put on incorruption, and this mortall must put on immortality. 6 art. The metaphor. Shall put on.A sweet and blessed metaphor is this word put on. It must be put on, in stead of the ragges wee put off: for mortality and corruption stick close to us, not as a close-bodied garment sticks to the body; but as the skinne and the flesh cleaves to the bones. And we can never put them off, and be rid of them: but by the common law, and necessity of dying, and rotting in the grave. There are only some few that shall have the prerogative, which shall live at the comming of Christ, they shall have a change, in stead of this death. But for us that must goe the com∣mon way of nature, wee know our doome. Now then this ragged garment, and vesture that wee car∣rie about us, by reason of Adams sinne, and our cor∣ruption which wee have multiplied, and added to Adams transgression: it must first be shaken off, by the omnipotent hand of God; it must be so purely, and so fully removed, as that no threeds, nor no tagg of it remaine: And then when that is done, there is time and place for the new robe to be put upon us, for that blessed garment which is to come in the place of this. But first, these torne raggs must be cast away; they must first be put off; and then this blessed vestment which the Lord hath prepa∣red, even the vestment of incorruption and immor∣tality shall succeed in the place of this. So that from
hence we see the truth of the former doctrine again. Saith S. Austin, the garment is one thing,Aug. and the thing garnished and decked is another; the gar∣ment is not the man, but an accident to the man: and it may be that hee may be here, and that may be there; or it may be here, and he may be away: and yet notwithstanding the man may be the same. So, likewise, the bodies that the Saints have in this world: they shall be still the same bodies; the same in incorruption, that they were in corruption: the same body that it was when it was mortall; the same shall it be when it is immortall, the same in sub∣stance, but not the same in glory and quality.Tertull. For as Tertullian saith, the Apostle disputes of the glory of the bodies, and not of the substance of them. There∣fore as a man that is of any state, and account in this world, he hath divers suites of cloathes; but he hath but one body: so it is true in this case, that the Lord upon one, and the selfe same body, shall poure mul∣tiplicity of garments, and riches of the rayment, which hee shall give in that blessed day. The gar∣ment of beauty, the garment of eternity, the gar∣ment of strength, of wisedome, of all kinde of ex∣cellencies, both of body and soule. The Lord shall sit them then with many changes of apparell; but still it shall be one, and the selfe same body. For this mor∣tall must put on the glorious garment of immortality: and this corruptible, must put on incorruption. So the Fathers in the Greeke Church taught their men and women in the Church to say, I beleeve the resurre∣ction of This flesh. When we say the Creed, wee say, I beleeve the resurrection of the dead, and the life ever∣lasting. But still they, when they came to this article;
they clapt their hand upon their breast, and said, I beleeve the resurrection of This flesh; punctually poin∣ting at themselves, because the Apostle saith, This corruptible must put on incorruption; and this mortall must put on immortality, to shew that it belongs to the person properly, and peculiarly to this very sub∣ject that he makes his proposition of. And this glorious garment, what it is, but the garment which God himselfe hath worne from all eternity. Hee is incorruptible, that is, unchangeable, and he is immortall; that is, it is impossible for him to grow worse. For God can never change from bet∣ter to worse: and hee shall give that power to the bodies of his Saints, that their perfection shall be so great, as that it shall not possibly be made better▪ and they shall be so singular, that it is impossible they should be made worse, or decline. For hee shall set them in the highest pitch of perfection; in the top of excellencie: that they shall receive neither majus nor minus; neither more nor lesse, neither better nor worse; they shall have no kinde of change. This is that glorious apparell, that God puts on. The Lord is King,Psal. 93.1. hee hath put on his glorious apparell, hee hath girded himselfe with strength and majestie. This is that apparell which the Apostle S. Iames speaks of, when he saith That the Lord is without any change,Iam. 1.16. or sha∣dow of changing. This garment which God hath put upon himselfe from all eternity, hee will vouchsafe in a degree, and measure, to his Saints in time: they shall be eternall from the time after, as he hath beene from worlds and ages, to world without end him∣selfe, one, and the same for evermore. Now whereas hee saith in the vinculum of this
proposition, that Oportet, this must needs be thus;  that it can be no other way but thus. This thing the Apostle adds for our comfort and consolation: both to encourage us patiently to abide the stroke of death; beause it must needs be so; for this corrup∣tible must put on incorruption, and this mortall must put on immortality: and to assure us of the necessity of the glory that shall be: it cannot faile, but it must needs come so to passe, as the Lord hath promised: Oportet, it must be so. There are certaine bonds that have passed from God to man, by the promise of the Almighty; that bindes him to it. For the word of a King, is a King to a man: as Demosthenes saith.Demost. Therefore God hath bound himselfe unto us by his word, and by the promises he hath made: and like∣wise we are againe bound by the necessity of congrui∣tie, by the necessity of fitnesse; that these things should be so. For it is of absolute necessity, in regard of the fall of Adam; and of our corruption, that wee have contracted thence: that we should not enter into that blessed incorruption, till wee have put off this corruption, which wee have contracted. There is no medling for a sound man, to come to them that are in the Pest-house; nor there is no conver∣sing for a man that is well in his wits, with them that are in Bedlam: there is no mingling of Sheepe and Goats together; there is no blending of light and darknesse, of Christ and Beliall; there can be no communion and fellowship betweene corruption and incorruption. It is impossible that the corrupt body of man should be able to entertaine, and re∣ceive that incorruptible crowne of heaven: it will burst him in his feeble abilities. As is said of Semele,
that when Iupiter appeared unto r in his full glo∣rie, shee was exhausted by meanes of his Majestie; shee expired and lost her life. So it is true and cer∣taine, this weake vessell cannot endure heaven, this corrupt body cannot abide incorruption: no more than Gunpowder can endure the approach of fire, for it will be swallowed up of it. Therefore the Lord prepared a habitation▪ and tabernacle for it in the earth: that by the earth hee may bring it to be ca∣pacious of the glory they shall receive. Therefore there is this necessity that the Apostle saith, It must be thus. And this necessity is in three respects. First, in respect of the soule, when it is seperate from the body. The soule is a part of a man, and the body is a part of a man as well as the soule; although it be not so great, and so excellent a part as that: but seeing that God hath appointed, that a body and a soule shall alway make a man; we cannot say there∣fore, that the body is a man, or that the soule is a man, but onely by way of eminencie. But we must needs take the soule, as long as it is seperate from the body; to be a thing imperfect, for it is not so much blessed as it shall be, when the body shall be re-united unto it. It is blessed as much intensively, but not exten∣sively: not in respect of the societie & company with the body, & with the glory, and beauty, and that joy of the holy Ghost, which shall be extended every where, as well to the body as to the soul. This the soul wants, and therefore they lie continually lingring & thir∣sting in expectation:Apoc. 6.10. How long Lord, holy, and true. They desire to be restored to their bodies, they be naked now; the sword is out of his scabbard now, the Lord hath drawne them assunder, notwithstanding
they are both in e hand of God. But then the Lord will again return the sword into his scabbard, when he hath clensed & pollished it, that it shal never after∣ward be seperated. In this regard it must needs be, that corruption must put on incorruption. For the soule by the hand of God, is made uncorruptible and immor∣tall; but the body is made both corruptible and mor∣tall: therefore that the one may fit the other, the Lord must make it by a strange & wondrous change, he must make this corruption put on incorruption; that is, he shall so mold the body, by lying in the earth, that he shall make it by the power of his hand, hee shall make it capable of that great incorruption which hee shall give it; when the soule and the body shall meete together in one. The second reason of this necessity is this; because  the good God hath ordained in justice to performe all things: and that according to that which a man hath done in this flesh,2 Cor. 5.10. for we mst receive according to the things that we have done in this flesh, whether they be good or evill, as the holy Apostle saith. Therfore the Lord will have this corrupt body, which hath suffered paine here on earth; this body which hath suffered for Gods cause; this body which hath suffered death; this body which hath endured the flame, and perse∣cution; this body which hath suffered hunger, and thirst, and nakednesse; this body that hath suffered infamy, and ignominy, reviling, and opprobries, as the Lord Iesus did for our sakes; this body which hath bin so brought under, and made as it were a laughing stock to the world; which hath bin made a refuge of scornes; this body which beares the prints & marks of the Lord Iesus Christ about with it;Gal. 6.17. this body
which hath bin in martyrdom, (so ignominious to the sight of the world, though it have beene noble in the sight of God) this body that hath born all the brunt, and toyl, & labour in affliction: this body must be glo∣rified againe, for that it stands with Gods justice, that every man shall receive according as hee hath done in this flesh, whether it be good or evill. Therefore it must needs be, that this corruption must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality: this very body that hath suffered, must be honoured: that as it hath suffered many evill things for Gods cause; so it may receive many good things, for its owne cause, & for the mercy of God, which shall be revealed upon it. And lastly, it is necessary it should be thus; Oportet, it must needs be that the body must goe to incorrup∣tion,Aquin. by the way of corruption, as Aquinas well no∣teth: because of the conformity of the members to the head. Our Lord Iesus Christ went this way; there∣fore we that are his servants, must not look to be a∣bove our Master,Luke 6.40. it is enough that the servant be equall to his Master. Christ is our head, he is our Master: & he could not come to immortality, but first he died; he was mortall, before he was immortall: and though he were not corruptible, although there was no change in his body, to corruption; yet he was mortall: there was a change in the colour, there was a change in his strength and life: these things were in him, for hee was dead; & these things cannot consist, but in him that is dead. So much as he was corruptible, hee had it for our sakes; hee was mortall, hee was dead and buried; and hee testified his mortality three dayes together by lying in the grave. Therefore as Christ went this way, and could not goe to heaven
untill he had tasted of death, first he must suffer, and so enter into glory. It followes therefore,Luke 24.26. that all his members must second him, and subscribe to that course which their Lord and head went, and be con∣tent to be like unto him; it must be with us, as it was with him; therefore this corruption must put on in∣corruption. That is, wee cannot come to that glory, but by dying first: we must die, to live; first we must be in our graves, in stinke and filthinesse, that wee may be raised to beauty, and strength, and perfection, according to the glorious promise which God hath made in Christ. Now the next thing to be observed, is the tri∣umph of the Church, when this is done; when this corruption hath put on incorruption, and this mortall hath put on immortality: when this blessed garment is once fitted, when this vestment shall be once ap∣plyed unto these bodies, as never to be put off again, Then shall be fulfilled this saying. This garment of incorruption and immortality, that is, this garment of glory and beauty, wherein God shall invest his Saints, it shall not be like these garments of ours, that are put upon our outsides, which cover onely our outward parts. They touch not our intrailes, they come not neare the heart: but this blessed garment of incorruption, it shall run through all the veynes of man; it shall possesse him every where; it shall be as the life is in all the parts of the body; in every part there is life, as well as in the rest. It shall be as the health is; it is the breath of heaven, which runs through all the parts of the body: if one part or member be sick, all the rest are so too for company. It shall be as the soule is,
in every part and substance of the bodie; the soule is in all the parts of the body; it is as well in the lit∣tle finger, as in the braine of a man. And after this kind shall this garment be put on; not as our cloathes which we put on and off: not as our garments, which keepe us warme in our outward parts, and never touch our inward. But this, as the Spirit of God, shall rule through the whole man; there shall be no part, nor no blood, but it shall be uncorrupt: there shall be no flesh in man, but it shall be immortall. There is no part, but it shall be garnished and adorned with this rare and singular quality, which shall run through the whole man, and shall possesse him wholly; and shall take that root in him, as it shall be impossible for it to be extirpated: for it is the glorious hand of God, that shall plant them there, and nothing therefore shall be able to supplant them. Wee must put on in∣corruption. And it shall be so put on, as the sun puts on his glory, never to put it off againe: as the stars put on their light, never to be eclipsed, never to have their light taken from them. Wee must not put on the robe, and garment of immortality, as Kings and Princes put on their gay cloathes and apparell.Chrysost. As St. Chrysostom saith, when Kings and Princes goe to the bath on earth, although they be never so gloriously apparelled, yet when they goe into the bath, they must put off their cloathes as well as other men: and when they goe to their graves, they must divest themselves, and goe after the order of other men. But the Saints of God shall not put on the cloathes of incorruption, as a man that goes to the bath; but they shall put it on, as God
hath put on eternity: they shall put it on, as the sun hath put on his light, never to be darke. They shall put it on, as the moon and stars, which have the same beauty and figure continually. Although to us, it seeme different, and the light of the starres are not seene in the day time; yet there is no hindrance in them, they have the same coat on them. The Saints shall have a garment, like the coat, and ha∣bite of the lillies; of which our Saviour saith, that Solomon in all his royalty,Luke 12.27. was not cloathed like one of them: their garments shall be so fit, and so dura∣ble, and so sweet, and so naturall; without any price, without any cost. The Lord shall then, fit the gar∣ment to the party. Making of garments, requires great skill, and much art: for it is no ordinary thing, for to fit a body truely, with a garment or vesture. But the Lord will shew that wondrous art, in fitting this garment to our bodies, in such a won∣drous aptnesse, in such a fitnesse, and proportion, and compleatnesse, that in every part of mans bo∣dy, there shall appeare this beauty, and this comeli∣nesse: this glorious apprehension of these heaven∣ly qualities, shall appeare in every part of man. The Lord shall so fit the body, that the garment shall glosse, and beautifie, and adorne the least part of the body. Therefore, let us lift up our heads,Rom. 13.11. for our salva∣tion drawes neerer, then when wee first beleeved: and let us delight our selves, and labour to put on this new garment, this blessed vesture, that we all seeke so much after. Wee are tired with these stinking cloathes,  with these perishing vanities of the world. Wee are
faine to perfume them with sweet odours, as the fashion of the times are now: wee cannot indure the graine of our owne bodies, but wee must per∣fume them with exotick, and strange smels. But that garment shall bee so perfumed, it shall bee so amiable by the power of God, that it shall need no other smell, or perfume. The curiosity of our dis∣positions, cannot indure a garment, a yeare toge∣ther. Shee is accounted a sordid woman, that weares that garment this yeare, which shee ware the last: and shee is neglected, and despised of her meanes, and friends. But the Lord shall so fit this garment, that we shall still take delight, wee shall have a holy pride in wearing of it, and it shall still bee the better for wearing, and have continually more splendor, and beauty, then when we first put it on. For this mortall must put on immortality, to all delight, and glory, to a lasting glory, and a con∣tinuall glosse, and beauty that shall never fade, but still increase to the party that weares it. Now let our appetites appeare, in desiring of it. When? when shall it bee? And so I come to the last point, that I will trouble you with at this time. When great promises are made, all delayes are te∣dious.Prov. 13.12. Hope that is deferred, kills the heart of man: therefore it is naturall for us, still to call, and urge for the time, When, Lord, when? why, when this corruptible hath put on incorruption, and this mortall hath put on immortality: when this is done, as it is certaine it shall bee done, (for wee have Gods word and promise for it, wee have the appetite of the matter, which still calls, and cries to God for a forme: and we have the Lord ingaged by example,
and president, and by the head, and first fruits, Christ Iesus, the head; when this is done) Then shall bee fulfilled, that which was spoken. As if he should say, I speake not these things to you of my selfe; and out of my owne Apostolicall authority, which I might stand upon: but I speake them out of the writings of those men, that were illuminated by the same Spirit, from the writing of the holy Prophets. Then shall be fulfilled that which was spoken, or written. That word, that word of grace, that word of promise, that word which is able to make the dead revive: and the word is this, that Death is swallowed up into victory. Where observe; First, who wrote this. And then, the substance of the words. Concerning the first, the Apostle defends his authority, from ancient times: to teach us what we are to doe in like cases. But this is a common obvi∣ous point, I will not insist upon it. Concerning the Author, Isay, and Hosea, are alledged for it; some holding with the one, some with the other. Certainely it is in Isay, in the true intimation according to the word, Isay 25.8.Isay. 25.8. where God promiseth the people a deliverance out of the Captivity of Babylon. He saith, God shall destroy death for ever, he hath swallowed up death for ever, or to victory, for  netsahh may signifie both entrance into length of time, or else victory. Because victory properly respects the time, and that is true victory, which is not to be dashed nor daunted with any time: that is the most perfect victory, that is not daunted in any time. So in this respect, the
word time, and victory is taken in the holy Tongue, for the same: and that which the Septuagint here translates the one, the Apostle in the Text, tran∣slates the other. Although indeed the Apostle follow the Septuagint, yet they have another tran∣slation besides: which is, God shall swallow up death for ever. So the Prophet Isays words I take to be the best and the fittest. Hos. 13.14.The other in Hosea, is in Hos. 13.14. where the verse following after my Text, is repeated ex∣presly; but the words of this verse of my Text, is not there to bee found. Therefore this I take to be the word of Isay. Observe now what the word is, that hee useth for it: it is full of life, it brings men from tempo∣rall things, to the expectation of things eternall. The Lord speakes to them of a great feast that they should make, after their comming up out of the Land: the Apostle takes it to set forth the eternall feast. For it is to no purpose, to have these temporall things, and to bee swallowed up of death, and hell. The Apostle teacheth us therefore, what con∣struction wee should make of the blessings of God in this life: to extend them in a high sense. They are never sweet, till then. The bread that wee eat, should make us mindefull of the bread of heaven: that is, of the glorious presence of God, which shall for ever delight us. And the honours, and preferments, that wee have here, except they signi∣fie to us those glorious and stately seates of glory hereafter, they are rather plagues, and punish∣ments then blessings.
By death there in the Prophet, is meant the gene∣rall Captivity: but the Apostle takes it for the death of the body. To victory is the terme, and manner, whereto it shall bee swallowed: But I should be too troublesome to enter up∣on them now. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.54. Then shall bee fulfilled that word which is written, Death is swallowed up into victory. Oh death where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory? WHat is so weak, and againe, what is so strong, as a Christian man? saith St. Ambrose.Ambros. Hee is ex∣ceedingly weake, because hee is subject to any temptation: and incomparably strong, be∣cause hee can triumph over death it selfe, which is the tri∣umpher over all mankind. For what can he feare, that is fearelesse of death? and what is able to in∣sult over him, that can insult over that which is the last of all terribles; which is the dissolution of na∣ture? Thus the Lord hath tempered in the same vessell, great infirmity, and great valour, that hee might shew his owne strength: for in mans weak∣nesse, is Gods strength consummate. The Apostle
therefore, to prove those wonderfull things which hee had said before; that this corruptible, must put on the garment of incorruption; this mortall must put on the weed of immortality: he doth now, as it were, bring into the minds of the Corinthians, the present spectacle; hee lifts up their hearts to view it, as a thing acted and done before their eyes. As he saith to the Galathians,Gal. 3.1. that Iesus Christ was crucified before their eyes, whom they never saw crucified: but hee was so lively described unto them by his Gospel, that he saith, they saw it acted, and saw him really crucified, and all the passages of his death, and passion. So now, he would bring the hearts and minds of the Corinthians, to such a kind of contemplation, as to see the Lord God rai∣sing up the dead; and to see the dead putting on their new garments, their new coat of immortality, and incorruption. He represents all to the eye: and when hee hath so done, hee brings in a kinde of insultation, a verse that they were wont to sing in victories, and triumphs.1. Sam. 18.7. As in the triumph of Da∣vid over Goliah; the women sang, Saul hath slaine his thousand, but David his ten thousand: so the Saints of God, as St. Chrysostome saith.Chrysost. Dost thou see (saith he) what a generous spirit is in the holy Apostle? how hee paints before the eyes of the people, this most noble and divine indowment; this garment of incorruption, and immortality? and behold how he himselfe is rapt! And in that most heavenly and strange rapture, as a man inspired from heaven, he insults over death, lying under his feet; and treads upon the head of him that treads downe all things else, and cries over him, Oh death
where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory? This is the song of the Church, and that song which the Saints of God desire with full contentment to sing; and it is given to all them that are true hear∣ted to the Lord, to sing this song with a full reso∣lution. But when the time is come that it should be sung, the weaknesse of our nature, perhaps, will not suffice to it. For it is one thing, for a man to bee valiant, when he is in health, and it is another thing, when the fit, and when the storme takes him: then to appeare, that which hee professed himselfe to be before; there are but few, that can come in the houre of death, to make this insultation. But all should aspire for it, and looke after it; and should desire God to inable them to doe thus, as St. Paul speaketh; and as many Saints, and Martyrs, have in their martyrdome, insulted over death, with these words. For this was often the motto in their mouthes, Oh death where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory? Division, into five Parts.Now that we may proceed in order. First, wee are to consider that which hee saith, the word shall be fulfilled, which was written. And then, where it is written. And thirdly, what it is that is written. Death is swallowed up into victory. And fourthly, when this shall bee performed; Then, then when our bodies are changed, and this corruptible hath put on incorruption,1. Cor. 15. and this mortall hath put on immortality; then shall bee fulfilled this saying. And lastly, the use and ground of all: that is to take heart, and courage; for these things are writ∣ten
for consolation. A man that can take no comfort against death, shall never have any comfort any time of his life: if there were no joy in our death, there could bee none in our life. Therefore all this, is to renew the spirits of Gods children, and to make them undaunted, when that great, and common Adversary shall ceaze upon them. The Insultation is in the 55. verse,1. Part. The fulfilling of the pro∣phecy. which is taken out of Hosea 13.14. Oh death where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory? Of these parts, briefly and in order: as it shall please God to give as∣sistance. And first concerning the fulfilling of the Prophe∣sie. The holy Apostle would raise up the Saints of God to applaud, and to take delight, and to gratu∣late one another, to see the fulfilling of Prophesies come to an end. For all Prophesies must bee fulfil∣led:Matth. 24 35. and though heaven and earth should passe away, yet no jote, and tittle of the Law, and the Pro∣phets can passe, till all bee fulfilled, and accompli∣shed. Now the Apostle brings to their minde, those sweet prophesies of former time: whereby he concludes the certainty of these things, which he now delivers to them. For there is no greater contentment to any man, that is a true judicious Reader of the Scriptures then this; to see that the things promised in the Gospel, are not yesterday matters; they bee no new things, no late devises, but they be almost as anci∣ent as the world: they are drawne out of the trea∣sures of God in former ages, by the holy Prophets, that spake in former times, what should come to passe in the fulnesse of time.
And as St. Pauls manner is, still, hee confirmes his doctrine by the precedent doctrine of the Pro∣phets: so here in this, saith St. Chrysostome, spea∣king many infinite, incredible things; it was need∣full for him to set to a seale, and to conclude all, with the authority of some Author that had gone before. And he tells them, this is a word written; It is a book-case, it is no new thing which he saith, but that which God had inspired before, into the holy Prophet Isay, and the Prophet Hosea, and di∣vers others, concerning the same doctrine that he reveales unto them. Therefore, to conclude this point, We should learne, by this example, to confirme our faith; to incourage our selves by the constancy of Gods word; the constant truth, which hath beene from age to age. And that is it which must settle, and stablish; if there were any thing which swerved from the common custome, or any thing that were new: then wee might doubt whether it were from God or no. But because in all things it is so consonant to it selfe; and God is the same God of the Old Testament, and of the New, it is a great confirmation to us, to keepe us from doubting, and from many scruples, which Satan the enemy of mankind, suggests unto us. 2. Part. Whore this is written.But where this word is written, or who is the Au∣thour of it, as I said, Divines doe diversly interpret. Some thinke it is from Isay; some thinke it is from Hosea; and some, that it is a writing from them both: that it is two testimonies. It is not unlikely, that his purpose was to cite both the Prophets, two of them together:Matth. 18.16. that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word might bee established. There∣fore the first part of the sentence, is taken out of Isay, the second part out of Hosea. That in Isay, is Isay, 25.8.Isay 25.8. you shall see there, the Lord makes a banquet to his Church: and the conclusion of that heavenly banquet is this, God shall destroy death for ever, hee shall swallow up death into victory, as it is here spoken. His meaning and purpose is there, to speake of the deliverance from the captivity of Babylon: but because there is no use in these tem∣porall blessings, except wee referre them to spiritu∣all, (for these outward things be but as earnests of greater graces, which God hath reposed for us in a better world) therefore the argument followes: As the common Tenent of the Scriptures hold still, that from things present, wee may argue things to come; and from things temporall, wee may prove to our selves the assurance of things spirituall: So the deliverance out of the captivity of Babylon, did sig∣nifie to them, and was an assurance of the delive∣rance from hell; of the deliverance, from the bon∣dage of destruction; of the deliverance, from the bondage of sin, and the bondage of death. There∣fore the Apostle translates that, according to the meaning of the Prophet: which raiseth Gods peo∣ple to understand, that they had greater enemies to encounter with, then Babylon. And if God should have stayed his hand there, and have given them a meere deliverance, out of Babylons countrey: they should be no better then men of a few dayes conti∣nuance. For they must die, after that deliverance, and they had greater enemies then Babylon was, from whom they must desire to bee delivered; and
whom they stood in feare of; which would draw a more dangerous consequence, then all their ene∣mies else besides. For Babylon could but inthrall their bodies, and that but for a time: but hell would destroy both body, and soule for ever. Therefore God saith, hee would destroy death, hee would de∣stroy the death of the body, and the death of the soule: the first death, and the second death: and he would swallow both into victory. That is, the death of Christ should get the mastery of them, that they should never need to feare them afterward: they should bee so couched in silence, that they should have no power, nor strength remaining in them; but they shall bee as though they had never beene, they shall be so obliterate. Now for the other place, Hosea 13.14.Hosea 13.14. where the Prophet discourseth strangely, after a won∣drous, and hidden manner. For I think there was never any man, but out Saviour Christ, was able to understand Hosea; no nor shall doe till the worlds end. To make a setled discourse, and a plaine expo∣sition of him, it is almost impossible: for hee seems upon purpose to write in parables, and hard Enig∣mataes and riddles. Therefore hee concludes his Prophesie,Hosea 14.9. He that hath wisedome shall understand this. For indeed, he that hath not wisedome, cannot pos∣sibly attaine the knowledge of it. But this that St. Paul saith, may be taken in divers kind of speeches: that either I will be thy death, oh death, (which is the best reading of all, and followed by the best Di∣vines) or, oh death, where is thy sting? as the Apostle reades it here. The summe of the Prophet Hosea is this; to teach
that God was purposed, and was willing to deliver his people out of the captivity of Babylon; and to have brought them quickly home againe, and to have stablished them in their owne country: But because they were contumelious, and rebellious a∣gainst him, therefore their wickednesse and obsti∣nacy stayed his purpose: and therefore he would be death to them, and would not spare them, as wee see in the sequell of the Text. But I will not trouble you with these thornie discourses. It is certaine that that which is there written, may be taken ma∣ny wayes: and for mee to shew you the variety of Readings, were but to cast a stumbling block be∣fore your most holy faith. Therefore I will resolve upon the authority of the Apostle, which followes the Septuagint, and reads it thus, not I will be thy death, but, Oh death, where is thy sting? oh grave, where is thy victory? according to the Septuagint. For St. Paul followes the Greek copie; the transla∣tion of the Septuagint, in all places almost where he citeth Scripture. Howbeit, to gather that cōclusion and proposition, as Hosea saith, by way of supposall: If my people had been good, if they had been wise, death should not have had power over them: but I would have been the death of death: the Apostle brings it in the way of affirmation, oh death, where is thy sting? Now the reason is this; where God propounds things by way of condition, there the Saints of God keep the condition alway: and so the matter is true to them, which is propounded. As in Psal. 81. If Israell would have kept my wayes,Psal. 81.13, 16. I would have fed them with the finest flowre of wheat: but because
they did not keepe my wayes, therefore they were famished, and perished. Out of this a man may ga∣ther, that a childe of God that keeps his wayes, shall be fed with the finest flowre of wheat, with the best delicates that can be. So Hosea speaks by way of supposition, in the potentiall mood: If my people had been wise; if they had repented them of their sinnes, I would have done this great miracle for them: the Lord would have freed them from their captivity, and brought them to Israel out of Baby∣lon, which he never did. Indeed, Iudah returned out of their captivity, but Israel did never returne. If they had been penitent, God would have done this; but because they were not, and repented not of their rebellion; therefore God determined death against them. Out of this, where the promises of God are hin∣dred by the malice of men, the Saints of God can gather matter of comfort and consolation. For they keepe the Covenant of the Lord, they repent them of their sinnes, they are wise when God strikes them, and their vexation gives them understan∣ding. Therefore they conclude; if God would have done this to them, if they had beene better; certainely he will doe it to mee, which desires to be better: if hee would have delivered them, if they had repented; he will deliver me, which doe repent before him in sackcloth and ashes. Those good things which the wicked cannot have, because they keepe not the condition; wee shall have them, because we keepe the condition. You understand then, how these things are to bee reconciled. Hosea speakes in the potentiall
mood, that God would doe this: but St. Paul speaks it in the indicative mood, by way of insultation: God hath done it. Hee will doe it, because the Saints of God are found not truce-breakers; but they keep covenant with the Lord (as much as they can) by the helpe and assistance of his holy Spirit. This is all the difference, for that which is in the moods, and is uttered againe in the tenses; it is of lesse moment. In that it is said in Hosea, the Lord shall doe it; and St. Paul saith, he hath done it; as spea∣king of the time past. This is the nature of faith, to expound the pro∣mises of the Gospel, as things done actually, because they are as sure, being once signed with the privy signet of God, as if they were performed; There being no difference with God, betweene the things present, and the things to come. So in the hope of Gods children, the promises of God are yea and amen. For in Christ Iesus, all the promises of God are yea,2. Cor. 1.2. and amen, 2 Cor. 1. So much concerning the Pro∣phet, where it is written. Wherein, because that is the greatest difficulty, I thought onely to observe, that the Apostle speaks in the confidence of faith; that it is now done, which the Prophet saith shall bee done. And that which the Prophet Isay saith, hee shall destroy death; the Apostle saith, he hath destroyed it: that is, then, when these things shall bee done. And Hosea saith, I will bee thy death; the Apostle saith, Where is thy sting, oh death. These matters (I say) must be expounded, as belonging onely to the faithfull; of whose resurrection the Apostle speaks in this Chapter, alone. For the faithfull, doe willingly keepe the condition with God: they
breake not peace with him, but keepe their covenant. Therefore that which the rebells should have had, if they had kept their truce, and covenant; that the godly shall have, because they doe keepe the con∣dition of the covenant. 3. Part. What is writ∣ten.Now I come to that which is written; the sen∣tence of Isay is, Death is swallowed up into victory. Here is first a strange, and wondrous position; that death should bee swallowed up; but of this I have spoken before, I will but touch it now. And then for the maner of the phrase, swallowed. And then the terme, whereto, to victory. And then the efficient cause whereby, what it is that swallowes up death: the death of Christ. 1. Swallowed.Concerning the first, wee must understand, that according to the common speech of men; death is such a puissant, and powerfull adversary, that there is no Prince in the earth, that can confront him. He is indeed, able to meet him, but he is foy∣led by him. Although indeed, death bee nothing but the cessation of nature: because a mans sight failes him, therefore he is blind; because the pow∣er of hearing ceaseth, therefore a man is deafe; be∣cause the power of life and heat failes, therefore a man dies. Death is nothing but a privation; and by consequent, it is nothing at all. As the Sunne when it is set, there is darknesse, which is a matter of no∣thing, but the absence of the Sunne. So death is no∣thing but the absence of life; nothing but a cessati∣on of the powers in man. But because wee con∣ceive it after another manner, as a grievous ene∣mie, as a triumphant enemy over all the world: therefore the Scripture condiscends to our capa∣city,
speaks in our language, and makes it as an ene∣my; Christ and it, as two enemies, encountring each other; and the one foyling the other, and so foy∣ling it, as that there is no reliques, or remainders of the one left, because of the great victory, and con¦quest of the other. The victory of Christ shall bee so absolute over death, that there shall be no occa∣sion of feare, because there shall bee no steppe of death, that shall have being in the world. And this is marvellously set downe by a meta∣phor of swallowing: that that monster which swal∣lowes all the world of men; that hath swallowed our forefathers, that hath swallowed all. The ages, and generations before us, what are they else but the morsels of death, which hee hath swallowed to glut his stomack? and all cannot serve, but still he is craving. For death, and hell, and the grave are unsatiable, they are never satisfied; although they have abundance of income, and harvest, dayly throwne into them. The metaphor is taken from those kinde of ra∣venous beasts, which vse not to chew, but to swal∣low their prey: and specially from fish, from Whales, and Crokodiles, which altogether smallow, and choake it up without any mincing the meat they re∣ceive. So the meaning is, that the death of Christ, swallowes up the death of nature, and the death of sinne, (the second death) that they have no more power over us. Hee shall swallow them, as the Whale swallowed Ionas: he shall swallow them, that there shall bee no more sight of them to live, and to bee, and to have power: hee shall swallow them, as the red sea swallowed up the Egyptians: he shall
swallow them, as the fiery furnace swallowes a little water that is cast into it, a sprinkling of water. It shall swallow them, as the mysts, and vapours are swallowed up by the beams of the Sun; that there shall be no appearance of them afterward: It shall swallow them, as the dry, gaping, thirsty land swal∣lowes a little showre of raine, after a long drought: It swallowes them up, as the weaker metalls that are cast into the fiery furnace; that are so spent and consumed, as that there is no remainder, nor foot∣steps left of them. So is this similitude contrived, that the devouring death, shall bee swallowed in the death of Christ. And whereto shall it be swallowed? To Victory.To victory. This is the strange terme, that there is nothing now in the Church of God, but triumphs, trophees, and victorie: there is nothing now but songs of deliverance, there is nothing but well-springs of life, to water every tree in the garden of God. The most strange, and compleat deliverance that can bee, is to bee brought from all the points of slavery, to all the points of liberty. Such a victoy is this, which is spoken of here: There shall bee nothing but victory, where there was no∣thing before, but captivity. Where there was no∣thing but sicknesse, and after sicknesse death; and after death damnation, by meanes of the sinne of Adam: Now there shall be nothing else, but life, and joy, and glory, and victory. And this is the happy estate, and condition of the second comming of Christ, and his presence, and pos∣session of his children, at his comming. So wee reade it, and so the best Translations hold it, to
victory. Some others reade it, to contention: So St. Ierom, Tertullian, St. Ambrose,St. Ierom. Tetull. Ambros. Aug. and St. Austin in many places, reade it to contention. For saith St. Ierom, it is a kind of contestation, a kind of law, and pleading in the court of God; betweene the death of Christ, on the one party; and the death of na∣ture inflicted for sinne, on the other party: and they shall enter into plea, the one against the other; and the power of the death of Christ, shall com∣mand, and overwhelme the power of the death of nature, and of the second death, which is of sinne: by reason of the justice, and righteousnesse which is in Christ. For thereupon it comes to passe, that death is swallowed up into victory: because the death of Christ, hath answered the justice of his Father, and hath satisfied the wrath, which wee had con∣tracted against us. And by that reason, hee shall cease the Commission of death, which is out for us, because of Adams sinne:Rom. 6. last. For the wages of sinne is death: but because Christ was without sinne, there∣fore hee had no cause, or reason to die, but onely for our sinnes; and so God is satisfied by his death, and is well-pleased in him, to give us life; be∣cause the actions that proceed from Christ, are not humane actions, but the actions of his person, the actions of God and man; and by consequent, able to merit for an infinite company, and to be applied to many worlds, (if there were any more then this) that is, to all believers to the end of the world, that shall have participation in his blood. They shall have (as they have a promise) forgive∣nesse of sinnes, and sinne being removed and for∣given, death hath no claime. But there was no sin
in Christ, therefore death had no right to him, nor shall have to those that are in him; therefore death shall make a surcease, and be no more; but shall be utterly abandoned, and swallowed up into victory. This is that plea, that the Lord Iesus in his death, makes against death; I will be death, against death. Because thou hast forfetted thy commission, because thou wast appointed of God to lay hold upon sin∣ners, and thou hast laid hold on him that is not a sinner: therefore thou shalt lose thy place, and thou shalt bee cashiered; thou shalt have no more right over sinners, because the justice and righteousnesse of the Sonne of God, is imputed unto them, to ridde them from thy hands, and from those dismall con∣clusions, which otherwise they should have beene drowned in: There is the contention on the one party. Death of Nature.The other party, is the death of nature. Death, which is the great master of the world to this day; he shall have another plea. Hee shall say, For thy part I acknowledge I was mistaken; I acknow∣ledge I laid my hands amisse, when I tooke thee: for there was no sinne in thee. But for all other men, from the beginning of the world, God gave me them as prisoners, and made mee their executio∣ner. I have not done amisse in these; therefore I may justly hold them, that are given me by Divine providence, by the will of God. It is true, thou art alone, the onely man, that hath overcome mee by thy justice and righteousnesse. But this justice and righteousnesse is in thy selfe. Escape therefore with thine owne life, goe with thine owne priviledge; trouble me not, and that which belongs unto mee;
enter not into my possession: the Lord hath given mee these sinners, as hee gave thee to be no sinner. What is thy holinesse to them that are unholy? what is thy righteousnesse to them that are ungodly, and sinners? what passage can there be betweene thee and them to bring them out of my hands? Yes, the plea is to contention, as St. Ierom saith: They shall contend who shall have their spoiles, and the Lord shall answer, that he came not as a private man: and that his works were not done personally, for himselfe, but they were publique actions, for the redemption of mankind. Therefore whatso∣ever hee did, hee communicates it to his followers: whatsoever he did, it was for his subjects, and ser∣vants. If he overcame death in his owne person, he hath done it not so much for himselfe, as for those that beleeve in him, that they might partake of his victory; and that they might rejoyce for his victo∣ry, that hee hath had over the world, the flesh, and the devill. So the contention, as St. Ierom saith, comes upon Christs side, by all reason: because he hath satisfied the justice of God the Father: be∣cause hee was offered a sacrifice of a sweet smell, which shall be ever in record before God: because his suffering was of an infinite nature, being the second Person in the Trinity; and the actions are al∣way given to the subject, and to the principall: the actions of Christ, are not attributed to his humane nature, but to his person, and so also his merits: and although he suffered in his humane nature properly, and not in his Divine, yet the merit, and the glory of that suffering, reflexed upon the Divine nature. For not onely the blood, but the blood of God was
spilt for the satisfaction of the wrath of God, and for the reconciliation of the world. Therefore the Lord Iesus shall answer again in the plea, that what∣soever he did, he did it for the good of all them that belong to him. I had never tooke flesh, but to make all flesh bles∣sed, by my Incarnation. I had never entred within the verge, and list of my mortall body, but to make all their bodies immortall: so great is the benefit, that I avow to man-kind, that not onely my friends, but also my enemies have that benefit by mee, to have their bodies immortall: & whatsoever I have done, either by way of suffering, by way of merit, by my miracles, by my death and passion, by my Resurrection, and ascension into heaven; I have done it not to reside onely in my owne nature, but to com∣municate it, that it may reside in my followers: for I have made all the world of beleevers, to par∣take of it. This shall be the contestation, (as St. Ie∣rome saith) as if the Lord should heare the just plea of Christ, and also the unjust wrangling of the death of nature, he shall heare the cause, and judge the matter on the part of our blessed Saviour, which hath deserved by his death and passion, to open the booke, and to unloose the seales, and to make good the promises, to indow himself and all his followers, in eternall possessions, in that holy and heavenly city which is the Mother of us all. Death is swallowed up into victory. Now it followes concerning the time, when this must be expected; then shall be fulfilled this saying; for these things be in order to be discussed. It is true, these things are accomplished now in some
degree; but the full accomplishment shall be then, when wee shall be consummate: then when Christ shall be consummate. Christ is never full, till his body be full; hee beares such love to his Church, that he is said yet to have reliques of passion,. Col. 1.24. the re∣liques of the passions of Christ. The glory that Christ possesseth, and is capable of, which he is advanced unto in the highest perfe∣ction, by his incarnation, which the Lord stands now in possession of, and he shall have no more glo∣ry conferred upon him then hee hath, and hath had for these sixteene hundred yeares, been possessed of; but for the infinite love that hee beares to his chil∣dren, to those that are of his body, he is said then to be compleat, not before, when all his members shall be completed: then death shall be swallowed up into victory. Death was swallowed up in victory, when Christ rose againe, when hee brought the spoyles of the grave away with him, when the Lord raised him, and when many bodies of the Saints which slept, were carryed up with him to his Kingdome; where he hath them now in heaven to converse with him, and keepe him company; then the Lord gave a gage and pawne of this that now shall be fulfilled: but be∣cause those were but a few, and because the fulnesse of the Church is that which Christ delights in; the Apostle refers us to the hope, and expectation of that time, when we shall get the garment of immor∣tality, when we shall have that new coat of incorrup∣tion, then we shall see that fulfilled, and clearly ac∣complished, which was spoken in former time, Death is swallowed up into victory. Not onely in the per∣son,
of Christ, but in thine, and mine, and all that have interest in Christ; Death is swallowed up into victory: that great swallower of all things in the world, that consumes not onely the fraile bodies of men, but the mighty monuments of marble, and the greatest things that are most unlikely to be dissol∣ved, & shaken asunder in the world, the very earth it self; the foundations of which we see oft stand trē∣bling, and cast the firme continent into the great sea, as it hath hapned to divers parts of the world. Now this great swallower which was the destroyer and consumer of all things before, and that never could meet with his match, now he himselfe shall be swallowed up, into compleat victory. Therefore this must be our desire, as souldiers after the victory, we follow a master which is a vi∣ctorious Captaine, that was never foyled by any ene∣my, but wheresoever hee goes, he carries the field before him. And souldiers (wee know) what great glory and glee they have; what noysing of trumpets, what erecting of spirits, when they once come to be masters of their enemies: there is not such a glorious sight under heaven, as a victorious army returning from the spoile. The Lord would teach us by this, what wee should doe, to lift up our spirits, to prepare us for the insultation over this grisly enemy, which is the devourer of all; the voice of victory must be glori∣ous, as it is said of Lepanto, when newes came to Venice, that the Christians had the victory over the Turkes; for three dayes together there was no other noise, nor voice rang among them, but victo∣rie, victorie: and though they lost many men that
were slaine, and heard of the death of many of their friends, yet they were content to offer the lives of their friends in that common sacrifice, so the victory might be pronounced amongst them. So we reade of Rome, and Athens, and especially of Carthage, for the newes of a victory that they had over the Romanes, they did nothing for a whole moneth together, but goe with garlands on their heads, and celebrate festivalls, as men with exceeding joy transported out of themselves. For this purpose also the great Conquerours called many Cities after that name, by the name of victory, as the City of Nice, where the first Counsell was kept, it signifieth vi∣ctory: and Nicosia-Stratonica, and Verturia Thessalo∣nica, and many other Cities, had their names given them of their victories; and the great Captaines would call themselves Nicanors, and by the like names, victorious men. And those that bore the victory, they still wore garlands, which were alway greene, because they would have their names, and conquests never to wax old, but be alway greene; therefore they had their garlands of Laurell. So wee see how the world use to be have themselves in victory; how they are ne∣ver daunted with any thing, nor grieved with any thing: if they may have the victory, they are con∣tent to lose the life of their best friends. This should teach us to apply these things in a spirituall sense, to be as wise in our generation, as the world is in their generation; we were so desirous of victory, and so desperate for it, that wee would have given all things to be made partakers of it: we would have given the first fruits of our bodies, for
the sinnes of our soules, thousands of rammes, and ten thousand rivers of oyle, that wee might be made vi∣ctors of this grisly monster: but we were not able to do it, nay rather then we would not have the vi∣ctory, we were content to lose the life of our Chief∣taine Christ Iesus, who slept in death, that we might ever wake unto life eternall; wee were content that he should die for us, and the hands of us all were in his bloud: we were content that he should die, that death by him might be swallowed up into vi∣ctorie. Let us therefore entertaine this glorious motion into our soules; let us lift up our heads with melody to God; let us know that nothing can make against us now, because wee have the victory; a constant and perfect victory, where there is no enemy re∣sides or remaines. The princes of this world have but halfe victories, the enemy runs away from them, and comes and makes head again, and comes the next yeare with a greater force. But God when he gets a victory, he leads captivity captive; he leaves no possibility of rising againe, but hee strikes to the maine, he strikes the adversary to the heart; he cuts off stub and stock of all likelihood and probability, that there should not be any fear of it afterward: he takes away the essence of the thing, and so he makes an absolute victory. The Insultatiō.Now followes the Insultation, whereunto God would raise a christian mans heart. Oh death where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory? These words that be in the vocative case in the Apostles writing, in the Prophet are in the accusa∣tive;
I will be death unto death, and I will be destructi∣on against hell. Here the Apostle understanding the purpose of the holy Ghost, teacheth us, not too much to be tyed to the letter of the Scripture, but to the sense and meaning: he takes out these two, hee singles them out, and sets them downe in the constancy of his spirit, as though they were two personated enemies, Death, and Hell: that is, death, and the grave; for hee speaks here of the resurrection of the dead, of such as are dead in Christ; and they shall never come to hell: therefore although the word be translated Sheol, hell; yet it is here taken for the grave onely, whereunto the godly goe, as well as the ungodly: to hell goe not the godly, but the un∣godly: they goe to the grave which is the common receptacle of all, and it is a degree of misery, and mischiefe; that after a man hath lost his ability, when he hath lost his life and power, when he hath lost his colour, and glory, and perfection, to be thrust down as a brute beast into a pit, and to lie there, and rot, and putrifie; therefore because these two are the most shamefull enemies, the one to rid a mans body of the precious soule that is in it; and the other to bring upon him the most foule, and beastly condition of rottennesse; the Apostle singles them both out, and insults upon them, as upon dead Captaines, as upon them that are not able any more to strike a stroke, but lie devoid of all power; and upon their heads he brings forth this insulting sentence, Oh death where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory? Oh death where is thy sting? thou that hast stung
all the men in the world, as we know death is pain∣ted with a dart in his hand, to sting and to strike to the heart, to deprive men of their life, to take away the heart bloud of men; thou that stingest men with sicknesse, and takest away their vitall spi∣rits: oh death! now thy sting is dulled, it is broken in pieces, it hath no edge, it hath no point, it can ef∣fect nothing further. And thou grave, which wast wont to have the victory, which wast wont to be so victorious, as to make the fairest faced dames, and the goodliest beau∣ty in the world, to bring to dust and ashes; to beat a man to powder, to bring a man to dust, which is the greatest victory that can be, to drive a man to dust; thou that wast so absolute a victor, where is now thy glory, and victory? as if he should say, it is no where, it is altogether vanished away, there is no appearance, nor any more power, nor life in thee, to worke death; we are secured from thee for ever, wee are freed from thy sting, that thou shalt no more strike us to death with thy dart. And thou grave, thy victory to turne us to dust is nothing: all these are taken out of thy hands for ever. So this is the glorious triumphant song, which the Church of God hath ever sung over this Conquerour; there were two enemies that fought a strange duell, (that was) the death of Christ, and the death of na∣ture: the Leader of the victorious army died, yet notwithstanding he lives for ever; the leader of the conquered, and banished army killed him; and yet notwithstanding he dies for ever; for so according to Heb. 2.14.Heb. 2.14. the Lord appointed that by death, the Lord Christ should destroy him that had the power
of death, that is, the devill. For the devill by means of a commission that he had from God, hee cast all men into the prison of death; and he keepeth them there, and will keep them there by the common calamity of sinne; he keeps all mens bodies there to the time of the resurrection, which the Lord shall cause in the fulnesse of time, but therefore, the Lord following the way of justice, and not the way of power: for God was able to take us from death, otherwise, by other meanes, then by the death of Christ; but then hee could not be just. Now God would teach us, that it is better to follow the way of justice, then the way of power: for every man can be powerfull, the devils themselves have power, but they have no justice; therefore God then in ju∣stice would have the death of his Sonne satisfie the wrath of God; and would have him to die for them that should have died; that his death might be the life of many thousands; that his death might be the destruction of the power of death, which had a com∣mission given for the time, that at the last might have an end. To conclude, because I see the time past; let us also learne to frame our selves to this high spirit of the Apostle, to insult over death, and then if wee can insult over death, much more may wee insult over all the calamities of this life: for what is so great a calamity as that? why should poverty op∣presse us? why should infamy vexe us, if sicknesse, diseases, and death it selfe cannot oppresse? why should trouble of conscience for sinne oppresse us, when the grand enemy himselfe is conquered? and when we have a part of the conquest? wee are
souldiers to that great Captaine, and hee communi∣cates his victory unto us all;Iohn 16. ult. Aug. Be of good comfort (saith Christ) for I have overcome the world. Saith St. Au∣stin, What dost thou meane by this, Be of good com∣fort, I have overcome the world? What have we to doe, to be of good comfort? it belongs not to us; be thou of good comfort; it pertaines to thee; what are we the better, because thou hast overcome the world? Yes, (saith hee) oh death, thou which hast been the devourer, now thou art devoured thy self; thou that hast swallowed up men, now thou art swal∣lowed up thy selfe, by a more potent cause: oh death! he was wounded for me, that made me; and he that through his death hath swallowed up thee, hee hath conquered thee for me: therefore I rejoyce in him, which is flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone: his victory, is my victory; therefore he saith, Be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. And this the Lord hath taught us in many passages of his holy Booke, that hee might prepare us once to this cou∣rage, to this great valour. For in this a man is seen more, than in any thing else; in the patient abiding of trouble and misery, in the patient enduring of death in this present life. All worldly passions are se∣perated as chaffe by the wind, from the godly; the wind blowes away the chaffe, but so it cannot the good corn, that falls still on the floore; the chaffe is blowne away with every wind of temptation, and persecution. Let us therefore take notice of that sin∣gular comfort which God hath given us, out of the Scripture, which all resolves at last into this one point, Oh death where is thy sting? oh grave where is thy victory?
In Iosuah, 10.Ioshuah 10.24. wee reade that Iosuah there the Prince, and Captaine; he brought out the five Kings that were closed in a Cave, and a stone rolled to the mouth of it, till hee should come back: hee brings them forth, and bade the Captaines tread upon the necks of the Kings, and not feare, for (saith hee) The Lord your God shall fight for you. This was a figure of this glorious victory of the Sonne of God over death. All the potentates of Hell, are like to the five Kings of Canaan, which oppresse all they meet; as Adonibezek they thumb them, hee cut off the thumbs and toes of men, and set them under his Table as dogges: The Lord signified this victo∣ry of Christ, by the victory of Iosuah over those five Kings, and Adonibezek, that hee would give a spirituall conquest over death, hell, sinne, and all the adversaries that could oppose him; and he would tread upon the necks of all his opposers. What is so base a part, what is so base a thing, as the foot of a man? and what is so lofty a thing as the necke? and yet the very foot of Gods children, the basest part, shall tread upon the necks of their enemies, upon the necks of Kings themselves, which are compassed, and surrounded with jewels, and orna∣ments, yet they shall bee subjected to the basest parts, even to the heeles of godly men; so great is the comfort of Gods children. And as it was done then in Iosuahs time, so also the comfort remaines now. So wee see again, the Lord bids the people look back whē they were past the Red-sea, look back upō the Egyptians; and the People & Miriam had a song,Exod. 15.1. when they looked back, & saw the Egyptians floa∣ting
above the water. A strange thing, but God would have it so, because he would have his peo∣ple to have Arms, to have the Arms of the Egyptians to fight against Amalek: It is said, the people loo∣ked back, and saw them; those proud spirited peo∣ple, those braggadocioes, which thought to have swallowed them up quick, and followed them with their chariots and Army; those which before could not bee resisted, now the Lord brings them to a calme; he so cooled the Nation, that the least boy might insult over them. Israel looked, and saw them, and tooke off their armour, took off their rings, and jewels, and their costly apparrell, and furnished themselves with it, when they went into the wildernesse: So shall the conquest of Gods chil∣dren be over death; although it have beene full of threatning, full of terrour, and blood before, yet the Lord will bring it into the floud, into the Red sea; he will overwhelme it in the water of his Omni∣potency: and his children shall look back, and shall see him, and spoyle him that was the spoyler, and destroy him that was the destroyer: and they shall take his weapons from him, and make use of them to their owne purposes; and they shall say as the people might have said to the Egyptians, Where is thy bragging that thou usedst before? thou art inclosed now in thine owne net. Where is thy sting oh death? Oh hell where is thy victory? The Lord shall turne the termes, the Lord shall make the field to goe on his owne side, and take away the conquest from the adverse party. It hath beene an ancient Proverb, That to pluck the beard of a dead Lion, even for children them∣selves;
it is an easie matter; a poore child that can∣not indure the noise, or the sight of a living Lion,Chrysost. (as St. Chrysostome saith) the boyes when they see a Beare, or a Lion, or a Wolfe dead in the street, they will pull off his haire, and insult over him, and deale with them as they please: they will trample upon their bodies being dead, which they durst not looke upon when they were alive. Such a thing is death, it is a furious Beast, a rampant Lion, a devou∣ring Wolfe which consumes all the world. The Lord hath laid him now at his length, he hath laid him dead that he is unable ever to have life againe, and so the very children (saith St. Chrysostome) are able to insult over him. That wee have had Mar∣tyrs (saith hee) of 14. or 15. yeares old, which have offred themselves to the fire, and to the sword, and to all the passions of this hungry beast; they have offered themselves to the devourers with a willing imbrace; and have played upon him which is the common swallower of all mankind; as Theo∣phylact saith well, We doe still devour, and swal∣low up death by the faith that wee have in the life of Christ; for that faith makes us so constant, as that nothing can separate us from the love of God in Christ Iesus, as the holy Apostle saith, Rom. 8.Rom. 8.35. What shall separate us from the love of God? shall tribulation, or persecution, or sword, or hunger, or cold, or nakednesse? shall Angels, or life, or death, things present, or to come, life, or death? No, none of these are able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Iesus our Lord: But these things are easily spoken, and as long as we be in Theories, so long as we bee in Contemplation, wee may easily subscribe
to them: but who is hee that is able to doe thus when the time serves? That is in the hand of the great God, to give the garland whensoever it shall please him. It must be our ambition to seek for it, to intreat the Lord to crowne us with that victory, with that heavenly valour which himselfe hath promised to all that love him.Apoc. 2.17. I will give him the crowne of life, and blessed is hee that continueth to the end; for hee shall eat of that hidden Mannah: and shall flourish as a tree in the Paradice of God. But it lies not in us to continue neither, therefore he that gives the end must also give the meanes; and the same prayer that sues for the one must also beg, and intreat for the other: all this comes from God, from the true love that wee have to Christ, from the hope that we have in him to partake of his vi∣ctory; from our beleeving, and confessing, that God hath raised up Christ from the dead: For if thou beleeve with thy heart, and confesse with thy mouth, that God hath raised up Christ from the dead, thou shalt bee saved. If wee beleeve that this vi∣ctory of Christ is for ever accomplished, wee shall be saved. If thou beleeve, although thou must doe many other things which are conditionall to salva∣tion, yet this is the maine point, beleeve in the Con∣querour, and the conquest is thine: hee conquered not for himselfe but for thee; to make the spirits of his Saints conquer in heaven, and to make their bo∣dies also to reigne with him there, when he shall ap∣peare:Col. 3 4. for when the Lord Iesus shall appeare, we shall also appeare with him in glory. See the extent, and latitude of his conquest: When God takes a field, hee takes it for all the world; not for one countrey,
as earthly Princes doe: but all commers from the East, and West, and North, and South, shall yeeld unto the Lord, and rest under his shadow. Even all Nations, a tot quot. The Dinner of the great King refuseth no guests, and rather then they will want guests, and the Feast shall be unfurnished, he will send to the hedges, and highwayes to bee searched, to come and fill his Table, whereunto hee calleth by the Gospel, and whereun∣to he bring us for his Sonnes sake. Amen. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.56. The sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the Law; but God bee thanked, that giveth us the victory, through our Lord Iesus Christ. TO bragge before the victory be¦gotten, before the field bee wonne; it was ever held a most vaine presumption: as the King of Israel said to the King of Syria, Let not him that buckleth on his armour, bragge as he that puts it off. For there is nothing more uncertaine then the events of warre; and oft times, when mighty men promise to themselves the assurance of the victory, they faile, and come to be foiled. Yet notwithstanding, so great is the confidence of St. Pauls spirit, and so great is the as∣surance that wee have in Christ Iesus our Lord, that wee dare boldly insult over death, and proclaime the victory, although our selves must bee vanqui∣shed.
For this most noble, and gracious Triumpher over death, hee lies in the grave, he lies in the dust, as well as wee must doe: and there is no difference to the sight of flesh, and blood, betweene the ashes of St. Paul, and the ashes of another common man; and yet notwithstanding, the Spirit of God was so mighty, and potent in him, and the faith of the things to come, did so represent unto him the things promised, that as though the matter were now presently performed, he insults over death, and takes upon him the person of a man new risen again from the dead. As St. Ierom well speaks, hee sup∣poseth that those times that bee long to come, and God knowes how long, he supposeth that they were come in his time; and as it were in the person of a man newly risen, newly raised from death; he be∣gins; Oh death where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory? So the holy Father tells us that the words should bee then rise in every mans mouth, when God shall raise them out of their graves, to that incorruption, and that immortality, which this corruptible, and this mortall must put on. It shall be the speech in every mans mouth then, as being triumphant over death; Oh death whre is thy sting? oh grave where is thy victory? Thou hast had vi∣ctory over my poore bones, and body a long time, but what is it now? thou hast lost it for ever∣more. In these victories in the world there is no cer∣tainty, because that which they call fortune, is so changeable, as it seldome setteth up one man, but anon it raiseth another to pull him downe againe: So the victories are fading, and passing away; and
he that is a Conqueror, is conquered and made a slave to those that formerly were his inferiours. Ignarius (it is said) had a great victory over the Cimbri and Tutons, yet hee fell shortly after into the hands of Scilla, that conquered him: and Scilla that was once the Sunne-rising, when Pompey once appeares, he becomes the Sunne-setting: And if Pompey were never so famous a Victor, as there was none more glorious in his time, yet at last hee shall fall, and be conquered by the hand of Caesar, and by his prowesse be outed both of his honours, and of his life. And Caesar himselfe in the height of all that glory that can come upon a man in this world; there was never any before him, or the like shall bee after him; yet hee could not hold his state, but he falls into the hands of Conspirators, a sort of bloody murtherers, that shall kill him in his Counsell-chamber; so uncertaine are the smiles of this world, that there is no victory constant; but still she flies, moves, and changes her tent, and ta∣bernacle from one side to another: therefore there can bee no boasting, or bragging in these earthly and worldly conquests, which hath made the wisest Emperours of the world, after they have had a good gale of fortune (as they call it) after they have prospered a while, for feare of crosse blowes after, they have left their honours, and betaken them to a solitary life, to live in Monasteries, lest they should have a foule end after such goodly, and faire proceedings. But in this case, in this vi∣ctory that wee now speake of, there is no uncer∣tainty, there is no inconstancy to be feared, Ianus Temple is shut for ever.
They had a custome among the Romans, they worshipped a certaine god, which they thought was the Lord, and Tutor of their City, which they called Ianus; which had in Rome a great Temple: the doores whereof stood open all the while they were in warres, and shut in all the time of peace; and they were so cumbred with warre for 800. yeares together, that in all that time the doores of Ianus Temple were but thrice shut; they were al∣way open, to shew that the warres were open, and therefore they gave their god leave to goe out and in to succour them, or else they thought his arme could not reach, his power could not extend to their ayde. See the ridiculous and foolish vanities of the Heathen; when the warres were ceased, they shut the doores to keepe in their god, there was no use of him then: Now this Temple (I say) for 800. yeares, was in all that time but three times shut. First, in the time of Numa Pompilius, Secondly, in the time of Tytus Maneus, (as Ty∣tus Livius saith) after the Carthaginian warre. And thirdly by Augustus Caesar. But when the time shall come, when God shall give to this corruption, incorruption; and to this mortall, immortality, then there shall be for ever a cessation of warre. The Temple of Ianus shall never more be opened, it shall be shut for everlasting; there shall bee no cause of warre, but the people of God shall bee in perfect peace with the Lord, and shall live under the defence of his protection, they shall live secure for ever. Plutarch saith, when Philip King of Macedon,
had gotten a great victory at Cheronia, hee wrote to Archimedes, and hee used lofty speeches in his letter; as being proud, and puffed up with his late victory: Archimedes, replies to him no more but this; Sir (saith hee) you write stately to mee, in high termes, and I partly know the reason of it: but if you will take the paines but to measure your owne shadow, you shall find that it is no more, that it is no greater, nor no larger then it was before your victory. You were as great a man then, and as many inches about as you are now. And it is true in worldly things. Chance (as they call it) is so variable, that no man can tell how hee shall begin, or how he shall end; but in this victory which the Lord vouchsafes us in Christ Iesus, it holds not; for the victory that we shall have there, shall make our shadowes greater, and it shall make our persons more honourable, and fuller of power, and majesty.1. Cor. 15.44. For it is sowen in dishonour, it riseth a∣gaine in honour. It is sowen in weaknesse, it riseth a∣gain in power. The victory therefore that we have in Christ, it is not like the victory that Philip the King of Macedon got; that his shadow was no bigger then before: but this victory in Christ is a great enlarger of man, and of all the parts, and faculties in him: that hee is not like himselfe as hee was be∣fore, no more then an honourable thing is like a di∣shonourable, or a strong thing is like unto a weake. Now to come to the OrderOder. of the words read unto you: here the holy Apostle explains that which he had said before, when hee insulted over death: A man might ask, what is the reason thou takest upon thee so much, seeing death shall conquer
thee as well as other men, and thou must die as well as the rest, that have gone before thee? To give a reason therefore of it, he shewes that it was no presumption, or idle imagination of himselfe, but it was a thing conferred unto him by the pow∣er of Christ and his Gospel. For (saith hee) I have good reason to insult as I did; I know when that blessed time shall come, wee shall have no enemies against us: If there should be any enemy, it should be either death, or sinne, or the law: But there shall be none of these, and therefore there shall bee no enemy, but a perpetuall end, and issue of man for ever. There shall bee no death, for why? because there shall be no sinne; for the sting of death is sin: and death cannot come upon man, but by the wrath of God, which is conceived for sinne, which be∣ing taken away, death must needs cease: for the worke ending, the wages must needs end, and the wages of sinne is death. But how will you prove that there shall bee no sinne? Because there shall be no law, for the strength of sinne is the Law, and the Lord shall give that glory to the bodies that shall rise, that they shall not need any Law, but they shall be a law to themselves; and every man shall love God, and please God, not by constraint, not by the terrours of the Law, and Com∣mandement, but from the ducture of his owne free-spirit, that shall leade and conjoyne, and make him one spirit with the Lord. Therefore that which the holy Apostle said before, is most constant and true; that because there shall bee no enemies then
left: therefore we may boast in the Lord our God, which hath given us perfect victory over all our enemies, and there shall be no enemie left; because there shall be neither sin, which is the grand cause, the Arch-enemy of mankind; for that is taken away by the righteousnesse of Christ, who knew no sinne; he that knew no sinne, God made him sinne for us, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God. Mark it, (saith the holy Apostle) that we might be made the righteousnesse of God. When was Christ made sinne for us? In this miserable life: and when shall we be made the righteousnesse of God? In that bles∣sed life. Therefore as God hath made him which knew not sinne, to be sinne for us; that is, he hath made him a sacrifice for sinne; and hee was accoun∣ted a sinner, as he was made sinne for us: so this is the effect of this account and imputation of our sins up∣on him, it shall be the imputation of his righteous∣nesse upon us; as the holy Apostle saith, 2 Cor. 6. He was made sin for us which knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God. Now after this he hath shewed us the enemies, he begins to shew us the use of all this; he drawes to a conclusion, and he saith, God hath given us vi∣ctory. Thanks be to God that hath given us victory through Christ Iesus our Lord. As if hee should say, if we had indeed the remnants of sin in us still, wee were foolish to make any insultation over death; for death would triumph over us; for as long as sinne remaines, death must needs ensue; and as long as the law is put upon us to curbe, and contradict us, sin will be; but now God be thanked, that hath gi∣ven us victory through Iesus Christ our Lord: For he
hath destroyed the one, and hee hath fulfilled the other; he hath destroyed the one by his gracious conversation, and he hath fulfilled the law, he hath appeased the wrath of God, that now there re∣maines no more enemy, but the field is cleare, and we are masters of the field for ever. Therefore God be thanked which hath given us victory through Iesus Christ our Lord. Wherein wee are to con∣sider, First, the gift that is given, It is victory,Division of the Text, into 5. parts. an ab∣solute and compleat victory over these fierce ene∣mies. Secondly, whence this victory comes, from  God; God hath given us victory: It is from the whole Trinity. Thirdly, the manner how it comes, by way  of gift, not by way of merit; blessed be God that hath given us the victory. Fourthly, the meanes through whom it comes,  through Christ: Thanks be to God that hath given us victory through Christ Iesus our Lord. It is by the arme of Christ. Fiftly, the end and use of all: Thanks be to God: For the blessings of God require thankfulnesse; therefore the Apostle gives glory to him, that glo∣rifieth us; he gives conquest to him, that is a con∣querour for us. Thanks be to God that hath given us victory, through Iesus Christ. The sting of death is sinne, the strength of sinne is the Law. This former part of the Text, describes the Ad∣versaries extinct, and vanquished; that which hee
speaks of a sting, is diversly translated by Interpre∣ters: some call it morsum, the biting; comparing it to a serpent, that poysoneth, and infecteth, and kil∣leth by biting: so sinne was represented to us in the garden, by the serpent that gave the apple unto Eve. Some take it for the sting of a waspe, the Hebrew word Kota in Hosea 13.Hosea 13.14. signifieth that which is sharp, as a stelletto; a thing that makes a present im∣pression; and by the puncture, it pierceth into the in∣ward parts, and brings sudden death. So by divers Translators it is thus read, I will be a plague unto thee oh death: and I will be thy destruction oh hell. Many and sundry wayes it is translated, but it is sufficient for us to take that, which the last and best translati∣on affords: and so we call it the sting, because in∣deed death was never, nor it could not be sharp un∣to us, except it come to be armed with sinne; nor there is no calamity in the world, no misery that a man suffers, but he suffers it willingly, if he have a cleare conscience; it being the onely rule of peace and quiet, to be free from the cause, and from deser∣ving that thing that is imputed, and cast upon a man. But when miseries come, not onely tedious of themselves, but they come armed with the condig∣nity of sinne, that they have a certaine correspon∣dence in commutative justice; that he that hath done evill must suffer evill. Now it becomes of all cala∣mities the extreamest and most miserable. There∣fore it is said here, The sting of death is sinne; as though death it self were nothing unwelcome, and harsh to the flesh of man; but that it is inflicted for sin, and as the wages of sin. But here a man may very well make a stand,
and aske how can this be? how should sin be the sting of death, seeing it is rather contrary? death is the sting of sinne; for which is first? was not sinne before death, saith St. Austin in his 7. Tom. in his 3.S. Aug. Tom. 7. lib. 3. d peceat. & remiss. Booke De peccatis, & remissione peccatorum, (saith he) we sinne not, because wee die; it is no sinne to die, because it is the fulfilling of the judgement of God upon sinne. We sinne not in dying, but we die for sinning, for from that comes our death: there∣fore seeing sinne was the cause of death, and that death is a thing of nothing, a thing that followes af∣te sinne; it seemes therefore, that sinne being first, and sin being the cause of death, it followes that it must use death as a sting unto it, and not on the contrary, that it should be a sting unto death. But for this, there is no great matter in the phrase; for as St. Austin,Aug. and the rest of Divines accord with him: the Apostle calls sinne the sting of death; not that death made it, but that death is made with it, and it is made by it; so it is called the sting of death, that is, a deadly sting that brings death with it. As a cup of poyson, we call it a cup of death; not as though death made the cup, but be∣cause death is with it; that he that takes that cup, shall die with it. So the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge; the meaning is not as though life were made by the tree, or that knowledge were made by the tree; but because the fruit of that tree would have brought life, and would have brought the knowledge of good and evill. This therefore is the meaning of the Apostles words, that sinne by the just permission of God, and by the deputation that God gave unto sathan, to exe∣cute
judgement upon sinners: it comes upon every man armed, and it is armed with death: the most de∣sperate weapon that can be, that destroyes the very nature of man, and brings him to his very founda∣tion, to a matter of nothing. This is that sting that must prick us all at length, as  signifieth. Therefore let us learne, while wee are now in this world, to prepare our selves for this sting, that we doe not kick against the pricks, as our Lord saith, Acts 9.Acts 9.5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Let us therefore never grumble against the ne∣cessity of sicknesse, disease, and miseries; for alas! these are nothing in comparison of death; we must endure death it selfe; that prick must gall us to the heart; all the power of Men or Angels cannot de∣liver us from it. Let us as well as we can entertain it, therefore, and not kick against the pricks; for we double our wound if we doe, and plague our selves more: there is no resisting of those things that be of necessity. Let us take heed withall, seeing sin is called the prick of death, or the death of death, which is all one; let us take heed (I say) that wee multiply not sinne, forasmuch as that is nothing else, but to dou∣ble, and re-double our torment, to an infinite mea∣sure. If a man be slaine with one stab of a goad, or with a prick of a Stelletto; though they are no lesse mortall, yet they are more sufferable: but if a man shall be cast upon a hurdle that is full of nailes, and be rolled up and down upon that, that is one of the terriblest deaths that ever was found out: and such a death every sinfull man casts himselfe into; the
more hee sins, and gives way unto his head strong affections, the more sharp nailes, points, and pricks he casts himselfe upon. Let us take heed, therefore, the sting of death is sin; the more we sin, the more nayles, and goads, and pricks we thrust into our owne sides; for there is no sinner, but as hee sinnes more, so hee offends God more; and so he brings more vengeance upon himselfe in a fearfull manner. The sting of death is sinne. But what sinne is this? is it to be accounted the actuall sin that men commit, or the originall sin in which they are borne? Surely it is true of both; but the Apostles mea∣ning is here, to speak of Originall sinne; for we see this a true doctrine, upon chlidren too, that never committed actuall sin; therefore we must give the sense of the words, the most large and utmost ex∣tent; because we see the doctrine of the place ex∣tends it self so farre; for children themselves are pricked to death, not by actuall transgression, ac∣cording to the similitude of the sinne of Adam, but by an inbred corruption, which is drawne from the seed of their parents, there lying a poyson in the seed of man, which came from the first fall, and cor∣ruption of man, in the materialls of Adam, in the substance, and bodily part, there lies a poyson of corruption; and it is strange that sinne which is an intellectuall thing, a matter of the understanding; for there is no beast can sinne, because it hath not the intellectuals, it wants the understanding. It is strange (I say) that it should rise unto a materiall thing, which hath no understanding, untill the soul
be added; but so the Lord hath ordained, that in the propagation of the corrupt seed of man, there should be infused a soule, which lying in a fustie vessell, should contract the impurity it finds there in the matter, and so should work in both together the damnation of the party in which it is. Behold therefore what that fearfull state or condition is in which we are conceived, and borne into the world; It is that which death useth for a sting; it is that fearfull weapon that wounds us, and pierceth us, not onely for one death, but for two, for the second death, even everlasting destructi∣on, if the mercy of God interpose not. This is that law in our members, that captivates, and makes us slaves, and carries us away from the law of God. This is that prepuce or uncircumcision of the heart, that makes us Philistins, and Aliens, and strangers from the Lord. This is that flint stone that will not be wrought upon by the finger of God, but hardens it selfe against all the proceedings of the Lord. This is that seminarie of all mischiefe, the originall of all kind of corruption; whatsoever a man can think of, it is included in Originall sinne. For Adam when he fell from God, he was a thiefe, a murtherer, hee was a blasphemer, hee was a man given to concupi∣scence, he was a false witnesse against his neighbour, hee was the breaker of every Commandement by that action, and his children take it from him by originall sinne, which is the Mother sinne of all abo∣minations that may be imagined; and as wee begin it, so wee continue the cherishers, and nourishers of it; we feed it, wee bring it up, we suckle this brat of perdition and filthinesse to our owne destruction,
that every man must needs be forced when he un∣derstands himselfe, to cry out with the Apostle, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? It is a body of death; it is not a limbe, it is not a superficies, it is not a quality, it is not a small matter; but it is a body, it is a legion of de∣vils, it is a multitude of sins, it is a kingdome of hell. This is that beastly corruption which we have all contracted. Let us labour in prayer, and sollicite God, that the power of this monster may be removed: for although we had no actuall transgression, but wee could live as pure, and sincere as the Angels in hea∣ven, in respect of actuall sinnes; yet as long as wee have this moisture in us, the fire is not out, though it seeme to be smothered; and though it break not forth, yet it is not quenched, it is not quite slacked. So much of the first part, the proportion, the sting of death is sinne; that is, originall sinne; because if we should take it for actuall sinne, then wee could not take children into the definition; but they are stung to death, they die, and yet they have no Actuall sinne; therefore it is spoken of originall sin properly. But how comes death and sinne to be thus potent and strong? The Apostle tell us, by the law. The strength of sin is the law. Till the law came, the edge and point of sinne was dull, it was blunt; when the law came, it whet∣ted it, and sharpned it againe, and made it more pier∣cing than ever it was before. The strength of sinne is the law.
And how is this? God gave the Law for a good Law, for a holy, and just Law, how came it then to bee the strength of sinne? It seemes God machinated a mischiefe to mankind, to give him that which should make him more sinfull. But you must understand it is one thing that a man doth upon purpose, and for good, and it is ano∣ther thing when the man to whom it is done can receive it so. God gave the Law indeed as a true direction for the reformation of life, and manners, but the party that received it, did not take it thus: thus by occasion not from the nature of it, but by the ill acceptance of the party, it came to be thus, to bee the strength of sinne. As when a Physician that is skilfull in his profession, hee doth all that belongs to a skilfull man; the druggs that he gives, and the ingredients are able to worke their effect, if they fall into a good body: but if the Patient bee froward and will not be ruled, or his body bee distempered, hee is not the better by it. Now the fault is not in the Physician, nor in the Physick, they be both very good, but the fault is resident in the party, that was not prepared for it, or that would not receive it, and convert it to that use, for which it was given him. So the Law of God of it selfe, is a light unto our feet,Psal. 119.105. and a lanterne to our paths, and the light of life it selfe, if we be able to follow it: but because of our owne indisposition, it comes to passe that the Law which should pull downe sinne, gives strength unto it; the Law that was made to kill sin, it gives life unto it, as the Apostle tells us at large, Rom. 7.Rom. 7.9. (hee saith) That sinne was dead untill the Law came
in. For where there is no Law, there is no transgres∣sion, and sinne was dead untill such time as the Law came in place; but when the Law came, then sinne revived: then sinne began to hew, and hack, then it began to kill, and slay, and to leade into captivity, which is a worthy point for our consideration, and therefore I must stand a little longer upon it. How should it bee that the Law of God which is so pure, and so holy in it selfe, that it should give any life, or any strength unto sinne, which it hates, and condemnes? I say, it comes to passe upon occasion of our weaknesse, and sinfulnesse; which takes not the Law of God for that end which he gave it for; but to a contrary end. The first reason, why the Law by occasion be∣comes the strength of sinne, is this,Chrysost. (as Chrysostome saith) that it makes our sinnes manifest; a man that is detected growes the more desperate: as long as he can keepe himselfe quiet, and be secret, and un∣seene, hee is more modest, but when hee comes once to be opened, when he comes to be discovered to the knowledge of Gods Law, and to the know∣ledge of men; then hee begins to ruffle with God, and with the Law; and he will approve and make a defence for those things that are damnable: the Apostle doth insinuate the reason, Rom. 8.9.Rom. 8.9. where hee saith, till the Law of God came, he did not know concupiscence, except the Law had said, thou shalt not lust. This you know by experience, that there is great difference betweene a foolish and an under∣standing servant: (The Lord Iesus saith) the un∣derstanding servant that knowes his masters will, and
doth it not, shall bee beaten with many stripes: As long as sinne is not knowne it lies hid, it is asleepe, it workes faintly; but when the Law comes, and gives light to a mans understanding, that he knows himselfe; that hee knowes God, and the promises of the Gospel, now sinne multiplies, there is no such sinner, as a wise sinner; there is no such sinfull person, as the learned person, because his know∣ledge makes his sinne apparant, and makes him de∣tected of the world; and so inrageth him to main∣taine, and make that good which is evill, and naught in it selfe. A simple ignorant man, although he carry the Devill about him, yet hee is not trou∣bled so much: he sinnes more easily, he hath weak passions, hee sinnes within compasse; hee sinnes as bruit beasts doe, which seldome or never tran∣scend the limits of nature; and they exceed mankinde in many respects, in moderating their lusts and concupiscence: but when the Law of God comes in place, it rouzeth a man from his igno∣rance, which would damne him; and shewes him the good will of God, it shewes him the acceptable yeare of the Lord, and what the hope is which he is called unto, and what are the treasures of the Gospel: It shewes himselfe to himselfe; and now the rage of sinne is more impetuous, and violent then before. For now hee lives, hee was dead in those former times; when he was ignorant, he was quiet: When the strong man keepes the house all is quiet, but when a stronger comes to thrust him out, then there is an uproare, and tumult in the house. S. Chrysost.Againe, another reason is, (saith St. Chrysostom) in this that God doth stretch forth his prohibition,
the nature of man is alway to desire, and long after that which is forbidden: and there is nothing that inflames his affections, so as the prohibition of the things hee desires. Would you have a booke sell well, get it prohibited; the onely way to make a woman to be a blabb, is to bid her keep counsell: it is the nature of man still to affect things unlawfull, and interdicted; and so much the stronger the in∣terdiction is, so much the more they are inflamed in the desire they have to accomplish it. To conclude this point, because we cannot en∣dure that our free-will should bee curbed and re∣strained; it comes to passe that the Law of God by occasion, is the reviving and increasing of sinne; for we cannot indure the liberty of our will should be curbed and checked; but we would live as we list every body: and this wee see was in the first temptation of our first parents: Satan comes to them; What, hath God made you to live as slaves under governement? doth he keepe you under the rodde? doth hee keepe you within the pale? hath hee forbid you one fruit of the garden? As if hee should say, because he had forbidden them one, it was as good as if he had forbid all: so our first Pa∣rents they could not indure this, they could not abide to bee kept under; to bee made boyes and children; to be under a Pedagogue, to bee under a Tutor, & governour as it were: not to make choice of their owne affections; if God had made them to their owne choice, well and good; but now the Lord hath made them under the governement of others, he hath made them under a Law; and they cannot abide that. And so it continues in the mind
of man still, he will have his owne mind, though it be contrary to the will of God; and though he hin∣der himselfe he will have it, if it be to the damna∣tion of his owne soule; if hee get hell for his will, yet he will have his will. This poyson being in our nature, makes good the doctrine that we speak of, that sinne revives; for the Law of God beats upon our sinnes, and makes us say and confesse, if wee will follow the guidance of it, Not my will, but thine be done. Let me not seek after mine own will which is base and corrupt, but after thy will which is ho∣ly and just. The Law of God would teach a man to say thus; but contrariwise, that which flowes from a mans selfe, it seeks it selfe; and seeing hee cannot please God norman, he will please his own soule: As the Poet saith, Delight thy owne soule; care not what other men speak, or doe, or think against thee. This is the wofull calamity of our na∣ture, over which we must desire God to give us the victory; and behold it followes in the Text: But thanks be to God which hath given us vi∣ctory through Iesus Christ our Lord. Which words I can but enter into, of the gift or blessing which is vouchsafed, victory. Victory is alwayes welcome; but especially when it is atchieved against a dangerous enemy; The child of God is borne to be a Conquerour, as (St. Iohn saith,) 1 Iohn 5.4.1 Iohn 5.4. Every thing that is born of God overcommeth the world. Every thing that is borne of God; where the Fathers observe, that the Apostle speaks in generall; he speaks in the neuter gender; to shew that there is no man that is so meane, or so vile and base, of whatsoever conditi∣on
he be, that he may rather be called a thing, than a man; yet that he hath the spirit of grace, by that hee is able to encounter, and overcome the world: and this victory that wee have, it is over such po∣werfull enemies, as that except God had promi∣sed it, except God should worke it, all the power in heaven, and earth, could not attain unto it. A man that is borne a Conquerour over his owne corrupti∣ons, and over himselfe, he is greater than ever was the greatest conquerour: and it is better to be made in this kind a Victor over his owne passions, than to be the universall Emperour of all the world. Saith Seneca, there are many men that have subdued Principalities, Kingdomes, Cities, Townes, and Countries, and brought them under their owne masterie; but there are few that have guided themselves, but still there is a Tiger within them, that disgraceth and obscureth their outward conquest, by reason of the foule seethings, and corruption in their owne flesh; therefore for a man to get the victory, and to overcome himselfe, is to get the victory, and to overcome all the world: for man is a microcosme, a little world, as St. Austin saith; thou maist obtaine the victory against thy selfe, for thy selfe. After a certaine wondrous manner God hath ordained a christian souldier a militant member of his Church, to fight against himselfe, for himselfe: For hee that will lose his life (saith Christ) for my sake and the Gospels, shall save it. Hee that will lose his delights, and his pleasures; hee that will make warre with himselfe, and will have no peace with his affections; the Lord shall give him that peace
that passeth all understanding; and although hee kill his body with chastizing it, yet it shall be saved in the day of the Lord,St. Bern. (saith St. Bernard.) The vi∣ctory is thought, and reputed in the world to be lost, rather by flying, than by dying; for there are many men slaine in the field, that are not accoun∣ted as cowards, and fugitives, or vanquished men, because they died upon the place; but when they quit the place, when they fly, and are not able to hold out in the field: hee that remaines accounts himselfe the Victor, because the rest are fled, and vanished away. So the spirituall victory in Christ, it is lost by flying; for we should rather die for God, we should rather die in his zeale, and for his glory, and keep our standing, than to yeeld and fly from the devill, and our own corrupt affections, and stoop to them; then sathan gets the victory, when wee cast away our weapons, and play the loose scouts in the field. There is no hope of victory in those actions. Hee hath given us victory. Over what hath he given us victory? victory must be over some enemie? I shewed you before the parties what they are; now I am to shew you who they are that God hath given us the victory over; over death, over sinne, over the law: over death, that there is not so much as a relique of it remaining there; there is no hope that ever hee shall returne, and make head againe: that is a famous victory, wherein the roots of future seditions are taken away, and plucked up; when there is nothing left for any hope of future rebel∣lion.
When the Romanes had warred with the Cartha∣genians, and oft times overcome them; yet still within a while, within 8. or 10. yeares, or lesse, they made head againe, and stirred up new warres, and so they had successive combustion. And so in all the Nations of the world, there are none that are so vanquished now, but they may become con∣querours hereafter. The same thing that the Lord hath made an underling now, may be the Head, and Chieftaine in time to come. But in this victory that we have over death, it is without any hope or com∣fort on deaths part, and without any feare of suf∣fering on our part; for it is so taken away, as though it had never been; and that which had the greatest triumph, the mightiest trophees in the world, unto which all Kings and Princes have bowed their heads, and laid downe their scepters; for all the goodly things in the world have been nothing else but the morsells of death. I say this victorious ene∣mie by the hand of Christ, it shall be turned to a thing of nothing; it shall have no name nor notion; it shall be left without any hope of recovery. It shall have no more strength to sting, for the sting is gone. The second enemy we shall have victory over is sin, because the prince of this world sifted Christ, to know whether hee were pure wheat or no: and (the Text saith) he found nothing in him, but he was as the finest flowre of wheat, without all bran of cor∣ruption, without all inclination to sinne, being con∣ceived, and borne in perfect purity, and living in the strength of that purity; insomuch as hee defies all his adversaries, hee challengeth them, saying,
Who can accuse mee of sinne? Because (I say) our blessed Saviour in all the parts of him, had nothing but the light of purity in his eyes, in his understan∣ding, in his tongue, in his gesture, in his words, in his actions, in his perseverance, in all the parts of his doctrine, in all the passages of his miracles, there was nothing else but a fountaine and a world of purity; therefore death incroaching (by the malice and violence of sathan, and the envy of the high priests) upon him that had no sinne, it lost all the power, and government that it had before; for taking away life from him that had no cause of death in him; it follows therefore that it is justly exattorate, and put out of place, and hath lost his commission for ever: for Christ overcame sinne, by satisfying for it on his holy crosse, and by his example in his holy life; by giving a holy example to his Apostles, and Disciples, and all beleevers in the world. Hee overcame sinne, by drinking the cup of Gods wrath, which by our sinnes was filled to him: and he over∣came sinne by his gracious example, by the copie of his holy life; and much more by his holy Spirit, by which he diffuseth his grace to thousands and millions in the world that beleeve in him; that al∣though there be sinne now in our mortall bodies, yet it doth not raigne; it commands us not to every thing; it finds us not as the Centurions servants, to goe when it saith goe: but it is in many things bro∣ken and dissipated, and the Lord hath beat sathan under our feet, that is, the usuall work of sathan, sinne, and foule impressions in your soules and un∣derstandings. Thus the Lord hath given us victory over sinne,
in himselfe fully, in us it is begun: but for that wee shall have occasion afterwards to discourse. The Lord himselfe being free from all sinne, hee was therefore a Conquerour over that pestilent viper, that poyson of our nature; and he gave his people the infusion of his Spirit to guide them, by the which Originall sinne is weakned, the sire is abated and allayed, the edge of sin is lessened. The last is, over the Law. That still is the grea∣test enemy; that still layes before us the judgments of God, Doe this and live: Doe that and be damned. Follow this course, and thou shalt be damned for ever. If thou be a drunkard, if thou be lustfull, if thou be covetous and worldly, if thou be revengefull and malicious, the sentence of damnation is passed upon thee: that is all the comfort wee have by the Law: but Christ hath given us victory over this enemy, which followes us at the heeles, when wee doe amisse; and still puts us into qualmes of consci∣ence for our misdeeds, and curbes and bridles us by the checks of conscience; that if a man could but see the end of these foule actions, as hee seeth the be∣ginning, he would never doe them; because there is no equality between the short time of sinning, and the eternity of punishment. But against all this Christ hath given us victory: for he hath fulfilled the law of God, he hath stopped the crimination; he he hath stayed all those slanders, and all those ac∣cusations that the devill would make by the law, or that those that have been curious observers of the law would make; and those accusations that an evill conscience would make by the power of the Law of God, which hath enlightened it. He hath
silenced all these in this life; but the consummation of this, we must understand is to come, when this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortall shall put on immortality. They are now gone before in the head, they shall then follow in the body. (Saith St. Austin,Aug.) Whatsoever Christ hath done in his owne body, it shall follow in our mortall bodies; When hee shall change them,1 Cor. 15. and make them like unto his owne glorious body, according to his mighty power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himselfe. This is that goodly victory, in the which the Lord hath interested us all. To conclude, and refer the rest till the next time. I beseech you (beloved in the Lord) let us con∣sider what part we have in this victory: wee ought not to insult and triumph in a vaine presumption, in blessings that pertaine not to us: but if we think we have the victory, let us labour to finde it, and so enter into judgement with our owne soules, who it is that overcommeth.Apoc. 3. To him that overcommeth will I give to eate of the tree of life in the middest of the paradice of God: to him that overcommeth will I give a white stone, &c. And what must he overcome? He must overcome himself, and all his passions; he must overcome the feare of death, the power of sinne, and the terrours of the Law. A fearfull en∣counter, and a great troop of enemies is laid open; the Lord strengthen poore David, that he may be able to encounter with this mighty Goliah; for it seemes that hell it selfe is open upon him: when therefore we doe give our selves that liberty as to doe what our selves list, against the good will and
command of God; let us not thinke to have any part in this victory: we are rather as so many con∣quered slaves, and vassals that lie at the command of death; that whereas wee should tread Satan un∣der our feet, Satan tramples us under his, and makes us the most base, and vile creatures in the world. Thou that hast enough in this world, and yet canst not tell when thou hast enough, but still art distracted with envious desires, and makest thy self great by other mens falls; that raisest thy owne fortunes by other mens ruines; that usest any meanes, good, or bad; by hooke, or by crooke to ad∣vance thine owne estate, to make thy selfe rich, and settest thy selfe onely to the study of the Idoll Mammon; what kinde of victory, or what hope of conquest canst thou have in that great and mighty victory, which wee pretend the Lord Iesus hath given us? surely none. There is no such gally∣slave in the world, as a man that is given and ad∣dicted to his wealth, and riches in this present life: for it pierceth men through with many sorrowes, as the Apostle saith, They that will be rich,1 Tim. 6. pierce them∣selves thorow with many sorrowes. Behold the sting of death, is the sting that pierceth them, the sting of death is sinne: and this sting, it pierceth through the heart, and stabbs the soule of every covetous man in the world, that they cannot claime any part of that victory, which God communicates to his children; but they are foyled base creatures that are made for slaughter and destruction. And so againe, for them that live in their plea∣sures, in their voluptuous and filthy courses; that
will grow old in adultery, that will make no end of their filthinesse, and uncleannesse, but with greedi∣nesse seeke when one prey is enjoyed, how to obtaine another, these that make their vessells that should be Temples of God, the brothell-houses of the De∣vill; that are no sooner tempted but they yeeld: these comming Creatures, how, or with what face, with what confidence can they lay claime to the victory, that we have in God through Iesus Christ our Lord, being nothing else but bruits, and are gi∣ven over, yeelding themselves: they have taken the marke of the beast, and follow Satans directi∣on and command, as if Christ had no power to be their Chieftaine, but the Prince of darknesse must rule. The like may bee said of all these malicious prowling spirits that be in the world; that take de∣light to sting their brethren, to doe mischiefe with∣out cause: to sow the seeds of dissention, that will wrangle out their lives to trouble others, to bring upon them endlesse suits, and questions, that shall never be decided, to vexe the world with begging, or buying of new found offfices, to make their hands full out of every thing, sacred and prophane; to play the very roaring Lions in their dennes, that no man can tell how hee should live, or keepe him∣selfe quiet with them: That these Creatures (I say) should come, and claime any part in this victo∣ry, that we have in Christ, it were a fanaticall mad∣nesse, a ridiculous base delusion. Therefore let them that are willing to comfort their owne soules against the day of trouble, let them thinke that there is no comfort to bee had but in this victory:
and there is no comfort can bee had in this vi∣ctory, except they strive to be Victors, and Con∣querors in Christ: to have a part in him, and to fight as well as they may under his banner; as long as they live in sinne, that they seeke it, and study it, and mainetaine it, and defend it; let them delude their owne soules, and deceive themselves, which is the grossest, and most fearefull deceit of all o∣thers, for a man to deceive himsefe: they may thinke they are Conquerers, but they are the De∣vills vanquished ones: they are his captives, they are held in the Devils Irons: God be mercifull to us, for there is none that lives in sin, but the poore miserable thiefe that lies in the dungeon, is better then hee. But this victory notwithstanding is the Churches, and wee are of the Church: wee are baptized, wee are called to the knowledge of the misteries of the Gospel; and God doth not call men for nothing, hee doth not make his mysteries idle. It is true therefore, as long time as God hath vouchsafed us, wee have still time to bee victors, and though our soules cleave to the earth, though they sticke to the pavement, yet God can raise us out of the dust, and make us equall with the Princes of his people, as the Prophet David saith.Psal. 113. Therefore let us call to the Lord God, and though wee find no strength in our selves, nor no meanes, nor will: if there bee not so much as a will, yet let him that hath the wills of men in his hand, that hath the hearts of men in his hand, and turnes them as the rivers of waters, let him doe as it pleaseth him; let him worke this for us, that
can worke nothing for our selves. To whom bee praise, and glory, obedience, and thanksgiving, both now and for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15.56, 57. But thanks be to God that hath given us victory through Christ our Lord: therefore (beloved Brethren) be stedfast and unmoveable, abounding in the worke of the Lord alway, because you know your labour is not lost, nor in vaine in the Lord. THere is nothing more certain,Note. then that it is the portion of a Christian soule to fight, and la∣bour in this life present; The Church is a militant Church, a People that are alway at com∣bat, and conflict with the de∣vill and with men; and if these faile, with himselfe too. Saith S. Austin,St. Aug. we would faine be freed from this fight, from this continuall perturbation; but the comfort that God hath given against it, is that as we are called to a triall: so the Lord assists us too
in the day of Trouble, and assures us of the victory; that howsoever we cannot overcome all these ene∣mies by any grace that is inherent in us, but that we are often foyled and conquered, yet we have ano∣ther Meane to conquer them by; that is, by faith: and the apprehension of the victory, that the Lord Iesus Christ hath purchased for us, over the devill, and all these Adversaries: and this victory can be given us but by one hand, it lyes onely there to di∣spense; that is, in the hand of God: which is the Lord of Hoasts, and Armies. It is he alone that en∣clines the battaile, it is hee that weakneth the ad∣versaries, and that strengthens those that follow his colours; when they are foyled, hee raiseth up them that are fallen; it is he that beateth downe Sathan under our feet; that was our conquerour. This spi∣rituall conquest is of all others the most excellent, for the rest (as IsayIsay 8. saith) They are gotten with tu∣mult, and with tumbling of garments in bloud. But this conquest that we have in the Lord Iesus, it was like a Lamb-slaughter in the day of Madian. You know in the day of Madian what kinde of victory it was, Gideon went out, hee did nothing; the Lord did all for him: for still hee brought downe his troups from thousands to hundreds, to three hundred, and when they were to be set to worke, they did nothing but onely clash their broken pitchers; and the Lord wrought a great slaughter in the Hoast of Madian. Such a victory is the conquest wee have in Iesus Christ our Lord: he is still the victor, that got the conquest without all appearance of second Cau∣ses, without all union of forces, and power in the world, that God may be all in all.
In other victories there be many sharers that may claime a part in the conquest, there is some∣thing belongs to the Generall, some to the Colo∣nels, some to the Captaines, some to the other Officers, some to the common Souldiers. There is no man but hee may claime a part in the common victory. But in this victory that we have obtained, by the meanes of Christ Iesus our Lord, there is no∣thing that belongs to any but to God; Therefore the Apostle saith, Thanks be to God: thanks be to no man, thanks be to no Angell, thanks be to no power that can be supposed to help us: but the thanks and praise must rest in God alone, which hath wrought all this for us. As the Heathen Orator said to Cae∣sar when hee had overcome his anger, and had par∣doned his Enemie: In other warres (saith he) there is a communication of the praise of the wars: it be∣longs to one as well as to another. But in this vi∣ctory which thou hast gotten over thy selfe,Orat. pro Milone. in gi∣ving, and forgiving; thou hast gotten the glory The like may wee much more truly say of God, as the Apostle saith here, Thanks be to God, and to none but to him that hath given us victory; for he alone with his owne hand, and his stretched out arme,Psal. 94. hath gotten himselfe the victory, as the Psalmist saith. So TertullianTertul. speaking of this point, in his fifth booke against Marcian, Chap. 10. The Apostle (saith he) being well advised how the conquest comes to a Christian, hee gives no thanks to any other God; but him alone that put the word of triumph and insultation into his mouth. That God that gave him power, to say, by way of triumph, Oh Death where is thy sting! Oh grave where is thy victory! To
that same God that gave him the word of triumph, he returnes the word of thanksgiving, and retribu∣tion of praise, because it belongs onely to him. If Marcians god, (as Marcian supposed hee had another god than that which is the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ,) can tell mee such things as hee hath done; or that hee hath published any such thing to the world as this: I will account him the Father of mercy. But till then, I will account him Marcians Idoll, a meere Idoll. And S. IeromeS. Jerom. spea∣king of this argument, Thanks be to God that hath given us victory through Iesus Christ our Lord. For (saith hee) who was there to doe it but God? Who was there to encounter all these enemies, but Christ a∣lone? His friends forsooke him, his Disciples left him;Isay 45. (as the Prophet saith) It was I, and none else that stood in the battaile. Therefore (saith S. IeromeS Jerom.) to him alone belongs all the praise of the victory. And S. AustinS. Aug. most heavenly and graciously discourseth of this point: When I consider the victory of a Christian (saith he) which is this, that his chiefe and deadly enemy is swallowed up by Death; and by what death was he swallowed up? by the death of life. That is a strange saying, that Death should be swallowed up by the death of life. Why should I doubt to say that of God, which God hath not doubted to doe for mee? God hath certainly per∣formed this for me, therefore I may speake, and af∣firme this of him. What is the matter therefore that the Apostle saith, wee may insult thus over Death, and give thanks to God for the victory? be∣cause (saith he) that Life being dead, did kill Death, the fulnesse of life, did swallow up the bitternesse of
death: and all death and miserie is dissolved, and consumed in the body of the Lord Iesus. So S. Chry∣sostome saith, In this great warre (saith he) the tro∣phee was planted by the hand of the Lord himselfe, he set downe the standard; he set downe the place; and note, and mark where the enemy was discom∣fited, and left the field. But after that was done, he cast out garlands as after the battaile is won, after the field is won; the Emperours devised Crownes, and Garlands for those that had beene Conquerors with them: But the Lord finding none there but he himselfe, hee calls the by-standers; wee that had not sought a stroke; yet he vouchsafed to cast unto us Crownes and Garlands: and hath made us to com∣municate, and participate of that noble and glorious victory, which himselfe hath only attained. But this point of Doctrine must bee brought home more familiarly: for this is true to those that be men of judgement, and understanding: they make no doubt of it; but I must make it plaine to babes and sucklings. How is it possible therefore that the victory of Christ, which hee got over sinne, and over death; that it should be ours? seeing both personall actions be uncommunicable, that which is done by one per∣son, is not communicated to another person; be∣cause the act is confined in him that did the act. And seeing also that the children of God as long as they live in this world, that they cannot be called Conquerours of their temptations; for they are con∣quered many times: and hee that is the best man in the world, though he sometime overcome, yet he is many times overcome too. Nay, almost the
least temptation, although it wound not a man to the heart, yet it drawes blood of him; as (S. Iohn saith) If we denie, and say that we have no sinne, we deceive our selves. If we say he speakes of himselfe, and the rest of his fellow Apostles;1 Ioh. 1.8. If wee say that there is not sinne in us; that there doth not sinne remaine in us, we lie, and the truth of God is not in us, we deceive our selves. And the Apostle saith, That hee was a miserable man himselfe under captivity,Rom. 7.19. & 23. and that good thing that I would doe that doe I not, and that evill thing that I would not doe, that I doe. What a mise∣rable kinde of conquest is this? Can a man be said to be a Conquerour in this miserable state, when he can doe nothing that he would doe, and doth all things that he would not doe? How can this be agreeable? Besides; we see in the examples of the Children of God, that they have had no conquest; but have beene foyled. What conquest had David over his great and grievous temptations? We shall see almost nothing that was offered to him, but he fell in it: When he comes to be a Iusticiarie, which is the easiest matter in the world to doe Iustice; yet hee failed in that, and gave to a false servant halfe his Masters good. And when it came to a matter of revenge, he failed in that too: when hee made that rash vow, that he would cut off from Naball, all that turned to the wall; besides, the foule fall that hee had afterwards: so that what victory had this man? what victory had Manasses, that afterwards was saved by the miracle of mercie? What victory had hee over those murtherous attempts, and con∣ceits that he had, whereby hee put to death many thousands of Gods children? What conquest had
Salomon, when he was brought from his high wise∣dome to that low ebb? when hee was brought to serve whores, and devils, and Idols? and yet hee was a Type of Christ, and is a true Saint in heaven. The Thief on the Crosse what conquest or victory had he? nothing in the world, except we account that victory, to controll his fellow thief: and to stand & speake a word for Christ. To conclude this point: seeing there is calling at the eleventh houre, and as long as a man hath life; he hath hope to be called to the service of God: and many are not called untill the last period of their life. It seems therefore that a Christian hath no conquest in this life, for he is carried to doe that which he would not do; and he cannot do that which he would do: for al the exam∣ples in the Scriptures carrie us in a contrary streame. How then is it said we have the cōquest & victory? For the first, I answer thus, where it is said, that all actions personall are incommunicable; It is true: except they be generall persons. If the man be a pri∣vate peculiar person, the action rests in himselfe; but if he be a selected uniuersall chosen person; the Action doth not rest in himselfe: but it extends it selfe to a great multitude, even to all that belong to him. Such an one is Christ, his Actions are not personall to be limited to himselfe; but by way of merit they are applied, and extended to all the world of Beleevers. Wee may understand this by those things that God hath given us, by the com∣parisons he hath made unto us in the Scriptures; as being figures and fore-runners of his blessed Sonne. In 1 Sam. 17.8, 9.1 Sam. 17.8.9. looke there at that mighty president, the fight betweene Goliah and David: which figu∣red
unto us the fight betweene the devill and the world, and all adverse powers on the one side, and the Lord Iesus our Chieftaine on the other side. Marke what the Captaine of the Philistines saith, Why (saith he) should we joyne our selves in bat∣taile the whole Army? let there be one man cho∣sen out on either part, and let us have a single com∣bat, and let us end the quarrell so; and if hee over∣come mee, then we will be your servants; and if I overcome him, then you shall be our servants. Be∣hold, here are but two men that fight, the action of fighting belongs but to two persons; but by the power of God, David overcame; and the effect of that victory redounded to thousands; to Saul which was the King, and to all his Courtiers, and to all Is∣raell, to all the people of God: the power of Davids victory belonged to them all: and so the action of David, it was not limited to his owne person, be∣cause hee was a chosen man, a chosen vessell set forth by the Spirit of God to this victory. There∣fore the power of the victory was beneficiall to all his Countrymen; much more is the victory which Christ hath obtained against the powers of dark∣nesse; he fought alone, and he overcame alone. It is true, the personall act belongs to him alone; and hee deserves onely all the glory for it: but the extent of the act he communicates to his friends, to every true Christian. It is that which is called our victory, because the Iew overcame the Philistin: Therefore all the Iewes overcame the Philistins, because our flesh and nature hath overcome in Christ, for hee was flesh of our flesh and bone; therefore our nature is advanced, and exalted by him, that is the Victor;
and hee being the Conquerour; wee that are his friends, and kinsmen, are Conquerours with him, though we have not struck one stroake in the bat∣taile. Againe, observe in the like:Gen. 14.15, 16 when Abraham came to destroy those 5. Kings, and to rescue Lot; and the four Kings that were defeated, that Text saith, that Abraham alone, and his owne people got the victory: but when hee had done, the glory of the victory was given to all those that had lost in the battaile, every man had his owne as far as might be restored; and Abraham would not gain so much as the latchet of a shooe, lest they should say they had made Abraham rich; and so the power and glory of his victory, was communicated to those that had any dealing in the warre. Therefore (I say) if this were possible in humane things, how shall we doubt of it in the Omnipotencie of the Almigh∣ty, that the victory of Christ is made common to all that beleeve in him? and they have part in that victory that can claime it, that can intreat it of him; they are made fellow conquerers, although they had no hand in it, nor made no appearance in the doing of it. Againe, wee see in 1 Sam. 30.1 Sam 30. when the people were ready to stone David; and he receives an an∣swer from the Lord, that if he would follow those robbers, hee should rescue the prey, and so by the mercy of God he did; but there were two great rubs after hee had got the conquest: The one was when the souldiers came to divide the spoile, whe∣ther they that had fought in the warre, should have all or no? To which David saith no: there were 200
men which were not able to follow them being faint, and therefore were faine to stay by a brook; they could goe no further in regard of their weak∣nesse; and the souldiers that got the battaile, after they had the victory, they would have had them to have had no part of the spoile, because they went not forth with them. But David saith no:1 Sam. 30.24. Who will trust you in this thing? who will beleeve you in this matter? they that stay by the stuffe, they shall have as good share as they that fought in the battell, because although they went not with us, yet their good will was with us, therefore they shall have as great share as we. Againe, when the spoyle came to be divided, he sent of it to severall Cities and Townes thereabout; to them which never had any hope to have rescu∣ed their owne goods, hee sent unto them, saying, Here is a blessing from the Lord to such a towne, & here is a blessing from the Lord to such a town. Behold! now how is it possible for us not to be∣leeve, that we have part in the conquest of Christ? We see David, which was a figure of Christ, hee doth thus; they that were not able to follow, they that could not march along with them, they have part of the prey; and they that never came out, they that did not dare to rescue their goods, they have the prey sent home to them. Our Lord Iesus Christ is far more rich in mercy, then any man can be ima∣gined to be; hee sent unto us the spoiles of hell, the spoile of death; and he made us partakers of his vi∣ctory, although wee were so faint and so fearfull, that wee could not march in the battaile, nor stand with him, because he would have all the glory and
praise alone; yet hee takes not the victory alone, but he gives us part and possession; he gives us part of the spoiles of his enemies, hee makes us Con∣querers of all those that he hath conquered. So then to conclude this point, there are two wayes, how Christ makes us partakers of this victory. The one is by way of Application. The other is by way of Corroboration. The Application of faith is this;1. Application. That Christ doth take unto himselfe all his followers, to re∣ceive their life, and nourishment, and their being, and glory from him: and upon this promise, faith doth worke, and saith, Christ is mine, and all Christ belongs to me: He was incarnate for mee, hee was borne for me, he lived for me, he died for me, he rose againe for me, he overcame for mee, and whatsoever he did it is mine; that is the power of faith, by way of application, which God hath given as a duty, or office to the holy Spirit; that the holy Spirit must apply the Sonne of God, and his merits unto us; and by this meanes of applica∣tion, we are made Conquerers. The second meanes is Corroboration.2. Corroboration. When faith hath applied Christ, it receives comfort and power; and with that strength that God hath vouchsafed it, it works its best against the powers of darknesse. That it hates, and detests evill wayes, that it shuns iniquity, it labours to avoid all meanes of apostacie, and backsliding from God, and seeks every thing that may please the Lord, with an up∣right, and perfect heart: and though he cannot doe it, yet he seeks to doe it, and hee wishes perfection when he is in the lowest, and basest degrees of im∣perfection.
Therefore out of this wee learne; that if wee would have comfort to our selves of the victory of Christ, to joyne these together; application, and corroboration. Wee are too forward to apply to our selves all the merits of Christ; every man saith, Christ is mine, but when it comes to the push, and when temptation the enemy appeares, wee are then so base, and so cowardly, as that we flee almost before we have seene the enemy: like men that rather de∣sire to be overcome, then to be conquerers; like those that have neither will, nor strength, to stand in the battell. Let us therefore call unto God that gives both, to give us application, and to strengthen our spirits by his powerfull inhabitation: that as wee know wherein our strength consists, so we may be able to exercise that strength wee have received, that our faith bee not in vaine, (for a dead faith is in vaine, saith BernardS Bern.) for hee that overcomes must bee a live man, there is no dead man that can overcome; and he must not onely be a live man, but hee must bee quicke, and able; for a sicke man cannot fight. Let us therefore labour that as God hath given us faith, that it may be a living faith, that it may be a working faith; that it be not a dead faith, a vaine imagination and fancy, but that it may bee vivere, valere, vigere; that we may bee strong, and coura∣gious, and quit our selves like men, in the battell of the Lord, that wee may stand in our strength, that wee may hold that tenent of victory, and glory, and conquest which the Lord Christ hath put over unto us. So much of the first point, concerning
the personality of the action. Secondly, how can this bee made good? when as the children of God by experience find in them∣selves such weaknesse, that they are conquered al∣most by every temptation. Shew me that covetous man twenty yeeres agoe, that is a liberall person now, and I will say it is a miracle: but hee holds his old course still as hee begun, and growes rather worse every day. Let mee see that man that hath beene a drunkard heretofore, and is become a sober and temperate man now, and wee will sing a poena, a hymne to God for his deliverance. And so for the lustfull man, if hee begin to follow that course once, he followes it, and holds on to his dying day; except God worke a strange and marvellous deli∣verance. And seeing that every man in the world is tainted with this, that according as hee is given, and inclined by his corrupt nature; doe what hee can he shall hold a tang of it to his death: And the Lord doth not this for any harme he wishes them, but to exercise their humilitie in the sight of their frailty, that they might see their weaknesse, and to exercise their faith. Therefore seeing that eve∣ry man is thus inclined, as by nature, and corrupti∣on he is bent; how can we be assured of the victo∣ry? how can we take any glory in this that we are conquerers, when we are trod under foot, and foi∣led every where? when any passion of anger can put the best, and the wisest man out of himselfe, that there is no man that can rule himselfe in any passion, the least matter of revenge makes a man forget himselfe, forget his Christian charity, and he boyles in his blood till hee have some recompence
for the wrong done him. The dearest childe of God that ever was, cannot say, but that look what temptation he hath beene given to by nature; still he hath a sting of it to his death, to his dying-day, and where is the victory then? what conquest is this? When a man suffers the least wrong, pre∣sently to sweare, or curse, or fall into angry termes, as though there were no Spirit of God to rule him? when a man is offered a matter of gaine, and ad∣vantage, that hee will set it upon the tenters, and wrest his conscience to bring it in, although it bee false, though it bee against the common good of his brethren. What victory can this be? But for this wee must understand, that the grea∣test comfort that we have is this; that though wee cannot overcome the work of the temptation, yet we overcome the evill of that work. For our vi∣ctory consists especially in our faith.1 Iohn 5.14. This is the victory whereby wee overcome the world, even our faith, and in the next verse after, who is hee that o∣vercomes the world, but he that believeth that the Sonne of God is come in the flesh, and hath reconciled the world to God. So that although it bee true in∣deed, that faith must be a living faith, and we must prove it by works; yet notwithstanding when all comes to all, the worth of the conquest, shall not rest in the worke of the person of man, but in the faith of the man, that apprehends the victory of Christ. This is the conquest that Christ hath impu∣ted and imparted to us. A man that hath no good works, hath no testimo∣niall, and hee that hath no letters testimoniall, when he travels the Country, hee is accounted a runna∣gate,
and vagabond, and is clapt up every whereas he goes. So it is with a Christian man, that hath no desire to please God by the testimony, and evidence of a good life: And yet notwithstanding, when the Lord comes to deliver the reward, to give the retribution, he doth not so much examine the dig∣nity of the work, but the dignity and soundnesse of faith, whereby wee lay hold on the principall, whereby we lay hold of him that is the Captaine of our nature, and in him we overcome. For wee must consider, that the victory is without us, and though God give us grace many times within our selves to overcome temptations, yet the maine vi∣ctory is without us, in Christ Iesus, therefore wee are to flie to him, and to desire of him a perfect conquest, and that all our imperfections may bee shrowded under his glorious victory. This is that that makes us conquerers. To conclude this point, wee see it in the Father of the faithfull, in Abraham; hee is commended for his faith; but there is no great matter of any works, (as the Apostle saith concerning workes) hee had no great matter to glory before God; hee could not glory before God, before men he might. But what was his righteousnesse then? The righteousnesse of faith, and beliefe: Abra∣ham beleeved God,Gal.. 3.6. and it was imputed to him for righ∣teousnesse. This was his conquest and victory; that he beleeved God: he hoped against hope, that God was able to give him a sonne, now hee was an hun∣dred yeares old: and that hee was able to raise the dead wombe of Sarah, and give them the promised issue: that he would give him the land of Canaan
where hee was, though not for his owne possession, yet to his posterity, and that this land of Canaan was a figure, and embleme of heaven, that glorious Kingdome which is above. These things which were farre above reason, and common sense; that God should make them apparent to his sense, that hee should make him verily beleeve that they should come to passe; this was his righteousnesse. Abraham beleeved God,Iam. 2.23. and it was accounted to him for righteousnesse; he beleeved God that he was om∣nipotent, and true of his promise, and that was ac∣counted to him for righteousnesse: So in us that are the children of Abraham, although wee must study holinesse,Heb. 12.14. without which no man shall see God: and we must abhor all the works of darknesse, and come into the light; yet we are so fraile in this flesh, that we cannot doe the one, nor the other. But misera∣ble wretches! we have two lawes, the law of our members, and the law of God: and so we must con∣clude with the Apostle;Rom. 7.25. I serve the law of God in my minde and spirit, but the law of sinne with my members: and yet hee concludes in this place; thankes bee to God, that gives us victory in Christ Ie∣sus our Lord. To conculde this point. It is the faith that a man holds in God, the faith he hath in Christ, that makes us Conquerers, and gives us the victory. It was this that armed the thiefe upon the Crosse: when hee had done nothing all his life time, but plaied the thiefe, and robbed, and oppressed, and played his tragicall part in the world; yet hee shewed himselfe to have one mite of faith in the end of his life, and for that he was accepted: And
Christ saith unto him,Luke 23.43. This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise: That whereas the Pharisees, and Priests, and Scribes thought Christ to be justly exe∣cuted, and put to death; yet notwithstanding hee put his faith in him, and beleeved that hee was a King, and that he had a great portion of glory re∣served for him; and that hee was able to communi∣cate it to his followers, therefore he desires to par∣take of that glory;Luke 23.42. Lord remember me when thou commest into thy kingdome. Now I come to the last point of the precedent verse; Thanks be to God since wee have the victory in Christ Iesus our Lord: that is, since wee have both received the fulnesse of the conquest impar∣ted to us, and also the first fruits of the Spirit, by which we are able to overcome, though not fully to overcome, yet to overcome by the power of his victory, and to be accounted conquerers, though we bee but cowards. Thanks be to God for this great gift, and mercy of imputation. The holy Apostle (saith TheodoretTheodoret.) hath concluded all his discourse with a necessary line, with thanksgiving, and praise to God. For indeed, as wee are bound to thanke God for every thing that wee receive, so much more for the chiefe and principall things that wee take from his hands. There is no thing so gracious as this, to be victors, to bee borne to be Conque∣rers; and to be conquerers over such enemies too, as have conquered all the world this many thou∣sand yeares together: that in sight, that there was nothing that domineered, nor nothing got the vi∣ctory but death, and sinne, and hell: and to conquer these miscreants, that had over-run all the world;
this is the hand of God which is to be rejoyced in; and if there bee any blessing for us to blesse our soules in, it is this, that we are conquerers in Christ, saith St. Austin:Aug. For (saith hee) If I must thanke God for every petty benefit, what greater reason can I have then to give thanks for chiefe and maine benefits? The grace of God in Iesus Christ our Lord, is that which gives us this victory. Thanke God, (saith St. Bernard) thanke not thy selfe,St. Bern. thank not Saints, thanke not Angels, thanke not preparatory works, thanke not foreseene merits, thanke nothing else; but let the praise rest wholly, and totally in God. It is he that did all, therefore to him be gi∣ven all praise, and glory for ever and ever. FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection. 1 COR. 15. ult. Therefore beloved brethren be stedfast and unmovea∣ble, abounding in the worke of the Lord alway, be∣cause you know your labour is not in vaine in the Lord. WEE are come now to the con∣clusion of this Chapter, which followes most naturally, (as Chrysostome saith) Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye sted∣fast, &c. It is a true conclusion, when a man hath fully proved the premises: hee that concludes a thing before he hath argued well, and proved the matter he discourseth of, hee is ei∣ther a foole or a falsarie; for it must needs argue it is a lie, when a man will ground upon uncertaine grounds. It argueth also weaknesse in him, when hee thinks hee hath perswaded without sufficient ground: for there is no wise man will be perswa∣ded
without due confirmation, and demonstration of those things that are argued. Therefore now the Apostle comes in as an excellent Oratour, to con∣clude, not upon poore grounds, nor upon weak evidences, but upon strong perswasion and de∣monstration, (saith Tertullian.Tertul.) Hee useth all the strength of the holy Ghost to perswade to this po∣werfull article of the Resurrection: his meaning is with all the power of the holy Ghost that he was ca∣pable of; for else the power of the holy Ghost is as infinite, as God himselfe is infinite. But now when the Apostle had driven this doctrine home, when he had so beat it into them, as that there was no scruple left to any gainsayer or contradictor; when he had shewed the cause of the Resurrection; when he had shewed the maner of it; when he had shew∣ed the absurdities that would follow the contrary doctrine, if men did doubt of it; when hee had shewed the effects and consequents of it, of that glo∣rious incorruption and immortality; when hee had proved it by force of holy Scriptures, Oh death, I will be thy death: oh hell, I will be thy destruction. When he had set downe all these firme and maine presidents: it is time for him now to bring in his conclusion. He is a foolish builder, that will set up the roofe of his house, before the walls be built; and he is an idle discourser that will offer to bring a thing into his Auditory, upon any triviall reason; but the Spi∣rit of God teacheth us first to settle the understan∣dings, to perswade the minds of men, by strong and puissant arguments; and then to draw forth conclusions: for hee must first move a mans senses
and understanding, and then draw his will; for the will is alway plyable to the conclusion, but the un∣derstanding is attentive to the demonstration. All this while the Apostle had held the under∣standing, giving demonstrative causes; and such rea∣sons, as no man could contradict him in. Now that being done, he closeth with the will; and that is ea∣sily brought if he can perswade the understanding: therefore he saith, Therefore my beloved brethren: that is, seeing these things are thus, seeing I have told you the will of God in this point, that Christ is risen himselfe; and that he is risen so palpably, that he was seene of more than five hundred bre∣thren at once; and that he is the Head of the body; and that therefore all the members must be raised up at one time to come with their Head, and be joy∣ned unto him. Seeing that there is no religion, without the faith and hope of the Resurrection; there is no religion in the world, but all must be taken away. Seeing that the Lord is able to doe what it pleaseth him, and that he doth it in the corne, in the grasse; that hee makes variety of all things in the world, that there is one kind of light of the Sunne,1 Cor. 15. another of the moone, another of the stars; that there is one flesh of fish, another of beasts, another of foules: the Lord that is able to work this strange variety in things of this nature, much more shall he in that se∣cond refined nature, in that proportion of glory that he hath ordained for us. Seeing therefore that I have made this plaine to you, that I have shewed you the manner how we shall rise; by the noise of a Trumpet, and by the voice of an Angell. Seeing I have proved this by the Spirit of prophesie, out of
the Prophet Isay, and also out of Hosea, that death hath lost his sting, and the grave hath lost his vi∣ctory; seeing all these things are so plain, that there is no man can take exceptions against them, There∣fore my beloved brethren, be yee stedfast and unmove∣able, &c. This is that sweet Rhetorick which the Spirit useth in the booke of God, and which we find no where else. If we reade the writings of Heathen men, of Phi∣losophers, they conclude before they have given sa∣tisfaction to him, that they would draw to approba∣tion: they would draw him to probation, before they have proved it; they give a reason or two of a fri∣volous thing, that a man may speak against them as well as for them: and yet they will draw a man, and bring him to their faction, or else he is accoun∣ted an adversary. This is the wisedome of men, to steale away the hearts of men, to seek to be masters before they have gotten the masterie; but let the truth of God come, and then I will yeeld. So the Book of God it brings the truth, it brings the testi∣mony of God which cannot lie; wee see this in the power of God in the creatures, in the daily use of them: we see it in our fields, in our closes; we see it in our gardens, we see it in our selves, in our owne natures, God hath made an experiment of it. There∣fore upon this firme argument, grounded upon ex∣perience, upon Scripture, upon nature, and upon all these demonstrations, Beloved be ye stedfast and un∣moveable, &c. Let us learne this excellency of the holy Ghost, that whatsoever we perswade men to, to give suffi∣cient,
and good reasons of it, and not to bring in false or idle conclusions, but to shew good reasons for that we perswade unto. And then observe, in that hee saith, beloved bre∣thren. This is the way to bring in his conclusion. Love me, and say what thou wilt,S. Aug. (saith St. Austin) therefore he calls them brethren, and beloved bre∣thren, as being willing to fasten the conclusion up∣on them: (as St. IeromeS. Jerom. saith) As the haire brings in the thread, and so the work is made, and fastned not by the haire, but by the thread: So the words of amity and love bring in the doctrine of Christ, that it may be a work of needle-work: as it is in Psal. 45.Psal. 45. The Church stands in a garment of needle work, wrought with divers colours. He calls them here by a worthy compellation: Brethren of the same mother, brethren in the same faith, brethren as having their denomination of the same father; brethren as having drunke of the same Spirit of God; brethren as those that shall rise with my body in the common resur∣rection of bodies; brethren, as those that are incor∣porated, and ingraft into Christ our elder brother: brethren as those that keepe a consort, in the tune in singing this song, Thanks be God that hath given us victory, brethren in all these things: and brethren most beloved as in the bowels of Christ, beloved at the heart root. I beseech you take this as the conclusion of all, and take it as a brotherly exhortation; I speak no∣thing, but it comes from the affection of a brother; take it as a brotherly word spoken with a brotherly mind and heart. I beseech you beloved brethren, be stedfast and unmoveable, &c. But I have often met
with this, therefore I will stand no longer upon it, to shew the mildnesse and sweetnesse of the Gospell, it doth not terrifie, and threaten men to beleeve this or that; but onely in the way of clemency, to per∣swade; he works not upon them violently, but per∣swades a man to yeeld to reason, to hearken, to be tractable, to be ruled, to be docible: I require no more. The precepts of men are hard, and grievous, they will force men to obey, where they give no satisfaction to the mindes of men; but I deale not so, I come unto you as beloved brethren. It is the sweetnesse of the Gospell, that it hath this influence into the hearts and affections of men; hee deales not as if he were a ruler over their faith; he deales not as the tyrants of the antichristian Church, to make them under paine of Anathema, to beleeve this or that; the Apostle might have done it, as well as any other man, in this speciall point, and article of the Resurrection, who would not put Anathema upon him that would not beleeve it. But the Apo∣stle useth, and taketh another course, Therefore belo∣ved Brethren. It is a word of a brother, it is a word that comes from God our Saviour, and it is the te∣nent of our common mother, the Church of God, the Spouse of Christ; therefore take it as brethren. And what is this word that he saith, Be ye stedfast and unmoveable? The word signifieth properly a man that sits fast upon his seat: So the Apostle would give us to un∣derstand, that the devill and wicked carnall temp∣tations, doe alway labour to unsettle a man, to put him out of his place, to set him beside his cushion, as we use to say; but the Lord would have him still
to hold his place, and to keep his seat, to be a man still resolved, and not suffer himselfe to be displa∣ced or disappointed, but to be like unto the Square or Cube, that which way soever it turnes, rests still upon its selfe; and if it be of a greater bulk, than the partie that moves it, it cannot be moved, because it rests fully setled upon one side; or if it be removed it still holds it selfe up, which way soever it goeth; for every side is alike, and one side will beare it all. So the Lord hath set us upon a cube, upon a square foundation, not to be removed: and therefore hee would have us looke to that seat, that he hath set us in, and wee shall be safe; there is no body that shall unsettle us, for the Lords owne hand hath planted us. Let us keep our seat, which the devill seeks to thrust us out of, and we shall be well enough; for we have Gods assistance to keepe us in: that is the first instruction. Then secondly, be stedfast and unmoveable: that is, in respect of outward enemies, which come with great violence in your open profession, to dis∣plant and dislodge you. Be not moved, that is, be not blowne away with every blast of doctrine, be not shaken with every earthquake, that sathan moves unto us: be not removed out of your seat, be not re∣moved out of the point of that seat, wherein you were set before: for so the words are, be not re∣moved from the point, including a marvellous per∣fection, that a man must keep him constant to the very point of the place that he is in; the devill oft∣times seekes to remove men, and although he can∣not altogether remove them out of their place, out
of the seat of their holy faith and profession, yet hee will remove them from the very point of their place, he will make them dispute of some points, he will make them doubt of some things, hee will make them question somewhat. No, saith the Apostle, suffer not any motion to come upon you; not so much as the shaking of the place wherein you are; the great mother the earth that beares us all, when the wind which is in her bowels and concavities cannot break forth, then the earth shaketh: but the child of God must be stronger then the earth; he must not be shaken: al∣though he shake concerning his obedience, yet not concerning his faith, which still is planted in the Lord, upon the Cube Christ Iesus. Behold, here is the duty of Gods child: those that are truely grounded upon Christ, they must be like a house built upon a rock, that when windes or weather come, they cannot prevaile against it: so strongly it is built, that all the waters are broken against it, but cannot downe with it. (Saith St. Au∣stin) While the waves of the sea threaten the ruine of the house,Aug. they are turned into froth: so while they seeke to ruinate the house of God, which is like to the Mountaines of Ierusalem, which stand fast for ever, and cannot be removed. It it like the Army of God that keepe their station. This is the duty of every true Christian. As for false hearts that will turne their religion upon every trouble, and will suffer themselves by disputations to be brought from that to another way; these have no part in the victory of Christ, but they are foyled, & tumbled under by every temp∣tation
that Satan brings upon them, for there is not any place for staggerers, and cowards, nor for any but those that apprehend truely this victory, by a demonstrative faith in Christ. There is no other meanes whereby they can lay claime to the victo∣ry of Christ besides this, for by faith wee stand,Rom. 9. and it is that onely which layeth hold on the con∣quest by Christ. The next thing that he exhorts them to doe, af∣ter they bee setled in the faith; is, that they bee carefull to extend themselves to good works,Iam. 2. for faith without works is dead, therefore hee saith, alway abounding in the work of the Lord. Where we are to consider;Division of the Text into 4. parts. First, the object, the worke of the Lord. Then the degree of it, abound in that worke. Then, the extent of it, alway. And the reason followes after, Because you know that your labour is not in vaine in the Lord. If your labour were in vaine, I would not wish you to make any continuance in that course; but because your labour is not lost, therefore beloved brethren, be stedfast, and unmoveable in the worke of the Lord, &c. In the worke of the Lord. Every good thing may bee termed the worke of
the Lord: both in respect of the beginning from whence it comes; and in respect of the reference, and end of it, to which it tends. All good works are from God, there is no good thing in us,2. Cor. 3.5. that is, in our flesh. Wee are not suffi∣cient to thinke a good thought, all is from God. Therefore as there is no good thing naturally in us, so there is nothing that is good that comes from us naturally, but it is from the Spirit of God; so they are called good in respect of the Originall from whence they come. Every good gift (saith St. Iames) and every perfect worke also,Iam. 1.17. is from him that is the Father of lights. That is one reason, why every good worke is called the worke of the Lord. Againe, every good thing is called the worke of the Lord, because it is referred to the Lord, and is done for the Lord.Matth. 25. So, whatsoever good worke is done to these, it is done to me. All is for him, and for his glory: as it is hee that gives the power of the worke; so the effect, and fruit of the worke is to be returned to him, hee that gave the beginning of it, hee also is to have the end of it: So the worke of mercy is the worke of the Lord. This is true; but it is not that worke of the Lord, that the Apostle speakes of in this place. The worke of the Lord is not every generall worke, but some particular pe∣culiar thing. The Fathers therefore are in divers opinions, but I will stand upon the choise and best of them. Some thinke that the worke of the Lord here, is the Gospel; Abound in the worke of the Lord, that is,
in the Gospel, which Christ came to preach him∣selfe, which he came to testifie, and witnesse by his death and passion, that is the worke of the Lord, that glorious worke, by the which we are all saved. Be stedfast in the profession of that holy Gospel. Another opinion of the worke of the Lord here, is, that it is the worke of charity to the poore: which is true, it is the worke of the Lord. But I take it, the best and principall sense of the worke of the Lord in this place is, the Article of the Resurrection: Bee stedfast in the worke of the Lord; that is, be stedfast concerning the Article of the Resurrection, for this is the worke of the Lord, and upon this all the rest depends: set up this, and all the rest will follow; take away this, and all will fall downe. If it were not for this, our preaching were in vaine, and your hearing were in vaine, and all your labour lost, as you heard before; but you have not lost your labour, as he saith in this verse; therefore when he saith, Be stedfast in the worke of the Lord, his meaning is, in the profession of the Resurrection of the body; that Christ shall raise them by vertue of his resurrection, bee stedfast in this worke. And this worke doth not exclude the o∣ther workes, but it drawes them in: Because I be∣leeve that there shall be a resurrection, therefore I beleeve the Gospel preached; therefore I have faith in Christ; therefore I assent to that which is written in the Gospel; and because I hope for a re∣ward at the resurrection, therefore I give almes to my brethren, I exercise works of charity, and doe good to my fellow members, because that one day
I hope to be proclaimed a member of the Sonne of God. Upon this work therefore followes all the rest, this is that great worke of the Lord, which is called, The worke of the Lord; by way of excellency. All good things be the workes of God, It is true: but, the worke, the singular worke of the Lord, is this, whereby hee raised his Sonne from the dead, the totall of our faith, and resurrection, the onely thing that makes us assured of salvation.Rom. 10. If thou be∣leeve with thine heart, and confesse with thy mouth, that God hath raised Christ from the dead thou shalt bee saved, (saith the Apostle.) Behold, the whole worke of salvation runnes upon this, and though there bee other things required; for hee that beleeveth must bee conformed to the glory of God, which hath raised his Sonne, yet the maine, and chiefe point of a mans salvation, is this; that hee beleeve, and confesse that God hath raised his Sonne Iesus from the dead; and that he shall give life unto those that are dead, and those things that were conquered, hee shall make them more then conquerers: This is that that saves a man. 2. Part the de∣gree. Abound.Bee abundant alway in the worke of the Lord. It is not onely necessary for us to worke the worke of the Lord, but we must bee abundant in it; God doth require of us an eminency: for it is true, that unto him that worketh by the grace of God that he hath received, there is a commendati∣on, and a testimony due unto him: yet notwithstan∣ding if hee rest satisfied with his small measure,
hee cannot aspire to this dignity, to partake of the conquest of Christ, because he doth not abound in the worke of the Lord. Abound in the worke of the Lord, that is, bee abundantly able to comfort thy selfe in this matter of the resurrection, and to com∣fort others that shall come to take comfort of thee: The childe of God must abound, as a River that keepes not the water that is in it for it selfe, but disperseth it to the dry ground: so the children of God must abound in the worke that they have by the Lord, in the worke of charity, in the worke of beliefe, and apprehension of the Articles of their faith: In every thing the Lord will have them abounding creatures. In the first beginning it was the blessing of the Lord, increase and multiply:Gen. 1.20. we see of two crea∣tures, hee made a great world by that blessing up∣on it. And as in naturall things, much more in spiritu∣all: a man must increase and multiply, he must not stand at a stay, but abound, and goe forward. Hee must abound, not to supererogation (as the Papists would have it) a man cannot be so abundant as to have enough for himselfe and others; God knows, he that hath the most hath too little for himselfe; for it is the merit of Christ that must doe all. For this is the meaning of the Apostle, where he saith, Bee abundant in the worke of the Lord; that is, that they should not content themselves with that measure that they had received, there is more be∣fore; forgetting that which is behind, and pressing forward. So that if a man have done that which is
good, he must not think that he hath done enough, but he must goe forward in well-doing, and not bee weary. Whatsoever good worke the Lord hath in him, to crowne, and accomplish it with perseve∣rance; it is that that makes up all the graces of God, and that is it which he saith here, 3. Part. The extent.Alway. A grievous thing it is to bee set to worke, there is no man can endure labour, and worke; especi∣ally the work of the Lord is hard, and contrary to flesh and blood, which is made easie by the grace of God, but when a man hath begun, he thinkes he may safely with a good conscience leave off after a short time, and so he falls to be cold in his profes∣sion of those good things, which formerly he con∣tented himselfe withall. Hee that hath beene in the service of God from his youth, a long time, hee thinks he may take some respite in his old age: he thinks his earnestnesse, and fervour, and heat of zeale in his youth may admit some kinde of allay, and his former zeale may be a sufficient defence for it: A man that hath given to a poore man, hee thinkes hee hath beene very beneficiall when hee hath given so much, and hee bids him come no more at him; hee hath done so much for him al∣ready. When a man prayes, when hee hath done his devotion in the morning, he thinks whatsoever occasion comes, hee shall have no occasion to pray till night. And so in the course of al holy matters, we grow weary of the service of God; so the Apostle
cuts this sluggishnesse away, & tells them he would have them be as a fountaine, he would have them abound; never to be exhausted, never to be drawne dry; as the fountaine runnes alway, so the foun∣taine of grace, in Gods children it runs continually. To what purpose is it to give a poore man a peny to day, and see him starve to morrow? hee had as good give him nothing at all, hee were as good have died to day, it is but a dayes respite: the charity of Gods children must bee perpetuall, let them give as they are able; but let them give con∣tinually, let them pray continually, let them reade continually, let them meditate on the works of God continually, let them rejoice, let them give thanks continually, let them approve the works of God continually, let them satisfie doubting consciences continually; let their fountaine be alwayes running, let there be no stop in the fountaine of grace; when it hath once begun, let it goe on in a happy streame, and flow unto all the inheritance of God. I be∣seech you beloved, be alway abundant in the worke of the Lord. This worke of the Lord, the resurrection, bee abundant in that, and in all the rest of the works of the Lord: because the Lord is alway plenti∣full to you in mercy, so be you plentifull to him in good workes, to draw this mercy of God upon your owne soules. Now followes the reason of all, and it is indeed a sweete contentment to every Christian man.
Knowing that your labour is not in vaine in the Lord. There is no signe more ridiculous, and frivo∣lous then the labour in vaine: for a man to wash an Ethiopian, for a man to wash a brick, for a man to take paines for that which is not worth his labour if it be atchieved, or which he cannot possibly at∣chieve. If their labour had beene such as this, then the Apostle should wish them to their losse, to their great dammage, and frustration. But the Spirit of God doth not meane to set men a worke with a fooles errand, to set men on worke with∣out ensuing profit. The blessed God that cannot lie to any man, hee hath promised, and assured that those that labour in him, they shall not lose their reward. The reason subdivided in∣to 4. branches.First then of the labour. Secondly, that it is not in vaine. Your labour is not in vaine. Thirdly, why it is not in vaine: Because it is in the Lord. Fourthly, how we come to this: You know this is so; It is a thing that no man can make que∣stion of. 1. The labour.First of the labour. It is true, all the parts of
religion are laborious, and there is no man that takes such paines as a Christian doth. When the great Conquerers of the world have subdued whole Nations, yet the mastery was hard for them to at∣chieve over themselves; that is the labour of the Lord: but the labour that is spoken of here, is chiefly to bee referred to three heads. First, to the Ministers of Corinth,This labour is referred to 3. persons. 1. Ministers. you that preach the doctrine of the resurrection, your labour is not lost, therefore have a good confidence. You preach that which is true, you preach not lies, and fan∣cies; but the doctrine that you preach, that all men shall bee raised againe, it is as true as God is true: therefore you that are Preachers hold on, be not dismaied, whatsoever those Heretiques, and adversaries goe about to cast against you, and op∣pose you in your way. Keepe the tenents of your profession, hold on constantly, for your labour is not lost, the Lord shall make it good. It is an idle thing for a man to stand in the Pulpit and tell no∣thing but lies to the people, such a man deserves to be stoned to death for it, to abuse the faith, and to abuse the understandings of men; to tell them things that God never meanes to doe: And the Ministers of Corinth were men that were but Novices, and there were so many hereticall fellows among them, that they were not able to answer their sophismes: and so they beganne to leave off their preaching of the doctrine of the resurrection, because that was full of arguments, and difficulties, and they knew not how to evade out of it, and an∣swer their Opposers. Therefore they began to give
over that, and take some other points; but no, saith the Apostle, goe on with this doctrine; let all the gates of hell open themselves, they shall not pre∣vaile against you. It is the worke of the Lord, and the Lords arme is higher and mightier then the po∣wers of hell, and that which you say, the Lord will make it true in the time of the resurrection of the bodie; whatsoever the gates, and power of hell can make against it; that is the first sense, which Saint BasilS. Basil. followes; and indeed it is good and true. Another sense is of the Brethren in Corinth, that were of the common faith among them, which were exercised in the Agonies of a christian life; as if hee should say, (Brethren) I understand you are by reason of this doctrine of the resurrection, scoft at, and laughed at; they think you are fooles, they imagine that such a thing as this, is a meere dreame; they account you creatures of another world, and such as have a vaine beliefe; and per∣swade your selves of these schismes, which these new teachers have put into your heads: and I see you have great troubles in your life: and these troubles that you have by your persecution, and troubles of conscience, (which are all sweetned by the Resurrection) they are aggravated: so that as I beseech my brethren that teach, so also I intreat you that heare, to abound in the worke of the Lord; that as they preach, and teach, so that you may perceive this doctrine to be true; al∣though the world resist it never so much; this is the agony of a christian life, with Heretiques, with
Schismatiques, with himselfe, with the world. This is the Agonie which a Christian is born unto, which some of the Fathers take to be the labour here spoken of; so St. Ierome, Epiphanius,S. Jerom. S. Epiphan. and di∣vers others follow that. But that which I take to be the best, is the sense which St. Austin and some others give,S. Aug. which is this; Your labour is not in vaine; that is, your labour of love. Marke, the Apostle there reciting all the Intellectuall graces of the Spirit of God,1 Thes. 1.4. hee speakes there of the labour of love: for there is nothing that hath so much labour in it as love: although it be without paines, if we regard the outward act and worke, yet the imployment is great; nothing is so laborious as love; it is still doing good, comfor∣ting those that are distressed, bestowing somewhat to the poore out of that little it hath; to spare it out of its owne mouth; to give admonitions to the pee∣vish, to deale wisely with froward spirits. A man were as good goe about to tame a wild Tigre, as to tell men that are setled in evill courses of their faults; yet a Christian must doe this: so this is that labour of love, the love of that blessed day, the love to the time when a mans body shall be raised; it makes him change his place, remove his lodging; it makes him spend his meanes, it makes him doe all the good he can in this world, because he hopes for the blessed resurrection of his body: as the Apo∣stle speaks,Acts 20. For the hope of the Resurrection I am bound with this chaine. This is that labour, for wee doe not labour for nothing, and indure all this toile and trou∣ble;
but because wee looke for the resurrection of the dead. This is that labour of love that wee must strive to finde in our selves; that same unsatiable and unwearied labour, that is still working, still teaching without any intermission: and although we be not called into the Vineyard of the Lord all at one time, all at one houre, but some at the third, some at the sixth, some at the ninth, and some at the eleventh houre; and though the worke of them be not all alike, but some beare the burthen in the heat of the day, and some are called at the evening; yet we see all wrought untill the evening, so long as they could worke. So the labour of the Lord is never to be laid aside:Luke 9.62. No man that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is meet: And (as our Saviour Christ saith) Remember Lots wife:Luke 17.32. But we must be constant, as the greek word here signifieth, a chop∣ping labour, a labour that cuts a man in pieces; there is nothing that so divides betweene the sinewes, and the joynts, and the marrow, as the labour that proceeds from true love and friendship. And there is nothing that makes a man more settle himselfe to worke, then the labour of love which is alway working, like the soule in the bodie. The soule and life it is in every part of the bodie; and where any part is out of temper, or sick, there is heat, and anguish; there every member con∣doles with that member that is affected, and out of place. So it is with the labour of love among Gods children;2 Cor. 11.29. Who is offended, and I burne not? who is
weak, and I am not weak? The passion of Gods Church is as combustible matter; when it once takes hold, it runs over all; this labour of love is the work here spoken of. Now he shewes the reason; it is a comfortable and sweet speech, It is not in vaine. The word properly signifieth a thing where there is nothing, where there is a vacuum. They say in nature there is no vacuum, or void place, but still there is some∣thing every where; and rather then there should not bee something, things would forget their owne nature: the aire will descend to fill up the roome. If a man should dig to the Antipodes, the aire which is a light thing, will descend downe like a heavy body, rather than it shall be empty: and the water which is a heavy body will ascend up; if a man draw with his breath in a conduit, or pipe, it will mount to the top of a house, rather than there shall be a vacuum. Now the Lord, as hee fills all things with sub∣stance, so he shall fill your labours also: hee shall give it substance, and being; there is nothing vain in his creation, much lesse shall there be any thing in vaine, in the regeneration. It is a great incouragement for a man to worke, when hee is sure of his wages for it; not like that foolish saying among foolish men, that take up their money before hand; and when they have drunke it out, and spent it, then they say they worke for nothing. But hee that works for the Lord, he never works for nothing, but he is ever
sure of his recompence;Apoc. 22.12. Behold, I come, and my reward is in my hand, and plentifull is your reward in heaven: be glad, and rejoyce, for copious and great is your reward in heaven. Because therefore your labour hath a reward, it is a great incouragement to you to the worke. The children of God work not for a blind day, for a blind purpose, but they are sure of the con∣sequent, they are sure of a copious reward in heaven. But what is this to a Christian? he should doe it for Gods cause, although there were no reward; a christian is bound to doe good, although there were no heaven nor no hell? It is true, I cannot stand upon it at this time, but onely to shew the principle of it: when the Apostle saith, Be abundant, because you know your labour is not in vaine; This is not a prime argument, but a secondarie argument: indeed it is a good incou∣ragement. It is true, we should love the Lord, it is due debt: we are his creatures, we depend upon him, and hee may conclude of us as it pleaseth him, to make us vessels of wrath, or vessels of honour: and wee should doe good workes for his sake, without any reference to wages; God must be loved without any cause, and without any measure: hee must be loved above all things: with all our heart, with all our soule, and with all our strength. Saith Saint Austin, We worke not for God as a meane, but as the end, the maine and chiefe end of all things. If wee should love God for some other thing,
then we should think some other thing better than God, and then wee should make God inferiour to another: we should make him inferiour to our owne desires, which we must not doe. Saith Saint Austin,Aug. It is a foolish thing for a man to use that which hee should enjoy, and to enjoy that which he should use: for the things of this world are but the things that wee use, and our owne salvation is a thing that wee use in comparison of God: It is God that wee enjoy, and nothing else: there is nothing else that can be enjoyed: and wee must not love our salvation it selfe in respect of God: hee is the price of all things; all things else are of no price, but drosse and dung in comparison. The blessed Apostles meaning therefore is not that hee would have us labour as hirelings, to give a mercenarie love to God, but to love God for his owne sake: Hee disputes as a man, because it is a fit argument to stir men up to labour, because they shall have a recompence for it: the greatest ar∣gument to encourage a man to worke, to worke abundantly as the Apostle saith here, is to set be∣fore him the copiousnesse of the reward: it will make him worke plentifully, not for the rewards sake, but chiefly for the love of God, and in the se∣cond place for the other. Therefore it is unlawfull, which the Popish Doctors say, for a man to work simply upon the sight of divine wages, but a man must worke first, and chiefly for God; and then in the second re∣spect for the reward.
And that a man may thus doe for his incourage∣ment, it is plaine in the Scriptures; The blessed man of God Moses,Heb. 11.26. he rather desired to suffer af∣fliction, and persecution with the children of GOD, than to enjoy the pleasures of sinne for a season. Why? Because hee had respect to the recompence of reward. So Christ incourageth us in this, that hee saith, Verily I say unto you, the more troubles you have in this life, the greater shall be your reward in hea∣ven. And Saint Matthew speaking of the great bles∣sings that are laid up for the godly, he saith, Those that have borne part with Christ in the doctrine of his regeneration, they shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Aug.The reward, saith Saint Austin, is that that sets a man in spirit; and if wee would sustaine our la∣bours, and troubles, let us look to the recompence of reward as Moses did. And as St. Paul saith, These momentany afflicti∣ons, they worke unto us an eternall weight of glorie. And as CalvinCalvin. saith well, when the Apostle saith, So run that ye may receive;1 Cor. 9.24. saith hee, If you take away the hope of the reward, all the hopefulnesse and alacrity in running the race, it doth not onely waxe cold, but it falls downe, and failes; for the hope of a reward from the Lord, it sets us up to make us worke chearefully, because wee serve not a churlish Laban, but a chearefull God: wee serve not as Iacob did a long time to little purpose, for two wives, and two maids, and a little flock; but wee serve the blessed God, that gives an infinite
reward: for a cup of cold water, hee gives a glori∣ous Kingdome for ever and ever. Your labour is not in vaine. Why? Because it is for the Lord; because it is to him, and for his sake; or else if it were in the quality of the worke, it were in vaine; for there is nothing in us that is good; therefore it is not any thing that is inherent in that, but it is in the power of God that can doe what pleaseth him, and that will give liberally, even for the least thing that we have done, he will give a great recompence; it is he that makes it fruitfull, and copious, and plentifull in the recompence: it is the Lord that rewardeth all thus. And he concludes it under scale, you know that this is true; you know your labour is not in vaine in the Lord. This is that great blessing of God, that double grace, when hee makes us know the thing that it is impregnable, that it is a thing not to be resisted, that it is such a thing, as all the po∣wers of hell, and darknesse, and contrary disputati∣ons cannot make you doubt of. You know this: To know, is to know by reasons naturall that never faile, that this shall be thus; the promise of God is so; therefore you know it by that, you know it by the practice of the Saints, you know it by the testimony of the Spirit of God, you know it by the common tenent of the world: so that whatsoever God hath spoken, hee is willing to performe, and it is done already, as though it were acted at this present time. It is the heavenly and blessed contentment of a Christian man, that hee hath the priviledge to
know his happinesse before hee hath it; that man that is advanced to morrow, that is a poore man to day; hee may hope well, and wish well, but hee knoweth nothing; a man that goes to the field to fight in the battaile, hee knowes not whether ever he shall come againe; as Ahab said, He that puts on his armour, let him not brag as he that puts it off. When a man sets forth on a journey, hee knowes not whether ever hee shall returne home or not. When a man enters into traffique for viands, and matters of life, hee knowes not whether hee shall gaine, or lose; there is nothing that wee can tell in this world, that it shall be thus; for time will al∣ter, and change it. In all the works of Philosophy, there is no cer∣tainty of the time to come; but in the booke of God, there is a certaine knowledge: blessed be God for that knowledge. It is a thing without excepti∣on, it is a thing without all doubt. Iohn 4.Our Lord Christ said to the woman of Samaria, Ye know not what ye worship, we know what we wor∣ship. The knowledge therefore of true religion was among the people of God; so the knowledge of the promises was among them too: wee know saith the Apostle,1. Cor 5.1. when this earthly Tabernacle shall be abolished, we have a heavenly mansion. So the Apostle saith, I know whom I have believed, I know whom I have trusted. And in 1 Iohn 2.15. Wee know that we are translated from death to life, because wee love the brethren. This therefore is that excellent priviledge of a Christian, that he hath above all the schollers in
the world, that as he is made to glorie, so he knows it before: he hath a taste of the Spirit, the earnest of the Spirit before, which makes him cry Abba, Father: that helps him to pray, that comforts him in trouble, that stands by him, that leads him, and guides him on, that never forsakes him in the state of grace, till it bring him to the state of glory. To the which the Lord bring us, for Christ his sake. Amen. FINIS.
CORINTHS COLLECTION, FOR THE SAINTS AT IERUSALEM. Seven Sermons on 1 Corinth. 16. the first 9. Verses. BY That Worthy and Learned Preacher of Gods Word, MARTIN DAY, Chaplaine in Ordinarie to his Majestie, and late Rector of S. FAITHS, London. Heb. 13.16. To do good, and communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. LONDON, Printed by T.H. for Nathanael Butter, and are to be sold at the signe of the Pide Bull neere Saint Austins gate. 1636.
1. Cor. 16.1.2. Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, ven so do y: pon the first of the Weeke, Let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings, when I come. THis is the last head, or common place of this holy Epistle, which the Apostle hath therefore reserved to the last, because he would have it the better in printed in the memory of his school∣lars. For all the rest indeed have beene matters of great concernment, but this most of all; it being the common office of Christianitie; and a generall duty that runnes through the whole body; as the life doth: For the poore you shall have alway with you, saith our Lord Christ, and therefore your mercie to the poore shall be alway exacted; so (S. Chrysostome.Chrysost.) The Apostle (now saith hee) goes forward to the head and principle of all good things. He hath tou∣ched upon it before in Chap. 13.Chap. 13.1. speaking of chari∣tie, Though I had the tongue of men and Angels; yet if I had not charitie, I were nothing. But that charitie is of another kinde, for that intends the use of spiri∣tuall gifts; that a man should forget himselfe for the common good: that hee should not labour so
much to shew himselfe a scholler, or a Linguist, as to speake to common capacities; that is the charitie meant in that place. But now here he speakes of a∣nother kinde of charitie, not in the collation of things spirituall; but of temporall: wherein a man is put to his proofe more then, then in the other: for the con∣ferring of sprituall things commonly as they come freely; so they come easily; without much paine or trouble. There is no man almost, but he will com∣municate his learning, and knowledge to another gra∣tis; but for these temporall goods that we have in this world, they can hardly be drawne from us; and a small quantitie, a poore despicable portion is exacted: when we are brought to the best: There∣fore now the Apostle comes to that point of charitie, which doth most of all discerne a Christian, where∣by he is best knowne, the parting from his owne goods; the defrauding of his owne genius: of his owne belly, that he may be helpfull to others. And so this is the ninth and last part of this Epi∣stle, for as I told you heretofore, Divines have di∣versly distinguished the Epistle; but the best, and the most neere, and likely division is into nine severall points of doctrine: whereof this is the last. The first was of taking away the schismes and di∣visions which was in the Church of Christ; One was of Paul, another of Apollo, another of Cephas, another of Christ. In the first, second, third, and fourth Chapters, that is the first common place of this Epistle. The second was concerning the power of corre∣ction, which the Church hath by way of excommuni∣cation; to purge it selfe of those that be notorious and
scandalous livers, and that is in the fift chapter, con∣cerning him that lived with his mother in law, his fa∣thers wife, and made no matter of conscience of it, no nor his neighbours neither, but they were readie to beare him out in it. The third head is concerning going to law among brethren, and that under infidels too; which is in the sixt chapter, where he limits the causes, and bids the Christians take upon them that charge, for as much as it is a thing belonging to any man that is indifferently wise to compound, and arbitrate matters in question. The fourth is concerning marriage, and virginity, and widdowhood in the seventh chapter. The fift is concerning things offred to Idols, and things indifferent, that they should abstaine from things that else were lawfull, for avoyding of offence and scandall, and that is in the eight and ninth chap∣ters. The sixt is concerning the use of the Sacraments, in the tenth and eleventh chapters. The seventh is concerning the improvement of spirituall gifts, how the spirituall gifts of Prophesie, of Revelation, and of tongues should be used in the Church of God, to the profit and benefit of all the hearers: and that is in three chapters, the 12.13. and 14. chapters. The eighth common place is concerning the re∣surrection, which is handled most nobly all through the fift chapter. The last member of all is this, concerning colle∣ctions and gatherings in the Church of God; which is the subject (for the most part) of this chapter:
whereunto he addes certaine solicitations, after his manner, and so concludes the Epistle. Now it is true he hath formerly spoken of this also, of charity in temporall things, for in 1 Cor. 9.1 Cor. 9. we finde, that those that minister spirituall things, must re∣ceive of them to whom they minister temporall things: and it is no great matter for them to make an ex∣change of the one for the other: but because the A∣postle doth but touch it there by occasion, and be∣cause the necessity of the times, and the dignity of the argument was great; therefore he now resumes, and takes it againe to handle more copiously. Now the purpose of the Apostle is this, to speake for the Saints at Ierusalem; for, for them chiefly is this whole matter addrest: that they should be pro∣vided for that were in most need. The Saints at Ie∣rusalem had undergone a great measure of affliction and persecution from their brethren; more then any part of the world: for there was knowledge, there was priesthood, there was authority, and therefore there they had the greatest trouble; whereas a∣mong the Gentiles, and those nations that had not heard of Christ before, there was lesse trouble: and it was an easier matter to put upon them the truth and power of the Gospell, then upon the others, which were a stifnecked people, so for the Saints there hee doth intercede that there might be a collection made for them, as he had done formerly also in the Epi∣stle to the Romans, chap. 15.Rom. 15. and he saith it was the first legacy that they had, Gal. 2.Gal. 2.2. That he and Barna∣bas were set on worke to goe and preach the Gospell; and especially to have minde on the poore, to have re∣gard of the poore which were at Ierusalem: for these
I say he becomes a petitioner, and he tels the Corin∣thians what he would have done in three principall heads. The first is, how they should make the collecti∣on. The second is, how they should keepe it. The third is, how they should send it. For it must first be made, and then it must be pre∣served to be presented, and when it was presented by the Church, it must be transmitted, and goe from them to the parties to whom it was destinated, that is, to the Church at Ierusalem. So concerning the first, he saith in these two first ver. That he would have every man to lay up by himselfe something upon the first day of the weeke: that so there might be a stocke of treasure made against the time hee should come. And then secondly he would have it kept in the custodie of them, lest there should be some inter∣vention; because there were no officers appointed in the Church, for this purpose at that time. And lastly, he would have it transmitted, and sent to Ierusalem by the Brethren; and if need were, hee would goe himselfe to make the concord. That we may keepe our selves within the com∣passe of these words, we are; First, to consider the matter it selfe desired, a col∣lection: what this collection is. Secondly, the object of it, for whom it is intended; a collection for the Saints: and who these Saints are, chiefly them that be at Ierusalem. Thirdly, the manner of this collection; which is noted to us partly by an example, and partly also
by a speciall direction. The example is this, as it is in the Churches of Galatia; as I have appointed them there, even so doe you: you have heard what I have appoynted other Churches; doe you so too, follow their example, And the direction is in the second verse. First, to the persons. Secondly, of the action. Thirdly, of the time. The persons, every man; every man must be a be∣nefactor to the poore, to the poore Saints. Then the action, what he must do; He must lay it up as a treasure: they must lay it up in their own houses, by themselves, they must bee Gods Deacons, they must be Gods Overseers for the poore, they must be Church wardens to themselves. And then the quantity, how much, whatsoever, shall seeme good, or whatsoever the Lord hath prospered them in. And lastly, the time, when this must be done, upon the first of the weeke: after which is adjoyned a reason: wherefore he will have this done on this manner; Lest when I come, the collection be then to be made: lest it be making then when it should be made before. So the sence of the words is this, that concerning the generall collection, which you know God and Na∣ture hath taught us to be made for our brethren; as I by my Authority Apostolicall have appointed in other Churches: so I would have you follow their example, you are not worse then they, you are not poorer then they, you are as well able as they, there∣fore insist in their steps, doe as they have done, ther∣fore my ordinance is this, that upon the first of the
weeke, wherein you meete together to praise the Lord, upon that day when your meetings are in the Church, for divine service; every man shall upon the comfort that he hath received in the Church, and from the love he beares to God; whose word he hath heard, and whose Sacrament he hath recei∣ved, every man shall goe home, and lay downe something what he can spare, if God have given him ability, so, if not, he is not bound, but such as he can spare out of his trading, and negotiating in the world, out of that he shall give something: and yee shall doe it before my comming, because I will not have the Macedonians that I shall bring with me, to see that you are behinde in this matter. For I have told them that you are forward, and if I come, and they shall see that you are unprovided, it will bee a shame to you and me too, by reason of this, I would have it done before I come; that it may appeare, that in these things you are prepared, that you have out∣run my diligence, that I need not to spurre you on, and instigate you unto workes of mercy, because of your selves you are forward enough. This I take to be the summe and sence of the words read: To pro∣ceed in order. First therefore concerning the maine thing, the collection; this word is never used in the Scriptures, in this sence, but in this place: and Saint Paul, (as Chrysostome saith) he cals the election,S. Chrysost▪ the collection for the Saints; or the collection of the Saints. The first originall of the word commeth of Lego, which in the Greeke language hath its primary sence to ga∣ther the fruits of the earth; or to gather something that is scattered: something that is beneficiall for the
life of man: and so likewise in the Latine, the word Collecta commeth from the same head; and so in the booke of our divine service, where you reade of Collects, such Collects for such dayes; the reason of the name is this, when the time of prayer, and the time of reading was, the people came to offer up their gifts, to offer to the poore mens boxe, of such meanes as God had inabled them, and that was called the collection, and the prayer that was said, was to this end and purpose to desire God Almighty to receive that collection that was offered there with a gratious hand, with a favourable eye, and not to disdaine it, but to take it in good worth; and so the reason of the name of Collects came into the Church: It is true indeed, the collection of the prayers that are made in the Collects, is stil a collectiō of the things that are read in the Epistles & Gospels, a collection of them, and of those things that did fit the times, but the Church joyned to the collection of them prayers, the collection of those things that God hath bles∣sed them with: so they joyned prayer and practise together, they offered freely such things as came to hand, and withall desired the Lord to accept of their collection. In other places of Scripture it is cal∣led commonly a communion, so the Apostle, Rom. 1.Rom. 1. That I might communicate with you, and in Gal. 6.Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught and instructed, communicate to him that instructeth him in all the good things that hee hath: for the Saints of God, had all things common, Acts 4.Acts 4. in the Primitive Church, all things were common, they thought nothing they had was their owne; and still there ought to be a communication: as there is the communion of Saints: by the same spirit, so there should be also a communicating of the good
and comfortable things of this world: that no man should separate from the body, but he should have a care of every member that wants, and make a supply unto it, according as God hath enabled him. Now the reason of the metaphor is divers. For some take it from the gathering of a field, which is the most naturall. And some also from the gathering of a shot in a banquet or friendly meeting. Concerning the first, which is the most common and naturall intention of the word; the holy Ghost would teach us that the Church of God, and the people of God are a gratious field▪ the field of God, the vineyard of God, the garden of God: it is no idle place, no barren ground; but a place that brings forth flowers and fruit in abundance; in Ioh. 15.Joh. 15. saith Christ, My Father is the Husbandman, comparing the Church to a Vineyard, in Gen. 32.Gen. 32. saith Isaack, the smell of my sonne, is like the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed. Now therefore as the fields, and the gardens, and the vineyards by the mercy and blessing of God, and by the benefit of the for∣mer and latter raine, and the beames of the sunne, doe yeeld forth timely fruit in due season, and not onely timely fruit, but full and plentifull fruit, so the Church of God ought much more to demeane her selfe, that she be not sterile and barren, and fruit∣lesse; not to beare a little fruit to no purpose: as the corne that is in the house top,Psal. 1. whereof the Mower fils not his hand, nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosome: but it must corne; that there may be some remain∣ders for the poore. As it was in Moses law, that in
all the harvest of the Iewes, they must leave some gleanings remaining still for the poore; so there must be in this collection, and gathering fruit: Gods peo∣ple being his trees, being his corne fields, and vine∣yards that bring forth fruit, fruit acceptable, and fruit seasonable: in the gathering of these fruits, there must alwaies be a remainder for the poore ones that have nothing. So the Lord hath determined and ap∣pointed,Deut. and made the Law; Thou shalt not shake thy olive tree: thou shalt not shake all off it, but thou shalt leave some here and there, that the poor may get something. And when thou reapest thy field, thou shalt not rake up thy corne al together to thy selfe, but thou shalt leave some gleanings; as we see, Ruth gleaned in the field of Boaz: and when thou takest in thy vintage, thou shalt not gather every cluster, but thou shalt leave some scattered clusters, for the poore to come after, and take. Thus the blessed God will have still some reliques for the poore; and which is strange, once in seven yeares, the poore had all the fruit of that yeare, being the yeare of Sabbaoth and rest. So then out of this metaphor, or reference, wee learne what kinde of persons we ought to be, as the Lord hath tilled us, and manured us, and hath spent much time and labour, and paines, and cost about us; so let us labour to bring forth fruit, and not to re∣maine barren, and to bring forth such fruit, as that we may have sufficient for our selves, and some∣thing also remaining unto others, that we may have a kinde of exuberancie; a kinde of superfluity to the praise and glory of God; and to the helpe and com∣fort of our brethren that are in need. Therefore we
conclude, that where there is either no fruit, or where the fruit is all appropriate to a mans selfe, that there is nothing communicated to the Church of God: where there is no collection, there is no Church of Christ: if there can be a collection made. For the time, it is now so full of miserie, and danger, that there are many thousand places in this Land where there is a Church, and yet there can be no collection: for the Landlords, the great oppressors, and bloud∣suckers of the whole Nation, they have so improved every thing, and so racked, and wrung every thing to the very bloud; that the poore Tennant cannot tell how to keepe, and maintaine himselfe with bread, and other common necessaries. Therefore it is not to be looked for at their hands, that which is spoken of here, that there should be a superfluitie, that there should be any thing collected for the poore Saints at Ierusalem: for themselves perish, and starve in scarsitie, but for these things, we may ra∣ther take delight in complaining, then conceive any hope of the amending of it. Another metaphor is taken (as others suppose) not so much from the field, and from the fruit of the field; as from the casting in of the shot of a com∣pany that are met together in the way of friendship, to eate, and drinke together upon every mans mo∣ney. So Cicero useth the word in his second de Ora∣tore.Cicero . de O∣rator. Cressus (saith he) because thou dealest with me, as with yong men when they meete together; or as other men when they meet together to eate, and drinke upon their owne money, and to pay the shot: therefore thou thinkest I will be one of that company; I will do it (saith he) so Tully useth the
word; and BezaBeza. alloweth of it, and it is very fit for the purpose; and the argument agrees one way s well as another: and in this it must needs bee that the second is certaine. For it is true, the people of God, when they bee in the Church, they must either understand themselves to be at a feast; or else they come without a wedding garment: for he that comes not to the Church of God with the people of God, with an heart full of joy, and delight in the holy Ghost; and with a desire to heare the things in the Law, and the Gospell explained; and with a hungring and thirsting after it, to lay it up in his heart, and bring it forth in his life, as occasion shall serve; he that comes not thus provided, is as a man without a wedding garment Now then seeing all must come, as to a feast, as to the feast of the great King; though we be not able to set any great cheare before you, yet if you bring good stomacks, and appetites, you will ccount it good cheare. The prayers to God, the preaching of the word, the administration of the Sa∣craments, you must account them a feast, or else you are no Christians; and when you are at this feast, it is certaine God requires no man to pay for that which he hath. Come buy milke, and honey, buy with∣out money,Isa 55.1.2. or money worth: yet hee is accounted a simple, and base fellow that being invited to any place in the world, that will not give the servants some thing; that will not give the doore keeper some thing, and the watters at the table some thing: a matter of nothing, and they do it out of charitie, out of love to the Inviter, and the love that they beare to the company; and for the grace they owe to themselves: for their owne credit. This the
Apostle cals the shot, that is to be payed when the Saints meet together in the Church at their common festivall: when they are assembled, there is a shot to be payed to the poore servants; to the waiters. Therefore in your meetings, when there is any man that is so hunshing, and so miserable, that he will not pay his share, that hee will not come off with his part, that he will not respect those that at∣tend, and waite, when he grumbles at it, and will not shew himselfe as the rest of his neighbours▪ you thinke such a one a hrsh fellow, fit to be casheered out of the company. So the great God, they that come to the plce of oblaton, they that come to his sanctuary, to his Temple: except they come with a free inde to do as much good as they are moved unto, the Lord thinkes them unworthy of the place; fit to be casheered: and put out because they use such dodging, that they will not give any thing, as a te∣stimony of their thankfulnesse to the Inviter. Either of these wayes the word may bee accepted. I be∣seech you take it which way it pleaseth you: if you be fields, bring forth fruit, bring forth profit to God; that it may be seene there is some thing abounds: and remaines for the gleaning of the poore. And if you be banquetants, those that are invited; then give something to the poore walters, to the poore at∣tenders in the Church, to the Ministers of the Gospel: especially to those that are destitute, & miserable: that it may appeare, that you are no such misers, as have left their purses at home; that make forgetfulnesse go for payment: let it not be thus among you, that are the free bred children of God; but as the Lord hath inabled you, so let your works be according to the
evidence, and power of the Spirit. So much of that concerning the collection. Now for the Object, wher∣upon the collection must be conferred; that is, Vpon the Saints. 2. Part. The object of the collection.We must do good to all men, but especially to them of the houshold of faith. The Saints ought to bee the chiefe men in our estimation, as they bee also in Gods, Psal. 16.2.Psal. 16.2. My goods are nothing to thee, but to the Saints that dwell in the earth; in whom I delight: and to them I seeke to abound, which although it be otherwise expounded of other Interpreters, yet the common current of the Fathers leads me, and perswades me that way. Therefore, I say, as your heavenly Father makes his raine to fall, and his Sunne to shine upon the bad, and upon the good, as well up∣on the just as the unjust: so every Christian man is bound, in case of necessitie, to supply the wants of a wicked man; whom he knows to be Gods enemy, and his owne enemy. For so God doth, and wee must be mercifull as our Father which is in heaven is mercifull. But yet there must be a speciall regard, there must be a double hand reserved for them that bee Saints; for them of the houshold of faith: for them that belong to God. For from God wee re∣ceive all, and to him we must returne praise, and thanks: and though indeed wee must cloathe our enemies, when they be naked, and feed them when they be hungrie; and the enemies of God too, when they bee in necessitie, that the Lords largesse may have a certaine waste, as in a Kings Court, or Prin∣ces familie: they spend many times, waste as much
as a Nobleman spends in all his house; so God will have his mercie runne over, he will have it runne at waste to his enemies; yet the principall checkroll, the goodly Court belongs to his friends; to them that are inrolled, to them especially is the benevolence of the Saints extended: the Saints to the Saints, fellow members, to fellow members; supplie the sap, and nourishment one to another; from their common head Christ Iesus. And who be these Saints? Surely the power of charitie is such, by the sweet∣nesse of the Gospell that perswades it to this;Who taken for Saints. to thinke every man a Saint, that we know not certainly to be a devill. For there bee but two sorts of men in the world, and if a man know not certainly that a neighbour, or a man knowne to him is in the state of damnation; he must be taken, and judged to be in the state of sanctification, and account him a Saint. For there be Saints divers wayes. There are Saints by birth, 1. Cor. 7.Diversitie of Saints. Now are they holy. If it were not so, then were your children un∣holy, but now they are holy. There is sanctification by the faith of the parents, wherein all our children are borne, and for which cause they are to be cal∣led Saints: because they are borne of beleeving pa∣rents. Secondly, there are Saints by profession, that is,  those that receive their baptisme, and the Sacrament of the Lord Iesus Christ: that make an open profes∣sion of his name, those be Saints also. And thirdly, there bee Saints by calling, when God hath brought a man to a change: for he is a true  Saint, whom God hath changed, and there is no
man that can challenge to himselfe any hope, or any comfort in the number of Saints, but onely he that is changed from himselfe, that doth leave and forgo his former vanities: and betake himselfe to the obedience of God in Christ. This is that wee call sanctitie of calling, called Saints, Saints by calling, as it is in the first Chapter of this Epistle.1. Cor. 1.4. Fourthly, and lastly, there are Saints by Conver∣sation, and good works: which are here principally spoken of. Saints of God that suffer for Christ: Saints of God that live according to the power of the Go∣spell: Saints that professe Christ in the middest of persecuters: these be chiefe chosen Saints, of which the Lord makes that glorious army of Martyrs: The noble armie of Martyrs praise thee. Out of this number of those that are persecuted, and suffer for Christ, the Lord chooseth the most glorious number of Saints, so these are the Saints that are spoken of, that were at Ierusalem. Concerning the collection for the Saints. The Saints at Ierusalem were most troubled of all others in the world, but because the name is not here mentioned, I will but onely speake it to you in a word. For there they had the high Priesthood, there they had the Scribes, and Pharisees, that carried the wisedome of the world (as they thought) in their lippes; The Priests lippes should preserve knowledge, and the people should seeke it at their mouth. They had the Law of God, and his veritie, the best law under heaven; but they set themselves against the Gospell of Christ: therefore the poore Saints had no such strong per∣secutors in any place as in that. And besides Agabus in Act. 11. foretold that there should be a great fa∣mine,
which seemed now to be raised when the Apostle wrote these words, it seemes the famine was then upon the land of Iudaea; It is said that it came in the dayes of Claudius Cesar, but it was spoken of in the dayes of Caligula, the event of it was in the third or fourth yeare of Claudius Cesar. Suetonius and Tacitus that write of that Emperour, say that search was made by the Romans for all strangers, and they were put forth of the Citie, the famine was so great; and Claudius Cesar made a haven, which is now out of use: but after that it was a famous ha∣ven, which he made by digging a mouth out of the River Tiber, by which meanes he brought provisi∣on into the Citie, and made a passage for all the world, at all times (as Dio the Historian said.) This famine therefore which Agabus foretold, was the cause why the Apostle wrote now, to make provi∣sion for the Saints at Ierusalem: for the Lord had sent an heavie hand of scarsitie among them. Be∣sides the persecution they indured, and those two wofull events perplexed them wondrously: there∣fore the Apostle desires that their charitie might a∣bound to them: as their misery had abounded. So out of this we learne. First, that the Saints of God may want,Saints may want. and stand in need to be maintained. The Apostle tels us, that he was a petitioner for the Saints; therefore the Saints be men that may be in want. The Saints of God are very needfull here upon earth, and it is a thing that I need not proove; all experience con∣firmes it. The Lord God is able to give them of the dew of heaven, and of the abundance of the earth, to make them lords of all the soyle; the Lord of
heaven hath promised them the blessings of this life, and of another: a better (as the Apostle saith) yet notwithstanding they want many times, and stand in need of other men; and haply of worse men then themselves are in the booke of God: what is the reason of this? Why the Saints are in want.First, because God would shew us that they be weaned from this world, that they are greater then the world, as Saint Chrysostome saith, speaking to a Philosopher, Thou knowest not how to master thy affections, thou knowest not how to be in poverty, and in disgrace: but I will shew thee out of mine owne bringing up, how we are able to beare these things, and to contemne them. So the Lord by this would shew that his children are of another spirit, of an higher spirit which the world cannot com∣prehend; but they can easily comprehend the world: and cast it behinde them. For they looke for a Citie whose builder and maker is God: they expect the treasures of heaven, which are reposed in the bo∣some of Christ, therefore they scorne these things below, they do not minde them, but for the present necessitie. Onely as Severus said of his souldiers, that those were his best souldiers that were the poo∣rest; and when they began to grow rich, then they began to be naught: so in the schoole of Christ, the Saints are trained up in povertie (as the Poet saith) if you will bring up a boy, a yong man, to be a soul∣dier; learne him first to endure povertie: learne him to lye hard, to fare hard, to encounter all the harda∣ges which nature it self can hardly beare; and which these delicious fellows cannot endure to thinke of: let them first master them, and then they shall bee
able to overcome their enemies. And so in the field of Christ, the Lord suffers his Saints to want; not be∣cause he cannot provide for them, nor because he doth not intend to help them; for those that he will give heaven to, will he not give them earth, if it be for their good & comfort? but the reason is, to bring them up in the discipline of warre, to traine them up for souldiers, to traine them as weaned children: lest they should be taken away with the pleasures of the world, and drowned in the vanities of this life; and so forget God, and their owne soules health, which is most of all to be regarded. Secondly, Reason. another reason why God suffers his Saints to want, is because he would shew the myste∣ry of his providence, that great and wondrous myste∣ry; that having nothing, the Saints possesse all things. That a man should be hungry, naked, and thirsty, and yet never disappoynted, never starved; that he should be so strangely preserved by the omnipotent provi∣dence of the Lord; that rather then faile, the fowles of the ayre should bring him meate as the Raven did to Elias. The Lord would shew by this, that his eye hath a regard unto his children, that hee will feed them in the middest of dearth, in the time of famine, and though all things want,Psal. 34.14. though the Ly∣ons pine, and suffer hunger, yet the Lords servants suf∣fer none. The Lord traines them up in the want of these things, that he may fill them with greater things, with those infinite blessings in the world to come. And for this cause wee doe not onely finde in Scripture, that Iacob was sometimes a poore man, but the children of Israel was a poore nation: in Deut.Deut. 26.5.
26.5. I am a poore Syrian, and my father was a poore Syrian: when they were to come with their basket to offer their first fruits, the first word a man was to say to God, was this, that he and his forefathers were nothing but meere beggars, poore things. And we see it afterwards in David, for ten yeares, he was a miserable poore man all the time of his per∣secution. We see it also in Iob, he was stated in great wealth, yet because God would make a decla∣ration to the world: what he was able to doe in the middest of misery, he divested him of all that hee had before, that he might requite it with a double portion afterward. And for Lazarus and the Apo∣stles, and our Lord Iesus Christ himselfe; we know that he was poore: the Foxes had holes, and the fowles of the ayre had nests, but the sonne of man had not where to lay his head: he that was the head of the Church, had not whereon to lay his own head. Comfore.Therefore this must be a comfort to Gods chil∣dren here in this world, if they be poore: The ser∣vant is not above his Master, it is enough that hee be equall with his master: the head hath gone before, and sanctified the cup unto me. 2 Observ. Not to respct men according to outward meanes.Secondly, observe out of this, in that he saith, to∣ward the Saints of God, toward the holy ones, that this word Saints, makes amends for that he said be∣fore: this word makes amends for the other word, where he said Poore. For though they want and stand in need of a collection, yet it is enough that they are Saints, and so here we are taught, Not to respect men according to their outward esteeme, according to the outward meanes and place that they have in this life; but rather to make that esti∣mate
of them that God makes of them, to see how they be esteemed in Gods bookes: and so account of them. The fashion is now in our times, away beggar, a∣way bankrupt; every man scornes a man that is be∣hinde hand; a man that is underfoot, that is not a∣ble to carry his face out in the world, they cannot indure his company, they scorne to receive any word, either of admonition, or of consultation from him: for every man is esteemed now by that hee hath; that is, in the trash and treasure that he hath in these outward and temporall things: not by in∣ward and spirituall things, there is no account made of that. But (beloved) the holy Ghost tels us that we should swallow all basenesse in this greatnesse, the greatnesse of this to be a Saint, to be a holy man; ought to countervaile all: and to cut downe all re∣spect of basenesse in the men we have to deale with: what if he be poore and base? yet it may be he is holy, it may be he is a Saint, and it may be thou art not so, and then there is infinite difference be∣tweene him and thee; and though thou account thy selfe as a great meteor above him, or as the sunne in the firmament, and him but as a clod of earth: yet understand it is Gods esteeme that shall carry it, it is Gods judgement that shall prevaile, and mans judge∣ment shall be evacuate and annihilate; for he is not commendable that man commends, but he that God commends; & he that is in the love and favour of God, is greater than the most glorious Persian Prince in the world. There is no such commenda∣tion as this, to be a Saint, to be a holy man, to be accepted with the Lord.
Labour therefore to be that which he is, rather then that which thy selfe is, and put no confidence in vaine riches, which belong oft times to divels; and which make no difference betweene a childe of God, and a childe of darkenesse, and which may soone be taken away: he that is now a rich man, may to morrow be a poore man: but to proceed. 3 Part.Now followes the manner: we see the collection what it must be, and for whom. Now followes the manner how this must be done. Where first we will speake (though it be a kinde of inversion of order) of that that he implyes by way of a speciall precept. And then of that he prescribes by way of exam∣ple from other Churches. Of the first he saith, that the manner and order of the collection must be this; That every man must lay up by him, he must put aside by himselfe something; whatsoever God hath given him, and inabled him to give, and it must be done upon the first day of the weeke, where there is, First, the persons. Secondly, the act. Thirdly, the measure. Fourthly, the time. The persons, Every man. The act, Lay by him. The measure, as God hath prospered him. The time, Vpon the first day of the weeke. But I shall not be able to runne through these dis∣courses, therefore I will briefly goe on a little fur∣ther, and incroach upon your patience, to shew a little the manner of this collection. First for the persons.The persons. It is said, Every one, Let eve∣ry
one lay by him: What? shall every one lay up? poor as well as rich? shall the servant that hath but wa∣ges he can scarse live upon, lay up something for the use of the poore? Many of the Fathers, (and Saint Chrysostome saith) in direct termes,Chysost. that whe∣ther he be poore or rich; whether he be Master or Servant: he is bound and tyed to this precept, and commanded to lay up something for the poore; and so it is according to the advise of the wise man, Give of that which thou hast: If thou have but little, doe thy diligence to give of that little; and notwith∣standing the great authority of that most holy father, and the rest that hold with him; I thinke there is no necessity of this consequence: for I take it, that God bindes no man to impossibilities, & I know this, that there are many men whose meanes are so poore, as that they are fitter to be receivers to take from o∣thers, then to be givers: and for servants it, is cer∣taine, many of their meanes and wages are so slen∣der, as that they have scarce enough to maintaine their owne bodies. Therefore seeing the great God that sets men to worke, will never call them to a worke that is impossible; he will not call men to a necessity of inconvenience to their persons and states: but he would have men to consider their place, to consider the state they are in. Certainely the Lord doth not call to such a generall collection, as that all should give, but according to their place and ability. Therefore I take it this universall Terme, Every man, is to be restrained to that which followeth, according as God hath inabled him. Now God hath not inabled every man, therfore every man is not bound to make this collection. It is true, if you know him a
man fit to be a receiver: you ought to give some∣what; but because there be divers sorts and rankes of men; some God hath made to be givers, and some to be receivers; therefore I conclude that every man cannot be a giver: because then the distinction of difference should be taken away. The second mem∣ber of the distinction should be taken away, and there could be no receivers: for one begger to help another, it is impossible, indeed by admonition and counsell, one may doe it to another; but by way of helpe, and worldly support, they cannot doe so; therefore I take it , is to be referred onely to him, that God hath inabled out of that superfluity and abundance God hath given him, to give some∣thing to the poore Saints. Now for the Act,2 The act. he saith, they must lay up: they be words of exceeding comfort, that he must lay it up as a thing never to be taken from him, and hee must lay it up as a treasure, he must lay it up as a thing that shall be of much advantage to him, lay it up as in a treasure Citie, lay it up as a thing against to morrow, that is against future time; because a man is still doubtfull of the future, he hath for the present, but he knowes not what he may need after, therefore a treasure is laid up for a time he knowes not of, for an evill time. So then the ho∣ly Ghost would give us comfort in this, that man that layes up for the poore, he layes up treasure, Matth. 6. Lay not up treasure here on earth, but lay up your treasure in heaven. And this treasure it must be made of the richest things, either of iewels, or of gold or silver, because they be of most price, because they are contained in the least roome: a man makes
no treasure of other fruits of the earth, he makes not a treasure of corne or fruit, but of gold and sil∣ver, that is a treasure where much wealth may lye in a little compasse. So the holy Ghost hath taught this for our comfort, that that man that gives to the poore, he hath great wealth in a small roome: al∣though thou canst give but little, yet notwithstan∣ding if thou give according to that which God hath inabled thee, it is not the quantity of the gift, but the quality and minde of the giver that is accepted with the Lord. He must lay up by himselfe: Why by himselfe? why should he not bring it to the poore mans box? why should he not bring it to the Church-Wardens? to the Overseers for the poore? to the Collectors for the poore? Because there were no such officers appointed then in the Church, the Church was but young, it was but then in the cradle; and by reason that they were many of them poore men, that could lay up but every weeke a little, they would have beene a∣shamed to have brought so little, therefore the A∣postle bids them lay it up, keepe it by them, that ma∣ny littles might make a mickle, as the Proverbe is, and that so many crums might come to be a whole loafe; and then to present it, when it was an accep∣table gift: when it might carry some shew with it. But here we may see what was the wonderfull goodnesse and conscience of the Church in those times; every man was his owne Lord Almner: his owne Treasurer, he laid up for God, and for himselfe what he could well spare for the Saints of God, he laid it up every weeke: If the men of our times
were put to this passage, they would abate from it for their owne allowance, and when their friends, and acquaintance should come to them, they would draw some thing from the treasure that they had laid up for God. Let us be ashamed of these base and vile exorbi∣tances, and aspire as much as we may to that sincere zeale, and affection, that was in Gods people in former times; which were true accounters to the Lord God; and laid up every weeke what they could spare for the honour of God, and for the good of his people; at the command of the Apostles, that they should be masters of it, they layed it down at their feet when they called for it, and they would never take any part from it: for then the Apostles would not have trusted them with their owne: for a man may be good this weeke, and lay up somewhat for a good purpose; the next week hee may be a drun∣kard, and spend that he layed up before; but they were still constant; that which they had layed up, and consecrated to the wayes of God, they were as carefull in the keeping of it. Let every man lay up by himselfe. Vpon this Saint ChrysostomeCrysost. worthily comments: I pray thee, good Christian, know thy honour; thy Church is thy house; and thy house is made a Church by this meanes: for that that is given to Saints, they are holy goods, they are holy gifts, and the Lord hath made thee a Deacon to thy selfe: behold thy great honour, the Lord hath chosen thee to be a Deacon, and a collector for the poore; to be a Treasurer for the state of the Church.
Now then let us labour also for this perfection, that whatsoever we vow to God, whatsoever wee do to him, that we keepe and hold it. When a man is to go on a journey (hee saith) if God will send me well on my journey, I will give so much to the poore; this vow stands upon record in heauen: the Lord takes notice of it, when he comes home againe he forgets his vow; and never looks after the per∣formance of it. A man goeth by an Hospitall, and saith, he will give them somewhat when he comes backe againe: and when he comes backe he thinkes not of it; Imagine what you will, although you forget it, yet it stands on account in Gods booke, hee will call you to a reckoning for it: and if you sneake away, and will not pay the shot, the Lord will take it upon your bodies, and soules in hell. For you must not thinke to passe a vow to the Lord in a good mood, for a good purpose; but the Lord will take it: and exact it at your hands. Therefore let every man lay downe for himselfe, God intrusts e∣very mans selfe, he trusts every mans honesty: This should be a great comfort, and a meanes to provoke us to be true to God. Let every man lay by him in store. For if every man should have brought it present∣ly to the poore mans box, it might have beene thought to have beene done out of a present passion; and that he would have taken it out againe after∣ward: after it was cast in, if he might have had leave. But for a man to be constant in it, to let it stand by him a moneth, or two moneths, or a quarter of a yeare;
that hee saith, and resolveth, this they shall have, whatsoever become of me: I will not abate a penie of the stocke of God, of the stocke of charitie; when he saith, Let every man lay up by him in store: his meaning is, that God will call every man to ac∣count, if hee bee inconstant, and forgetfull of his vow, and promise, the Lord will not let such a one escape. As whatsoever God hath prospered him with. 3 The measure.First, what is this that he must put apart, what∣soever God hath prospered him with? so we may turne it,. quod ei bene successerit. s. placuerit. but the word is a rare word, and therefore it is diversly expressed by Interpreters: some say that which is fit, some say that which hee thinkes good, and these are true: for there is no man herein com∣pelled to do any thing but what he doth out of his owne heart, of his owne free-will. The Lord loves a free-giver, a chearfull giver; and hee will have no constraint. Yet Expositors come not neere the glory of the word, for it is a metaphor taken from Mer∣chant-venturers; that cast their goods into a bot∣tome: it may be halfe their estate sometimes, it may be sometimes all: and if God give them a good voy∣age they are made; if not, then they are downe the winde; undone. So it signifies a good journey, or a good voyage; you have the word twice over in the Scripture, both before, and after this. In Rom. 1.10. saith the Apostle, I pray to God continually, if God would give me a good journey to come to you, . The same word is used here, hodos, a journey, heodos a good journey. As the Lord is pleased to blesse a
man in his trade, and course of life; so the word is used in 3. Ioh. 2. Beloved brother, I desire of God that thou mayest have a good journey, that thou maiest pro∣sper, and be well, and in good health; as thy soule prospereth: that thou shouldest have a good journey in all things. So by these two places you under∣stand, what is the meaning of the word, that where∣as all the provision of the life present here is made upon casualties: there is no man can tell, when he sets up how the Lord will blesse him before the yeares end: some runne bankrupt: some againe get by the mercie of God: the Lord sets up one, and brings downe another. Men in their trading here, be as Mer∣chant adventurers upon the Sea, there is as great ad∣venture on the Land, as on the Sea: and there is not greater danger there then here: so when it pleaseth God that the ship comes well from the sea, that it brooks all, that it escapes all rocks, and pyrats, and comes home full fraught: then all the neighbours rejoyce about it, and shew their joy by shooting off peeces of ordnance, for the great benefit they have received: and give thanks to God by this merri∣ment. So when a Merchant man upon the Land drives out his Trade by his frugalitie, and good hus∣bandrie: and by his just dealing keepes a good con∣science to all men, and the Lord raiseth him out of his 100. l. unto an hundred and twenty, or more: the Lord requires some custome to be payed, some impost money, there is some scot and allowance to be made. Therefore, I say, we must pay this tribute, it belongs, it is due unto God: For this good jour∣ney, for this prosperous and good voyage he hath given thee; out of this thou must lay up somewhat
for the poore Saints. Thou must reserve that which is fit for thy person, what is fit for thy children and family. God gives thee leave to doe this, but thou must leave a remnant still for the poore, according to the good iourney that the Lord hath given thee: The Lord it may be hath multiplied thy hundreds to thousands, thou must therefore remember the Lord thy God, that hath given thee this great in∣crease and abundance, above all that thou couldest hope or conceit in former times: for what was eve∣ry yong beginner that now is growne rich? let him say himselfe: thou wouldest have beene glad of the tenth part of that that God hath enriched thee with, and now the Lord hath multiplied and encrea∣sed thee: oh let thy hand againe be inlarged toward God, and abundant to him, that hath so abounded in grace and mercy to thee: and as the Lord hath gi∣ven a man a good iourney, a good way and passage; a good trade, and prospers him that he thrives in his calling, so let him againe doe the workes of mercy, for the God of mercy. But these things that re∣maine, are so full of matter and variety, and I have beene so troublesome to your patience already, that I must reserve the rest that remaines un∣till the next time.
The second Sermon. 1 COR. 16.1.2.3. Now concerning the collection for the Saints, according as I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, even so doe you. In the first day of the Sabbath, or of the weeke, Let every one of you lay up by himselfe a treasure of whatsoever God hath prospered him, &c. THere is no point in all divinity, that needs more cleare propoundig, and more earnest prosecuting, then this of Almes-deeds, and brotherly benevo∣lence. For men are wondrously, and by a strange motion of the spirit of God, brought unto it, against the current of nature: every man thinking that that which is given, is lost, that it is cast away; and there is scarse any man perswaded that he that gives to the poore, lends to the Lord, al∣though it be a common speech in every mans mouth. Therefore the Apostle being appointed by the Church of God to have a speciall regard of this among the rest, to have a care of the poore, Gal. 2.Gal. 2. Wheresoever he came, he did found and settle this constitution as strongly as any of the rest: as that of faith, so this of workes; that those that had beleeved
and received the Lord Christ into their hearts by faith, that they should extend their hands by good workes; to feed him, and to minister to his mem∣bers which are wanting here upon earth. We have thus farre proceeded to shew what kinde of Gift or Present this was; which the Apo∣stle required: it is , their fruit, it is the corne they yeeld; the harvest which Gods children (which be his fruitfull field) yeeld unto him. It is the shot they pay which are invited to the supper of the great King. And it is not cast away upon such as are unworthy persons, but bestowed upon the Saints themselves; that whereas God requires that we should helpe our owne flesh, whether good or bad: and we should imitate our heavenly Father which makes his light to shine, and his raine to fall as well upon the uniust, as the iust: yet the Apostle re∣commends unto them, not the common refuse of men, whereunto notwithstanding they were bound by nature: but a select company of Saints, and such a company as were under persecution; and that the most hot and sharpe persecution and trouble, that was then to be found in the world: for the Church of God never suffers so ill, as it suffers from it selfe▪ all civill wars, and intestine discords being the grea∣test plagues that can he. The Church of Ierusalem having received the law and the promises, and glo∣rying in their prerogative: they could not therefore indure, that a new religion should come and con∣front theirs, and put that out of place: but they sought by all meanes to beat it downe againe: and by consequent no man could lift up his head, but presently there were letters from the high Priests
and Elders to cast him into prison, to thrust that light under a bushell, which God had set upon a Candle∣sticke, to give light to the whole house. And againe, there was another cause of it, by rea∣son of the famine which Agabus prophecied of in the end of Caligula his reigne, for which cause the Church of God made provision against that time of famine and scarcity. Now the quantity that they should give, it is not set downe, but it is left to every mans disposition: for the Church of God will not make charity com∣pulsive, but leaves it to the free-will in it selfe, that it may be the more gratious, and the better accepted with God: but look whatsoever God had prospered them withall, according as God had blessed them; according as he had given them a good voyage in the affaires of the world: according to that, hee should not scant and balk the Lord, but he that had received much, should give much, and he that had received little, should give of that little, according to the quantity and proportion: so that was left to the conscience of every man. And that this collection should be done in private, that every man should lay up by himselfe; by him∣selfe, because there were no officers appoynted as then in the Church, or because he might be defea∣ted of it by trusting of others: or because some had so little, that they durst not bring it every weeke being so small, but were to lay it up by them, that many littles might make a mickle: therefore they were to keep it till it might be a convenient summe, that it might carry some shew with it; in regard of this, the Apostle bids them lay up by themselves.
And they must lay it up as a Treasure, for as much as the Lord accounted of that in heaven; he tooke account of that in heaven, which they layd forth in earth: and it was a treasure to them, that when they should come to faile, to faile of this life: when they should come to dye, when no friend should help and rescue them from the hand of death; they may have some treasure in heaven; that when they came into a strange country, they might finde some treasure there, they might have a banke there to give them refreshing. As when a man is outed in England, when he is outlawed or banished, if hee can make an escape, and can have a banke at Venice, or at Amsterdam, and can goe to his friends there, and have somewhat laid up for him in trusty hands, he is as well there almost as he is here. So the Lord compares the passages of this life, to those of a bet∣ter life: but we cannot deny, nor doubt, but that we shall be infinitely farre better there, then we are here: but yet we are loath to part with this habitati∣on, we would faine keepe this tabernacle of the bo∣dy, as long as we could: although it be with hard conditions. Now the Lord tels us, to incourage us in our journey, that all our good works, all our Almes∣deeds are sent before as a treasure: they are laid up as a stocke of money in a faithfull hand, not in a mountebankes hand, but in the trusty hand of God, which will repay us againe, and will repay us with interest: he that gives to the poore, lends to the Lord upon interest: so it is called in this place  of Thesaurus a treasure, to lay up treasure; to lay up for to morrow, to lay up for the time to come: thus farre we proceeded.
Now we come to the next point in the Text,The time of the collection. which is, what day; what time he chooseth out for the setting apart of this portion, of those that offe∣red to the Lord, and to his poore Saints: and that is noted here to be the first day of the weeke. Secondly, wee are to note the incentives rea∣sons, and arguments to moove them to this; because charity, and the workes of charity are not easily perswaded; men must be drawne to them by very attractive and forcible reasons and arguments, such as may win, though not constraine and force their piety. His first argument is this, the common example; for these things we must propound them diversly, and otherwise then they lye in the Text, for order sake, and for method of teaching. For those things that are first in the Text, are not alway first in order of time, nor in order of teaching; how will he ther∣fore winne the Corinthians to give unto strange poore, when they had enow of their owne? he tels them there is an example for it, the Churches of Gala∣tia: As I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, so doe ye. As if he should say, I bring no new matter among you; I put no burthen upon you which is not generall and common in all the Churches: your brethren have gone before in other Countries, which are poorer men, and weaker every way in their fortunes then you: therefore that which they doe, which are poorer and more unable, you must doe it much more, as being more blessed of God. As I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, so doe ye: where we are to understand three things. First, the antiquity of the Church of Galatia.Three things. 1 The antiquity
2 Apostolicall authorty.Secondly, that the Apostle had ordained it, hee commands it; he counselleth them not to doe it, but by his power Apostolicall he enjoynes them. 3 The power of the Church.Thirdly and lastly, what is the force and power of this argument which is drawne from the authority of the Church; what is the nature of it, and how farre it must prevaile with all the followers of Christ? For thus he argueth, The Churches of Gala∣tia doe this; and if you doe it not, you are in great fault, and in danger of damnation: for you must follow the example of elder Churches, but they have done thus, therefore you must doe so much more, having greater meanes, and better ability then they: that is one motive. Another incentive is this, that he himselfe will come, and that he will see to these things, and that he will receive it at their hands: and that hee will make a convoy for it to the place where it should be surely delivered, which is a great argument: for a man is very willing to part with his money, if he be sure that it shall not be interverted; that there shall be no falshood, but that it may come to the hands of those, for whom it is intended: upon these termes it may be he will be reasonable willing to part with it. Therefore for this he tels them that he will take an order, and that order that shall be best liking to themselves; for when he comes, they shall appoint and choose certaine fit men, that they may trust with money; and indeed he that a man may trust with money, he may trust him with any thing almost; therefore they shall choose such men, not as may be their owne carvers: not such as shall seek to make themselves rich of other mens goods,
much lesse out of the poore mans stocke, but such as shall be true, and faithfull dispensers of that which is offered by them; and these shall bee chosen by themselves (because he was a stranger to them, and they were strangers to him) and not onely so, but they shall commend them to the brethren at Ierusa∣lem by their Epistle; and if need were, he himselfe would helpe to convoy it: he would helpe to passe their blessing. The last motive that he useth is this, that he saith, they shall carry your grace to Ierusalem, , cal∣ling that almes that they should give a grace, as ma∣king them gracious before God, and men; as pro∣ceeding from the grace, and good spirit of God; as comming from meere grace, not of constraint. Eve∣ry man desires to be gracious, and to be reputed gracious; the tythe of grace is the most honourable, and the greatest thing that can be in the world, e∣specially of divine grace, and such a thing is this almes deeds; he calls it not almes, he cals it not bene∣volence; or a collection: but he cals it grace. They shall carry your grace to Ierusalem: that is, that gracious gift which the Spirit of God shall worke you to. And the summe of all is this, that he would have this done before he come; lest they should be found too tardy: if they should then fall a gathering, when they should be a presenting, and offering their gift: for tardinesse and unreadinesse is a base fault in any man, but most in Christians; and in Christian duties most of all. It was the fault of the foolish virgins, which were tardy, and lost the kingdome for it: things must be done in season, in due time; so saith the Apostle, lest it be to be made when I come: I
pray make it before, as he saith in 2. Corinth. 9. If the Macedonians that I shall bring with me, when they come, shall finde you making your collection; you and I shall be both ashamed: to see your unreadinesse in this point of Religion, and devotion; whereunto you should go with the formost. I take this to be the summe and substance of the words read: that upon the Lords day, every man should repose, and lay by himselfe of that which it had pleased God to give him, and that he is pleased to give againe to the Church; to lay by that he can spare, and to do it up∣on consideration, that other Churches have done it before him: and that all the members of Christ are bound one to another, and also because it was a pre∣cept, and command upon the Church left by Aposto∣licall power; and chiefly because the whole mana∣ging of the businesse was certaine, to be conveyed by men of most knowne fame, and experienced goodnesse and honesty; Such as should be chosen by themselves, such as should be confirmed by their letters commendatorie; and all this the Apostle instances, lest they themselves should not be found so ready, and chearfull in the worke: lest they should be lagging in their gift, which should bee ready and willing to keep their credit, especially in so good an action. Of these things briefly, and in order; and but a word, because I will not extend your patience beyond the time. 1 The time of the collection.First for the day, the Apostle would have this done upon the first day of the weeke: wee may take it for granted, that it was the Lords day; we will prove it afterward: we will have it granted now. The first day of the weeke, the first of the Sabbath, for all the
dayes of the weeke were among the Iewes reckoned for Sabbaths, so Sunday was the first; and Munday the second; and Tuesday the third Sabbath: and so forth. And according to this reckoning they all computed their time, their moneths, and their weeks among the Iews. In which sence the Pharisee is to be understood when he saith, I fast twice in the Sabbath, that is, twice in the weeke: For the Sab∣bath being the great day, and the principall of the seven, it gives the denomination to all the rest, and they be called the first, and second, and third, ac∣cording as they have their distance from that day. So this first of the weeke, it was the Iews Munday, as it were, it is our Lords day; which immediately succeeded the day of the Passeover wherein our Lord Iesus lay in the grave, and which was the first day of his resurrection: and therefore is remembred throughout all Christian generations. This was the time that the Apostle thought fittest for Christian men to lay aside their charitie, to lay it up for the common treasure; for the common stocke of the Saints: for the poore Saints at Ierusalem. It teacheth us, that as all the works of mercie be∣come the Lords day; so especially this of almes gi∣ving: it is a worke proper to the Lords day. For therein we have both rest from labour, representing unto us our eternall rest in heaven; and when a man is not cumbred with the labours of the world, his minde is better, and more easily induced to do good: a man that is puzzelled about his worke, he saith he hath other mattrrs to do then to attend a poore man; he cannot be for him now, he puts him off till another time, and bids him come to morrow, as the
wise man saith, Say not to thy neighbour, Come againe to morrow,Prov. 3. if thou have it now by thee. A man being distracted with his businesse, he takes his opportuni∣tie; and makes these excuses to answer God, and his owne conscience with these or the like, and saith he cannot now intend it: he is otherwise busied. But when hee hath a relaxation from his labour, which is the proper fruit of the Sabbath, the minde of man is made more gentle, and more easily per∣swaded to do any good worke: because it knows that therefore a man is lift up from the cares, and troubles of this life to the speculation of heavenly things; therefore he is the more easily perswaded to do the works of heavenly charitie, and divine o∣peration: which the Spirit of God acts in the hearts and soules of all his children. So that is one reason why the Apostle bids that this gathering should be on the first of the Sabbath, because then men are at leasure, then they are not cumbred with the world: they are freed from peevishnesse, and impatience which oft times hinders a poore man of an almes: which if he had come when the partie was at quiet, and rest, he might have obtained. 2 Reason. The benefits re∣ceived on that day.Another reason is, because of the benefits that we receive upon that day, the commemoration of the blessings God hath vouchsafed us upon that day; upon that day the root of life rose, the Lord Iesus: who rising againe from the dead, hath opened to us a certaine gappe, and hope of life everlasting, the meditation of the good creatures of God, the state of the Gospell cals us unto the liberty of the sonnes of God; all the whole blessings of the Gospell be repre∣sented, and accumulated unto us upon that day.
Therefore that was the fittest time to be thankfull to God for his mercies, wherein God is most abun∣dant in mercy to us, that then wee should returne somewhat backe againe, some small widdows mite: some little portion to Gods children, for all those in∣finite treasures we have received: for this is all that God requires, that we should give but something of his owne, of some but the thousand part, of some but the hundreth part; this is all that he requires for that great store: those mighty summes, and in∣finite riches, and treasures, and masses of wealth he hath given us. That we should make a little ac∣knowledgement by giving some small sprinkling for all this: That is another reason why the Apostle would have this collection be upon the Sunday; wher∣in the memory of al the blessings of God upon body, and soule, are the goodliest in every thing, there∣fore it makes men more prone; and inclined to do some good for him: that hath wrought so much good for them. The third reason is,  The exercises of the day. because upon that day the publique meetings were made, where there was pro∣phesie, and preaching, and praying, and singing of Psalmes, and holy revelations, and instructions from heaven: all which were as fire to kindle the zeale of a man to be for God; and for his brethren; and to joyne together the members of the Lord Ie∣sus in a firmer conjunction, then any other societie in the world. If a man love a man abroad in the mar∣ket, he will love him ten times better in the Church: if there be any pietie, or any coales of love to kindle his affections elsewhere, it will be much more in the Church: where every word of God, every Sermon,
every prayer, every thanksgiving, every Psalme that is sung brings some fuell to that heavenly flame. Therefore for this cause the Apostle chuseth that time, as being the most select and choise opportuni∣tie for the conferring of that which God had blessed them withall: upon the first day of the weeke, that is, upon the Lords day. 4 Reason. The Sacrament was th n re∣ceived.And lastly, because that upon that day, the Church was alway wont to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; it was not with them then, as it is with us now, men will receive it when they list: but every Sunday was with them a Sacrament day, and oft times every day in the weeke: but on the Lords day they never failed. Therefore as a testimony of their thankfulnesse to God for the benefit of the bo∣dy, and bloud of Christ, which was offered on the Crosse as a ransome, and propitiation for all their sins, they thought they were bound in conscience, and they were easily induced, and perswaded upon the receiving of the Sacrament, to give something to the sacred, and holy Saints that belong unto the Lord. And so indeed after our Sacrament, we have still a collection in remembrance of that; there it was according to the greatnesse of their spirits, and the greatnesse of their meanes which were superemi∣nent; ours are according to our poore meanes, and measure: and according to the scantinesse of our af∣fections which is every day colder then other. For these reasons the Apostle requireth that these things should be done, and layd up upon the Sabbath day. For then men are best affected of all times: if ever a man will give any thing, he will give it then, when he is at rest for God, and when he is expressing his
thankfulnesse to God, for the great mercies that he hath powred upon him; in all the course of his life: then he heares the word, that stirres him up to good actions; then he joynes in prayer with the Church of God: then he understands that God hath not spa∣red the precious bloud of Christ, much lesse therefore should he spare a peny, a small thing to give for his sake, that hath given his bloud for his redemp∣tion. Thus wee see great reason why the Apostle ap∣pointed the collection to bee made at this time: It is true, the collection for the Saints is due and seaso∣nable at all times, but especially when there is the fairest, and goodliest opportunitie; and then it is like∣ly to prove best, when there are the strongest mo∣tives to worke men unto it. Vpon the first of the weeke. But now we must launch into a great Sea, to prove this doctrine; which I need not do for men that are setled; But because these last times affoord a number of monstrous doctrines, and this Citie es∣pecially is plagued with those Iewish Sabbatarians, that would still retaine the Iewish Sabbath, and can very hardly be drawne from it; but in their conven∣ticles they draw away Gods children, and trouble them that are not able to give a reason of their faith; let us therefore a little search into this point, for it the first day of the weeke were the Lords day, when Sermons, and prayer, and communicating in the Sacrament were made, and received: It follows, that the Church had changed the Sabbath day, from
the seventh day unto the eight; and so we are to re∣solve our selves against these innovators how this might be done: for assure your selves, although we be well resolved in the thing, and long experience hath taught us to be quiet, and to settle our selves in the authoritie of the Church; yet there is nothing that is of weaker authoritie then the change of the Sabbath; and if these new Hereticks can prevaile with us in other things, it is no marvell if they pre∣vaile in this; for there is nothing that is left upon so weake a foundation, that hath so slender proofe as this: which makes them to get ground upon unsta∣ble soules, that are their hearers, being a multitude of men, where there is varietie of affections; and imbecillitie of judgement: and every man is carried away with every blast of doctrine, as children, to and fro, no marvell if they have sowne such seeds of pestilent schisme, by these contrary blasts which are every where studied. Therefore you shall understand, that the holy Apostles presently after our Lords ascention into hea∣ven;The Sabbath changed by the Apostles. they did ordaine that the meetings of Christi∣ans for the Sabbath, that those exercises, should be upon the eight day of the weeke; I meane upon the eight day from the creation, upon the Iews Mun∣day; which now is called Sunday, or our Lords day; and those feasts, that formerly were wont to fall upon any day of the weeke; as Easter day, which was kept according to the course of the Moone; and if it fell upon a Wednesday, or a Thursday, or the like, still it was Easter day, the Passeover day, the feast of sweet bread: when the paschall Lambe was offer∣ed. But the Apostles changed it, that it should al∣wayes
be on the Sunday; upon the day of our Lords resurrection: and Whitsuntide, which followes af∣ter Easter, being a moveable Feast, and as Easter was still that was to be referred to it: now the feast of Pentecost was referred by the Apostles, to the Lords day: the day of our Lords resurrection, our Sunday. And this was not the devise of PiusPius. the first Pope, or Dicta the first Pope, (as some have imagined) which was many yeares after our Lords ascention; but it is certaine, it was the ordinance of the Apo∣stles themselves, as we may see in two famous pla∣ces: for we have but two as BezaBeza. saith well, in Acts 20.10.Act. 20 10. and in this place. In these two places, we observe that liberty that the Lord gave to his Church,1 Cor. 16.2. to change the seventh day to the eighth. And whereupon? upon what ground did they take this liberty? for we have no direct word from the mouth of our Saviour for it, but they did it one∣ly upon the revelation of the spirit of God; and they had such firme arguments and reasons, as might sway them against the common tenents of the Iew∣ish slavery and bondage whereby they were tyed and bound to the observation of their Sabbath. The first maine reason that the Church had for the changing of the Sabbath;1 To shew the prerogative of Christ. it was to shew the prero∣gative of the Sonne of God, which saith of himself: The sonne of man is Lord of the Sabbath also; he is Lord even of the Sabbath, Mark. 3.Mark. 3. Now therefore if he were Lord of the Sabbath, then it lay in his power to change the time of the Sabbath; the morall action he changed not, that alway continueth, we must have a day to worship God in: we should worship God al∣way, but the publique worship of God is the proper
end and office of the Sabbath. I but for the time why it should be upon the se∣venth day, or on the eight day, this was left in the Lordship of Christ, being the Lord of the Sabbath, which therefore could tell what he did, when hee would rejourne the Sabbath to some other time, where it might be a figure of some better significati∣on, therefore to shew the glory of the sonne of man, the Church thought good to change the time of the Sabbath to another time.2 In remem∣brance of the work of redemp∣tion. Secondly, there was another reason as Athanasi∣usAthanasius. observeth upon those words of Christ; All things are given to me of my Father: he extends it thus far, even to the change of the Ceremonies of Moses Law: now saith he, there are two great workes of God which are to be considered in their substance, and in their ceremony. The first is the worke of creation. And the second is the worke of redemption, wher∣in the world was recreated and made anew. For the first, the worke of creation, the old Sab∣bath was instituted and ordained of God in remem∣brance of his worke: for God rested the seventh day from all the worke that he had wrought, and created in the sixe dayes before he rested the seventh day, and blessed it, and hallowed it for man to remember the workes he had created in the sixe working dayes, and that man should also worke in sixe dayes as he had done, and rest upon the seventh day: for as the Lord had wrought sixe dayes, so he saith, sixe dayes shalt thou labour: for all the life of man must be con∣formed to the example of Almighty God: so now there being these two great workes, the one of cre∣ation,
the other of redemption; wee are to consider whether of these two are the greater; and surely we shall finde the worke of redemption is a greater matter then the worke of creation. When the Lord created the world by his omnipotent power, he did but speake the word, and it was done. The Lord did but say let there be light, and there was light. Let there be a firmament, and there was a firmament. Let there be sea and land, and there was presently sea and land, and every thing else necessary. But when he wrought redemption, it was not done by a word, but it cost the bloud, it drew the bloud from the heart of his deare Sonne, for it could not be done by way of omnipotency, because it must be done by way of justice: the justice of God must be satisfied, which could not be satisfied, but the sinner must loose his life which he had forfeited to God, and God himselfe must doe it; the person of God must take upon him the nature of man, to suffer death for sinfull man that had deserved death everlasting: this is the worke of recreation, and redemption. Now saith Athanasius, these workes had their severall a∣ges, the worke of the creation was to be remem∣bred untill Christ came to worke the worke of re∣demption, and when he was come, then the age of that was to passe away, it was determined and termi∣nate in Christ. And now began another age, a more blessed and glorious age, that of redemption that was now to flourish, and to be esteemed in the world, and so it was necessary that there should be a cessa∣tion of the former, that there must be an introducti∣on of this. But how then will some say,  shall we not remem∣ber the works of the creation still as well as wee
should before? Yes, but now the Lord hath given that grace, and that light that wee may remember them e∣very day, we may meditate of them as we are do∣ing our workes, for the Gospell is so cleare, and hath laid open the treasures of heaven so plainely, that as we doe the workes of our hands, we may remem∣ber the workes of the Lord too, which the Iewes could not doe in their worke and labour, for it was so hidden from them, that they knew not that which was done before their faces, as the Apostle saith, 2 Cor. 3.2 Cor. 3. Therefore this is one reason, the gratious worke of the redemption, and recreation of the world being the greatest worke that ever was, requires the grea∣test memoriall. Therefore it is necessary there should be a Sabbath day, a time of rest for the contemplati∣on and meditation of that rather then for the lesser worke, the worke of the creation which may be meditated on, and remembred every day as well as upon the Sabbath, but the worke of redemption, although it be to be thought upon, and remembred every day, and may be meditated upon daily, yet then we must thinke of it more seriously, with a more curious observation and meditation upon the Lords day, because then upon that day was the re∣surrection of the Sonne of God, who is the first fruits of all Christian beleevers. 3 The Iewish Sab∣bath was for distinction.Againe, another reason of the change of the Sabbath is, because the Sabbath was made for a mat∣ter of distinction, to distinguish the Iewish nation from all other people in the world, it was a matter of separation and privacy, but the Lord Iesus came to
be publique, he would have none of those private signes continue, he tooke down the partition wall which was made betweene Iewes and Gentiles; they were before shut up one from another, there was no agreement or correspondency betweene them, and the symboll of this separation was the Sabbath day: for the Gentiles scorned them and said, they spent the seventh part of their time in idlenesse; meaning their Sabbath day. Now by this separati∣on, there grew enmity and hatred, and outward opposition, because the one had a rest, and the o∣ther had not. Now the Lord Iesus came to take downe this separation to take away this wall of di∣stinction which was betweene them, and so he made the eighth day the day of rest, the Sabbath, not for a day of separation, as the seventh day was, which separated them, and made them strangers from all other men, but to unite them, so that now there is none strange in Christ, but all are one,Gal. Iewes and Gentiles, male and female, bond and free; there is no nation, nor no condition whatsoever, but all are welcome to Christ, the Saviour of the world. Ther∣fore he made the Sabbath upon a new day, because the other was a day of separation and division, but this is a day of common convocation and collection, and gathering of all together, as the Hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, Mat. 23.Mat. 23. Further,  In memory of Christs resurre∣ction. because the Lord would assure us that both himselfe was risen, and that wee also should rise by the vertue and power of his resurrection: this is the maine head of our religion, and all our faith, therefore he would have us keepe the Sabbath upon the same day that he rose againe from the dead.
Therefore the Church changed that day from the Iewish Sabbath, to rest, not upon that day, but upon the first day of the weeke, which is our Lords day. I say because the Lord would teach us the glorious article of his owne resurrection, and would assure us of the consequent of it, our resurrection by that po∣wer of his; therefore he would have every Sabbath day to be a day of meditation upon that benefit, that every Christian may say this is my resurrection day; this day my Head rose againe, which is the first fruits, and I am assured that by the power of his re∣surrection, I shall rise also: therefore that Christ might make a way to my resurrection, he hath or∣dained a day, a Sabbath wherein I must contemplate upon that benefit, and this I feed on, this is my Sabbath dayes feast, wherein I rest, and quiet my soule; and if it were not for the certainty of the re∣surrection of Christ, and the certaine hope of my own resurrection, I could keepe no Sabbath, but now I keepe a Sabbath by the appoyntment of the Church, by the wise judgement of my Mother, as a symboll of my resurrection, as a signe and symboll that my head is risen, and that his body also shall rise in due time, as certainly as the head is risen already. From the end of the Sabbath.Againe, the Sabbath, and the end of the Sabbath was a cessation from worke; and it signifieth both a cessation from sinne, and also the rest that our Lord and Saviour Christ was to have in the grave, to make a cessation from our sinnes, and from all sinne in his children. Observe the argument, ye shall see it in Heb. 4.10.Heb. 4.10. The Apostle there tels us, that one of the ends of the Sabbath was this, that a man should rest from his worke, even as God rested from
his; what are mens works? sinne; what are Gods workes? the glorious act of the creation; therefore as God ceased from his worke, and made a Sabbath to shew that then he had finished his worke, and re∣sted, so there remaines a Sabbath to the people of God, to shew that there is a cessation from their worke. Now this cessation of Gods people, it must come to the members from the head, it must begin at our head Christ; first he must cease from sinne; but Christ had no sinne, therefore he could not cease from sinne; but because hee said consummatum est, the day be∣fore the Sabbath, that is, the price of mans sinne which was cast upon him it was now payed, there∣fore there is a cessation from sinne: and wee must not live any longer therein, but be dead to sinne as Christ was in his grave, and rise to holinesse of life, which is the proper end of his resurrection. Marke how the Church concludes upon this, the Sabbath was a type of Christs resting, but he never rested till he was in his grave; for saith he, My Father workes hitherto, and I worke, and I worke to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfect: still in this fraile life he was working, but upon the Sabbath day, then he rested, to shew that now he had given the Sab∣bath a perfect rest for ever: that there should be no more ceremoniall worke, he had then fulfilled all the ceremonies; the sinne of man was payd for, and all the troublesome ceremonies of the law were abro∣gate, and to shew that the Sabbath was ended, he ce∣lebrated it in his grave: and then upon the Munday, the Iewes Munday, the day of his resurrection; hee rose againe to shew that ours must be an active life, not in idle circumstances, to passe it away in ceremo∣nies,
as in the law: but to remaine as an eternall Sab∣bath for ever: we keepe a publique Sabbath to God, though not in the same time, and in memory of the same thing, yet in the remembrance of a farre grea∣ter benefit. 6 From the ap∣paritions of Christ.To conclude the point, our Lord graced this con∣stitution of the Church, by his own presence: most of his apparitions were upon the eighth day, as wee may see in the Gospell, that day that he rose still he glorified it with his presence; eight dayes after he rose, he came and shewed himselfe to his Disci∣ples, and the next day to Thomas, and the rest of the Disciples: and so for the time of 40. dayes that he continued on earth, after his resurrection, look how many Mundayes of the Iewes there was which is our Lords day, so many apparitions hee made upon that day: whereby they gathered that it was the will of the Lord, and that hee meant to make that day glorious by his comfortable apparitions; for still as I said, his apparitions were upon that day, he was absent all the weeke before, hee appeared to none, except it were to some few persons, as Peter and Iohn, but he made no publique apparition, but onely upon the Lords day. And upon this the Church of God was induced to make this change, and we see it acted, Acts 20.10.Acts 20.10. 1 Cor. 16. and this chapter is a publique te∣stimony of it, and likewise in Rev. 1.Rev. 1. Saint Iohn saith, I was in the spirit upon the Lords day, which is gene∣rally taken by the fathers of the Church, and by the Interpreters of the Gospell, for this, that we hold in¦stead of the Sabbath day. But because these kinde of people will never be satisfied, except wee can answer their reasons, as
well as they can heare ours: give me leave a little to goe forward in this poynt; and heare what they can object for this,Arguments a∣gainst the change of the Sabth. which thinke the Iewish Sabbath still to remaine in force. I have spent the time a∣gainst my minde and purpose, therefore I will but name the chiefe heads of their arguments, and re∣fute them. They conclude therefore that there is no certaine warrant for the changing of the Iewish Sabbath to ours:1 There is no written word for it. because there is no direct written Scripture to prove it; we have no Text of Scripture to worke it into us. But for that we are to answer them,  The Apostles in this guided by the spirit of God. whatsoever the Apostles did being guided by the spirit of God; their practise is a sufficient direction to us,, it is war∣rant enough that they have done it before us: For so we have in many other things, the practise of the Apostles to be a rule of our faith, Christ not determi∣ning many particular things in the Church, but lea∣ving it to the discretion of the wise, those that should be well furnished with knowledge for the di∣recting of things in their places where they were: therefore that which the Apostles did, it was the act of Christ; for they did it not of themselves, but from a higher person, from him that sent them. Another reason they have, and that is this;2 It is a part of the decalogue. the decalogue or tenne Commandements, are a perpetuall law: but this is a part of the decalogue, therefore this is a perpetuall law, and the precepts that be in the tenne Commandements are all morall; they are precepts that belong to all men, to all times and pla∣ces in the world. Thirdly, God is pleased to call the Sabbath an
everlasting covenant,God cals the Sabbath an ever∣lasting covenant Deut. 12.16. I have made an everlasting cov∣nant, saith the Lord, Deuter. 12.16. and in divers other places hee cals it a perpetuall covenant be∣tweene me, and my people Israel: therefore it fol∣lows, it must last as long as the world lasts, and con∣sequently it cannot be changed, for then we alter the covenant of God. 4 It was aucienter then Moses.A fourth objection is this, all the laws that are an∣cienter then Moses are immutable, but this was more ancient then Moses law; for it was given to man in paradise: the Lord there by resting upon the seventh day, did consecrate the Sabbath to be kept; although some of the Fathers say (as Iustin MartyrIustin. Martyr.) that they did not keepe it before the Floud, but yet there was the institutiō of it: therfore seeing it was a law given before Moses, and before the fall of man; it follows it is immutable, and unchangeable: because if there be any change, it must be for imperfection, and if there be any imperfection, it must be for sinne; and there was no sinne before the fall. Therefore what∣soever was commanded before the fall, was so per∣fect, that it could not be altered, it had no respect of imperfection in it. 5 The cause of it is perpetuall.And lastly, the perpetuall cause of a law makes the law continue: if the cause of it remaine; the law must also continue: and therefore there are many lawes that are made, and abrogate againe, because there is no use of them; they were made in such a time, for such things, and the cause failing, the law ceaseth: but where the law hath a perpetuall cause, there the law is in force to continue alway: but the cause of the Iewish Sabbath continueth, the medita∣tion and contemplation upon the works of God; and
the holy operation of his hands, this is the cause of the Sabbath: and this alwayes continueth, therefore the Iewish sabbath must continue. These are the prime and chiefe grounds of their arguments, I will answer a word to these, and so conclude. First, in that they say, the decalogue or ten Com∣mandements, is a law perpetuall,Ans. to Ob. 2. The Iewish Sab∣bath partly ce∣remoniall. and bindes the con∣sciences of all men. It is true, as farre forth as it is morall it doth, but those parts that bee ceremoniall; as the Sabbath is partly morall, and partly ceremoniall, and as it is moral it binds, but as it is ceremoniall, it doth not. For the moralitie of the Sabbath is this, to worship God in a publique service, that wee are bound unto, that which is ceremoniall, that we should serve him upon such a day, upon the seventh day rather then any other, that doth not binde, there is no part of mora∣litie in that: that is but an appendix, but a reference, but a consequence: & for that it is a limited ordinance, and is not to have a continuall succession, and perpe∣tuitie: no more then circumcision, and the rest of the figures of the law. And for that they say,Ans. to Ob. 3. The Sabbath not said to be ever∣lasting property. that God made an everla∣sting covenant of the Sabbath, you must understand that word there Legnolam, it signifieth not that eter∣nitie that never ceaseth, but a diuturnitie, a long time; so it was for the law, it continued 2000. yeares, which is said in Scripture to bee eternall, and those things which exceed the age of a man, which passe the conceit, and opinion of man; that no mans me∣mory can extend so farre, they are called eternall, many times in Scripture. It is said of the kingdome of David, that it should last unto eternitie, and yet
we know it lasted but five hundred yeares, which is farre short of eternitie. So for the land of Israel, it is said the people of Israel should inhabite it for eter∣nitie, and yet in a thousand yeares they were outed, and expelled. But the word signifieth that which is of long induring, of long continuance, such a thing was the Sabbath: for the testimony and covenant of God in ceremoniall things, they were long, but they were not eternall. Ans. to Ob. 4. All laws before Moses not im∣mutable.And then where it is said that those lawes that were before Moses, those lawes that were in the state of paradice, they are unchangeable, and immu∣table, because there is no imperfection in them. First of al, I denie their ground that the law of the Sabbath was given in Paradise. And secondly, that such lawes as were before Moses, as onely thus farre immutable, unlesse they may be otherwise better supplyed; for it was Gods will that those things that were before, should be types and figures, and shad∣dowes of things that were to come after; Now when the perfect body was once come in place, all those figures, and shaddowes were to be removed. So was circumcision foure hundred yeares before Moses, yet we see it is abrogate, and ceaseth by the com∣ming of our Lord, and Saviour Christ. So was the Sabbath, the Lord Christ being the summe of circum∣cision, and also being the summe of the Sabbath day, being our rest in God, and assuring us of our rest from all sinne, from all torment, from all feare, and all paine which our nature is subject unto; it was needfull therefore that he should come in the place of all these shaddows, and that they should cease; and have no further intelligence or operation.
And for the last,Ans to Ob. 5. Meditation of Gods works not tyed to one day. where they say the cause of the law continueth, and therfore the law must continue: but the cause of this law was the meditation of Gods works, and that must be continuall: therefore the Sabbath must be continuall. It is true, if the meditation of the works of God were of necessity put to one day; then the argument were good and strong; but because it may be done upon the eight; or first, or second as well as upon that, the argument concludes not. Indeed where the cause of the law, and the end of it can be no o∣therwise attained but by the direct word, and letter of the law: there the law must continue as long as the end of it continueth. But the end of the law of the Sabbath, is the meditation of Gods creatures, which may be attained unto another way; for we see in Christ better then they could in Moses: for we see the fulnesse of God, the excellencie of the creation, that cleare light of contemplation in the Sonne of God, which was not to be discerned in the old Te∣stament: The grace of God hath appeared to all men:2. Tit. 11. and hath removed the clouds of darknesse that were before, that we might walke in a new light; that we might walk from glory to glory, we see face to face,2. Cor. 3. as the Apostle saith. I have beene too troublesome to you in this point, to speake to them that are well setled, but it is for this respect, to cleare this point; to make it ap∣peare what phanaticall spirits these be, that after so much, and so long peace, and quiet of the Church: would begin to trouble the faith of Christians again, by renewing the Iewish Sabbath. For they go in effect to proove that there is no Christ come into the
world: for seeing their Sabbath was a type of Christs resting in the grave, and that he should bury it in the grave with all other ceremonies; they do in effect de∣ny that Christ dyed, and that he is risen againe; they deny his resurrection by drowning the memory of that in remembring their Sabbath: by obscuring our Lords day in keeping that Sabbath in which he lay in the grave, and by keeping that, they put a cessation to this. But it is good also that we should understand the tenents of our faith, upon firme and strong argu∣ments, that the powers of darknesse, the gates of hell may have no prevailing against us, in the time when they come to fight with us. It is true, this argument doth afford to wrangling spirits as much contradi∣ction, as any matter of Divinitie; but we have the authoritie of the Church grounded upon good rea∣sons, and arguments why we do so: to commemo∣rate the glorious worke of the resurrection of our head. To assure us that we which are his members shall rise with him. Now follows to speake of the incentives, and motives concerning this worke of charitie; but I am afraid too much to op∣presse your patience, therefore I will conclude.
The third Sermon. 1. Cor. 16.1.2.3. Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, even so do you. In the first of the Sabbath, let every one of you lay up by himselfe treasure of whatsoever God hath prospered him, that there be no gathering when I come. And when I come, those whom you shall ap∣point, and approve by your letters, those will I send to carry your grace to Ierusalem. THere are but two places in the Scrip∣ture that gives a powerfull warrant to the Church of God for the change of the Sabbath day, from the seventh to the eighth day. And therefore I thought it fit (falling upon this Text) not to leave that point negligently or sleightly handled, but to regard it so farre as my weaknesse could attaine un∣to. The last time I shewed the reasons of the change of it. It was a thing that was partly ceremoniall; and the Church of God is bound to it no further then it is morall. It was a matter of distinction it made a separation betweene Iewes and Gentiles; Christ came
to take downe the wall of separation. It was a me∣moriall of the Resurrection of Christ, and the com∣fort of us all; in that the root of life was raised: therefore there is a lively hope made over to all the branches that they shall rise againe with the root. It was graced by the manifold apparitions of Christ, and confirmed unto us according as the Apostles had receiued it from the will of Christ; to grace that day the eighth day with his apparitions. It was confir∣med unto us by the Apostle Saint Iohn, who maketh mention of the Lords day, hee was rapt in the Spirit upon the Lords day. And by these two places, Act. 20.10. and this present place, 1. Cor. 16.2. The time prevented me that I could not shew you the authoritie from age to age, and the concur∣rence of these two things which was the gathering of collections upon that day: for the Apostle includes both these, both that the day should be changed to the first of the Sabbath, that is, to the first day of the weeke. And secondly, that upon this first day of the weeke, it should be a particular appendix of the Sab∣bath dayes worke, to lay up somewhat for the Saints; because then there were no such officers ap∣pointed in the Church, therefore every man wa his owne Treasurer, every man was his owne overseer for the poore, to lay up by himselfe as (Chrysostome saith) this priesthood thy charitie, and thy love to thy brother hath bestowed upon thee, that a man should provide and ordaine by his owne hands, till such time as the Church should provide overseers, and collectors for the poore, and Deacons that they should be every where as they were then at Ieru∣salem.
Now it may seeme a matter not worth the la∣bour, to prove this point concerning the time of the Sabbath, if it were not that some phanaticall spirits in these latter dayes had raised such a mist and vapour, to cloud this truth; and to bring backe the Iews ce∣remoniall Sabbath which (saith Gregory) if any go about to do, he must bring in the Iews sacrifice: and so he shall derogate and destroy the bloud, and sa∣crifice of Christ, which was offered once for all. Give me leave therefore a little before I come to the residue of the Text (for indeed it is full of mat∣ter) to shew you how the Church of God in the first beginning acknowledged this day for the true Sab∣bath of the Lord. And upon these grounds out of Scripture, I need not do it, I know among you that are fully perswaded, but there are some men that do infringe the glory, and purpose of this Text, and contradict the Fathers, even some of our late Wri∣ters, that are otherwise worthy Interpreters of the word of God, yet here they hold that the Apostles meaning is, where he saith, One of the Sabbath, that it is not to be understood, upon the Lords day: but they thinke it may be any one day in the week. Wherein it is a wonder that they should give such a scandall to the Church of God, in weakening the arguments and the faith of the Fathers, that were be∣fore us; and to make us uncertaine what to adhere and cleave unto: I spare their names, because they are worthy instruments of the Gospell. Onely I go about to refute, and cast down their opinion; which I will do briefly, and by the libertie and licence of the time, that I may make the shorter worke.The first of the Sabbath, the Lords day. Therefore that this first of the Sabbath is the Lords
day, it is manifest by other places of Scripture: whose consent make an absolute verity every where: for the rule of Scripture is to expound one place by another. In Matth. 28.2. The woman came to the grave upon the first of the Sabbath, when as it shined up, when the light shined up upon the first of the Sabbath, then came the woman to the grave; the same word is used there, as there is here; The first of the Sabbath, which was the day of the Lords resur∣rection, and not every day in the weeke, but the eight day from the creation. So againe more clearly in Mark. 16.2. and vers. 9. it is said there verse 2. the women came very early in the morning upon the first of the Sabbath, or of the weeke. And in the 9. verse it is said, Iesus did rise upon the first of the Sabbath in the morning: that is, upon the first day of the week. This phrase in Scripture alludeth to that in Gen. 1.7. the morning and the evening were the one day, that is, the first day: for one and first in the Hebrew tongue are promiscuously taken, which is, in every one day of the Sabbath, that is, in every Sabbath, or upon the Lords day, or in every first day of the weeke which is the Lords day. Then the authoritie of the Acts of the Apostles; and this place, and that of Saint Iohn, which saith, he was rapt in the spirit upon the Lords day.The judgement of the Fathers for the oberva¦tion of the Lords day. All these things be firme, and true establishers of the point we have declared. Now for the Fa∣thers, that they were all also of the same minde, you shall heare. Iustin MartyrIustin Martyr Apolog 1.2. that lived an hundred yeares after Christ, within an hundred and foure yeares after, he saith in the second of his Apollogeticks: In the day, saith he, that we call Sunday, the day which the
Heathen men called Sunday, which is now our Sab∣bath day: for the other day before was called Sa∣turne day of Saturne, which was the Iews Sabbath, in that day, saith he, the congregation come toge∣ther, and there are prayers offered up to God, and af∣ter the Sacraments are received, there is a collection made, every man layes up as much as his own good will is, according to his own election, and it is given to the superintendent, or to the chiefe Minister of the place, and he seeth the poore provided for with it, he seeth it be bestowed upon them. Tertullian which lived two hundred and foure yeares after Christ, in his booke called,Tertull. in sould. Crowne. Apolog. ca. 16. The souldiers Crowne, he saith, Vpon the Lords day wee abhorre fasting, for it is a time of feasting with us. And in his Apolloget. Chap. 16. saith he, If we give one day in seven to merrinesse and joy, to joyfulnesse in the holy Ghost, it is but all one as the Iewes do which give yet superstitiously the day of Saturne to idlenesse, and meere superstition, so saith Tertullian, there is a certaine little chest in the Church, and every man puts into it what seemes good to him, if he can; and if he will: for there is no man constrained, and this is done once in a moneth. For the place could not endure that it should be done every Sabbath, (as the Apostle saith) here upon every first of the Sabbath, but because of the povertie of the countrey it was but once in a moneth, that they brought their charitie for the poore. Clemens Alexandrinus in the fifth of his Stromata,Clem. Alexan. Strom. 5. Pato. he brings a prophesie out of Plato, that God would change the seventh day to the eighth; to signifie thereby, that God would bring a rest to all the
world: so that our change of the Sabbath day, saith he, it is not onely of us, not onely manifested to us, but it was opened to the Gentiles themselves; they also acknowledged it. Cyprian Diacon. Epist 41.Cyprian the Deacon saith, he shall reade the next Lords day, wherein the Church must bring their ac∣customed sacrifice to God; that is, the sacrifice of Almes-deeds, the treasure of life eternall: and in his 41. Epistle (saith he) in the station, that is, in the Church where we meet, and stand together before God; let you almes be ready, and let no man appeare empty before the Lord, alluding to the law, spea∣king of the change of the Sabbath, and the collection for the poore Saints named in this place, by the common state of the Church. Basil. Hexamer. secund.Basile in the second of his Hexameron, (saith he) that the Lord might bring us from this present life, to the thought of a better life, of the life to come, he hath appointed the first fruits of the Sabbath, wherein the first fruits of the living rose again from the dead: the Lord Christ which was dead, did then live, which was the beginner and continuer of light in his Church; I meane (saith he) the holy Sabbath day, glorified by the resurrection of Christ, and commended to the Church to be alway fulfilled and kept. Nazianzinus orat. 43.Nazianzen saith he, there were two Lords dayes, the one for the Iewes, the other for the Gentiles; but ours that we have is more excellent than that: for that was belonging to mans salvation, but this was the very nativity of salvation, the birth of our Savi∣our. The Iewes Sabbath was the intermedium, the passage betweene the buriall of Christ and his re∣surrection,
for Christ lay in his grave upon their Sabbath day, and there he rested, and with him re∣sted all the ceremonies of the law, never any more to revive, but this of the resurrection of Christ, is plainly and fully the day of the second generation, and regeneration of all the Saints; and he gives a reason for it: For, saith he, even as the first creation of the world begun from the Sabbath day: so we must imagine that God began to make the world upon the Munday as we call our weeke, for in his eternall rest whereby he rested from all eternitie, he began then to worke, although it were no worke to God but a rest, even the creation, it was a rest to him, he did not worke then more then before, yet it is signified to us by worke in the Scripture, and that he began in the beginning of the weeke to set himselfe to worke, therefore as that worke of the creation began from the Sabbath, so the worke of the recreation and redemption of man must begin from the Sabbath. And although this be the eighth day, yet it is the best day of all that were before it, and of all that shall come after it; being more high, and glorious, then that glorious day that was before, and being more wonderful and admirable then that wondrous time that preceded it. Saint Ierome in the second Epistle of his booke against Vigil. The Apostle Paul saith he,S. Hierom. contra Vigil. Epist. 3. Vigitantius I suppose. command¦ed almost all Churches that there should be collecti∣ons for the poore made upon the Lords day, which is the first day of the weeke, that is, the first of the Iewish weeke. And in his fourth question to Hibibbia, How soone, saith he, did the Apostles of Christ turne, and
change the Iewish Sabbath? to shew the libertie of Christians from the bondage of the law, how soone did they turne it to the Lords day? Aug. 10. Tom.Saint Austin in the tenth Tome of his Sermon up∣on these words of the Apostle, saith he, When the seventh day was fulfilled which is the consummation of the world, we must come backe againe to the first, and reckon from seven to seven, and this first will be found the eight day: the seventh day is end∣ed, and then the Lord is buried, the eight day be∣gins, and then the Lord is raised, for the raising up of the Lord Iesus hath promised unto us a day eter∣nall, and hath consecrated to us the Lords day which is the signe, and note, and assurance unto us of that eternall day of that everlasting Sabbath: for now the rocke is raised up againe. Let all our hearts be cir∣cumcised (speaking of the manner of circumcision which was done with a knife of stone,) with a piece of a stone taken out of the rock, out of the rock which is Christ. Chrysost. on 1. Cor. 16.2.Saint Chrysostome upon this place. In one of the Sabbaths, that is (saith he) upon the Lords day: for the time it selfe was of sufficient force (saith he) to bring a man to bee liberall; to give almes plenti∣fully. Oecumenius.Oecumenius saith, the same (saith hee) it should rouze us up this time, the Lords day, to do good to the Lords Saints. Theophilact.Theophilact, being the first day of the weeke, the time wherein we meet together before God: they never (saith he) went without love to God, and to the Saints; upon the first day of the weeke, which is the Lords day.
Theodoret,Theodoret. saith he, the day, and the worke are met together; a man should do the works of the time in his owne time: a worke done in season is the more gratefull, and acceptable. Therefore, saith he, the day of the Lord wherein the resurrection of Christ is honoured, is the fittest time to shew our bountifulnesse to God; which hath beene so bounti∣full to us in giving us the memoriall of him, that was Lord of his owne, and of our resurrection. AthanasiusAthanasius. upon that place: All things are deli∣vered to me of my Father, which I stood on the last day; and shewed his reasons for the change of the Sabbath. Cirill of Ierusalem in the fourteenth of his Cate∣chisme, saith he, Yesterday,Cirill of Ierus. Catech. 14. upon the Lords day in the congregation of the Saints, and at the generall prayers of the people; you heard me speak and dis∣course of these things, where we may see that in that countrey also the same manner was retained. Epiphanius in his second booke;Epiph. lib. 2. The Sabbath of the Iewes remained in the law till the presence, and comming of Christ: but Christ dissolved the Sab∣bath, and gave a Sabbath of his owne, which is a type of that true rest of that sabbatism wherby the Saints rest from ceremonies, and are come to the substance, the Sonne of God, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 4.7. Cirill of Alexandria, in his seventh booke to Pal∣ladius: We know, saith he,Cirill Alexand. l. 7. ad Pallad. that the Lord Christ came to make us a perfect rest from sinne, from death, from miserie, and to give us conquest over death: and he had power being Lord of the Sabbath, to make a new day, to make a new consecration which the Church of God hath alway followed.
Saint AmbroseAmbrose. 2. Cor. 16.2. upon this place, saith he, this one of the Sabbaths, or the first of the Sabbath, is the Lords day, as it is written every where in the Gospell, that Christ rose on the first day of the weeke. Leo on the Collects,Leo on the Col∣lects. speaking to the Saints to give bountifully, now is the time, saith he, now is the Lords day, now shew your thankfulnesse, and your love to God in Christ, by your bountie to those that are the members of Christ. Greg. Epist. 3.Saint Gregory in his third Epistle, If any man (saith he) say that the Iews sabbath should be reduced, and brought backe, let them reduce all the ceremonies with it, and if the one be abhominable, the other is abhominable also: therefore take heed you be not seduced, despise the words of fooles, weigh every thing in the ballance of reason, and that revelation that you have received the sabbath is made the day of the Lord, that looke what errours we commit the week before, we should make amends, by expiation, and confession, and sorrow, and contrition upon the Lords day. Damscene.Damascene, We celebrate the Lords day, as the perfect rest of humane nature, for the Iews sabbath was a carnall rest, a temporall, and figurative rest, of that which was to come; but this is the perfect rest of nature, to have an assured promise of our resur∣rection, which we could not have but by the memo∣riall of a resurrection; and that could not be done, but in the resurrection of Christ: therefore we cele∣brate this day in memory of Christs resurrection, and in token of the assurance of our resurrection. Beza, and Musculus,Beza and Muscuus. and other late writers, unlesse one or two, which I spake of before, which indeed
are singular men in their place, and degree: I say these men dissent from them, and they say, and ac∣knowledge that these two places of Scripture make it apparant, the authoritie of the change of the Sab∣bath. I have beene too long on this subject. Now I come to that which is more plaine, and easie. After he had told them on what time this should be done, and we see the time was upon the Lords day; and we see the reasons why it was changed from the seventh day from the creation to the eighth day. Now let us go to the next that follows in the order of the words. By what reasons,The motives to charitie. by what argu∣ments would the Apostle perswade them to this act? What arguments doth he use? It is a hard mat∣ter to bring a churles money out of his purse, and even those that bee generous, and excellent well minded; yet they cannot endure to heare much of almes, for charitie is soone wearie; and being once wearie; there must needs come infinite danger to the soule. For the heart grows hard, if charity bee weary. And therefore to the intent it may hold out, good arguments and reasons must be devised, to feed and incourage it: for charitie of it selfe will lagge, and faile, except it be well supported. There∣fore the Apostle gives such motives as that nothing could be found more opportune, and fit to keepe men in practise then this. And first from the example of other Churches, As I have appointed in the Churches of Galatia, so do ye: that which other Churches do, surely that you will do, especially that which poorer Churches have done, that are not able to come neere you in state, and meanes, you will be ashamed to come behinde
them; but the Churches of Galatia which are more ancient then you, and withall poorer then you; they have done this. Therefore I pray do you so too, that is one great incentive, wherein we are to con∣sider what the Church of Galatia was, and also what his authoritie was among them, I have appointed, I have commanded (saith he) saith S. Chrysostome, he did not counsell them, he did not exhort them, by faire words to do it, but he appointed them by his power Apostolicall, by his Apostolicall authoritie: whereby it appeares, that the Church hath power to dispose of mens goods in the generall, though not in the speciall quantitie; that is one motive to draw them on. Another is taken from the faire carriage that should be in the businesse, a man will more easily be intreated to do something, if he be perswaded that there shall be no false play in it; but that every thing shall be done according to the Donors intenti∣on, and that the parties appointed shall be sure to receive that which they have given; without any fraud or deceit: for that the Apostle gives them sa∣tisfaction, and tels them, that when hee comes the money shall be sent, and transmitted to Ierusalem, to the poore Saints of Ierusalem, for whom he beg∣ged, as we heard before; it should be sent to them, and it should be sent by those that they should chuse themselves, and if need were he himselfe also would go with them. So that here is a full certain∣tie made, that it should not be balked, that it should not be interverted, nor kept in private mens hands, or be turned to the private good of a few, but it should redound to the benefit of those for whom it
was intended: and for that purpose hee tels them there should be certaine men chosen, and chosen of the Corinthians themselves; men that should be ap∣proved by their letters, and Epistles: and if there were further necessitie, he himselfe would go to be a witnesse, and testifie of this their great grace; which God had done by them: This is the second motive whereby he incites them. The third is, the glorious title he gives them: for  charitie, although it be not proud, yet notwithstand∣ing it looks that there should be some thankfull re∣membrance of it, it desires no glorious titles, nor no blazing, yet the Lord God in mercie hath appointed that if the poore woman shall poure upon the body of Christ such a box of oyntment, the Lord saith, Verily I say unto you, wheresoever the Gospell shall be preached, a memoriall shall be made of her, of this that she hath done, her box shall go with her for a memoriall of her. The Lord will not have the good deeds of his Saints to be buried in oblivion; but hee will have them famous, he will have them carried through the world; therefore the Apostle gives it a glorious name, a glorious title; and saith, your grace. They shall carry your benefit, or your grace, your benefit as the word signifieth at large; But the Apostle speakes here in another minde, as of a thing that comes from the grace of God, that ruled and reign∣ed in them, and moved them to this gracious worke. And then the last is from the inconvenience, that  would come otherwise, hee desires that it might be done with all speed, for hee (saith hee) would have none to gather when he came, because it would
tend both to his, and to their shame, if they should be found unready. Vnreadinesse is a fault in all the parts of Christianitie, and there was no man that ought to be so forward as they; therefore he prayes them to do it before hand. These are the parcels of this Text. Of these things briefly, and in order; as it shall please God to give assistance. 2 Motive, from the Chur∣ches authority.First, concerning the motive from the Church. It hath alway beene a strong argument that is taken from the Churches authority, He that heares you, heares me: and he that scornes you, scornes me, saith our Lord Christ: and tell it to the Church, and if he will not heare the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen, and a publicane, or sinner. Hee that will not do as the Church doth, he is out of the Church of God, he is a banished man from heaven: and a cast-away from all hope of salvation. This argument therefore must be of speciall consideration with us; what the anci∣ent Church hath done before times, we must follow their steps, if we meane to partake of the reward that they, and we both looke for. We see that anti∣quitie is a great and a maine reason to induce any good understanding: for if the Church of God have authoritie to perswade all her children, and those that follow after, certainly then the ancientest Chur∣ches are of the greatest authoritie. Now the Church of Galatia was a more ancient Church then Corinth. Therefore the Apostle alledgeth the authority of that Church, to bring this on. So we see also in persons, not only in Churches, but in particular persons, Rom. 16.6. Salute Andronicus, and Iunia that were before me in the Lord they were Christians before Saint Paul, therefore Saint Paul gave them honour as his pre∣decessors,
as his glorious, and honourable Ancestors, that were in the Lord before him. Therefore hee saith, honour them, and salute them much. So in this case Galatia was the more ancient Church, therefore it was to be the rule of Churches after∣ward in all good things, in all things belonging to the propagation of the Gospell; to the maintenance of a good conscience. The authoritie of the Church is the greatest argument one of them under heaven, and it is certaine, if our mother Church which was once, the Church of Rome; if it had not proved ex∣treamly cruell, and tyrannous in her proceedings, there ought no Church to have fallen away from her communitie: for by separation from her, if she had continued a true mother; they had separated from their father too: the God of all comfort, the God of heaven and earth: for a man cannot have his fa∣thers blessing, if he go from his mothers bosome, but now when all things were turned to pride, to worldly covetousnesse, to ambition, and vaine glo∣ry, and their own greatnesse without the true aime, and without respect to the right end, when all was turned to pride, and selfe-love, that they would de∣pose Kings, and Princes out of their seats and king∣domes, it grew then to be a monster, and ceased to be a mother, and thence it is not lawfull to have any communion with them, that are so blasphemous. But else, I say, if they had continued in that modest humilitie, which they were first bred in,Rome a true Church 500 yeares after Christ. & continu∣ed in for the space of foure or five hundred yeares, surely, the authoritie of the Church had beene a rule for the whole world; for where they do well, the Apostle makes a law from their doings, As the
Churches of Galatia do, so do ye. 2 What the Church of Gala∣tia was.Secondly, here is to bee observed, what this Church of Galatia was, it was a famous, but yet it was but a poore Church: it was so famous in zeale, that the Apostle protests that they would have given him their eyes to have done him good, wherein he signified their infinite ardor, and fervencie to the Gospell of Christ, at his first comming, although af∣terwards by his absence, they were seduced, and drawne away by circumcision, by some creeping Iewes that stole in among them. But as it was famous for the greatnesse of the graces of the spirit, so it was but meane in condition. Therefore the Apostle might well draw an argument from it: for the Co∣rinthians could not object, and say, What do you tell us of Galatia? Galatia is a potent kingdome, a rich kingdome full of meanes, and full of glory above our Citie, but this they could not do: for it appea∣red to all the world to be but a poore place, a place of no trafficke, except it were a little in the Euxine sea: for it is a middle-land place. And although the countries of Asia-minor (whereof Galatia is one) can maintaine themselves,Galatia in Asia minor. yet for any great super∣fluitie, and abundance, to send to others, they can∣not do it, especially the Citie of Galatia which is excluded, and kept from the Pamphilian Sea, by the border of the South which lyeth betweene it and Pamphilia. So we see here, that according as God hath given Churches meanes and abilitie, so they should exceed those that are poorer: the richer sort must do after a rich manner; and if the poore should at any time seeke to transcend them, it were a shame to them that are greater, and more able. The Citie
of Corinth, it was the Mart of all the world:Corinth the Mart of the world. Hom. Iliad 2. there∣fore Homer in his time which was one of the anci∣entest Writers that ever was among the Heathen, there is none like him, in his second Iliad he saith three times over, Rich Corinth. The reason of it is because of the scituation which is betweene two seas, from whence all the traffick of the world flocked, & flowed to it. Therefore it followed that seeing the Church of Galatia had farre lesse meanes then Co∣rinth, and yet they had done thus. Therefore Co∣rinth must much more obey this precept. And it is a lesson that I would that men of sence and reason would lay to their owne consciences both in the Church, and in their private persons: for we have a great number of poore Churches even in this Citie, that are sessed oft times to pay farre more then richer places do: and there are many poore persons that are truer pay-masters, that pay scot, and lot better then many greater men do, which the A∣postle intimates here to be a shame, it is a shame that poore Churches should go before rich: it is a shame that Galatia should go before Corinth, and exceed them; it is a thing that God will have a saying for; and these great ones that have their thousands, and their ten thousands about them, and yet they will not pay that which belongs to their poore officers, to their poore servants, such as belong to them, poore Church-men, that will not pay that which be∣longs to them of custome, and dutie; these men shame themselves infinitely, and disturbe the order of nature: and perhaps lay up a curse for their owne soules. The last thing that I observe hence is this: how
will he make the Church of Galatia to provoke them, how will hee bring the Corinthians to this? how shall it be brought about? The Corinthians might have objected and said, What do you tell us of the Church of Galatia? Have not we poore enow of our owne? as we use to say now adayes, we will give nothing abroad, because wee have poore at home. It is true, a poore mans neighbour that is neere unto him, ought in the first and principall place to be regarded; no question of it, yet there ought something to be done to the poore at large. Now lest the Corinthians should say they would be at their choice, and they would either do, or they would not do, and the Church of Galatia was of no power to prescribe them, or their example was of no force to move them by way of necessitie. The Apostle therefore tels them, I did appoint: So by this he shews, that he came with full authoritie, as spea∣king more authentically, and more powerfully, not by perswasion and counsell, but by his Apostolicall authoritie, which he had received by Christs com∣mand. As I have appointed. The Church hath power to dispose of mens goods.We learne by this that the Church hath power to dispose of mens goods; and yet this must be done in a gentle manner, with a reservation of their owne will for the quantitie: for in the quantitie it cannot say, saith Saint Chrysostome, thus much or thus much, but must leave it to a mans owne conscience, accor∣ding as God hath inriched him: but as I said before, whensoever God hath given a prosperous voyage
according as a man hath had a good journey in his trade, so he must prosper Gods Saints according as God hath prospered him. But for the maine point that he must give something, it lyes in the Churches power to command that almes-deeds, and works of charitie should be done, that is as much in the Chur∣ches power as that we should keepe a Sabbath day, that men should meet together, and heare the word, and administer Baptisme, and the Lords Supper, in the Church, wee know these things the Church hath power to ordaine, and constitute, and as much power hath the Church to ordaine the collection for the poore: for all come from one authoritie. Therefore the Apostle saith here, As I have appointed. So then the Corinthians were bound not onely by the exam∣ple of the Church of Galatia, but by that Apostolicall power, by that authoritie which the Apostles had received from Christ, Feed my sheepe, feed them with your prayers, feed them with your preaching, feed them with your exhortations, feed them in giving them bread for the body, feed them by your exam∣ple, feed them every way that may be helpfull, and commodious to them. Howbeit out of this we must not gather that the Church hath that fulnesse of power to impose what they list, and to oppresse by way of exaction, to thrust in upon the members of Christ what it plea∣seth them. No; the Apostle gives no way here for annates, he gives no way for Peter-pence, nor for such kinde of collections: for those were exactions, and extortions against the good wils of the parties, to the impoverishing of them that gave it, and to the exceeding enriching of those that received it.
Therefore in such a case we must take notice how farre the Churches authoritie doth extend, that is, when it is to do good to them of Ierusalem, for the Saints of Ierusalem, for the good of them that want, of them that are disabled by age, or by nature, or by misfortune, to do good to them, this is the will of God, and this the Church hath power to raise out of a mans substance; and there is nothing that is a mans owne, there is nothing that he can say, hee takes comfort in, unlesse the poore man take part of it; there is no pound that thou hast except the poore man have a quantitie out of it, if it be but a farthing in a pound, except he have something from it, there can be no rest nor quiet to thee of it, the Lord hath appointed unto men, that as he hath blessed them, so they should returne some tribute, some acknow∣ledgement to his poore members on earth. As I have appointed in the Churches of Galatia. This is the first motive, I lay no new thing upon your shoulders, no new burthen upon you, but that which other Chur∣ches beare as well as you; nay that which poorer Churches, as that of Galatia, (which is not compa∣rable to you) beares the same burthen: therefore I pray do you beare it. It is the common taxation of the Church of God, the collection for the poore the taxing for the poore, it hath beene still a fol∣lower, and a concomitant of the Gospell to have mind of the poore Saints, it was the charge given to Paul and Barnabas, Gal. 2. as a chiefe part of their office to be mindfull of the poore. 2. Motive. The safe carri∣age of it.The second motive is taken from the faire carriage that shall bee in this matter: for the Corinthians might feare, when they had made this collection, and
should send it, that it would miscarry; for Ierusalem was almost a thousand miles off from Corinth, take the neerest way that might be, and there might ma∣ny casualties fall out before it came there, it might be taken by tyrants, or they might be false among themselves, so that they knew not whether ever it should come to the hands of them that should have it tendred them. Therefore for that he saith, he will see to it, they shall be sure it shall be carried safe, and sent to Ierusalem. It is a great comfort, and a great argument to stirre up mens hearts to do good, when they know there shall be no fraud nor deceit in the conveyance of it, it was that onely in∣centive that moved our forefathers to be so bounti∣full to the Church of God, as they were, that they went from the giving of almes-deeds to the building of Cels, and Colledges, and Monasteries, and great Churches, and goodly Pallaces, a strange and wondrous height there was of pietie and devotion. Indeed there was much superstition mingled with it, there was much vanitie mixed with it: but yet we may well thinke that if those men had ever thought of such sharkers as came after them, to pull downe all, and to make every thing equall with the ground, they would have saved a labour, and would never have beene so bountifull to the Church. If they had thought that such a sort of intruders, and ravenners would have taken the goods, and the stocke of the Church, and the stocke of the poore, and have made such havocke of them, not caring for the honour, and respect of the Church. But here for this, the Apostle tels the Corinthians, that they should have no such feare; for, saith he, whosoever you shall
commend, such as shall be fit men, they should be appointed for the carriage of this money. Indeed he must be a fit man that may be trusted with mo∣ney, as he saith in the Comedie, if thou findest a man that is faithfull in money, he may easily be belee∣ved on in any word of counsell, for he that may bee trusted with the one, may be trusted with the other: and they are excellent men indeed that can bee faithfull in those things that are committed to their charge, especially in money, where the craft and sub∣tiltie may be easily hidde, and can hardly be bolt∣ted out. Therefore he saith, there shall be fit men, chosen men of conscience, men fearing God, and ha∣ting covetousnesse; as Moses father speakes of officers, not such as were collectors afterward, men that were carelesse, that will spend the whole yeare in out∣laying, and will worke all that while out of the poore mens stocke, they care not how much, men that will come here with a Briefe, and stay upon pleasure in the Citie, and spend out their time, that they care not when they returne to the poore men for whom they gather; much lesse shall they bee such men as those that shall barter their Briefes, and sell their Patent, and take a certaine summe of mo∣ney beforehand of some hide-bound fellows, of such wretches that will extort, and gather farre more then they could do, these must be no such compa∣nions; but they must be men fit, faithfull men cho∣sen of the Corinthians themselves: for he saith, those that you shall approve by your letters, by them will I send the money. So from hence wee understand, first that there ought officers for the poore, collectors for the poore,
alwayes to bee chosen among the parties with whom they live; indeed some officers cannot bee chosen by the common people, spirituall officers cannot be chosen by them: for the people cannot chuse their Bishop; they cannot chuse their Minister: they must not, they cannot meddle with it, because it belongs not to them to be judges of gifts, and abi∣lities of the spirit; wherein they have no insight. But for temporall things, the Lord hath given them power to elect and make Officers, and the Civill Law gives them leave to chuse their Pleaders, their Phy∣sitians, and their Schoolmasters, and Officers of the like kinde. So that in this the Church hath authoritie, and power, as we see by the Apostles words. And it is with great care and conscience to be left to them, unlesse higher authority interpose, which must be hearkened unto, or else, I say, it is left to them: therefore the Apostle saith, They shall chuse, because they were knowne to them, they were not knowne to the Apostle, except it were by revelation, he knew not by a mans face, whether he were honest or no. Therefore the Corinthians were to make choice of them, and them that they chose, he would not re∣ject, and put by, but whom they should nominate, he would allow, and confirme them in their election and choise. By this we learne, that it is no small honour for a man to bee chosen a collector for the poore. It is thought of men to be a poore, and base office, but it is that place that God puts a man into, and that God and the Church trusts him withall. It is a place that is gotten by the grace of God that shines in a man, and therefore it is not to be balked, and put off, and
rejected as a matter of basenesse, but to be account∣ed a faire degree in the Church of God, as the Apostle speaks of the Deacons office which is like unto this of collection for the poore. 3. Motive. Letters of com∣mendation.But now how shall these men be commended? they must not onely be chosen, but they must be commen∣ded; by their letters, and Epistles. The Corinthians must write letters testimoniall to commend these as faithfull brethren, to the Saints at Ierusalem. The Church of God alwayes had a great care of letters te∣stimoniall, they would have no man go, or travell, without them; they would have no man go into a strange place to receive the Sacrament, but he must have a letter of testimony with him: Letters of com∣mendation have beene of ancient use in the Church of God, which are still to be honoured, and to be kept with much care.Three sorts of letters. These kinde of letters were of three sorts. 1 Letters of peace.They were either letters of peace, which were such as a man must needs have with him if he came to the King, or to the Bishop, he had still a letter of peace, that was to shew that such a man was in the peace of the Church, that he was a member of Christ, that he was a professour of the faith, that he received the Sacrament duely, that he was in the communion of the body; if he had these letters, he might come into the presence of the King, or of the Bishop, or else he might not. 2 Letters of form.And then there were letters of forme, by which the Church used to commend a man to the Presbyter, or to the people, to whom they must come with these, and by no meanes without them. A man could not travell out of his countrey, but he must
have of these letters to commend him. And then there were these letters testimoniall,3 Letters testimo∣niall. which the Apostle here speaks of, that these brethren that should be supposed faithfull, that should admi∣nister the portion that God had vouchsafed them, that they should deliver it to the full, that they should not balke a peny, nor spend of the Churches store, any more then needs must, nor stay by the way longer then need required; but that they should in all parts be faithfull dispensers, those that made conscience, and those that would give an ac∣count, and answer to God for the things they had beene trusted withall. The Church had this care of letters, because they would have no falsaries to go up and downe, no idle vagabonds, to pretend poverty, and to collogue and cozen the world, to whom they were to send for those that wanted. And the Church was also carefull to see that undoubted seale from those whom the letters were sent, that it were no counterfeit, lest there should be any deceit, any forged letters, and lest there should be any cause of trouble in the Church by unnecessary letters, that should be sent to no purpose, as many now adayes that gad about upon their pleasure, and men will send letters with a beggar to maintaine his gadding, the Church of God could not endure this, but had a speciall regard to the letters of the Saints; and took them still as so many appendixes, as so many seales, as writings applyed to their faith; they received them with as great reverence as an Angell from hea∣ven: this was the antiquitie of letters. Now a dayes they are so common indulgences, and such like things which the Pope hath set forth
for the pardon of sinnes, for the gathering of so much money in such a countrey, for the preferment of such a novice in such a place, in a strange land, they were so ordinarie,Letters and Popes Buls puc down by H. 3. as that our Land in the time of King Henry the third, quite casheered all of them, we heard no more of them since: We have had a great Sabbath, a long rest from them. It is good that these letters should be respected among friends, that there should be regard had of them: for as they do not much good, so they do much harm in the world; men should be carefull what they write, what they set their hands unto. It is the fashion now adayes, when a friend saith it, or but send it in writing to his friend, for friendship sake he will set his hand to it, that a man is a good competent schollar, when hee knows nothing of learning, one that never saluted learning from the threshold; that a man is vertuous, when he is cleane contrary. It is a thing that will be brought against many at the day of the Lord, for writing of letters vaine, and idle, and false. The Church of God heretofore had them in great estima∣tion: in the beginning of the Church, they were taken as the word of God, not that they were of the same authoritie with the word of God, but being spoken by the Church, they were taken as an appendix of the word of God. 4. Motive. Almes called grace.Againe, he gives them another reason from him∣self, and tels them that if there might be faire deal∣ing, he would go with them himselfe, if need require. And he gives their almes a glorious name here, They shall carry your grace to Ierusalem, your benefit, or grace. It is true, the word signifieth a benefit in the common sence, at large; but the Apostle speakes in
another phrase: for the phrases of Scripture, and the phrases of the Heathen must not be confounded, and mixed together: the Apostles meaning is this, that it was a grace indeed: for it was wrought in them by the grace of God, there is no man that can give a poore man a peny, but it proceeds from the grace of God. Although it may be pride, or vanity, or cu∣stome, may bring a man to do something, yet there is some sparke of grace in any man that doth any thing for Gods people, therefore the Apostle cals it not a gift, that was not sufficient to expresse it, he cals it a grace or blessing of God which could not be expressed, as he saith in 2. Cor. 9. And it proceeds from the grace of God,1 Because it pro∣ceeds from grace. whatso∣ever Gods Saints do, it comes from the grace of God. Wicked men, naturall men, they many times do the works of God for ambition, for shew, for vaine-glory: but the childe of God still, he works upon grace, the stocke of grace is the foundation of all that he doth; and the grace of God in Christ is that which moves him to do a grace to them that want, because God hath beene gracious to me, and hath redeemed my soule from death, and hell; in remem∣brance of this grace, I am raised up to do some grace to a poore man, to redeeme him from his misery, and poverty, as I am redeemed by the bloud of Christ, by the grace of God from eternall misery. Secondly,2 It is gracefull to Gods providence. because it was a thing most gracefull to God, there is nothing that graceth Gods provi∣dence more then a good almes man: for God hath left many poore people without that grace in the world, they have no meanes, nothing to betake themselves to, nothing but misery, and it is a scorne
to a great mans house to have many ragged beg∣gars belonging to it, it is a disgracefull thing: so in Gods house, we have a great number of poore, a great number of people that have nothing to live on; therefore he that is helpfull to these, he graceth Gods providence, and the government of God, and he purchaseth everlasting grace to his own soule. 3 Because it comes freely.Lastly, he cals it grace, because it comes not by constraint, but of grace: they gave it freely, and vo∣luntarily, out of their owne free heart, not of compul∣sion: this therefore ought to be a reason, and a mo∣tive to stirre up the Corinthians to it, because it was a grace, a grace that made them acceptable to God, because it graced the providence of the Lord, because the Lord respects a chearfull giver, one that gives with a free consent, without inforcement: do it therefore, it is your grace. There is nothing that will stand by you so graciously as this will: you think you are gracious with fine apparrell, that there is a great grace in rich buildings, in estimation, and great place in the world: no, your grace it stands in almes giving, that is the greatest grace in the world. And when you have reckoned up all the monuments of honour, and put them all together, they are not at all comparable to this grace of well doing. As it is said of Vespasian, that other men set up monuments of brasse, and stone, but he set up greater monuments then all the rest, that was his good doing: good deeds they are great monuments, they are more stable, and strong then Hercules pillars, then the pillar that Ab∣salom built. It is your grace to do well, therefore saith the Apostle, they shall carry your grace to Ieru∣salem, that is, your almes whereby you become gra∣cious both to God and man.
And the last reason of all, that the Apostle useth,5. Motive. That they be not found unready. is this, lest when I come the collection be to be made: the Apostle would not have them slacke, he would have them to keepe their credit, the credit of their alacritie, and chearfulnesse: for so he saith in 2. Cor. 9. When the Macedonians shall come, and finde you tardie in the matter, that you have not collected, but are then making the collection, we shall all be a∣shamed, both you, and I, so the Apostle explaines himselfe in that place. And indeed to be long in doing a good thing, is a disgrace to the action, as Sene∣cae saith, he that is long a giving, that gives late, it is as if he did not give at all, and as the Poet saith, that office, and that good deed that is delayed, and sticks long in a mans fingers, it hath no grace in it, the grace of a thing is in the quicknesse and expedition of it. Therefore the graces are painted forth ready to runne a race, that should be the nature of a benefit, of a grace, to be quicke. And therefore in the Latine all the conjugations are long, but dari, and that is short, to shew that a man should be quicke in giving, and so datum and all that come of it are short, to shew that men should be ready, and willing to run to do good things. This doth greatly condemne our backwardnesse, although I need not speake it comparatively: for per∣haps there is not any Church in the world compara∣tively, that is, more famous in good deeds, and chari∣table almes then this is, yet notwithstanding when men come to some speciall actions, they be marvel∣lous slacke, and unready, and they are hardly drawn. It is said, in the Records of the Church, that when the Statute for the poore came out first, when it was
first made a statute law, the devout men there blessed themselves, and smote their breasts, and wondred that there should come such a coldnesse of charitie, that men which before times had beene ready, and plyable, should be forced unto it now by the law: but we see every day there is a necessitie of a law for it, and there shall be every day more need; we must be constrained to do that good, that we should do out of the bowels of mercie which should be in us, we should do it frō the influence of the grace of God to us in Christ, we should do it as fellow members, we should love our owne flesh, we should do it as though we our selves were pinched with the infirmities of other men; we should give poore men that which we can spare, as freely as we give them our looks, as freely as we give them the gesture of our bodies, and the like: and we know that words and looks are not hun∣shingly drawne from us, but when we come to works of mercie, then we dreame, they come hard∣ly off, it sticks with us: but the holy Apostle tels us, there is a shame in this, when men are so backward, although they do good deeds, yet when they do them not in the firstnesse of time, and when they do not go through them with chearfulnesse, they shew themselves to be fallen backe in their love to Christ, and to his members. But I need not insist much upon this in this Congregation, which hath alway beene ready in these matters, and in this Citie the bowels of the Saints, and their necessities finde such reliefe that it gives occasion to a company of wandring folk to put them oft times to great and transcendent, and excessive collections, whereof I would have charitie to be a little shie; but when these things come that
are of extraordinarie consequence, as the undoing of our brethren, the overthrowing of their estates by fire, and such like casualties as these, and are testified to us under the hands and certificates of great men, men of place, and worth, and credit, in these things wee are not to make question, nor to be slacke or unto∣ward, for it is the voice of God that rouzeth us. And as we should be cautelous in those things that we know not; so wee should be forward, and ready in those things whereof there is a declaration made, whereof no doubt can be made. Therefore I be∣seech you, as the Lord hath inabled you, that every man would labour to maintaine in his heart the fire of charity, that it may still burne as the fire was to burne continually upon Gods altar, that your zeale to the members of Christ may still continue, that Christ may live in you by faith, by apprehending the promises, and by love, and charitie, which is the chiefe demonstration of himselfe, and his abiding in you.
The fourth Sermon. 1 COR. 16.4.5. And if it shall be worthy of my journey that I shall go with it, they shall go with me. But I will come to you when I shall passe through Macedonia: for I do passe through Macedonia. THis proposall of a collection for the poore Saints that were at Ierusalem, was a matter of great moment, and that was it that made the Apostle to stand so much, and so largely upon it: for the lives of the brethren that were there, were much indangered both by want, and by extreame persecution, but especially by reason of a famine, whereof Agabus prophesied, in Act. 11. which hap∣pened in the third or fourth yeare of Claudius Cesar: and therefore as Pompey said once, when Rome was in great lacke, and scarsitie of victuals, and he was ready to embarke in a tempestuous sea, in a dange∣rous weather, his friends counselled him by all meanes to looke to his life, and not to expose him∣selfe to the perill of the sea at that time. He answer∣ed them very valorously againe, that he must needs saile, and set forward that expedition, and that he
did contemne, and scorne his owne life, in respect of the common good, and the desire he had of the safe∣ty of those lives that he had at Rome, which were to be sustained. So the Apostle sets this forward with all his diligence, there must be a collection made for the Saints at Ierusalem, and it must be done quickly with great zeale and devotion. And therefore hee offers himselfe to the action if need so require. The way was long from Corinth to Ierusalem, they were about nine hundred or a thousand miles distant, in which way many great inconveniences, and incom∣modities might happen. The men also that were to beare it might perhaps prove unskilfull, or unfaith∣full, the treasure that was gotten, and gathered in the Church of Corinth, was great, and therefore to be so much the more regarded: these, and the like cir∣cumstances so troubled the minde of the Apostle, that he could not in few words discharge himselfe, but he useth a number of intimations to them; as be∣ing possessed with the thought and great zeale that the businesse might be fairely carried, that it might have good successe, and because the blessing of God went with him wheresoever he went; and he made no question, but his presence would secure the state of the collection, that no thiefe or pyrate should seize upon it by the way, nor no meanes should be used to intervert it; therefore he promiseth that if it be worthy his labour, if it come to such a summe as may beseeme the person of an Apostle to be sent in ambassage, and legacie about it, that then he will go, and he will give a kinde of securitie to it: for indeed as yet although it were a great treasure, that was ga∣thered at Corinth, yet the Apostle knew it not, for he
now writes but for the gathering of it: but after∣ward in his second Epistle, he gives them thanks for it. He thanks God for that unspeakable gift, that is, that summe of money which was such a masse as that he saith, the gift was meerly unspeakable, their liberalitie was so free, that it was a very munificence, a magnificent thing, as the word is: for this therefore because the charge was great, he promiseth that if need require, that his person should be there, hee would go with them, and would see the whole busi∣nesse expedite: for he was secure of this, that what∣soever he set his hand unto, the Lord would give it protection by the way that it should safely arrive at Ierusalem, if he should come to go with it. And because they had written in their letter to him, desiring him to come, and to reforme certaine abuses that were crept into their Church, as we may see by that that follows: Therefore he now answers to that part of their letter, in vers. 5. and tels them that he meanes to come, and to visit their Church, and to redresse those things that were disordered among them. But he tels them that he cannot come yet, because he had a purpose to passe through Ma∣cedonia. The occasion of which we may reade Act. 19. when he was asleepe in his bed one night, the Lord appointed that in a dreame or vision a certaine man of the Macedons, that had a Souldiers jacket like the phalanx of Macedonia, like their ordinary mili∣tarie garments not used in those countries, and he stood in such a vesture, as that any man that had seene the custome of the times, and the manner of those Nations might have knowne him to be a Ma∣cedonian; and he appeared to Paul when he was a∣sleepe
in a dreame, desiring him to come, and helpe them. Come to Macedonia, and helpe us; which Saint Paul tooke as an heavenly vision, and therefore he purposed and resolved the first thing he did to obey that vision, to go to Macedonia. And though it were farre by the bow, because Corinth was as neare or nearer to Ephesus, above halfe as neare againe as Macedon was, yet he purposed to do that, to go thi∣ther first, because he thought the Lord would have that quickly dispatched: so he tels them he will go first thither, and then he will come back to Corinth, and so he might well, for he might land at Thessa∣lonica, or at Ephesus, and round all about the coasts of Dalmatia, and Illyrium, and from thence come to Corinth which was very opportune and fit, be∣cause it stood upon the necke of the Ionian sea, that he might take shipping in any part of the countrey at the lower end of Tyrus, and so sayle for Corinth. He desires them therefore in the meane time to ex∣pect him: for now he was to go about that busines, and after he had performed this journey he would remember them, and come, and order the things that were amisse in their Church. This is the summe of the words read unto you. Now to proceed in order with them. We must first consider the Apostle supposeth that the Churches collection, and gathering at Corinth for the Saints at Ierusalem, it might come to a great fumme, or perhaps that it might faile of that summe that it might come short of his expectation, and ac∣cording to this he pronounceth, If it fall out so as I would have it; then I will go:Parts of the Text 1. so that here is a condi∣tion, and a resolution.
The condition1. Conditio. 2. Resolutio. in these words: If it be worthy. If it be a thing worthy my labour, that it may be∣seeme the person of an Apostle to attend it, and to guard it, I will go with it, that is the resolution, if it be worthy, then he promiseth the presence of his owne person, that he will imploy himselfe in that, although he could hardly be spared: for he was to plant the Church of God, and not to intend worldly things so much, and yet he was so touched with the weaknesse, and with the frailtie, and wants of his bre∣thren at Ierusalem, that he would dispence with that function for a while, to do the works of mercy. And then after in the last part of the Text he comes to a private overture, concerning their fami∣liar state. Now hee hath done with the generall, concerning the Church abroad, he comes to the par∣ticular, what he would do for them in the Church of Corinth. He saith, he will come, and see them; he will come, and visit them, and see their order, to congratulate with them; wherein they had done well, and to visit them, and reprehend them, where∣in they had done otherwise then well. And then the time when; not presently, but he would come to them after he had gone to Mace∣donia, because it was a great way about; therefore they must stay for him till that journey were finish∣ed. These are the branches of the Text. Of these in order, as God shall give assistance, and the shortnesse of the time will permit. 1 Part. The condition.And first concerning the condition that he pro∣pounds, in that he saith;
If it be worthy that I shall go. The word is taken in two sences in the Scripture, sometime it is taken for this, if it be needfull, if you thinke it needfull for me to go. But in this place by the consent of all Interpreters, it hath a greater, and higher sence, and must be taken for a matter of dig∣nitie, that is, if there be so much worth in your colle∣ction; as that it may well beseeme the legacie and ambassage of an Apostle, then I will undertake it; where, First, we are to observe a contrary passage to that which commonly fals out in the liberalitie of the world, wherein men are not to looke in the mouth of a given animall, as they say, not to num∣ber and estimate mens benefits that are given frank∣ly and freely, but to take the gift as it pleaseth the gi∣ver to bestow it: but Saint Paul seemes to intimate another thing, that the Church of God looke to be respected in their suits, and Briefes, and supplications, not with a nigardly hand, not with a perfunctory kinde of service; but the thing must be done in some state, according to a mans abilitie he should have a dignitie in the worke: for those benefits that are small and slender, they have no grace nor dignitie in them. Although it be true indeed that sometimes the poorest gift is as greatly rewarded, and respected of God, as the poore widdows mite, which she cast into the treasurie: was more regarded then all that the rich cast in, because she cast in all that she had, all her substance: But yet when men part with it hunshing∣ly, with a kinde of contradiction, and he that is worth
thousands of pounds will give but a poore peny to a generall, or common good, or a small thing which is farre inferiour, and disproportionable to the state which God hath vouchsafed him, as it is now adaies; this is a kinde of unworthy contribution, it is a col∣lection which the Apostle thinks hath no worth in it, and there is no reason that S. Paul should go with such a collection, but any vulgar man might go with such a vulgar sacrifice. If it be worthy. That is, if it come to so great a summe, that it shall be fit to maintaine the poore, to serve their turne for some length of time in a good measure; it shall then be a worke of a sweet smell, most gratefull, and acceptable to the Church of God at Ierusalem: and it shall befit me also to attend it. For otherwise the Apostle could ill be spared from that wondrous, and unwearied peregrination which he made in the world; for he went from place to place, and still was win∣ning countries to the obedience and service of his Lord, and master, he might therefore ill loose so much time as should be spent in carrying the mo∣ney from Corinth to Ierusalem, or from Ephesus: where it seemeth he now was, because many coun∣tries in the world were not yet discovered, there were many Nations that were not yet brought to the faith, and obedience of Christ; and he was sent to be a Preacher to the Gentiles, and therefore he was to preach to all the Gentiles; that he could ex∣tend himselfe unto, being (as Chrysostome saith) like unto the sunne in the firmament, that riseth in the one
part of the world, and in twenty foure houres com∣passeth all the round: such an one was the Apostle, which was sent and instituted by our Saviour, and therefore it was much for him to lose so much time as this action would require to carry it so farre as to Ierusalem; but now that the love of the brethren was so great, and their necessitie was so important and exi∣gent, that he thought it not amisse for the time to lay aside the care of the greater office, and to stoupe to this which was the lesser: for it is true indeed, the Apostle which way soever he went, he gained soules to his master, and it was all one for him, howbeit there is great difference in this, in planting of a new foundation where Christ was never heard of, and in confirming of those places where Christ had beene taught, and received, and embraced. Therefore there was some oddes, and disadvantage in this; that he should spend so much time as to go backe to Ie∣rusalem: whereas all those places were now already wonne to Christ, and he should have gone, and mar∣ched forward toward the North parts of the world; where Christ had not as yet beene heard of: and yet he sets all the care of this aside, for the present, and urgent necessitie that his brethren were in at Ierusalem; and he thinkes that the works of mercie that belong to the Saints of God; are to possesse and to take up the time of a man, rather then some higher thing. What, then the preaching of the Gospell? was not that the greatest part that belonged to his function?  why then should he leave that? seeing it was con∣trary to the rule that the Apostles themselves gave, Act. 6.2. where there was a mutiny among the
Greeks and the Hebrews, because there was a neglect of their women in the common ministration: and the Apostles to prevent such a mischiefe which was now growing among them, and to take away the viper of discention and division which now trou∣bled the Church, they made this generall rule and principle, that it was not fit that they should leave the Word of God to serve tables. Behold this rule, it bound all men, it included all the Ministers of the Church, and all the Apostles themselves; therefore the Min∣sters or Apostles should not leave the Word of God, their daily function Apostolicall, to serve tables. And yet we see the Apostle leaves the word of God, the preaching of the Gospell, and other matters of great concernment, the calling of the world to the faith of Christ, he leaves this to serve tables, that is, to carry the money that was gathered at Corinth to Ierusa∣lem, which in effect was nothing else but to serve tables. This therefore hath beene a question among Divines in all times, how farre it should be extend∣ed, and whether Saint Paul exceeded the limits or no; or whether that that he did were well or no: for some have thought, that either he forgat that rule, or else that he was not bound unto it. But this is easily answered. It is true as long as the Church of God suffers no detriment by a mans ab∣sence, no notable detriment, and so long as it is otherwise well provided, and so long as the businesse swallows up no great length of time, but that with convenient speed the party may returne to his for∣mer calling, so long the Apostles themselves were bound to intend the works of mercie, and to serve tables. It is true, the Apostle was not to leave the
Gospell, and to serve tables, because the greater work must be first intended: except there be present ne∣cessity; but in the second place, he ought to intend that, and if so be they can be joyned both together, the preaching of the word, and the serving of tables, as Saint Paul did in this action: for it is manifest they did concurre together both. If a man can do thus, it makes a more gratefull smell in the nostrils of God. As Saint Austin said, that he did not take accounts, and reckonings, because he bent his study to answer Hereticks; he carried no keyes, nor rings, to seale dai∣ly matters, and every commoditie of victuall in his house; which they used to seale with a ring, he car∣ried none of these, but he gave all the charge of them to his Steward; but (saith hee) if God should give me a vacant time, I know that this belongs to my charge too. And Synetius Bishop of Pentapolis, saith he, I am farre from condemning those Bishops that take upon them the care of orphans, and seculer poore, and of almes houses, and hospitals; I am so farre from condemning their holy actions, that I do ad∣mire at it, and much wish that my selfe were fit for both; but I know mine owne infirmitie, they can passe through them both without pollution: but if I should enter into these reckonings and summes, to take care for these things, I should lacke the whole sea, the whole Ocean could not bee sufficient to cleanse mee from the pollution I should contract thereby. And the Quinisex Councell in Cannon 35.Concil. Quini sex. Can. 35. they ordained that the Bishop should looke to the provision for the poore, either in his owne person, ei∣ther himselfe, or else by his Prelate or Archdeacon, that was under him; these things are so manifest, as
that no man of sence can deny it, but those of the new fangled opinion of late, would draw Ecclesi∣asticall persons from medling with temporall things; yet surely these things are not meerly temporall, but are ecclesiasticall, for it is the gathering, and collection of men that are spiritually minded, and it is imploy∣ed for a spirituall purpose, for the maintenance of the Church, which are the sonnes and daughters of the Spirit of God. It is true, there was somewhat more in Saint Paul, then in another man, because he was not tyed to any place, he had no fixed seat, but he might go through the world; therefore much more might hee passe such a journey, and backe againe: wheras our Bishops now have their setled residence, and their little compasse, therefore he might better do it, then other men, ordinary Bishops in that oeco∣nomicall Province which the Lord put him in trust with.Church men may tend secular affaires. But to conclude this point, the Apostle teach∣eth us that it is lawfull, for Church-men to intend these businesses which we call secular. In times past it was so, although the Laws, and Canons, and Con∣stitutions have obscured the light of poore Ecclesiasti∣call men, as that they should be no guardians of the poore, of widdows, and orphans, many have taken these to themselves to manage their lands, and pos∣sessions; yet the common tenent of the Church hath ever beene, that those things were most sure, and trusty which were put into the Churches hands, and that they might do, it is manifest by the example of the Apostle, who layes aside the care of his generall function, in preaching to all the world, and is con∣tent to negotiate for one Church, and for the poorest thing in the Church, not so much for the admini∣stration
of the Sacrament, or the preaching of the Word, but to carry a little maintenance, to carry a little victuall which one would think might as well have beene transported without his presence, as with it. But now observe the condition;The Churches sacrifice must be worthy. for so he promi∣seth all upon a condition, If the collection shall be wor∣thy, I will go with it. So we learne out of this, that the Church of God is bound to make all their sacri∣fices as worthy as they may, to have a worthinesse in them. A leane sacrifice is a shamefull kinde of sa∣crifice, it was an abhomination to God, the Lord would have the fattest, and the fairest. Therefore those that present any thing to him, except it be out of a willing minde, and proportionable to that which God hath blessed them with, it rather draws a curse, and indignation, and detriment, and losse upon them; then a benefit and help to themselves: the Lord loves a chearfull giver; and the Lord would have them that do good works either to be rich in good works, or else not to do them at all, both in respect of the quantitie, in giving so much, and to account themselves so much the more rich, by how much they have beene contributers to the poore: for this is that great support whereby we live, and it is a mystery which we cannot be perswaded of, yet it is most true. Which if we looke into it, will make any man amazed, that there is no man that thrives so well in the world, nor shall thrive, as those that are open-hearted, and bountifull handed, in good causes, and for good purposes: We see how the meanes of the Church from time to time they have beene im∣bezelled, and brought to nothing, and yet if we
looke into the fortunes and states of those men that have done it, that have thus wasted them, we shall see that hungrie beggarly povertie hath overtaken them, that they are not able to do the tenth part of that which their fathers did, that had no such bene∣fit as they have incroached to themselves. There∣fore seeing the Lord is mercifull, in blessing, and there is a secret bountie to them that are bountiful∣ly minded; It should teach a Christian man to re∣solve not to hearken to flesh, and bloud, not to hear∣ken to the contradictions of nature, not to hearken to the probabilities of reason, for they will tell a man it is good for him still to be hoording, it is good for him to save in private, to keepe all to himselfe, and by so doing, bee thinkes to gather a multitude of wealth and riches together, although indeed it be contrary: for the Lord scatters where men scrape; and where men scatter, and disperse abroad, the Lord multiplyes, and increaseth. If it be in a good cause, and if it be chearfully with a willing minde: It is therefore a Christians glory, and his care to make up the service of his God as faire as he may. It is a shamefull thing when the people of God shall have a stye for their Church, as they have in many poore places in our Land, where there is not so much as a roofe or covering to the Church, but it lyes open, ex∣posed to winde, and weather; it is a shamefull thing that the service of God should be offered up in such a base place as that. It is a shamefull thing to have the Ministers of the Gospell poorely, and basely, and beggarly respected, to have the sonnes of Ely for∣ced to begge a peece of bread, as it is 1. Sam. 3.1. Sam 3. ult. It is a shamefull thing to see the meanes of the Church
so cut downe, as that there is no hope for ever of reviving of it to the sight, and shew of men, neither is there any possibilitie that learning should thrive there, or that ever there should grow or spring any kinde of literature thence, and that any honest man∣ners should come to any purpose, these things are a shame to the world, and the goods of our common Church, which should bee faire, and goodly in the view of all the world; now they are turned to Chap∣pels of ease, to corner Churches, to Gentlemens chambers, to preaching by the fire side, to conferen∣ces in bed roomes, and such base tearmes the whole Gospell is brought unto, that there is almost no shew or similitude of any true love and charity in the poore distressed parts of this Nation. It is a com∣mon, thing (as we say) in the Churches beyond the Seas, where all things are wasted, and spoyled, and cast downe, but I would it had not come over the Sea too; it hath also invaded us, as a great canker-worme, in the state of many places of this flourishing kingdome: for although (God be thanked) there is a singular alacritie in the spirits of many men, to beautifie Churches, to make spatious and goodly Colledges, and to keepe the poore in Hospitals, and Almes-houses, these things are yet in many places to the glory of God, and the commendation of the people of God; yet in many other places, and farre more in number, there is nothing but misery, vasta∣tion, and meere desolation, and it is so desperate, as that it is almost impossible, except an extraordinary hand of God from heaven worke it, that there should be any reliefe. That which we do for Gods cause, let us do it with good will, let us do it with a
chearfull minde, to make it as neare as we can, as the Apostle saith here, , a worthy collection, a worthy sacrifice, a worthy house of prayer, a worthy Scholar, a worthy Preacher of the Word of God, a worthy maintenance for the poore, a worthy allowance for Hospitals: whatsoever we do, let us labour as much as wee can to make it worthy. God cannot abide these hungry, base, beggarly things, which Saul himselfe in the pursuit of the Amalekites kil∣led, he destroyed the weary leane creatures which were not worthy to be sacrificed, but he saved the best, and the fattest, because he knew that God in his Law required the fattest to be offered to him in sa∣crifice. And now also the Lord will have the flower, and the creame of that which he hath bestowed on men, when he cals for it: for a man to serve God with branne, when he hath bestowed flower upon him, it is an ungratefull retribution, and unjust, and it brings a plague, and a curse upon the resi∣due, upon the stocke that remaines. So much for that point, that it was the Apostles purpose upon condition, that their collection were faire, and wor∣thy, that it might be thought fit for his presence, he would go with it. Wherein we see, and may gather from the generall, that mens mindes and affections are to be stirred up with strong words, and motives, or else charitie is so cold of it selfe, that it will be brought to little or nothing. We see here the Apostle Saint Paul he begges closely, but yet very strongly, and efficaciously, for the Saints of God that were at Ierusalem: for he puts them in minde thus, that whereas he was so willing to go, and to shew himselfe in the cause, all the fault was
in them if he did not: and whereas the brethren would take it more gratefully, and more accep∣table, if he should come with it; the presence of the Apostle Paul would bee very acceptable to them. Therefore he saith, if they will looke to this, that their collection shall be worthy, that it shall beseeme his presence, then he will do it, or else hee would not. He would be loath to loose his labour, to go about a small unworthy pittance that beseemed him not; therefore hee would have it something like himselfe, something beseeming an Ambassador of Christ, that he might go as the common Provost for the people of God, to give them not onely their spirituall, but temporall food; so herein he gives them a close exhortation, and stirres up their minds to put their hands to their purses once againe; that they might augment that which before they had collected sparingly, that so it might be carried by the hand of the Apostle, as a thing which was regi∣stred, and set downe in heaven, as a thing that God tooke notice of, and which he would reward every particular giver for, and as it was a thing given for the sake of Christ; so it should bee carried, and delivered by Saint Paul, the Minister and messenger of Christ. Now after this, he comes to a familiar promise,S. Pauls promise. which he makes to them concerning his comming to Corinth; After he had dispatched the matter of the Churches in generall, hee tels them now that whereas there was a particular motion made that they would have him come to Corinth, to redresse certaine abuses which were crept into that Church, he answers them now, and tels them that he will
come; yet because he had another journey to passe, he must first go to Macedonia, yet in the meane time he was comming to them, he came to them by his letters, and by his Epistles: for this is the third time, saith he, that I am comming to you, in the se∣cond Epistle, which is meant of his Epistles: he came to them by his letters, as well as by his person; but now he tels them that he will come in person, and satisfie their desire: for the weake brethren in Co∣rinth were daily laden with such a number of He∣reticks, and Imposters, and those that were puffed up, because they thought the Apostle would not come thither. I say, the weake brethren were afraid they should bee over-quelled with the number, and strength of these their opposers, and therefore they desired the Apostle to interpose himselfe, and his au∣thoritie, that thereby things might be redressed, and reformed. I will come unto you. Concerning this comming of the Apostle, you have two conditions in this Epistle, the one as a mat∣ter of feare; the other a matter of promise: the one of threatning, the other of comfort, in 1. Cor. 4.15.16. you shall see there, that there were divers sedu∣cers in Corinth, that were secure, that the Apostle would not come among them. Therefore they dis∣persed their seducing doctrine, upon that presump∣tion that the Apostle would not come thither; they thought either that he durst not because of the mul∣titude of opposites that were there, or else that he could not because of the multitude of affaires that
imployed him, and upon this they grew impudent, and carelesse in their seducing courses: therefore saith the Apostle, Some are puffed up as though I would not come, but I will come: and when I come I will not onely know the words of them that are puffed up, but the power: for the kingdome of God consists not in speech, but in power, and might, and evidence, and effica∣cie of the holy Spirit. And then againe hee saith in the latter end of the Chapter, What will you, that I shall come to you with a rodde, or in the spirit of meek∣nesse? Both these places, as we see, make his com∣ming to be a matter of threatning, and commination. As Saint Austin saith, If thou wilt come unto us with a rodde, come not to us at all, except thou come otherwise then with a rodde, come not at all. But here now as Chrysostome saith,Chrysost. in Ep. 1. ad Cor. c. 4. ver. ult. . he speakes more gently, more calmly, and quietly, for he tels them then in an holy passion, in anger, that hee would come, and he would come to their cost, to their shame, and reproofe; but now having given them these gentle directions in all things, hee begins to returne to the disposition of a cockering, and indul∣gent father, and hee tels them that he will come by way of promise, he will come to their great com∣fort, to the reformation of the Church, but it shall be in that modestie, and meeknesse as that no man shall take himselfe to be offended. I will come. This place with divers other of like nature doth confirme unto us the necessitie of Ecclesiasticall vi∣sitation. It is needfull, I say,Ecclesiasticall Visitatin pro∣v d. that there should bee
some superiour, some stranger, and those that bee farre off, to come at some times to visit the state of every Church. And this is no devise of man, but the ordinance of God himselfe, and it is not out of a kinde of domineering, as foolish men would per∣swade themselves, which thinke that the Bishops vi∣sitation is like the visitation of God, in a plague, or pestilence, they are not ashamed thus to open their mouthes against all good order in the Church: but, I say, it is for no such end, that men should domi∣neere over the flocke of Christ, nor is it to main∣taine ambition, much lesse is it for greedinesse, and lucre, for desire of gaine or profit, there is no such thing intended by it, but for this purpose that those things that bee corrupt, and sicke in the body of Christ, should be cured, and healed, and there is manifold necessitie of this, whether wee con∣sider Necessity of ec∣cles. visitation.The slownesse of the Churches building; Or the sicklenesse and inconstancie of the affections of men; Or the malice of Sathan: Or the craft of Hereticks. Or the common condition of humane things, which unlesse they be looked unto do naturally contract those materials which make them tend to putrefaction, and corruption. 1 In regard of the slownesse of the Churches build∣ing.For in the first respect it is certaine, that the Churches of God as they be mighty massie bodies, so they are long building, long a raising, they can∣not be done with one hand, but there must be many hands set on worke, before it can bee effected or brought to any good purpose, Ioh. 2. Fortie sixe
yeares was this Temple a building, say the Iewes to Christ, and wilt thou destroy it, and raise it againe in three dayes, speaking of the materiall Temple, whereas Christ spake of the temple of his body: and we know the reason why it was so long, because it was hindred by Sanballet and Tobiah, and other adversaries, and by reason of the Iewes povertie: But, beloved, there is no Church longer setting up then the spirituall flocke, and company of Christ, to have a setled Church well ordered, and instructed in the faith, free from all superstition, and to have a true fountaine of uncorrupt doctrine, and infallible truth, to bring a Church to such a state as this, it requires oft times twise as many yeares as that comes to, and more: for it is with the Church as it is with the body of an Army, it being a great huge bodie, it moves but slowly: so the worke of the Lord in the Church it moves but slowly, there is no businesse goes forward with lesse speed then that, and in this regard Saint Paul saith to Barnabas, Let us rise, let us go to visite the brethren, wee have layed the foundation of the Churches, now let us go, and set up the walls, let us make it compleate; at the least let us looke that there be no undermy∣ning of that foundation that we have alreadie laid. The Church of God is a tender plant, it asketh a great deale of watering, a great deale of fencing, a great deale of pruning, and dressing, and therefore it had need bee helped with visitations for this purpose: for although men may say what need you bring strangers to visit us? we have sufficient men of our owne. The Corinthians might say, what need you bring Paul himselfe to Corinth, we have Mini∣sters
of our owne, what need he come? he will but intrude into another mans place, and take another mans calling out of his hands. 2 In regard of mens affections.No: the worke of visitation is most effectuall when it is done by a stranger: for although there be a sufficient Minister appointed for that place, yet men are fickle and inconstant, and can love nothing long together, they grow weary of their ordinarie Minister, but a stranger, one that comes afarre off, is admired, men are easily induced to hearken to him, all things are great, and excellent that are said from abroad, as for the gifts, and the light that men have among themselves, they be dimme after they have a while shined there. As our Lord Iesus said of Iohn Baptist, that he was once a bright candle, a bright shining light, but after he came to be eclipsed, to fall into a darke smoake, because of their darke, smokie, and fickle affections: for this therefore it is necessarie that there should bee a visiter from a∣broad, as Saint Paul here was to come from Ephesus to Corinth, because that which is among men, that which they ordinarily enjoy, they account it a base and vile thing, which they are daily conversant with; but things that are strange, and geason, are ad∣mired, and men are sooner led by them. 3 In regard of the devils malice.Againe, it is needfull that there should be a visi∣tation by Saint Paul, that he should say, Veniam, I come, because of the devils malice, because of his wiles, and sleights in the Church, as the Apostle saith, 2. Corinth. 2. we know his shifts well enough, we are not ignorant of his sleights where the word is ex∣cellent:
for saith he, as the devill hath wit in him to undermine, and destroy, so the Apostle saith, he hath a countermyning wit whereby hee is able to deale with him, and to finde him, and sift him out, and prevent him in all his plots. Sathan therefore useth in the absence of the Pastor alwayes to raise up mutinies, sects, seditions, and heresies, and new de∣vises, as the woolfe when he sees the shepheard, and his dogge absent from the flocke, then he comes, and makes havocke, and destroyes without danger or feare, and kils pell-mell, the absence of the chiefe Pastor is that which gives the devill occasion, and his presence is that which affrights him, and though the Corinthians had Ministers of their owne, yet notwithstanding their gifts were nothing comparable to the excellencies, and rare perfections that were in Saint Paul, which brought the world into admiration wheresoever he was: they had but a little rivolet, in regard of that mighty swelling River, as Chrysostome calls it, which ranne over all the banks, and could not be comprehended in any channell. And generally it is the nature of all humane things,4 From the condi∣tion of humane things. unlesse we looke to them with much dili∣gence, and care, to repaire them, they will grow presently to destruction. There is no house so cleare, but in a short time it will contract slutterie to it, un∣lesse it be kept with continuall dressing. There is no body that is so faire, and so strong, and able, but ex∣cept it be kept with exercise, and with physicke, and such meanes, it will fall by its owne weight, to sick∣nesse, and diseases, and be consumed ere a man be a∣ware:
there is nothing that can by nature consist long, without there be much care, and diligence, and art used to it; and if every thing bee so subject to prolapses, and declining; much more is the Church of God: for the Church of God hath greater ene∣mies then this body, it hath greater enemies then these houses of clay, or then these buildings that we have in the world, or then our worldly stocke that we carry about us, there is no such malice suggest∣ed, and intended, and laid against them, as there is against the Church of God. Therefore where the craft of the devill is most perpetuall, there should the watchfulnesse of the Pastor be equall, and an∣swerable unto it, that according to the divels great observant malice, there may be as much diligence used against that serpent, to crush his head when he seeks to bruise their heele. S. Paul would not go without the CointhiansBut now to conclude the Text, he saith, that hee will come, but he saith, they shall go with him to Ierusalem when hee commeth; that is, those that they had chosen as being fit men, to whose fidelitie they would commit the money; They should go with him, he would not go alone, and carry it him∣selfe. So we see by this, that the Apostles purpose was, that although hee went to Macedonia, yet if newes were carried to him, if there were any post sent to him, as indeed he was but on the other side of the Sea in Asia; if news, I say, were brought him that he must go with them, he would dispence with the other action, and intend this. We see here the Spirit of God it tyes not a man
to absolute necessities, but it gives him libertie accor∣ding to the circumstances, to use his owne discretion: for it seemeth that the collection which the Corinthi∣ans made, although it were great, yet it seemes that it was transported very quickly, and finely, or o∣therwise that Saint Paul did take it with him from Ephesus after the feast of Pentecost, and so carried it, for in these things no man can tell, nor the particu∣lar place certainly from whence this Epistle was written. Onely this is plaine, and that I will insist on, that when he should come to carry it, he would not carry the money himselfe, but he saith, that those whom they should appoint, should go with him. And so hee puts from himselfe all suspition of double dealing,S. Pauls care to avoid suspition. hee would not have them thinke that he would intervert the money, or that he would give it to some other purpose, then they intended it, or make himselfe rich of the poore mens stocke, he is carefull of this; this argued the sweetnesse, and sin∣ceritie of the Apostles minde, and it makes a rule for all that come to Apostolicall place, that deale with Apostolicall matters, to take heed that the world have no ground to conceit that any thing in this kinde sticke to their fingers, but that they may shake their hands, and their garments, and quit themselves in all causes wherein the world shall thinke they have too much interest, or that they have beene unfaithfull, and false stewards. So Chrysostome, and Saint Austin, He doth not say (saith Austin) that if the collection come to a great summe, I will carry it to Ierusalem my selfe: for then some sycophants that
were in Corinth, some Adversaries that he had there would have objected, and said, that hee meant to make himselfe the better by it. No, saith he, but those whom ye shall appoint, and put in authoritie, they shall go with me. A man must wash his hands from all bribery, and corruption, that will be in any place of God, that will be in the place of Paul, or that hath any commission from God, he must be like unto Samuel, that he may say as he did, Whose oxe have I taken, or whose asse have I taken, or who have I wronged, or defrauded in judgement? or any way in any intention, let him speake, And as Zacheus saith, I will restore him foure fold.Luk. 19 9. These men that meddle with holy things to make themselves somewhat the better, or at the least to beare their charges upon Gods stocke, and such a charge as perhaps the poore would be loath it should come to, these are false brethren, and no true Transporters of the heavenly treasure, they should be such as do that which they do for the Lords sake, and if they can disburthen, and discharge the poore of all charges, in the car∣riage, they should take it upon themselves, and do it for Religions sake. Chrysostome it seemeth was troubled with such kinde of companions in his time; for (saith he) the collection that we make for the poore, and are alway calling upon you, Give to the poore, give to them that stand in need, which (saith hee) I will never leave off, but will speake it as long as God gives me my voyce. This calling, and crying for the poore, it makes you thinke that we have a great stocke of treasure, that we feed our selves in private with, you thinke that the Priesthood lives upon this: Nay, (saith he) we defie all such cogita∣tions:
we give you the Gospell freely without any charge. And although we worke not as Saint Paul did, with our hands, yet you know that we have in∣dowments to live upon of our owne. We have so much Church-lands to maintaine us, that we abound, and we seeke not any thing from you, for our owne selves, but we seeke it for the indigent poore that are errant, and go about the streets; and for such as want upon casualtie, by reason of fire, by robbery, or by drowning, or by miscarriage in their trade; or being captivated by Infidels, or the like, we labour onely to stirre up your bountie towards them. This was the noble state of the Church in Saint Chryso∣stomes time. We are content, and satisfied with that which is our owne, what is the Churches owne now adayes? In those parts which I touched on before; There is nothing left that the Church may call her owne, except it be a poore rotten wall, except it be an old Bible, except it bee an handfull of thatch where that Bible lyes to save it, that the raine come not upon it, and so put them to new charges; as for other things, there is nothing that is her owne, but the wilde Bore out of the forrest hath almost wasted, and desolated the whole Congregation of God, and hath made them as so many vagabonds in Israel, that there is nothing but beggarly raggednesse both in the temporall, and also in the spirituall body. But it is to no purpose to complaine in a desperate con∣dition. Saint Chrysostome saith, Whosoever thinks that there is any such men in the Church, that make themselves rich, or better themselves by the col∣lections that are given to the poore, let him come forth, and shew it, let him proove it, and wee will
confesse it, and it shall appeare if these things can be proved, and the man bee convinced of them, that such a man is not onely worthy to be brought to shame, but he is worthy that ten thousand thun∣derbolts should be shot against him, he is not worthy to live, and breathe in this common ayre which hath attempted such a monstrous robbery, and invasion up∣on the people of God. To conclude all in a word, the Apostle saith con∣cerning all, for matter of giving to the poore, for matter of doctrine, for matter of manners, he saith, for all I will come. And no doubt this word veniam it had a divers tone, and sound, a different tune to the Corinthians eares; for Saint Paul had a great num∣ber of good friends in Corinth; he had also a great number of pestilent enemies: to the one this word sounded in a gentle, and sweet harmonious tune, it was certaine he came to them as friends, he came as a Saint of God, he came as an incomparable Ie∣well, he came as one that brought the blessing of God where he came, hee came as one whose feet were beautifull to bring the glad tydings of the Gospell of peace, as one that came to the salvation of their soules, as one that came to settle, and to reare up the broken towers of David, he was most acceptable to them. To others he came as welcome as water into the shippe, nay they had a great hope that he would never come there, but that his occasions would so intangle him, that hee should never set foot that way. So we see that Saint Pauls veniam, is expounded according to the contrary dispositi∣ons, and qualities of men, and accordingly it occa∣sioned
matter of joy, or sorrow in Corinth. Now if Saint Pauls comming to visite were a matter of such emphasis,  as to make his friends re∣joyce, and to cause his enemies to repine, and mur∣mure, what then shall be the veniam of the Lord Ie∣sus, the master of Saint Paul, and the master of us all; which will come, and will not tarry,Heb. 10.37. which comes unto us every day, and visites us every houre, if we had but sence to perceive it; whose footsteps are at our doores, who comes in mercie, giving us long peace, from the broyles and garboyles of warre: he comes unto us in his judgements in these unseasona∣ble seasons, threatning us with this abundance of raine, and deluges: he comes to us in the judgement of scarsitie, and want, and many kinde of defects, whereof every man complaines, and whines, and is in misery: and yet no man can tell the cause or reason why; certainly it is a steppe of the comming of the Lord Iesus, he comes also in the ratling and tumults of warre, therein the Sonne of God seemes to have girt his sword upon his thigh, as the Prophet saith, Psal. 45. And he will make head, hee will march, and go forward, and never leave the field untill his horse goeth up to the bridle in bloud, as Saint Iohn prophesieth in the Revelation. Thus the Lord comes, and draweth neare unto us, any man of wit or understanding may easily see him, and may heare the noyse of his horse heeles, as the Pro∣phet Isaiah saith, concerning the King of Babylon. But suppose he do not come thus, or that men will be deafe that they will not heare this, nor per∣ceive
it: yet there is another veniam, his comming to judgement which shall certainly be, and wee know not how soone it shall be, for these things are fore-runners, and presages of that dismall com∣ming, and that comming shall be as this veniam of Saint Paul, with acceptation to his friends, but with terrour to his enemies; the comming of Christ to them shall be more terrible then all the Armadoes, and Invasions of the world: if they were all joyned together, they are nothing comparable to the com∣ming of the Sonne of man in the clouds. To those that are perfect and just men, that waite for his comming, he saith, Behold I come, and my reward is with me, Revel. 22. Hebr. 11.5. Behold he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, saith Saint Paul. And to this the Church in an earnest eccho replyes, Yea come, and come quickly Lord Iesus: for they waite, and expect that great visitation of mankinde, when he shall come to root all the weeds out of his garden, and shall make an everlasting spring of grace, and shall settle his plants so strongly, that they shall no more be subject to extirpation. On the other side, his enemies shall have a fear∣full sentence at that veniam, the wicked men of this world, they would then give all to avoyd that fear∣full comming of the Lambe of God; and wish that he might never appeare nor come to judgement. As for the godly, they know that when their glory, When Christ which is their glory shall appeare,Col 3.4. then they shall appeare with him in glory. So the enemies of the Lord they know that when he which is judge both of the quicke, and dead shall come, that he shall passe
a sentence of judgement against them,Matth. 25. Go ye cursed into hell-fire prepared for the divell and his angels. Let therefore this sound be alway in our eares, that whether it be men, as Saint Paul that come to visit us, let that keepe us in awe; if Saint Paul say he will come, certainly it will make a man look to him∣selfe the better: for there are many men that can indure no visitation, a man that lives, and goes on in sinne, and impietie, these sacrilegious patrons, these Lords, and Ladies, that maintaine the Priests with old shoes, as the Prophet speaks, that take all his lively∣hood from him, these cannot endure to heare of a visitation, they are afraid lest their sacrilegious acts should be called in question. Although they be se∣cure enough, and carelesse in these kinde of acts; and there is no law that can take hold of them for it, yet they do not love to have the memorie of them rubbed afresh; they do not love to have themselves proposed, and traduced, they cannot endure to have other men to blaze it. There are many other simonicall contracts that are come into the Church, not by the doore, but they come ano∣ther way, they take downe the tiles as the men did for the poore man, that came to bee healed of Christ; they tooke downe the tyles of the house, and so let him downe: so there are a number of simonicall Priests that come not in by the doore, but are entred into the Church another way; they climbe in at the windowes like theeves, and robbers, and these cannot endure to be visited; if Saint Paul say hee will come, it is likely they will flee; if Paul come, they will go, they cannot
consist together in one place; because they live in sinne, and in open profession of their impenitency. Therefore it is good whatsoever a man do in this life, to thinke still that there will come a visitation upon him, and he is an happie man that can endure the visitation, although it be but the visitation of a mortall man. But when Christ shall come to visite, and to visite all the world; when he shall come with his fanne in his hand, he shall purge his floore, and gather the corne into his garner: he shall come to plucke the proud feathers of the potentates of this world, that could not be quiet and peaceable, but were still di∣sturbing each other, he shall then come and heare the cries, and lamentations of the afflicted, he shall come to redresse the cause of the fatherlesse and widdow, he shall come to remove all scandalous do∣ctrine from his Church, and to plant his owne truth there to flourish for evermore. This shall bee the great and wondrous apparition, this is that admira∣ble marching, and procession, this is that comming that shall worke wonders; this comming shall bee more terrible to the consciences of wicked men, then the comming of all the power and glory in the world, if they should come all together. Therefore let this sound in our eares, as Hierome saith, that he did alwayes thinke he heard the trumpet sound in his eares, Surgite mortui, Arise ye dead, and come to judgement. Certainly, beloved, we must looke for a visitation, either from men or from God, or from both; in the meane time we have our conscience to serve instead of a visitor. Let it therefore do it for good, for there will be a visitation; if wee do not by timely repentance meet the Lord in the way;
and intreat for mercie, and pardon; if wee do not follow the counsell of Christ, that saith, a man that goeth forth against his enemy, if he go forth with ten thousand, he will sit downe, and reckon whether he be able to go against him that hath 20000, or else he will send Ambassadors to intreat peace of him, if he be not able to match him. If we do not take the like course we shall fall into the visitation of the Lord. The Lord strengthen us, and support us, that whensoe∣ver that day comes wee may finde him come with comfort, as one that comes to reward us with abundant recom∣pence.
SERM. 5. 1 COR. 16.5, 6. But I will come unto you when I shall passe through Macedonia: for I passe through Macedonia, and perhaps I will abide with you, or else will winter with you, that you may have me along to any place whither I shall goe, for I will not see you now as I passe by. A Man that reades these things, would presently imagine that all this were true, and that all had an issue according as it is here spoken; but that is not certaine: for that which St. Paul wished, and desired, it did not alway come to passe, as he saith Rom. 15.Rom. 15. that he had a purpose to goe to Spaine, but yet St. Paul never came there: So the Prophets were uncertaine in these particulars, how God would dispose of them: for wee see in Acts 16.Acts 16. that when they were come to Bythinia, and would have preached the Gospel, the Holy Ghost would not suffer them to doe it, and when they came unto Asia-Minor, the same Spirit of God for∣bade them to preach the Gospel there: and if the
Spirit of God would interpose himselfe, to forbid the preaching of the Gospel, you may then con∣clude for other matters of lesse importance: for this Towne, or that place, the Lord would much more disturbe, and turne away their purpose: For man purposeth, but God disposeth. But howsoever, although St. Paul did not finish this journey accor∣ding to his promise here, yet the efficacy, the ver∣tue, and power of it is all one: for hee shewes what hee would have done, if God had not turned his will by necessity in calling him another way. Such things as these in the Scriptures wee oft times meet withall, and whether a man should in∣sist upon them or no, it may bee a matter of dispu∣tation; because the common people think, that no∣thing is fit to bee spoken of, but that which makes for morality, that which tends to manners, they call that onely edifying, which buildeth up in mat∣ter of life; whereas those that are seene in lear∣ning, or that are men of sense, they know that edi∣fication is as well in matters of knowledge; and there is no part of the Booke of God that is written, but it is written for our learning, to build us up, first out of our Ignorance, and then secondly to build us from wickednesse to newnesse, and holinesse of life; for the second can never bee without the first. Therefore wee must take the Scripture as it lies, and although this Text afford no great matter for manners, or conversation of life, yet the schollers of Christ, must heare his Word preached whereso∣ever it is, and make profit by it, and as long as they doe understand that either they know something which they knew not before, or that they know it
better and more soundly, and perfectly then they did before, they cannot but say, they are edified by it. The first thing then that wee are here to consi∣der is this,Parts of the Text. the maine bulke of the Text whether  this thing was performed or no; that hee saith hee would come to them when hee should passe through Macedonia. Secondly, wee are to come to the particulars of  the Text; What is Macedonia,What Macedo∣nia was. and how hee made his passage thereout, and how God furnished him, and where he stayed him in his journey. Thirdly, the purpose that hee had in staying, and  Wintring with the Corinthians;His purpose. wherein wee are to consider, that though the Apostles were sent to preach the Gospel of Christ, yet the Lord tied them not to any ill way, or to any ill weather, but he gave them place of lodging when they had time, and how, and upon whose cost the Apostle should lodge there. The fourth thing to be considered, is the end of  his lodgi there,The end. that they might carry him along on his joney; where there is another act in his journey which Christian common duty called them unto, to bring him along on his way, both to defend him, and to shew him the way, and also to carry him with a kinde of credite belonging to an Apostle. And lastly, the forme of all these things; that  hee knowes not whether these things shall bee so, or so, and therefore hee referres all to the will of God, and saith , by chance, I will doe thus, or by fortune, or (if the Lord permit) I will doe thus.
Where hee shewes, what hee would have done, what his affection did stand to; but whether the consequence of it should bee answerable or no, hee leaves it to the will of God; and indeed that which hee here promiseth, by all likelihood it never fell out: I know it is argued both wayes, but I thinke they are in the better opinion, that conclude that this purpose of the Apostle was never effected. 1. Part. That the Apostle came not to Corinth.Concerning the first part of the Text, that you may the better understand it, looke to 2 Cor. 1.16, 17, 18. And in this confidence I would have come unto you before, that you might have had a second grace, or benefit; and I would have gone by you, and passed into Macedonia; and againe, would have come from Macedonia to you, and by you have been led along, or sent along to Iudea. Marke what his purpose was, it was his intent to doe thus, but hee could not doe this; and there∣fore hee answers the Corinthians againe, which might have said unto him: What? dost thou tell us that thou wilt come, and dost thou faile of thy promise? art thou so inconstant? art thou so for∣getfull of thy selfe, and of us? Therefore it fol∣lowes in the next verse, where he answers for him∣selfe: (saith he) when I consulted of these things with my selfe; when I purposed to doe thus, did I use lightnesse? did I use inconstancy? or did I make it so that those things that I counsell, did I counsell according to the flesh, that with mee there should bee yea, yea, and nay, nay? that my yea should bee yea, and my nay, nay; observe the meaning of this, hee answers them, that when hee purposed these things, hee was not then the master of his
owne guidance in the Action; but hee was to bee lead, and directed by a Spirit that was higher then his owne: by the Spirit of God. And hee was not so resolute as fleshly men are, as to say, I will doe this, or I will doe that. His yea was not yea, and his nay, was not nay; as if he should say, I was not so peremptory as to come unto you, till I knew the will of God: as St. IamesIames 5. saith, Chap. 5. For this you ought to say, if God will, or if the Lord per∣mit: so the sense is this; That whereas I purposed to come unto you, and doe not now come, you must pardon mee, for I am not lead by my selfe, but by a higher Spirit, which hinders and inter∣vents my purposes, as it pleaseth him; for I de∣pend not upon my owne will, but upon the will of God: for if I had beene guided by my owne will, I had been with you. Then as it followes in the Text; The Lord is faithfull, for our speach to you hath not beene yea, and nay: for the Sonne of God Iesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, was not yea and nay, but yea: for all the promises of God in him, are yea, and in him are amen. As if hee should have said; You must make a difference betweene my Preaching of the Gospel, and the promises that I make as I am a man, as I am a weake man, and know not the things that are to come, I know not the things that are contingent: so I tell you this, and I tell you that, which it may bee shall not bee performed, and made good, so that I will not say, that my yea, is yea, or my nay, nay; but when I come to preach the Gospel, I am sure of those things, I know what I say, I understand my selfe, I know the foundation of truth is unmoveable; I know
that there it is not yea, and nay in Christ, but all the promises of God in him, are yea, and in him, are Amen, for ever. Thus you partly understand this: But that wee may make it a little more open, the sense of the Apostle is this; That whereas I pro∣mised you in my former Epistle to come unto you, I was so in earnest affected to this journey, that whereas I told you I would not passe by you, but would first goe to Macedonia, and then come backe to you, yet my minde was so altered, and my bowels againe were so earnest, that I determi∣ned to bee better then my word; I purposed to come to you first, and so to passe from you to Ma∣cedonia, but all this was not in my owne govern∣ment, but in the hand of God; I know not whe∣ther I shall goe, I know not how I shall be dispo∣sed of, I know not how the Lord hath laid the way for mee, I know not where hee will have mee im∣ployed; I went to preach unto all Nations the Go∣spel of Christ, but the Lord hindered mee, and would not suffer mee to preach to many of them, but bade mee hold my tongue: so I promise you now to come to Corinth, but I know not whether ever I shall come, or that this shall come to passe, therefore I would have you distinguish, and make a difference between the word of my preaching, and the word of my Promise; the word of my Prea∣ching is alway certaine, it is yea and amen; but those words that I promise as a man, they bee yea and nay as God shall dispose of them; I have not power of my selfe to order them; so this place is a plaine argument of that I said before, that St. Paul never performed this, which hee thought,
and desired, that is, to come to Corinth. Now looke to another place that makes it a lit∣tle more plaine;2. Cor. 2.1. where hee gives another reason for it; I determined (saith hee) I disposed with my selfe that I would never come in sorow to you: I would never come to you in heavinesse, but if I come, I will come in joy and cheerefulnesse: Now I un∣derstand that yee are in heavinesse, because of the letter that I wrote unto you; I wrote a letter con∣cerning the incestuous fellow, that used his fathers wife, and lived with her; and I understand that you are in heavinesse for this, and I would not therefore come unto you for this cause, because you were in sorow, although I bee glad for it that you are sorry: for it was a godly sorrow which cau∣sed repentance; but yet I would not come unto you in that state, but when you have made your peace with God, and with your selves, when you may entertaine me with cheerefulnesse, it is my purpose then to come. So both the will of God, and my will wrought together in this, for Gods will it per∣fects my will; it was Gods will that I should not come unto you, and my will is agreeable to Gods will; the Lord told mee that it was not fit for mee to come, and take you in sorrow; for the spirit of the Pastor and of his Schollers should alwayes meet in joy; they should rejoice continually as the Apostle saith: We see then it was not done. Now let us see a little the cause why it was not done;The cause why he came not. how came it to passe that the Apostle Paul was thus disturbed, and disappointed of his pur∣pose? For that you shall see, Acts 20.3.Act. 20.3. St. Paul went to Macedonia, and came through those parts,
and exhorted the brethren with much exhortati∣on, from thence he came into Grecia; and staying there three moneths, he heard say, that there was treason plotted against him; that there was a conspi∣racy against him in Asia by the Iewes; or else in some part of Grecia, the Iewes had laid wait for his life, to intercept and hinder him: Therefore hee was counselled by the company, by the body of the Apostles, those that were then companions with him, to goe backe againe to Macedonia, and from thence he came to the port Towne, to Philippi, and thence along, and never touched at Ephesus (as we shal have occasion to shew upon the next verse, if God give permission) he never touched there, but went along upon the first day, upon Easter Munday, (as wee call it) and so passed on till Pentecost, and never saw Ephesus nor Corinth more, but went to Ierusalem, and after hee was carried to Rome, and there he continued till the time of his Martyrdome. So out of this we gather, that St. Paul was twice at Macedon, once when hee planted the Church, and another time when hee came to visite the Church. The planting of the Church wee find, Act. 16.9.Acts 1.9. It is said there, that there was in the night time, a vision made to Paul, a certaine vision ap∣peared to him: for there was a man of Macedon, that stood there, and intreated him, and said unto him; Come over to Macedonia and help us. And upon this, the Text saith, that they went presently, as soone as they saw the vision, they went forward to goe to Macedon: knowing by certaine argu∣ments that the Lord had called them, there to preach the Gospel. So from Troas hee went to Sa∣mothracia,
and from thence hee went the same day to Neapolis, from thence he passed to Philippos, &c. Now in this first journey to Macedon, the Apostle was intercepted and hindred that he could not goe through as hee purposed to doe, as we finde in the story: from Philippos he passed to Appolonia, which were a company of people that were strangers, carried and planted in a strong place, in the con∣fines betweene Thrace and Macedon. From thence he came to Amphipolis, from thence to Thessalonica, where he stayed three weeks untill the Iewes per∣secuted him thence for his life; and then he came to Berea, which were most noble minded men, which examined the Scriptures, & tried daily whe∣ther those things that Paul spake were the Word of God, as we see Acts 19.Act. 19. From Berea the Iewes hun∣ted him, they came from Thessalonica with permis∣sion to take him wheresoever they could find him; therefore the brethren conveyed him from thence to Athens, and then he came to Corinth, where he stayed 18. Moneths, that was the first time of his being at Corinth, where he conversed, I say, a yeare and a halfe. At Macedon he was twice; for the se∣cond time he went, he passed almost by Dalmatia, and Illiricum, as he speaks in the Epistle to the Ro∣manes; and then hee came backe, and thought to have gone to Corinth, but newes was brought him, that the Iewes would take away his life, therefore he returned, and could not come; but hee desired the money to bee sent to him to Philippi, by Titus, which they did, and so it was carried to Ierusalem, and bestowed on the brethren. But here is some difficulty: For how could it
be that their benevolence should be put off for so long a time? a poore man must have reliefe quick∣ly, or else he perisheth; this money that was ga∣thered at Corinth, either it must be conveyed upon the sudden, or else the brethren at Ierusalem for whom it was destinate, are like to lose life, and state, and all. But for this we must understand, that the want was not so great, it was not so urgent, but that they could stay some time; and so it was almost a year indeed before he dispatched his journey in going to Macedon, and returning from Philippos, and if he receive their benevolence, and it be sent from thence, there will be time sufficient for it to relieve them at Ierusalem at the time of Pentecost. These things are needfull to be knowne, although the common people cannot brook them, because they think they edifie not, yet it is no great mat∣ter, as long as I follow the Text, I am carelesse of all censures. 2 Part. Macedonia, what.Now I come to the particulars of the Text; hee saith, hee will come to them when he shall come from Macedonia. Macedonia it is a great and large coun∣try in the North of Greece; it is now called Ronnelli, and Albania, in old time it was called Emathia, and Emonia: it is that country which is intimated to us by the name of Kittim,Macedonia, Kittim. Gen. 10.4. or Kethim: Gen. 10.4. The sons of Iavan were Kethim and Dodanim: of Doda∣nim came the inhabitants of Rhodes, or Rodanim; and of Kethim came the inhabitants of the Isles, and especially the inhabitants of Macedonia. And though Macedonia be no Isle, but a Continent, yet it is adjacent, and they were the mother of it:
and this word Kethim I stand upon the more, be∣cause the Scripture hath many ambiguities about it. In Dan. 11.Dan. 11. The ships of Kethim shall come against them: that is, against the Assyrian Kingdome, un∣der the Antiochees. In Isay 23.1.Isay. 23.1. Houle ye ships of Tarshish, for Kittim shall make good this word: that is, Alexander the great King of Macedon shall make good this word: for that which Nebuchad∣nezzar had done before him, he did in a short time after him againe: that is, to the Iland of Tyre, which was seperate from the sea by the span of two miles, or a mile and a halfe; both Nebuchadnezzar with the strong, and indefatigable labour of his men, and Alexander after him by his infinite high spirit, brought it of an Iland to be a Continent, and made themselves Lords of the place: so that where he saith, Houle yee ships of Tarshish, for Kittim shall make good this word: that is, that prophesie that I give of it. There shall come a man out of Kittim, that is, AlexanderAlexander. the great, King of Macedon, hee shall make good this that I have prophesied: this is a plaine demonstration, that Kittim is this Macedon. And in Ezek. 27.Ezek. 27. saith he, speaking of the ships of Kittim, (although the Iews alway understand it of Ciprus, yet better judgements have, and doe take it for Macedon, because there was a city built there which was called Ketiem, or Ketium: for LivieLivius. saith, that PerseusPerseus. the last King of Macedon, hee ga∣thered his people together at Ketium; and it is an easie translation of the word, (as SuidasSuidas. a learned man notes) that from Kethim comes Macedon by appendix of the syllable Ma; Makethim, Makedon, or Makethia; so the name is very natural and agree∣able
with the first Originall, Kethim. This I note, onely to shew you the congruity of these words, which we meet with oft in the Scrip∣tures. I know that Kethim is more than the City of Macedon; I know that the Macedons possessed Ita∣lie; and built a city there, and called it Kittie; but it was called Kittim of that city in Macedon; the Macedons I say possessed great part of Italie, as all the parts about Apulea and Brundis,Brundusinm. which were for a long time after called Magna Grecia, Great Greece. This is that Macedon (saith Plinie. Lib. 5. Cap. 11.) that was once the mistresse of the world. This is that which overcame Egypt,Plin l. 5. c. 11. that was Lord of Asia: this is that which wandred as far as India; namely, by the prowesse, and strength of Alexan∣der the great King of Macedon: but (saith hee) the same Macedon is fallen to a low ebbe; and shee that was the mistresse of the world, by one of our vali∣ant men Paulus Aemilius,Paulus Aemilius. was in one day sacked, and he did sell and mortgage 72. Cities of it. See (saith he) what great difference there is in the luck and fortunes of two men; Alexander the Great, and Perseus the last King of Macedon: Alexander the Great won and purchased all; Perseus the last King of Macedon, hee lost all that was won before. This is that country therefore that the Apostle pur∣posed to goe to; it was fallen from the glory of the world, and now it was come to receive the glory and Kingdome of Christ: it had lost something a∣mong the nations, but it found place to be a most constant Church: For Paul needed nothing to doe in that Church, after he had once confirmed it, as we see in many passages of his Epistles. It was the most
glorious, constant, and pure Church in the world: the Church of Macedon. We come now to the promise that hee makes to them at Corinth, they might say,3 Part. St. Pauls pro∣mise to winter at Corinth. If thou goe to Ma∣cedon, when wilt thou come to us? for this was the great and earnest desire of the Corinthians to see their Pastor; they were troubled with seducers, they were troubled with a number of ravening wolves that were crept into the flock, and they knew not how to keepe the body of Christ unparted: Some would be of Paul, some would hold with Apollo, some with Cephas, some with Christ, some with their owne fancie; therefore they desired that he would come and rectifie these disorders, which he was willing to doe, if the Lord permitted him. Now Paul promiseth them what he intended to doe in Theory, in contemplation, if God would give him leave he would come to them, and stay with them, and perhaps winter with them. I passe to Macedon, but I will stay with you. Macedon is a Church that needs no great reformation, it is enough that I vi∣sit that, and passe by it; but I will stay longer with you, because you want my presence to make some∣what good which is amisse. And for this wintering of St. Paul, the holy Ghost gives us to understand, that although of necessity the Minister of the Gospell be to apply himselfe to the word of God, especially in the prime plantation of it; yet the Lord vouchsafes unto them a kind of Sabbath, a kind of resting time. It is not for a man to expose himselfe to danger at all times, and in all places; but that liberty which the Lord hath affor∣ded to men in reason, and common nature, that li∣berty
the preachers of the Gospell may take to themselves. There is some time indeed when a man must lay downe his life when God calls him to it; but otherwise except he have a speciall command for it, a man is not to offer himselfe. The winter is an unfit time to travaile in, therefore St. Paul takes his opportunity to winter at Corinth. The snow in Thracia, the dangerous weather by the sea, the frost and cold of those countries are extream for the time that they last; these things were sufficient motives to Paul to make him take up his lodging, and his station at Corinth. Liberty allow∣ed to Preachers.So it doth give and afford liberty to all the Mi∣nisters of the Gospell, to take those opportunities which the Lord reacheth forth unto them; a man is not bound to preach when he is sick, nor he is not bound to find a Preacher in his sicknesse, but at the charge of the parish, and those that belong unto it: for there is no reason for men to trouble a sick man with whole mens businesse; for the seasons must be considered, the Lord bids the wind blow at one time, and hee bids it cease at another; he commands the raine to fall at one time, at another time the doores of heaven are stopped up. So he saith, Isay 5.Isay 5. that the clouds shall not raine; so sometimes the Preacher of the Gospell, he cannot raine, he cannot distill that which hee hath received, for want of health, or by reason of discontent, or else by reason of opposition in the world: and men must take these things well. A man might have said to Paul, What, will you spend a whole winter at Corinth? You should goe
about your masters businesse; the Lord hath sent you to preach the Gospell through the world, will you take up so much time at Corinth, to lie there idle so long? Nay, (saith he) the Lord hath given me this liberty, I may although not give indulgence to my flesh, yet I must spare my life till God call for it; and then I must not when he calls for it, but till then I must take the opportunities, as common sense and reason shall guide me. But here behold what a wintering this was;What winte∣rings S. Pauls wa. this wintering of the Apostle, it was not as other winte∣rings be; the word is borrowed from souldiers, and from shipping, when the souldiers cannot keepe in the field, by reason of the extremity of the wea∣ther; they then take up their station in some good populous towne, where they may have habitation and ability against the summer, and then be brought forth into the field to doe more service It is also ta∣ken from ships, when the sea is shut up in the winter times, the ship is pulled into the dock, till the spring come that it be brought out againe after reparati∣on; from these things is this word taken: but yet the wintering of St. Paul, it was not like that of souldiers, or the wintering of ships, for they com∣monly be both unprofitable; but the wintering of St. Paul was as profitable where he was, as his tra∣vailes could have been in other places; for indeed, souldiers cannot sight in winter, they cannot beare armes in the field, by reason of the extremity of the weather: and if they doe any thing at home, it is some small triviall thing to keep themselves in acti∣on, to raise a rampier, or sconce, or some such thing, not like unto the dangers that are abroad in the
field: so the ships in the dock, they doe nothing but stand meerely without any use; but the winte∣ring of St. Paul was not so, but it was full of action, full of profit: for in Corinth where hee wintered, if he had wintered there, and had come to effect his will and purpose, hee had been still in the Lords Vineyard, hee had been still preaching, and exhor∣ting, and going from house to house (as the fashion was then) to give comfort, and consolation to those that were afflicted, to confirme them against the stormes of persecution, to shine before them in the example of holy and good living. In this regard St. Pauls wintering was a glorious progresse; when hee rested, he ceased not; hee ceased not from his la∣bour, but still hee was full of life, and action, and as the sunne in the firmament, which cannot stand still, but is ever running his course like a mighty gi∣ant, Psal. 19.Psal. 19. So we see here a mighty difference between the word of God, and all other actions; other men, whatsoever is their profession, and trade, they must of necessity leave when their opportunity ceaseth, they can work no longer; a man cannot work by night, as our Lord Iesus saith, The night commeth when no man can worke. Although there be many that work by artificiall light, yet there are some kinde of works that will not admit of any but day light: And when the water is up, when the weather is extreame, when the water is frozen, there are many trades that cannot worke: and likewise the aire may be so intolerable, that no man can work in it; and the mist and damp may be so thick, that a man cannot work in them; but the glorious Gospell
of Christ is of a spirituall nature, it works when all things doe oppose it: when every thing is against it, the Gospell works. As the Apostle saith, Although I be bound, yet the Word of God is not bound, 2 Tim. 2.2 Tim. 2. Although I be bound, yet the Gospell of Christ is free, and it judges the judgers, and condemnes the condemners, and stands against the opposers, and re∣futes the adversaries; it is mighty and powerfull, even in the chaines of darknesse; there is nothing that can stop the light and glory of the passage of the word of God: The Minister can work when no man can work, and he can doe the parts of his cal∣ling, when every man else is silent, and is not able to proceed in that thing that hee makes profession of; for the glorious Gospell of Christ, it is the Mid∣wife of the world: the Midwife must rise at all houres in the night to attend and to bring forth babes into the world; and such a Midwife spiritually is the preaching of the Gospell, which is ready at all times, and upon all occasions, if God give strength, at all houres of the day, and all times in the night, to bring forth new creatures unto Christ, and to feed them with the spirituall and sincere milk of the Word. I will harbour, or winter with you. I, but at whose cost wilt thou winter?At whose char∣ges St. Paul wintered. upon thy owne purse, or at the charge of the Corinthians? That is a great matter nowadayes, a poore mans wintering it is a trouble to a whole city, they can hardly beare his charges, although in old time in the Primitive Church, they were so free spirited, that every man had a house for S. Paul, every man had a bed, & a chamber for him, and for his followers;
but now men are growne so hide-bound, and so base, that S. Paul himselfe might lie in the streets perhaps if he were here in person, before he should be entertained, unlesse he brought some great and strange miracle with him, or some great demonstra∣tion of the Spirit, he might lie upon the stalls, or the shop-boards, hee should hardly be entertained into their houses. Therefore it is a matter of great mo∣ment to consider, in that he saith, hee will winter with them; who shall beare his charges in his winte∣ring? You may think this to be a simple conceit, but if you marke the writings of the Apostle Paul, you shall see there is some consequence in it: marke what he saith, 1 Cor. 9.1 Cor. 9. saith he there, I was never troublesome to you, I never tooke any thing of you, nor was chargeable to you. And againe hee saith more cleerely, 1 Cor. 12.13.1 Cor. 12.13. I pray, saith he, where∣in did I baffle you, for so the word signifieth, where∣in did I baffle you above other Churches? was it in this, because I was not burthensome to you? forgive me this injury: It is an ironia, where the Apostle saith, hee was never burthensome to them, or ne∣ver tooke any thing of their purses; and by way of ironia hee desires them to forgive him that wrong, he nevertroubled them, which he doth account not a wrong, nor any man would account it a wrong, for it was a singular courtesie, for a man to abstaine from his owne right, to quit and disclaime that which was due to him, that which was his mainte∣nance: for God hath appointed that those that wait on the Altar, should live on the Altar; so those that preach the Gospel, should live on the Gospel; but the Apostle saith, he did not this, hee tooke no∣thing
from them. Now then observe, seeing St. Paul was so carefull to proove that he gave the Co∣rinthians a Gospel freely without charge, and now he saith, he will lodge with them all the winter: it argueth that St. Paul lodged upon his owne cost, and not at their cost and charge, although perhaps there were many faithfull men in Corinth that would intreat him, yet hee disbursed the charges his owne selfe. But some will say,  how could this come to passe, how was this done? Hee gives the reason in 2 Cor. 11.  I robbed saith he other Churches to doe you service. When I came to Macedon, I found such free,2 Cor. 11. such generous and high spirits, that they denied mee nothing that I would have, they furnished him with money in abundance, that he saith, he robbed them, he took so much of them. I robbed other Churches to doe you service, he had therefore a stock with him, where∣by hee was able to maintaine himselfe at Corinth, and not be chargeable to them. So much of that point. Now to make some Application of it. It is cer∣taine that the Messengers of Christ ought to bee maintained wheresoever they come, if they can proove, that they come in a good cause, and upon necessity; hee is no member of Christ that will not receive them, but withall they must indeavour to come as Paul did, not to trouble them, nor bee chargeable to them. If they see the place cannot brooke it, if the disposition of men bee churlish, they ought not to impose it upon them, nor to work upon them too much, but to take that thank∣fully
that comes from them willingly, and if no∣thing come, they must sit downe content with no∣thing: As St. BernardS. Bern. speaks upon this place (saith he) St. Pauls wintering was a small matter, he had a small retinue, his company was few; a meane lodging would content him, a poore thin diet would suffice him: but saith he, if there should an Abbot goe to such a place, he would bring a famine after him, hee goes with such great equipage, and with such pompous company that men could not possible without a great burthen entertaine such a creature. But St. Paul was of another minde, hee came with such a mediocrity that hee is content with a small matter, a little thing served his turne; hee served the Lord with fasting oft, with much prayer, he preached oft, hee watched oft, he was not one that sought varieties, or dainties, but a small matter for his Wintering would doe it; therefore he saith, considering that they knew his manner of fare, and diet, hee was so bold, and presumed that they were willing to entertaine him, as being one that was no devourer, but was content with what∣soever came to hand. 2. Part. The end of Pauls lodging at Corinth.The next thing that followes in the Text, is the end, wherefore the Apostle saith, hee would lodge with them, or winter with them; the end is be∣cause hee would bee led by them wheresoever hee should goe, by their meanes he would be conducted on the way. It is certaine, this was not the prime cause that St. Paul would winter at Corinth; the chiefe cause was to reforme disorders, but he like a gracious, and loving father conceales that, hee meanes to doe that with a gentle hand, with a silent
passage, he doth not tell them that he will come to correct things amisse, to reforme them, to take the rod into his hand, to domineere over their faith, as he saith, 2 Cor. 1. ult.2. Cor. 1. ult. hee will not come in such a style, in such a manner as that, but hee will come as one friend comes to another, as friends when they part from a place, the common company ride so ma∣ny miles with him that is to take a journey; so the Apostle saith, hee will come for that purpose, to be guided and lead along the way by them. So wee see the courtesie of conducting,Accōpanying Preachers in their journey, ancient. and gui∣ding the Ministers of the Gospel in their way, it is an ancient and honourable custome; and though these ill-favourd, deformed times, have brought all things to nothing, yet notwithstanding where it may bee conveniently, and handsomely done, the thing is well-pleasing to God to accompany those that goe in the way of their calling, or in way of necessity; it is a thing that the Lord looks for, and it is a thing that by this example here, he commands to the Churches. That you may guide me in my way. They might say;  Is it not enough for us to entertaine you at Corinth, and to keepe you a long time there but wee must goe with you, wee must spend our times and meanes to goe, and guide you along the way? No, saith the Apostle,  I presume so much of your friendship, and favour in Christ, that you will carry me along on my way, that you will bee my Convoy; and that for three reasons.3. Reasons of it. First, in respect of defence. Secondly, in respect of knowledge, for the discer∣ning
of the way which he knew not before. And lastly, in respect of the honour belonging to an Ambassadour of Christ. 1. For defence.First, in respect of defence, the Apostle was a lone man, and he had many enemies that beset him on every side: the wicked Iewes laid waite for him, and if those had wanted, suppose there had beene none of them, yet there were a number of peevish Grecians which lay in the streets, and in the passa∣ges by the way, that would have made a booty of the poore Apostle; therefore as hee saith after in the Chapter, that they shall conduct Timothy, that they should keepe him safe; so for himselfe he de∣sires their conduct for his safety: by reason it was not seemely, nor yet safe for a man to goe alone. But what, was not Paul secure that hee should not bee hurt, as well as when hee was in the barba∣rous Countrey? and the Viper could not hurt him, as wee see afterward, the Viper fell off, and hurt him not: and if a Viper could not hurt him, what should he feare a thiefe for? For answer to this God would have us to take, and to use second causes; we tempt the Lord if wee neglect the meanes that may bee used for our de∣fence: the Lord had appointed that the company and society of men should daunt those kinde of thieves, those hedge-creepers, those waiters of the Iewes, such traytors that lay in the way; the Lord appoin∣ted that they should bee disappointed by the com∣pany that should attend Paul, therefore the Lord would have him take this course, and not goe a∣lone, and unprovided; for that had beene a temp∣ting of God, to forsake the meanes which he had
sanctified for that purpose, therefore hee saith, you shall convoy mee when I am to goe abroad, when the Spring shall open it selfe and the Winter bee past, that I shall take my journey, and passe through the world, which I must as long as the Lord shall spinne out the threed of my life; then you shall convoy mee to some place that you know, where you shall commit mee to some other convoyes, so still men were to leade him along for matter of defence. Secondly, for direction to shew him the way:2. To shew him the way. for the Apostle although hee knew all spirituall things, yet hee knew not experimentally the things of the world, untill such time as he had seen them, therefore hee would not dwell in those places that were unknowne to him, except hee were put on it of necessity; and then it was necessary for him to have a guide, how shall I do this without a guide, saith the Eunuch to Philip, in a matter spirituall; so in temporall things a man cannot know without expe∣rience, and the Apostle had no time to lose, and hee was carefull to spend that time hee had in the best manner, and to bee a wandring starre, a wandring spirit, it is a shamefull thing; therefore hee will have them to guide him, and to conduct him on his way. And lastly, for the pompe,3. For honour. and honour belonging to an Apostle, it is a shamefull thing for an Am∣bassador of Christ to be seene alone, to goe without company: Wee see when there is any Ambassador comes, we still send to meet him in the way, and to bring him along with honour. And in the time of Popery when there came any Cardinall into Eng∣land,
the fashion was for the great Lords, and Pre∣lats to meet them at the Sea-side, and to send so many Mules, and sumpters, and such cost as would now grieve the world to looke upon, men are growne so penurious: but certainely in former time there was never any man of worth came to any place, but there was an honourable conduction of him: a company sent to bring him along, to shew that he was welcome to the place whither he was come. This is that which the Apostle would have, hee would have them beare him company, that hee might not goe as a common vulgar fel∣low, but as an Apostle, and Ambassador of Christ, and that hee might be brought along by their Mi∣nisters. Wee see therefore, how farre wee are out of order in our Church now adayes, wee are growne so hungry, and so peevish, and so carelesse that we disdaine, and neglect those that we should respect; that as in the later times of Popery, and I doubt it is not much better now, they made mockeries of them as they went in the street, they cast Libells, they curtailed their animalls as they went, and such like disgraces; perhaps it was because they were not like St. Paul, but the Lord will bee Judge be∣tweene them: for it is not the conceit of men that must carry it in these things, but the breast of God himselfe: and certainely they are wretched and wofull persons, that will offer, although the man that come bee an Heretique, yet if hee come in the Name of Christ, nay although hee come not for Christ but against him, yet the people of God are not to attempt any outrage against him, they must
not seeke to disgrace, and defame him or insult o∣ver him, but to performe the works of nature to every man: for where there is no nature, there can be no grace: the worke of nature is this, to enter∣taine strangers. But suppose hee be not for Christ, but against him? Wee may not say, God-speed to his wicked actions when wee know it, but so long as wee doe not know it, we must not disgrace, or defame him, as the custome is now in these later times of the world. Surely I make no question, but if St. Paul were here among us in person, except hee could well prove himselfe to be Paul, he should be torne with the malicious speeches of men, and with mocks, and scoffes, with the intemperate abusive be∣haviour, and ill-manners of all envious natures, and sausie manners in the world. And for con∣duct, it may be, he should have a company of boyes to follow him, and to cast stones at him, and to mocke him as the boyes mocked Elisha, and called him Bald-pate, bald-pate; but hee brought two Beares foorth of the Wood, and destroyed fourty two of them. Let us take heed in these cases what wee doe: let us strive to bee as humane, and courteous as wee can in all the points of Christian duty: let us seeke to shew our love even to our enemies, and as long as we doe not know them to bee enemies of God, and of Christ, so long let us give them all kinde of furtherance, and approbation, and good countenance: let us entertaine them at our charge, and conduct them foorth; especially when wee know that a man is set for the building up of the Kingdome of
God, and for preaching of the name of Christ. 5 Part. The forme of speech.Now to conclude all (because the time is past) with the forme of speech that the Apostle useth; that is, perhaps; or peradventure: Perhaps I will come and winter with you. He that saith perhaps, he doth not speak certainly. It is a wondrous thing that the Apostle should say, perhaps, or it may chance, or it may fortune, or the like; when as hee knew that there is no chance, nor no fortune, but that all is ruled by the Divine providence. And if the po∣stle say so, then we may; but wee are taught not to use it;Aug. as Austin saith, it repents me (saith hee) that ever I named fortune, seeing therefore that all things are ruled by the providence of God, that not so much as a sparrow can fall to the ground, nor so much as a haire of our head. When a man combs his head, there is not a haire that falls down, but it is in the sight, and knowledge, and providence of God; how then can the Apostle name fortune, and say perchance I will doe this? How the Apo∣stle saith per∣chance.But you must understand that the Apostle speaks not this as a man that was Atheistically minded, to doubt of Gods providence, but as one doubting of the event of the thing; he knew his owne will, but he did not know Gods will; he speaks therefore cer∣tainely of himselfe, and saith, I will come: : that is, if the Lord give me leave: but because he knew not whether he would give him leave or no, there∣fore he saith, peradventure, or perhaps I will come. So although there be no such thing as fortune, to speake the truth, that governes any thing; the pro∣vidence of God rules all; yet because we are igno∣rant what God will doe, as we say all, it is the ig∣norance
of the cause that brought the name of for∣tune, for of it selfe it is nothing; but because wee know not what there is to come hereafter, the hid∣den things are reserved to God: therefore wee so moderate our selves with this kind of speech, and say, perhaps this shall be, with ifs, and ands, and con∣ditions, because wee can set nothing downe abso∣lutely. This was the goodly and glorious spirit of the Apostle, hee still yeelds himselfe to the direction of God, and hee would doe nothing till hee saw Gods command for it, and his approbation of it: for he was still ruled with this, , perhaps I will doe thus, or perhaps I shall not doe thus; for I serve not my owne flesh, I am not my owne servant, but I am the servant of God. Thus farre I have troubled you with this dis∣course, which the common people take no affection, or liking to: but those that are understanding men in the Church of Christ, they know that these things also must be stood upon as well as others. The spi∣rit of the Apostle is to be imitated of us, in that hee assures himselfe of all kindnesse, and comfort from his schollers the Corinthians, and presumes that as he was willing to come to them, so he knows that they were as willing to receive him. This spirit should be in all christians, to surmise no bad thing in any man; and although a man see a cloud in the face, and brow of a man, yet still to perswade him∣selfe the best of gentlenesse and kindnesse in him; this is the true temper of the child of God. St. Paul knows hee may be bold to say he will come to Co∣rinth, and hee knows that they will be as willing
to receive him, and to convey him againe: it is a sweet harmony where these things agree together. Now in these latter times, there is nothing but striving, and pushing about common, and meere necessary things; If poore St. Paul were now to passe in England, he must spend a great deale of his owne meanes to get in his tythes, or else hee could not have them; there is such seeking every day to undermine, and to defraud by base contracts, and se∣cret leases, and one thing or other, that would suck the bloud of St. Paul, and make him that he should not be able to pay for his wintering. But the chil∣dren of God are of another mind, and those few that be among Gods people, they be content to winter, and to summer the Preachers of the Gospell, to give them all approbation and content, that the Gospell may proceed, and not be hindered by the malice of men. This is the goodly disposition of the Saints; and they that doe thus, the peace of God, and the glory of Israel shall be with them; and if they give but a cup of cold water in the name of a Prophet, they shall not lose their reward, but shall receive the re∣ward of a Prophet in the day of reward, which the Lord grant us all. FINIS.
SERM. 6. 1. COR. 16.8, 9. But I will stay at Ephesus till Pentecost, for there is a great doore opened to me and a mighty, and there are many adversaries. SAith the Wise man in the Pro∣verbs, Man may purpose, but it is in God to dispose, and governe that purpose: for these purposes of S. Paul, as it seemes by all likeli∣hood, they never came to take effect, and that made him in the former verse to qualifie his speech with , it may chance, or perhaps I will come to you, and if the Lord permit, I will doe thus, or thus: for as it is the phrase of the faithfull never to be peremptory in any of these contingent things of this world, to say this I will doe, and that I will doe without li∣mitation: So S. Paul gives us here the same example in himselfe, that hee was not certaine of his owne actions; he was not sure how God would dispose of him: and so being not the Lord and Master of his journeyes, and intendiments: but resting still at the disposall of God, he seasons his speech with this gra∣cious qualification; and saith, if God permit, if God
will have it so, I will doe it, for the will of God is that unknowne, and hidden cause of causes which must be fulfilled. Whatsoever men imagine, or wish, or desire, yet if it be not according to Gods will, it shall never stand:Iam. 4. therefore as S. Iames saith, Chap. 4. Woe be to you that say this yeare, and the next yeare, we will goe to such a Citie and dwell there, and traffique there, and yet you know not whether ye shall live till to morrow: For this you ought to say, If God will, and if the Lord permit, and if we live we will doe thus or thus; shewing unto us how the life of a Christian man ought ever to hang before him; still to be in anxiety in this world; because we have no certaine dwelling here, but we expect an abiding place hereafter. The Apostle therefore hath taught us by his gracious example, that all these things that may be so, or so; wee should not grow to any confidence in them, but wee should referre all to the will of God; that governes and guides us, and all the parts of the world, according to his secret judgement, and coun∣sell, and whose will can never be sounded till it be effectuate in the world. For when wee see things come to passe, we understand that it was Gods will they should be so; but till they come to passe in particular, we cannot dive into it. The will of God it must be, that Cynosura, that load-starre that must guide the barke amidst the sea of this world; It must be as the cloud about the Arke of God, when the Arke was to remove that removed, and it never stirred till the cloud removed before, and the mo∣ving of the cloud caused the moving of the Ark, and the staying of the cloud caused the staying of the Ark: still as the cloud carried it selfe, so was the Ark
demeaned; so should our heart and life be, which is the Arke of God, the temple of the holy Ghost; in which God vouchsafeth to dwell, we should not of∣fer to presume upon any thing further than the will of God is; but to yeeld our selves in all things, and to say as our Lord and Saviour teacheth us, in that most holy Prayer, Thy will be done, not mine,Math. 6. but thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. It seems there∣fore that it was not the wil of God, although it were the wil of Paul; though he had a will to come to Co∣rinth, to stay with them, and to winter there, as he had said before, yet God had another purpose, wch made the Apostle speak in these doubtfull termes; for by the relation of S. Luke, which he makes in Act. 20.Acts 20. and by likelihood of all circumstances in the Acts of the Apostles, the Apostle Paul never came at Ephe∣sus any more, but wrote this Epistle from Philippi a Citie in the North of Macedonia. And he excuseth himselfe in the second Epistle, that hee could not come to Corinth, as he intended; and hee gives the reasons of it. Now that I may proceed in order,Parts of the text. and so as your memories and understandings may goe along in the parcells of the Text; we will consider here, First, a resolution and purpose that the Apostle had. And then the reasons and arguments to con∣firme that. The resolution that hee had was this, to stay at Ephesus till Whitsontide, till Pentecost. The reason of it why? because a great doore was open to him, that is, a large and faire oportunity for the winning of soules to God. And besides, that
there were many adversaries, among whom hee should get great glory to God by the confusion of the adverse power, by the light and glory of the Go∣spell of Christ. In the first part the resolution, we are to consider two things. First, where the Apostle was, when he wrote this Epistle, because hee saith hee will stay at Ephesus; therefore it seemeth that hee was now there, and that he wrote from that place to the Corinthians. Secondly, we are to consider also the time that he had in his resolution, and purpose how long hee would stay there, I will stay at Ephesus till the day of Pentecost, till the feast of Pentecost, that is, till such time come that he might saile from Ephesus to Ie∣rusalem, and get thither by Pentecost: for so I must needs understand these words: for the Apostles purpose was, not to be at Ephesus at Pentecost: for so he should have lost his occasion and oportunity. His occasion was then to be at Ierusalem, because of the great concourse and assembly of people, that ga∣thered together to keepe the feast, and to offer up their sacrifice, and there as Peter, he was to launch into the deepe, where the Sea was deepe, and where there was aboundance of fish, there to become a fisher of men; so the summe of his resolution was this, I will stay at Ephesus till Pentecost; that is, if the Lord further my desires, I will stay at that Citie, till I shall have sufficient leasure to goe to Ierusa∣lem, and to be there at Pentecost: that was his in∣tention to be at Ierusalem, that was the place of his great victory. The second part of the text, is his reasons inducing
him to stay at Ephesus; till such time as hee might get to Ierusalem by Pentecost: the reason is, because a doore is opened to me. Where we are, First, to consider what is meant by this doore. Secondly, who opened it: he doth not say, I have opened a doore; but it is opened to my hand, that is, God hath opened a doore. Thirdly, the quality of this doore, a great doore, and effectuall, and a powerfull one. And lastly, the noble spirit that he had to under∣take the battaile, and skirmish against the enemies; The adversaries are many; a man would think that therefore hee should not goe, because there were many enemies: Who would thrust himselfe into the hands of his enemies? but the spirit of God was most noble in the Apostle, and hee made that one motive or reason, that because there were many adversaries, therefore hee would goe to confront them all, and to out-face the falshood, and prevari∣cation of the superstitious Iewes; and to plant the Go∣spell of Christ, the word of truth in the inheritance of Christ, which hee had bought with his owne bloud; maugre the devill, and all adverse powers whatsoever. These are the reasons to stay him at Ephesus, because there was an effectuall doore. Now whether the doore were opened at Ephesus, or at Ierusalem, it is a matter that I greatly make qustion of, which I shall come in time to speake of; for as yet I think that all the Writers upon this place are deceived: for they think that this doore was at Ephesus, and that the Apostle had a great and faire occasion there; but it cannot be that the Apostle should settle his thoughts there: his ayme was at
the greatest and fairest; so that the doore must be at Ierusalem; as after we shall prove by some argu∣ments, such as God shall suggest; of these things briefly, and in order, as the shortnesse of the time will permit. Where S. Paul ws when hee wrote this Epistle.Concerning the first point, where Saint Paul was when hee wrote this Epistle: for it seemes to him that reades that hee was now at Ephesus, and yet as I said before, and according to the Story, it is certaine that hee was not there, now when hee wrote these things; but hee was at Philippi, and so the subscription it selfe seemes to signifie: But here mee thinks I heare one of those supersilious men; that will understand no more than they list themselves; that will confine the Ministers in the preaching of the Gospell:  mee thinks I heare him move a question, what should wee doe hearing of an idle discourse concerning the Apostles being where he was, and in what place when this Epistle was written? What is this to duty? what is this to the building of us up in faith? so the speech runnes among such kind of people. Whereunto I answer, That there is nothing that is more materiall to a wise Christian, to those that will understand any thing; then to know the order of times, and the Chronologie of Scripture, it is as deepe, and as profound, and  necessary, and as com∣fortable a matter as any things in the world: next to the points of salvation and justification, there is nothing that delights a man more than the order of time and place; which i i be not set downe no∣tably: there is no History so excellens, but it my seeme a fable, and a tale; if it have not constantly
the time and place adjoyned, and these men must understand, that if they think it is to no purpose to discourse of these things, that then the Church of God hath beene in a great, and a long error: Is it no matter to know where S. Paul wrote this Epistle, whether at Ephesus, or at Philippi, and is it so great a matter to know whether Peter were at Rome? and yet we know what a strong foundation is layd upon that, what great building there is upon it, the whole primacie of the Apostolike See, and the priority of all Churches is built upon this, whether Peter were at Rome? And the Church of God hath beene alway inquisitive to know the passages of the providence of God, and of his government in the world; in so much that concerning the building of the Temple, there is an exact account of the yeares set downe. From the comming out of Egypt to the building of the Temple; there is an exact number of the yeares set downe, and divers and sundry Records in the Scriptures: there is nothing more common and familiar then this is. Therefore for the answer to this question, I say, it may justly be doubted whe∣ther Paul were at Ephesus, nay, we may rather con∣clude, that he was not there when hee wrote this Epistle; for although there be something that per∣swades to it, as Chrysostome,Chrysost. and after him Cal∣vin,Calvin. and divers of the later Interpreters hold it, be∣cause he saith he will stay at Ephesus, that therefore he was there. And againe there is another reason, in the salu∣tation at the latterend, ver. 18.Ver. 18. The Churches of Asia salute you: Now Ephesus is in Asia, and Philippi is in Europe, in Macedonia; it seemes therefore that hee
wrote the salutation from the place where he was, and he tells them, the Churches of Asia salute them, therfore he was in Asia, & by consequence at Ephe∣sus; for either he must be at Philippi, or at Ephesus: for there is no third place that can be imagined. But for this, first it followeth not, that, because he saith he will stay at Ephesus, that therfore he was there, for he had it onely in resolution; he was de∣termined to goe now, and he was now to embarke at Philippi, and so to saile to Ephesus; but he under∣standing that there was treason layd for him in the way, he durst not come there; hee did not goe by the way of Asia: but he came another way. And for that he saith, the Churches of Asia salute you, that might be also upon the remembrance of his late comming from Ephesus; or by the letters that hee received from them: hee received a letter from Ephesus, wherein the Churches of Asia saluted the Church of Corinth: so that neither of these doe prove that he was at Ephesus when hee wrote this Epistle. It is likely therefore that he was at Philippi a Citie in the North part of Macedonia, as it might be in the North part of England; and so to come along the shore as farre as the great Citie: that this is so, and that this Epistle was written from Philippi, the subscription makes it manifest, For, saith hee there, it was written from Philippi, and sent by Stephanas and Fortunatus; and al∣though inded these subscriptions bee oft times faulty, yet in this there was never any that durst move or make any contradiction against it. BezaBeza. whose judgement I esteeme above all men in these cases, hee holds for certaine, that it must needs be
written from Philippi; so then the manner of this journey that S. Paul purposed, it was hindered by the treachery of the Iewes: who hearing that Paul was in Grecia in Macedonia, they layd wait for him in the chiefe parts of Asia; and as they heard that Demetrius and his fellowes had wrought him a mis∣chiefe in Ephesus, when they had like to have slain him: therefore they entered into Ephesus, and by treason lay in wait to kill him, which when Paul understood, the brethren gave him counsell. After he had spent three moneths in Grecia, that is, in the parts of Aeolia, and those parts adjoyning to Ma∣cedonia; they desired him that hee would not goe to Corinth from Ephesus; but returne back againe by Philippi, and so to Macedon. In Act. 20.3.Act. 20 3. Luke doth discourse plainly of it, the Apostles advice was to goe back againe through Macedon, and so taking ship at Philippi, which is the uttermost Citie of Ma∣cedon; and there having received the almes which was contributed in the Church of Corinth in great abundance: he did addresse himselfe to Ierusalem, not comming at Ephesus, but sayling by it: as wee see Acts 20.17.Act. 20.17. he purposed to sayle into Asia, but not to come at Ephesus, but to sayle by it; and when he came to Miletus, which is about three or foure leagues from Ephesus, he stay'd there, be∣cause it was a place that was more private: and be∣cause the Iews could not so soone have intelligence that hee was there. From thence he sent a Boat to Ephesus, to entreat the Elders and Seniours to come thither to him; and in Acts 20. we read of his con∣versing with them, they tooke the Communion to∣gether, and hee gave them notice and knowledge,
that there were Wolves crept into the Church of God: and he told them also what their duty was, to watch as good Bishops, as good Pastors to the flock, over which Christ had made them over-seers: and hee told them that they should never see his face any more. So this was the last journey that ever S. Paul had in the world: for going from Philippi he sayled by Ephesus, he came not at it, and from Ephe∣sus, that is, from the parts about Ephesus, hee went along to Tyre; and from thence he came to Cesarea, and from Cesarea to Ierusalem. And when he came thither, hee entred into a vow according to the di∣rection of the Apostle S. Iames, and the rest of the Elders at Ierusalem; and then the Iewes set upon him, and tooke him in the Temple, and brought him to the barre: and there hee made three or foure Apologies for himselfe, and when hee saw that they were cruelly and bloudily set to take away his life, hee appealed from them to Caesar the Emperour at Rome: being very neere 2000. miles off, and by this meanes he saved his life from the cruelty of the Iewes, and gained many people in Rome, and in Cesars house, to the doctrine of Christ. So that S. Paul was henceforth a prisoner, but the word God was not bound, but that ranne swiftly and wonne ma∣ny to the credit and faith of the Gospell: howbeit, he being in bonds, and being a prisoner, hee could not take his scope to see the Countries as before, but he lay a prisoner in Rome untill the last yeare of Nero,Paul beheaded in the lst year of Nero. in which time he was beheaded in the latter end of the Emperour Nero; as all Historians agree. So much of that point, I will stay at Ephesus, that is, if God give me that I have purposed, that it may be
effected; that I shall get to Ephesus, and have liber∣ty and scope peaceably to be there, I will stay there till I can get a convenient oportunity, to goe to Ierusalem to be there about Pentecost, but because in the meane time he heard of another thing, that the Iewes had laid wait for him, that they had beset the Creeks and Ports about Corinth, and other parts of Greece; and that they had entred into Ephe∣sus, and into divers strong parts of Asia, where they thought that S. Paul would goe by land. Therefore the Apostle takes that meanes that God had set apart, and defeats them, and comes not at Ephesus, but went away by Sea, and came safe to Ierusalem, where he offered up his last service to God, I meane the service to the Saints, which was the gift and contribution which the Church of Corinth sent; and he stood a true professour of the faith before Felix, and before Festus, and before the Presidents, and before Bernice, and before Herod, and after that he was cast in prison, hee was taken prisoner, and sent by a Captaine to Rome to the Emperour. Now for the Place, where he saith he will abide, we are a little to take notice of that. I will stay at Ephesus. This Ephesus which at this day is called Fesome,Ephesus what. a Citie in Turkie in Euonia, in the lesser Asia, which is watered with the river Catristell; it was a famous and noble place in respect of the great riches, and the great concourse of all Navigators and Merchants thither. It was famous also for the Temple of Diana, which although it were burned before by that wic∣ked Impe Diostrotus; yet it was reedified again by the Kings of Asia, and was made the goodliest place
in the world, where there was also the shrine of Iupiter, and the shrine of Diana, which came from heaven: as the vaine Inhabitants imagine. This place was famous for Witchcraft, and they had al∣so certaine Letters, whereby they could bind, and loose, and hee that had those Letters about him, they thought him able to worke wonders where∣soever he went. In summe, this Ephesus was a place where the devill had set his throne by Magick, and by all kinde of licentiousnesse, and loosenesse, by most abominable idolatry. Great is Diana of the Ephesians, great is Diana of the Ephesians. The devill had not such a court againe under heaven, as he had there: for neere unto it was the Oracle Branchyde,Branchyde. which was the greatest wonder one of them in the world, that the devill should fore-tell things to come, and that he should speake out of a stone, and although that at DelphosDelphos. in Grecia were more famous, be∣cause the Grecians were much inamoured of their owne land, yet the Oracle of Branchyde was more true, and infallible in the prediction of events; then the other was; such a place was this, which the Apostle Paul had a purpose to abide in: For indeed (as ChrysostomeChrysost. well observes,) there is no such foo∣ting for Christ, as where the devill hath made his stay before: for when the strong man keepes the house, all things are in quiet, the devill is compared to the strong man, all things were in quiet at Ephesus, and there was never any uprore till S. Paul came there, and when hee came once to conjure the Conjurer, and to over-rule the devill, and to pull downe the Shrines and Images, and to make Diana, and the Silver-smiths that wrought about her, to be of little
account: then all the Citie is in a stirre, and in an uprore. So here wee see the singular spirit of the Apostle, and that spirit that should be in all the Mini∣sters of the Gospell, to settle themselves where the devill is most rampant, and raging, and not to feare danger, not to feare his cloven foot, but to settle themselves in his habitation, that the stronger man may cast out the strong man: for as Christ saith, when the strong man possesseth the house, all things are quiet, but when a stronger then he comes, hee disrobes him, he puts him out of his harnesse, and he binds him, and casts him out of his house, and so takes the house into his owne possession. So much of that, of the place. Now for the time, how long hee will stay;Part 2. The time. that is, till Pentecost: that is, I will stay there that I may have dayes enow to sayle to, and arive at Ierusalem by them; what this Pentecost is, it seemes not great∣ly materiall to enquire, because every man thinks he hath the knowledge of it. But if you should see the diversity of Writers, and Interpreters, you would wonder to see so much question about a thing that seemes so out of question. For Erasmus and some others think, that it signifies nothing but fifty dayes, that S. Paul writ at a certaine time of the yeare, not alluding to this, that is, that hee had no reference to this feast of Pentecost, but onely that he purposed to stay fifty dayes at Ephesus, and then to journey to Ierusalem; But this cannot be: for the Article . plainly proves, that it was that feast, that Pentecost, that is, that famous feast of the Iewes. Others move the question whether it were the Christian Pentecost, or the Iewish Pentecost,
for they will have the Christian Pentecost as soone as the holy Ghost came downe, that it was kept ever after presently upon that day, wherein I see many, and great Writers and Interpreters, doe much differ: and I suppose indeed it is true, that although the Apostles did keepe that Pentecost of the Iewes, be∣cause that then the company met and assembled together, and then it was the best time for them to worke, yet I think the Apostles meaning in this place, is not of any Iewish feast, but of the Pentecost which the Christians used, because it was coinsident happily with the Iewish Pentecost. I shall intreat your patience a little in this point, and although it bee somewhat troublesome, yet it is good to know it. You know the Pentecost of the Iewes was fifty dayes after the feast of Sweet bread, or fifty dayes af∣ter the Passeover, for the Passeover was then to be presented to God, at the feast of Sweet bread, when the corne was first ripe, the first fruits of their corn. The Iewes used to sprinkle their corne in the fire before it was ripe, to broyle it in the fire, and so to make a kinde of bread meale of that, that was the beginning of their Harvest, the time of first fruits was then come, and that was that the Apostle alludes unto when he saith,1 Cor. 15. Our first fruits are raised from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that sleepe, because that hee was offered then at the feast of the Passeover: now after that feast, after the Passe∣over they were to number the feast of weekes, that is, they were to number 7. weeks or 50. dayes, and then all their Harvest was come to be inned among the Iewes; so that whereas before they offered
sprinkled corne at Easter, now they bring whole loaves at Whitsontide, being made of the new corne of that yeare, and so they presented it, and an ac∣knowledgement was made to God for the corne that hee had given them that yeare, and this was the reason of it; The word Pentecost signifieth 50. dayes, called the feast of weekes. Now it appeares in Acts 20.Act. 20. that the Apostle imbarked at Philippi pre∣sently after the Passeover; after the day of Assum or the day of sweet bread, that then hee tooke ship∣ping at Philippi, and sayled into Asia, and that hee would not goe to Ephesus then, for the reason be∣fore mentioned, because of the treason of the Iewes. This being a Iewish feast, the feast of weekes, or Pentecost, which was 50. dayes after the Passe∣over, when they offered of their new corne to the Lord Christ glorified it by sending downe the holy-Ghost upon that day, as wee see Acts 2.Act. 2. when the Church was gathered together at the feast of Pente∣cost, when the 50. dayes were ended after Easter, there came a mighty noyse, a mighty winde with cloven tongues, and fire, and sate upon the Apostles, and gave them such evidence of the Spirit to speak in strange languages, in strange tongues, the great and won∣drous things of God. Now then I conclude, that the Iewes Pentecost, and the Christian Pentecost came al∣together upon one day. The Lord picking out that day that served most for his purpose, for when there was most men gathered, and assembled to∣gether, a greater Harvest was like to be brought in to God, when therefore they were met at the Iewish Pentecost which was now ended, because the ceremo∣niall Law was abrogated, yet the Lord so graced the
time, and the oportunity, to work at that time, as to send the holy Ghost upon that day.Aug. And Austin gives the reason, for saith he, as the Law was given 50. dayes after the Passeover was eaten, so 50. dayes after Christ our Passeover was offered, the holy Ghost was given to write the Law of God in the hearts of all the faithfull people of God. And I make no doubt but the Christians were possest with this, that there was more glory in their Pentecost, then in the Pentecost of the Iewes, as being the summe of all things, the sending of the holy Ghost: And if the re∣membrance of their corne were so great a blessing, that the feast of weekes must be celebrated for it; the feast of Pentecost being a thing too, which was given by Moses Law, which is a killing letter; Much more glorious must this feast be, when God sent the holy Ghost into the hearts of men, to inflame them well such heavenly qualities, and such rare perfecti∣ons as were never planted in the persons of any that were meere men; so clearely as it was in them. But how could it be that the Iewes Pentecost and the Christians Pentecost could come both together to be observed upon one day? I beseech you observe a little: About 190 yeares after Christ, concerning the keeping of Easter there was great thundering, and great excommunication: Now observe;190 Yeares af∣ter Christ, dif∣ference about keeping Easter. I will tell you in a word how this came: you know the feast of Whitsontide or Pentecost it is ruled according to the feast of Easter; as Easter falls out, so Pentecost falls out just 7. weekes after. Now Easter it selfe was moveable also, and came up∣on the 14. day of the first Moone after the Equinox, after the Sunne hath bin in the Equinox of Aries, the
next full Moone of that new that came after, was the day of the Passeover; when the Passeover was offred. As suppose I say that we should joyne March and April into one moneth, as the computation of the Iewes is, suppose it should be the 24. of March. Now the Iewes, whensoever it fell to be the 14th. day of the Moone, that is, when it was full Moone, for the course of the Moone is 28 dayes, and it is full in 14. whensoever that day came, it was kept precise∣ly whether it were upon Tuesday or Wednesday after our calculation But now the Church of God thought fit to keepe it back till Sunday. The Iewes and the Easterne Church that followed the Iewes, they kept it upon the weeke day, if so be that the 14. day fell upon the weeke day: for so indeed God directly said Doe it upon the 14. day of the first moneth, &c. But the Westerne Churches, they thought that although the full Moone fell upon the Munday or the Tuesday, yet they would not keep the feast of Pentecost upon that day, but they would stay till the Lords day, till the Sunday after: because at the first institution they fell both together, for the same day that was the Pentecost of the Iews, the same day was the comming down of the holy Ghost sent frō the Son of God. Now therefore sometimes they met together, although sometimes they varied, here was then the summe; Whensoever the 14. day lighted upon the Lords day, then the Iewes & the Christians celebrated their Pentecost both at one time, there was no difference between the Eastern & Western Churches, th did all accord; but when it fell out that the day differed, the Churches of God in the West, did think it conve¦nient to reserve that honorable feast to an honora∣ble
time, that is, to the Lords day, for they thought that God had truly cast all honor upon that day. So I conclude this point, that Paul when he speaks here of Pentecost, he means the Pentecost of the Christians, and I am not moved with any argument that they bring to the contrary: for indeed they be childish and frivolous, as that wch neutaries & novalists have devised, as how there should come to be a falling out betweene the Churches, if they certainly knew the day? I gave you the reason before, that the Iews alway kept it upon that day it fell and the Easterne Churches, but the Western Churches reserved it to the glorious day, the day of the Lord, the Lords day. I have troubled you too long in these thorny discourses, but those that be of the best understanding, they know that in these things also there is great profit, and very great necessity: the Scripture is not written for us to understand by piece-meale, to take here a patch & there another, as the cōmon fashion of men now is; and as many of the ancient Writers in for∣mer time have done, but if we read the Scriptures we must understand all, or else wee must account our selves exceeding falling: for the whole booke of God must be known, in the parcels of time & place, and in all the circumstances, as wel in the substance of it; that this is the true meaning, that it was the Christian Pentecost, the Fathers make mention. Justin Martyr.Iustin Martyr in his 105 question, he asks the rea∣son, Why doe we not kneele saith he at Pentecost, as we doe at other times of the yeare? and he answers againe, Because saith he of the glorious descending of the holy Ghost, wherein we shew forth the joy and comfort that the Comforter brought unto us, there∣fore
kneeling being an abasing of the body, and an argument of mourning and humiliation (but we must at that time shew forth joy and comfort) therfore we kneele not, so that the feast of Pentecost was kept in his time, which was 104 yeares after Christ. TertullianTertul. saith he, this noble feast of Pentecost, it is more noble then all the feasts of the Gentiles. And in the Writings of IgnatiusIgnatius. and PolycarpusPolycarpus. it is mentioned. In the time of VictorVictor. when it came to be a matter of controversie. In the time of Anicetus,Anycetus. of Pius,Pius. this feast of Pentecost was ob∣served, and commanded to be observed: all the Fathers that lived for three or foure hundred yeares after they still made Sermons of it, Nazien∣zen,Nazienzen. Leo,Leo Ierome,S. Jerom. Austin,S. Aug. Chrysostome,Chrysost. Ambrose;Ambrose. there is nothing more obvious, wee see still, their discourses and Sermons upon the feast of Pentecost, which plainly proves that it is no new thing, but that it was founded from the first, and that Christi∣ans have as great reason to keepe a feast in remem∣brance of the comming downe of the holy Ghost, which is the greatest blessing that ever was: as the Iews have for the offering up of their corn, and when their loaves of bread were brought into the San∣ctuarie. Now we come to the causes & inducements wher∣fore the Apostle determined to be at Ephesus,Part 3. The induce∣ments of Pauls stay at Ephesus. if it be Gods wil that he may be there, till he may have con∣venient time to goe to Ierusalem, and be there at the feast of Pentecost, for saith he: A doore is opened to me. This similitude of a dooreDoore what. is very frequent in the Scripture, it signifieth a plaine and easie way, an easie
path or oportunity, where a man may suffer no impe∣diment, but goe on his way, as the Lord Iesus saith, Ioh. 10.Ioh. 10. I am the true Shepheard of the Sheepe, hee that comes in by the doore comes in the true way, hee is a true Shepheard; but he that climbes up another way is a thiefe; his meaning is, if he come in at the doore it is an easie matter; no man resists or hinders him, but hee hath the way made plaine before his face. But how can this be, when there were many ad∣versares? he saith, there were many adversaries, and yet a doore is opened to him? For this you must understand as afterward it ap∣peares, that the Lord opens a doore to men through the middest of danger, and all the adversaries in the world cannot shut that doore which God hath once opened. The Lord beares the keyes, he shuts and no man opens, he opens and no man shuts: This doore the Apostle speakes of to the Colossians; I beseech you, saith hee, pray for us, that to mee may be given a doore of utterance, to speake as I ought to speake. Now the opening of this doore, hee speakes of it in the passive voyce, It is opened to mee, a doore is opened to mee, that is, an occasion is ministred to mee, hee doth not attribute it to himselfe, to say, I have made my selfe a way, and by my preaching I have opened a doore that was shut to me before; but hee referres it to God whose property alone it is. It is opened to my hand by the mighty hand of the Almighty, which hath the ruling of mens hearts, and which flowes into their affections, and guides and turnes them as it pleaseth him. There is a doore opened to mee, It is therefore God that openeth
the door, as it is the devils malice still to shut the door, that there may be no passage betweene God and man, and that Christ may knock at the doore, and never be admitted nor heard, as he saith Rev. 3.Rev. 3. Behold I stand at the doore and knock, if any man open unto me, I will come in and dwell with him, &c. So I say wee should still leave the praise where it is due, and attribute the honour and glory of the fact to him that deserves it; for it is neither in Paul that preacheth, nor in Apollo that watereth, nor in any second cause to open the doore of mens hearts, being barred up by the malice of the devill, and become infatuate and insensible, that a man may beat aswell upon a flint stone, as upon the doore of a mans heart, till it please God to open it. Therefore it must teach us to returne all praise to God Almighty, and not to second causes: And withall it teacheth us to desire of God which hath the key of David, that openeth when no man shuts, that it would please him to assist the passage of the gospell, with the gracious assistance of his helping hand: for indeed, the Word is preached in many places, where there is no doore open: and yet it seemes that all the whole house is open. When a man comes to preach, the Church is open, and the men present, and yet there is a certaine occlusion, a shutting up in the inward man, in the heart, that the Lord finds no entertainment there. It must be begged at the hand of God therefore, that as hee hath given his Word, so to open the hearts of men to receive it, that the doore of the heart may be open, that Christ may be admitted. This is that wee reade of in Acts 16.Acts 16. When the
Apostles preached, God opened the heart of Lidia. As if he should say, it was never opened till that time; and then when the Lord opened her heart, shee opened her hand in all liberality to the Apo∣stles: If you think me Gods child, if you think mee to be Gods owne, I beseech you come unto mee, doe me that honour, as to receive some benefit and favour for your maintenance from me. And this is that which Moses saith to the people of Israel, You had never your eyes open till this day, nor you ne∣ver had your eares open, nor your hearts untill this day: meaning that they were still in the middest of Gods miracles, as men amazed or astonished, and were not sensible, they understood not what God did for them. It is God that must open, it is God that bores the eare, as the Psalmist saith, Psal. 40.Psal. 40. Bore my eares oh Lord, saith the Prophet. It is God that toucheth the heart, It is God that moveth the tongue, it is he that ordereth the invention, it is he that must grace the elocution, it is hee that works all in all. Opening it comes not of man, it is not of the wit of man, or of the labour and toile of man, but it is God that gives the increase. A doore is opened. A great doore.Now for the quality and condition of this doore, hee saith briefly, that it is a great one, and effectu∣all. A great and mighty entrance makes roome for a great company. It is no wicket, it is no small posterne, it is no little enterie, it is no rist or cre∣vice, but it is a doore, and that a great open doore; that is, the Lord hath given me such an opportuni∣ty, meaning at Ierusalem, (as after I shall prove) such a mighty doore is opened to mee at Ierusalem,
by reason of the concourse and assembly of the peo∣ple there; as that it seemes the Gospell shall be re∣ceived in at broad gates, all the gates and win∣dowes shall be laid open, to receive the Lord of life; for where the great company of men are, and where the great concourse of the world is to be seene, there is also the best working for the Gospell of Christ: it loves no paucities, it loves not hand∣fulls of men; there is nothing more base to the Gospell, than contemptible companies of people: a great doore, a great assembly gives incouragement to the speaker: when there is a mighty number, when there is a great multitude, as three thousand men at Peters Sermon converted; there is then a mighty doore opened: when Christ shall have seaven thou∣sand men follow him up and downe the wilder∣nesse, this is a mighty doore: as for handfulls of men, although God despise them not, but where two or three be met together, he will be present; yet where there should be a doore open, and there is but a wicket, it is a matter of scorne and dis∣grace. Kings doe not use to come in at wickets, but at great gates; and the King of Kings bids us not open a wicket, but Lift up your heads ye gates,Psal. 24. and be ye lift up ye everlasting doores, that the King of glory may come in, even the Lord of Hoasts, mighty and strong in battaile, he is the King of glory. Therefore it concernes us as much as wee may, that we labour to make the company of Christ fair and full; that wee make the doore large, and spaci∣ous, and wide, that there may be roome enough for the Lord to come in;Esay 40. Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight; not strait, or narrow,
but straight, that is, faire and even; and there is nothing more disgracefull to the Church of God, then when wee shall have the pues as many as the men and women, and the walls for their auditors; and chiefly that base, and most wicked, and ungod∣ly fashion that is growne in Gentlemens houses, they must have Sermons in their chambers, at their fire sides, at their boords end, where a man must looke upon his auditors, and can scarcely call them in the plurall number, this is base, and unacceptable to the Lord; and these men seldome offer to open to the Lord; these are they that make the course of the Gospell that it can have no prosperity; that there can be no blessing upon it, but rather it is tur∣ned to a shame, and a curse, and a meere frustrati∣on; and yet the fashion is now to bring all our Chur∣ches into houses, and the Patron must command the word, and have it attend upon him like a dog at the table. A great doore is opened. But it is no matter how great it be, if it be not ef∣fectuall;An effectuall doore. therefore saith he, it was so too : BezaBeza. thinks it was , and so hee saith the mea∣ning is, that the gate was set up to the full; it was wide open, it stood not askance; but the word it selfe, and the copies hold it as I have read it, an ef∣fectuall doore. Why how could it be great, except it were ef∣fectuall? Yes, there may be a great passage to little pur∣pose; for the gate, where there is a high way lies, or a thorow-fare, it may be great, but men runne along, they passe through, and make no residence;
they make no stay, and so it is no effectuall way: so when mens eares and hearts are open to receive Christ, if they have no delight to keepe Christ when he is there, but let him goe out again as in a thorow-fare, here is no efficacy, here is no power, here is no foyson, here is no profit comes of the Word of God; it is without life, it is without efficacy, without the consequent which of due belongs unto it. This al∣so, as I said before, the great God must worke, to make that which is spacious and large of it selfe, to make it effectuall; that when the doore hath once admitted the King of glory, that we may keep him there, that we may entertaine him into our hearts, that we may lodge him in our affections, that wee may yeeld our selves unto him in all our actions, and that wee may bring forth fruit in our lives and conversations, that our faith within us, and the Lord within us, may work effectually without us. This is that mighty effectuall doore which God must open, and make it wide, and large, and great, and effectu∣all, and prosperous, that God may enter in, and dwell there for ever. I should come now to the last part of the Text, which is full of great, and various matter; I should be too troublesome, if I should enter into it; name∣ly, concerning the Adversaries that were there, to shew what were these adversaries; They were Iewes no doubt, and such as had skill in the law of Moses, for they were the chiefe enemies of Paul; the heathen came in more easily, because they thought it was a better religion that they taught, than that they had already; but the Iewes thought theirs to be the best religion; therefore St. Paul
found the most enmity, and hatred among them in all places. And likewise concerning the place where these adversaries were, not at Ephesus, as most Interpre∣ters agree, but at Ierusalem; because there was the great feast of Pentecost kept; there was no such number of men simply in the world, there was no such number of men, as was gathered at Ierusalem at the feast. Three times in the yeare, saith God, you shall come and appeare before me; In the Passeover, in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of Tabernacles. And Iosephus makes a true record, that there were nine millions at one Passeover in his time, which is a number sans number, not to be numbred; but only that the Iewish Nation were scattered in the world, and wheresoever they were scattered, they had the conscience to come at the feast to pay their vowes and sacrifice to God; therefore the sea being full of fish, it was time for St. Paul now to cast in his net; and it could not fall amisse, but it would no doubt prove an effectuall doore, and take that which came to hand; and sure it was effectuall, for hee took so many that his net was almost broken with the mul∣titude of fish: but these things I will not trouble you with at this time, I have been too offensive to you already. FINIS.
SERM. 7. 1 COR. 16.9, 10. A great doore is opened, and there are many Ad∣versaries. THe summe of that I have said of the travells of St. Paul, concerning these places of Co∣rinth, and Ephesus, and Mace∣don, is this, that St. Paul was for the space of three years at Ephesus, and from thence hee was driven out by the conspiracy of Demetrius the silver-smith, and his company: hee went there∣fore to Macedon, to visite the Churches that hee had planted before; and being at Ephesus almost three yeares, hee disputed dayly for the space of a yeare and halfe, in the Schoole of one Tyrannus a Philosopher; after that time hee never came to E∣phesus more: for although he had a determination to be there, and to stay there till hee might have a convenient saile to goe to Ierusalem by the Feast of Pentecost; yet the Lord that disposeth of all things, would not suffer that to bee so: but the Iewes ha∣ving laid wait for him in the way as hee was to re∣turne, so the brethren gave him counsell to goe
back againe by Philippos into Macedon, and to fetch a Northerne course, that so their land-wait for him might be disappointed, in which journey he wrot this Epistle to the Corinthians, as one purposing to come to them, but he was hindered by the treason of the Iewes: for at Corinth hee had beene before, for the space of 18. Moneths; and the reason why he was there so long was, because God told him in Acts 18.Acts 18. that hee had much people in that city, and afterward going to Ephesus, and staying there the space almost of three yeares, and being driven out by the conspiracy of Demetrius, he went to Ma∣cedon to visite the Churches, that hee had before planted there: for you heard before, that he had two journeys to Macedon; the first by reason of the vision, in Acts 16. there appeared to him a man of Macedon, and said, Come to Macedon and helpe us; And then he could goe no further then Berea, that noble City; because the Iewes sent thither from Thessalonica to take him, after he had beene there three weekes discoursing of the Kingdome of God. So his friends brought him along to Athens, and from Athens to Corinth, and there hee spent 18. Moneths, and from thence hee went to Ephesus, and stayed there three yeares, from Ephesus being driven by the conspiracy of Demetrius, he went to Macedon, to view the Churches hee had planted there, and to goe no further in the Countrey; then purposing to come to Corinth, they told him of a treason, that was plotted against him, which both hindered his purpose to come to Corinth, as also his going to Ephesus, therefore hee sailed by Ephe∣sus, because as I said, there was treason, as that hee
could not with a safe conscience cast himselfe into the danger without tempting of God; and because he had a great desire to be at Ierusalem at Pentecost. These things are plainly set downe in the Acts of the Apostles,: You shall see in Act. 20.Acts 20. how these things agree: In the first verse, as soone as this tu∣mult was ceased, that is, that great tumult of the people, when they cried Great is Diana of the E∣phesians, great is Diana of the Ephesians, which De∣metrius raised; when the tumult was ceased, Paul called the Disciples together and saluted them, and went to goe forward to Macedon, and comming in∣to those parts, hee intreated them, and exhorted them with much speach; and comming into Greece, hee stayed there three moneths, and hearing of a certaine treason that was laid for him by the Iewes, as hee was to goe to Syria, therefore there was a Decree made, that hee should returne back againe by Macedon. Now three verses after you have it, that wee sailed after the day of Sweet-bread, from Philippi, and came to the brethren at Troas in five dayes, &c. where wee stayed seven dayes. Now about the 15. verse of that Chapter, St. Paul did saile besides Ephesus, that hee might not spend time in Asia, for hee made hast, if it were possible for him, at the day of Pentecost to bee at Ierusalem. So hee sent from Myletus to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church, and spake to them those rare, and fatherly speaches as it followes after in that Chapter. Therefore of this wee are certaine, that though St. Paul purposed to stay at Ephesus, and to make his abode there, yet the Lord would not suffer him so to do, but he had purposed other∣wise
for him, and he was not at his owne disposing, but at the disposing of the will of God. Now in these words read unto you, in that hee saith, there bee divers great, and many enemies; though a doore be open, yet the enemies are great; we are to consider;Parts of the Text. First, where these enemies were. Secondly, as a generall deduction, that the Church of God can never want enemies, and those that bee the Preachers of the Gospel, they are evermore o∣verwhelmed with enemies, if the hand of the Lord interpose not. Thirdly, what kind of enemies they were, the worst, and most to be feared, that is, those that are most neare in the profession of the faith, and the common religion; those are the worst, and most grievous enemies. Fourthly, the great alacrity of spirit, that mo∣ved the Apostle to goe, although there were so ma∣ny enemies, although there was so great and nu∣merous a company that would dismay flesh, and blood, and would rather have made him have sought a corner, and a cave to keep himselfe in a whole skinne; but the spirit of the Apostle was o∣therwise, hee would goe the rather because there was so many adversaries. Fiftly, that these although they were adversa∣ries, yet they were not to bee hated as direct ene∣mies, but onely they were enemies for the time, for he saith, , not . 1 Part. Where these adversaries were.Concerning the first point, the place where these enemies were. I see it is the common con∣sent of all Interpreters for the most part, not one
or two excepted, that these enemies were at Ephe∣sus, and it seemes indeed most agreeable, because hee saith, he would stay at Ephesus, and hee gives the reason why, because there is a great doore ope∣ned, that is, there is a great facility, or opportunity to gaine soules, which is compared to a doore, and besides there bee many adversaries to bee resisted, whose mouthes must be stopped, that is as it seemes, in the same place at Ephesus, therefore hee would stay there, because they needed his presence. I am loth to contradict the current of so many great, & worthy learned men, yet notwithstanding it is free in the Church of God, for any man to speak his minde, as long as he speaks in termes of modesty. I say therefore, let them enjoy their owne exposi∣tion: I cannot imagine that the Apostle should think his enemies should bee at Ephesus, but at Ierusa∣lem: and although he speake not here of Ierusalem, but of Ephesus alone, yet presuming that Paul had a great, and earnest purpose, to bee at Ierusalem at the Feast of Pentecost, and in regard that hee did neglect his friends, and those places that he should have gone unto; he sailed by Ephesus, hee would not come there, beause he would goe to Ierusalem, and hee takes the first hint of it, hee goes from Philippi at the day of Sweet-bread, at Easter, and hee would not come at Corinth, nor at Ephesus; it followes by just consequence therefore, that all his intention was to keep the Feast of Pentecost at Ieru∣salem, and that there was the doore, and there were the enemies: for a man that hath his minde upon one thing especially, upon one maine project, when he speaks of by-matters, he speaks oft times
confusedly; but you must take him according to the great streame, according to the current of his minde. His minde was still to bee at Ierusalem, to confound the adversaries of the Gospel. Now al∣though he saith he would stay at Ephesus, his mea∣ning is not, that there were the enemies, but he will stay a while there, till such time as God would give him a just number of dayes, that hee might saile from thence to Ierusalem by Pentecost, to en∣counter with the enemies that were there. Reasons that the adversaries were at Ierusa∣lem.So the first reason I have for it is, the constant words of St. Luke. Luke saith, that hee had still a minde, hee had still a desire to bee at Ierusalem, at  the Feast of Pentecost, and therefore it was not his purpose to stay at Ephesus, but onely some few dayes; neither was it his purpose to decipher to the Church, that his enemies were at Ephesus, but at some other place. Secondly, another reason for it is this, that those that were at Ephesus were bruit beasts rather then men, they were not adversaries, but beasts rather. If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men.1. Cor. 15. In the Chapter aforegoing, there was no dealing with Demetrius; there is no dea∣ling with worldlings, with a man that understands nothing: there is no glory to bee gotten in dispu∣ting with a simple fellow; all the credit, and glo∣ry comes to the Gospel, by confounding of them that are wise: the Ephesians were Idolaters, they were beasts rather then men, therefore his adver∣saries were not there, so much as at Ierusalem. Thirdly, it appeares that hee left them, and would come no more at them, by reason of the
tumult that was in the time of Demetrius, that hee raised; but he sayled by them, and would no more touch there, but sent for the chiefe of them; there∣fore it seemed hee reserved himselfe for enemies and adversaries in some other place, greater than that. Fourthly, the word  signifieth those  enemies; that is, those capitall enemies of the Go∣spell, the Iewes; the Ephesians were Idolaters, and the Grecians; and although they were adversaries too, yet they were nothing like to the Iewes; for the Iewes fought with weapons; the Gentiles were like the Americans, like the west Indians, which are bare people without any weapons, without any harnesse, it is an easie matter to make a slaughter among them; but the Iewes were armed at all points; they had the Scriptures, they had the Word of God against Christ, they had the Law, they had the promises, they had the covenant of grace from Abraham, they were the peculiar people of God, there were no such adversaries as they; therefore he sets them downe by a peculiar name, , those adversaries; that is, those grand adversaries, those adversaries that are sharp set against the word, those dangerous men to be dealt with, those are they that I would encounter with. And lastly, it appeares by the event: for the e∣vent  shewes that he singled them out for his adver∣saries that were at Ierusalem: For whither went he? did he stay at Ephesus? did hee goe to Ephesus? No, the Text saith, that he sayled by it. And whi∣ther did he goe but to Ierusalem, there to struggle and strive with the power of darknesse, and to con∣found
by his doctrine all the Iewes and all his oppo∣sers? which although they took him, and cast him into prison, yet his word, and power, and spirit was stronger than they all, and convinced, and confuted them; that although they seemed to themselves to be conquerers, yet they were vanquished; for so the Word of God useth to doe, to conquer the conquerers; and although they thought they took him prisoner, yet he took them prisoners: for it is a horrible victory that a man gets against the truth; a man were better to be taken by the truth, than to overcome, and quell it. These things I note, as not any way prejudiciall to the authority or antiquity of those great Fathers and Interpreters: but being as I think the more cleare exposition, & the truer meaning of the Text, that he purposed to goe to Ierusalem by the feast of Pentecost, and that was but seven weeks off now: and although hee purposed if matters had been in place, to have staid a while at Ephesus, yet still his mind was at Ierusalem where the door was opened, because of the aboundance of people that flocked and came thither; and the adversaries were so ma∣ny, that it exceeded all faith to make relation of: for the Iewes were bound thrice in the yeare, all that were above 15. yeares old in the neare coun∣tries, and all that were above 20. yeares old in far countries, they were all bound thrice in the yeare to present themselves before the Lord in Ierusalem: and they were such an infinite multitude, that a man would wonder that the Land was not over∣runne with them like grashoppers, and destroyed by their being there. But wee are too narrow, to
consider the blessings of God upon that Land; for besides this, that they were men of a very sparing, and moderate dyet, and cared not so much for soft beds, but were content to lie in the fields, to lie in tents; nor they cared not for variety of fare, any thing was sufficient for them. Wee see that faith and credit makes this good in the History of Iose∣phus, who (as I said) reports that there were nine millions at one Passeover. Wee see the possibility of it also in King Iehosa∣phats time, that had eleven hundred thousand men and upwards, that did alway wait upon him, besides those that were in his strong gallies that were men of warre, as we see in 2 Chron. 17.2 Chron. 17. Now if he were able to maintain such a number of men, it may well be thought, that when the generall concourse of that people was, from all the parts and kingdomes of the world, that there must be an infinite masse of people. If hee had above one million daily at∣tending upon him, surely the severall parts of the world would furnish it to the number that Iosephus speaks of. And it is not to be disputed how the land could beare them, how it could nourish them; these things wee are not to question, but to understand that the blessing of God was mightily poured forth upon that Nation. It is apparant I say in 2 Chron. 17. that Iehosaphat had so many hundred thousand men alway at his command. So then the Apostle saith here, a doore was ope∣ned; there were so many men, and so many adver∣saries for the most part; therefore his minde was set, and his spirit was inflamed so much the more,
to throw himselfe into the danger, and to cast him∣selfe into the front of the battaile, because he knew he was secure of the victory: & although he were overcome by the troublesome world, yet he knew he should overcome in the quarrell of Christ; that the truth of God should prevaile against them, and chaine the chainers. So much for the story. 2 Part. The Church of God cannot want adversa∣ries.Now for the common induction that wee are to make out of this: we learne that the Church of God, and the truth of God can never want enemies: wee must look still for a great number of adversaries;  saith the Apostle, wee are made for this pur∣pose. In 1 Cor. 4.1 Cor. 4. I am perswaded, saith the Apostle, that God hath set us the last Ministers of the Gospell: he hath set us out to be the off-scouring of the world, the scorne of the people, to be a theatre, and stage for men and Angels to gaze upon. And Simeon when he had the babe our Lord Iesus Christ in his armes, he saith of him, that hee was borne to be a stumbling stone, to be a marke of contradiction; hee was borne to have adversaries. No sooner could the Gospell peepe out into the world, then it had a number of adversaries, and enemies, to tread and trample it downe againe. Those persecutions that were under the first Em∣perours after Christ, the ten bloudy persecutions, they witnesse what great adversaries the poore truth of Christ had. And the Church of the Iewes which the Apostle called before him Acts 28.Acts 28. when they were convented, and called together by the Apostle, they told him that this new heresie, the doctrine of the Gospell of Christ Iesus, which they accounted heresie, they knew for a certaine that it
was every where spoken against, that it was every where gainsaid. It is an easie matter for lies to prevaile in the world, the sonnes of darknesse are predestinated to bee drowned in darknesse, to vanish in their owne dreames; and so the lies of one Philosopher may passe upon another, and they may joyne, and blend them together, and live in quiet, and peace, and yet all be lies. But the pure truth of God, and the sincere light of the Gospel it can indure no such Egyptian smoaks, but it will shine bright forth of it selfe, and therefore it cannot bee suffered; for the Devill the Prince of darknesse, he doth alway shew himselfe against the Lord of light, and against the Gospel of light still, either to extinguish it, if possi∣bly he can, or at least to eclipse, and dazle the light of it, or to immure it in cloudes, that it may not appeare to the sonnes of men. It was the fortune of all truth, ever to be bea∣ten downe by liars, but yet the Lord hath given it this victory: It runnes the same course with Christ: for hee died, and was buried three dayes, but hee rose againe; so the truth, which is his daughter, the daughter of the Trinity, the sister of the Sunne, the brightnesse of the world, although it bee for a time obscured, and damped by the wickednesse of the Devils instruments, and such miscreants; yet in time it riseth againe it selfe, by the power of God it is raised from the dead, after that never more to be outed, and undone, but still to shine and fill the Hemisphere. Therefore this should teach us,  that men must not be discouraged in the worke of the Ministery,
because of the noise, and tumult of the adversaries: he that is for Christ, he must feare no rumors; but in good reports, and bad reports, and through prospe∣rity, and mischiefe he must make a way unto him that he seeks for, of whose Name he makes pro∣fession. Adversarii multi, the adversaries bee many, adversaries without any cause, adversaries to them that bee their friends; this is the case of the Gospel, as our Lord Christ saith, I am come to save you, I come to heale you, I come to redeeme you from all misery, and you seeke to kill me a man that hath done good to you. And St. Paul saith, Am I there∣fore your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Such grosse and senslesse adversaries the Gospel must looke for, absurd men, 2. Thess. 2.2 Thess. 2. I beseech you bre∣thren, pray to God for us, that wee may bee delivered from absurd men, senslesse men, that will not know their owne good, men that know not who comes to doe them service, strange adversaries that will fight against their benefactors: such are the adversa∣ries of the Gospel. I paid that which I never tooke, they rewarded me evill for good, saith David, to the great discomfort of my heart; but the servant is not above his Master; if our Lord have beene served thus, we must not thinke much to taste of the same cup, of which he hath drunke before us. Againe, this must teach all men that travaile in the cause of Christ, to have the world in no esti∣mation, but to account it as an inraged beast; that speaks and doth, and kicks as a child that hath no wit nor sense, that scratcheth the Nurses duggs from which it receives milkc. Wee must thinke to be in the middest of Lions, as our Lord Iesus saith,
in the middest of Wolves: Behold, I send you forth as Lambs in the middest of Wolves, be yee therefore wise as Serpents, and simple as Doves. And here there are two sorts of men greatly to be blamed. First, those of former times, that could not in∣dure opposition, but when the adversaries began to rise, they would fall into the Wildernesse, and live like Hermits: men of great gifts, and of excellent perfections, yet they could not indure opposition; being tender hearted, and of weake spirits, they could not beare the malice of the multitude, but would keepe themselves away, and would leave the places wherein they might have done great good: they left them to be invaded by Foxes and Wolves, to destroy the vineyard of the Lord. This I say was culpable in them, because they came short of the spirit of St. Paul, that was not daunted with the multitude of adversaries, but he would goe so much the rather, by how much the adversaries were greater, and more in number: for there bee many things in the world, in the aboun∣dant company of the adversaries, which are so far from affrighting, as that they give greater incou∣ragement. As the Poet saith, the Shepheard spea∣king there of the cold Winter, and of the North∣wind, hee saith, that hee feared them as little as the Wolfe feares a number of sheepe; or as the Land-flood doth feare the banks in a river. So it was in the high and gracious spirit of the Apostle, and those that were like unto him: for St. Paul was called comparatively the Wolfe of Benjamin, and in a good sense, because the sacrifices were offered
in the Tribe of Benjamin, the Temple being in the Tribe of Benjamin, it was called a ravening Wolfe, because it devoured the bodies of the beasts that were offered in sacrifice. So St. Paul that was of the Tribe of Benjamin, was compared to a Wolfe, as Gregory,Gregory. Augustine. and Austin give the reason, because he did eate up the sacrifices of the Heathen people, as St. Peter in the vision, was bid to Arise, kill and eate: this was the power that the Apostle had in the Church, to devoure the wickednesse of the people, and to change and digest it into their owne stomacks. Now as the Wolfe cares not how many sheepe there be in a fold, for when hee comes to steale, if the shepherd and his dog be away, hee takes more comfort in a great many, then to see a handfull of sheepe; he knowes that if their were ten times so many they could doe him no harme, being feare∣full creatures, therefore he rejoyceth. So the children of God are compared to Wolves, to Lions, to creatures that are victorious, and con∣quering: they are so farre from a sheepish and feare∣full, and base, and cowardly disposition, for the fa∣culties, and abilities of their adversaries, that they take the more delight to see the adversaries many. And as the great floods when the snow is melted upon the mountaines, or when there hath beene a great Land-flood, when it flls from the hills, it scornes to be compassed in within banks, but it over∣flowes, and over-runnes all, and makes new con∣duits, new sourses, and new channels, where there was never any before: So the mighty streame of the Gospel, by the Apostles, it could not bee contai∣ned
within the banks, and common limits that the Philosophers, and naturall men could afford; but it over-ranne all with a mighty current, and flood up∣on the world; with the sacred influence of it, the hearts, and mindes of them were watered, that were never possessed of it before. That kind of Monasticall, Heremiticall life, it is nothing agreeable to the profession of St. Paul in this place, that for feare of danger will convey themselves into woods, into caves, and cells, and alienate themselves from their worke, and labour, because they are afraid of opposition; the spirit of St. Paul riseth the greater: As the Palme-tree, the more weight is laid upon it, so much the more it strives, and heaves against it: so the Spirit of God in this Apostle, and in all true Christians, it is ne∣ver so frolick, nor they are never so high-spirited, as when they see the malice of their adversaries most pregnant, and most furious against them. Secondly, it blames those men much more,2 Sort blamed. that in the time of prosperity, when there are ma∣ny adversaries; yet they will not shew themselves, but lie on their pillowes of pleasure, and seeke to bee quiet: they will have no man speake against them, they will incurre no mans hatred, or ill-will, but they will hold the truth of God to themselves in the bosome of their owne conscience, and never open it, or stand for it. These men are farre worse then the former, for indeed the former had some good pretence, because there was way-laying, ly∣ing in wait for their lives, and conspiracy against them, to take them away from the earth; there∣fore they thought it fittest to yeeld to the time,
and to reserve themselves unto a better occasion. But when men shall live in their prosperity, and have peace round about them, and shall see the ad∣versaries come, and creep in craftily, and sow false doctrine, hereticall doctrine, and things that savour of the old dregs, and reliques of Antichristianisme, and they themselves have excellent gifts, and meanes to refute, and confound these things; and yet because they will not abridge themselves of their pleasure, they will set some young novice in the place, that is able to speake nothing to the pur∣pose, especially nothing to the combate, no∣thing to the duel, that ought to bee betweene the adversaries, and the champions of Christ, but leave all to such kinde of fresh-water-souldiers, and them∣selves in the meane time, taking their ease, because they thinke it is not safe medling; and perhaps, because they thinke they shall bee discomfited, and if they should chance to be overcome, there would bee more shame to them by their overthrow, then there could come glory by their conquest, if they should offer to stand in the cause of Christ. These kinde of men are exactly contrary to the Apostles spirit. Where there are many adversaries, there the Spirit of God should rise in men, as it is said of Saul, when Nahash the King of the Ammonites put that base, and deadly condition upon the Gileadites; that they should give him their right-eyes by way of compact: The Text saith, the Spirit of God came upon Saul when hee heard such a thing, that although the Ammonits were a great, and terrible, and an infinite number, and the case grew despe∣rate:
for they were to deliver the Citie within eight dayes, yet so much the more strong was the Spirit of God in Saul, and he tooke a yoke of oxen, and cut them in pieces, and sent them to the quar∣ters of Israel, and told them that so their cattell should bee served whosoever would not follow him in this just quarrell. So St. Paul although o∣therwise in Acts 17.Acts 17. when hee saw Athens full of Idols, full of Devills, that there was every where Temples set up, the Text saith, that his spirit was exasperated, so moved he was in himselfe he was in a holy trance, hee was without himselfe to see that horrible blasphemy against God. So it is ever na∣turall to true spirits, that are guided by the Holy Ghost, not to bee daunted with perill, nor to hang downe their heads for the opposition of the Devil, but to gather strength and courage; for as much as it is a signe that God is with them, a signe that God hath sent them. It was the lot of Christ, to be be∣set about on every side, that when he had done the most good, to sustaine the greatest harme of those ungratefull monsters. The adversaries are many, therefore I will goe;Adversarii multi contrary to the course of flesh and blood, which because the adversaries are many, and great, there∣fore I will not goe, I will keep within doores, I will lie safe, I cannot doe any good; what can I doe against so many, what can one man do against so many thousands? No; but the Spirit of God perswaded him, that hee alone had the world in his breast, and that he was able to conquer as Sam∣son, who with the Iaw-bone of an Asse slew a thou∣sand men, and he was stronger by the haires of his
head, which were but an excrement, yet it made him stronger then all the adversaries that were against him; so the least thing in the child of God, which seems the excrement of the world, the hairs of their head, are able to confront and confound all adverse powers. Mat. 10.As our Lord Iesus tels his Disciples in Mat. 10. They shall not be able to resist the Spirit whereby you speake,Deut. 28. one of you shall scatter ten of them, and an hundred of you shall scatter a thousand of them. The enemies of God are set to be routed before the few handfulls of Gods children, as in the Ar∣my of Gedeon, 300. men put to the slaughter, and wrought the confusion of a thousand thousand Midianites. Let us therefore have this confidence in our spi∣rits, in the truth, and cause of God, and not be un∣setled or moved with the speech, or with the acti∣ons of men, or with the disasters of the times, nor with the conceits that flesh and bloud will suggest unto us; for verily if we stand upon our own foun∣dation, we shall be able to undermine them, and to keep our standing against them: there is no counsell, nor no power, nor no hand that can come against the will of God; for hee carries all abrest before him, and his legions are able to drive the world in∣to smoake, and to make the mountains to tremble at the approach of him. The adversaries are many.] Many, because they are gathered from many Nations; Devout men of the Iewes, from all quarters under heaven. Acts 2.Acts 2. And wheresoever these Iewes dwelt, they were still as it were the chief Prelats; they would looke
to the state of the Church, and make that the su∣preame object. We see in Thessalonica a poore Colonie, they sent as if they were the chiefe Magistrates after St. Paul to take him alive, and to bring him to his answer, when he was at Berea. A strange spirit was in them to be adversaries to the cause of Christ; they were great persecutors wheresoever they were; whereas our Colonies, and our Churches in other places of the world, they take not half so much upon them; a man may live as quietly and safe at Hamborough and such places, in as much peace and quiet, and more too sometimes, than in his owne countrie; because there is not that fulnesse of authority there as there is here. But the Iewes were of that nature, that still they would be the chiefe primates, and the great men of the world wheresoever they were; Therefore the Apostle having such a confluence of them, from Greece, from Asia, from Scythia, from India, from Egypt, from Cyrene, from Rome, and from all the parts of Italie, from Germanie, and from Spaine it selfe, where the Iewes were disper∣sed and scattered, he finding them in all places, so exact, and so purposely set to the maintaining of Moses law, and to oppose any new opinion that should come in place, he must needs complaine of adversaries. There is a great number of adversaries from all parts of the world; and they be all adversaries full of power, and full of terrour; every man thought himselfe a Prelate, every man took himselfe to be a ruler, and a governor, therefore the match was so much the harder, the combat was so much the
more dangerous, because he was in the middest of all the power of his adversaries; and yet this daun∣ted him not. But now the holy Ghost gives us here to consi∣der, what kinde of adversaries these were; that is, they were the most potent, and powerfull adver∣saries; not only great in their number, but great al∣so in their affections, great in their strength, and great in their zeale; for there is no adversarie so much to be feared, as those that are nearest neigh∣bours to us in the profession of the common reli∣gion. In Micah 5.Micah 5. Let no man trust his servant, nor his neighbour. A mans owne houshold shall be his greatest enemies: as the common pro∣verb saith, A man hath no worse friends than them hee brings from home with him: so it was here; the Iewes of all others should have maintained Christ, they should have been the Preachers of the glorious Kingdome, and doctrine of the Lord Iesus: yet these were they that set themselves against it, and their opposition was the most dangerous of all others, and the most whetted, and exasperated by extreame hatred; for there is no hatred like the ha∣tred of those that being nearest of religion, yet agree not in religion; there is no such hatred, as the hatred of brethren when they fall out, as we see in Cain and Abel, upon the part of Cain, for Abel was a meere patient. So we see in other stories, as that of Antiochus and Polinesus, &c. So in the point of religion, when nature is once disturbed, a man for∣gets himselfe to be that that he is, and kindles his wrath against those that he should love, and there is no wrath nor malice like unto that. So it is between
the Iewes and Christians, compare all the world to∣gether, and you shall finde among the Turks and Mahometans, (them that worship the filthy Idols) no such hatred between them and their company, although they differ in their sects; nor you shall finde no such hatred between them and us, as there is between Iewes and Christians. A man were better a great deale to dwell under the Turke, than under a Iew, a man that is a Christian; and a Iew had bet∣ter to dwell under the Turk, than under a Christian. And why? because they are domesticks, they are men of one house; for they must be brought in one day, the Lord will make them children, and bring the naturall branches that are stricken off, and ingraft them, and make the fulnesse of the Gentiles by them; in the meane time they be of the same house with us; and because of that, their anger and malice is the greater, so that their adverse power is more than that of the Turks or Sarazens. And then againe, if wee looke farther into the state of Christendome, to those that professe Christ, wee shall see no such hatred betweene Pagans and Christians, as there is betweene Papists and Prote∣stants, because they are domesticks, of one and the same house, professors of the same Lord in com∣mon, they have the same faith in the most things, they agree in the same tenents; but because they fall out, and cannot be reconciled in other points, therefore their hatred and malice is extreame one against another, that a man had better dwell with a Iew, than with a Papist; and a Papist had better dwell with a Iew, than with a Protestant; because the nearer they come in religion, the greater is the
adversnesse between them. And to goe farther, among those that be Prote∣stants, there is no such hatred under heaven, as there is betweene the Formalists and the Puritans; there is no man in the world that knows the course of the world, and hath experience in men, but hee had rather live being a Formalist among the Pa∣pists, than with a Puritanc; and the Puritans give out in plaine termes, that they had as lieve be sub∣ject to the Papists, or to the Iewes, as to the Forma∣lists. What is the reason? because they are still do∣mestici, men of one house, the Lords purpose being to set men of one house together by the eares; so the Lord Christ protests, Doe you think that I am come to send peace into the world? I am not come to send peace, but to set men at variance, to bring a sword: which comes to passe accidentally by mens corrup∣tion; for otherwise, the Gospell is a doctrine of peace, but by mens corrupt mindes it comes to passe, that that which was made for peace, it is turned to war; Saith he, I come to turne, and to estrange, and ali∣enate, and alter the mindes of men, the sonne shall fall from the father, and the father shall forsake his sonne; and the mother in law shall hate the daugh∣ter in law, and the daughter in law shall be against her mother in law. A strange kinde of opposition, and the reason of it is this, because as wee see in wars, those that are called civill, that are kindled in the bowels of the Common-wealth, there is no ha∣tred like unto that. Civill warre is the worst warre that can be, for it feeds upon its selfe, it eats up its owne bowels; whereas in forraigne warres there is some mercy, there is some kind of moderation;
there may be some truce or reconciliation; but civill war is full of bloud, full of revenge; there is no mean to stop that great streame of hatred that runnes there. So it is in religion, when men fall out, when there is civill war among themselves, that the hou∣shold of God war one against another, there is no hatred to that. Therefore hee saith, , those enemies, those that professe the same God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob as we doe; those that have the same Covenant, those that look for the same Messias, those that have the promises of grace, & the better promises of the life to come, these are they that are our adversaries. This is the strange strait and pressure that the Apostle was brought unto, that he was not to fight with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men; he was not to encounter with them that were of no learning, hee had no promise, nor no assurance of that he took to; but he waged war with them that were of one house, them that had claimed the house of a long time, almost for the space of 2000. years, them that God called his peculiar people: this was the great adverse power. These things therefore should teach us to call unto the Lord God, that we may be the same men,  of one mind, as we are of one house;To pray for unity. that as he hath gi∣ven his Word to be a common direction to all, so it may be the common guide, that it may be the sweet mistris unto us, to conduct us in the way of life, to please us all, that we may be alike enamou∣red on it, and that it may still seek to preserve its own purity, for religion is the great mistris of the world; if we fall out about that, there will be
more war about it, than that of Troy for Hellene, (as Austin saith,S. Aug.) The Truth of Christ hath far grea∣ter beautie, and is far more worth, and deserves far more to be fought for then Hellene of Greece did. In the body of man, there is no greater danger than when the like humours of the body are stri∣ving one with another, when the bloud and the chol∣ler are one against another; for then there is an evidence, and open sign, and overture of destruction, there being as it were all the banners of nature dis∣played to destroy it selfe. So in the Church of Al∣mighty God, when learned men set thēselves against learned men, and one great wit against another, and every man seeks the destruction of his fellow, then fall the mighty men of Iudah; whereas if they would set themselves against the punies, against the common sort, as Abner said to Ahazel that fol∣lowed him as a nimble Roe, and thought to have wearied him, and then to have surprized him. Ab∣ner bids him follow the young men, and not the Captaine himselfe, which he would not heare, and therefore Abner thrust his speare into him. So if men would be content to spend their wits, to spend their time, and their arguments against the common adversaries, against the heretiques, against the Pela∣gians, against the Marcionites, and those that have been outed from the Church in former times, the common adversaries of the faith, this were a sweet and gracious kind of combat, and that the Church might take great comfort in; but when men will set themselves one against another, as the fashion is growne now too grosse, when one Protestant
Preacher is set to dispute that which another tea∣cheth; to pull down that which another buildeth; this of all other is most dangerous, and a fore-run∣ner of a great and fearfull calamity that must befall the whole house. But this will never be otherwise, although the reverend Prelates of the land have gone about by all meanes to stop the course, yet it will not be, but still there will be a heart burning, and breaking out, and some men will be catching, and wresting other mens works and writings, that a man shall be dri∣ven to an extacie, and almost to desperation in know∣ing the truth. There are many adversaries. And never more than there are now, when the world is growne to take a pride in being adversa∣ries, and think themselves base and idle, except they can contradict the common rules of religion. He that preacheth no other thing than was taught by the Fathers, he is accounted a silly fellow: he that goes the ordinary tract, and high way, and hath not some fetches and revolts of his owne; that hath not a maze of his owne devising, a labyrinth of his owne invention, he is no singular man. If he can contradict Calvin, and Beza, and the Fathers of the Church, and his fellow Preachers, he is a rare fel∣low now adaies. These are the most terrible adver∣saries of all, and there are none so dangerous as these; and these at the last they will make the Word but a mockerie, and all religion uncer∣taine, that no man can ground upon it, but as
the ball of fortune that reeles and turnes every where. Therefore wee ought to be wise concerning these kinds of mountebanks, to understand where they be, to search them that wee be not deceived by them▪ for assuredly if any thing take away the light of the Gospel, and remove the lanterne, it will bee this. The itching eares, and uncessant desires that men have to broach novelties, to bring new things into the Church of God, these be adversaries as well as the Iewes, that would suffer no new thing to come in. The Iewes thought that their religion was the old religion, and that Christs religion was new, and therfore they would not keepe it, they would not suffer it to come in, howbeit there is not any thing in it that is a novelty: for from the beginning of the world there hath beene the same faith. The same faith that St. Paul preached, in the same faith Adam died. Abel died in the same faith, and Noah, and Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and all the Patriarchs in former time, they died in the same profession of Christ, in the same maner as the Apostle preached, but because they thought it was a new thing, they thought it was new come up, therefore they opposed it as a novelty, as a new and quaint device, obscuring thereby the glorious antiquity of the Gospel, by which it is more strong then by any argument in the world: for it is the prime truth,Prima veritas. and therefore it shall stand for ever, as it hath beene ever since the beginning of the world. Last part.The last thing to bee considered in the words,
is this, that hee saith, There be many adversaries,Not enemies, but adversaries. hee doth not call them by the name of enemies di∣rectly, such enemies as were to bee despaired of, but onely adversaries, such as may be won in time, such as may come in; this is a thing to bee obser∣ved, we see it in Paul in another place, in 2 Thess. 3.15.2 Thess. 3.15. when hee speakes of them that were to be ex∣communicated, because they had given themselves over to all uncleane, and vile examples, saith hee, Doe not keep company with such a one, how be it, doe not hate him, doe not repute him as an enemy, but instruct him as a brother. Whence the Apostle makes this wonderfull mitigation, belonging to the sweetnesse of Gods Spirit; still in reproving mens faults, to have a love still to their persons; although wee detest their sinnes, though wee are not to grace them with our company, being per∣sons excommunicate; yet wee are to instruct them, to doe the best we can to save their soules; to win them as being brethren. That place doth illustrate, and set forth this. For the Apostle calls these adversaries: hee saith, the adversaries are strong, and many, that are set against me: they come as a mighty Army of men, they come as the Philistins against Samson, yet hee doth acknowledge them to be such as were not di∣rectly enemies, no desperate men, but such as the word may conquer, they may bee brought in, and become of adversaries, friends, and turne their hands, and give a supply to the Gospel of Christ: Therefore he gives them a gentle Terme, and hath a favourable conceit of them; hee saith, they be adversaries for the present, it may bee hereafter,
they will become friends, and compliers to the Gospel. Not to judge peremptorily of adversaries.This moderation of the Spirit, should keepe us within our compasse, wee should not judge per∣emptorily of any that seeme adversaries to the faith, till wee have sought by all meanes to re∣claime them, for there is no enemy but hee that is an enemy finally. It is the common course that God takes, to make friends of enemies, for there is no man that can come to be Gods friend, but hee is a reconciled friend, he comes by way of reconci∣liation, for hee was first an enemy: every man is borne the enemy of God, and his owne enemy; and it is the grace of God that brings us into friendship, it is the grace of God that brings men to comport∣ment, that they lay aside their enmity, and take un∣to them bowels of amity, and concord, that God should enlighten them to doe this. Therefore we doe not pray as the Popish Church doth; they pray against Protestants, and against Turks, and against all that are not of their religion, and with bell, booke, and candle they excommunicate them, and send them downe to hell, to the Devill; this is not the course that God hath sanctified, it is not the course that the Apostle takes, but they must bee accounted men reclaimable: there is no man that is so opposite, but God can reclaime him. This appeares by many examples in the Scrip∣ture: Saul was a ravening Wolfe against the flocke of Christ, hee came afterward to be a gracious Pa∣stor, and feeder of the flock of Christ; Manasses caused the streets of Ierusalem to runne with blood, afterward he came in, and was a true convert to God.
These things are commonly knowne unto us; for if sinners had beene desperate, wee had never beene saved, being all sinners. We know by expe∣rience of our selves that there is no man desperate, because the grace of God hath abounded to us, wee know that the hand of God is not shortned, but the same grace that enlightned us, it will enlighten them in due time, if it please him to call them: Therefore in the middest of all hostile opinion, we should still maintaine peace, and a good hope of those that are our very adversaries; God may call them, and make them better, if they be enemies now: God may make them friends if he see good; for the Lord can turn the hearts of men, The hearts of men are in the hand of the Lord, he turnes them as it pleaseth him. Though they be professed enemies of religion, the Lord can turne them: there is no man so wild, but the Lord can put a snaffle in his nose, and a hooke in his jawes, and bring him back againe: there is no heart so stubborn, but the Lord is able to make it yeeld: he can bring water out of the flint stone, and can make the wildernesse a stan∣ding well. There is nothing impossible to the Lord: the mighty Cedars of Lebanon are at his command, although they stand so proudly, as though they would stand there in despight of their Creator; yet the Lord can dismount them, and bring them low as the bramble of the field. The mighty hand of the Lord works all things according to his power, and according to his blessed will. We must not therefore think peremptorily of any man; we must indeed think him for the present to be wicked, and ungodly, and a vagabond as long
as he is thus; but still reserve our thoughts with a condition of changeing, and hope for it; for the Lord is able to change even the wild branches that are planted, into the naturall olive tree, that as they came in beyond all hope, so the branches that are lopped off, that a man would think could never re∣ceive juice or nourishment againe, the arme of the Lord is able to plant them.Iewes shall be called. The Jewes that are the enemies of Christ, they shall be replanted againe, and set in their native stock, and bring forth fruit in such abundance and glory, as no nation under hea∣ven shall be compared with the Iewes. The summe of all is this, A Christian must know that he hath to buckle in the world with adversa∣ries; he must not dreame of peace, he must not pro∣mise quietnesse to himselfe; but where he doth best, there he must looke for most opposition; hee must looke for the devill in the middest of his audi∣tory, in the middest of the Church, where prayer and preaching is. Where Iehoiada the High-priest stands at the Altar, there sathan stands at his right hand; and though the Angel say, The Lord rebuke thee, the Lord rebuke thee, yet he will not leave his station for all that. Therefore a man must take up his resolution, and say, This I will doe though all the powers of hell resist it; or else he layes his hand to the plough and looks back, and makes himselfe unworthy of the Gospell. Simile.It is the nature of Camomile, the more men tread upon it, the more and the better it growes; so the Word and the Gospell of Christ, it grows the bet∣ter, where there are more adversaries; it grows ne∣ver so well, as when it is imbrued in bloud; The
bloud of the Martyrs being the seed of the Church. The Saints of God are never so high in spirit, nor never so well affected to salvation, and to heaven, as when they are most incumbred with stumbling blocks in the world; happy is he that can leap over them, or else passe by them; for none shall be so happy as not to meet with them. It was the condi∣tion of Christ, and the Prophets before us, and it shall be the condition of all after us. Therefore we must desire God to sanctifie our adversities, and that which shall oppose us; for we are sure to have them; onely let us desire God to turne them to good, as all things work to the best to those that love and fear the Lord: which the Lord grant unto us for Iesus Christ his sake. To whom, &c. FINIS.
