7434.7 24338552 27534
ENGLANDS HOPE, AGAINST IRISH HATE. Sint Maecenates et non deerunt Marones. AT LONDON, Printed by VV. VV. for Thomas Heyes. 1600.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE. I Haue here presumed for to present you with my ENGLISH HOPE: which, though it be but roughly handled, yet the Matter is good. If you be pleased to take delight in it, I shall not onely be encouraged to some more serious study, but be bound (before any other) to make you par∣ thereof. I hope you will not measure the Matter by the M, nor proportion the worth of my labour with the vnwor∣thines of my selfe: fr that were to refuse the Rose, because it hath pr; or to make light esteeme of Hnny, because the L'ee hath a . I know Mous will looke at it narrowly, and say; So  a matter is but weakly follwed. Zoylus with his squint eyes, will finde some fault with the shape; so shall I be bittn both for matter and method: Well, I care not though They be , if I finde you curteus. If an Asse strike me, I will neuer lift vp my heele: ad if Diogenes be cinicall, I will shake off his  with Ariipus. Though Hipanchion could not warble like Opheus, yet he coulde pipe. And though Eni-wrote a rough stile yet he was a  and I may tearme my selfe a Writer, thou   Inditer. Every one dippes not his  with Hmer in the  nor all mens workes cant . How so euer I haue pleased , and my trust  please you: In which hope, I commit my selfe, and  Booke, to your  censure.
ENGLANDS HOPE AGAINST IRIHS HATE. THE Serpents sly insinuating course, Is farre below most opposite to sight; His practize deadly, his desier worse: The fairest greene conceales his hidden spight, Nothing lesse feared then to shunne his force: Yet nothing sooner doth beget mishappe, For worst insnares the suddaine vnseene trappe. Such are those creeping Machauils of late, Those eues-dropping Heralts listning spies, That come to prye into our Countries state; To hide their Treason, Vizards they deuize; That so they may our purposes relate: With vs they walke, they laugh; with vs they eate Yet in their hartes hath Iudas ta'ne his seate.
But if their falsehood, Trueth hath open laide; If younger wits, their elder shifts haue seene: If their close meeching prouidence displaide, And all their councels haue confounded been: If Trecherie haue Treasons selfe betraide, And not our selues do laugh at them alone, If all miscarry: Why not then Terone? What venome beast compared to the Toade, Doth better picture malice of the minde? Hee stripes so long his rancor to vnloade, As coueting an equall pitch to finde: With him whose clouen hoofe is scarce so broade In puft presumptuous humor glowting sitts, Vntill his carcas quite in sunder splitts. Such is the broody monster Rome containes, His eyes he straines vntill they sparkle fire: His handes are fatted with continuall gaines: Each howre against the annoynted hee conspires His hart a thousand stratagems retaines, And downe his throat he needs wil swallow Spaine With Fraunce and Italy, to worke our paine.
But if this dyet haue distemper wrought, If this huge glutton surfettor on hate, In striuing to be greater then he ought: Hath still been crost with death, a boading fate, That his disseuered members fly about; And some of them vnto our gates at blowne, For Crowes to feed on: Why not then Terone? The Shepheards dread, the silly flockes annoy, The rauening Woolfe, is euer knowne to be His thirsty stomacke slaughter must inioy, And naught but blood allayes his tyrannie: The more he hath, the more he will destroy, Nor is it soueraintie, but beastiall lust: For who knowes not the sillie Lambe is iust? Such is the sterne Iberian Monarchy, Whose fingers dipt in ill effused gore: And hartes ybath'd in neighbor Tyranny, Lift vp their snowts into the West for more, And nought may staunch their bloody penury, But wrongfull massacre of Gods elect, The more their proude ambition to detect.
But if the sinnewes of their strong assaultes, The iust reuenger haue in sunder crackt: If so their huge Armados in the vault's, Of vast Oceans kingdome haue been wrackt, Leauing the world to descant on their faults: If all their boasting theaes away were blowne, And they supprest: then why not now TERONE? If wauering with the reede that shakes his toppe, Which way the wind sends footh a whistling gale, Euer bee turning with the weather-cocke, And spred Inconstancies forbidden sayle, Deserue reproach, and euery Idiots mocke: What then shall they that like Camelions skinnes, Make euery obiect Authour of new sinnes? Yet such there are, whose rotten inside showes Their outward painting, but corrupted drosse, Whose fayth as often alters, as the gloe, For most aduantage in deceipt so grosse: As for their gaine, they wrecke not honors losse; Now swearing, then recounting what they swore, One foote on board, the other on the shore.
But if the Plaines of Cressy, like a Booke Containe in Carracters their heauie doome: If Bullen, Turny, Poictiers, pale do looke, To thinke what hath, or may here after come: If they be witnesses how ill we brooke Dissembling lips, when Trueth the goale hath won, Treading on falshood: Why not then Terone? The Foxe is subtile, and doth lie a loofe, Wayting occasion when to catch his pray; Seeing, and yet not seene, for his behoofe, As though compassion kept him at a stay, When (God doth know) ti's feare doth rule the day: Yet such is his Hypocrisie by kinde, He will be thought to loue; to hate inclinde. Such Cubbes the Northerne issue of the aire, Sends foorth to barke against the siluer Moone Whose frosen temperate cannot repaire Nor better fame that Region euer wonne. Ti's hard to wring moyst water from a stone: What hath been custom'd, seldome men refraine, A bone-bred euill, the flesh will still retaine.
But if their lurking malice hath been impt Euen when their treason, like grassie blads did spring And downe their gyant boastings rudly tript, When circumuention lookt for greatest speeding, And in one day their Army lay a bleeding: If King and people both were ouer-throwne, What lets to hope the like against Terone? As that disease which doth attaint the hart, Is more pernitious fatall then the griefe, Doth outwardly afflict some other part; And is lesse capeable of swift reliefe: So mongst our enemies the worst and chiefe, Is nothing foraine, but the home-bred foe; And such as owne dominion vnder-goe. Whereof foure kindes I purpose to relate; All Viper-like, their mothers wombe assayling: All worse then Hemblocke to their countries state, Against her life, with meagre death preuailing, In them faire Peace her miseries bewailing: That most vnnaturall outrage filles the aire, And Prince and subiect feedes vpon dispaire.
The first, the Traitor Passant I define: The next, Regardant: Couchant is the third: Rampant the fourth and last: where I combine The generall Eyrie of this monsterous Birde; Whereof not one hath wickedly been stirde, That vnder vengaunce iustly did not groane, To quit rebellion: Why not then Terone? THE TRAITOR PASSANT. This whelpe of Typhe, this grosse influence, Of canckring humors hauing taken holde, Infecteth all, like to the Pestilence: Gaddes too and fro, in councell shameles boulde; Perswading here, there tempting with his golde: That so he may peruert the ciuill good, And hurt, for whom he owes his vassaile blood. Such Inundation of lewde villanie, Such walking Spirits, such hopping Grashoppers: Such Frogges of Aegypt, bastard Iesury, Not long agoe did play the damn'de introppers, VVith drawing subiects from their fealtie: Sounding our Hauens, gathering in munition, Gainst some forraine power abrupt-intrusion.
But if Throckmorton, Campion, and the rest, With those their deadly sinnes, in number doubling All agents to the Triple wreathed Beast: VVith plodding feete our spring of gladnes troubling Fell in their owne mudd errours, groueling: If their blood paceing trackts, were quickly knowne, And they supplanted: VVhy not then Terone? THE TRAITOR REGARDANT. This sqint-ey'd wat, this wry-neckt fugitiue, Labours in like oppugnacie of fayth: Some fatall Organon for to contriue, VVhereby he may procure his Countries scath; But being smoakt in that he plotted hath, A way he goes; yet flying wrythes his head, Repyning still at those from whom he's fled. Such after-malice, such retorting hate, That grindes the teeth when he is forst'to skud: Cursing the fortune of well gouern'd state, VVhen other mischiefe wholly is withstood, Ploughing with speed through the Ocean flud: And hauing got the seas vpon their backe, Looke ore their shoulder for their countries wracke
But if their staring expectation faile, And they haue gapt vntill their lawes do ake: It imprecations nothing do preuaile, Nor else what they in practize vnder take, But dayly miseries their soules pertake: As not the wofull Westmerland alone, Repents his treason: Why not then Terone? THE TRAITOR COVCHANT. This leering monster lurkes within his den, Seeming well pleasd with any square of life; Conceales his thoughts from publike sight of men: Giues vnder-hand increase to factious strife, And in his bosome hides the fatall knife: With which, when Innouation calles him out, Hee ruthles meanes to cut his countries throate. This is that lumpe of vile hipocrisie, That Ianus-like doth beare a double hood. This is that framer of bace villanic, By whom all vertuous actions are withstood. He neuer doth intende his Countries good; But priuatly indeuours publicke smart, To whom he owes his blood, his life, his hart.
Such are the ruines of decayde excesse, The Catelines that some time pestered Rome, Our newtrall male-contents, of conscience lesse Then they which sacriledge their fathers Tombe: With them Church will-full exiles halting come; Who are as Spiders mongst the honny Bees, Or to pure Wine, the dreg downe sinking Lees. If these grosse abiectes, these indifferences, Respecting almost neither hell nor heauen; Haue been ingaold within their durty styes, Of all exulting glory quite bereauen: Not daring once lift vp their low-checkt eyes▪ If trembling feare haue drencht them in their mone, Leauing them prostrate: Why not then Terone? THE TRAITOR RAMPANT. Amaine, Amaine, thus cryes this lustie base, The toppe must vaile, no other congie serues: A Cottage? fic, his seate must be a Pallace; To which his brandisht blade, his passage carues, All, or else none, his worthines deserues: And so doth eleuate his reaching paw, VVith kingly spoyle, to gorge Ambitions maw▪
Such was the Serpentine late gathered head, Congeald obedience publisht in the North▪ And such is that in Ireland now bred, By him whose parentage is little worth: That hath inkindled Maiesties high wroth: Those onely Vermine of their Countries soyle, Contemning Peace, and glorying so in spoyle. But if in all times former memory, Such, and the like proceedinges haue declinde: If neuer yet was seene that Trechery, Against th'annoynted, had his force combinde; But still deserued-vengaunce was assignde: If all haue learned experience one, by one, To taste affliction: VVhy not then Terone? To ouer passe the ruines long perfixt, Inroulde in leaues of graue Antiquitie: The mutuall Blood of Traitors late commixt, Let out by sword of sharpe seueritie, Giue warrantize of lawrell victorie: And to these Rebels fearefull discipline, What ty's a subiectes duetie to resigne.
If Rory Oge, a pillor of that crew, Of glib-pate Karne, and breechles pedigree; Presuming of a Scepter to ensue: Fell headlong into cureles miserie, Cursing the time of treading thus awry, And with his blood powrde foorth repentant teares, To shew his sorrow, for mispence of yeares. If Feaghe Mackhugh an other out-law carle, Stampt of the same rebellious vp-start moulde, With those, against the regall guidance gnarle: Not enterprizing what they should, but would; Receau'd his hire, for being ouer bould: And for adulterat Nobilitie, VVas taught the studie of Astronomie. If sterne Mackshaw irregular and bloody, That likewise gaue vs base vpon the bogges, In treasons pursute, obstinate and moody: Trayning with him a number such like dogges, Performd at last his currish obsequie, A haulter destin'd to his mankind necke, That gaue the lusty gamester mate and checke.
If great Oneale, sole great in his abuse, Rich in the want of true humilitie: A pignie punie for the spirits infuse; And Irus poore for his fidelitie, Was forst to see his naked Trecherie, And stealing foorth to finde the Figtree-shade, Could no way shrowd th'offence his soule had made If Desmond, that Hereditary Lord, Lilke Naball vaunting his large Seigniorie; Thousandes depending on his ill drawne Sword, Payde dearely for his damned periurie: His House attaint with lasting infamie, And his cropt head aduanct' in deathes pale throne, For men to gaze at: Why not then Terone? If Deitie the righteous cause vpholde, And wrong be still the Iewell of his hate: If band coale blacke, their Princes loue haue solde, And blest that sticke vnto their countries state: If death the one doe neuer subiugate, But spight of Destinie, his fame shall flourish, Where as the other eternally shall perish.
If Traytors though immûr'd in walles of Brasie, And lockt in Armour of the strongest proofe; In courage still, are brittle as the Glasse, Their conscience telling how they keepe aloofe: If they are but a bubble, smoake, a puffe; Afrayde to looke vpon the rysing Sunne, And dreading more, when he his course hath runne If euery scowlyng cloud aloft doth glaunce, And some times but the shadow of a Tree, Make them coniecture some suddaine wrackfull chaunce, Leading their senses to an extasie: If multitudes and many handes they bee, But hartes to guide those handes but few or none: Who sees not then the downe-fall of Terone? A Traitors Cognizaunce to know him by; Are his leawd deedes, and successe therein, To finde them such peruse their villany: Vnrippe the fardle of their mouldy sin: Describe the puddle they do wallow in, The haynous theftes, the massacres of ruth, Wherin they haue bin nouzled from their youth.
As they are rude, and strange in their attyre, Portrayted in an Anticke fashion: So all their dispositions, all desire, Bewrayes a crooked generation, Vnciuill in their first creation: Each channell begger needy will be a Lord, Although his honors purchace be a cord. Those ciuill hartes that stoope to iust commaund, Allow Religion, and imbrace their God: They seriously with all their might withstand, Afflicting them with warres deepe wounding rod, Accounting still the number to be od, Vntill such Subiectes they haue ouerthrowne, As are vnfaigned friendes vnto the Crowne. Banquets wherein their appetites may broach, The crymsen veynes of kinne, to quench their thirst: In rage they wrecke not Natures neare approach; Who is the last, appeareth to be first. If he can glory most of deedes accurst: All their delight is generall annoy, And by most harmes acrues their greatest ioy.
Fruite Fieldes ore-runne, and stately Cities burning, Order disordered, Iustice in the wayne: The current of sweete Peace, to discord turning: Women lamenting, Children cryes in vayne: What ere is got, accounted honest gayne. Blasphemie to God, to Men a scandall, This Irish Kerne allowes, else they condemne all. Their will submits not to their Princes will. Obedience is a word, they neuer heard: Their hope is for to be magnifide for ill. The Law's a chastitie, a taske too hard. Prayer, and all good exercise, is bard: And sooner they will lift a hand to kill, Then once intreat remission of that ill. Humilitie is natiue arrogance, Retaine from time of their Conception. Three thinges accompanie their essence, Neuer retaine but by subuersion, Feare, Shame, and Guilt of Consience: But if it chaunce they do out-liue their pride, Then comes Repentance, else they are neuer tride.
Feare of his Iudgement that appeares aboue, Shame of the worldes reprochfull censure, The mindes fell torment that doth euer moue, And wrappes the body in perpetuall torture: This is a duetie growing euery quarter; Exactes a pention, if it be denide, Dispaire assayles the partie, so exilde. And then proceedes the sport as at a feast, Blindnes goes on, and their delight is prest, More rude in Nature then the sauage Beast: Obseruing these three qualities detest, Impudencie, Craft, and Couetousnes: Whereof the first assures them voyde of shame: The second wealth: the third a victors name. When, though the boosome of Affection ope, The eye of Pittie smyle them in the face; The tongue pronounce sweete Liberties free scope: And Armes expantion offer kind imbrace: Though all resolue to doe them any grace; As what on earth is more to be extolde, Then Princes loue, out valuing finest golde?
Yet they contemne with Aesops Cocke the Pearle, Esteeming more some dirtie Graine rake vpp, Then all the blessinges gratious Heauens do sell, To such as thirst to drinke of Vertues cuppe, Treading the open way that leades to Hell: Rather then enter at the Narrow gate, Whose Iorney is the blessednes of fate. Nature besides abhorres this loathed vice, Opening her wombe in monsterous prodigies, Whose better fauours melt away like yce, Supplanting them with harder penuties. The earth all barren and forsaken lyes, In stead of holsome fruites, ranckest of weedes, Albeit their labour cast in better seedes. Heauen lowres in Tragicke collours of disdaine, His marble face hath no relenting motion: The day expectes her wonted light in vaine: Or if it deigne the world her beames of notion, It is with fiery meteors perturbation: The angery Sunne refraines to shine on those, VVhich are to God and men such brainsicke foes.
The dropsy-sicke infeebled ayre a boundes VVith mystie vapours filling all her partes. The Siluans their mellodious cheerefull soundes, To dismall Skreech-Owle Elegies conuertes, Downe the blacke vesture of sad Fos' skyrtes: A Deluge from her raynie cheekes distilles, To see the earth replenisht with such diuelles. Looke towards the mountaines, & in modest lothing They shrinke aside, not able to indure The hidious proude vnnaturall incroching Of such their pleighted loyaltie abiure: The sauage Beastes hold this as most impure; They follow the iust instinction of their kind: Men are to all lycentiousnes inclind. The raging Waters of the boysterous Seas, A litle banke of Sand doth circle in; Although it seeme nought may his threats appease, Yet to exceed his boundes, was neuer seene. The Sunne, the Moone, & Starres, obsequious beene: The Cloudes depart not out their station, But gliding, keepe their first creation.
More neare to come, peruse the bodyes frame, How all thinges keepe their mutuall harmonie, VVithout the least commotion in the same; The one disturbing not the others duetie, But loue induceing friendly amitie, Causeth a sweete consent of many stringes, That to the whole exceeding comfort bringes. The Hand giues not direction to the Head, But seruiceable takes his charge from it. The Foote instructeth not the Eye to guide; But from his beames receiues his borrowed light: Contemplate on the flaming vitall bright VVithin the Hart; the motiue in the Brayne: The naturall power the Liuer doth contayne. VVho sees not yf the least of these reuolt, Presuming to supplant his neighbour brother Ruine, destruction doth the rest assault; And that becomes their murther, was their mother; Moysture contending lyuely Heate to smother: Cold conquering Heate, and what was spirit & life, Quite profligate by such intestine strife.
May droopes not straight, yf but in qualitie The bodyes temperature retaine excesse? As say the blood inflamd with Luxurie, Increase beyonde his wonted greatnes: What sodaine pricking yrksomnes Nettles the Veynes? as but some Delphian art Rebuke disorder: health is desperat. Obedience ioynes; Disorder seperates. Obedience pitties; but Disorder scornes. Obedience plantes vineyardes of sweete Grapes: Disorder planted with sharpe pricking Thornes. This many cut-throate Ministers subbornes, That styrres direct Astras golden Helme, And makes a peacefull want, excluding Realme. Yet these blind reprobates, Megara's brats, These Safforne-shirts; these party-pleited lackes: These wod borne Sauages; these dunghill Gnats, Had rather beare war-armour on their backes, (So they may practise rapes, and tru-mens wrackes) Then freely take fayre Mercy by the hand, To glad themselues, and dignifie their land.
But if the end of Theft, be Ibbet-capering. Or if the Scorpion haue a glosing face; Yet in her tayle conceale 2 deadly sting. If Iudgement do a while giue Ryot place, And in the end, pay home with deepe disgrace. If Treasons period be confusion, Quelling the proudest: Why not then Terone? The valiant hand of ESSEX honored line, Already once display de great Mars his Banner; Ringing the owtes of these rebellious Swine, Within their Confines, teaching them the manner, Of mylde obedience, humbly to surrender Their necks to yoak, though fircely they withstood And know the penalty of sheddyng blood. A Vollume would but serue a readyer Pen, Then my slow feathered Muse to celebrate; The golden Trophies were erected then, VVhen that renowmed Knight vphelde the state, Sir HENRY SIDNEY gratious by his fate, A throng of Rebels to his mercy crowched, And who refus'd, the scaffold dead auouched.
The Bogges yet tremble, and the leaued Trees Shake their high branches in memoriall Of his sharpe censure, and seuere decrees. The warlike GRAY, whose actions Tragicall, Did likewyse curbe their mindes Imperiall, Giues document; Fitzwilliams, and the rest, In those proceedinges euer highly blest. Preuaylde they then? Our quarrell's still the same, Our wrong no lesse; nay rightly vnderstood, Who sees not merite of farre greater blame, By lauish late expence of English blood: This ioyned with th'abuse of Traytor-hood, Incites reuenge, deafes-heauen with clamorous cryes, Till they goe downe, and we in conquest rise. For this vile ribble rabble vp-start crew, Mis-led by Treasons treacherous commaunde; And that rebellion teacher, that late drew His Countrey gainst their head to lift vp hand; Will know what t'is to dwell in warres false band: And will with cause cry woe, woe; one by one: VVoe to thee that misled'st vs: woe Terone?
