8134.3 99850568 15779
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ❧ By the Queene. ❧ A Proclamation for the prices of wine. WHere it is ordeined and prouided by a statute made & established in the Par∣liament holden at Westminster the viii. day of Iune, in the xxviii. yeere of the Reigne of the Queenes Maiesties dearely beloued father of famous memorie King Henry the eight, that the prices of all kind of wines, (that is to say) of the Tunne, Butte, Pipe, Punchion, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel, and Rundlet, when it shoulde be solde in grosse, should be limitted and declared by the Lorde Chauncelor of England, Lord Treasourer of England, Lord President of the said Kings most honorable counsell, Lord priuie seale, and the two chiefe Iustices of either benche, or fiue, foure, or three of them, and that the same should be solde according to the same prices so by them set and taxed vpon payne and penaltie conteined in the saide Acte: Forasmuch as the Lorde Chancelor of Englande, the Lord Treasourer of Eng∣land, and the two Lord chiefe Iustices for diuers considerations them mouing, and according to the effecte and meaning of the saide statute and acte, haue in writing by their deliberate aduices vpon conference had with sundry persons thereto requisite, taxed, limitted, assigned and appointed the prices of Gascoigne and Frenche wines to be solde within this her hignesse Realme for this yeere following (that is to say) Euery Tunne of the best Gascoigne and Frenche wines to be solde (the seller bearing all the charges due and pay∣able to her Maiestie in her Custome house) after the rate and price of thirteene poundes sterling and not aboue, The buyer bearing all the said charges after the price & rate of x. li. vi. s. viii. d. sterling the Tunne, & not aboue. And euery Pipe, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrell, Rundlette, and other vesselles of the same seuerall wines to be solde in grosse after their quantities according to the same rates, and not aboue. And euery Tunne of Rochel & other smal and thinne wines to be sold (the seller bearing all the charges due & payable to her Maiestie in her Custome house) after the price and rate of eleuen pounds sterling the Tunne, and not aboue. And the buyer bearing the said charges at viii. li. vi. s. viii. d. sterling the Tunne, and not aboue. And euery Pipe, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrell, Rundlette, and other vesselles of the same seuerall wines to be solde in grosse after their quantities according to the same rates & not aboue. The Queenes most excellent Ma∣iestie therefore straightly chargeth and commandeth all and singuler her louing Subiects and others put∣ting any maner Gascoigne, Frenche, Rochel, or other small or thinne wines to sale within this her highnes Realme, that they, ne any of them in any maner of wise by any craft, couin, or priuate agreement shall sel any Gascoigne, Frenche, Rochel or other small or thin wines, otherwise then is aboue limitted upon paine to forfeit and pay such penaltie as be conteyned and expressed in the said statute, or in any other statute made or ordeyned for the same. And moreouer her highnesse pleasure and commandement is, that all & singuler Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables and other officers to whom it apperteineth, that they, and euery of them with diligence, cause and see that this her Proclamation be put in due execution after the tenour of the same, and also according to an other acte of Parliament established in the Parliament aboue rehear∣sed against such as will refuse to sell their wines at prices taxed as is aforesaid, as they will answere there∣to at their perils. Giuen at our Mannour of Richmount the eleuenth day of Nouember in the three and twentieth yeere of our raigne. God saue the Queene. ❧ Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most Excel∣lent Maiestie.
