8710 99836730 1016
I R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ❧ By the King. ¶ A Proclamation for the search and apprehen∣sion of Henry Feild. FOrasmuch as one Henry Feild, hauing by Our speciall commaund been apprehended for great contempts and offences by him done, against Our selfe and Our Lawes, hath two seuerall times reseued himselfe, and escaped away from those that had him in their custodie, and now (as it seemeth) lurketh very closely in some secret places, and will not submit himselfe to Justice, to the great abuse, and vnsufferable contempt of Vs and our Regall authoritie; Wee haue thought it fit to publish his escape and contempt to all our louing Subiects, not doubting of their care & for∣wardnesse in his Discouery and Apprebension: And Wee doe hereby charge and command all Justices of Peace, Maiors, Sheriffes, Con∣stables, Headboroughs, and all other Our Officers, Ministers and Subiects whatsoeuer, to bee diligent in enquiring and searching for the sayd Henry Feild in all places whatsoeuer, aswell with∣in Liberties as without; whom if they shall happen to finde, Our pleasure is, they take and send him, with sufficient Guard, to the Gaole of the County or place where hee shall bee taken, there to remaine in safe custodie, and presently to aduertise one of Our principall Secretaries of his ap∣prehension. And Wee doe promise to bestow vpon such person as shall apprehend the said Feild, or cause him to bee apprehended, the summe of tenne Pounds, for such his care and paines therein. And as We are pleased to reward the endeauors of such as shalbe zealous in performance of this Our pleasure; so We doe hereby let all men know, that if any person, after this Our Proclamation publi∣shed, shall directly or indirectly conceale, harbour, keepe, relieue, or maintaine the said Henry Feild, or shall not vse their best endeauour for his apprehension, aswell by giuing due aduertisement thereof, to Our Officers, as by all other good meanes, Wee will (as there is iust cause) proceede against them so neglecting this Our commandement with all seuerity. And to the end the said Henry Feild may the better be discouered, Wee haue thought fit to describe him herein: He is a man of a middle stature, about fortie yeeres of age, some pockholes about his nose, his face leane, his complexion sal∣low, very hollow eyed, the haire of his head brownish, his beard some what lighter, thinne of haire, and cut short and blunt; when hee was last seene, hee ware a cloth suite of darke greene colour, with two laces in aseame, of a lighter colour. Giuen at Our Court at Greenwich the thirtieth day of May, in the one and twentieth yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland. God saue the King. ¶ Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. M.DC.XXIII.
