B1583 13222048 98537
THE BEGGARS BUSH. Written by FRANCIS BEAVMONT, Gentlemen. And IOHN FLETCHER, Gentlemen. You may speedily expect those other Playes, which Kirkman, and his Hawkers have deceived the buyers withall, selling them at treble the value, that this and the rest will be sold for, which are the onely Originall and corrected copies, as they were first purchased by us at no mean rate, and since printed by us. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson, and Anne Mosely, at the three Pigeons, and at the Princes Arms in Saint Pauls Church-yard, 1661.
DRAMMATIS PERSONAE. GOswin a young Merchant of Bruges, viz. Florez the right Earl of Flanders Woolfort, Usurper of the Earldome, Clause King of Beggars, viz. Gerrard Father to Florez, Hubert disguised ke a Huntsman, A Lord of Flaunders Hemskirk, A Favourite of the Usurper. Lord Arnold Two Lords of Flaunders disguis'd like Beggars Lord Costin, Two Lords of Flaunders disguis'd like Beggars Iaqueline, Daughter to Gerrard. Bertha, Heir of Brabant. Van-dunck Burgomaster of Bruges Merchants, Saylor, &c. Higgen, Ferret, Prig, Snap, and others, Beggars. Boors, Souldiers Young Merchants, and others, Guests at Goswins Wedding. Margaret, Wife to Vandunck. Attendants, Boy with a Song. The Scene BRUGES.
BEGGARS BUSH. Actus Primus, Scaena Prima. Enter a Merchant and Herman. Mer. IS he then taken? Her. And brought back even now sir. Mer. He was not in disgrace? Her. No man more lov', Nor more deserv'd it, being the only man That durst be honest in this Court. Mer. Indeed We have heard abroad sir, that the State hath suffered A grea change since the Countess death▪ Her. I hah sir. Mer. My five years absence hath kept me a stranger So much to all he occurents of my Country, As you shall bind me for some short relation To make me understand the psent times. Her. I must begin then with a war was made And seven years with all cruelty continued Upon our Flanders by the Duke of Brbant The cause grew thus: During our Earls mi∣nority, Woolfrt, (who now usurps) was emplyd thither To rea about a mach between our Earl And the Daughter and Hir of Brabant; du∣ring which treaty The Brabander pretends, this Daughter was Stoln from his Court by practice of our State, Though we are all confirm'd, 'twas a sought quarrel To lay an unjust gripe upon this Earldom, It being here beliv'd the Duke of Brabant Had no such loss. This war upon't proclaim'd, Our Earl, being then a Child, although his Father Good Gerrard liv'd, yet in respect he was Chosen by the Countess favour for her Hus∣band, And but a Gentlemen, and Floriz holding Hi right unto this Country from his mother, The State thought fit in this defensive wa, Woolfort being then the only man of mark, To make him General. Mer. Which place we have heard He did discharge with honour. Her. I, so long, And with so blst successes, that the Brabander Ws forc'd (his treasures wasted, and the choice Of his best men of Ams tyr'd or cut off) To ave the fild, and sund a base retreat Back to his Country; bu so brken both I mn and meas, er'e to make head again, iherto he ss down by his loss, Nt daing, or for hnour, or revnge Agan t' attempt his fortune. But this Victory broke our State, and made a deeper hurt In Flanders then the geatest overthrow Sh ver rceivd: For Woolfort nw beholding Hmel an actions in the flattering glass O slf-deservings, and cherisn't by The strog assurance of his power, for then Al Capains of th Army were his creatures, T cmmn Souldier too at his devotion, Made so by full indulgence to their rapines And secret bunis; this strength too well known, And what it could effect, soon put in practice, As furhered by the child-hood of the Earl And thir improvidence that migh have pic't The hear f his designs, gave him ccasion To sieze the whole, and in that plight you find it. Mer. Sir, I receive the knowledge of thus much As a choice favour from you. Her. Oly I must add, Bruges holds out. Mer. Whether sir, I am going, For there last nigh I had a ship put in, And my horse waits me. Exit.
Her. I wish you a good journey. Enter Woolfor, Hubert. Wool. What? Hubert stealing from me! who disarm'd him? It was more then I commanded; take your sword, I am best guarded with it in your hand, I have seen you use it nobly. Hub. And will turn it On mine own bosom, ere it shall be drawn Unworthily or rudely. Wool. Would you leave me Without a farewel, Hubrt? fly a friend Unwearid in his study to advance you? What have I ere possess'd which was not yous? Or either did not court you to command it? Who ever yet arriv'd to any grace, Reward or trust from me, but his approaches Were by your fair reports of him preferr'd? And what is more, I ma my self your servant, In making you the master of those secrets Which not the rack of conscience could draw from me, Not I, when I askt mrcy, trut my prayers with; Yet after these assurances of love, These ties and bonds of friendship, to forsake me, Forsake me as an enemy? come you must Give me a reason. Hub. Sir, and so I will, If I may do't in private, and you hear it. Wool. All leave the room: you have your will, s down And use the liberty of our first friendship. Hub. Friendship? when you prov'd Traytor first that vanish'd; Nor do I owe you any though but hate; I know my ight hah forfeited my head; And so I may make you first understand What a strange monster you have made your sel, I welcoe it. Wool. To me this is strange language. Hub. To you? why what are you? Wool Your Prince and Master, The Earl of Flaunders. Hub. By a proper title, Rais'd to it by cunning circumvention, force, Blood, and proscriptis. Wool. And in all this wisedom; Had I not reason? when by Cerrards plots I should have first been call'd to a stict ac∣compt, How, and which way I had consum'd that mass Of money, as they term it, in the war, Who underhand had by his Ministers Detracted my geat action, made my faith And loyalty so suspected; in which ailing He sought my life by practice. Hub. With what fore-head Do you speak this to me? who (as I know't) Must and will say 'tis false. Wool. My guard there. Hub. Sir you bad me sit, and promis'd you would hear Which I now say you shal; not a ound more, For I that am contener of mine own, Am Master of your life; then here's a sword Between you and all aids, Sir; though you blind The credulous beast, the multitude, you pass not These gross untruths n me. Wool. How? gross untruths. Hub. I, and it is favourable language, They had been in a mean man lies and soul ones. Wool. You take strange license. Hub. Yes, were not those rumours Of being called unto your answers, spread By your own followers; and weak Gerrard wrought (But by your cunning practice) to believe That you were dangerous; yet not to be Punish'd by any formal course of law, But first o be made sure, and have your crimes Laid open after, which your queint train take∣ing You fled unto the Camp, and thre crav'd humbly Protection for your innocent life, and that, Since you hd scap'd the fury of the war, Yu might not fall by treason; and for proof You did not for your own ends make this dan∣ge, Some that had been before by you subornd, Came sorth and took their oaths they had been hir'd By Gerrard to your murther This once head, And easily believ'd, th' inraged Souldier
Seeing no further then the outward man, Snatch'd hstly his Ams, ran to the Court, Kill'd all that made resistance, cut in pieces Such as wer Servants, or thought Friends to Gerrard, Vowing the like to him. Wool Will you yet end? Hub. Wich he foreseeing, with his Son, the Earl, Forsook the City; and by secret ways As you give out, and we would gladly have it, Escap'd their fury; though 'tis more then fear'd They fell among the rest: Nor stand you there To let us only mourn the impious means By which you got it; but your cruelties since So far transcend your former bloody ills, As if compar'd, they only would appear Essays of mischief; do not stop your cars, More are behind yet. Wool. O repeat them not. 'Tis hell to hear them nam'd. Hub. You should have thought That hell would be your punishment when you did them. A Prince in nothing but your Princely lusts And boundless rapines. Wool. No more, I beseech you. Hub. Who was the Lord of house or land that stood Within the pospect of your covetous eye? Wool. You are in this to me a greater Tyrant Then ere I was to any. Hub. I end thus The general grief, now to my private wrong, The loss of Gerrards daughter Iaqueline, The hop'd for partner of my lawful bed, Your cruelty hath frighted from mine arms, And her I now was wandring to recover. Think you that I had reason now to leave you, When yu are grown so justly odious, That ev'n my stay here,, with your grace and vour, Makes my life irksome? here surely take it, And do me bt this fruit of al your friendship, That I may dye by you, and not your hang∣man. Wool O Hubert, these your words and rea∣sons have As well drawn drops of blood from my griev'd heart, As these tears from mine eyes; Despise them not; By all that's sacred I am serious, Hubert, You now have made me sensible what uries, Whips, hangmen, and tormentors a bad man Do's ever bear about him: let the good That you this day have done, be ever numbred, The first of your best actions; Can you think Where Florez is, or Gerrard or your love, Or any else, or all that are poscrib'? I wil resign what I usup, or have Unjustly forc'd; the days I have to live Are too too few to make them satisfaction With any penitence; yet I vow to practise All of a man Hub. O that your heart and tongue Did not now differ! Wool. By my griefs they do not; Take the good pains to search them out; 'tis worth it; You have made clean a Leper, trust me you have, And made me once more fit for the society, I hpe, of good men. Hub. Sir, do not abuse My aptness to believe. Wool. Suspect not you A faith that's built upon so true a sorrow, Make your own safeties; ask them all the ties Humanity can give; Hmskirick too shall Along with you to this so wish'd discvery, And in my name profess all that you promise; And I will give you this help ro't; I have Of late receiv'd certain intelligence That some of them are in or about Bruges To be found out; which I did then interpret The cause of that Towns standing out against me, But now am glad it may direct your purpose Of giving them their safety, and me peace. Hub. Be constant to your goodness, and you have it. Exit. Scaena Secunda. Enter three Merchants. 1 Mer. 'Tis much that you deliver of this Goswin.
2. Mer. But short of what I could; yet have the Countrey Confirm'd it true, and by a general oath, And not a man hazard his credit in it Hbars himself with such a confidence As if he were e mastr of the Sea; And not a wind upon the Saylors compass, But from one part or other was his Factor? To bring him i the bs commodities Merchant e're ventur'd for. 1. Mer. 'Tis strange. 2. Mer. Ad yet This do's in him deserve the least of wonder, Compared with other his peculir fashions, Which all admire: he's young, and rich, at least Thus far reputed so, that since he liv'd In Bruges, there was never brought to harbour So rich a Bottome but his bill would pass Unquestion'd for her lading. 3 Mer. Y he still Continues a good man. 2 Mer. So good, that but To doubt him would be held an injury Or rather malice, with the best that traffique; But this is nothing, a great stock, and fortune Crowning his judgment in his udertakings, May keep him upright that way: But that wealth Should want the power to make him dote on it, Or youth teach him to wrong it, best com∣mends His constant temper; for his outward habit 'Tis sutable to his present course of life: His table furnish'd well, but not with dainties. That please the appete only for their rareness, Or the dear pice: no given to wine or women Beyond hi health, r warrant of a man, I mean a good one; and so loves his state He will no hazard it at play; nor lend Upon the assurance f a well pen'd Letter, Although a challenge second the denial, From such as make th' opinion of their valour Their means of eeding. 1 Mer. These are ways to thrive, And the means not curs'd 2 Mer. What follows this, Makes many  with him, in their wishes, For his prosperity: for when desert Or reason leads him to be liberal, His noble mind and ready hand contend Which can add mot to his free curtesies, Or in their worth, or speed to make them so. Is there a virgin of good fame wans dowre? He is a father to her; or a Soldier That in his Countries serice, from the war Hath brought him only scars and want? his house Receives him, and relieves him with that care As if what he possess'd had been laid up For such good uses, and he steward of it. But I should lse my slf to spak him further And stale in my relation, the much good You may b witnss of, if your remove From Bruges be not speedy. 1 Mer. This report I do assure you will not hasten it; Nor would I wish a better man to deal with For what I am to part wih. 3 Mer. Never doubt it; He is your man and ours▪ only I wish His too much forwardness to embrace all bar∣gains. Suck him not in the end. 2 Mer. Have better hopes; For my part I am confident: here he comes. Enter Forez and the fourth Merchant. Flor. I take it at your own rates, your wine of Cyprus; But for your Candy sugars, they have met With such soul weaher, and are priz'd so high I cannot sve in them. 4 Mer. I am unwilling To seek anoher Chap-man; make me offer Of something near my price, that may assure me Yu can deal for them. Flor. I both can; and will, But not with too much loss; your bill of la∣ding Speaks of two hundred chefts, valued by you At thirty thousand gders: I will have them▪ At twenty eight; so, in the payment of Three thousand sterling, you fall only in Two hundred pound. 4 Mer. You know they are so cheap— Flor. Why look you, I'le deal fairy, there's in prson And at your suit, a Pirate, but unable To make you satisfaction, and pst hope
To live a week, if you should prosecute What you can prove against him; set him free, And you shall have your money to a stiver, And present payment. 4 Mar. This is above wonder, A Merchant of your ranke, that have at sea So many Bottoms in the danger of These water-theves should be a means to save them, It more importing you for your own sfety, To be at charge to sur the sea of them, Then stay the swrd of Justice, that is ready To fall on one so conscious of his guilt Tht he dares not dey it. Flo. Yu mistake me, If you think I would chrish in this Captain The wng he did to you or any ma, I ws ltely with him, (aving fist from others True tstimony ben aured, a man O more desert never put from the shore.) I read his ltters of Mart from this State grant∣ed, Fr the rcovery of such losses as He ad receiv'd in Spain; 'twas that he aim'd at, Not at three tuns of wine, bisket, or beef, Which his necssity made him take from you. If he had pilag'd you near, or sunk your ship, Or thrown your men o're-boord, then he de∣serv'd The Laws exreamest rigour: But since want Of what he could not live without, compell'd him To that he did, (which yet our State calls death) I pity his misfortune; and to work you To some compassion of them, I come up To your own price: save him, the goods are mine; If not, seek else where, I'le not deal for them. 4 Mer. Well Sir, for your love I will once be lead To change my purpose. Flo. For your prof rather. 4 Mer. I'e pesently make means for his dis∣charge, Till when I leave you. 2 Mer. What do you think of this? 1 Mer. As of a deed of oble pity, guided By a strong judgement. 2 Mer. Save you Master Goswin. Flor. Good day to all. 2 Mer. We bring you the refusal Of more Commodities. Flor. Are you the owners Of the Ship that last night put into the Har∣bour? 1 Mer. Both of the Ship and lading. Flor. What's the fraught? 1 Mer. Indico, Quitchincel, choise Chyna stff. 3 Mer And cloth of Gold brought from Camall. Flor. Rch lading, For which I were your chapman, but I am Alrady out of cash. 1 Mer. I'le give you day For the moiety of all. Flor. How long? 3 Mer. Sx moneths. Flor. 'Tis a fair ffr, which (if we agree About the prizes) I with thanks accept of, And will make pesent payment of the est; Some two hous hence I'le come aboord 1 Mer. The Guner shall speak you welcome. Flor. I'le not fail. 3 Mer. Good morrow. Exit. Mer. Flor. Heaven grant my Ships a safe return before The day of this great payment, as they are. Expected three moneths sooner, nd my credit Stands good with all the wold. Enter Gerrard. Ger. Bless my good Master; The prayers of your poor Beads-man ever shall Be sent up for you. Flor. God 'a mercy Clause, There's something to put thee in minde here∣after To think of me. Ger. May he that gave it you Reward you for it, with encrase, good Master. Flo. I thrive the better for thy prayers. Ger. I hope so. This three years have I sed upon your bounties, And by the fire of your blest charity warm'd me, And yet, good Master, pardn me, that must, Though I have now rceiv'd your almes; pre∣sume To make on sute more to you. Flor. What is't Clause?
Ger Yet do not think me impudent I be∣seech you, Since hitherto your charity hath prevented My begging your relief; 'tis not for money Nor cloaths (good Maste) but your good word for me. Flo. That thou shalt have, Clause, for I think thee honest. Ger. To morrow then (dear Mster) take the trouble Of walking early unto Beggars Bush, And as you see me among others (Bethren In my affliction) when you are demanded Which you like best among us, point out me, And then pass by, as if you knew me not. Flo. But what will that advantage thee? Ger. O much, Sir; 'Twill give me the preheminence of the rest, Make me a King among 'em, and protect me From all abe such as are stronge might Offer my ag; Sir, at your better leizure I will inform you further of the good It may do to me. Flo. 'Troth thou mak'st me wonder; Have you a King and Commonwealth among you? Ger. We have, and there are Sates are go∣vern'd worse. Flo. Ambition among beggars? Ger. Many great ones Would part with half their 'states to have the place And credit to beg in the first file, Master: But shall I be so much bound to your furthe∣rance In my petition? For. That thou sht not miss of, Nor any worldly care make me forget it; I will be early there. Ger. Heavn bless my Master. Exeunt. Actus Secunds, Scaena Prima. Enter Higgen, Ferret, Prig, Clause, Iaculine, Snap, Gykes, and other Beggars. Hig. COme Pices of the ragged regi∣me, You o' the blood, Prig my most upright Lord, And these (what name or title e're they bear) Iarkman, or Patrico, Cranke, or Claperdud∣geon, Fratr or Abram man; I speak to all That stnd in fair Ection for the title Of King of Beggars, with the command ad∣jyning; Higgen, your Orator in this Inter-regnum, That whilome was your Dommerer; doth be∣seech you. All to stand fair, and put your selves in rank, That the fst comer may at his first view Make a free choice, to say up the question. Fer. Pr. 'Tis done Lord Higgen. Hig. Thanks o Prince Prig, Prince Ferret. Fer. Well, pray my Masters all Ferret be chosen; Y'are like to have a merciful milde Prince of me. Prig. A very tyrant, I, an arrant tyrant, If e're I come to reign; therefore look to't, Except you do provide me hum enough, And Lour to bouze with: I must have my Ca∣pons And Turkeyes brought me in, with my gren Geese, And ducklings i'th' season; fine fat chickens; O if you chance where an eye of tame Phe∣sants O Partridges are kept, see they be mine, Or straight I seize on all your priviledge, Places, revenues, offices, as forfeit; Call in your crutches, wooden legs, fale bel∣lies, Forc'd eyes and teeth, with your dead arms, nor leave you A durty clout to beg with o' your heads, Or an old rag with Butter, Frankinsence, Brimstone and Rozn, birdlime, blood, and cream, To make you an old sore; not so much sope As you may fme with i'h' faling-sickness; The very bag you bea, and the brown dish Shall be escheated. Al your daintist dells▪ too I will deflowr, and take your dearest Doxys From your warm sides; and then some one cold night I'le watch you what old barn you go to roost in, And there I'le smother you all i'h' musty hay.
Hig. This is tyrant-like indeed: But what would Gynkes Or Clause be here, if either of them should reign? Ger. Best ask an ass, if he were made a Cam∣mel, What he would be or a dog, and he were a Lion. Gynks. I care not what you are, Sirs, I shall be A beggar, still, I am sure, find my self there. Enter Florez. Snap. O here a Judge comes. Hig. Cry a Judge, a Judge. Flo. What ail you, Sirs? what means this out-cry? Hig. Master, A sort of poor souls met: Gods fools, good Ma∣ster, Have had some little variance amongst our selves Who should be honestest of us, and which lives Uprightest in his call: Now, 'cause we thought We ne're sould gree on't our selves, because Indeed 'tis hard to say; we all dissolv'd to put it To whom that should come next, and that's you▪ Mastership, Who, I hope, will temine it as your mind servs you, Right, and no otherwise we ask it: which, Which does your Worship think is he? sweet Mster, Look ver us all, and tell us; we are seven of us, Like to the seven wise Masters, or the Planets, Flo. I should judge this man with the grave beard, And i he be not— Ger. Bless you, good Master, bless you. Flo. I would he were. There's something too, amongst you, To keep you all honest. Exit. Snap. King of heaven go with you. Omn. Now good reward him, May he never want it, to comfort still the poor in a good hour. Fer. What is't? see: Snap has got it. Snap. A good crown, marry. Prig. A crown of gold. Fer. For our new King: good luck. Gynks. To the common treasury with it; if't be gold Thither it must. Prig. Spoke like a Patriot, Ferret.— King Clause, I bid God save thee first, first, Clause, After this golden token of a crown; Where's Oratour Higgen, with his gratulating speech now, In all our names? Fer. Here he is pumping for it. Gyn. H'has cugh'd the second time, 'tis but once more, And then it comes. Fer. So, out with all: expect now— Hig. Thou that ar chosen, venerabl Clause, Our King and Sovereign, Monarch o'th' Maun∣ders. Thus we throw up our Nb-ceats first for joy, And then our filches▪ last we clap our fambles, Three subject signs, we do it without envy: For who is he here did not wish thee chosen, Now thou art chosen? ask 'em: all will say o, Nay swea't; 'is for the King; but let that pass. When last in conference at the bouzing ken This other day, we sate about our dead Prince Of famous memory, (rest go with his rags:) And that I saw thee at the tables end Rise mov'd, and gravely leaning on one Crutch, Lift the other like a Scepter at my head, I then presag'd thou shortly wouldst be King, And now thou art so: but what need presage, To us, that might have read it in thy beard, As well as he that chose thee? by that beard Thou wert found out, and mark'd for Sove∣raignty. O happy beard! but happier Prince, whose beard Was o remark'd as marked out our Prince, Not bating us a hair. Lng may it grow, Ad thick, nd fair, that who lives under it May live as safe as unde Beggars Bush, Of which this is the thing, hat bu ype. Omn. Excellen, xcllnt O  good Higgen; Give him leave to sit; the in, well pken Higen. Hig is is the beard, the bsh, or bshy∣bar,
Under whose ld and silver ign 'twas said So many Ages since we all should smile On impositions, taxes, grievances, Knots in a State, and whips unto a Subject, Lye lurking in this beard, but all hem'd out: If now the beard be such, what is the Prince That owes the beard? a father; no, a grand∣father; Nay, the great-grandfather of you his people. He will not force away your hens, your bacon, When you have ventr'd hard for't, nor take from you The fattest of your puddings; under him Each man shall eat his own stoln eggs and but∣ter, In his own shade, or sun-shine, and enjoy His own dear Del, Doxy, or Mort, at night, In his own straw, with his own shirt, or sheer, That he hath filtch'd that day, I, and possess What he can puchase, back or belly cheats To his own prp; he will have no purveyors For Pigs and Poultry. Ger. That we must have my learned Ora∣tour, It is our will, and every man to keep In his own path and circuit. Hig. Do you hear? You must hereafter maund on your own pads he saies. Ger. And what they get there is their own, besides To give good words. Hig. Do you mark? to cut bene whids, That is the second Law. Ger. And keep afoot The humble and the common phrase of beg∣ging, Lest me discover us. Hig. Yes, and cry someimes, To move compassion: Sir, there is a table That doth cmmand all these things, and en∣joys 'em Be perfect in their crutches, their fain'd paisters And thir true pass-ports, with the ways to stammer, And to be dumb, and dea, and blind, and lame; Thre all he halting paces are set down I'th' learned language. Ger. Thither I refer them; Those you at leasure shall intepret to them; We love no heaps of Laws where few will serve Omn. O gracious Prince, 'save, 'save the good King Clause. Hig. A Song to crown him. Fer. St a Centinel out first. Sn. The word? Hig A Cove comes, and fumbumbis to it. — Strike. The Song. CAst our caps and cares away, this is beg∣gars Holy-ay; At the Crowning of our King, thus we ever dance and sing: In the world look out and see, where so happy a Prince as he? Where the Nation live so free, and so merry as do we? Be it peace, or be it war▪ here at liberty we are, And enjoy our ease and rest; to the field we are not prest; Nor are called into the Town, to be troubled with the Gown. Hang all Offices we cry, an the Magistrate to, by: When the subiie's increast we are not a pen∣ny ceast: Nor will any go to law with the Bgar for a straw. All which happiness he brags, he doth ow unto his rags. Enter Snap, Hubert, Hemskirk. Snap. A Cove: Fumbumbis. Prig. To your postures; arm. Hub. Yonder's the Town▪ I see it. Hemsk. There's our danger Indeed afore us, if our shaddows save not. Hig. Bless your good Worships. Fer. One small piece of mony Prig. Amongst us all poor wretches. Ger. Blind and lame. Gynks. For his ske that gives all. Hig. Piful Worships. Snap. One little oyt. Enter Iaculine. Iac. King, by you leave, where are you?
Ger. To buy a little bread, Hig. To feed so many Mouths as will ever pray for you. Prig. Here be seven of us. Hig. Seven good Master, O remember seven, Seven bssings. Fer. Remember, gentle Worship. Hig. 'Gainst seven deadly sins, Prig. And seven sleepers. Hig. I they be hd of heart, and will give nothing.— Alas, we had not a charity this three days. Hub. There's amongst you all? Fer. Heaven reward you. Prig. Lord reward you. Hig. The Prince of pitty bless thee. Hub. Do I see? or is't my fancy that would have it so? Ha? 'tis her face: come hither maid, Iac. What ha' you, Bells for my squirrel? I ha' giv'n Bun meat; You do not love me, do you? catch me a but∣tefly, And I'le love you again; when? can you tell? Peace, we go a birding: I shall have a fine thing. Hub. Her voice too saies the same; but for my head I would not that her manners were so chang'd: Hear me thou honest fellow; what's this may∣den That lives amongst you here? Gyn. Ao, ao, ao, ao. Hub. How? nothing but signes? Gyn. Ao, ao, ao, ao. Hub. 'Tis strange; I would fain have it her, but not her thus. Hig. He is de-de-de-de-de-de-deaf, and du-du-dude-dumb Sir. Hub. 'Slid they did all speak plain even now methought; Dost thou know this same maid? Sn. Why-why-why-why-which, gu-gu-gu-gu Gods fool, She was bo-bo-bo-bo-brn at the barn yonder, By be-be-b-be-Bggars Bushbo bo-Bush; Her name is My-my-my-my-my-match, so was her mo-mo-mo-mothers too-too. Hub. I understand no word she says; how long Has she been here? Sn. L-lo-long enough to be ni-ni nigled, and she ha' go-go-go-good luck. Hub. I must be better inform'd then by this way. Here was another face too that I mark'd, O the old mans: but they are vanish'd all Most suddenly; I will come here again: O▪ that I were so happy as to find it, What I yet hope it is put on. Hm. What mean you, Sir, To stay there with that stammerer? Hub. Farewel friend;— It will be worth return to search: Come, Protect us our disguise now; pre'thee Hemskirk If we b taken, ow dost thou imagine This Town will use us, that hath tood so long Out against Woolfort? Hem. Ev'n to hang us forth Upon their walls a sunning, to make Crows meat; If I were no assur'd o' the Burgomater, And had a pretty scuce to ee a niece there, I should scarce venture. Hub. Come, 'tis now too late To look back at the prts: good luck, and en∣ter. Exeunt. Scaena Secunda. Enter Florez. Flo. Still blowst thou there? and rom all other parts, Do all my Agents sleep, that nothing comes? There's a conspiracy of winds and servants, If not of Elements, to ha' me break. What should I think, unless the Seas and sands Had swallow'd up my ships? or fire had spoil'd My ware-houses? or death devour'd my Factors? I must ha' had some eturns. Enter Merchants. 1 Mer. 'Save you Sir. Flo. 'Save you. 1 Mer. No news yet o' your Ships? Flo. Not any yet Sir. 1 Mer. 'Tis strange. Fl. 'Tis true Sir▪ what a voice was here now?
This was one passing bel; a thouand ravens Sung in that man now, to presage my ruine. 2 Mer. Goswin, good day, these wds are vey constant. Flo They are so Sir. to hurt— 2 Mer. Ha' you had no Letters Lately from England, nor from Denmark? Flo. Neither. 2 Mer. This wind bings them; nor no news over land, Through Spain, from the Straights? Flo. Not any. 2 Mer. I am sorry, Sir. Flo. They alk me down; and as 'tis said of Vultures, They scent a field sought, and do smell the car∣kasses B many hundred miles: So do these my wracks At greater distances: why, thy will heaven Come on and be: yet if thou please, preserve me But in mine own adventure here at home, Of my chast love▪ to keep me worthy of her, It shall be put in scale against all il fortunes: I am not broken yet, nor should I fll, Me thinks, with less then that that ruines all. Exit. Scaena Tertia. Enter Van-dunck, Hubert, Hemskirck, and Margaret, Boors. Van. Captain, you are welcome; so is this your fiend Most safly welcome; though our Town stand out Against your Master, you shall find good quar∣ter; The truth is, we not love him. Meg. some wine; Let's tak a little treason, if we can Talk treason 'gainst the Traytors; by your leave Gentlemen, We here in Bruges think he does usurp, And therefore I am bold with him. Hub. Sir, your boldness Haply become, your mouth, but not our ears, While we are his servants; And as we come here Not to ask questions, walk forth on your wals, Visi▪ your Courts of Guard, view your mu∣nition, Ask of your corn-provisions, nor iquire Into the least, as spies upon your strengths; So let's entrt we may receive from you Nothing in passage or discourse, but what We may with gladness ad our honesties hear, And that shll ealou welcome. Van. God; let's drink then; Mage, fill out; I keep mine own pearl still Captain, Mar. I hang fast man. Hem. Old Jewels commend their keeper, Sir Van. Here's to you with a heart, my Cap∣tains friend, With a good heart; and if this make us speak Bold words anon, 'tis all under the Rse Forgotten: drown all memory when we drink. Hub. 'Tis freely spken, noble Burgomaster, I'le do you ight. Hem. Nay, Sir, mine heir Vandunk Is a tue Sates man. Van. Fill my Captains cup there; O that your Mster Woolfort Had been an honest man! Hub. Sir? Van. Under the Rose. Hm. Her's to you Marget. Mar. Welcome, welcome Captain. Van. Well said my pearl still. Hem. And how does my Niece? Almost a woman, I think? This friend of mine I drew alon with me through so much hazard, Only to see her; she was my errnd. Van. I, a kind Uncle you are, (fill him his glass) That in seven years could not find leasure.— Hem. No, It's not so much. Van. I'le bate you nev'r an hour on't: It was bfore the Brabander 'gan his war, For moon-shine, i'th' water there, his daugh∣ter That never was lost; yet you could not fide time To see a Kinswoman: but she is worth the see∣ing, Sir▪
Now you are , you ask if she were a wo∣man? She is a woman▪ Sir; fetch her forth Marget. Exit Marg. And a fine woman, and has suitors. Hem. How▪ What suitors are they? Van. Batchelors; young Burgers: And one a gallant, the young Prince of Mer∣chants We call him here in Bruges. Hem. How?  Merchant? I thought Van-dunck, you had understood me better, And my Niece too, so trusted to you by me, Tan to admit of such in name of suitors. Van. Such? he is such a such, as were she mine, I'de give him thirty thousand Crowns with her. Hem. But the same things, Sir, fit not you and me. Exit. Va. Why, give's some wine then; this will fit us all: Here's to you still, my Captains friend; all out: And stil, would Woolfort were an honest man, Under the Rose I speak it: But this Mrchant I, a brave boy; he lives so i'the Town here, We know not what to think on him; At some times We fea he wil b bankrup, he does stetch Tnter his credit so; embraces all, And to't, the winds have ben contrary long: But then if he should ave al his returns, We tink he would be a King, and a half sure . Yur  a Trytor, for all this Under the Roe;  to you; and usurps The Ealdom from a btter man. Hub. I marry Sir, Where is that an? Van. Nay soft▪ and I could tel you, 'Tis ten to one I would not: here's my hand; I love not Woolfort; sit you still with that: Here comes my Capain again, and his fine Nce; And thre's my Merchant, view him wll; fil wine here. Entr Hemskirk Bertha, and Florez. Hem. You must not only know me for your Unce, Nw, but obey me▪ you go cast your self Away upon a dunghil here? a Merchant? A petty fellow? one that makes his trade With Oaths and perjuries? Flo What is that you say, Sir? If it be me you speak of, as your eye Seems to direct, I wish you would speak to me, Sir. Hem. Sir, I do say she is no merchandize; Will that suffice you? Flo. Mechandise; good Sir! Though ye be Kinsman to her, take no leave thence To use me with contempt: I ever thought Your Niece above all price. Hem And do so still▪ Sir; I assure you her rae's at more then you are worth. Flo. Yu do not know what a Gentleman's worth, Sir, Nor can you value him. Hub. Well said Merchant. Van. Ny, Lt him alne, and ply your tter. Hem. A Gentleman? What o'the wooll-pack? or the sugar-chest? Or lists of Velvet? which is't? pound or yard, You vent your Cntry by? Hub. O Hemkirk, fie. Van. Com do not mind 'em; drink, he is  Woolfort, Capain, I advise you. Hem. Als, my pretty man, I thik' be angy, by its look: Come hither, Turn this wa a little: If it were the blood O Charcmain, s't my (for ougt I know) B some god Botchers issue he in Bruges. Flo. Hw? Hem. N, I'e not certain of that; of this I am, If it nce buy and sell, its gentry is gon. Flo. H, a! Hem. Yu are angry though ye laugh. Flo. N, now 'tis pitty O you poor arguent Do not you the Lords O land (if you be any) sell the grass, The corn, the straw, the milk, the cheese? Van. And butter; Remember butter; do not leave ou butter. Flo. The Bfs and Muttons that your
grouds are stor'd wih? Swin, with the very mast, bside the woods? Hem. No, for these sordid uses we have Te∣nans, Or else ou Byliffs. Flo. Have not we, Sir, chap-men, And Factors then, to answer these? your errour Fetch▪c from the Heraulds A B C and said over With your Court-faces, once an hour, shall ne∣ver Make me mistake my self. Do not your Law∣yers Sel all their practice, as your Priests their Prayers? What is not bought and sold? The company That you had last, what had you for't, y'faith? Hem. You now grow sawcy. Flo. Sure I have been bred Still with my honest liberty, and must use it. Hem. Upon your equals then, Flo. Sir, he that will. Provoke me first, makes himself my equal. Hem. Do you hear? no more. Flo. Yes Sir, this little, I pray you, And't shall be aside, then after as you please. You appear the Uncle, Sir, o her I love More then mine eyes; and I have heard your scorns, With so much scoffing, and so much shame, As each stive which is greater: but beieve me, I suck'd not in this patience with my milk. Do not presume, because you see me young, Or cast desights on my profession, For the civility and tameness of it. A good man bears a contumely worse Than he would do an injury. Proceed not To my ffnce: wrong is not still succesful, Indeed it is not: I would approach your Kins∣woman With all respect done to your self and her. Hem. A ay companion; handling her? take that. Flo. Nay I do love no blows, Sir, there's ex∣change. Hub. Hold, Sir. Mar. O murther. Ber. Hep, my Goswin. Mar. Man. Van. Let 'em alone; my life for one▪ Flo. Nay come you have will. Hub None to offend you; I Sir? Flo. He that had thank himself: not hand her? yes Sir. And clasp her, and embrace her; and (would she Now go with me) bear her through all her race, Her Father, Brethren, and her Uncles, arm'd, And all their Nephewes, though they stood a wood Of Pikes, and wall of Cannon: Kiss me Gertrude; Quake no, but kiss me. Van. Kiss him, girl, I bid you: My Merchant royal, fear no Uncles: hang 'em, Hang up all Uncles: Are we not in Bruges? Under the Rose here? Flo. In this cirle, Love, Thou art as safe as in a Tower of brass; Let such as do wrong, fear. Van. I, that's good, Let Woolfort ook to that. Flo. Sir, here she stads, Your Niece, and my Beloved. One of these titles She must apply to; if unto the last, Not all the anger can be sent unto her In frown, or voyce, or other art, shall force her, Had Hercules a hand in't: Come, my Joy, Say thou art mine aloud, Love, and profess it. Van. Do; and I drink to it. F. Prethe say so, Love. Ber. 'Twould take away the honour from my blushes: Do not play the Tyrant, sweet; they speak it. Hem. I thank you Niece. Flo. Sir, thank  for your life, And fetch your sword within. Hem. You insult too much With your good fortune, Sir. Eit Florez. Hub. A brave clear spirit: Hemskirk you were to blame; a civil habit Oft covers a good man; and you may meet In person of a Merchant, with a soul As resolute, and free, and always worthy, As else in any file of mankind: pray you, What meant you so to flight him? Hem. 'Tis done now, Ask no more of it, I must suffer. Exit Hemskirk. Hub. This
Is still the punishment of rashness, sorrow; Well, I must to the woods, for nothing here Will be got out; there I may chance to learn Somewhat to help my enquiries further. Van. Ha? A looking-glass. Hub. How now, brave Burgomaster? Van. I love no Woolforts, and my name's Van-dunck. Hub. Van-drunk it's rather: Come, go sleep within. Van. Earl Florez is right heir, and this same Woolfort, Under the Rose I speak it,— Hub. Very hardly. Van. Usurps: and a rank Traytor as ever breath'd; And all that do uphold him. Let me go, No man shall hold me, that upholds him; Do you uphold him? Hub. No. Van. Then hold me up. Exeunt. Enter Florez and Hemskirk. Hem. Sir, I presume you have a sword of your own, That can so handle anothers. Flo. Faith you may, Sir. Hem. And ye have made me have so much better thoughts of you, As I am bound to call you forth. Flo. For what, Sir? Hem. To the repairing of mine honour and hurt here, Flo. Express your way. Hem. By fight, and speedily. Flo. You have your will: Require you any more? Hem. That you be secret, and come single, Flo I will. Hem. As you are the Gentleman you would be thought? Flo. Without the Conjuration, and I'le bring Only my sword, which I will fit to yours, I'le take his length within. Hem. Your place now, Sir? Flo. By the sand-hills. Hem. Sir, nearer to the woods, If you thought so, were fitter. Flo. There then. Hem. Good. Your time? Flo. 'Twixt seven and eight. Hem. You'l give me, Sir, Cause to report you worthy of my Niece, If you come like your promise. Flo. If I do not, Let no man think to call me unworthy first, I'le do' my self, and justly wish to want her. Exeunt. Actus Tertius, Scaena Prima. Enter three or four Boors. 1 B. COme, English Beer hostess, English Beer by th' belly. 2 B. Start Beer boy, stout and strong Ber▪ so, sit down lads, And drink me upsey-Duch; Frolick, and fear not. Enter Hig. like a Sow-gelder, singing. Hig. Have ye any work for the Sow-gelder, boa? My horn goes too high, too low, too high, too low. Have ye any Pigs, Calves, or Colts, Have ye any lambs in your holts, To cut for the stone? Here comes a cunning one. Have ye any branches to spade; Or e're a fair maid That would he a Nun, Come kiss me, 'tis done. Hark how my merry horn doth blow, Too high, too low, too high, too low. 1 B. O excellent! two pence a piece boys, two pence a piece. Give the boys some drink there. Piper wet your whistle. Can'st tell me a way now, how to cut off my wives Concvpiscence? Hig. I'le sing ye a Song for't.
The SONG. TAke her, and hug her, And turn her and tug her; And turn her again boy, again, Then if she mumble, Or if hr taile tumble, Kisse her aain boy▪ amain. Do thy endeavour, To take off her feaver, Then her disease no longor will raign. If nothing will serve her, Then thus to preserve her, Swinge her amain oy, amain. Give her cold jelly To make up her belly, And once a day swinge her again. If she stand all these pains Then knock out her brains, Her disease no longer will reign. 1. Bo. Moe excellent, more excellent, sweet Sow-gelder,. 2. Po. Three-pence a piece, three pence a piece. Hig. Will you hear a Song how the Divell was gelded? 3. Bo. I, I, let's hear the Divell roar, Sow-gelder. 1. Bo. Groats a piece, groats a piece, groats a piece. Enter Prig. and Ferret. Prig. Will ye see any feats of actvity, Some eight of hand, leigerdemain? hey pass, Presto, be gone there? 2. Bo. Sit down Jugler. Prig. Srra, play you your art wlls draw near piper: Look you my honest friends, you se my hand; Plain dealing is no Divell: lend me some money; Twelve-pence a piece will serve. 1. 2. B. Ther, there, Prig. I thank you, Thank ye heartily: when shall I pay ye? All B. Ha, ha, ha, by 'th mase this was a fine trick. Prig A merry slight toyt but now I'le shew your worships A trick indeed, Hig Mk him well now my Masters. Prig. Here are three balls, These balls shall be three bullets, One, two, and three t ascentibus, malentibus, Presto, be gone: they are vansh'd; fair play Gentlemen, Now these three, like three bullets, from your three noses Will I pluck prsently: feare not, no harme boyes, Titere, tu patule. 1. B. Oh, oh, oh. Pri. Recubans sub fermine fagi. 2. B Ye pull too hard; ye pull too hard. Prig Stand fair then: Silvestram trim tram. 3 B. Hold, hold, hold. Prig. Come alst bullets three▪ with a whim-wham: Have ye their moneys? Hig. Yes, yes. 1. B. Oh rare Jugler. 2. C. Oh admirable Jugler, Prig. Oe trick more yet; Hey, come aloft: sa, sa, flim, flum, tara∣dumbis? East, west, north, south, now flye like Iak with a oumbis. Now all your money's gone: pray search your pockets. 1. B. Humb. 2. B. He, 3. B. The Devill a penny' here, Prig. Tis was a rare trick. 1. B. But 'twould be a farre rarer t re∣store it. Prig. I'le do ye that too: look upon me arnestly, And move not any wayes your eyes from this place, This button here: pow, whir, whiss, shake your pockets. 1. B. B'th msse 'is here again boye. Prig. Rst ye rry; My fist trck has paid me. All B. I, take i, take it, And take some drink, too. Prig. Not a drop now I thank you; Away, we are discove'd else. Exit.
Enter Gerrard like a blind Aqua∣vitae man, and a boy singing the SONG. BRing out your Cony-skins, fair maids to me, And hold 'em fair, that I may see; Grey▪ black, and blew: for your smaller skins, I'le give ye looing-glasses, pins. And for your whole Coney, here's ready ready money. Come gente Jone, do thou begin, With thy black, black, black Cony skin. And Mary then, and Jane will follow, With their silver-hair'd skins, and their yellow The white Cony-skin, I will not lay by, For though it be faint, 'tis faire to the eye, The grey it is warm but yet for my money, Give me the bonny, bonny black Coney. Come away fair maids, put your ware away. Cony-skins, Cony-skins, have ye any Cony-skins, I have fine brace-lets, and sine silver pins. Ger. Buy any brand-wine, buy any brand-wine? Boy Have ye any Cony-skins. 2. B. My fine Canary-bird, there's a Cake for thy worship, 1. B. Cme, fill, fill, fill suddenly: le's see Sir, What's his? Ger. A penny Sir. 1. B. Fill till't be six-pence, And there's my pig. Boy. This is a counter Sir. 1. B. A counter? stay ye, what are these then? O execrable Jugle! O damn'd Jugler! Look in your hose, hoa: this comes of look∣ing forward. 3. B. Divell a Dunkirk! what a rogue's this Jugler, This hey pass, repass, h'as repast us sweetly. 2. B. Do ye call these tricks: Enter Higgen. Hig. Have ye any ends of gold or silver. 2. B. This fellow comes to mock us; gold or silver? cry copper. 1. B. Yes my good friend. We have e'ne an end of all we have. Hig. 'Ts well Sir, You have the less to care for: gold and silver, Exit. Enter Prig. Pr Have ye any old cloakes to sell, have ye any old cloaks to sell. Exit. 1. B. Cloakes? look about ye boyes: mine's gone. 3. B A— juggle 'em? —o' their Prestos: mine's gone too. 3. B. Here's mine yet. 1. B. Come, come, let's drink then: more brand-wine. Boy Here Sir. 1. B If e're I catch your Sow-gelder, by this hand I'le strip him; Were ever fools so ferkt? we have two clokes yet, And all our caps; the Divell take the flincher. All B. Yaw, yaw, yaw, yaw. Enter Hemskirk. Hem. Good do'n my honest fellows, You are merry here I see. 3. B. 'Ti all we have lft Sir. Hem. What hast thou! Aqua-vitae? Boy, Yes. Hem. Fill out then; And give these honest fellows round. All b. We thank ye. Hem. May I speak a word in private to ye? All b. Yes Sir. Hem. I have a business for you, honest friends, If you dare lnd your help, shall get you crowns. Ger. H? Lead me a little nearer, boy. 1. B. What is't Sir? If it be any thing to puchase money, Which is our want, command us. Boors. All, all, all Sir. Hem. You know e young spuce Merchant in Bruges. 2. B Who, Master Goswin? Hem. That: he owes me money, And here in town there is no stirring of him. Ger. Say ye so? Hem. This day upon a sure appointment,
He meets me mile hence, by the Chase side, Under the row of Okes, do you know it? All b. Yes Sir. Hem. Give 'em more drink: there if you dare but venture When I shall give the word to seize upon him, Here's twenty pound. 3. Bo. Beware the Jugler. Hem. If he resist, down with him; have no mercy. 1. Bo. I warrant you: wee'l hamper him. Hem. To discharge you, I have a warrrant here about me. 3. Bo. Here's our warrant, This carries fire i'the taile. Hem. Away with me then, The time drawes on, I must remove so insolent a Suitor, And if he be so rich, make him pay ransome Ere he see Bruges towres again: thus wise men Repaire the hurts they take by a disgrace, And piece the Lyons skin with the Foxes case. Ger. I am glad I have heard this sport yet, Hem. There's for thy drink, come pay the house within boyes, And loose no time. Ger. Away with all our haste too. Exeunt. Scaena Secunda. Enter Florez. Flo. NO wind blow faire yet? no re∣turn of moneys? Letters? nor any thing, to hold my hopes up? Why then 'tis destin'd, that I fall, fall mi∣serably, My credit I was built on, sinking with me. Thou boysterous North-wind, blowing my misortunes, And rosting all my hopes to cakes of coldness, Yet stay thy fury: give the gentle South Yet leave to court those aies that bring me safety, And you auspicious fires, bright twins in heaven Daunce on the shrowds: he blowes still stub∣bornly, And on his boysterous rack rides my sad ruine; There is no help, there can be now no comfort, To morrow with the Sun-set, sets my credit. Oh misery! thou curse of man, thou plague, In the midst of all our stength thou strik'st us▪ My vertuous love is toss'd too, all what I have been, No more hereafter to be seen then shadow; To prison now well, yet there's this hope left me, I may sink fairly under this dayes venture, And so to morrow's cross', and all those curses: Yet manly I'le invite my fate, base fortune Shall never say, she has cut my throat in fear. This is the pace his challenge call'd me to, And was a happy one at this time for me, For let me fall before my foe i'the field, And not at barr, before my creditors; Aa's kept his word: now Sir, your swords tongue only Loud as you dare, all other language,— Enter Hemskirk. Hem. Well Sir, You shall not be long troubled: draw. Flo. 'Tis done Sir, And now have at ye, Hem. Now Enter Boores. Flo. Betraid to Vilains? Slaves, ye shall buy me bravely, And thou base coward. Enter Gerrard and beggars. Ger. Now upon 'em bravely, Conjure 'em soundly boyes. Boores. Hold, hold. Ger. Lay on still, Down with that Gentleman rogue, swinge him to sirrup: Retire Sir, and take breath: follow & take him, Take all, 'tis lawfull prize. Boores. We yield. Ger. Down with 'em Into the wood, and rifle 'em, tew 'em, swinge 'em, Knock me their brains into their breeches. Exeunt. Boores. Hold, hold. Flo. What thse men are I know not, nor for what cause They should thus thrust themselves into my danger, Can I imagin. But sre heavens hand was in't;
Nor why this coward knave should deale so basely To eat me up with slaves: but heaven I thank thee, I hope thou hast reserv'd me to an end Fit for thy creature, and worthy of thy honour: Would all my other dangers here had suffered, With what a joyfull heart should I go home then? Where now heaven knowes, like him that waits his sentence, Or hears his passing-bell; but there's my hope still. Enter Gerrard. Ger. Blessing upon you Master. Flo. Thank ye; leave me, For by my troth I have nothing now to give thee. Ge. Indeed, I do not ask, si, only it grieves me To see you look so sad; now goodness keep ye From troubles in your mind. Flo. If I were troubled, What could thy comfort do? prethee Clause, leave me. Ger Good master be not angry; for what I say Is out of true love to ye. Flo. I know thou lov'st me. Ger. Good Mr. blame that love then, if I prove so sawcy. To ask ye why ye are sad. Flo. Most true I am so, And such a sadnesse I have got will sink me. Ger. Heaven shield it, sir, Flo. Faith, thou must lose thy master. Ger. I had rather lose my neck sir: would I knew— Flo. What would the knowledge do thee good, so miserable Thou canst not help thy self? when all my ways Nor all the friends I have— Ger. You do not know, sir, What I can d cures sometimes, for mens cares Flow, where they least expect 'em. Flo. I know thou wouldst do, But farewell Clause & pray for thy poor n ater. Ger. I will not leave ye. Flo. How? Ger. I dare not leave ye, And till ye beat me dead, I must not leave ye. By what ye hold most precious, by heavens goodness, As your fair youth may prosper, good Sir tell me: My mind believes yet something's in my power May ease you of this trouble. Flo. I will tell thee, For a hundred thousand crowns upon my credit, Tken up of Merchants to supply my traffiques, The winds and weather envying of my fortune, And no return to help me off, yet shwing, To morrow, Clause, to morrow, which must come In spron, thou shalt find me poor, and broken▪ Ger. I cannot bame your grief sir. Flo. Now what sayst thou? Ge. I say you should not shrink; for he that gave ye, Can give you more; his power can bring ye off, sir; When friends & all forsake you, yet he sees you. Flo. That's all my hope. Ger Hope still sir; are you ty'd Within the compasse of a day, good master, To pay this mass of money? Flo. Ev'n to morrow; But why do I stand mocking of my misery? Is't not enough the floods, & friends forget me? Ger. Will no lesse serve? Flo. What if it would? Ger. Your patience, I do not ask to mock ye: 'tis a great sum, A sum for mighty men to start and stick at; But not for honest: have ye no friends left ye; None that have felt your bounty, worth this duty? Flo. Duty? thou knowst it not. Ger. It is a duty, And as a duty from those men that have felt ye, Should be return'd again: I have gain'd by ye, A daily almes these seven yeares you have showr'd me, Will half supply your want? Flo. Why dost thou fool me? Canst thou work miracles? Ger. To save my master, I can work this. Flo. Thou wilt make me angry with thee. Ger. For doing good? Flo. What power hast thou? Ger. Enquire not: So I can do it to preserve my master;
Nay if it be three parts. Flo. O hat I had it! But good Clause talk no more, I feel thy charity, As thou hast felt mine: but alas! Ger. Distrust not. 'Tis that that quenches ye: pull up your spirit, Your good, your honest, and your noble spirit; For if the fortunes of ten thousand people Can save ye, rest assur'd; you have forgot, Sir, The good ye did, which was the power you gave me; Ye shall now know the King of Beggars treasure: And let the winds blow as they please, the seas roar, Yet, here to morrow, you shall find your harbour, Here faile me not, for if I live I'e fit ye. Flo. How fain would I believe thee! Ger. If I lie master, Believe no man hereafter. Flo. I will try thee, But he knowes, that knowes all. Ger. Know me to morrow, And if I know not how to cure ye, kill me; So pass in peace, my best, my worthiest master. Exeunt. Scaena Tertia. Enter Hubert like a Huntsman. Hub. Thus have I stolne away disguis'd from Hemskirk, To try these people, for my heart yet tells me Some of these Beggars are the men I look for; Appearing like my self, they have no reason (Though my intent is fair, my main end ho∣nest) But to avoid me narrowly; that face too, That womans face, how near it is! O may it But prove the same, and fortune how I'le bless thee! Thus, sure they cannot know me, or suspect me, If to my habit I but change my nature, As I must do: this is the wood they live in, A place fit for concealment, where, till fortune Crown me with that I seek, I'le live amongst 'em. Exit. Enter Higgen, Prig, Ferret, Gynks, and the rest of the Boores. Hig. Come bring 'em out▪ for here we sit in justice: Give to each one a cudgel, a good cudgel: And now attend your sentence, tha? you are rogues, And mischievous base rascals (there's the point now) I take it, is confess'd. Prig. Deny it if you dare, Knaves. Boores. We are Rogues Sir, Hig. To amplify the matter, then rogues as ye are, And lamb'd ye shall be t're we leave ye. Boores. Yes Sir. Hig. And to the open handling of our ju∣stice, Why did ye this upon the proper person Of our good Master? were you drunk when you did it! Boores. Yes indeed were we. Prig. You shall be beaten sober, Hig. Was it for want you undertook it? Boores. Yes Sir. Hig. You shall be swing'd abundantly. Prig. And yet for all that You shall be poor rogues still. Hig. Has not the Gentleman Pray mark this point brother Prig, that no∣ble Gentleman, Reliev'd ye often, found ye means to live by, By employing some at sea, some here, some there, According to your callings? Boores. 'Tis most true Sir. Hig Is not the man an honest man? Boores. Yes truly. Hig. A liberall Gentleman? and as ye are true rascals, Tell me but this, have ye not been drunk, and often, At his charge? Boores. Often, often. Hig. There's the point then, They have cast themselves, brother Prig. Prig. A shrewd point brother. Hig. Brother, proceed you now, the cause is open, I am somewhat weary. Prig. Can you do these things? You most abominable stinking Rascals, You turnip-eating Rogues . Boores. We are truly sorry. Prig. Knock at your hard hearts Rogues, and presently
Give us a sign you feel compunction, Every man up with's cudgell, and on his neighbour Bestow such almes, till we shall say sufficient, For there your sentence lyes, without partiality, Either of head, or hide, Rogues, without spring, Or we shall take the pains to beat you dead else: You shall know your doom. Hig. One, two, three, about it. Prig. That fellow in the blew has true com∣punction, He beats his fellows bravely, oh, well struck boyes. Enter Gerrard. Prig. Up with that blew breech, now playes he the Divell, So get ye home, drink small beer, and be honest. Call in the Gentleman. Ger. Do, bring him presently, His cause I'le hear my self. Enter Hemskirk. Hig. Prig. With all due reverence, We do resign, Sir. Ger. Now huffing Sir, what's your name? Hem. What's that to you, Sir? Ger. It shall be ere we part. Hem. My name is Hemskirk, I follow the Earl, which you shall feel. Ger. No threatning, For we shall cool you sir; why didst thou basely Attempt the murther of the Merchant Goswin? Hem. What power hast thou to ask me? Ger. I will know it, O flea thee till thy pain discover i. Hem. He did me wrong base wrong. Ger. That cannot save y, Who sent ye hi her? and what further villanies Have ye in hand? Hem. Why wouldst thou know? what prefi, If I had any private way▪ could rise Out of my knowledge, to do thee commodity? Be sorry for what thou hast done, and make amends fool, I'le talk no further to thee; nor these rascals. Ger. Tye him to that tree. Hem. I have told you whom I follow. Ger. The Devill you should do, by your villanies; Now he that has the best way, wring it from him. Hig. I undertake it; turn him to the Sun boys, Give me a fine sharp rush; will ye confesse yet Hem. Ye have robb'd me already, now you murther me. Hig. Murder your nose a little: does your head purge Sir? To it again, 'twill do ye good. Hem. Oh! I cannot tell you any thing. Ger. Proceed then. Hig. There's maggots in your nose, I'e fetch 'em out Sir. Hem. O my head breaks. Hem. O my head breaks. Hig. The best thing for the Rhume Sir, That falls into your worships eyes. Hem. Hold, hold. Ger. Speak then. Hem. I know not what. Hig. It lyes in's brain yet, In lumps it lies, I'le fetch it out the finest: What pretty faces the foole makes,? heigh Hem. Hold, Hold, and I'le tell ye all look in my doublet, And there within the lining in a paper, You shall find all. Ger. Go fetch that paper hither, And let him loose for this time. Enter Hubert. Hub. Good ev'n my honest friends. Ger. Good ev'n good fellow. Hub May a poor huntsman, with a merry heart, A voice shall make the Forrest ring about him, Get leave to live amongst ye? true as steel boys. That knows all chases, and can watch all hours, And with y quarter-stff, though the Divell bid stand, Del such an almes, shall make him roar again? Prick ye the fearfull hare through crosse wayes, sheep walks, And force the craftie Reynard climb the quick∣sts; Rouze ye the lotie Stag, and with my bell-horn Ring him a knell, that all the woods shall mourn him, 'Till in his funeral tears he fall before me? The Polcat, Marterne, and the rich skin'd Lucerne, I know to chase the Roe, the wind our-stripping Isgrin himself, in all his bloody anger, I can beat from the bay; and the wild Sounder Single: and with my arm'd staffe, turn the Boa,
Spight of his omy tushes; and thus strike him, 'Till he fall down my feast. Ger. A goodly fellow. Hub. What mak'st thou here, ha? Ger. We accept thy fellowship. Hub. Hemkirk, thou art not right I fear, I fo thee. Enter Ferret. A Letter. Fer. Hre is the paper: and as he said, we found it. Ger. Give me it, I shall make a shift yet, old as I am, To find your knavery: you are sent here, Sirra, To discover certain Gentlemen; a spy-knave: And if ye find 'em, If not by perswaion, To bring 'em back, by poison to dispatch 'em. Hub. By poison, ha? Ger. Here is another, Hubert. What is that Hubert, Sir? Hem. You may perceive there. Ger. I may perceive a vilanie, and a rank one, Was he joyn'd partner of thy knaverie? Hem. No. He had an honest end, would I had had so, Which makes him scape such cut-throats. Ger. So it seems, For here thou art commanded, when that Hubert Has done his best and worthiest service, this way, To cut his throat; for here he's set down dan∣gerous. Hub. This is most impious. Ger. I am glad we have found ye, Is not this true? Hem. Yes; what are you the better? Ger. You shall perceive Sir, e're you get your freedom: Take him aside; and friend, we take thee to us, Into our companie, thou dar'st be true unto us? Hig. I, and obedient to? Hub. As you had red me. Ger. Then take our hand: thou art now a servant to us, Welcome him all. Hig. Stand off, stand off, I'le do it: We bid ye welcome three waies; first for your person, Which is a promising person; next for your quality, Which is a decent, and gentle quality; Last or the fquent means you have to feed us; You can steal, 'tis to be presum'd? Hub. Yes, Venison, Or if I want— Hig. 'Tis wll you understand right, And shall learn daily: you can drink too? Hub. Soundly. Hig. And ye dare know a woman from a weather cock? Hub Yes it I handle her. Ger. Now swear him. Hig. You are welcome brother. All. Welcome, welcome, weldome, but who shall have the keeping Of this fellow? Hub. Thank ye friends, And I beseech you if ye dare but trust me, For if I have kept wild dogs, and beasts for wonder, And made 'em tame too: give into my custody This roaring rascal, I shall hamper him. With all his knocks and knavery, & I fear me, Discover yet a further villny in him; O he smells rank o'th rascal. Ger. Take him to thee, But if he scape— Hub Let me be ev'n hang'd for him; Room Sr, I'le tye ye to my lsh. Hem. Away Rascal. Hub. Be not so stubborn: I shall swinge ye soundlie, And ye pay tricks with me. Ger. Now swear him. Hig. I crown thy nab with a gag of ben∣bouse, And stall thee by the salmon into the clowes, To maund on the pad, and strike all the cheats To mill from the Nuffmans, commision and slaes, Twang del's i'th stiromel, and let the Quire Cuffin, And Hermon Beck strine, and trine to the Ruffin. Ger. Now interpret this unto him. Hig. I poure on thy pate a pot of good al And by the Rogues oath, a Rogue thee install, To beg on the way, to rob all thou meets, To steal from the hedge, both the shirt and the sheets: And le with thy wench in the straw till she twang,
Let the Constable, Justice, and Divell go hang. Ger. So, now come in, But ever have an eye Sr, to your prisoner. Hub. He must blind both mine eyes, if he get from me. Ger. Go, get some victuals, and some drink, some good drink, For this day we'l keep holy to good fortune; Come and be folick with us. Hig. Ye are a stranger. Exeunt. Scaena Qarta. Enter Florez, and Bertha. Ber. Indeed ye are welcome: I have hard your scape, And therefore give her leave that only loves you, (Truly, and dearly loves you) give her joy leave To bid you welcome: what is't makes you sad man? Why do you look so wild? is't I offend ye? Beshrew my heart, not willingly. Flo. No Iertred. Ber. Is't the delay of that ye long have look'd for, A happy marriage? now I come to urge it: Now when you please to finish it. Flo. No newes yet? Ber. Do you hear Sir? Flo. Yes. Ber. Do you love me? Flo. Have I liv'd In all the happinesse fortune could seat me, In all mens fair opinions? Ber. I have provided A Priest, that's ready for us: Flo. And can the Divell, In one ten days, that Divel chance devour me! Ber. Wee'l fly to what place you please. Flo. No star prosperous? All at a swoop? Ber. You do not love me Goswin? You will not look upon me. Flo. Can mens prayers Shot up to heaven, with such a zeal as mine are, Fell eck like lazy mists, and never prosper? Gyvs I must weare, and cold must be my comfort. Darknesse, and want of meat: alas! she weeps too; Which is the top of all my sorrows: Iertred. Ber. No, no, you will not know me; my poor beauty; Which has been worth your eyes. Flo. The time growes on still: And like a tumbling wave, I see my ruine Come rolling over me. Ber. Yet will ye know me? Flo. For a hundred thousand crowns? Ber. Yet will ye love me? Tell me but how I have deserv'd your slighting? Flo. For a hundred thousand crownes? Ber. Farewell dissembler. Flo. Of which I have scarce ten: oh, how it starts me! Ber. And may the next you love, hearing my ruine. Flo. I had forgot my self, O my best Iertred! Crown of my joyes and comforts! Ber. Sweet, what ayle ye? I thought you had been vex'd with me. Flo. My mind, wench, My mind o'reflow'd with sorrow, sunk my memory. Ber. Am I not worthie of the knowledg of it? And cannot I as well affect your sorrowes, As your delights? you love no other woman? Flo. No I protest. Ber. You have no ships lost lately? Flo. None that I know of. Ber. I hope you have spilt no blood? whose innocence May lay this on your conscience. Flo. Clear, by heaven. Ber. Why should you be thus then? Flo. Good Iertred, ask not, Ev'n by the love you bear me. Ber. I am obedient. Flo. Go in my fair, I will not be long from ye; Nor long, I fear me, with thee: At my return Despise me as you please. Ber. The good gods guide ye. Exit. Flo. Now for my self, which is the least I hope for, And when that falles, for mans worst fortune, ply. Exit.
Actus Quartus, Scaena Prima. Enter Florez and four Merchants. Flo. WHy Gentlemen, 'tis but a week more I intreat you, But seven short days, I am not running from ye, Nor, if you give me patience, is it possible All my adventures fail; you have ships abroad, Endure the beating both of wind or weather; I am sure 'twould vex your hearts to be prote∣sted; Ye are all fair Merchants. 1 Mer. Yes, and must have fair play, There is no lying here else; one hours failing Fails us of all our friends, of all our credits: For my part I would stay, but my wants tell me I must wrong others i't Flo. No mercy in ye? 2 Mer. 'Tis foolish to depend on others mer∣cy: Keep your self right, and even cut your cloth, Sir, According to your calling: you have liv'd here In Lord-like prodiglity, high and open, And now ye find what 'tis: the liberal spending The summer of your youth, which you should glean in, And like the labouring Ant make use and gain of, Has brought this bitter stormy winter on ye, And now you cry. 3 Mer. Alas! before your poverty We were no men, of no mark, no endeavour; You stood alone, took up all trade, all business Running through your hands, scarce a sayl at Sea But loaden with your goods: we poor weak ped∣lers, When by your leave, and much intreaty to it, We could have oage for a little cloth, Or a few wines, put off, and thank your Wor∣ship. Lord, how the world's chang'd with ye? now I hope, Sir, We shall have sea-room. Flor. Is my misery Become my scorn too? have ye no humanity, N part of men left? are all the bounties in me To you, & to the town, turn'd my reproaches? 4 Mer. Well get your moneys ready, 'tis but two hours, VVe shall potest ye else, and suddenly. Flo. But two days. 1 Mer. Not an hour, ye know the hazard. Exit. Flo. How soon my lights put out: hard-hearted Bruges, Within thy walls may never honest Merchant Venture his fortunes more: O my poor wench too. Enter Gerrard. Ger. Good fortune, Master. Flo. Thou mistak'st me Clause, I am not worth thy blessing. Ger. Still a sad man? Enter Higgen and Prig, like Porters. No belief gentle Master? come, bring it in then, And now believe your Beadsman. Flo. Is this certain? Or dost thou work upon my troubled sense? Ger. 'Tis gold, Sir, Take it and try it. Flo. Certainly 'tis treasure; Can there be yet this blessing? Ger. Cease your wonder, You shal not sink for nev'r a sous'd flap-drag∣gon, For nere a pickl'd pilcher of 'em all, Sr; 'Tis there your full sum, a hundred thousand Crowns; And good sweet master, now be merry; pay 'em, Pay the poor pelting knaves, that know no goodness, And chear your heart up handsomly. Flo. Good Clause How cam'st thou by this mighty sum? if naughtily I must not take it of thee, 'twill undo me. Ger. Fear not; you have it by as honest means As though your father gave it; Sir, you know not To what a mass the little we dayly get Mounts in sven years; we beg it for heavens charity,
And to the same good we are bound to render it. Flo. What great curity? Ger. Away with that, Sir; Were not ye more then all the men in Bruges, And all the money in my thoughts— Flo. But good Clause, I may dye presently. Ger. Then this dies with ye. Pay when you can, good Master, I'le no parch∣ments, Only this charity I shall entreat ye, Leave me this ring. Flo. Alas▪ it is too poor Clause. Ger. 'Tis all I ask, and this withal, that when I shall deliver this back, you shall grant me Freely one poor petition. Flo. There, I confess it, And may my faith forsake me when I shun it. Ger. Away, your time draws on: Take up the money And follow this young Gentleman. Flo. Farewel Clause, And may thy honest memory live ever. Ger. Heaven bless ye and still keep ye; fare∣wel Master. Exunt. Scaena Secunda. Enter Hubert. Hub. I have lockt my youth up close enough for gadding, In an old tree, and set watch over him. Enter Iaculine. Now for my Love, for sure this wench must be she; She follows me; Come hither pretty Minche. Iac. No, no, you'l kiss. Hub. So I will. Iac. Y'ded law? How will ye kiss me, pray you? Hub. Thus: soft as my loves lips. Iac. Oh! Hub. What's your Fathers name? Iac. He's gone to heaven. Hub. Is it not Gerrard, sweet. Iac. I'le stay no longer; My mother's an old woman, and my brother Was drown'd at Sea, with catching Cockles. O love! O how my heart melts in me! how thou fir'st me! Hub. 'Tis certain she: pray let me see your hand sweet. Iac. No, no, you'l bite it. Hub. Sure I should know that Gymmal. Iac. 'Tis certain he: I had forgot my ring too. O Hubert, Hubert. Hub. Ha? methought she nam'd me— Do you know me, Chick? Iac. No indeed, I never saw ye, But methinks you kiss finely. Hub. Kiss again then; By heaven 'tis she. Iac. O what a joy he brings me. Hub. You are not Minche? Iac. Yes pretty Gentleman, And I must be married to morrow to a Capper. Hub. Must ye my sweet? and does the Cap∣per love ye? Iac. Yes, yes, he'l give me pye, and look in mine eyes thus. 'Tis he; 'tis my dear love: O blest fortune! Hub. How ain she would conceal her self? yet shew it, Will ye love me, and leave that man? I'le serve. Iac. O, I shall lose my self. Hub. I'le wait upon ye, And make ye dainty Nose-gays. Iac. And where will ye stick 'em? Hub. Here in bosome, and make a crown of Lillis For your fair head. Iac. And will ye love me 'deed-law? Hub. With all my heart. Iac. Call me to morrow then, And we'l have brave chear, and go to Church together. Give you good ev'n, Sir. Hub. But one word fair Minche. Iac. I must be gone a milking. Hub. Ye shall presently. Did you never hear of a young Maid called Iaculine? Iac. I am discovered; hark, in your ear I'le tell ye;
You must not know me Kiss and be constant ever. Hub. Heaven curse me else, 'tis she; and now I'me certain They are all here: No for my other project. Exeunt. Scaena Tertia. Enter Florez, fur Merchants, Higgen, and Prig. 1 Mer. Nay, if it would do you courtesie. Flo. None at all Sir; Take it, 'is yours: there's your ten thousand for ye, Give in my Bills: your sixteen. 3 Mer. Pray be pleas'd, Sir, To make a further use. Flo. No. 3 Mer. What I have, Sir, You may command; pray let me be your Ser∣vant. Flo. Put your hats on; I care not for your courtesies, They are most untimely done, and no truth in 'em. 2 Mer. I have a fraught of pepper. Flo. Rot your pepper; Shall I trust you again? there's your seven thou∣sand. 4 Mer. Or if you want fine sugar, 'tis but sending. Flo. No, I can send to Barbary; those people That never yet knew faith, have nobler free∣doms. These carry to Vanlock and take my Bills in: To Peter Zuten thse: bring back my Jewels: Why are these pieces? Exter Saylor. Saylor. Health to the noble Merchant; The Susan is return'd. Flo. Well? Say. Well, and rich, Sir, And now put in. Flo. Heaven thou hast heard my prayers. Say. The brave Rebecca oo, bound from  Straights, With the next tide is ready to put after. Flo. What news o'th' Fly-bat? Say. If this wind hold till midnight, She will be here, and wealthy, scap'd fairly. Flo. How, pre'thee Saylor? Say. Thus, Sir; she had fight Seven hours together with six Turkish Gallies, And she fought brvely, but at length was board∣ed, And ovelaid with strength; when presently Comes boring up the wind Captain Van-noke, That valiant Gentleman you redeem'd from prison; He knew the Boat, set in, and fought it bravely, Beat all the Gallies off, sunk three, redeem'd her, And as a service to ye, sent her home, Sir. Flo. A honest noble Captain, and a thank∣full. There's for thy news; go drink the Merchants healt, Saylor. Say. I thank your bounty, and I'le do it to a doyt, Sir. Exit Saylor. 1 Mer. What miracles are powr'd upon this fellow? Flo. This year I hope, my friends, I shall scape prison, For all your caes to catch me. 2 Mer. You may please, Sir, To think of your por servants in displeasure, Whose all they have goods, moneys, are at your service. Flo. I thank you, When I have need of you I shall forget you: You are paid I hope. All. We joy in your good fortunes. Enter Van-dunck. Van. Come Sir, come take your ease, you must go home With me, yonder is one weeps and howls. Flo. Alas, how does she? Van. She will be better soon I hope. Flo. Why soon Sir? Van. Why when you have her in your arms, this night, My boy she is thy wife. Flo. With all my heart I take hr. Van. We have pepared; all thy friends will be there, And all my rooms shall smoke to see the Revel:
Thou hast been wrong'd, and no more shall my service Wait on the knave her Uncle; I have heard all, All is baits for my boy; but thou shlt have her; Hast thou dispatch'd thy business? Flo. Most. Van. By the mass Boy, Thou tumblest now in wealth, and I joy in it; Thou art the best Boy that Bruges ever nou∣rish'd: Thou hast been sad, I'le chear thee up with Sack, And when thou at lusty I'le fling the to thy Mistess: She'l hug thee, sirra. Flo. I long to see it. I had forgot you; there's for you my friends; You had but heavy burthens; commend my love To my best love; all the love I have To onst Clause, shortly I will thank him bet∣ter. Exit. Hig. By the Mass a Royal Merchant, Gold by the handful; here wil be sport soon Prig. Prig. It partly seems so, and here will I be in a trice. Hig. And I boy; Away apace we are lookld for. Prig Oh these bak'd meats, Methinks I smell them h her. Hig. Thy mouth waters. Exeunt. Scaena Quarta. Enter Hubert and Hemskirck. Hub. I must not. Hem. Why? 'tis in thy power to do it, and in mine To reward thee to thy wishes. Hub. I dare not, nor I will not. Hem. Gentle Huntsman, Though thou hat kept me hard, though in thy duty, Which is requir'd to do it, th' hast used me stubbornly, I can forgive thee freely. Hub. You the Earls servant? Hem. I swear I am near as his own thoughts to him, Able to do thee— Hub. Come, come, leave your prating. Hem. If thou dar'st but try. Hub. I thank you heartily, you will be The first man that will hang me, a sweet recom∣pence; I could do, but I do not say I will, To any honest fellow that would think on't, And be a benefactor. Hem. If it be not recompenced, and to thy own desires, I within thse ten days I do not make thee— Hub. What, a false knave? Hem. Prethee, pe hee conceive me tightly, any thing Of profit or of place that may advance thee. Hub. Why, what a Gos-cap would'st thou make me, Do not I know that men in misery will promise Any thing, more then their lives can reach at? Hem. Believe me Huntsman. There shall not one short syllable That comes from me, pass Without its full performance. Hub. Say you so, Sir? Have ye ere a ood place for my quality? Hem A thousand Chases, Forests, Parks; I'le make thee Chiefe ranger over all the games. Hub. When? Hem. Presently. Hub. This may provoke me; and yet to prove a knave too. Hem. 'Tis to prove honest; 'tis to do good service, Service for him thou art sworn too, for thy Prince, Then for thy self that good: what fool would live here Poor, and in misery, subject to all dangers Law and lewd people can inflict, when bravely, And to himself he may be Law and credit? Hub. Shall I believe thee? Hem. As that thou holdst most holy. Hub. Ye may play tricks. Hem. Then let me never live more. Hub. Then you shall see, Sir, I will do a service That shall deserve indeed.
Hem. 'Tis well said Huntsman, And thou shalt be well thought of. Hub. I will do it: 'Tis not your letting fee, for that's meer nothing; But such a service, if the Earl be noble, He shall for ever love me. Hem. What is't Huntsman? Hub▪ Do you know any of these people live here? Hem. No. Hub. You are a fool then; here be those to have 'em, I know the Earl so well, would make him caper. Hem. Any of the old Lords that rebeld? Hub. Peace, all; I know 'em every one, and can betray 'em. Hem. But wilt thou do this service? Hub. If you'l keep Your faith, and free word to me. Hem. Wilt thou swear me? Hub. No, no, I will believe ye: more then that too, Here's the right heir. Hem. O honest, honest Huntsman! Hub. Now, how to get these Gallants, there's the matter; You will be constant, 'tis no work for me else. Hem. Will the Sun shine again? Hub. The way to get 'em. Hem. Propound it, and it shall be done. Hub, No sleight, (For they are devilish crafty, it concerns 'em) Nor reconcilement, (for they dare not trust neither,) Must do this trick. Hem. By force? Hub. I, that must do it: And with the person of the Earl himself, Authority (and mighty) must come on 'em, Or else in vain; and thus I would have ye do it: To morrow night be here; a hundred men will bear 'em; (So he be there, for he's both wise and valiant, And with his terrour will strike dead their for∣ces.) The hour be twelve a Clock; now for a guide To draw ye without danger on these persons; The woods being thick and hard to hit, my self With some few with me, made unto our purpose, Beyond the wood, upon the plain will wait ye By the great Oak. Hem. I know it: keep thy faith Hunts-man, And such a shour of wealth— Hub. I warrant ye: Mis nothing that I tell ye. Hem. No. Hub. Farewell; You have your liberty, now use it wisely▪ And keep your hour; go closer about the wood there. For fear they spie you. Hem. Well. Hub. And bring no noise with ye. Hem. All shall be done to th' purpose: fare∣well Hunts-man. Exit Enter Gerrard, Higgen, Prig, Gynks, Snap, Ferret. Ger. Now what's the news in town? Gyn. No news but joy, Sir; Every man wooing of the noble Merchant, Who has his hearty commendations to ye. Fer. Yes, this is news, this night he's to be married. Gyn. By th' Mass that's true, he marries Van∣duncks daughter, The dainty black-ey'd bell. Hig. I would my clapper Hung in his Bald-rick, what a peal could I ring? Ger. Married? Gyn. 'Tis very true Sir; O the pyes, The piping-hot-mince-pies. Prig. O the plum pottage. Hig. For one leg of a Goose now would I venture a limb boys; I love a fat Goose as I love Allegiance, And—upon the Boors, too well they know it, And therefore starve their poultry▪ Ger To be married To Van-duncks daughter? Hig. O this precious Merchant; What sport he will have? But hark ye brother Prig, Shall we do nothing in the fore-said wedding? There's money to be go, and meat I take it; What think ye of a moris? Prig. No, by no means,
hat goes no further thn the street, there leaves ; Now we must think of something that must draw us Into the bowels of it, into th' buttery, Into the Kitchen, into the Cellar, something That that old drunken Burgo-master loves; What think ye of a Wassel. Hig. I think worthily. Prig. And very fit it should be; thou, and Ferret, And Gynks to sing the song; I for the structure, Which is the bowl. Hig. Which must be up-sey English, Strong lusty London Beer; les think more of it. Ger. He must not marry. Enter Hubert. Hub. By your leave in private, One word, Sir, with ye, Gerrard; do not start me, I know ye, and he knows ye that best loves ye; Hubert speaks to ye, and you must be Gerrard, The time invites you to it. Ger. Make no shew then; I am glad to see you, Sir, and I am Gerrard; How stands affairs? Hub. Fair, if ye dare now follow; Hemskirk I have let go, and these my causes; I'le tell ye privately, and how I have wrought him, And then to prove me honest to my friends, Look upon these directions; you have seen his. Hig. Then will I speak a speech, and a brave speech In praise of Merchants; where's the Ape? Prig. —Take him, A gowty Bear-ward stole him the other day. Hig. May his Bears worry him, that Ape had paid it; What dainty tricks? — o' that whorson Bear-ward: In his french doublet, with his bastar'd bullions, In a long stock ty'd up, O how daintily Would I have made him wait, and change a trencher, Carry a cup of wine? ten thousand stinks Wait on thy mangy soul thou lowzy Bear-ward. Ger. 'Tis passing well, I both believe and joy in't, And will be ready, keep you hre the mean while, And keep this in; I must a while forsake ye Upon mine anger no man stir this two hours. Hig. Not to the wedding, Sir? Ger. Not any whither. Hig. The Wedding must be seen, Sir; we want meat too, We be monstrous out of meat. Prig. Shall it be spoken, Fat capons shak't their tails at's in defiance, And Turkey toombs such honourable monu∣ments? Shall Piggs, Sir, that the Parsons self would en∣vy, And dainty Ducks?— Ger. Not a word more, obey me. Exit Ger. Hig. Why then come doleul death, this is flat tyranny, And by this hand— Hub. What? Hig. I'le go sleep upon't. Exit Hig. Prig. Nay, and there be a wedding, and we wanting, Farewel our happy days: we do obey, Sir. Exeunt. Scaena Quinta. Enter two young Merchants. 1 Mer. Well met, Sir, you are for this lusty wedding. 2 Mer. I am so, so are you, I take it. 1 Mer. Yes, And it much glads me that to do him service Who is the honour of our trade and luer, We meet thus happily. 2 Mer. He's a noble fellow, And well becomes a bride of such a beauty. 1 Mer. She is passing fair indeed; long may their loves Continue like their youths, in spring of sweet∣ness; All the young Merchants wil be here No doubt on't;
For he that comes not o attend this wedding, The curse o a most bind one fall upon him, A loud wife and a lazy: here's Vanlock. Enter Vanlock and Frances. Van. Well overtaken Gentemen, save ye. 1 Mer. The same to you Sir: save ye, fair Mistress Frances, I would this happy night might make you blush too. Vanl. She dreams apce Fran. That's but a drowsie fortun. 2 Mer. Nay, take us with ye too, w come to that end; I am sure ye are for the wedding. Vanl. Hand and heart man, And what their fet can do; I culd have tript it Before this whorson gou. Enter Gerrard. Ger. Bless ye Masters. Vanl. Clause? how now Clause, thou art come o see thy Master, (And a good Master he is to all poor people) In all his joy; 'tis honestly don of thee. Ger. Long may he live, Sir; but my business now is, If you would please to do it, and to hi too. Enter Florez. Vanl. He's here himself. Flo. Stand at the door my friends? I pray walk in: welcome fair Mistress Frances, See what the house affords, there's a young La∣dy Will bid you welcome. Vanl. We joy your happiness. Exit. Flo. I hope it will be so. Clause nbly wel∣come, My honest my best friend, I have been care∣ful To see thy moneys— Ger. Sir, that brought not me; Do you know this Ring again? Flo. Thou hadst it of me. Ger. And do you well remember yet the boon you gave me▪ Upon the return of this? Flo. Yes, and I grant it, Be it what it will; ak what thou canst, I'le do it, Within my power. Ger. Ye are not married yet? Flo. No. Ger. Faith I shall ask you that that will di∣stub ye, But I must put ye to your promise. Flo. Do, And if I faint and flinch in't— Ger. Well said Master, And yet it grieves me to, and yet it must be. Flo. Prehee distrust me not. Ger. You must not marry, That's part of the power you gave me; which to make up, You must presently depart and follow me. Flo. Not marry, Clause? Ger. Not if you keep your promise, And give me power to ask. Flo. Prehee think better, I will obey by heaven. Ger. I have thought the best, Sir. Flo. Give me thy reason; dost thou fear her onesty? Ger. Chaste as the yce, for any thing I know, Sir. Flo. Why shouldst thou light on that then? to what purpose? Ger. I must not now discover. Flo. Must not marry? Shall I break now, when my poor heart is pawn'd? When all the preparation? Ger. Now or never. Flo. Come, 'tis not that thou would'st; thou dost but fright me. Ger. Upon my sou it is, Sir, and I bind ye. Flo. Clause, canst thou be so cruel? Ger. You may break, Sir, But never more in my thoughts appear honest. Flo. Di'st ever see her? Ger. No. Flo. She is such a thing, O Clause, she is such a wonder, such a mirror, For beauty▪ and fair virtue, Europe has not: Why hast thou made me happy to undo me? But look upon her, then if thy heart relent not I'le quit her presently; who waits there? Servant within. Sir? Flo. Bid my fair love come hither, and the company; Prethee be good unto me; take a mans heart, And look upon her truly; take a friends heart▪
And feel what miserie must follow this, Ger. Take you a noble heart and keep your promise: I forsook all I had to make you happy. Enter Bertha, Van-donk, and the rest Merchants. Can that thing call'd a woman stop your godness? Flo. Look there she is, dl with me as thou wilt now Didst ever see a fairer? Ger. She is most goodly. Flo. Pray ye stand still. Ber. What ailes my love? Flo. Didst thou ever, By the fair light of heaven, behold a sweeter? O that thou knew'st but love, or ever selt him, Look well, look narrowlie upon her beautis. 1. Mer. Sure h'as soe strange in hand, he stars so. 2. Mer. This Beggar has a strong power over his pleasure. Flo. View all her bodie. Ger. 'Tis exact and excellent. Flo. Is she a thing then to be lost thus lightly? Her mind is ten times sweeter, ten times nobler, And but to hear her speak, a Paradise, And such a love she bears to me, a chaste love, A vertuus, fair, and fruitfullove: 'tis now too I am readie to enjoy it; the Priest readie, Clause, To say the holy words shall make us happie, This is a crueltie beyond mans studie, All these are readie, all our joyes are readie, And all the expectation of our friends 'Twill be her death to do it. Ger. Let her die then. Flo. Thou canst not: 'tis impossible. Ger. It must be. Flo. 'Till kill me too, 'will murder me by heaven, Clause I'le give thee halfe I have; come thou shalt save me. Ger. Then you must go with me: I can stay no longer, If ye be true and noble. Flo. Hard heart, I'le follow: Pray ye all go in again, and pray be merrie. I have a weighty businesse, give my cloake there, Enter Servant (with a Cloake.) Concerns my life, and state; make no enquiry, This present hour befaln me▪ with the soonest I shall be here again: nay pray go in Sir, And take them with you, 'tis but a night lost Gentlemen. Van. Come, come in, we will not lose our meat yet, Nor our good mirth, he cannot stay long from her I am sure of that. Flo. I will no stay; believe Sir, Exit. Gertrude. a word with you▪ Ber. Why is this stop Sir? Flo. I have no more time left me, but to kisse thee, And tell thee, this, I am ever thine: farewell wench. Exit. Ber. And is that all your ceremonie? Is this a wedding? Are all my hoes and prayers turnd to nothing? Well, I will say no more, nor sigh, nor sorrow; oh me, Til to thy face I prove thee false. Exit. Actus Quintus, Scaena Prima. Enter Bertha, and a Boore. Ber. LEad, if thou thinkst we are right, why dost thou make These often stands? thou saidst thou knewst the way Boor. Fear nothing, I do know it: would `twere homeward. Ber. Wrought from me, by a Beggr? at the time That most should tie him? 'Tis some other Love That hath a more command on his affections, And he that fetcht him, a disguised Agent, Not what he personated; for his fashion Was more familiar with him, and more pow∣erfull Then one that ask'd an almes: I must finde out
One, if not both kind darkness be my shrowd And cover loves too curious search in me, For yet, suspition, I would not name thee. Boor. Mistris, it grows some-what pretty and dark. Ber. What then Boor. Nay, nothing; do not think I am afraid, Although perhaps you are. Ber. I am not, forward▪ Boor. Sure but you are: give me your hand, fear nothing. There's one leg in the wood, do not pull back∣ward: What a sweat one on's are in, you or I? Pray God it do not prove the plague; yet sure It has infected me; for I sweat too, It runs out at my knees, feel, feel, I pray you. Ber. What ailes the fllow? Boor. Hark, hark I beseech you, Do you hear nothing? Ber. No. Boor. List: a wild hog, He grunts: now 'tis a beare: this wood is full of 'em. And now, a wolfe Mistris, a wolfe, a wolfe, It is the howling of a wolfe. Ber. The braying of an asse; is it not. Boor. Oh, ow one has me; Oh▪ my left ham, farwell. Ber. Look to your shanks, Your breech is safe enough, the wolfe's a Fern∣bre. Boor. But see, see▪ see. There is a Serpent in it, It has eyes as broad as platters; it spits fire; Now it creeps towards us, help me to say my prayers▪ It has swallowed me almost, my breath is stopt, I cannot speak; do I speak Mistris? tell me. Ber. Why, thou timerous Sot, canst thou perceive Any thing i'the bush, but a poor glo-worme? Boor. It may be 'tis but a glo-worm now, but 'twill Grow to a fire-drake presently. Ber. Come thou from it: I have a precious guide of you; and a courteous That gives me leave to lead my selfe the way thus. Boor. It thunders, you hear that now. Ber. I hear one hollow. Boor. 'Tis thunder, thunder: See, a flash of Lightning, Are you not blasted Mistris? pull your mas off, It has plaid the barber with me here: I have lost My beard, my beard, pray God you be not shaven, It will spoile your marriage, Mistris. Ber. What strange wonders Fear fancies in a Coward? Boor. Now the earth opens. Ber. Prethee hold thy peace. Boor. Will you on then? Ber. Both love and jealousie have made me bold, Where my fate leads me, I must go. Exit. Boor. God be with you then. Enter Woolfort, Hemskirk, and Attendants. Hem. It was the fellow sure, he that should guide me, The hunts-man that did hollow us. Woolf. Best make a and And listen to his next: ha? Hem. Who goes there? Boor. Mistris, I am taken. Hem. Mistris? look forth souldiers. Woolf. What are you siah? Boor. Truly all is left Of a poor Boor, by day-light, by night no body, You might have spar'd your drum, and guns, and pikes too For I am none that will stand out Sir, I. You may take me in with a walking stick Even when you please, and hold me with a pack-threed. Hem. What woman was't you call'd to. Boor. Woman? none Sir. Woolf. None? did you no name Mistris? Boor. Yes, but shee's No woman yet  she should have been this night. But that a Beggar stole away her Bridegroom. Whom we were going to make hu-and-cry after; I tell you true Sir, she should a'bin mared to day, And was the Bride, and all; but in came Clause, The old lame Beggar, and whipt up Mr. Goswin;
Under his arm, away with him as a Kite, O an old Fox, would swoop away a gossig. Hem. 'Tis shee, 'tis she, Niece? Ber. Ha! Hem. She Sir. This wa a noble entrance to your fortune, That being on the point thus to be married, Upon her venture here, you should surprise her. Wool. I begin Hemskirk, to believe my fate Works to my ends. Hem. Yes Sir▪ and this addes trust Unto the fellow our guide, who assur'd me Florez Liv'd in some Merchants shop, as Gerrard did I'th the old beggars, and that he would use Him for the train, to call the other forth, All which we find is one—That's he again— Holla again Woolf. Good we sent out to meet him. Hem. Here's the Oake. Br. O I am miserably lost, thus falne Into my Uncles hands, from all my hopes: Can I not think away my self and dye? O I am miserably lost, thus fallen Into my Uncles hands, from all my hops: No matter now, where thou be false or no, Goswin, whether thou love another better, Or me alone; or where thou keep thy vow, And word, or that thou come, or stay; for I To thee from henceforth must be ever absent, And thou to me: no more shall we come near, To tell our selves, how bright each others eyes were, How soft our language, and how sweet our kisses, Whilst we made one our food, th' other our feast, Not mix our soules by sight, or by a letter Hereafter, but as small relation have, As two new gon to inhabiting a grave: Can I not think away my self and die? Enter Hubert, Higgen, Prig, Ferret, Snap, Gincks, like Boores. Hub. I like your habits well: they are safe, stand close. Hig. But what's the action we are for now? ha? Robbing a Ripper of his fish? Prig. Or taking A poultrer prisoner, without ransome, Bullye? Hig. Or cutting off a convoy of buter? Fer. Or surprising a Boors ken, for granting cheats? Prig. Or cackling cheats? Hig. Or mergey-praters, Rogers▪ And Tibs o'th the Butey? Prig. O' I could drive a Regiment Of geese afore me, such a night as this, Ten leagues with my hatt, and staffe, and not of hiss Heard, or a wing of my troops disordered. Hig. Tell us, If it be milling of a lag of duds, The fetching of a back of clothes, or so, We are horribly out of linnen, Hub. No such matter. Hig. Let me alone for any Farmers dog, If you have a minde to the cheese-loft: 'tis but thus: And he is a silenc'd Mastff, during pleasure. Hub. Would it would please you to be silent. Hig. Mum. Woolf. Who's there? Hub. A friend, the Huntsman. Hem. O 'tis he. Hub. I have kept touch Sir, which is the Earl of these? Will ye know a man now? Hem. This my Lord's the friend Hath undertook the service. Hub. I't be worth His Lordships thanks anon, when 'tis done Lording, I'le look for't, a rude woodman, I know how to pitch my toyles, drive in my game▪ And I have don't, both Florez and his Father Old Gerrard, with Lord Arnold of Benthuisen; Cozen, and Iaqueline, young Florez Sister, I have 'em all. Woolf. Thou spakst too much, too happy, To carry faith with it. Hub. I can bring you Where you shall see, and find 'em. Woolf. We will double, What ever Hemskirk then hath promised thee. Hub. And I'le deserve it treble; what horse ha' you? Woolf. A hundred. Hub. That's well: ready to take Upon surprise of 'em? Hem. Yes.
Hub hen, Your force ino five Squadrons, for there are So mny out-ets wyes through the wood, That issue from the place whee they are lodg'd; Five severall wayes, of all which pssags We must possess our selves, to round 'm in, For by one starting hole, they'l all escape ese, I and four Bors here, to ye will be guides. The Squadron where you are, my sel will ad. And that they may be more scure, I'le use My wonted whoops, and hollowes, as I were A hunting for 'm; which will make them rest, Careless of any noyse, and b a direction To the other guides ow w approach m stil. Woolf. 'Tis ordered well, and relisheth the Souldie. Make the division Hemskirk: you are my charge, Fair one, I'e look to you. Boor. Shall no body need To look to me? I'le look unto my self. Hub. 'Tis but this, rmember. Hig. Say, 'tis done boy, Exunt. Scaena Secunda. Enter Gerrard and Florez. Ger. By this ime; Sir, I hope you want no reasons Why I broke off your marriage, for though I Should as a Subject study you my Prince In things indifferent, it will not therefore Discredit you, to acknowledge me your Fa∣ther, By harkening to my necessary counsells. Flo. Acknowledge you my Father? Sir I do, And may impiety, conspiring with My other Sins, sink me, and suddainly When I forget to pay you a Sons duty, In my obedience, and that help'd sorth With all the cheerfulness. Ger. I pray you rise, And may those powers that see and love this in you, Reward you for it: Taught by your example Having received the rights due to a Father, I tender you th' allegiance of a Subject: Whch as my Pince accpt of. Flo. Kneel to me? My muntains fist fall down beneah hir valleys, And fie no more mount upwards, when I suffr An act in nature so prposterous; I must o'recome in this, in all things else The victory be yours t could you here read me, You should perceive how all my faculties Triump in my blest fate, to be found yours; I am your sn, your Son Sir, and am prouder To be s, to the ather to such goodnesse (Which heaven be pleas'd, I may inherit from you) Then I shall ever o those specill titles That plead for my succssion in the Earldome (Did I pssess it now) lft by my mother. Ger. I do believe it: but— Flo. O my lov'd Father, Bfore I knew you were so, by instinct, Nture had taught me, to look on your wans, Nt as a stranges: and I know not how, What you call'd chritie I thought the paiment Of some religious debt nature stood bound for; And last of all, when your magnificent bounty, In my low ebb of fortune, had brought in A flood of blessings, though my threatning wans And fear of their ffcts, still kept me stupid, I soon found out, it was no common pittie That lead you to i. Ger. Think of this hereafter When we wih joy may call it to remembrance, There will be a time more opportune, then now, To end your storie, with all circumstances, I adde this onely: when we fled from Woolfort I sent you into England, and there placed you With a brave Flanders Merchant, call'd rich Goswin, A man supplyed by me unto that purpose, As bound by oath never to discover you, Who dying left his name and wealth unto you As his reputed Son, and yet received so; But now, as Florez and  Prince, remember, The countries▪ and the subjects generall good Must challenge the first part in your affecion: The fair maid, whom you chose to be your wife,
Bing so far beeath you, tha yur love Mt grnt▪  not your equall. Flo. In discnt Or borrowed glois, from dead Ancestos, But or her bautie▪ chastitie, an all vertues Ever remembre in the best of women, A Mnach might rceive rom hr, not give, Though she were is Crowns purchase, In this only Be n indulgent Father: in al lse, Ue my authority. Enter Hubert, emskirk, Woolfort, Bertha, and Souldiers. Hub. Sr, hre be two of 'em, The Father and the Sonne, the rest you shall have A ast as I can rouze them. Ger. Who's this? Woolfort? Wool. I criple, your faigned cruches will not hep you, Nor patch'd disguise that hath so long con∣ceal'd you, I's now no halting: I must here find Gerrard, And in this Merchants hbit, one called Florez Who would be an Earl. Ger. And is, wert thou a subject. Flo. Is this that Traitor Woolfort? Wolf. Yes, but you Are they that are betraid: Hemskirk; Ber. My Goswin Turn'd Prince? O I am poorer by this great∣ness, Then all my former jealousies or misfortunes. Flo. Gertrude? Woolf. Stay Sir, you were to day too near her, You must no more ayme at those easie acceses, Less you can do't in aire, without a head, Which shall be sodainly try'de. Ber. O take my heart, first, And since I cannot hope now to enjoy him, Let me but fall a part of his glad ransome. Woolf. You know not your own value, that entreat Ger. So proud a fend as Woolfort. Woolf. For so lost A thing as Florez. Flo. And that would be so Rather then she should stoop again to thee; There is no death, but's sweeter then all life, When Woolfort is to give it: O my Gertrude, It is nt that, no Pincedom that I go from. I is from thee, that losse includeth al. Wool. I, if my young prince knew his loss, he would say so, Which that he yet may chew on, I will tell him This is no Gertrude, nor no Hemskirkes Nece, Nor Vandoncks daughter; this is Bertha, Brtha, The heir f Babant, he that caus'd the warre, Whm I did steale, during my treaty there, For your minority, to raise my selfe; I then forseeing 'twould beget a quarrell. That, a necessity of my employment, The same employment, make me master of strength, That strength, the Lord of Flanders, so of Brabant, By marrying her si, which had not been to do: She come of yers, but that the expectation First of her Fathes death retarded it, And snce the standing out of Bruges, where Hemskirk had hid her, till she was ner lost: But Sir, we have recover'd her: your Mr∣chantship May break, for this was one of your best b∣tomes I think. Ger. Insolent Devill! Enter Hubert, with Iaqueline, Gynks and Costin. Woolf. Who are these, Hemskirke? Hem. More, more, Sir. Flo. How they triumph in their treachery? Hem. Lord Arnold of Benthusin, this Lord Costin. This Iaqueline the sister unto Florez. Woolf. All found? why here's brave game, this was sport-royall, And puts me in thought of a new kind of death for 'em. Huntsman, your horn: first wind me Florez fall, Next Gerrards, then his daughter Iaquelins, Those rascals, they shall dye without their rights: Hang 'em Hemskirk on these trees; I'le take The assay of these my selfe. Hub. Not here my Lord,
Let 'em be broken up, upn a scaffold, 'Twil shew the better when their arbou's made. Ger. Wretch art thou not contnt thou hst betraid u, But mock us too? Gynks. False Hubert, this is monstrous. Woolf. Hubert? Hem. Who, this? Ger. Yes, this is Hubert, Woolfort, I hope he ha's helpt himself to a tree. Woolf. The first, The first of any, and most glad I have you Sir, I lt you go before, bt for a train; I't you have done tis service? Hub. As your Hntsman, But now as Hubert; save your selves, I will, The Woolf's a foot, let slip, kill, kill, kill, kil, Enter with a dru Vn-dock Merchants, Higgen, Prig, Ferret, Snp. Woolf. Betray'd? Hub. No, but well catch'd: & I the Huntsman. Van-d. How do you Woolfort? Rascall, good knave Woolfort. I speak it now without the Rose; and Hemskirk, Rogue Hemskirk, you that have no niece, this Lady Was tolne by you, and tane by you, and now Resign'd by me, to the right owner here: Take her my Pince▪ Flo. Can this be pssible, Welcome my love, my weet, my worthy love. Van-d. I ha' giv'n you her twice: now keep her better, and thank Lord Hubert, that came to me in Gerrards name, And got me out, with my brave boys, to march Like Caesar, when he bred his Commentaries, So I, to end my Chronicle, came sorth Caesar Van-donck, & veni, vidi▪ vici, Give me my Bottle, and set down the drum; You had your tricks Sir, had you? we ha' tricks too, You stole the Lady? Hig. And we led your Squadrons Where they ha' scratc'ht their legges a little, with brambles, If not their faces. Prig. Yes, and run their heads Against res. Hig. 'Tis Captain Prig, Sir. Prig. And Coronell Higgen. Hig. We fil'd a pit with your people, some with legges, Sme with ames broken, and a neck, or two, I think, be loe. Prig. The rest too that escap'd, Are no yet out of the briars, Hig. And yur hoses, Sir, Are wll set up in Bruges all by this time▪ You lok as you were no well Sir, and would be Shortly let blood; do you wan a scarf? Vand-d. A halter. Ger. 'Twas like your self, honest, and noble Hubert: Ca'st thou behold these mirrors altogethr, Of thy long false, and bloody usurpation? Thy tyrannous proscription, and frsh treason▪ And not so see thy self, as to fal down Ad sinking force a grave wih thine own guilt, As deep as hel, o cover thee and i? Woolf. No, I can stand, and praise the toyles that took me, And laughing in them dye; they were brave snares. Flo. 'Twre truer valour if thou durst repent The wrongs th' hast done, and live. Woolf. Who I repent? And say I am sorry? yes, 'tis the fools language And no for Woolfort. Vandd▪ Woolfort thou art a ivell, And speakst his anguage, oh that I had my longing Under this row of trees now would I hang him. Flo. No, let him live, untill e can repent, But banish'd from our State, that is thy doom. Vand. Then hag his worthy Captain here, this Hemskirk For profit of th' example. Flo. No, let him Enjoy his shame too: with his conscious life, To shew how much our innocence contemns All practice from the guitiest, to molest us. Van-d. A noble Prince. Ger. Sir, you must help to joyn A pair of hands, as they have done their hearts here, And to their loves with joy. Flo. As to mine own, My gracious Sister, worhiest Brother: Van-d. I'le go afore, & have the bon-fie made, My fire-work, and flap-dragons, and good back-rack,
With a peck of little fishes, to drink down In healths to this day. Hig, Sligh, here be changes, The Blls ha' not so many, nor a dance, Prig. Prig. Our Company's growne horrie thin by it, What think you Ferret? Fer. Marry I do think, That we might all be Lords now, if we could stand fo't Hig. Not I, if they should offer it: I'e dislodge first, Rmove the Bush to another climat. Ger. Sir, you must thank this wothy Bur∣gomaster, Here be friends ask to be look'd on too: Ad thank'd, who though their trade, and course of life Be not so perfect, but it may be better'd, Hve yet us'd me with curtesie, and bin tru Subjcts unto me, while I was thei King, A place I know not well how to resign. No unto whom: But this I will intreat Your grace, command them, follow me to Bruges; Where I wil take the care on me, to finde Some manly, and more profiabe course To fit them, as a part of the Rpublique. Flo. Do you hear Sirs? do so. Hig. Thanks to your good grace▪ Prig. To your good Lordship. Fer. May you both live long. Ger. Attend me at Van-doncks, the Bur∣gomasters. Ex. all but Beggars. Hig. Yes, to bt hemp, and be whipt twice a week, O turn the wheel for Crab the Rope-maker▪ Or earn to go along with him, his cours; Tat' a fie course now, i' the Commonwealth, Prig. What say yo to it? Prig. It is the backwardst course I know i'the world. Hig. Thn Higgen will scarce thrive by it, You do conclude? Prig. 'Faith hardly▪ very hardly. Hig. Troth I am partly of your mind, Prince Prig. And therefore farewell Flanders, Higgen will seek Some safer shelter, in some other Climat, With this his tatter'd Colony: Let me see, Snap, Ferret, Prig, and Higgen, all are let O the true bloo: what? shall we into England? Prig. Agreed, Hig. Thn bar up bravely with your Brute my lads Higgen hath prig'd the prancers in his dayes: And sold good peny-worths; we will have a couse. The spirit of Bottom is grown bottomlesse. Prig. I'le mand no more, nor cant. Hig. Yes, yur six-peny worth In privte, bother; six-pence is a sum I'le steal you any mans dogge for. Prig. For six-pence more, You'l tell the owner where he is. Hig. 'Tis right, Higgen must practise, so must Prigt, o eat: And write the Letter: and gi' the word, But now No more, as either of thse. Prig. But as true Beggars, As ere we were. Hig. We stand here, for an Epilogue▪ Ladies, your bounties first; the rest will follow, For womens favours are a leading alms, If you be pleas'd look cheerely through your eys: Out a your maskes. Prig. And let your beauties sparkle. Hig. So may may you ne'er want dressings, jewells▪ gownes Still i'the fashion. Prig. Nor the men you love, Wealth, nor discourse to please you. Hig. May you Gentlemen, Never want good fresh suites nor liberty. Prig. May every Merchant here see safe his ventures. Hig. And every honest Citizen his debts in. Prig. The Lawyes gain good Clyents. Hig. And the Clyents good Counsell. Prig. All the Gamesters here good fortune. Hig. The Drunkards too good wine. Prig. The eaters me Fit soe their tastes and pallats. Hig. The good wives kind Husands. Prig. The young maids choyce of Sutors. Hig. The Mid-wives merry hearts. Prig. And all good chre▪ Hig. As you are kind unto us and our Bush, We are the Beggars and your daily Beadsmen, And have your money, but the Almes we ask And live by, is your Grace, give that and thn Wee'l boldly say our word is, Come agen. FINIS.
THE PROLOGUE. TO please you with this Play, we feare-will be (So doe's the Authour too) a mystery Somewhat above our Art; For all mens eyes, Ears, faiths, and judgements, are not of one size. For to say truth, and not to flatter ye, This is nor Comedy, nor Tragedy, Nor History, nor any thing that may (Yet in a week) be made a perfect Play: Yet those that love to laugh, and those that think Twelve-pence goes farther this way then in drink, Or Damsels, if they mark he matter through, May stumble on a foolish toy, or two, Will make 'em shew their teeth: pray for my sake (That likely am your first man) do not take A distaste before you feel it: for ye may When this is hist to ashes, have a Play, And here, to out-hisse this; be patient then (My honuor done) y' are welcome Gentlemen. THE EPILOGUE. IF you mislike; (as you shall ever be Your own free Iudges) this Play utterly, For your own Noblenesse, yet do not hisse, But as you go by, say it was amisse; And we will mend: Chide us, but let it be Never in cold blood: O' my honesty, (If I have any) this I'le say for all, Our meaning was to please you still, and shall.
