B319 11933212 51170
Honm{us}, Francisc{us} Bacon{us}, Baro de Veru∣lam: Vice-Comes Scti Albani. Mortuus 9o Aprilis, Anno Dn̄i. 1626. Anno{que} Aetat 66.
Resuscitatio, Or, Bringing into PUBLICK LIGHT SEVERALL PIECES, OF THE WORKS, Civil, Historical, Philosophical, & Theological, HITHERTO SLEEPING; Of the Right Honourable FRANCIS BACON Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban. According to the best Corrected COPPIES. Together, With his Lordships LIFE. By WILLIAM RAWLEY, Doctor in Divinity, His Lordships First, and Last, CHAPLEINE. Afterwards, CHAPLEINE, to His late MAIESTY. LONDON, Printed by Sarah Griffin, for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks-head, neer the Mitre Tavern, 1657.
A GENERALL TABLE OF THE TRACTATES, Contained in this BOOK. 1. SPeeches in Parliament, Sa-chamber, Kings Bench, Chan∣cery, and other where. Fol. 1 2. Observations upon a Libell, published in Anno 1592. 103 3. A true Report, of Doctor Lopez, his Treason. 151 4. An Advertisement, touching the Controversies, of the Church, of England. 162 5. A Collection, of the Felicities, of Queen Elizabeth. 181 6. A brief Discourse, of the Union, of England, and Scotland. 197 6. Articles, and Considerations, touching the Union, aforesaid. 206 7. A Beginning, of the History, of Great Britain. 221 8. A Letter, and Discourse, to Sir Henry Savill, touching Helps, for the Intellectuall Powers. 225 9. Certain Considerations, touching the better Pacification, and Edification, of the Church, of England. 233 10. Certain Considerations, touching the Plantation, in Ireland. 255 11. Advice to the King, touching Mr. Suttons Estate. 265 12. A Proposition, to the King, touching the Compiling, and A∣mendment, of the Lawes, of England. 271 13. A Fragment, of an Essay, of Fame. 281 14. Letters, to Queen Elizabeth, King James, divers Lords, and others. 1 15. Other Letters. 89 16. A Confession, of the Faith. 115
TO THE READER. HAving been employed, as an Ama∣nuensis, or dayly instrument, to this Honourable Authour; And ac∣quainted with his Lordships Con∣ceits, in the composing, of his Works, for many yers together; Especially, in his writing ime; I conceived, that no Man, could pretend a better Interest, or Claim, to the ordering of them, after his Death, then myself. For which cause, I have compiled in one, whatsoever bears the true Stamp, of his Lordships excellent Genius; And hath hi∣therto slept, and been suppressed; In this present Vo∣lume; Not leaving any Thing, to a future Hand, which I found, to be of moment, and communicable to the Publick; Save onely some few Latine Works; Which, by Gods Favour and sufferance, shall soon after follow. It is true, that for some of the Pieces, herein con∣tained, his Lordship did not aim, at the Publication of them, but at the Preservation onely; And Prohibiting them from Perishing; So as, to have been reposed, in
some Private shrine, or Library: But now, for that, through the loose keeping, of his Lordships Papers, whilest he lived, divers Surreptitious Copies have been ta∣ken; which have since, employed the Presse, with un∣dry Corrupt, and Mangled, Editions; whereby Nothing hath been more difficult, than to find the Lord Saint Alban, in the Lord Saint Alban; And which have pre∣sented, (some of them,) rather a Fardle of Non-snse, then any true Expressions, of his Lordships Happy Vein; I thought my self, in a sort, tied, to vindicate these In∣juris, and wrongs, done to the Monuments, of his Lord∣ships Penne; And at once, by setting forth, the true, and Geuine, writings themselves, to prevent the like In∣vasions, for the time to come. And the rather, in regard, of the Distance, of the time, since his Lordsips Dayes; whereby, I shall not tread too near, upon the Heels of Truth; Or of the Passages, and Persons; then concerned, I was induced hereunto. Which, considering the Lu∣bricity of Life; And for that, I account my self, to be; Not now in Vergentibus, but in Praecipitantibus Annis, I was desirous to hasten. Wherein, I shall crave leave, to open, my Counsels, and Purposes, as concerning this present Edition, in these five Particulars. First, I have ranked the severall Tra∣ctates; Either, according to the Dignity, of the Work; as Demosthenes, or Cicero's, Orations, do precede De∣mosthenes, or Cicero's Epistles; Or else, according to the Series of the Times, wherein they were written; or to which, they refer. By which Means, they may give the better Light; the one Part, to the other. Secondly, I thought it fitting, to intimate; That the Discourse, within contained; Entituled, A Colle∣ction, of the Felicities, of Queen Elizabeth; was written, by his Lordship, in Latine onely: whereof, though his Lordship had his particular Ends, then; yet, in regard, that I held it a Duty, That her own Nation, over which she so happily reigned, for many years; should
be acquainted, and possessed, with the Vertues, of that excellent Queen, as well as Forrein Nations; I was in∣duced, many years agoe, to put the same, into the Eng∣lish Tongue; Not, Ad Verbum; For that had been ut Flat, and Injudicious; But, (as far, as my slender A∣bility could reach,) according to the Expressions, which, I conceived; his Lordship would have rendred it in, if he had written the same in English: Yet ever acknow∣ledging, that Zeuxis, or Apelles, Pencill, could not be attained, but by Zeuxis, or Apelles, Himself. This Work, in the Latine, his Lordship so much affected; That He had ordained, by his last Will, and Testament, to have had it published, many years since: But that singular Person, entrusted therewith, soon after deceased. And therefore, it must now, expect a Time, to come forth, amongst his Lordships, other Latin Works. Thirdly, in the Collection of Letters; which is, as the Fourth Part, of this Volume; there are inserted some few, which were written, by other Pennes, and not by his Lordships own: Like as we find, in the Epistolar Au∣thours; Cicero, Plinius secundus, and the rest: which be∣cause I found them immixed, amongst his Lordships Pa∣pers; And that they are written, with some similitude of Stile; I was loath, they should b left, to a Grave, at that time, when his Lordships own Conceptions, were brought to life. Fourthly, for that Treatise, of his Lordships, Inscri∣bed, A Confession of the Faith; I have ranked that, in the Close, of this whole Volume: Thereby, to demonstrate to the World; That he was a Master, in Divinity, as well as in Philosophy, or Politicks; And that he was Versed, no lesse, in the saving Knowledge; Than, in the Vniver∣sall, and Adorning, Knowledges. For though, he com∣posed the same, many years, before his Death, yet I thought that, to be the fittest place; As the most ac∣ceptable Incense unto God, of the Faith, wherein he resigned his Breath; The Crowning, of all his other Per∣fections,
and Abilities; And the best Perfume, of his Name, to the World, after his Death. Lastly, if it be objected, that some few, of the Pie∣ces, whereof this whole consisteth, had visited the Pub∣lick Light before; It is true, that they had been obtru∣ded, to the World, by unknown Hands; But with such Skars, and Blemishes, upon their Faces; That they could passe, but for a Spurious, and Adulterine Brood, and not for his Lordships Legitimate Issue: And the Publishers, and Printers, of them, deserve to have an Action, of De∣famation, brought against them, by the State of Learn∣ing, for Disgracing, and Personating, his Lordships Works. As for this present Collection, I doubt not, but that it will verifie it self, in the severall Parcells thereof; And manifest, to all understanding, and unpartiall, Readers, who is the Authour of it; By that Spirit, of Perspicuity, and Aptnesse, and Concisenesse, which runs through the whole Work; And is ever an Annex, of his Lordships Penne. There is required now; And I have been moved by many; Both from Forrein Nations, and at Home; who have held in Price, and been Admirers, of this Honou∣rable Authours Conceits, and Apprehensions; That some Memorialls, might be added, concerning his Lordships Life; Wherein I have been more Willing, then sufficient, to satisfie their Requests: And to that End, have endeavou∣red, to contribute, not my Talent, but my Mite, in the next following Discourse; Though, to give the true Va∣lue, to his Lordships Worth; There were more need, of another Homer, to be the Trumpet, of Achilles Vertues. WILLIAM RAWLEY.
THE LIFE OF THE HONOURABLE AUTHOR. FRANCIS BACON, the Glory, of his Age, and Nation; The Adorner, and Ornament, of Learning; Was born, in York House, or York Place, in the Strand; On the 22th Day of January; In the Year of our Lord, 1560. His Father, was that Famous Counseller, to Queen Elizabeth; The Second Propp, of the Kingdome, in his Time; Sir Nicholas Ba∣con, Knight, Lord Keeper, of the Great Seal, of England; A Lord, of Known Prudence, Sufficiency, Moderation, and Integrity. His Mother, was Ann Cook, one of the Daugh∣ters, of Sir Anthony Cook; unto whom, the Erudition, of King Edward, the Sixth, had been committed: A choyce Lady, and Eminent, for Piety, Vertue, and Learning; Being
exquisitely Skilled, for a Woman, in the Greek, and Latin, Tongues. These being the Parents, you may easily imagine, what the Issue, was like to be; Having had, whatsoever, Nature, or Breeding, could put into Him. His first, and childish, years, were not without some Mark of Eminency; At which Time, he was endued, with that Preg∣nancy, and Towardness, of Wit; As they were Preages, of that Deep, and Universall, Apprehension, which was ma∣nifest in him, afterward: And caused him, to be taken notice of, by several Persons, of Worth, and Place; And, especially, by the Queen; who, (as I have been informed,) delighted much, then, to confer with him; And to prove him with Que∣stions: unto whom, he delivered Himself, with that Gravity, and Maturity, above his years; That her Majesty, would of∣ten term Him; The young Lord Keeper. At the ordinary years, of Ripeness, for the university; or rather, something earlier; He was sent, by his Father, to Tri∣nity Colledge, in Cambridge; To be educated, and bred, under the Tuition, of Doctor John White-Gift, then Ma∣ster of the Colledge; Afterwards, the Renowned Arch-Bi∣shop, of Canterbury; A Prelate, of the First Magnitude, for Sanctity, Learning, Patience, and Humility: Vnder whom, He was observed, to have been more, then an Ordinary Profi∣cient, in the severall Arts, and Sciences. Whilst he was com∣morant, in the University, about 16. years of Age, (As his Lordship hath been pleased, to impart unto my Self;) he first fell, into the Dislike, of the Philosophy, of Aristotle: Not for the Worthlesnesse, of the Authour, to whom he would ever ascribe, all High Attributes; But for the Unfruitful∣nesse, of the way; Being a Philosophy, (as his Lordship used to say,) onely strong, for Disputations, and Contentions; But Barren, of the Production, of Works, for the Benefit, of the Life, of Man. In which Mind, he continued, to his Dying Day. After he had passed, the Circle, of the Liberall Arts; His Father, thought fit, to frame, and mould him, for the Arts, of State: And, for that end, sent him over into France, with
Sir Amyas Paulet, then Employed Ambassadour Lieger, into France: By whom, he was, after a while, held fit to be en∣trusted, with some Message, or Advertisement, to the Queen: which having performed, with great Approbation, he returned back, into France again; With Intention, to con∣tinue, for some years, there. In his absence, in France, his Father, the Lord Keeper, died; Having collected, (as I have heard, of Knowing Persons,) a considerable summe of Money, which he had separated, with Intention, to have made a competent Purchase of Land, for the Lively-hood, of this his youngest Son; (who was onely unprovided for; And though, he was the youngest in years, yet he was not the lowest, in his Fathers Affection;) But the said Purchase, being un∣accomplished, at his Fathers Death, there came no greater share to him, than his single Part, and Portion, of the Money, dividable amongst 5. Brethren: By which meanes, he lived, in some streits, and Necessities, in his younger years. For as for that pleasant Scite, and Mannour, of Gorhambury, he came not to it, till many years after, by the Death, of his Dea∣rest Brother, Mr. Anthony Bacon; A Gentleman, equall to him, in Heigth of Wit; Though inferiour to him, in the Endowments, of Learning, and Knowledge: Vnto whom he was, most nearly, conjoyned in Affection; They two, being the sole Male Issue, of a second Venter. Being returned from Travaile, he applyed himself, to the study, of the Common Law; which he took upon him, to be his Profession. In which, he obtained to great Excellency; Though he made that, (as himself said,) but as an Accessary, and not as his Principall study. He wrote, severall Tractates, upon that Subject. Wherein, though some great Maisters, of the Law, did out-go him, in Bulk, and Particularities of Cases; yet, in the Science, of the Grounds and Mysteries, of the Law, he was exceeded by none. In this way, he was, af∣ter a while, sworn, of the Queens Counsell Learned, Ex∣traordinary; A Grace, (if I err not,) scarce known before. He seated himself, for the Commodity, of his studies, and Pra∣ctise; amongst the Honourable Society, of Greyes Inn;
Of which House, he was a Member; where he Erected, that Elegant Pile, or Structure, commonly known, by the Name, of the Lord Bacons Lodgings: which he inhabited, by Turns, the most part, of his Life, (some few years onely ex∣cepted,) unto his Dying Day. In which House, he carried himself, with such Sweetnesse, Comity, and Generosity; That he was much revered, and loved, by the Readers, and Gen∣tlemen, of the House. Notwithstanding, that he professed the Law, for his Live∣lyhood, and Subsistence; Yet his Heart, and Affection, was more carried, after the Affaires, and Places, of Estate; For which, if the Majesty Royall then, had been pleased, he was most fit. In his younger years, he studied, the Service, and Fortunes, (as they call them,) of that Noble, but unfortu∣nate Earl, the Earl of Esex; unto whom, he was, in a sort, a Private, and free, Counseller; And gave him safe, and Ho∣nourable Advice; Till, in the end, the Earl inclined too much, to the violent, and precipitate Counsell, of others, his Adhe∣rents, and Followers; which was his Fate, and Ruine. His Birth, and other Capacities, qualified him, above o∣thers of his Profession, to have Ordinary Accesses at Court; And to come frequetly, into the Queens Eye; who would of∣ten grace him, with private, and free, Communication; Not onely about Matters of his Profession, or Businesse in Law; But also, about the Arduous Affairs, of Estate; From whom she received, from time to time, great Satisfaction. Ne∣verthelesse, though she cheered him much, with the Bounty, of her Countenance; yet she never cheered him, with the Bounty, of her Hand: Having never conferred upon him, a∣ny Ordinary Place, or Means, of Honour, or Profit, Save onely, one dry Reversion, of the Registers Office, in the Star-Chamber; worth about 1600 l. per Annum; For which he waited, in Expectation, either fully, or near, 20. years: Of which his Lordship would say, in Queen Elizabeths Time; That it was, like another Mans Ground, buttalling upon his House; which might mend his Prospect, but it did not fill his Barn. (Neverthelesse, in the time, of King James,
it fell unto him. Which might be imputed; Not so much, to her Majesties Aversenesse, or Disaffection, towards him; As to the Arts, and Policy, of a Great Statesman, hen; who laboured, by all Industrious, and secret, Means, to sup∣presse, and keep him down; Lest, if he had rise, he might have obscured his Glory. But though, he stood long at a stay, in the Dayes, of his Mi∣stresse, Queen Elizabeth; Yet, after the change, and Com∣ming in, of his New Master, King James, he made a great Progresse; By whom, he was much comforted, in Places, of Trust, Honour, and Revenue. I have seen, a Letter, of his Lordships, to King James, wherein he makes Acknowledge∣ment; That He was that Master to him, that had raysed, and advanced him, nine times; Thrice in Dignity, and Sixe times, in Office. His Offices (as I conceive,) were; Counsell Learned Extraordinary, to his Majesty, as he had been, to Queen Elizabeth; Kings Solliciter Gene∣rall; His Majesties Atturney Generall; Counseller of Estate, being yet but Atturney; Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England; Lastly, Lord Chanceller: Which two last Places, though they be the same, in Auhority, and Power; yet they differ in Patent, Heigth, and Favour of the Prince: Since whose time, none of his Successours, did ever bear the Title, of Lord Chanceller. His Dignities were, first Knight; Then Baron of Verulam; Lastly, Viscount Saint Alban: Besides other good Gifts, and Bounties, of the Hand, which his Majesty gave him; Both out of the Broad Seal; And out of the Alienation Office. Towards his Rising years, not before, he entred into a mar∣ried Estate; And took to Wife, Alice, one of the Daughters, and Co-Heires, of Benedict Barnham, Esquire, and Al∣derman of London; with whom He received, a sufficiently ample, and liberall Portion, in Marriage. Children he had none: which though they be the Means, to perpetuate our Names, after our Deaths; yet he had other Issues, to perpetu∣ate his Name; The Issues, of his Brain; In which he was e∣ver happy, and admired; As Jupiter was, in the production
of Pallas. Neither did the want of Children, detract from his good usage, of his Consort, during the Intermarriage: whom he prosecuted, with much Conjugall Love, and Re∣spect; with many Rich Gifts, and Enowments; Besides a Roab of Honour, which he invested her withall; which she wore, untill her Dying Day; Being twenty years, and more, after his Death. The last five years of his Life, being with-drawn from Ci∣vill Affaires, and from an Active Life, he employed wholy, in Contemplation, and Studies. A Thing, whereof his Lordshp would often speak, during his Active Life; As if he affected, to dye in the Shadow, and not in the Light; which also, may be found, in severall Passages, of his Works. In which time, he composed, the greatest Part, of his Books, and Writings; Both in English, and Latin: Which I will enu∣merate, (as near as I can,) in the just Order, wherein they were written. The History, of the Reign, of King Henry, the Se∣venth: Abecedarium Naturae; or A Metaphysicall Piece; which is lost: Historia Ventorum: Historia vitae & Mor∣tis: Historia Densi, & Rari, not yet Printed: Historia Gravis, & Levis, which is also lost: A Discourse, of a War, with Spain: A Dialogue, touching an Holy War: The Fable, of the New Atlantis: A Preface, to a Digest, of the Lawes of England: The Beginning, of the History, of the Reign, of King Henry, the Eighth: De Augmentis Sci∣entiarum; Or the Advanccment of Learning, put into La∣tin, with severall Enrichments, and Enlargements: Coun∣sells Civill, and Morall; Or his Book of Essayes, likewise, Enriched, and enlarged: The Conversion, of certain Psalms, into English Verse. The Translation into Latin; of the History, of King Henry the Seventh; of the Counsells, Ci∣vill, and Morall; of the Dialogue, of the Holy War; of the Fable, of the New Atlantis; For the Benefit, of other Nations. His Revising, of his Book, De Sapientià Ve∣terum. Inquisitio de Magnete; Topica Inquisitionis, de Luce, & Lumine; Both these, not yet Printed. Lastly, Sylva Sylvarum, or the Naturall History. These were the
ruits, and Productions, of his last five years. His Lord∣ship also designed, upon the Motion, and Invitation, of his late Majesty; To have written the Reign, of King Henry, the Eighth; But that Work Perished, in the Designation meerly; God not lending him Life, to proceed further upon it, then onely, in one Mornings Work: Whereof there is Extant, An, Ex Ungue Leonem, already Printed, in his Lordships Miscellany Works. There is a Commemoration due; As well, to his Abilities, and Vertues, as to the Course, of his Life. Those Abilities, which, commonly, goe single, in other Men, though of prime, and Observable, Parts, were all conjoyned, and met, in Him. Those are, Sharpnes of Wit, Memory, Judgement, and Elocution. For the Former Three, his Books doe abun∣dantly speak them; which, with what Sufficiency he wrote, let the World judge; But with what Celerity he wrote them, I can best testifie. But for the Fourth, his Elocution; I will onely set down, what I heard, Sir Walter Rauleigh, once speak of him, by way of Comparison; (whose Iudgement may well be trusted;) That the Earl of Salisbury, was an ex∣cellent Speaker, but no good Pen-man; That the Earl of Northampton, (the Lord Henry Howard,) was an excel∣lent Pen-man, but no good Speaker; But that, Sir Fran∣cis Bacon, was Eminent in Both. I have been enduced to think; That if there were, a Beame of Knowledge, derived from God, upon any Man, in these Modern Times, it was upon Him. For though he was a great Reader of Books; yet he had not his Knowledge from Books; But from some Grounds, and Notions, from within Himself. Which, notwith∣standing, he vented, with great Caution, and Circum∣spection. His Book, of Instauratio Magna, (which, in his own Account, was the chiefest, of his works,) was no Slight Imagination, or Fancy, of his Brain; But a Setled, and Concocted, Notion; The Production, of many years, Labour, and Travell. I my Self, have seen, at the least, Twelve Coppies, of the Instauration; Revised, year by
year, one after another; And every year altred, and amended, in the Frame thereof; Till, at last, it came to that Modell, in which it was committed to the Presse: As many Living Crea∣tures, do lick their young ones, till they bring them, to their strength of Limms. In the Composng, of his Books, he did rather drive, at a Masculine, and clear, Expression, than at any Finenes, or Affectation, of Phrases: And would often ask, if the Mean∣ing were expressed, plainly enough: As being one, that a∣counted words, to be but subservient, or Ministeriall, to Matter; And not the Principall. And if his Stile were Polite, it was because he could do no otherwise. Neither was he given, to any Light Conceits; Or Descanting upon Words; But did ever, purposely, and industriously, avoyd them, For he held such Things, to be but Digressions, or Diversions, from the Scope intended; And to derogate, from the Weight, and Dignity, of the Stile. He was no Plodder upon Books; Though he read much; And that, with great Iudgement, and Rejection of Impertinences, incident to many Authours: For he would ever interlace, a Moderate Relaxation, of His Minde, with his Studies; As Walking; Or Taking the Aire abroad in his Coach; or some other befiting Recreation: And yet, he would loose no Time, In as much, as upon his First, and Immediate Re∣turn, he would fall to Reading again: And so suffer, no Mo∣ment of Time, to Slip from him, without some present Im∣provement. His Meales, ere Refections, of the Eare, as well as of the Stomack: Like the Noctes Atticae; or Convivia Deip∣no-Sophistarum; Wherein, a Man might be refreshed, in his Minde, and understanding, no lesse, then in his Body. And I have known some, of no mean Parts, that have professed, to make use, of their Note-Books, when they have risen, from his Table. In which Conversations, and otherwise, he was no Dashing Man; As some Men are; But ever, a Coun∣tenancer, and Fosterer, of another Mans Parts. Neither was he one, that would appropriate the Speech, wholy to Him∣self;
or delight to out-vie others; But leave a Liberty, to the Co-Assessours, to take their Turns. Wherein he would draw a Man on, and allure him, to speak upon such a Subject, as wherein he was peculiarly Skilfull, and would delight to speak. And, for Himself, he contemned no Mans Observati∣ons; But would light his Torch, at every Mans Candle. His Opinions, and Assertions, were, for the most part, Binding; And not contradicted, by any: Rather like Oracles, then Discourses. Which may be imputed, either to the well weighing of his Sentence, by the Skales, of Truth, and Rea∣son; Or else, to the Reverence, and Estimation, wherein he was, commonly, had, that no Man would contest with him So that, there was no Argumentation, or Pro and Con, (as they term it,) at his Table: Or if their chanced, to be any, it was Carried, with much Submission, and Moderation. I have often observed; And so have other Men, of great Ac∣count; That if he had occasion, to repeat, another Mans Words, after him; he had an use, and Faculty, to dresse them, in better Vestments, and Apparell, then they had before: So that, the Authour, should finde his own Speech much amended; And yet the Substance, of it, still retained. As if, it had been Naturall to him, to use good Forms; As Ovid spake, of his Faculty, of Versifying; Et quod tentabam Scribere, Versus erat. When his Office, called him, as he was of the Kings Coun∣sell Learned, to charge any Offenders, either in Criminals, or Capitals; He was never of an Insulting, or Domineering Nature, over them; But alwayes tender Hearted, and carry∣ing himself decently towards the Parties; (Though it was his Duty, to charge them home:) But yet, as one, that looked upon the Example, with the Eye of Severity; But upon the Per∣son, with the Eye, of Pitty, and Compassion. And in Civill Businesse, as he was Counseller of Estate, he had the best way of Advising; Not engaging his Master, in any Precipi∣tate, or grievous, Courses; But in Moderate, and Fair, Proceedings: The King, whom he served, giving him this Testimony; That he ever dealt, in Businesse, Suavibus
Modis; Which, was the way, that was most according to his own Heart. Neither was He, in his time, lesse Gracious with the Subject, then with his Soveraign: He was ever Acceptable, to the House, of Commons, when He was a Member thereof. Be∣ing the Kings Atturney, & chosen to a place, in Parliament; He was allowed, and dispensed with, to sit in the House; which was not permitted, to other Atturneys. And as he was, a good Servant, to his Master; Being ne∣ver, in 19. years Service, (as himself averred,) rebuked by the King, for any Thing, relating to his Majesty; So he was, a good Master, to his Servants; And rewarded, their long At∣tendance, with good Places, freely, when they fell into his Power. Which was the Cause, that so many young Gentle∣men, of Bloud, and Quality; Sought to list themselves, in his Retinew. And if he were abused, by any of them, in their Places; It was onely the Errour, of the Goodnesse, of his Nature; But the Badges of their Indiscretions, and Intem∣perances. This Lord was Religious: For though the World be apt, to suspect, and prejudge, Great Wits, and Politicks, to have somewhat, of the Atheist; Yet he was conversant with God: As appeareth, by severall Passages, throughout the whole Cur∣rent, of his Writings. Otherwise, he should have crossed, his own Principles; which were; That a little Philoso∣phy, maketh Men apt, to forget God; As attributing too much, to Second Causes; But Depth of Philosophy, bringeth a Man back, to God again. Now, I am sure, there is no Man, that will deny him, or account otherwise of him, but to have been, a deep Philosopher. And not onely so; But he was able, to render a Reason, of the Hope, which was in him; Which that Writing of his, of the Confession, of the Faith, doth abundantly testifie. He repaired frequent∣ly, when his Health would permit him, to the Service, of the Church; To hear Sermons; To the Administration, of the Sacrament, of the Blessed Body, and Bloud, of Christ; And died, in the true Faith, established in the Church, of Eng∣land.
This is most true; He was free from Malice; which, (as he said Himself,) He never bred, nor fed. He was no Revenger of Injuries; which if he had minded, he had both Opportu∣nity, and Place High enough, to have done it. He was no Heaver of Men, out of their Places; As delighting, in their Ruine, and Undoing. He was no Defamer, of any Man, to his Prince. One Day, when a great States-Man, was newly Dead; That had not been his Friend; The King asked him; What he thought, of that Lord, which was gone? He answered; That he would never have made, his Maje∣sties Estate better; But he was sure, he would have kept it, from being wrse. Which was the worst, he would say of him. Which I reckon, not amongst his Morall, but his Chri∣stian, Vertues. His Fame is greater, and sounds louder, in Forraign Parts, abroad, then at home, in his own Nation. Thereby verify∣ing that Divine Sentence; A Prophet is not without Ho∣nour, save in his own Countrey, and in his own House. Concerning which, I will give you a Tast onely, out of a Letter, ritten from Italy, (The Store-House of Refined Witts,) to the late Earle of Devonshire; Then, the Lord Candish. I will expect the New Essayes, of my Lord Chancellr Bacon; As also his History, with a great deal of Desire; And whatsoever else, he shall compose. But in Particular, of his History, I promise my Self, a Thing perfect, and Singular; especially in Henry the Seventh; Where he may exercise, the Talent, of his Divine Understan∣ding. This Lord is, more and more, known; And his Books here, more and more, delighted in; And those Men, that have more than ordinary Knowledge, in Humane Affaires, esteem him, one of the most capa∣ble Spirits, of this Age; And he is truly such. Now his Fame doth not decrease with Dayes since, but rather encrease. Divers of his Works, have been, anciently, and yet late∣ly translated, into other Tongues, both Learned, and Mo∣dern, by Forraign Pens. Severall Persons of Quality, du∣ring his Lordships Life, crossed the Seas on purpose, to gain
an Opportunity, of Seeing him, and Discoursing with him whereof one, carried his Lordships Picture, from Head to Foot, over with Him, into France; As a Thing, which he foresaw, would be much desired there; That so they might en∣joy, the Image of his Person; As well as the Images of his Brain, his Books. Amongst the rest, Marquis Fiat; A French Nobleman; who came Ambassadour into England, in the Beginning, of Queen Mary, Wife to King Charles was taken, with an extraordinary Desire of Seeing him: For which, he made way, by a Friend: And when he came to him, being then, through weaknesse, confined to his Bed; The Mar∣quis saluted him, with this High Expression; That his Lordship, had been ever to Him, like the Angels; of whom he had often heard; And read much of them in Books; But he never saw them. After which, they con∣tracted an intimate Acquaintance; And the Marquis did so much revere him; That besides his Frequent visits; They wrote Letters, one to the other, under the Titles, and Appel∣lations, of Father, and Son. As for his many Salutations, by Letters, from Forraign Worthies, devoted to Learning; I forbear, to mention them; Because that is a Thing, common to other Men, of Learning, or Note, together with him. But yet, in this Matter of his Fame, I speak, in the Com∣parative, onely, and not in the Exclusive. For his Reputati∣on is great, in his own Nation, also; Especially amongst those, that are, of a more Acute, and sharper, Iudgement: Which I will exemplifie, but with two Testimonies, and no more. The Former; When his History, of King Henry, the Se∣venth was to come forth; It was delivered, to the old Lord Brooke, to be perused by him; who when he had dispatched it, returned it to the Authour, with this Eulogy: Com∣mend me, to my Lord; And bid him take care, to get good Paper & Inke; For the Work is Incomparable. The other, shall be that, of Doctor Samuel Collins, late Provost, of Kings Colledge, in Cambridge; A Man of no vulgar Wit; who affirmed unto me; That when he had read, the Book of the Advancement of Learning; He found Him∣self
in a case, to begin his Studies a new; And that he had lost, all the Time, of his tudying, before. It hath been desired; That something should be signified, touching his Diet; And the Regiment, of his Health: Of which, in regard, of his Universall Insight, into Nature, he may, (perhaps,) be, to some, an Example. For his Diet; It was rather a plentifull, and liberall, Diet, as his Sto∣mack would bear it, then a Restrained. Which he also com∣mended, in his Book, of the History, of Life, and Death. In his younger years, he was much given, to the Finer, and Ligh∣ter, sort of Meats; As of Fowles, and such like: But after∣ward, when he grew more Iudicious; He preferred the stron∣ger Meats; such as the Shambles afforded; As those Meats, which bred the more firm, and substantiall Juyces, of the Bo∣dy; And lesse Dissipable: upon whih, he would often make his Meal; Though he had other Meats, upon the Table. You may be sure; He would not neglect that Himself, which He so much extolled, in his Writings; And that was the Vse of Ni∣tre: Whereof he took, in the Quantity, of about three Grains, in thin, warm, Broath, every Morning, for thirty years toge∣ther, next before his Death. And for Physick, he did, in∣deed, live Physically, but not miserably: For he took onely, a Maceration of Rhubarb: Infused into a Draught, of White Wine, and Beer, mingled together, for the Space of half an Hour; Once in six, or seven Dayes; Immediately before his Meal, (whether Dinner, or Supper,) that it might dry, the Bo∣dy, lesse: which, (as he said,) did carry away frequently, the Grosser Humours, of the Body; And not diminish, or carry away, any of the Spirits; As Sweating doth. And this was no Grievous Thing to take. As for other Physick, in an ordinary way, (whatsoever hath been vulgarly spoken;) he took not. His Receit, for the Gout; which did, constantly, ease him of his Pain, within two Hours, Is already set down, in the End, of the Naturall History. It may seem, the Moon, had some Principall Place, in the Figure, of his Nativity. For the Moon, was never in her Passion, or Eclipsed, but he was surprized, with a sudden
Fit, of Fainting: And that, though he observed not, nor took any previous Knowledge, of the Eclipse thereof: And assoon as the Eclipse ceased, he was restored, to his former strength again. He died, on the 9th. Day of Aprill, in the year 1626 In the early Morning, of the Day, then celebrated, for our Savi∣ours Resurrection; In the 66th. year of his Age; At the Earle of Arundells House, in High-gate, near London; To which Place, he casually repaired, about a week before; God so ordaining, that he should dye there: Of a Gentle Fea∣ver, accidentally accompanied, with a great Cold; whereby the Defluxion of Rheume, fell so plentifully upon his Breast, that he died by Suffocation: And was buried, in Saint Mi∣chaels Church, at Saint Albans; Being the Place, designed for his Buriall, by his last Will, and Testament; Both be∣cause, the Body, of his Mother, was interred there; And be∣cause, it was the onely Church, then remaining, within the Precincts, of old Verulam: Where he hath a Monument, erected for him, of White Marble; (By the Care, and Gra∣titude, of Sir Thomas Meautys, Knight, formerly his Lordships Secretary; Afterwards Clark, of the Kings Ho∣nourable Privy Counsell, under two Kings:) Representing his full Pourtraiture, in the Posture, of studying; with an Inscription, composed, by that Accomplisht Gentleman, and Rare Wit, Sir Henry Wotton. But howsoever, his Body, was Mortall; yet, no doubt, his Memory, and Works, will live; And will, in all proba∣bility, last, as long as the World lasteth. In order to which, I have endeavoured, (after my poor Ability,) to do this Ho∣nour, to his Lordship, by way, of conducing to the same.
SPEECHES IN Parliament, STAR-CHAMBER, Kings Bench, CHANCERY, AND OTHER-WHERE, Of the Right Honourable FRANCIS BACON, Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban. LONDON, Printed by Sarah Griffin, for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks-head, neer the Mitre Tavern, 1657.
A SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, Elizabeth 39. UPON THE MOTION of SVBSIDY. AND please you, (Mr. Speaker,) I must consider the Time, which is spent; yet so, as I must consider also the Matter, which is great. This great Cause was, at the first, so materially, and weighti∣ly, propounded; And after, in such sort perswaded, and enforced; And by Him, that last spake, so much time taken, and yet to good purpose; As I shall speak at a great disadvantage: But because it hath been alwayes used, and the Mixture of this House doth so require it; That in Causes of this Nature, there be some Speech and Opinion, as well from persons of Generallity, as by persons of Authority; I will say somewhat, and not much: wherein i shall not be fit for me, to enter into, or to insist, upon secrets, either of her Majesties offers, or of her Councell, but my Speech must be, of a more vulgar Nature. I will not enter (Mr. Speaker) into a laudative Speech, of he high and singular Benefits, which, by her Majesties, most politick, and happy Government, we receive, thereby to incite you to a
Retribution; partly, because no breath of Man, can set them forth worthily; and partly, because I know hr Maesty, in her Mag∣nanimity, doth bestow her benefits, like her fee'st Pattents, ab∣sque aliquo inde reddendo; Not looking for any thing again, (i it were in respect only of her particular,) but Love, and Loyalty. Neither, will I now, a this time, put the case of this Realm of England, too precisely; How it standeth with the Subject, in point of payments to the Crown; Though I could make it appear by Dmonstration, (what opinion soever be conceivd,) that never Subjects were partakers of greater Freedome, and Ease; And that, whether you look abroad, into other Countries, at this present time or look back to former Times, in this our own Countrey; we shall find an exceeding Difference, in matter f Taxes; which now I reserve to mention; not so much in doubt to acquaint your Ears with Forrain Srains, or to digge up the Sepulhers f Buried and Forgotten Impositions, which in this case, (as by way of Comparison,) it is necessary you understand; But because Speech in the House, is it to perswade the generall point; And particularity is more proper and seasonable for the Commttee. Neither will I make any Observations, upon her Majesies manner of expending and issuing Treasure; being not upon xcssive and exobitant Donatives; nor upon sumptuous and unnecessary Triuph, Buildings, or like Magnificence; but upon the Preservation, Protection, and Honur of the Realm. For I dare no scan upn he Majesties Aion; whch it become∣meth me, rather to admire in silence, then to gloss, or discourse upon them, though with never so good a meaning. Sure I am, hat the Treasure that commeth from you to hr Majesy, is but as a Vapour, which iseth from the Earth, and gatherth into a Cloud, and stayeth not there long; but upon the same Earth it falleth again; and what if some drops of this, do fall upon rance, or Flaunders? It is like a sweet Odour of Honour, and Reputation, to our Nation throughout the World. But I will onely insist upon the Naturall, and Inviolate, Law of Preser∣vation. It is a Truth, (Mr. Speaker,) and a familiar Truth, that safety, and preservation, is to be preferred, before Benefit, or Encrease: In as much as those Counsels which tend to preservation, seem to be attended with necessity; whereas those Deliberations, which tend to Benefit, seem onely accompanied with perswasi∣on. And it is ever gain, and no loss, when at the foot of he ac∣count, thee remains the purchase of safety. The Prints of this are, every where, to be found: The Patient, will ever part, with some of his Bloud, to save and clear the rest. The Sea-faring Man will, in a Storm, cast over some of his Goods, to save and as∣sure the rest. The Husband-man will afford some Foot of Ground, for his Hedge and Ditch, to fortifie and defend the rest. Why (Mr. Speaker) the Disputer will, if he be wise, and cunning,
grant somewhat, that seemeth to make against him, because he will keep himself within the strength of his opinion, and the better maintain the rest. But this Place advertiseth me, not to handle the Matter, in a Common Place. I will now deliver unto you that, which upon a probatum est, hath wrought upon my self, knowing your Affections to be like mine own. There hath fallen out, since the last Parliament, four Accidents or Ocur∣rents of State; Things published and known to you all, by eve∣ry one whereof, it seemeth to me, in my vulgar understanding, that the danger of this Realm is encreased: Which I speak not, by way of apprehending fear; For I know, I speak to English Courages; But by way of pressing Provision; For I do find, (Mr. Speaker,) that when Kingdomes and States are entred into Tearms and Resolutions of Hostility, one against the other, yet they are, many times, restrained from their Attempts, by four Impedi∣ments. The first is by this same Aliud agere; when they have their Hands full of other Matters, which they have embraced, and ser∣veth for a diversion of their Hostile purposes. The next is, when they want the Commodity, or opportuni∣ty, of some places of near Approach. The third, when they have conceived an apprehension of the Difficulty, and churlishness of the enterprise, and that it is not prepared to their Hand. And the fourth is, when a State, through the Age of the Mo∣narch, groweth heavy, and indisposed, to actions of great Perill, and Motion, and this dull Humour, is not sharpened, nor infla∣med, by any provocations, or scorns. Now if it please you to examin, whither by removing the Impediments in these four kinds, the Danger be not grown, so many degrees nearer us, by accidents (as I said) fresh, and all dated since the last Parliament. Soon after the last Parliament, you may be pleased to remem∣ber, how the French King revolted from his Religion; whereby every Man of common understanding, may infer, that the Quar∣rell, between France, and Spain, is more reconcileable; And a greater inclination of affairs to a peace than before: which sup∣posed, it followeth, Spain shall be more free, to intend his Malice, against this Realm. Since the last Parliament, it is also notorious, in every mans knowledge, and remembrance; That the Spaniards have posses∣sed themselves, of that Avenue, and place of approach, for Eng∣land, which was never in the Hands of any King of Spain before; And that is Callais; which, in true Reason, and Consideration of estate, of what value or service it is, I know not; but in common understanding, it is a knocking at our Doors. Since the last Parliament also, that Ulcer of Ireland, which in∣deed brake forth before, hath run on, and raged more: which cannot but be a great Attractive, to the Ambition, of the Couucel
of Spain, who by former experience know, of how tough a Com∣plexion, this Realm of England is, to be asailed: And therefore (as Rheumes, and Fluxes, of Humours,) is like to resort to that part, which is weak, and distempered. And lastly, it is famous now, and so will be many Ages hence, how by these two Sea-Journey's, we have braved him, and ob∣jected him to scorn: so that no Bloud, can be so frozen, or mor∣tified, But must needs take Flames of Revenge, upon so mighty Disgrace. So as this Concurrence of Occurents, all since our last Assem∣bly; some to deliver, and free, our enemies; some to advance, and bring him, on his way; some to tempt, and allure him; some to spur on, and provoke him; cannot but threaten, an encrease of our Perill, in great Proportion. Lastly, (Mr. Speaker,) I will but reduce to the Memory of this House, one other Argument, for ample and large providing, and supplying Treasure; And this it is. I see, Men do with great Alacrity, and Spirit, proceed, when they have obtained a course, they long wished for, and were re∣strained from. My self can remember, both in this Honourable ssembly, and in all other places of this Realm, how forward, and affectionate, men were, to have an Invasive War. Then we would say; A Defensive War, was like eating, and consuming Interest; And needs we would be Adventurers, and Assailants. Habes quod totâ mente petisti. Shall we not now make it good? especially, when we have tasted, so prosperous Fruit, of our De∣sires? The first of these Expeditions Invasive, was atchieved with great Felicity; ravished a strong and famous Port, in the Lap, and Bosome, of their high Countries: Brought them to such Despair, as they fired themselves, and their Indian Fleet; in Sa∣crifice, as a good Odour unto God, for the great and Barbarous Cruelties, which they have committed, upon the poor Indians, whither that Fleet was sayling; Disordred their Reckonings; so as the next News we heard of, was nothing but protesting of Bills, and Breaking credit. The second Journey, was, with notable Resolution, born up against Weather, and all Difficulties; And besides the success, in amusing him, and putting him to infinite charge, sure I am, it was like a Tartars, or Parthians Bow, which shooteth backward; And had, a most strong, and violent effect, and Operation, both in France and Flaunders, so that our Neighbours, and Confede∣rates, have reaped the Harvest of it; And while the Life Bloud of Spain, went inward to the Heart, the outward Limmes, and Members trembled, and could not resist. And lastly, we have a perfect account, of all the Noble, and good Bloud, that was car∣ried forth; And of all our Sea-walls, and good Shipping with∣out Mortality of Persons, wreck of Vessels, or any manner of Di∣minution.
And these have been the happy Effects, of our, so long, and so much desired, Invasive War. To conclude (Mr. Speaker) therefore I doubt not, but every Man will consent, that our Gift must bear, these two Marks, and Badges: The one, of the Danger, of the Realm, by so great a Proportion, since the last Parliament, encreased: The other, of the satisfaction we receive, in having obtained, our so earnest, and ardent Desire, of an Invasive War. A Speech made by Sir FRANCIS BACON Knight, chosen by the Commons, to present a Petition, touching Purveyors, delivered to his Majesty, in the with-draw∣ing Chamber, at White-Hall, in the Parliament, held o. & 2o. Iacobi, the first Session. IT is well known, to your Majesty, (excellent King) that the Emperours of Rome, for their better Glory, and Ornament, did use in their Titles, the Additions of the Countries and Nations, where they had obtained victories: As Germanicus, Britannicus, & the like: But after all those Names, as in the higher place, fol∣lowed the Name of Pater Patriae, as the greatest Name of all hu∣man Honour, immediatly preceding that Name of Augustus; whereby they took themselves, to expresse some Affinity, that they had, (in respect of their Office,) with Divine Honour. Your Majesty mought, with good reason, assume to your self, many of those other Names; As, Germanicus, Saxonicus, Britannicus, Francicus, Danicus; Gothicus, and others, as appertaining to you; Not by Bloud-shed, (as they bare them,) but by Bloud: your Majesties Royall Person, being a noble confluence, of streams, and veynes, wherein the Royall Bloud of many Kingdoms of Eu∣rope, are met, and united. But no Name is more worthy of you, nor may more truly be ascribed unto you, then that Name, of Father of your people, which you bear, and express, not in the For∣mality of your stile, but in the reall Course of your Government. We ought not to say unto you, as was said to Caesar Iulius; Quae miremur, habemus, quaelaudemus, expectamus: That we have alrea∣dy, wherefore to admire you, And that now we expect some∣what, for which to commend you. For we may, (without su∣spicion of Flattery) acknowledge, that we have found in your Majesty, great Cause, both of Admiration, and Commendation. For great is the Admiration, wherewith you have possessed us, since this Parliament began, in those two Causes, wherein we have had accesse unto you, and heard your Voice: That of the return of Sr. Francis Goodwine; And that of the Union: Whereby it seemeth unto us; The one of these, being so subtile a Question
of Law; And the other, so high a Cause of Estate; That, as the cripture aith, of the wisest King; That his Heart was as the Sands of the Sea; which, though it be one of the largest, and vastest Bo∣dies, yet it consisteth, of the smallest Moates, and Portions. So (I say) it appeareth unto us, in these two examples, that God hath given your Majesty a rare sufficiency, both to compasse, and fathome, the greatest matters, and to discern the least. And for matter of Praise, and Commendation, which chiefly belongeth to Goodness, we cannot but with great thankfulness profess; That your Majesty, within the Circle of one Year, of your Raign, (infra Orbem Anni Vertentis) hath endeavoured, to unite your Church, which was divided; To supply your Nobility, which was diminished; And to ease your People, in Cases, where they were burthened, and oppressed. In the last of these, your high Merits; That is the Ease, and Com∣fort, of your People; Doth fall out to be comprehended, the Message, which I now bring unto your Majestie; concerning the great Grievance, arising, by the manifold Abuses, of urveyors; Differing, in some Degree, from most of the things, wherein we deale, and consult; For it is true, that the Knights, Citizens, and urgesses in Parliament assembled, are a Representative Body, of your Commons, and Third Estate: And in many matters, although we apply our selves, to perform the trust, of those that choose us; yet, it may be, we do speak much, out of our own Senses, and Discourses. But in this Grievance, being of that Nature, where∣unto the poor People is most exposed, and Men of Quality less; we shall most humbly desire your Majesty, to conceive, That your Majesty, doth not hear, our Opinions, or Senses, but the very Groanes, and Complaints temselves, of your Commons, more truly, and vively, then by Representation. For there is no Grievance, in your Kingdome, so generall, so continuall, so sen∣sible, and so bitter unto the common Subject, as this whereof we now speak. Wherein, it may plese your Majesty, to vouchsafe me leave; First, to set forth unto you, the dutifull, and respective Carriage, of our proceeding; Nxt the substance of our Petiti∣on; And Thirdly, some Reasons and Motives, which, in all Humbleness, we do offer to your Majesties, Royall Consideration, or Commiseration: we assuring our selves, that never King raigned, that had better Notions of Head, and Motions of Heart, for the Good, and Comfort, of his loving Subjects. For the first; In the Course of Remedy, which we desire, we pretend not, nor intend not, in any sort, to derogate from your Majesties Prerogative; Nor to touch, diminish, or question, any your Majesties Regalities, or Rights. For we seek nothing, but the Reformation of Abuses, and the Execution of former Laws, whereunto we are born. And although, it be no strange Thing in Parliament, for new Abuses, to crave new Remedies; yer never∣theless in these Abuses, (which, if not in Nature, yet in extremi∣ty,
and Heigth of them, are most of them new) we content our selves with the old Laws: Onely we desire a Confirmation, and Quickening of them, in their Execution; So far are we, from any Humour of Inovation, or Incroachment. As to the Court, of the Green-Cloh, ordained, for the Provision, of your Majesties most Honourable Houshold, we hold it Anci∣ent, we hold it Reverent. Other Courts respect your Politick Person, but that respects your Naturall Person. But yet not∣withstanding, (most Excellent King,) to use that Freedom, which to Subjects, that poure out their Griefs before so gracious a King, is allowable, we may very well alledge unto your Majesty, a Com∣parison, or Simitude, used by one of the Fathers, in another Mat∣ter; And not unfitly representing our Case, in this point: And it is of the Leaves, and Roots, of Netles. The Leaves, are veno∣mous, and stinging, where they touch: The Root is not so, but s without Venome, or Malignity: and yet it is that Root, that bears, and supports, all the Leaves. To come now, to the substance, of our Petition. It is no other, then by the Benefit of your Majesties Laws, to be relieved, of the Abuses, of Purveyors; Which Abuses, do naturally divide them∣selves, into three sorts. The first, they take in Kind, that they ought not to take. The second, they take in Quntity, a far greater proportion, then commeth to your Majesties Use. The Third, they take in an unlawfull manner: In a manner, (I say) directly, and expresly, prohibited, by divers Laws. For the First of these; I am a little to alter their Name. For instead of Takers, they become Taxers: Instead of taking Provisi∣on for your Majesties service, they tax your people, ad redimendam vexationem: Imposing upon them, and extoting from them, di∣vers sums of Money, sometimes in gross, sometimes in the na∣ture of Stipends annually paid, Ne noceant, to be freed, and eased, of their oppression. Again, they take Trees, which by Law they cannot do; Timber-Trees, which are the Beauty, Countenance, and Shelter, of Mens Houses; That Men have long spared, from their own purse, and profit; That Men esteem, (for their use, and delight,) above ten times the value: That are a Loss, which Men cannot repair, or recover. These do they take, to the De∣facing, and Spoyling, of your Subjects Mansions, and Dwellins; Except they may be compounded with, to their own Appe∣tites. And if a Gentleman, be too hard for them, while he is at home, They will watch their time, when there is but a Bayliffe, or a Servant, remaining, And put the Axe to the Root of the Tree, ere ever the Master can stop it. Again they use a strange, and most unjust, Exaction; In causing the Subjects, to pay Poundage, of their own Debts, due from your Majesty unto them: So as a poor Man, when he hath had his Hay, or his Wood, or his Poultry, (which, perchance, he was full loath to part with, and had, for the Provision, of his own Family, and not, to put to Sale,) taken
from him; And that not at a just Price, but under the value; And commeth to receive his Mony, he shall have, after the rate, of 12. pence in the Pound, abated, for Poundage, of his due Pay∣ment, upon so hard Conditions. Nay further, they are grown to that extremity, (as is affirmed, though it be scarce credible; save that in such Persons, all things are Credible) that they will take double Poundage; Once when the Debentur is made; And gain the second time, when the Money is paid. For the second Point, (most Gracious Soveraign) touching the Quantity which they take, far above that which is answered to your Majesties use, they are the onely Multipliers in the world; They have the Art of Multiplication: For it is affirmed unto me by divers Gentlemen, of good report, and Experience, in these Causes, as a Matter, which I may safely avouch, before your Ma∣jesty, (To whom we owe all Truth, as well of Information, as Subjection;) That there is no Pound Profit, which redoundeth to your Majesty, in this Course; But induceth, and begetteth three Pound damage upon your Subjects; besides the Discon∣tentment. And to the end, they may make their Spoil, more se∣curely, what do they? whereas divers Statutes, do stricly pro∣vide, that whatsoever they take, shall be registred, and attested; To the end, that by making a Collation, Of that which is taken from the Countrey, and that which is answered above, their De∣ceits might appear; They, to the end, to obscure their Deceits, utterly omit the Observation of this, which the Law prescri∣beth. And therefore to descend, if it may please your Majesty, to the Third sort of Abuse; which is of the unlawfull Manner of their Taking, whereof this Question is a Branch; It is so manifold, as it rather asketh an Enumeration, of some of the Particulars, then a prosecution of all. For their Price: By Law they ought to take, as they can agree with the Subject; By Abuse they take, at an imposed, and enforced, Price: By Law, they ought to make, but one Aprizement, by Neighbours, in the Countrey; By Abuse, they make a second Aprizement at the Court Gate; And when the Subjects Cattell, come up, many Miles, lean, and out of Plight, by reason of their Travell, then they prize them anew, at an a∣bated price: By Law, they ought to take, between Sun and Sun; By Abuse, they take by Twilight, and in the Night time, A Time well chosen for Malefactours: By Law, they ought not to take in the High wayes, (A place, by your Majesties high prero∣gative, protected; And by Statute, by speciall words, excepted;) By abuse, they take in the wayes, in Contempt of your Majesties prerogative, and Laws: By Law, they ought to shew their Com∣mission; And the Form of Commission, is, by Law set down; The Commissions, they bring down, are against the Law; And becaue, they know so much, they will not shew them. A num∣ber of other particulars there are, whereof, (as I have given your
Majesty a Tast,) so the chief of them, upon deliberate Advise, are set down in writing, by the Labour of certain Committees, and approbation of the whole House, more particularly, and lively, than I can express them; My self having them at the second hand, by reason of my Aboad above. But this writing, is a Collection of theirs, who dwell amongst the Abuses of these of∣fenders, and Complaints of the People: And therefore, must needs have, a more perfect understanding, of all the Circum∣stances of them. It remaineth only, that I use a few words, the rather, to move your Majesty, in this cause. A few words, (I say,) a very few, For neither need so great Enormities any aggravating; Neither needeth so great Grace, as useth of it self, to flow from your Majesties Princely Goodness, any Artificiall perswading. There be two Things onely, which I think good, to set before your Majesty. The one, the Example, of your most Noble Pro∣genitours, Kings of this Realm: who from the First King, that en∣dowed this Kingdom, with the Great Charters of their Liberties, untill the last, have ordained, most of them, in their severall Raignes. some Laws, or Law against this kind of Offenders: And specially the Example of one of them; That King, who for his Greatness, Wisdom, Glory, and Union of severall Kingdoms, resembleth your Majesty most, both in Vertue, and Fortune, King Edward the Third; who, in his time onely, made ten severall Laws, against this Mischief. The second, is the Example, of God himself; who hath said and pronounced; That he will not hold them guiltless, that take his Name in vain. For all these great Misdemanours, are committed, in, and under your Majesties Name. And therefore we hope your Majesty, will hold thm twice guilty, that commit these offences: Once for the Oppres∣sing, of the People: And once more, for doing it, under the Colour, and abuse, of your Majesties most dreaded, and beloved, Name. So then, I will conclude, with the saying of Pindarus; Optima Res Aqua: Not for the Excellency, but for the Common use of it: And so contrary-wise, the Matter of Abuse of Purvey∣ance, (if it be not the most hainous Abuse,) yet certainly, it is the most common, and generall, Abuse, of all others, in this King∣dom. It resteth, that according to the Command laid upon me, I do, in all Humbleness, present this writing, to your Majesties Royall Hands; with most humble Petition, on the Behalf, of the Com∣mons; That, as your Majesty, hath been pleased, to vouchsafe, your Gracious Audience, to hear me speak: So you would be pleased, to enlarge your Patience, to hear this writing read, which is more Materiall.
A Speech used by Sir Francis Bacon in the Lower House of Parliament, 5o. Jacobi, concerning the Article, of gene∣rall Naturalization, of the Scottish Nation. IT may please you, (Mr. Speaker,) Preface will I use none, but put my Self, upon your good Opinions, to which I have been accustomed beyond my Deservings. Neither will I hold you in suspence, what way I will choose; But now, at the first, de∣clare my self, that I mean to counsell the House, to naturalize this Nation. Wherein, nevertheless, I have a request to make unto you; which is of more Efficacy, to the purpose, I have in Hand, then all that I shall say afterwards. And it is the same, which Demosthenes did, more then once, in great Causes of Estate, make to the People of Athens; Vt cum Calculis Suffragiorum, suman Magnanimitatem Reip. That when they took into their Hands, the Balls, whereby to give their Voices, (according as the man∣ner of them was;) They would raise their Thoughts, and lay aside those Considerations, which their private Vocations, and Degrees, mought minister, and represent unto them: And would take, upon them, Cogitations, and Minds, agreeable to the Dignity, and Honour, of the Estate. For, Mr. Speaker, as it was aptly, and sharply said, by Alexan∣der, to Parmenio; when upon the Recitall, of the great offers, which Darius made, Parmenio said unto him; I would accept these offers, were I as Alexander: He Turned it upon him again; So would I, (saith he) were I as Parmenio. So, in this cause, if an honest English Merchant, (I do not single out that State, in disgrace; For this Island ever held it Honourable; But onely for an Instance, of a private profession:) If an English Merchant should say, Surely I would proceed no further in the union, were I as the King; It mought be reasonably answered; No more would the King, were he as an Eng∣lish Merchant. And the like may be said of a Gentleman of the Countrey, be he never so worthy, and sufficient; Or of a Lawyer, be he never so wise, and learned; Or of any other particular Condition, in this Kingdome. For certainly, Mr. Speaker, if a Man shall be onely, or chiefly, sensible, of those Respects, which his particular Vocation, and Degree, shall suggest, and infuse, in∣to him; And not enter into true, and worthy Considerations, of Estate, he shall never be able aright to give Counsell, or take Counsell, in this Matter. So that if this Request be granted, I account the Cause obtained. But to proceed to the Matter it self. All Consultations, do rest, upon Questions Comparative. For when a Question is, De Vero, it is simple. For there is but one Truth: But when a Questi∣on is De Bono, it is for the most part Comparative: For there be
differing Degrees, of Good, and Evill; And the best, of the Good, is to be preferred, and chosen; And the worst, of the Evill, is to be declined, and avoyded. And therefore, in a Question of this Nature, you may not look for Answers, proper to every Incon∣venience, alledged: For somewhat that cannot be specially an∣swered, may, nevertheless, be encountred, and over-weighed, by matter of greater moment. And therefore the Matter, which I shall set forth unto you, will naturally receive this Distributi∣on of three parts. First, an Answer, unto those Inconveniences, which have been alledged, to ensue, if we should give way to this Naturalization: which, I suppose, you will find, not to be so great, as they have been made: But that much Dross, is put into the Ballance, to help to make weight. Secondly, an Encounter against the Remain, of those Incon∣veniences, which cannot properly be answered; By much grea∣ter Inconveniences, which we shall incur, if we do not proceed, to this Naturalization. Thirdly, an Encounter likewise, but of another Nature; That is, by the gain, and benefit, which we shall draw, and purchase to our selves, by proceeding to this Naturalization. And yet to avoid Confusion, which evermore followeth of too much Gene∣rality, it is necessary for me, before I proceed to perswasion, to use some Distribution of the Points, or Parts of Naturalization: Which certainly can be no better, nor none other, than the anci∣ent Distribution, of Ius Civitatis, Ius Suffragii, vel Tribus, and Pe∣titionis, sive Honorum. For all Ability, and Capacity, is either of private Interest, of Meum & Tuum, or of publick Service. And the publick consisteth chiefly, either in Voyce, or in Office. Now it is the First of these, Mr. Speaker, that I will onely handle at this Time, and in this Place; And reserve the other two, for a Com∣mittee; Because they receive, more Distinction, and Restricti∣on. To come therefore, to the Inconveniences, alledged on the other part. The first of them is, that there may ensue of this Naturalization, a surcharge of people upon this Realm of England; which is supposed already, to have the full charge, and content: & therefore, there cannot be an admission of the adoptive, with∣out a Diminution, of the Fortunes, and Conditions, of those that are Native Subjects of this Realme. A grave Objection, Mr. Spea∣ker, and very dutifull: For it proceedeth not, of any unkindness, to the Scottish Nation, but of a Naturall Fastness to our selves. For that Answer of the Virgins; Ne forte non sufficiat Vobis & Nobis, pro∣ceeded, not out of any Envy, or malign humour, but out of pro∣vidence, and that originall charity, which begins with our selves. And I must confess, Mr. Speaker, that, as the Gentleman said, when Abraham, and Lot, in regard of the Greatness of their Fa∣milies, grew pent, and straitened; it is true, that (Brethren though
they were) they grew to difference, and to those words; Vade i ad Dextram, & ego ad sinistram, &c. But certainly I should never have brought that Example on that side, For we see what fol∣lowed of it; How that this Separation, ad Dextram, and ad Sini∣stram, caued the miserable Captivity of the one Brother, and the Dangerous, though prosperous War, of he other, for hi Rescous, and Recovery. But to this Objection, Mr. Speaker, being so weighty, and so pincipall, I mean to give thre several Anwers; every one o them, being, to mine understanding by it self sufficient. The first is that this Opinin, of the Number, of the Scottis Naion, that should be likely, to plant themselves, here amongst us, will be found, to be a Thing, rather in Conceit, then in E¦vent. For (Mr. Speaker) you shall find these plausible Simili∣tudes, of a Tree, that will thrive the better, i it be removed in to the more fruitfull Soyl; And of Sheep, or Catell, that, if they find a Gap, or passage open, will leave the more barren Pasture, and get into the more rich, and plentiull; To be but Arguments meerly superficiall, and to have no sound Resemblance, wi the Transplanting, or Transferring of Families. For the Tree, we know, by nature, as soon as it is set in the better Ground, ca fasten upon it, and take Nutriment from it: And a sheep, as soon as he gets, into the better Pasture, what should let him to graze, and feed? But there longeth more, (I take it,) to a Family, or particular Person, that shall remove, from one Nation, to ano∣ther. For if (Mr. Speaker) they have not Stock, Means, Acquain∣tance and Custome, Habitation, Trades, Countenance, and th like; I hope, you doubt not, but they will starve, in the midst, o the rich Pasture; And are far enough off, from grazing, at their pleasure. And therefore, in this Point, which is conjectual, Experience is the best Gude: For the Time past, is a Pattern, o the Time to come. I think, no Man doubteth, Mr. Speaker, bu his Majesties first comming in, was as the greatest Spring-tde, for the Confluence, and Enrance, of that Nation. Now I woul fain understand, in thes four years space, and in the Fulness, and Strength, of the Current, and Tide, how many Families, of the Scottish Men, are planted, in the Citties, Eurroughs, and Towns, of this Kingdom? For I do assure my self, that moe then some Per∣sons of Quality, about his Majesties Perso, here at the Court, and in London, And some other inferiour Persons, that have a De∣pendancy upon them; The Return and Certificate, if such a Survey, should be made, would be, of a Number, extremely small. I report me, to all your private knowledges, of the places, where you inhabit. Now (Mr. Speaker,) as I said; Si in Ligno viridi ita fit, quid fiet in arido? I am sure there will be no more such Spring-Tdes. But you will tell me, of a multitude of Families, of the Scottish Nation in Polonia: And if they multiply, in a Country, so far off, how
much more here at hand? For that (Mr. Speaker) you must im∣pute it, of necessity, to some speciall Accident, of Time, and place, that draweth them thither. For you see, plainly, before your eyes, that in Germany, which is much nearer; And in France, where they are invited with priviledges, And with this very priviledge, of Naturalization, yet no such Number can be found. So as it cannot be, either nearness of place, or priviledge of Per∣son, that is the Cause. But shall I tell you (Mr. Speaker,) what I think: Of all the places in the world, near or far of, they will never take, that course of life, in this Kingdome, which they con∣tent themselves with, in Poland. For we see it, to be the Na∣ture of all men, that they will rather discover Poverty abroad, then at home. There is never a Gentleman, that hath over-reached himself in Expence, and thereby must abate his Counte∣nance, but he will rather travell, and do it abroad, then at home. And we know well, they have good high Stomacks, and have ever stood, in some terms, and Emulation, with us; And therefore they will never live here, except they can live in good fashion. So as I assure you (Mr. Speaker,) I am of Opinion, that the strife, which we now have to admit them, will have like Se∣quele, as that Contention had, between the Nobility, and People of Rome, for the admitting of a Plebeian Consul; which while it was in Passing, was very vehement, and mightily stood upon: And when the People had obtained it; they never made any Plebeian Consul; No, not in 60. years after. And so will this be for many years, as I am perswaded, rather a Matter in Opinion, then in use, or effect: And this is the First Answer, that I give to this main Inconvenience, pretended, of Surcharge of People. The Second Answer, which I give to this Objection, is this: I must have leave to doubt, (Mr. Speaker,) that this Realm of Eng∣land, is not yet peopled to the full. For certain it is, that the Territories of France, Italy, Flaunders, and some parts of Germany, do in equall space of Ground, bear and contain, a far greater Quantity of People, if they were mustred by the Poll. Neither can I see, that this Kingdom, is so much inferiour, unto those sorrain Parts in fruitfulness, as it is in population; which makes me conceive, we have not our full charge. Besides, I do see manifestly among us, the Badges, and Tokens, rather of Scarce∣ness, then of Press of People; as Drowned Grounds, Commons, Wastes, and the like: Which is a plain Demonstration, that how∣soever there may be, an overswelling throng, and press of People, here about London, which is most in our Eye; yet the Body of the Kingdome, is but thin sown with People. And whosoever shall compare, the Ruines, and Decayes, of ancient Towns, in this Realm, with the Erections, and Augmentations, of new; cannot but judge, that this Realm, hath been far better peopled in fomer times; It may be, in the Heptarchy, or otherwise; For generally the Rule holdeth, The smaller State, the greater Population,
prorat. And whether, this be true, or no, we need not seek further, then to call to our remembrance, how many of us, serve here, in this place, or desolate, and decayed, Burroughs. Again (Mr. Speaker,) whosoever looketh into the Principles of Estate, must hold it, that it is the Mediterrane Countries, and not the Mari∣me, which need to fear surcharge of People. For all Sea rovin∣es, and specially Islands, have another Element, besides the Earth, and Soil, for their Sustentation. For what an infinite, Number of people, are, and may be sustained by Fishing, Carriage by Sea, and Merchandizing? wherein, I do again discover, that we are not at all pinched, by Multitude of People. For if we were, it were not possible, that we should relinquish, and resign, such an infiite Benefit, of Fishing, to the Flemmings, as, it is well known, we do. And therefore, I see, that we have wastes by Sea, as well as by Land: which still is an infallible Argument, that our Indu∣stry, is not awaked, to seek maintenance, by any over great Press, or charge of people. And lstly (Mr. Speaker) there was never any Kingdome, in the Ages of te world, had, I think, so fair, and happy means, to is∣sue, and discharge, the Multitude of their People, (if it were too great,) as this Kingdome hath; In regard, of that desolate, and wasted, Kingdome of Ireland; which, (being a Countrey, blessed, with almost all the Dowies of Nature; As Rivers, Havens, Woods, Quarries, good Soyl, and temperate Climate; And now at last, under his Majesty, blessed also with obedience) Doth, as it were, continually call unto us, for our Colonies, and Planta∣tions. And so I conclude, my second Answer, to this petended Inconvenience, of surcharge of People. Te Third Answer, (Mr. Speaker,) which  give, is this. I de∣mand, what is the worst Effect, which can follow of Surcharge of People? Look into all Stories, and you shall find it none other, thn some Honourable War, for the Enlargement of their Bor∣des, which find themselves pent, upon Forrain parts. Which Incovenience, in a valourous, and Warlike, Nation, I know not, whether I should term, an Inconvenience, or no? For the saying is most true, though in another Sense; Omne solum Forti Patria. It was spoken, indeed, of the patience, of an exil'd Man: But it is no less true, of the valour, of a Warlike Nation. And certainly, (Mr. Speaker,) I hope, I may speak it without offence: That if we did hold our selves worthy, whensoever just Cause should be given; Either to recover our ancient Rights; Or to revenge our late wrongs; Or to attain the Honour of our Ancestors; Or to enlarge the Patrimony of our Posterity; We would never, in this manner, forget Considerations, of Amplitude, and Great∣ness, and fall at variance, about profit, and Reckonings; Fitter, a great deal, or private Persons, then for Parliaments, and King∣doms. And thus, (Mr. Speaker,) I leave this first objection, to such Satisfaction, as you have heard.
The second Objection is, that the Fundamentall Laws of both these Kingdoms, of England, and Scotland, are yet divers, and se∣verall: Nay more, that it is declared, by the Instrument, that they shall so continue; And that there is no intent, in his Maje∣sty, to make Innovation in them: And therefore, that it should not be seasonable, to proceed to this Naturalization, whereby to endowe them, with our Rights, and Priviledges, except they should likewise receive, and submit themselves, to our Laws. And this Objection, likewise, (Mr. Speaker) I allow to be a weigh∣ty Objection, and worthy to be well answered, and discussed. The Answer, which I shall offer, is this. It is true, for mine own part, (Mr. Speaker,) that I wish, the Scottish Nation, gover∣ned by our Laws: For I hold our Laws, with some reducement, worthy to govern, if it were, the world. But this is that which I say, and I desire therein your Attention; That, according to true reason of Estate, Naturalization is, in Order, First, and pre∣cedent, to union of Laws; In degree, a less Matter, then union of Laws; And, in Nature, separable, not inseparable, from uni∣on of Laws. For Naturalization, doth but take out, the Marks of a Forrainer; But union of Laws, makes them entirely as our selves: Naturalization taketh away separation; But union of Lawes doth take away Distinction. Do we not see, (Mr. Spea∣ker,) that, in the Administation, of the world, under the great Monarch, God himself, that his Lawes are divers; One Law in Spirits, another in Bodies; One Law in Regions celestiall, another in Elementary? And yet the Creatures, are all one Mass, and Lump, without any vacuum, or separation? Do we not see, like∣wise, in the State of the Church, that amongst People, of all Lan∣guages, and Linages, there is one Communion of Saints? And that, we are all Fellow Citizens, and naturalized, of the Heavenly Hierusalem? And yet, nevertheless, divers, and severall, Ec∣clesiasticall Lawes, Policies, and Hierarchies; According to the Speech, of that worthy Father; In veste varietas sit, scissurae non sit. And therefore, certainly, (Mr. Speaker,) the Bond of Law, is the more speciall, and private, Bond; And the Bond of Naturalizati∣on, the more common, and generall. For the Lawes, are rather Figura Reip, then Forma; And rather Bonds of Perfection, then Bonds of Entirenesse. And therefore, we see, in the Experience, of our own Government, that in the Kingdome of Ireland, all our Statute-Lawes, since Poynings Law, are not in force; And yet we deny them not, the Benefit, of Naturalization. In Gersey, Garne∣sey, and the Isle of Man, our Common-Lawes are not in force; And yet they have the Benefit of Naturalization. Neither need any Man doubt, but that our Laws, and Customes, must, in small time, gather, and win, upon theirs. For here's the Seat of the Kingdome, whence come the supreme Directions of Estate; Here is the Kings Person, and Example, of which the Verse saith. Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis.
And therefore, it is not possible; Although not by solemne, and formall, Act of Estates; yet by the secret Operation, of no long time, but they will come under the yoak of our Lawes; And so, Dulcis tractus pari jugo. And this is the Answer, I give, to this second objection. The third Objection, is, some Inequality, in the Fortunes, of these two Nations, England and Scotland; By the Commixture whereof, there may ensue Advantage to them, and Loss to us. Wherein, (Mr. Speaker) it is well, that this Difference, or Dispa∣parity, conisteth, but in externall Goods, of Fortune. For in∣deed, it must needs be confessed, that for the Goods of the Mind, and the Body, they are Alteri Nos; Other our selves. For to do them but right, we know, in their Capacity, and understanding they are a people Ingenious; In Labour, Industrious; In Courage, Va∣liant; In Body, Hard, Active, and Comely. More might be said, but in commending them, we do but, in effect, commend our selves: For they are of one Piece, and Continent, with us: And Truth is, we are participant, both of their Vertues, and Vices. For if they have been noted, to be a people not so tractable in Gvernment, we cannot, without flatteing our selves, free our selves, altogether, from that Fault; Being, indeed, a thing inci∣dent, to all Martiall People. As we see it evident, by the Example, of the Romans, and others. Even like unto Fierce Horses, that though they be, of better service then others, yet are they har∣der, to guid, and to mannage. But for this Objection, (Mr. Speaker) I purpose to answer it; Not by Authority of Scripture, which saith. Beatius est dare quam accipere: But by an Authority framed, and derived, from the Judgement of our selves, and our Ancestors, in the same case, as to this point. For, (Mr. Speaker,) in all the Line of our Kings, none useth to carry, greater Commendation, then his Majesties Noble Progenitour, King Edward, the First of that Name: And a∣mongst his other Commendations, both of War, and Pollicy, none is more celebrated, then his purpose, and Enterprise, for the Conquest of Scotland: As not bending his Designes to glori∣ous Acquests abroad, but to solid strength at home: which, ne∣vertheless, if it had succeeded well, could not, but have brought in, all those Inconveniences, of the Commixture, of a more Opu∣lent Kingdome, with a less, that are now alledged. For it is not the Yoke, either of our Arms, or of our Lawes, that can alter the nature of the Climate, or the Nature of the Soyl: Neither is it, the Manner, of the Commixture, that can alter, the Matter, of the Com∣mixture. And therefore, (Mr. Speaker,) if it were good for us then, it is good for us now; And not to be prised the less, because we paid not so dear for it. But a more full Answer to this Obje∣ction, I refer over to that, which will come after to be spoken, touching Surety, and Greatness. The fourth Objection, (Mr. Speaker,) is not properly an Ob∣jection,
but rather a preoccupation, of an Objection, of the o∣ther side: For it may be said, and very materially, whereabout do we contend? The Benefit of Naturalization is, by the Law, in as many, as have been, or shall be born, since his Majesties Com∣ming to the Crown, already setled, and invested. There is no more then, but to bring the Ante-Nati, into the Degree of the Post-Nati; that Men grown, that have well deserved, may be in no worse case, then children, which have not deserved: And Elder Brothers, in no worse case, then yonger Brothers. So as we stand, upon Quiddam, not Quantum; Being but a little diffe∣rence of Time, of one Generation, from another. To this, (Mr. Speaker,) it is said by some; That the Law is not so, but that the Post-Nati, are Aliens, as well as the rest. A point, that I mean not much to argue; Both because it hath been well spoken to, by the Gentleman, that spake last before me; And because, I do desire, in this Case, and in this place, to speak rather of Convenience, then of Law. Onely this will I say; That that Opinion, seems to me, Contrary to reason of Law; Contrary to form of pleading in Law; And Contrary to Autho∣rity, and Experience, of Law. For Reason of Law, when I me∣ditate of it; Methinks, the wisdom, of the Common Laws of England, well observed, is Admirable, in the Distribution, of the Benefit, and protection, of the Laws; According to the severall Conditions of Persons, in an excellent Proportion. The De∣grees are four, but bipartite. Two of Aliens, and Two of Sub∣jects. The first Degree, is of an Alien, born, under a King, or State, that is an Enemy. If such an one, come into this King∣dom, without safe Conduct, it is at his perill: The Law giveth him no protection, neither for Body, Lands, nor Goods: So as if he be slain, there is no Remedy, by any Appeal, at the parties sute, although his wife were an English Woman: Marry at the Kings sute, the Case may be otherwise, in regard of the offence to the Peace. The Second Degree, is, of an Alien, that is born under the faith, and Allegiance, of a King, or State, that is a friend. Unto such a Person, the Law doth impart, a greater Benefit, and protection; That is, concerning things personall, Transito∣ry, and Moveable; As Goods, and Chattels, Contracts, and the like: But not concerning Freehold, and Inheritance. And the reason is, because he may be an Enemy, though he be not. For the State, under the Obeisance of which he is, may enter intoy Quarrell, and Hostility; And therefore, as the Law hath but a Transitory Assurance of him, so it rewards him, but with Transi∣tory Benefits. The third Degree, is, of a Subject, who having been an Alien, is, by Charter made Denizen. To such an one, the Law doth impart, yet, a more ample Benefit: For it gives him power, to purchase Free-Hold, and Inheritance, to his Own use: And likewise, enables the Children, born after his Denization, to inherit. But yet, nevertheless, he cannot make Title, or
convey Pedegree, from any Ancestour Paramount. For the Law, thinks not good, to make him, in the same Degree, with a Subject born: Because he was once an Alien, and so mought once have been an Enemy. And Nemo subitò fingitur: Mens Affections, cannot be so setled, by any Benefit, as when from their Nativity, they are inbred, and inherent. And the fourth Degree, which is the perfect Degree, is, of such a Person, that neither is Enemy, nor can be Enemy, in time to come; Nor could have been Ene∣my, at any time past; And therefore, the Law gives unto him, the full Benefit, of Naturalization. Now, (Mr. Speaker,) if these be the true Steps, and Paces, of the Law, no Man can deny, but whosoever is born under the Kings Obedience, never could, in Aliquo puncto temporis, be an Enemy; (A Rebell he mought be, but no Enemy;) And therefore, in Reason of Law, is naturalized. Nay contrary-wise, he is bound, Iure Nativitatis, to defend this King∣dome of England, against all Invaders or Rebels: And therefore, as he is obliged, to the protection of Arms; And that perpetual¦ly, and universally; so he is to have, the perpetuall, and univer∣sall, Benefit, and protection of Law, which is Naturalization. For Form of Pleading, it is true, that hath been said; That if a Man, would plead another, to be an Alien; He must not onely set forth, negatively, and privatively, that he was born, out of the Obedience, of our Soveraign Lord the King; But affirmative∣ly, under the Obedience, of a forrain King, or State, in particu∣lar; which never can be done in this case. As for Authority, I will not press it; you know all what hath been published, by the Kings Proclamation. And for Experience of Law, we see it in the Subjects of Ireland; In the Subjects of Gersey, and Gernsey, parcels of the Dutchy of Normandy; In the Subjects of Calleis, (when it was English,) which was parcell of the Crown of France. But, as I said, I am not wil∣ling, to enter into an Argument of Law, but to hold my self, to point of Convenience. So as, for my part, I hold all Post-Nati, Naturalized, ipso Iure. But yet, I am far from Opinion, that it should be a thing super∣fluous, to have it done by Parliament; Chiefly, in respect, of that true principle; Principum Actiones praecipuè ad Famam sunt compo∣nendae. It will lift up a Sign, to all the World, of our Love to∣wards them, and good agreement with them. And these are (Mr. Speaker) the Materiall Objections, which have been made of the other Side, whereunto you have heard mine Answers: Weigh them in your Wisdomes; And so I conclude that General Part. Now, (Mr. Speaker,) according as I promised, I must fill the o∣ther Ballance, in expressing unto you, the Inconveniences, which we shall incurre, if we shall not proceed, to this Naturalization. wherein, that Inconvenience, which of all others, and alone by it self, if there were none other, doth exceedingly move me, and
may move you, is a Position of Estate, collected out of the Re∣cords of Time, which is this: That wheresoever severall King∣domes, or Estates, have been united in Soveraignty; If that Union, hath not been fortified, and bound in, with a further Union; And namely that, which is now in Question, of Naturalization; This hath followed; That at one time, or other, they have bro∣ken again, being upon all Occasions apt to revolt, and relapse, to the former Separation. Of this Assertion, the first Example, which I will set before you, is of that memorable Vnion, which was between the Ro∣mans, and the Latines, which continued, from the Battaile, at the Lake of Regilla, for many years, untill the Consulships of T. Manlius, and P. Decius. At what time, there began, about this ve∣ry point of Naturalization, that War, which was called Bellum So∣cile; Being the most Bloudy, and Pernicious War, that ever th Roman State endured. wherein after Numbers of Battailes, and infinite Seiges, and Surprises of Towns, the Romans, in the end, prevailed, and mastered the Latines. But assoon as ever they had the Honour of the War, looking back into what Per∣dition, and Confusion, they were near to have been brought, they presently naturalized them all. You speak of a Naturaliza∣tion in Bloud; There was a Naturalization indeed in Bloud. Let me set, before you, again, the Example of Sparta, and the rest of Peloponnesus, their Associates. The State of Sparta, was a Nice, and Jealous, State, in this point, of imparting Naturaliza∣ion, to their Confederates, But what was the issue of it? After they had held them, in a kind of Society, and Amity, for divers years: upon the first occasion given, (which was no more, then the Surprize, of the Castle of Thebes, by certain desperate Conspira∣tours, in the habit of Masquers; There ensued immediately, a generall Revolt, and Defection, of their Associats; which was the Ruine of their State, never afterwards to be recovered. Of later time, let me lead your Consideration to behold, the like Events, in the Kingdome of Arragon; which Kingdome was united with Castile, and the rest of Spain, in the persons of Ferdi∣nando and Isabella; And so continued many years; But yet so, as it stood, a Kingdome, severed, and divided, from the rest, of the Body, of Spain, in priviledges; And directly, in this point of Naturalization, or Capacity of Inheritance. What came of this? Thus much; That now of fresh Memory, not past twelve years since, onely upon the voice of a Condemned Man, out of the Grate of a Prison, towards the Street, that cried Fueros, (which is as much as Liberties, or Priviledges;) There was raised a dange∣rous Rebellion, which was suppressed, with Difficulty, with an Army Royall; And their priviledges disannulled, and they in∣corporated, with the rest of Spain. Upon so small a Spark, not∣withstanding so long continuance, were they ready to break, and sever again.
The like may be said, of the States of Florence, and Pisa: Which City of Pisa, being united unto Florence, but not endued with the Benefit of Naturalization, upon the first light of forrain Assistnce, by the Expedition, of Charles the eighth, of France, into Italy, did revol; Though it be since, again reunited, and Incorporated. The same Effect, we see, in the most Barbarous Government; which shewes it, the rather, to be an effect of Nature. For it was thought, a fit Pollicy, by the Councell of Constantinople, to retain the three Provinces, of Transylvania, Valachia, and Moldavia, (which were, as the very Nurses of Constantinople, in respect of their Provisions,) to the end, they mought be the less wated, onely under Vayvods, as Vassals and Homagers; And not under Bassa's, and Provinces of the Turkish Empire; Which Pollicy, we see, by late Experience, proved unfortunate; As appeared, by the Revolt, of the same three Provinces, under the Arms and Conduct of Sigismund, Prince of Transylvania; A Leader, very fa∣mous, for a time; which Revolt is, not yet, fully recovered. Whereas we seldome, or never hear, of Revolts of Princes, in∣corporate, to the Turkish Empire. On the other part, (Mr. Speaker,) because it is true, which the Logicians say; Oppsita, juxta se posita, magis elucescunt; let us take a view, and we shall find; That wheresoever, Kingdomes, and States, have been united; And that union Corroborate, by the Bond of mutuall Naturalization; you shall never observe them, afterwards, upon any Occasion of Trouble, or otherwise, to break and sever again: As we see, most evidently, before our eys, in divers Provinces of France; That is to say, Guen, Provnce, Normandy, Brittain; which, notwithstanding, the infinite infe∣sting Troubles, of that Kingdom, never offered to break again. We see the like Effect, in all the Kingdoms, of Spain which are mutually naturalized; As Leon, Castile, Valencia, Andaluzia, Granada, and the rest: Except Aragon, which held the contrary Course, and therefore had the contrary successe, as we said: And Portugall, of which, there is not yet, sufficient Trill. And lastly, we see the like effect, in our own Nation, which ne∣ver rent asunder, after it was once united; so as we now scarce know, whether the Heptarchy, were a Story, or a Fable. And ther∣fore, (Mr. Speaker,) when I revolve with my Self, these Exam∣ples, and others, so lively expressing the necessity of a Naturalization, to avoy'd a relapse into a Separation; And do hear so ma∣ny Arguments, and Scruples, made on the other side; It makes me think on the old Bishop which upon a publick Disputation, of certain Divines, Christians, with some learned Men of the Hea∣then, did extremely presse to be heard; And they were loath to suffer him, because they knew he was unlearned, though other∣wise an Holy and well-meaning Man; But, at last, with much a∣do, he got to be heard. And when he came to speak, instead of uing Argument, he did only say over his Belief: But did it with
such Assurance, and Constancy, as it did strike the Minds, of those that head him, more then any Argument had done. And so, (Mr. Speaker,) against all these witty and subtile Arguments, I say, that I do believe, and I would be sorry to be found a Pro∣phet in it; That except we proceed, with this Naturalization; (Though not perhaps in his Majesties time, who hath such Inte∣rest in both Nations,) yet in the time of his Descendants, these Realms will be in continuall Danger, to divide, and break again. Now if any Man, be of that carelesse mind, —Maneat nostros ea Cura Nepotes; Or of that hard Mind, to leave things, to be tried, by the shar∣pest Sword; sure I am, he is not of Saint Pauls Opinion; who af∣firmeth; That whosoever, useth not Fore-sight, and Provision for his Family, is worse then an unbeliever: Much more, if we shall not use fore-sight for these two Kingdoms, that comprehend so many Families: But leave things open, to the perill of future Divisions. And thus have I expressed unto you the Inconvenience, which, of all other, sinketh deepest with me, as the most weigh∣ty. Neither do there want, other Inconveniences, (Mr. Speaker,) the Efect, and Influence whereof, I fear, will not be adjourned to so long a Dy, as this, that I have spoken of. For I leave it, to your wisdom, to consider; whether you do not think, in case, by the deniall o this Naturalization, any Pike of Alienation, or un∣kindness; (I do not say,) should be, thought to be, or noised to be, between these two Nations; whether it will not quicken, and excite, all the Envious, and Malicious, Humours, wheresoever, (which are now covered,) against us, either forraign, or at home; And so open the way to practises, and other Engines, and Ma∣chinations, to the Disturbance, of this State. As for that other Inconvenience, of his Majesties Engagement, into this Action, it is too binding, and pressing, to be spoken of; And may do bet∣ter, a great deal, in your Minds, then in my Mouth; Or in the mouth of any man else; because, as I say, it doth press, our Li∣berty, too far. And therefore, (Mr. Speaker,) I come now, to the third generall part, of my Division, concerning the Benefits, which we shall purchase, by this knitting of the knot, surer, and streighter, between these two Kingdoms, by the Communicating of Naturalization. The Benefits may appear to be two; The one Surety; the o∣ther Greatness. Touching Surety, (Mr. Speaker) it was well said by Titus Quiutius, the Roman, touching the state of Peloponnesus; That the Tortois is safe within her shell: Testudo intra Tegumen tuta est. But if there be any Parts, that lye open, they endanger all the rest. We know well, that although the State, at this time, be in a happy peace; Yet, for the time past, the more Ancient Ene∣my, to this Kingdome, hath been the French; and the more late, the Spaniard: And both these, had, as it were, their severall po∣stern
Gates; whereby, they mought have approach, and En∣trance, to annoy us. France had Scotland, and Spain had Ireland: For these were the two Accesses, which did comfort, and en∣courage, both these Enemies, to assail, and trouble us. We see, that of Scoland, is cut off, by the Vnion, of both these Kingdoms; If that, it shall be now made constant, and permanent. That of Ireland, is likewise cut off, by the convenient situation, of the North of Scotland, toward the North of Ireland, where the Sore was: Which, we see, being suddainly closed, hath continued closed, by means of this Salve So as now, there are no Parts, of this State, exposed to Danger, to be a Temptation, to the Ambition of Forrainers, but their approaches, and Avenues, are taken away. For, I do little doubt, but those Forrainers, which had so little success, when they had these advantages, will have much lesse comfort now, that they be taken from them. And so much for Surety. For Greatness, (Mr. Speaker,) I think a Man may speak it sober∣ly, and without Bravery; That this Kingdom of England, having Scotland united, Ireland reduced, the Sea Provinces of the Low-Countreys contracted, and Shipping maintained; Is one of the grea∣test Monarchies, in Forces, truly esteemed, that hath been in the world. For certainly, the Kingdoms here on Earth, have a Re∣semblance with the Kingdome of Heaven; which our Saviour com∣pareth, not to any great Kernell, or Nut, but to a very Small Grain; yet such an one, as is apt, to grow, and spread. And such, do I take to be, the Constitution of this Kingdome; If indeed, we shall refer our Counsels, to Greatness, and Power; And not quench them, too much, with Consideration, of Utility, and Wealth. For (Mr. Speaker,) was it not, think you, a true Answer, that So∣lon of Greece, made, to the Rich King Craesus of Lydia, when hee shewed unto him, a great Quantity of Gold, that he had gathe∣red together, in Ostentation of his Greatness, & Might? But Solon said to him contrary to his Expectation; Why Sir, if another come, that hath better Iron then you, he will be Lord, of all your Gold. Neither is the Authority of Machiavell to be despised; who scorneth the Proverb of estate, taken first from a Speech of Muciauus; That Mo∣neys re the Sinews of War: And saith, There are no true Sinews of War, but the very Sinews, of the Arms, of valiant Men. Nay more, (Mr. Speaker,) whosoever shall look, into the Seminaries, and Be∣ginnings, of the Monarchies, of the world, he shall find them foun∣ded in Poverty. Persia, a Country barren, and poor, in respect of the Medes, whom they subdued. Macedon, a Kingdome ignoble, and Mercenary, untill the Time, of Philip, the Son of Amyntas. Rome had poor, and pastorall Beginnings. The Turks, a Band of Sarmatian Scythes, that, in a vagabond manner, made Impression, upon that part of Asia, which is yet called Turcomania. Out of which, after much variety of Fortune, sprung the Ottomon Fami∣ly, now the Terrour of the world. So we know the Gothes, Van∣dals,
Alanes, Huns, Lombards, Normans, and the rest of the Nor∣thern People, in one Age of the World, made their Descent, or Ex∣pedition, upon the Roman Empire; And came not, as Rovers, to carry away prey, and be gone again; But planted themselves, in a number, of fruitfull, and rich, Provinces; Where, not onely their Generations, but their Names, remain, till this Day: witness Lombardy; Catalonia, A name compounded of Goth & Alane; An∣daluzia, A name corrupted from Vandelicia; Hungary; Normandy; and others. Nay, the Fortune of the Swizzes, of late years, (which are bred, in a barren, and Mountanous Countrey,) is not to be forgotten; Who first ruined the Duke of Burgundy; The same, who had almost ruined, the Kingdome of France: what time, after the Battail of Granson, the Rich Jewell of Burgundy, prized at many Thousands, was sold for a few pence, by a com∣mon Swizze, That knew no more, what a Jewell meant, then did sops Cock. And again, the same Nation, in revenge of a Scorn, was the Ruin of the French Kings Affaires in Italy, Lewes the 12th. For that King, when he was pressed somewhat rudely, by an A∣gent of the Swizzes, to raise their Pensions, brake into Words of Choller; What, (said he,) will these Villaines of the Mountaines, put a Tax upon me? which words, lost him his Dutchy of Millain, and chased him out of Italy. All which Examples, (Mr. Speaker,) do well prove Solons opinion, of the Authority, and Mastry, that Iron hath over Gold. And therefore, if I shall speak, unto you, mine own Heart; Me thinks, we should a little disdain, that the Nation of Spain, (which, howsoever of late, it hath grown to Rule, yet of ancient time served many Ages; First under Carthage, then under Rome, after under Sarazens, Gothes, and others;) should, of late years, take unto themselves that Spirit, as to dream, of a Monarchy, in the West, according to that Devise; Vi∣deo Solem Ortentem in Occidente: Onely, because they have ravi∣shed, from some wild, and unarmed, People, Mines, and Store, of Gold: And, on the other side, that this Island of Britanny, seated, and manned, as it is, and that hath, (I make no question,) the best Iron in the world; (That is, the best Souldiers of the world;) should think of nothing, but Reckonings, and Audits, and Me∣um and Tuum, and I cannot tell what. Mr. Speaker,) I have, (I take it,) gone through the Parts, which I propounded to my Self; Wherein, if any Man, shall think, that I have sung Placebo; For mine own particular, I would have him know, that I am not so unseen in the world, but that I discern, it were much alike, for my private fortune, to rest a Tacebo, as to sing a Placebo, in this Business. But I have spoken, out of the Fountain, of my Heart: Credidi, propter quod locutus sum; I believed, therefore I spake. So as my Duty is performed: The Judgement is yours; God direct it for the best.
A Speech used by Sir Francis Bacons in the Lower House of Parliament, by occasion, of a Motion, concerning the Uni∣on of Lawes. AND it please you, (Mr. Speaker,) were it now a time to Wish, as it is to Advise; No Man should be more forward, or more earnest, then my self, in this wish; That his Majesties Subjects, of England and Scotland, were governed by one Law; And that for many Reasons. First, because it will be an infallible Assurance, that there will never be, any Relapse, in succeeding Ages, to a Separation. Secondly, Dulcis tractus pari Iugo: If the Draught lye most up∣on us, and the Yoke lightest upon them, it is not equall. Thirdly, the Qualities, and, (as I may term it,) the Elements of their Laws, and ours, are such, as do promise, an excellent Tem∣perature, in the compounded Body: For if the prerogative here be too indfinite, it may be the Liberty there is too unbounded: If our Laws, and proceedings, be too Prolixe, and Formall; it may be theirs, are too informall, and Summary. Fourthly, I do discern, to my understanding, there will be no great Difficulty, in this Work. For their Laws, by that I can learn, compared with ours, are like their Language, compared with ours. For as their Language, hath the same Roots, that ours hath, but hath a little more mixture of Latine, and French; So their Laws and Customes, have the like Grounds, that ours have, with a little more mixture, of the Civill Law, and French Customes. Lastly, the Mean to this work, seemeth to me, no lesse excel∣lent, then the Work it self: For if both Laws shall be united, it is of necessity, for preparation, and Inducement thereunto, that our own Laws, be reviewed, and recompiled, Then the which, I think, there cannot be a work, that his Majesty can undertake, in these his times of Peace, more Politique, more Honourable, nor more Beneficiall to his Subjects, for all Ages; Pace datâ Terris, Animum ad Civilia Vertit Iura suum, Legesque tulit justissimus Auctor. For this continuall Heaping up, of Laws, without digesting them, maketh but a Chaos and Confusion: And turneth the Laws, many times, to become but Snares for the People, as is said, in the Scripture, Pluet super os Laqueos. Now, Non sunt pejores Laquei, quam Laquei Legum. And therefore, this work, I esteem to be, indeed, a work, (rightly to term it,) Heroicall. So that, for this good wish, of Vnion of Laws, I do consent to the full; And, I think, you may perceive, by that which I have said, that I come not in this, to the Opinion of Others, but that I was, long ago, setled in it, my Self. Neverthelesse, as this is moved out of zeal,
so, I take it, to be moved out of Time; As commonly zealous Motions are: while Men, are, so fast, carried on, to the End, as they give no Attention to the Mean. For if it be Time, to talk of this now; It is, either because the business, now in hand, can∣not proceed without it; Or because, in Time, and Order, this Matter should be precedent; Or because, we shall leese some ad∣vantage, towards this Effect, so much desired, if we should go on, in the course, we are about. But none of these three; in my judgement, are true; And therefore, the Motion, as I said, unseasonable. For first, that there may not be, a Naturalization, without an V∣nion in Laws, cannot be maintained. Look into the Example, of the Church; And the Union thereof; You shall see severall Churches, that joyn in one Faith, one Baptism, (which are the points of spirituall Naturalization,) do, many times, in Policy, Consti∣tutions, and Customes, differ. And therefore, one of the Fa∣hers, made an excellent observation, upon the two Mysteries: The one, that in the Gospell; where the Garment of Christ, is said to have been with out Seame; The other, that in the Psalm, where he Garment, of the Queen is said, to have been of divers Colours; And concludeth, In veste Varietas sit, Scissura non sit. So, in this Case, (Mr. Speaker,) we are now in hand, to make this Monarchy of one Piece, and not of one Colour. Look again, into the Exam∣ples, of Forrain Countries; And take, that next us, of France; And there, you shall find, tht they have this Distribution; Pais du droit Escript; and Pais du droit Constumier. For Gascoigne, Langue∣dock, Prvence, Daulphenie, are Countries, governed by the Letter, or Text, of the Civill Law: But the Isle of France, Tourain, Berry, Anjou, and the rest; And most of all Brittain, and Normandy; Are governed by Customes, which amount unto a Municipall Law; And use the Civill Law, but only for Grounds; And to decide new, and rare, Cases; And yet, nevertheless, Naturalization, passeth through all. Secondly, that this Vnion of Laws, should precede the Natura∣lization; Or that it should go on, pari passu, hand in hand, I sup∣pose, likewise, can hardly be maintained: But the contrary, that Naturalization ought to precede. Of which my Opinion, as I could yield many reasons, so because all this, is but a Digression, and therefore ought to be-short; I will hold my self now, onely to one, which is briefly and plainly this: That the Vnion of Laws, will ask a great Time, to be perfected, both for the Compiling, and for the Passing: During all which time, if this Mark of Stran∣gers, should be denied to be taken away; I fear it may induce, such a Habit of Strangeness, as will rather be an Impediment, then a preparation, to further proceeding. For he was a wise Man that said; Opportuni Magnis Conatibus Transitus Rerum. And in those Cases, Non progredi est Regredi. An like, as in a pair of Ta∣bles, you must put out the former writing, before you can put
in new; And again, that which you write in, you write Letter by Letter; But that which you put out, you put out at once: So we have now to deal with the Tables of Mens Hearts, where∣in it is in vain, to think you can enter, the willing Acceptance of our Laws, and Customs; except you first put sorth, all Notes, either of Hostility, or Forrain Condition. And these, are to be put out, simulet semel, at once, without Gradations; whereas the o∣ther points, are to be imprinted, and engraven, distinctly, and by degrees. Thirdly, whereas it is conceived by some, that the Commu∣nication, of our Benefits, and priviledges, is a good Hold, that we have over them, to draw them to submit themselves to our Laws: It is an Argument, of some probability, but yet to be an∣swered, many wayes. For first, the Intent is mistaken; Which is not, as I conceive it, to draw them wholy, to a Subjection to our Law; But to draw, both Nations, to one uniformity, of Law. Again to think, that there should be, a kind of Articulate, and Indented, Contract; That they should receive our Laws, to ob∣tain our priviledges, it is a Matter in reason of Estate not to be ex∣pected; Being that, which scarcely a private Man, will acknow∣ledge, if it come to that, whereof Seneca speaketh; Beneficium ac∣cipere, est Libertatem vendere: No, but Courses of Estate, do de∣scribe, and delineate, another way; Which is, to win them, ei∣ther by Benefit, or Custome. For we see, in all Creatures, that Men do Feed them first, and Reclaim them after. And so, in the first Institution of Kingdomes, Kings did first win People, by many Benefits, and Protections, before they prest any Yoke. And for Cu∣stome which the Poets call, Imponere Morem: Who doubts, but that the Seat of the Kingdome, and the Example of the King, re∣sting here with us, our Manners will quickly be there, to make all things ready for our Laws? And lastly, the Naturalization, which is now propounded, is qualified, with such Restrictions, as there will be enough kept back, to be used, at all times, for an Adamant, of drawing them further on to our Desires. And therefore, to conclude, I hold this Motion, of Vnion of Laws, very worthy, and arising from ve∣y good Minds, but not proper for this Time. To come therefore to that, which is now in Question: It is no more, but whither, there should be a Difference made, in this priviledge of Naturalization, between the Ante-Nati, and the Post-Nati; Not in point of Law, (for that will otherwise be decided,) but onely in point of Convenience; [As if a Law, were now to be made, de novo.] In which Question, I will, at this time, onely answer two Objections; And use two Arguments, and so leave it to your Judgement. The first Objection hath been; That if a Difference, should be, it ought to be in favour of the Ante-Nati; Because, they are Per∣sons, of Merit, Service, and Proof; whereas the Post-Nati are In∣fants,
That, (as the Scripture saith,) know not the Right Hand from the Left. This were good Reason, (Mr. Speaker,) if the Question were, of Naturalizing some particular Persons, by a private Bill: But it hath no proportion, with the generall Case. For now, we are not to look to respects, that are proper to some, but to those, which are common to all Now then, how can it be imagined, but that those, that took their first Breath, since this happy Vni∣on, inherent in his Majesties Person, must be more assured, and affectionate to this Kingdome, then those generally can be pre∣sumed to be, which were sometimes Strangers? For, Nemo subi∣tò fingitur: The Conversions of Minds, are not so swift, as the Conversions of Times. Nay, in Effects of Grace, which exceed far the Effects of Nature, we see, Saint Paul, makes a difference, be∣tween those he calls Neophites; That is, newly grafted into Chri∣stianity; And those, that are brought up, in the Faith. And so, we see, by the Lawes of the Church, that the Children of Christians, shall be Baptized, in regard, of the Faith, of their Parents; But the Child of an Ehnick, may not receive Baptism, till he be able, to make, an understanding Profession, of his Faith. Another Objection hath been made; That we ought, to be more provident, and reserved, to restrain the Post-Nati, then the Ante-Nati: Because, during his Majesties time, being a Prince of so ap∣proved Wisdome, and Iudgement, we need no better Caution, then the Confidence, we may repose in Him: But in the Fu∣tue Reigns, of succeeding Ages, our Caution must be in Re, and not in Personâ. But, (Mr. Speaker,) to this I answer; That as we cannot ex∣pect a Prince hereafter, less like to erre, in respect of his Judge∣ment: so again, we cannot expect a Prince, so like to exceed, (if I may so term it,) in this point of Beneficence, to that Nation, in respect of the Occasion. For whereas all Princes, and all Men are won, either by Merit, or Conversation, there is no Appea∣rance, that any of his Majesties Descendants, can have either of these Causes, of Bounty, towards that Nation, in so ample De∣gree, as his Majesty hath. And these be, the two Objections, which seemed to me most Materiall, why the Post-Nati, should be left free, and not be concluded, in the same Restrictions, with the Ante-Nati, whereunto you have heard the Answers. The two Reasons, which I will use, on the other side, are brief∣ly these. The one, being a Reason, of Common Sense; The o∣ther, a Reason, of Estate. We see, (Mr. Speaker,) the Time of the Nativity, is, in most Cases, principally regarded. In Nature, the Time of planting, and setting, is chiefly observed. And we see, the Astrologers, pretend to judge, of the Fortune of the Party, by the Time of the Nativity. In Lawes, we may, not unfitly, ap∣ply, the Case of Legitimation, to the Case of Naturalization. For it is true, that the Common Canon Law, doth put the Ante-Natus, and
the Post-Natus, in one Degree; But when it was moved, to the Parliament of England; Barones unâ voce responderunt, Nolumus Le∣ges Angliae mutare. And though, it must be confessed, that the Ante-Nati, and Post-Nati, are in the same Degree, in Dignities; yet were they never so, in Abilities: For no Man doubts, but the Son, of an Earl, or Baron, before his Creation, or Call, shall inherite the Dignity, as well as the Son born after. But the Son, of an Attainted Person, born before the Attainder, shall not inherit, as the After born shall, notwithstanding Charter of Pardon. The Reason of Estate is; That any Restriction, of the Ante-Nati, is Temporary; And expireth with this Generation: But if you you make it in the Post-Nati also, you do, but in substance, pen, a perpetuity of Separation. (Mr. Speaker,) in this point, I have been short, because I little expected this Doubt, as to point of Convenience: And there¦fore will not much labour, where I suppose, there is no greater Opposition. A Report, made by Sir Francis Bacon, Knight, in the House of Commons, of a Speech, delivered by the Earl of Salisbury; And another Speech, delivered by the Earl of Northampton, at a Conference, concerning the Petiti∣on of the Merchauts, upon the Spanish grivances, Par∣liament 5o. Jacobi. ANd it please you, (Mr. Speaker,) I do not find my self, any wayes bound, to report that, which passed, at the last con∣ference, touching the Spanish Grievances; Having been neither employed to speak, nor appointed to Report in that Cause. But because it is put upon me, by a silent Expectation, grounded up∣on nothing, (that I know,) more then that I was observed, dili∣gently to take notes; I am content, (if that Provision, which I made for mine own Remembrance, may serve this House for a Report,) not to deny you that Sheafe, that I have, in hast, bound up. It is true, that one of his Majesties, Principall Counsellours in Causes of Estate, did use a Speach, that contained a World of Matter: But how, I shall be able to make a Globe, of that World, therein I fear mine own strength. His Lordship, took the occasion, of this, which I shall now re∣port, upon the Answer, which was by us made, to the Amend∣ments, propounded, upon the Bill of Hostile Lawes; Quitting that Business, with these few words; That he would discharge, our Expectation of Reply, because their Lordships had, no Warrant
to Dispute. Then, continuing his Speach, he fell into this other Cause, and said; That being now, to make Answer, to a proposi∣tion of ours, as we had done to one of theirs, he wished it could be passed over, with like Brevity. But he did foresee his way, that it would prove, not onely long, but likewise hard to find, and hard to keep; This Cause, being so to be carried, as above all, no wrong be done, to the Kings Soveraignty, and Authority; And in second place, no Misunderstanding do ensue between the two Houses. And therefore, that he hoped, his words should re∣ceive a benign Interpretation; Knowing well, that pursuit, and Drift of Speech, and multitude of Matter, might breed words to pass from him, beyond the Compass of his Intention: And ther∣fore, he placed more Assurance, and Caution, in the Innocency of his own meaning, and in the Experience of his Favours, then in any his Wariness, or Watchfulness, over his own Speech. This respective preface used, his Lordship descended to the Matter it self; which he divided into three Considerations: For, he said, he would consider of the Petition. First, as it proceeded, from the Merchants. Secondly, as from them, it was offered, to the Lower House. And thirdly, as from the Lower House, it was recommended to the Higher House. In the First of these Coniderations, there fell out naturally, a Subdivision, into the Persons of the Petitioners; And the Matter, and Parts, of the Petition. In the Persons of the Merchants, his Lordship made, (as I have collected them,) in number, eight Ob∣servations: whereof, the three first, respected the Generall Con∣dition of Merchants; And the five following, were applyed, to the particular Circumstances, of the Merchants, now complai∣ning. His Lordships first, generall Observation, was; That Merchants were of two sorts: The one sought their Fortunes, (as the verse saith,) per Saxa, per Ignes: And, as it is said, in the same place, Ex∣tremos currit Mercator ad Indos; Subjecting themselves, to Wether, and Tempest; To Absence, and, as it were, Exile, out of their Native Countreys; To Arrests, in Entrances of War; To For∣rain Injustice, and Rigour, in times of Peace; And many other Sufferances, and Adventures. But that there were others, that took, a more safe, but a less generous Course, in raising their For∣tunes. He taxed none, but did attribute, much more respect, to the former. The second Generall Observation, which his Lordship made was, That the Complaints of Merchants, were, usually, ubject, to much Errour; In regard, that they spake, (for the most part,) but upon Information; And that carried through many Hands; And of Matters done in Remote parts: So as, a false, or facti∣ous, Factour, mought, oftentimes, make great Tragedies, upon no great Ground. Whereof, towards the End
of his Speech, he brought an Instance, of one trading the Levant; That complained, of an Arrest of his Ship; And possessed the Counsell-Table, with the same Complaint, in a vehement, and bit∣ter, fashion; Desiring, and pressing, some present, and Expostu∣latory Letters, touching the same. Whereupon, some Counsel∣lours, well acquainted with the like Heates, and Forwardness, in Complaints, happened to say to him; Out of Conjecture, and not out of any Intelligence; What will you say, if your Ship, which you complain to be under Arrest, be now under Sail, in way homewards? Which fell out accordingly: The same Person, confessing, six dayes after, to the Lords, that she was indeed, in her way home∣wards. The third generall Observation, which his Lordship made, was this, in Effect: That, although, he granted, that the Wealth, and Welfare of the Merchant, was not, without a Sympathy, with the generall Stock, and State of a Nation, especially an Island; yet ne∣vertheless, it was a Thing, too familiar, with the Merchant, to make the Case of his Particular Profit, the publick Case of the Kingdom. There follow, the particular Observations, which have a refe∣rence, and application, to the Merchants, that trade to Spain, and the Levant. Wherein his Lordship, did first, honourably, and tenderly, acknowledge, that their Grievances were great, That they did multiply; And that they do deserve, compassion, and help; But yet nevertheless, that he must use, that loving plain∣ness to them, as to tell them, that in many things, they were Au∣thors, of their own Miseries. For since the Dissolving of the Company, which was termed the Monopoly; And was set free, by the speciall Instance, of this House; There hath followed, such a Confusion, and Relaxation, in Order, and Government, amongst them; As they do not onely incur, many Inconveniences; And commit many Errours; But in the pursuites, of their own Re∣medies, and suites, they do it so impolitiquely, and after such a Fashion; As Except, Legier Embassadours, (which are the Eyes, of Kings, in forrain Parts,) should leave their Centinell, and be∣come Merchants Factours, and Sollicitours, their Causes can hard∣ly prosper. And, which is more, such is now the Confusion, in the Trade; As Shop Keepers, and Handy-Crafts-Men, become Merchants there; Who being bound, to no Orders, seek base means, by Gifts, and Bribery, to procure favours, at the Hands, of Officers there. So as the honest Merchant, that trades like a substantiall Merchant; And loves not to take Servile Courses, to buy the Right due to him, by the Amity o the Princes; can have no Justice, without treading in their steps. Secondly, his Lordship did observe, some Improbability, that the wrongs should be so great, considering Trading, into those parts, was never greater; whereas if the wrongs, and griefs, were so intollerable, and continuall, as they propound them; It would
work, rather, a generall Discouragement, and Coldness, of Trade, in Fact; Then an earnest, and hot Complaint, in Words. Thirdly, his Lordship did observe; That it is a Course, (how∣soever i may be with a good Intent,) yet of no small presumpti∣on; for Merchants, upon their particular Grievances, to urge things, tending to a direct War; Considering, that nothing, is more usuall, in Treaties, then that such particular Dammages, and Molestations of Subjects, are left to a Form of Justice, to be righted: And that the more high Articles, do retain, neverthe∣less, their vigour inviolably; And that the great Bargain, of the Kingdome, for War, and Peace, may, in no wise, depend, upon such petty Forfeitures; No more, then in common Assurance, be∣tween Man and Man, it were fit, that upon every breach of Co∣venants, there should be limitted a Re-entry. Fourthly, his Lordship did observe; In the manner, of prefer∣ring their Petition, they had inverted due order; Addressing themselves, to the Foot, and not to the Head. For considering, that they prayed, no new Law, for their Relief; And that, it con∣cerned, Matter of Inducement, to War, or Peace; They ought, to have begun, with his Majesty, unto whose Royall Judgement, Power, and Office, did properly belong, the discerning of that, which was desired; The putting in Act of that, which mought be granted; And the Thanks for that, which mought be obtained. Ffthly, his Lordship did observe; That, as they had not prefer∣red their Petition as it should be; So, they had not pursued their own Direction, as it was. For, having directed their Petition to the King, the Lords spirituall, and Temporall, and the Commons in Parliament assembled; It imported, as if they had offered the like Petition, to the Lords; which they never did; Contrary, Not onely, to their own Direction, but, likewise, to our Con∣ceipt; who presupposed, (as it should seem, by some Speech, that passed from us, at a former Conference;) That they had of∣fered, severall Petitions, of like tenour, to both Houses. So, have you now, those eight Observations, part Generall, part Speciall, which his Lordship; made touching the Persons of those, which exhibited the Petition, and the Circumstances of the same. For the Matter, of the Petition, it self, his Lordship made this Division; That it consisteth of three parts. First, of the Complaints, of wrongs, in Fact. Secondly, of the Complaints, of wrongs, in Law; As they may be truly termed; That is, of the Inequality of Lawes, which do regulate the Trade. And thirdly, the Remedy desired, by Letters of Mart. The wrongs, in Fact, receive a locall Distribution, of three. In the Trade to Spain; In the Trade to the WestIndies; And in the Trade to the Levant. Concerning the Trade to Spain: Although his Lordship did use, much signification, of Compassion, of the Injuries, which the
Merchants received; And attributed so much, to their Profession, and Estate; As from such a mouth in such a Presence, they ought to receive, for a great deal, of Honour, and Comfort; (which Kind of Demonstration, he did enterlace, throughout is whole Speech, as proceeding, Ex Abundantiâ Cordis,) yet, nevertheless, he did remember four Excusations, or rather Extenuations, of those wrongs. The first was, that the Injustices, complained of, were not in the Highest Degree; Because, they were Delayes, and hard pro∣ceedings, and not Inique Sentences, or definitive Condemnati∣ons. Wherein I called to mind, what I heard a great Bishop, say; That Courts of Iustice, though they did not turn Iustice into Worm∣wood, by Corruption; yet, they turned it, into Vinegar, by Delaies, which sowred it. Such a Difference did his Lordship make, which, no question, is a Difference, secundum Magis, & Minus. Secondly, his Lordship ascribed these Delayes, not so much to Mallice, or Alienation of Mind, towards us; As to the Nature, of the People, and Nation; which is Proud, and therefore Dilato∣ry: For all proud Men are full of Delayes, and must be waited on; And specially, to the Multitudes, and Diversities, of Tribunals, and places of justice; And the Number of the Kings Counsels, full of Referrings, which ever prove, of necessity, to be Defer∣rings; Besides, the great Distance of Territories. All which, have made, the Delayes, of Spain, to come into a Byword, through the World. Wherein, I think, his Lordship might allude, to the Proverb of Italy; Me Venga la Morte di Spagna. Let my Death come from Spain: For then, it is sure, to be long a comming. Thirdly, his Lordship did use, an Extenuation of these wrongs, drawn from the Nature of Man; (Nemo subitò fingitur:) For that, we must make an account; That, though the Fire of Enmity, be out, between Spain, and us, yet it vapoureth: The utter Extinct∣ing whereof, must be the work of Time. But lastly, his Lordship did fall, upon that Extenuation, which of all the rest, was must forcible; which was; That many of these wrongs, were not sustained, without some Aspersion, of the Merchants own Fault, in ministring the Occasion, which grew chiefly in this manner. There is contained, an Article, in the Treaty, between Spain, and us; That, we shall not transport, any Native Commodities, of the Low-Countreys, into Spain: Nay more, that we shall not transport, any Opificia; Manufactures, of the same Countreys. So that, if an English Cloath, take but a Dye, in the Low Countryes, it may not be transported by the English: And the Reason is, be∣cause even those Manufactures, although the Materiall come from other Places, do yield unto them, a Profit and Sustentation, in regard their People are set on work by them: They have a gain, likewise, in the Price; And they have, a Custome, in the Trans∣porting. All which, the Pollicy of Spain, is, to debar them of;
Being no less desirous, to Suffocate the Trade of the Low-Countries, then to reduce their Obedience. This Article, the English Mer∣chant, either doth not, or will not, understand: But being drawn, with his threefold Cord, of Love, Hate, and Gain; They do ad∣venture, to transport, the Low-Countrey Commodities, of these natures; And so, draw upon themselves, these Arrests, and Troubles. For the Trade, to the Indies; His Lordship did discover unto us, the state of it, to be thus. The Pollicy of Spain, doth keep that Treasury of theirs, under such Lock, and Key, as both Confe∣derates, yea, and Subjects, are excluded, of Trade, into those Countries.: Insomuch as the French King, who hath reason to stand, upon equall termes, with Spain, yet nevertheless, is, by expresse Capitulation, debarred. The Subjects of Portugall, whom the State of Spain, hath studied, by all means, to content, are like∣wise debarred: Such a vigilant Dragon is there, that keepeth this Golden Fleece: yet neverthelesse, such was his Majesties Magnani∣mity, in the Debate, and Concluion, of the last Treaty; As he would never condiscend, to any Article, importing the Exclusi∣on, of his Subjects, from that Trade: As a Prince, that would not acknowledge, that any such Right, could grow, to the Crown of Spain, by the Donative, of the Pope; whose Authority he Disclai∣meth: Or by the Title, of a dispersed, and punctuall Occupati∣on, of certain Territories, in the name of the rest: But stood firm, to reserve that point, in full Question, to further Times, and oc∣casions. So as it is left, by the Treaty, in Suspence, neither de∣barred, nor permitted. The Tenderness, and Point of Honour whereof, was such, as they, that went thither, must run their own Perill. Nay further, his Lordship affirmed; That if yet, at this time, his Majesty would descend, to a Course of Entreaty, for the release, of the Arrests, in those parts, And so confess an Ex∣clusion; And quit the point of Honour; his Majesty, mought have them, forthwith released: And yet his Lordship added; That the Offences, and Scandalls, of some, had made this point worse then it was: In regard, that this very last Voyage to Virginia, intended for Trade and Plantation; Where the Spaniard, hath no People, nor Possession, is already become inflamed for Pyracy. Witness Bingley, who first, insinuating his purpose, to be an A∣ctour, in that worthy Action, of Enlarging Trade, and Plantation, is become a Pyrate; And hath been so pursued, as his Ship, is ta∣ken in Ireland, though his Person, is not yet in hold. For the Trade, to the Levant; His Lordship opened unto us, that the Complaint consisted, in effect, but of two Particulars: The one, touching the Arrest of a Ship, called the Triall, in Sicely; The other, of a Ship, called the Vineyard, in Sardinia. The First, of which Arrests, was, upon pretence, of Pyracy: The Second, upon pretence, of carrying Ordnance, and Powder, to the Turk. That Processe, concerning the Triall, hath been, at the Merchants in∣stance,
drawn to a Review, in Spain; which is a Favour, of excee∣ding rare President; Being directly, against the Liberties, & Pri∣viledges of Sicely. That of the Vineyard, notwithstanding it be of that nature, as, (if it should be true,) tendeth, to the great Disho∣nour, of our Nation: (whereof, Hold hath been already taken, by the French Ambassadour, residing at Constantinople; Who entred, in∣to a Scandalous Expostulation, with his Majesties Ambassadour there, upon that, and the like, Transportations, of Munition, to the Turk); yet neverthelesse, there is an Answer given, by Let∣ters, from the Kings, Ambassadour Legier, in Spain; That there shall be, some Course taken, to give reasonable Contentment, in that Cause, as far as may be: In both which Ships, (to speak tru∣ly,) the greatest Mass, of loss, may be included: For the rest are mean, in respect of the value, of those two Vessels. And thus much his Lordship Speech comprehended, concerning the wrongs in Fact. Concerning the Wrongs, in Law; That is to say; the Rigour of the Spanish Lawes, extended upon his Majesties Subjects, that traf∣fique thither, his Lordship gave this Answer. That they were no new Statutes, or Edicts, devised for our People, or our Times; But were the ancient Lawes, of that Kingdome: Suus cuique Mos. And therefore, as Travellers, must endure the Extremities, of the Cli∣mate, and Temper of the Air, where they travell: So Merchants, must bear with the Extremities, of the Lawes, and Temper of the Estate, where they trade. Whereunto his Lordship added; that our own Lawes, here in England, were not exempted, from the like Complaints, in Forrain Parts; Especially, in point, of Ma∣rine Causes, & Depredations; And that same swift Alteration, of Property, which is claimed by the Admiralty, in case of Goods, taken, in Pyrates hands. But that, we were to understand, thus much, of the King of Spains Care, and Regard, of our Nation; That he had written, his Letters, to all Corrigidors, Officers of orts, and other his Ministers; Declaring his will, and pleasure, to have his Majesties Subjects, used, with all Freedome, and Favour: And with this Addition, that they should have more Favour, when it might be shewed, then any other. Which words, howsoever the Effects prove, are not suddainly to be requited, with peremp∣tory Resolutions, till Time declare, the direct Issue. For the third Part, of the Matter, of the Petition; which was, the Remedy, sought by Letters of Mart; His Lordship seemed desi∣rous, to make us capable, of the Inconvenience, of that, which was desired, by setting, before us, two notable Exceptions there∣unto: The one, that the Remedy, was utterly incompetent, and vain: There other, that it was dangerous, and pernicious, to our Merchants; And, in Consequence, to the whole State. For the weaknesse, of the Remedy; His Lordship, wished us, to enter into Consideration, what the Remedy was, which the Sta∣tute of Henry the fifth, (which, was now sought, to be put in Exe∣cution,)
gave, in this Case; which was thus: That the Party grie∣ved, should first complain, to the Keeper, of the private Seal; And from him, should take Letters unto the Party, that had com∣mitted the Spoyl, for Restitution. And in default of Restituti∣on, to be made upon such Letters, served; Then, to obtain of the Chanceller, Letters of Mart, or Reprisall: which Circuit of Remedy, promised nothing, but endlesse, and fruitless, Delay; In regard that the first Degree prescribed, was never likely to be effected: It being so wilde a Chace, as to serve Processe, upon the wrong-Doer, in Forrain Parts. Wherefore his Lordship said, that it must be, the Remedy of Statute, that must do good, in this case: which useth to proceed, by Certificats, Attestations, and other means of Information; Not depending upon a privy Seal, to be served upon the Party, whom happily they must seek out, in the West-Indies. For the Danger, of the Remedy; His Lordship directed our Con∣siderations, to take notice, of the proportions, of the Merchants Goods, in either Kingdome: As that the Stock, of Goods, of the Spaniard, which is within his Majesties Power, and Distresse, is a Trifle: Whereas the Stock of English Goods, in Spain, is a Masse, of mighty value. So as, if this Course, of Letters of Mart, should be taken, to satisfie, a few hot Pursuitours, here; All the Goods, of the English Subjects, in Spain, shall be exposed, to Seisure, and Arrest; And we have little, or nothing, in our Hands, on this side, to mend our selves upon. And thus much, (Mr. Speaker,) is that, which I have collected, out of that excellent Speech, con∣cerning the First main part which was; The Consideration, of the Petition as it proceeded, from the Merchant. There followeth now, the Second Part; Considering the Petition, as it was offered in this House. Wherein his Lordship; after an affectionate Commemoration, of the Gravity, Capacity, and Duty, which he generally found, in the proceedings of this House; desired us, neverthelesse, to consider with him, how it was possible, that the Entertaining of Petitions, concerning private Injuries, and of this Nature, could avoid, these three Inconvenien∣cies. The First, of Injustice; The Second, of Derogation, from his Majesties supreme, and absolute Power, of concluding, Warre, or Peace; And the Third, of some prejudice, in reason of E∣state. For Injustice, it is plain, and cannot be denied, that we hear but the one Part: Whereas that Rule, Audi alteram Partem, is not, of the Formality, but of the Essence, of Iustice: Which is, there∣fore figured, with both Eyes shut, and both Eares open. Because, she should hear both sides, and respect Neither: So that, if we should hap, to give, a right Judgement, it mought be Iustum, but not Iustè, without hearing both Parties. For the Point of Derogation; his Lordship said; He knew well, we were no lesse ready, to acknowledge, then Himself; That
the Crown of England, was ever invested (amongst other Prero∣gatives, not disputable) of an absolute Determination, & Power, of concluding, and making, War and Peace. Which, that it was no new Dotation, but of an ancient Foundation, in the Crown, he would recite unto us, a number of Presidents, in the Raignes, of severall Kings; And chiefly, of those Kings, which come nearest his Majesties own worthinesse: Wherein He said, that he would not put his Credit, upon Ciphars, and Dates; Because it was ea∣sie to mistake, the year of a Raign, or number of a Rowle, but he would avouch them, in substance, to be perfect and true, as they are taken, out of the Records. By which Presidents, it will appear; That Petitions made in Parliament to Kings, of this Realme, his Majesties Progenitours; Intermedling, with matter, of Warr, or Peace; Or inducement thereunto; Received small Allowance, or Successe; But were alwaies put off, with Dilatory Answers: Sometimes, referring the matter, to their Councell; Sometimes, to their Letters; sometimes to their further Pleasure, and Advice; And such other Formes; Expressing plainly, that the Kings, meant to reserve, Matter of that Nature, entirely to their own Power, and pleasure. In the 18th. yeare of King Edward the First; Complaint was made, by the Commons, against the Subjects, of the Earle of Flan∣ders, with Petition, of Redresse: The Kings Answer was; Rex ni∣hil aliud potest, quam eodem modo petere: That is, The King could do o more, but make Request, to the Earle of Flanders, as Request, had been made to him: And yet no Body will imagine, but King Edward the First was potent enough, to have had his Reason, of a Count of Flaunders, by a Warr? And yet, his Answer was; Nihil aliud po∣test; As giving them to understand; That the Entering into a Warr, was a Matter Transcendent, that must not depend, upon such Controversies. In the 4th. year of King Edward the Third; The Commons Pe∣titioned; That the King would enter, into certain Covenants, and Capitulations, with the Duke of Brabant: In which Petition, there was also inserted, somewhat touching a Money Matter. The Kings Answer was; That for that, that concerned the Moneys, they mought handle it, and examine it; But touching the Peace, he would do, as to himself seemed good. In the 18th. year, of King Edward the Third; The Commons peti∣tioned, that they might have, the Triall, and proceeding, with certain Merchants Strangers, as Enemies to the State. The Kings Answer was; It should remain, as it did, till the King had taken fur∣ther order. In the 45th. yeare of King Edward the Third; The Commons complained; That their Trade with the Easterlings, was not upon equall Tearms; (which is one, of the poynts, insisted upon in the present Petition;) And prayed an Alteration, and Reduce∣ment. The Kings Answer was; It shall be so, as occasion shall require.
In the 50th. year, of the same King; The Commons petitioned to the King, for Remedy, against the Subjects of Spaine, as they now do. The Kings Answer was; that he would write his Letter, for Re∣medy. Here is Letters of Request, no Letters of Mart: Nihil potest nisi eodem modo petere. In the same year, the Merchants of Yorke, petitioned in Parli∣ament, against the Hollanders; And desired their Shipps mought be stayed, both in England, and at Calais. The Kings Answer was: Let it be declared, to the Kings Councell; And they shall have such remedy, as is according to Reason. In the 2d. year of King Richard the second, the Merchants of the Seacoast, did complaine, of diverse spoiles upon their Shipps, and Goods, by the Spaniard. The Kings Answer was, that with the Advise of his Councell, he would procure remedy. His Lordship cited two other Presidents; The one in the second yeare, of King Henry the Fourth; of a Petition, Against the Merchants of Genova: The other, in the 11th. yeare, of King Henry the 6th; Of a Petition, against the Merchants, of the Stilliard; which I omit, because they contain, no variety of Answer. His Lordship further cited, two Presidents, concerning other points of Prerogative; Which are, likewise, Flowers of the Crowne; The one; Touching the Kings supremacy Ecclesiasticall: The other; Touching the Order, of Waightes, and Measures. The former of them, was, in the time, of King Richard the 2d. At what time, the Commons complained, against certaine Encroachments, and Usur∣pations, of the Pope: And the Kings Answer was; The King hath given Order, to his Councell, to treat with the Bishops, thereof. The other was, in the 18th. year of King Edward the First; At which time, Complaint was made, against uneven Waights; And the Kings Answer was, Vocentur partes, ad placita Regis, & fit Iustitia: Whereby it appeared, that the Kings of this Realme, still used, to refer Causes, petitioned in Parliament, to the proper places, of Cognizance, and Decision. But for the Matter, of Warr, and Peace; As appeares in all the former Presidents; The Kings, ever kept it, in Scrinio pectoris; In the Shrines, of their own Breast; Assisted and advised, by their Counsell of Estate. His Lordship did conclude, his Enumeration of Presidents, with a notable President, in the 17. year, of King Richard the Second. A Prince, of no such glory, nor strength: And yet, when he made offer, to the Commons in Parliament; That they should take into their Considerations, Matter of Warr, and Peace, then in in hand; The Commons, in Modesty, excused themselves, and answered: The Commons will not presume to treat of so high a charge. Out of all which Presidnts, his Lordship made this Inference, that as, Dies Dim docet; So by these Examples, Wise Men, will be admonished, to forbear those Petitions to Princes, which are not likely, to have, either a Welcome Hearing, or an effectuall Answer.
And for prejudice, that might come, of handling, and debating, Matter of War, and Peace, in Parliament; He doubted not, but that the Wisedom, of this House, did conceive, upon what secret Consideration, and Motives, that point did depend. For that, there is no King, which will providently, and Matuely, enter into a War; But will first ballance, his own Forces; Seek to antici∣pate, Confederacies, and Alliances; Revoake his Merchants; Finde an opportunity, of the first Breach; And many other points: which if they once, do but take winde, will prove vaine, and frustrate. And therefore, that this Matter, which is Arcanum Im∣perij, one of the highest Mysteries of Estate, must be suffered, to be kept, within the Vaile. His Lordship adding, that he knew not wel, whether in that, which he had already said out of an extreme Desire, to give us satisfaction; He had not communicated, more particulars, then perhaps was requisite. Neverthelesse, he confes∣sed that sometimes, Parliaments have been made acquainted, with Matter of Warr, and Peace, in a generallity; But it was, upon one of hese Two Motives: When the King, and Counsell, conceived; That either it was Materiall, to have some Declaration, of the zeal, and Affection, of the People: Or else, when the King needed, to demand Moneys, and Aides, for the Charge, of the Warrs: Wher∣in, if Things did sort to Warre, we were sure enough, to hear of it. His Lordship hoping, that his Majesty, would find, in us, no lesse readiness, to support it, then to perswade it. Now, (Mr. Speaker,) for the last part; Wherein, his Lordship, considered the Petition, As it was, recommended from us, to the upper House; His Lordship delivered, thus much, from their Lorships; That they would make, a good Construction, of our Desires; As those, which they conceived, did rather spring, out of a Feeling, of the Kings Strength; And out of a Feeling of the Subjects Wrongs; Nay more, out of a Wisdome, and Depth, to declare our forwardness, if need were, to assist his Majesties fu∣ture Resolutions; (which Declaration, might be of good use, or his Majesties Service, when it should be blown abroad;) Ra∣ther, I say, then that we did, in any sort, determine, by this their Overture, to do that wrong to his Highness Supreme Power; Which happily, might be inferred, by those, that were rather apt to make evill, then good Illations, of our proceeding. And yet, that their Lordships, for the reasons, before made, most plainly tell us; That they neither could, nor would, concur with us, nor approve the course. And therefore concluded; That it would not be amiss, for us, for our better Contentment, to behold the Conditions, of the last Peace with Spain, which were, of a strange nature, to him that duely observes them; No Forces recalled, out of the Low-Conntries; No new Forces, (as to Voluntaries) restrained to go thither: So as the King, may be in peace, and never a Sub∣ject in England, but may be in War: And then, to think thus with our selves; That that King, which would give no ground, in
making his Peace, will not loose any Ground, upon just povoca∣tion, to enter into an Honourable War. And that, in the meane time, we should know thus much; that there could not be, more forcible Negotiation, on the Kings part, but Blowes, to procure Remedy, of those wrongs; Nor more fair promises, on the King of Spaines part, to give contentment, concerning the same: And therefore, that the Event, must be expected. And thus (Mr. Speaker,) have I passed over, the Speech, of this worthy Lord; whose Speeches (as I have often said,) in regard of his place, and Judgement, are extraordinary Lights, to this House; And have both the properties of Light; That is Conducting, and Comforting. And although (Mr. Speaker) a Man would have thought, nothing had been left, to be said; Yet I shall now, give you account, of another Speech, full of excellent Matter, and Ornaments; And without Iteration. Which, neverthelesse, I shall report, more compendiously; Because, I will not offer the Speech, that wrong, as to report it at large, when your minds per-case, and Attentions, are already wearied. The other Earl, who, usually, doth bear a principall part, upon all important Occasions; used a Speech, first of Preface, then of Argument. In his Preface, he did deliver, that he was perswaded, that both Houses did differ, rather in Credulity, and Belief, then in Intention, and Desire. For it mought be, their Lorships, did not believe, the Information so far, but yet desired, the Reformation as much. His Lordship said further that the Merchant was a State, and De∣gree of persons; Not only to be respected, but to be prayed for; And graced them, with the best Additions: That they were, the Convoyes, of our supplies; The Vents of our Abundance; Neptunes Almesmen; and Fortunes Adventurers. His Lordship, proceeded, and said; This Question, was new to us, but antient to them: Assuring us, that the King, did not beare, in vaine, the Devise of the Thistle, with the word; Nemo me lascecit impunè; And that, as the Multiplying of his Kingdomes, maketh him feel his own Power; So the Multiplying of our Loves, and Affections, made him to feel our Griefs. For the Arguments, or Reasons, they were Five in number, which his Lordship used, for satisfying us, why their Lordships, might not concur with us in this Petition. The first was, the Composition of our House; which he took, in the first foundation thereof, to be meerly Democraticall; Consisting, of Knights of Shires, and Bur∣gesses of Townes; And intended to be of those, that have their Residence, Vocation, and Employment, in the places, for which they serve: And therefore, to have a private, and locall wisedom, according to that Compasse; And so, not fit, to examine, or de∣termine, Secrets of Estate which depend, upon such Variety, of Circumstances; And therefore, added, to the President, formerly vouched, of the 17. of King Richard the 2d; When the Commons
disclaimed, to intermeddle, in matter of War and Peace; That their Answer was, that they would not presume, to treat, of so high, and variable a Matter. And although, his Lordship acknowledged; That there be divers Gentlemen, in the Mixture, of our House; That are of good Capacity, and Insight, in Matters of Estate; yet that was the Accident of the Person, and not the Intentention of the place. And Things were to be taken, in the Institution, not in the Practice. His Lordships second Reason, was; That both, by Philosophy, and Civill Law, Ordinatio Belli, & pacis, est absoluti Imperij; A principall Flower of the Crown. Which Flowers, ought to be so dear unto us, as we ought, if need were, to water them with our Blood. For if those Flowers, should, by neglect, or upon facility, and good af∣fection, wither, and fall, the Garland would not be worth the wearing. His Lordships third Reason was; That Kings, did so love, to imitate Trimum Mobile, as that, they do not like, to move in borrowed Motions: So that, in those things, that they do, most willingly, in∣tend; yet they indure not, to be prevented, by Request. Whereof he did alledge, a notable Example, in King Edward the 3d. who would not hearken, to the Petition of his Commons, that besought him, to make the Black Prince, Prince of Wales. But yet, after that Repulse, of their Petition, out of his own meer Motion, he created him. His Lordships fourth Reason, was; That it mought be some scan∣dall, to step, between the King, and his own Vertue: And that it was the Duty of Subjects; Rather, to take honours, from Kings Servants, and give them to Kings; then to take honours from Kings, and give them to their Servants: Which, he did, very ele∣gantly, set forth, in the Example of Ioab; who lying at the Siege of Rabbah; And finding, it could not hold out; writ to David, to come, and take the Honour, of taking the Town. His Lordships last Reason was, that it cast some aspersion upon his Majesty; Implying, as if the King, slept, out the Sobbs of his Sub∣jects, untill he was awaked, with the Thunderbolt of a Parla∣ament. But his Lordships Couclusion, was very Noble; Which was, with a Protestation; That what Civill Threats, Contestation, Art, and Argument, can do, hath been used, already, to procure Remedy, in this Cause: And a Promise; That if Reason, of State, did per∣mit, as their Lordships were ready, to spend their Breath, in the pleading, of that we desire: so they would be ready, to spend their Blouds, in the Execution thereof. This was the Resolution, of that which passed.
A Speech, used to the King, by his Majesties Solliciter, be∣ing chosen, by the Commons, as their Mouth, and Messen∣ger, for the presenting to his Majesty, of the Instrument, or Writing, of their Grievances; In the Parliament 7o. Jacobi. MOst gracious Soveraign; The Knights, Cittizens, and Burges∣ses, assembled in Parliament, in the House, of your Commons, in all humbleness do Exhibite, and present, unto your Sacred Ma¦jesty, in their own Words, though by my hand, their Petitions, and Grievances. They are here conceived, and set down in wri∣ting; According to ancient Custome, of Parliament. They are also prefaced, according to the Manner, and Tast, of these later Times. Therefore, for me, to make any Additionall Preface, were neither warranted, nor convenient: Especially speaking before a King; The Exactness of whose Judgement, ought to scatter, and chase away, all unnecessary Speech as the Sun doth a Vapour. This onely I must say: Since this Session of Parliament, we have seen your Glory, in the Solemnity, of the Creation, of this most Noble Prince: We have heard your Wisdome, in sun∣dry excellent Speeches, which you have delivered amongst us. Now we hope, to find, and feel, the Effects of your Goodness, in your Gracious Answer, to these our Petitions. For this we are per∣swaded, that the Attribute, which was given, by one of the wisest Writers, to Two, of the best Emperours; Divus Nerva, & Divus Traianus; (So saith Tacitus,) Res olim insociabiles miscuerunt, Impe∣rium, & Libertatem; May be truly applyed, to your Majesty. For never was there, such a Conservatour of Regality, in a Crown; Nor never, such a Protectour, of lawfull Freedome, in a Subject. Onely this, (Excellent Soveraign,) Let not the sound of Grie∣vances, (though it be sad,) seem harsh, to your Princely Eares: It is but Gemitus Columbae; The Mourning of a Dove; With that Pa∣tience, and Humility of Heart, which appertaineth, to loving and Loyall Subjects. And far be it from us; But that, in the midst, of the Sense, of our Grievances, we should remember, and ac∣knowledge the infinite Benefits, which by your Majesty, next un∣der God, we do enjoy; Which bind us, to wish unto your life, Fulness of Dayes; And unto your Line Royall, a Succession, and Continuance, even unto the worlds end. It resteth, that unto these Petitions, here included, I do adde one more, that goeth to them all: Which is; That if, in the words, and frame, of them, there be any Thing offensive; Or that we have expressed our Selves, otherwise then we should, or would; That your Majesty would cover it, and cast the Vaile,
of your Grace upon it; And accept of our good Intentions; And help them, by your benign Interpretation. Lastly, I am, most humbly, to crave, a particular pardon, for my self, that have used these few words; And scarcely, should have been able, to have used any at all, in respect of the Reve∣rence, which I bear, to your Person, and Judgement, had I not been somewhat relieved, and comforted, by the Experience, which in my Service, ad Accesse, I have had, of your continuall Grace, and Favour. A Speech, of the Kings Sollicitour, used unto the Lords, at a Conference, by Commission, from the Commons; Moving, and perswading the Lords to joyn with the Com∣mons, in Pettion to the King; To obtain Liberty, to treat, of a Composition, with his Majesty, for Wards, and Tenures: In the Parliament, 7o. Jacobi. THe Knights, Cittizens, and Burgesses, of the House of Com∣mons, have commanded me, to deliver to your Lordships, the Caues, of the Conference, by them prayed, and by your Lordships as∣sented, for the second Business, of this Day. They have had Re∣port, made unto them, faithfully, of his Majesties Answer, decla∣red by My L. Treasurer, touching their humble Desire, to obtain Liberty, from his Majesty to treat, of compounding for Tenures. And first, they think themselves, much bound unto his Majesty; That, in Renovâ, in which case Princes use to be apprehensive, he hath made a gracious Construction, of their Proposition. And so much they know of that, that belongs to the Greatness of his Majesty, and the Greatness of the Cause; As themselves acknow∣ledge, they ought not, to have expected a present Resolution; Though the Wise-Man saith; Hope deferred is the Fainting of the Soul. But they know, their Duty to be, to attend his Majesties Times, at his good pleasure. And they do it, with the more com∣fort, because in that his Majesties Answer, (Matching the Times, aad weighing the Passages thereof,) they conceive, in their Opi∣nion, rather Hope, then Discouragement. But the principall Causes, of the Conference, now prayed; (Be∣sides these significations of Duty, not to be omitted;) Are two Propositions. The one, Matter of Excuse, of themselves: The other Matter of Petition. The former of which growes thus. Your Lord∣ship, (my L. Threasurer) in your last declaration, of his Majesties An∣wer, (which according to the Attribute, then given unto it, had Imaginem Caesaris, fair, and lively, graven,) made this true, and ef∣fectuall Distribution: That there depended upon Tenures, Consi∣derations of Honour; of Conscience; And of Vtility: Of these three, Vtility, as his Majesty set it by, for the present, out of the Greatness
of his Mind; So we set it by, out of the Justnesse, of our Desires: For we never ment, but a goodly, and worthy Augmentation, of the Profit, now received, and not a Diminution. But, (to speak truly,) that Consideration falleth naturally to be examined, when Liberty of Treaty is granted: But the former Two, indeed, may exclude Treaty; And cut it off, before it be admitted. Nevertheless, in this that we shall say, concerning those Two, We desire to be conceived rightly: We mean not, to dispute with his Majesty, what belongeth to Soveraign Honour, or his Princely Conscience; Because we know, we are not capable, to dis∣cern them; Otherwise, then as Men use, sometimes, to see the I∣mage, of the Sun, in a Pail of Water. But this we say for our selves; God forbid, that we, knowingly, should have propounded any thing, that mought, in our Sense, and perswasion, touch, either of both: And therefore herin we desire to be heard, not to enform, or perswade his Majesty, but to fee, and excuse, our selves. And first, in generall, we acknowledge, that this Tree of Te∣nures, was Planted, into the Prerogative, by the ancient common Law of this Land: That it hath been Fenced in, and Preserved, by many Statutes; And that it yieldeth, at this day, to the King, the Fruit, of a great Revenue. But yet notwithstanding, if up∣on the Stemme, of this Tree, may be raised a Pillar, of support to the Crown, Permanent, and durable as the Marble, by investing the Crown, with a more ample, more certain, and more loving, Dowry, then this of Tenures, we hope we propound no Matter of Disservice. But to speak, distinctly, of both, and first of Honour. Wherein, I pray your Lordships, give me leave, in a Subject, that may seem, supra Nos, to handle it, rather as we are capable, then as the Mat∣ter, perhaps, may require. Your Lordships well know, the vari∣ous Mixture, and Composition, of our House. We have, in our House, learned Civilians, that profess a Law, that we reverence, and sometimes consult wih: They can tell us, that all the Laws de Feodis, are but Additionals, to the Ancient Civill Law; And that the Roman Emperours, in the full Heigth of their Monarchy, never knew them; So that they are not Impriall. We have grave Pro∣fessours, of the Common Law, who will define unto us, that those are Parts of Soveraignty, and of the Royall Prerogative, which can∣not be communicated with Subjects: But for Tenures, in substance, there is none of your Lordships, but have them; And few of us, but have them. The King, indeed, hath a priority, or first Ser∣vice, of his Tenures; which shewes, that they are not Regall, nor any point of Soveraignty. We have Gentlemen, of honourable Service, in the Wars, both by Sea and Land; Who can enform us, that when it is in question, who shall set his foot, foremost, towards the Enemy, it is never asked, whether he hold in Knights Service, or in Socage. So have we many Deputy Lievtenants,
to your Lordships; And many Commissioners, that have been for Musters, and Levies, That can tell us, that the Service, and De∣fence, of the Realm, hath, in these dayes, little dependance upon Tenures. So then we perceive, that it is no Bond, or Ligament, of Governmet; No Spur of Honour; No Bridle of Obedience: Time was, when it had other uses, and the Name of Knights Ser∣vice imports it: But, Vocabula manent, Res fugiunt. But all thi, which we have spoken, we confess to be, but in a vulgar Capaci∣ty; which, nevertheless, may serve, for our Excuse; Though we submit, the Thing it self, wholy to his Majesties Judgement. For Matter of Conscience, Far be it from us, to cast in any Thing, willingly, that, may trouble, that clear Fountain, of his Majesties conscience. We do confess, it is a noble Protection, that these young Birds, of the Nobility, and good Families, should be gahe∣red, and clocked, under the wings of the Crown. But yet, Naturae vis maxima: And suus cuique discretus sanguis. Your Lordships wil avour me, to observe my former Methode. The Common Law it self, which is the best Bounds of our wisdom, doth even, in hoc Individuo, prefer the prerogative of the Father, before the prerogative of the King: For if Lands descend, held in chief, from an Ancestour, on the part of a Mother, to a Mans eldest Son, the Father being alive; The Father, shall have the Custody of the Bo∣dy, and not the King. It is true, that this is only for the Father; And not, any other Parent, or Ancestour: But then, if you look, to the high Law of Tutelage, and Protection; And of Obedience, and Duty, which is the Relative thereunto; It is not said; Honour thy Father alone; But, Honour thy Father, and thy Mother, &c. Again, the Civilians can tell us, that there was a speciall Use, of the Pretorian Power, for Pupills, and yet no Tenures. The Citizens of London, can tell us; There be Courts of Orphants, and yet no Tenures. But, all this while, we pray your Lordships, to conceive; That we think our selves, not competent, to discern of the Honour, of his Maje∣sties Crown, or the Shrine of his Conscience; But leave it, wholy, un∣to him, and alledge these things, but in our own Excuse. For Matter of Petition, we do continue our most humble suit, by your Lordships loving Conjunction, that his Majesty will be please, to open unto us, this entrance of his Bounty, and Grace; As to give us liberty, to treat. And lastly, we know his Maje¦stie Times, are not subordinate at all, but to the Globe above: About this time, the Sun hath got even with the Night, and will rise apace; And we know, Solomons Temple, (whereof your Lord∣ship, my Lord Treasurer, spake) was not built in a day: And if We shall be so happy, as to take the Axe to hew, and the Hammer to frame, in this Case; We know, it cannot be, without Time; And therefore, as far, as we may, with Duty, and without Im∣portunity, we most humbly deire, an Acceleration of his Maje∣sties Answer, according to his good time, and Royall Pleasure.
A Speech, of the Kings Sollicitor, perswading the House of Commons, to desist from further Question, of receiving the Kings Messages, by their Speaker; And from the Bo∣dy of the Councell; As well as from the Kings Person; In the Parliament 7o. Jac. IT is my Desire, that if any the Kings Business, either of Honour or Profit, shall pass the House; It may be, not onely, with ex∣ternall prevailing; But with satisfaction, of the Inward Man. For in Consent, where Tongue strings, not Hart-strings, make the Musick; That Harmony may end in Discord. To this I shall alwayes bend my Endeavours. The Kings Soveraignty, and the Liberty of Parliament, are; as the two Elements, and Principles of this Estate; which, though the one be more Active, the other more Pasive, yet they do not crosse, or destroy, the one the other; But they strengthen, and maintain, the one the other. Take away Liberty of Parliament, the Griefes, of the Subject, will bleed inwards. Sharp, and Eager, Humours, will not evaporate; And then they must exulcerate, and so may indanger, the Soveraignty, it self. On the other side, if the Kings Soveraignty, receive Diminution, or any Degree of Con∣tempt, with us that are born under an Hereditary Monarchy; (So as the Motions of our Estate, cannot work, in any other Frame, or Engine;) It must follow, that we shall be a Meteore, or Corpus imper∣fectè mistum; which kind of Bodies, come speedily to Confusion, and Dissolution. And herein, it is our Happinesse, that we may make, the same Judgement of the King, which Tacitus made of Nerva; Divus Nerva, res olim Dissociabiles miscuit, Imperi∣um, & Libertatem. Nerva did temper things, that before were thought incompatible, Soveraignty, and Liberty. And it is not amise, in a great Councell, and a great Cause, to put the other part of the Difference; which was significantly expressed, by the Judgement, which Apollonius made of Nero; which was thus. When Vespasian came out of Iudea, towards Italy, to receive the Empire: As he passed by Alexandria, he spake with Apollonius. A Man much admired; And asked him a Question, of State. What was Nero's Fall, or overthrow? Apollonius said, Nero could tune the Harp well, but in Government, he alwaies, either wound up the Pinns too high, and strained the strings too far; or let them down too low, and slackened the strings too much. Here we see the Difference, between Regular, and Able, Princes; And Irregular, and Incapable; Nerva, and Nero. The one tempers, and mingles, the Soveraignty, with the Liberty, of the Subject, wisely; And the other, doth inter∣change it, and vary it unequally, and absurdly. Since therefore, we have a Prince of so excellent Wisdom, and Moderation; Of
whose Authority, we ought to be tender, as he is, likewise, of our Liberty; Let us enter, into a true, and indifferent, considrati∣on, how far forth the Case in Question, may touch his Authority, and how far forth our Liberty. And to speak cleerly; In my Opinion, it concerns his Authority, much; And our Liberty no∣thing at all. The Questions are Two. The one, whither our Speaker, be exempted, from Delivery, of a Message from the King; with∣out our Licence. The other, whither it is not all one, whi∣ther he received it from the Body of the Counsell, as if he received it immediatly from the King. And I will speak of the last First, because it is the Circumstance, of the present Case. First, I say, let us see, how it concerns the King, and then how it concerns Us? For the King; certainly, if it be observed, it cannot be denyed, but if you may not receive his pleasure, by his Repreentative Body, which is his Counsel of his Estate; you both streighten his Majesty, in point of Conveniency; And weaken the Reputation, of his Counsell. All Kings, though they be Gods on Earth, yet (as he said) they are Gods of Earth: They may be of Extreme Age; they may be indisposed in Health; They may be absent. In these Cases, if their Councells may not supply their Persons, to what infinite Accidents, do you expose them? Ny more, sometimes in Pollicy, Kings will not be seen, but cover themselves, with their Councell; And if this be taken from them, a great part of their safty, is taken away. For the other point, of weakning the Councel: you know they are nothing, without the King. They are no Body Politique: They have no Commission under Seal. So as, if you begin, to distinguish, and disjoyn them, from the King, they are Corpus Opacum; For they have Lumen de Lumine; And so, by distinguishing, you extinguish, the principle Engine, of the Estate. For it is truly affirmed; That Cousilium non habet po estatem delegaam, sed in haerentem: And i is, but Rex in Cathedrâ; The King in his Chair, or Consistory, where, his Will and Decrees, which are, in privacy, more changeable, are setled and fixed. Now for that which concerns our selves. First for Dignity, no man must think this a Disparagement for us. For the greatest Kings in Europe, By their Embassadours, receive Answers and Directions, from the Councell, in the Kings absence; And if that Negotiation be fit, for the Fraternity, and Party, of King; It may much lesse, be excepted to, by Subjects. For Use or Benefit, no Man can be so Raw, and Unacquainted in the Affaires of the World as to conceive, there should be any Disadvantage in it; As if such Answrs, were lesse Firm and Cer∣tain. For it cannot be supposed, that Men of so great Caun, as Counsellours of Estate, commonly are; (whether you take Cau∣tion, for Wisedom, or Providence; Or for Pledges, of Estate, or Fortune;) Will ever erre, or adventure so far, as to exceed
their Warrant. And therefore, I conclude, that, in this point, there can be, unto us, neither Disgrace, nor Disadvantage. For the Point, of the Speaker. First, on the Kings Part, it may have a shrewd Illation: For it hath a shew, as if, there could be a stronger Duty, then the Duty, of a Subject, to a King. We see, the Degrees, and Differences, of Duties, in Families, between Father, and Son; Master, and Servant; In Corporate Bodies, be∣tween Communalties, and their Officers; Recorders, Stewards, and the like; yet all these, give place, to the Kings commande∣ments. The Bonds are more speciall, but not so Forcible. On our Part, it concerns us nothing. For first it is, but de Canali, of the Pipe; How the Kings Message shall be conveyed to us, and not of the Matter. Neither hath the Speaker, any such Domini∣on; As that, comming out of his mouth, it presseth us more, then out of a Privy Councellours. Nay, it seems to be, a great Trust, of the Kings, towards the House; When the King, doubeth not, to put his Message, into their Mouth; As if, he should speak to the Citty, by the Recorder: Therefore, me thinks, we should not en¦tertain, this unnecessary Doubt. It is one use of wit, to make clear Things Doubtfull; But it is a much better, use of wit, to make Doubtfull Things clear; And to that, I would, Men would bend themselves. A brief Speech, in the End, of the Session, of Parliament, 7o. Jac. Perswading some Supply, to be given, to his Ma∣jesty; which seemed then, to stand, upon doubtfull terms; And passed upon this Speech. THe proportion, of the Kings Supply, is not now in question: For when that shall be, it may be, I shall be of Opinion, that we should give so now, as we may the better give again. But as Things stand for the present, I think, the point of Honour, and Reputation, is that, which his Majesty standeth most upon, That our Gift, may, at least be like those showers that may serve, to lay the Winds; Though they do not, sufficiently, Water the arth. To labour, to perswade you, I will not; For I know not, into what Form, to cast my Speech. If I should enter, into a Lauda∣tive, (though never so due, and just,) of the Kings great Merits it may be taken for Flattery: If I should speak, of the strait Ob∣ligations, which intercede, between the King, and the Subject, in case of the Kings want, it were a kind of concluding the House: If I should speak, of the dangerous Consequence, which Want may reverberate upon Subjects, it might have a shew, of a secret Me∣nace. These Arguments, are, (I hope,) needless; And do better, in
your Minds, then in my Mouth. But this, give me leave to say; That, whereas the Example, of Cyrus, was used; Who sought his Supply, from those, upon whom he had bestowed his Benefits; We must always, remember; That there are, as well Benefits of the Scpter, as Benefits of the Hand; As well of Government, as of Libe∣rality. These, I am sure we will acknowledge, to have come, plenâ manu, amongst us All; And all those, whom we represent; And therefore, it is every Mans Head, in this Case, that must be his Counsellor; And every Mans Heart, his Orator; And those inward Powers, are more forcible, then any Mans Speech; I leave it, and wish, it may go to the Question. A Speech, delivered by the Kings Atturney, Sir Francis Bacon, in the Lower House; When the House was in great heat, and much troubled, about the undertakers; which were thought to be, some able, and forward Gentle∣men; Who, to ingratiate themselves, with the King, were said, to have undertaken, that the Kings Business, should pass in that House, as his Majesty could wish. In the Par∣liament, 12o. Jac. (Mr. Speaker,) I Have been hithero silent, in this Matter of undertaking; wher∣in, as I perceive, the House, is much enwrapped. First, because, (to be plain with you,) I did not well under∣stand, what it meant, or what it was; And, I do not love, to of∣fer at that, that I do not throughly conceive. That Private Men, should undertake, for the Commons of England: Why? A Man mought as well undertake, for the four Elements: It is a thing, so giddy and so vast, as cannot enter, into the Brain, of a sober Man. And specially, in a new Parliament; When, it was impossible to know, who should be of the Parliament; And when all Men, that know never so little, the Constitution of this House, do know it to be so open to Reason; As Men, do not know, when they enter into these Dores, what mind themselves will be of, untill they hear Things argued, and debated. Much lesse, can any Man make, a pollicy, of Assurance; what Ship, shall come safe home, into the Harbour, in these Seas. I had heard, of un∣dertakings, in severall kinds: There were undertakers, for the Plantations, of Derry, and Colerane, in Ireland, the better to com∣mand, and bridle, those Parts: There were, not long ago, some undertakers, for the North-West Passage. And now, there are some undertakers, for the Project, of Died, and Dressed, Cloaths. And, in short, every Novelty useth to be strengthened, and made
good, by a kind of undertaking. But, for the Ancient Parliament of England, which moves, in a certain Manner, and Sphear; To be undertaken, it passes my reach, to conceive, what it should be. Must we be all Died, and Dressed; And no pure Whites amongst us? Or must there be, a new passage found, for the Kings Business, by a point of the Compass, that was never sailed by, before? Or must there be, some Forts built, in this House, that may command, and contain the rest? (Mr. Speaker) I know, but two Forts, in this House, which the King ever hath; The Fort of Affection, and the Fort of Reason; The one, Commands the Hearts, and the other, Commands the Heads; And others, I know none. I think Aesop was a Wise Man; that described, the nature, of the ly, tha sat upon the Spoke, of the Chariot Wheele, and said to her self; What a Dust do I raise? So, for my part, I think, that all this Dust, is raised, by light Rumours, and Buzzes, and not upon any solid Ground. The second Reason, that made me silent, was, because this Su∣sicion, and Rumor, of undertaking, settles upon no Person certain. It is like, the Birds of Paradise, that they have in the Indies, that have no Feet, and therefore, they never light upon any place, but the wind, carries them away And such a Thing, do I take, this Rumour to be. And lastly, when that the King, had in his two severall speeches, freed us, from the main of our Fears, In affirming, directly, that there was no undertaking to him; And that, he would have taken it, to be no less derogation, to his own Majesty, then to our Merits; To have the Acts, of his people, transferred, to particular per∣sons; That did quiet me, thus far; That these Vapours, were not gone up to the Head, howsoever, they might glow, and e∣stuate, in the Body. Neverthelesse, since I perceive, that this Cloud, still hangs over the House; And that it may do hurt, as well in Fame abroad, as in the Kings Eare, I resolved with my self, to do the part, of an honest voice, in this House, to counsell you, what I think, to be for the best. Wherein first, I will speak plainly, of the pernicious Effects of the Accident, of this Brute, and Opinion, of undertaking; To∣wards Particulars; Towards the House; Towards the King; And wards the People. Secondly, I will tell you, in Mine Opinion, what undertaking, is tolerable; And how far, it may be justified, with a good mind; And on the other side, this same Ripping up, of the Question, of Vndertakers; How far it may proceed, from a good Mind; And in what kind, it may be thought Malicious, and Dangerous. Thirdly, I will shew you, my poor advice, what Meanes there are, to put an end, to this Question of Vndertaking; Not falling, for the present, upon a precise Opinion; But breaking it, how many wayes there be, by which you may get out of it; And lea∣ving,
the choice of them, to a Debate, at the Committee. And Lastly, I will advise you, how things, are to be handled, at the Commitee, to avoid distraction, and losse of Time. For the First of these, I can say to you, but as the Scripure saith, Si invicem mordetis, ab invicem consumemini. If ye Fret, and Gall, one anothers Reputation; The end will be, that every Man shall go hence, like Coyn cried down; Of lesse price, than he came hither. If some, shall be thought, to fawn upon the Kings Business openly; And others, to crosse it secretly; Some shall be thought Practicers, that would pluck the Cardes; And others, shall be thought Papists, that would shuffle the Cardes; what a Misery is this, that we should come together, to foul one ano∣ther, instead of procuring the publick good? And this ends not in particulars, but will make, the whole House, Contemptible: For now, I hear Men say; That this Question, of undertaking, is the predominant Matter of this House. So that we are now, according to the Parable of Iotham, in the Case, of the Trees of the Forrest; That when Question was, whe∣ther the Vine should raign over them? That mought not be: And whether the Olive should raign over them? That mought not be; But we have accepted the Bramble, to raign over us. For it seemes, that the good Vine, of the Kings Graces, that is not so much in esteem: And the good Oyle, whereby we should salve, and relieve, the wants, of the Estate, and Crown, that is laid aside too: And this Bramble, of Contention, and Emulation; This Abime∣lech, which (as was truly said, by an understanding Gentleman,) is a Bastard: (For every Fame, that wants a Head, is Filius popu∣li;) This must Raign, and Rule amongst us. Then for the King nothing can be more opposite, Ex diametro, to his Ends and Hopes, then this. For you have heard him profess like a King; and like a gracious King, that he doth not, so much, respect, his present supply; As this demonstration, that the Peo∣ples Hearts are more knit to him, then before. Now then, if the Issue shall be this, that whatsoever shall be done for Him, shall be thought to be done, but by a number of Persons, that shall be laboured, and packt; This will rather be a sign of Diffi∣dence, and Alienation, then of a naturall Benevolence, and Affection, in his People, at home; And rather Matter, of Disrepu∣tation, then of Honour, abroad. So that to speak plainly to you; The King were better call, for a new Pair of Cards, then play upon these, if they be packt. And then for the People; It is my manner, ever, to look, as well beyond a Parliament, as upon a Parliament; And if they a∣broad, shall think themselves, betrayed by those, that are their Deputies, and Atturnies here; it is true, we may bind them, and con∣clude them, But it will be, with such Murmur, and Insatisfaction as I would be loath to see. These Things mought be dissembled; And so things left, to
bleed inwards; But that is not the way, to cure them. And there∣fore I have searched the Soare, in hope, that you will endeavour the Medecine. But this to do more throughly, I must proceed, to my Second Part; To tell you cleerely, and distinctly, what is to be set on the Right hand, and what on the left, in this business. First, if any Man, hath do good Offices, to advise the King, to call a Parliament; And to increase, the good Affection, and Confidence of his Majestie, towards his People; I say, that such a Person, doth rather Merit well, then commit any Errour; Nay further, if any Man, hath out of his own good mind, given an opinion, touching the Minds of the Parliament, in generall; How it is probable, they are like to be found; And that they will have, a due feeling of the Kings wants; And, will not deal drily, or illiberally, with him; This Man, that doth but think, of other Mens minds, as he finds his own, is not to be blamed. Nay furher, if any Man, hath coupled this, with good wishes, and Propositions; That the King do comfort, the Hearts of his People, and testifie his own love to them, by filing off, the harshness of his Prerogative; Retaining the substance, and strength; And to that purpose, like the good Housholder in the Scripture, That brought forth old store and new, hath revolved the Petitions, and Propositions, of the last Parliament, and added new; I say, this Man hath sown good seed; And he that shall draw him, into Envy for it, sowes Tares. Thus much of the Right hand. But on the other side, if any shall mediatly, or imme∣diatly, infuse into his Majesty, or to others; That the Parliament, is as Cato said of the Romans, like Sheep; That a Man, were bet∣ter drive a Flock of them, then one of them; And however, they may be wise Men severally, yet, in this Assembly, they are guided by some few, which if they be made, and assured, the rest will ea∣sily follow: This is a plain Robbery, of the King of Honour, and his Subjects of Thanks; And it is to make the Parliament vile, and servile, in the eyes of their Soveraign; And I count it no better, than a supplanting, of the King and Kingdom. Again, if a Man shall make this Impression; that it shall be enough for the King to send us some things of shew, that may serve, for colours; And let some Eloquent Tales, be told of them; And that will serve, Ad faciendum populum; any such Person, will find, that this House can well skill, of false Lights: And that it is, no wooing Tokens, but the true Love, already planted, in the Breast of the Subjects, that will make them do for the King. And this is my Opinion, touching those that may have perswaded a Parliament. Take it on the other side, (for I mean in all things to deale plainly) If any Man hath been diffident touching the Call of a Parliament, Thinking, that the best Meanes, were first for the King, to make his utmost tryall, to subsist of himself, and his own Meanes; I say, an Honest, and Faithfull Heart, mought consent to that Opinion; And the event, it seems doth, not greatly discredit it hitherto. Again, if any Man,
shall have been of Opinion, that it is not a particular Party, that can bind the House; Nor, that it is not Shews or Colours, can please the House; I say, that Man, though his speech tend to discourage∣ment, yet it is coupled with Providence. But by your leave, if any Man since the Parliamnt was called, or when it was in speech, shall have laid Plots, to crosse the good will of the Parliament, to the King; By possessing them, that a few shall have the thanks; And that they are (as it were) Bought and Sold, and betrayed; And that, that which the King offers them, are but Baites, prepar∣ed by particular persons; Or have raised rumours, that it is a packt Parliament; To the end, nothing may be done, But that the Parlia∣ment may be dissolved (as Gamesters use to call for new Cards, when they mistrust a Pack:) I say, These are Engins, and Devi∣ses, Naught, Maligne, and Seditious. Now for the Remedy; I shall rather break the Matter, (as I said in the Beginning,) then advise positively. I know but three wayes. Some Message of Declaration to the King. Some Entry, or protestation, amongst our selves: Or some, strict and punctuall Examination. As for the last of these, I assure you, I am not a∣gainst it, if I could tell where to begin, or where to end. For cer∣tainly, I have often seen it, that Things, when they are in smo∣ther, trouble more, then when they break out. Smoak blinds the Eyes, but when it blazeth forth into Flame, it gives light to the Eyes. But then, if you fall to an Examination, some Person must be charged; some Matter must be charged: And the Man∣ner, of that Matter, must be likewise charged; For it may be in a Good Fashion, and it may be in a Bad; In as much difference as between Black, and White: And then, how far Men will ingenu∣ously confess; How far they will politickly deny; And what we can Make, and gather, upon their Confession; And how we shall prove, against their Deniall, It is an endless peece of Work; And, I doubt, that we shall grow, weary of it. For a Message to the King; It is the Course, I like best; so it be carefully, and considerately, handled: For if, we shall represent to the King, the Nature of this Body, as it is; Without the vayles, or shadows, that have been cast upon it; I think, we shall do him Honour, and our selves Right. For any Thing, that is to be done, amongst our selves, I do not see much gained by it; Because it goes no further then our selves: Yet if any thing, can be wisely conceived, to that end, I shall not be against it; But, I think, the purpose of it, is fittest to be; Ra∣ther, that the House conceives, that all this, is but a Mis-under∣standing; Then to take knowledge, that there is, indeed, a Just Ground; And then, to seek, by a Protestation, to give it a Remedy. For Protestations, and Professions, and Apologies, I never found them very Fortunate; But they rather encrease suspicion, then clear it. Why then the Last Part is, that these things, be handled at
the Committee, seriously, and temperately: Wherein I wish, that these four Degrees, of Questions, were handled, in order. First, whether we shall do any thing, at all, in it; Or passe by it, and let it sleep? Secondly, whether we shall enter, into a particular Examina∣tion, of it? Thirdly, whether we shall content our selves, with some En∣try, or Protestation, amongst our selves? And Fourthly, whether we shall proceed, to a Message, to the King; And what? Thus I have told you mine Opinion. I know, it had been more safe, and politick, to have been silent; But it is, perhaps, more honest, and loving to speak. The old Verse is: Nam nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum. But, by your leave, David saih; Silui à bonis, & Dolor meus renovatus est. When a Man speaketh, He may be wounded by Others; but if He holds his peace, from Good Things, he wounds Himself. So I have done my part, and leave it to you, to do that, which you shall judge, to be the best. The Charge, of Sir Francis Bacon, Knight, his Majesties Atturney Generall, against William Talbot, a Coun∣sellor at Law, of Ireland, upon an Information, in the Star-Chamber, Ore tenus; For a writing, under his Hand, whereby, the said William Talbot being deman∣ded, whether the Doctrine of Suarez, touching Deposing, and Killing, of Kings Excommunicated, were true, or no? He answered, that he referred himself, unto that, which the Catholick Roman Church, should determine thereof. Ultimo die Termini Hilarij, undecimo Iacobi Regis. My Lords, I Brought before you, the first sitting, of this Term, the Cause of Duels: But now, this last sitting, I shall bring before you, a Cause, concerning the greatest Duell, which is in the Christian World; The Duels, and Conflicts, between the lawfull Authority, of Soveraign Kings, which is Gods Ordinance, for the comfort of Humane Society; And the swelling pride, and usurpation, of the See of Rome, in Temporalibus; Tending, altogether, to Anar∣chy, and Confusion. Wherein, if this pretence, by the Pope of Rome, by Cartels, to make Soveraign Princes, as the Banditi; And to proscribe their Lives; and to expose their Kingdomes to prey; If these pretences, (I say,) and all Persons, that submit them∣selves,
to that part of the Popes Power, be not, by all possible Se∣verity, repressed, and punished; The State of Christian Kings, will be no other, then the ancient Torment, described by the Poets, in the Hell of the Heathen: A man sitting, richly roabed, solemnly attended, delicious fare &c. With a Sword hanging over his Head, hanging by a small thread, ready every moment to be cut down, by an accursing, and accursed, hand. Surely, I had thought, they had been the Prerogatives, of God alone, and of his secret Judgements; Solvam Cingula Regum; I will loosen the Girdles of Kings; Or again; He powreth contempt upon Princes; Or, I will give a King in my wrath, and take him away again, in my displeasure. And the like: but if these be the Claims, of a Mortall Man, certainly, they are but the Mysteries, of that Person, which exalts himself, above all that is called God: Supra omne quod dicitur Deus; (Note it well:) Not above God, (though that, in a sense, be true, in respect of the Au∣thority, they claim over the Scriptures;) But, Above all that is cal¦led God; That is, Lawfull Kings, and Magistrates. But, my Lords, in this uel, I find this Talbot that is now before you, but a Coward: For he hath given ground; He hath gone backward, and forward; But in such a fashion, and with such In∣terchange, of Repenting, and Relapsing, as I cannot tell, whe∣ther it doth extenuate, or aggravate, his Offence. If he shall, more publikely, in the face of the Court, fall, and settle, upon a right mind, I shall be glad of it; And he that would be against the Kings Mercy, I would he might need the Kings Mercy; But, neverthelesse, the Court will proceed, by Rules of Justice. The Offence, wherewith I charge this Talbot, Prisoner at the Bar, is this, in brief, and in Effect: That he hath maintained, and main∣taineth, under his hand, a power in the Pope for the Deposing, and Mur∣thering, of Kings. In what sort he doth this, when I come, to the proper, and particular, charge, I will deliver it, in his own words, without Pressing, or Straining. Bu before I come to the particular charge, of this Man; I can∣not proceed so coldly, but I must expresse, unto your Lordships, the extreme, and imminent Danger, wherein our Dear, and Dread, Soveraign, is; And, in him, we all; Nay, and wherein, all Princes of both Religions, (For it is a common Cause,) do stand at this day; By the spreading, and Enforcing, of this furious, and pernicious, Opinion, of the Popes Temporall Power: which though, the modest Sort, would blanch, with the Distinction of; In ordine ad Spiritualia, yet that is but an Elusion; For he that ma∣keth the Distinction, will also make the Case. This perill, though it be, in it self, notorious, yet because there is a kind of Dulness, and, almost, a Lethargy, in this Age; Give me leave to set before you, two Glasses; Such as, certainly, the like, never met, in one Age; The Glasses of France, and the Glasse of England. In that of France, the Tragedies acted, and executed, in two Immediate Kings; In the Glasse of England, the same, or more horrible, at¦tempted,
likewise, in a Queen, and King, immediate; But ending, in a happy Deliverance. In France, H. 3. in the face of his Ar∣my, before the walls of Paris, stabbed, by a wretched Iacobine Fryer: H. 4. (a Prince, that the French do surname the Great;) One, that had been a Saviour, and Redeemer, of his Country from infinite Calamities; And a Restorer of that Monarchy, to the ancient State, and Splendour; And a Prince, almost, Heroicall; (except it be, in the Point, of Revolt, from Religion;) At a time, when he was, as it were to mount on Horse-back, for the Commanding, of the greatest, Forces, that, of long time, had been levied in France; This King, likewise, stilletted, by a Rascal votary; which had been enchanted and conjured, for the pur∣pose. In England, Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory; A Queen com∣parable, and to be rankt, with the greatest Kings; Oftentimes attempted, by like votaries; Sommervile, Parry, Savage, and o∣thers; But still protected, by the Watch-man, that Slumbreth not. Again, our excellent Soveraign, King Iames; The Sweetness, and Clemency, of whose nature, were enough, to quench, and mor∣tifie, all Malignity; And a King shielded, and supported, by Po∣sterity: Yet this King, in the Chair of Majesty, (his Vine and Olive Branches about him;) Attended, by his Nobles, and Third Estate, in Parliament; Ready, in the Twinckling of an Eye; (As if it had been, a particular Doomesday;) To have been brought to Ashes, dispersed to the four Winds. I noted, the last day my Lord Chief Iustice, when he spake, of this Powder Treason, he laboured for words; Though they came from him, with great Efficacy, yet he truly confessed, and so must all Men; That, that Treason, is above the Charge, and Report, of any Words whatsoever. Now, my Lords, I cannot let passe, but in these Glasses, which I spake of, besides the Facts themselves, and Danger, to shew you two Things. The one, the Wayes of God Almighty, which tur∣neth the Sword of Rome, upon the Kings, that are the Vassals of Rome; And over them, gives it power; But protecteth those Kings, which have not accepted, the Yoak of his Tyranny, from the Effects of his Mallice. The other, that, (as I said at first,) this is a common Cause, of Princes; It involveth Kings, of both Religions; And therefore, his Majesty, did most worthily, and prudently, ring out the Alarum Bell, to awaken all other Princes, to think of it, seriously, and in Time. But this is a miserable case, the while; That these Roman Souldiers, do, either thrust the Spear, into the Side of Gods Annointed; Or, at least, they Crown them with Thorns; That is, piercing, and pricking, Cares, and Feares, that they can never be quiet, or secure, of their Lives, or States. And as this Perill, is common to Princes, of both Religi∣ons: So Princes of both Religions have been, likewise, equally sen∣sible, of every Injury, that touch't their Temporall. Thunaus reports in his Story; That when the Realm of Fraunce
was interdicted by the violent proceedings of Pope Iulius the 2d. the King, Lewis the 12th. otherwise noted for a Moderate Prince, caused Coyns of Gold to be stamped with his own Image, and this Superscription; Perdam nomen Babylonis è terrâ. And Thuanus saith, Himself hath seen, divers pieces thereof. So as this Catholick King was so much incensed at that time, in respect of the Popes Vsurpa∣tion; As he did fore-run Luther, in applying Babylon to Rome. Charles he 5th. Emperour, who was accounted, one of he Popes best Sonnes; yet proceeded, in matter temporall, towards Pope Clement, with strange Rigour; Never regarding the Pontificality, but kept him Prisoner 18. Moneths, in a Pestilent Prison; And was hrdly disswaded by his Councell, from having sent him, Captive into Spain; And made sport with the Threats of Frosberg, the Ger∣maine; who wore a silk Rope, under his Cassock, which he would shew in all Companies; Tellng them, that he carried it, to strangle the Pope with his own hands. As for Philip the Faire; I is the ordinary Example, how he brought Pope Boniface the 8th. to an ignominious End; Dying Mad and Enraged; And how he stiled hi Rescript, to the Popes Bull, whereby he challenged his Tempoall; Sciat Fatuitas Vestra; Not your Beatitude, but your Stultitude; A Stile, worthy to be continued, in like Cases. For certainly, that claim is meerly Folly, and Fury. As for Native Examples here, it is too long a Field to enter into them. Never Kings of any Nation, kept the Partition wall, between Temporall, and Spiriuall, better in times of greatest Superstition: I report me, to King Edward I. that set up so many Crosss; And yet cros∣sed that part of the Popes Iurisdiction, no Man more strongly. But these things, have passed better Penns and Speeches: Heere I end them. But now to come to the particular Charge, of this Man: I mus enform your Lordships the Occasion, and Nature, of this Offence Thee hah been published, lately, to the World a Work of Surez a Portugese; A Professor in the Vniversity of Coimbra; A Confiden and daing Writer; such an one, as Tully describes in derision, Nihil tam verens, quam ne dubitare, aliquâ de re, videretur: One that feares nothing but this, least he should seem to doubt of any thing. A Fellow, that thinks with his Magistrallity, and Goose-quill, to give Lawes, and Mannages, to Crowns and Scepters. In this Mans writin this Doctrine of Deposing, and Murthering, Kings, seems to com to a higher Elevation, then heretofore; And it is more artted, and positived, then in others. For in the passages, which your Lord∣ships shall hear read anon, I find three Assertions, which run, not in the vulgar Track, But are such, as wherewith Mns Eares (as I suppose) are not much acquainted. Whereof the first is, That the Pope hath a superiority over Kings, as Subjects to depose them; Not only, for Spirituall Crimes, as Heresie, and Schisme; But for Faults, of a Temporall Nature; Forasmuch, as a Tyrannicall Government, tendeth ever, to the Destruction of Soules. So by this Position, Kings of either Religi∣on,
are alike comprehended, and none exempted. The Second, that after a Sentence, given by the Pope, this Writer, hath defined, of a Series, or Succession, or Substitution, of Hangmen, or Burreo's, to be sue, least an Executioner should fail. His Assertion is; That when a King, is sentenced, by the Pope, to Deprivation, or Death; The Executioner, who is first in place, is He, to whom the Pope shall commit the Authority; Which may be a Forraign Prnce; It may be, a Parti∣cular Subject; It may be, in generall, to the first undertaker. But if there be no Direction, or Assignation, in the Sentence, speciall, nor ge∣nerall, then, de Jure, it appertains to the nex Successour: (A naturall, and pious, Opinion; For, commonly, they are Sons, or Brothers, or near of Kin, all is one:) So as the Successor be Apparent, and also that he be a Catholique. But, if he be Doubtfull, or that he be no Catho∣lique, then it devolves, to the Commonalty, of the Kingdome; So as, he will be sure, to have it done, by one Minister, or other. In the Third, he distinguisheth of two kinds, of Tyrants; A Tyrant in Ti∣tle, and A Tyrant in Regiment, he Tyrant in Regiment, cannot be re∣sisted, or killed, without a Sentence,, precedent, by the Pope: But a Tyrant in Title, may be killed, by any private Man, whatsoever. By which Doctrine, he hath put the Judgement, of Kings Titles; (which, I will undertake, are never so clean, but that some vain Quarrel, or Exception, may be made unto them;) upon the Fancy, of e∣very rivate Man; And also couples, the Judgement, and Execu∣tion, together; That he may judge him, by a Blow, without any other Sentence. Your Lordships see, what Monstrous Opinions, these are; And how, both these Beasts, the Beast with seven Heads, and the Beast with Many Heads, Pope, and people, are, at once, let in, and set upon the sacred Persons of Kings. Now, to go on, with the Narrative. There was an Extract made, of certain Sentences, and Portions, of this Book; (Being, of this nature, that I have set forth;) By a great Prelate, and Coun∣cellor, upon a just Occasion; And, there being some Hollowness, and Hesitation, in these Matters, (wherein, it is a thing impious, to doubt,) discovered, and perceived, in Talbot; He was asked, his Opinion, concerning these Assertions, in the Presence of his Majesty: And afterward, they were delivered to him; That, up∣on advise, and Sedato animo, he mought declare himself; Where∣upon, under his hand, he subscribes thus. May it please your Honourable good Lordships: Concerning this Doctrine of Suarez, I do perceive, by what I have read, in his Book, that the same, doth concern, Matter of Faith; The Controversie growing, upon Exposition of Scriptures, and Councels; Wherein, (being ignorant, and not studied,) I cannot take upon me, to judge: But I do sub∣mit mine Opinion therein, to the Iudgement, of the Catho∣lick Roman Church, as in all other Points, concerning Faith, I do. And for Matter, concerning my Loyalty, I do acknowledge, my Soveraign Liege Lord King James, to be lawfull, and undoubted, King, of all the Kingdomes, of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And I will bear, true faith, and Allegeance, to his Highness, during my life. NOw, (my Lords,) upon these words, I charge William Tal∣bot, to have committed a great Offence; And such an one, as if he had entred, into a voluntary, and malicious, Publicati∣on, of the like writing; It would have been, too great an Offence, for the Capacity of this Court. But because, it grew from a Questi∣on, askt by a Councell of state; And so, rather seemeth, in a fa∣vourable Construction, to proceed, from a kind of Submission to answer, then from any malicious, or insolent Will, it was fit, ac∣cording to the Clemency, of these Times, to proceed in this ma∣ner, before your Lordships. And yet, let the Hearers, take these things right; For certainly, if a Man be required, by the Lords o the Councell, to deliver his Opinion, whether King Iames, be King, or no? And He deliver his Opinion, that He is not; This is, High Treason. But, I do not say, that these words, amount to that And therefore, let me open them, truly, to your Lordships; And therei, open also, (it may be,) the Eyes, of the Offender Himself, how far they reach. My Lords, a Mans Allegeance, must be Independant, not pro∣visionall, and conditionall. Elizabeth Barton, that was called, the Holy Maid of Kent, affirmed; That if K. H. 8. Did not take, Kathe∣rine of Spain, again, to his Wife, within a twelve moneth, he should be no King; And this was judged Treason. For though this Act, be Contingent, and Future; yet Treason, of compassing, and imagi∣ning, the Kings Destruction, is present. And in like manner, if a Man should, voluntarily publish, or maintain; That whensoever a Bull, or Deprivation, shall come forth against the King, that from thenceforth, he is no longer
King: This is of like Nature: But with this, I do not charge you neither: But this, is the true Latitude of your Words; That if the Doctrine, touching the Killing of Kings, be Matter of Faith, that you submit your self, to the Judgement, of the Catholick Roman Church: So as now, (to do you right,) your Allegeance, doth not depend sim∣ply, upon a Sentence, of the Popes Deprivation, against the King; But upon another point also; If these Doctrines be already, or shall be declared, to be Matter of Faith. But my Lords, there is little won in this: There may be some Difference, to the guiltinesse, of the Party; But there is little, to the Danger of the King. For the same Pope of Rome, may with the same breath, declare boh. So as still, upon the matter, the King is made, but Tennant at will, of his Life, and Kingdomes; And the Allegiance of his Subjects, is pinn'd upon the Popes Act. And Certainly, it is Time, to stop the Current of this Opinion, of Acknowledgement of the Popes power, in Temporalibus; Or ele, it will supplant, the Seat of Kings. And let it not be mistaken, that Mr. Talbots Offence, should be no more, then the Refusing the Oath of Allegiance. For it is one thing to be silent, and another thing to affim. As for the Point of Matter of Faith, or not of Faith; To tell your Lordships plain, it would astonish a Man, to see the Gulf of this implyed eliefe. Is nothing excepted from it? If a Man should ask Mr. Talbot, whe∣ther he do condemn Murther, or Adultery, or Rape, or the Doctrine of Mahomet, or of Arius, in stead of Zuarius; Must the Answer be, with this exception, that if the Question concern matter of Faith, (as no question, it doth, for the Moral Law is matter of Faith) That therein, he wil submit himself, to what the Church shall determine? And no doubt, the Murther of Princes, is more then Simple Murther. But to conclude, (Talbot,) I will do you this Right; and I will no be reserved in this, but to declare that, that is true; That you came afterwards to a better mind; Wherein, if you had been constant, the King, out of his great goodnesse, was resolved, not to have proceeded with you, in Course of Justice: But then again, you Started aside, like a Broken Bow. So that, by your Variety, and Vacillation, you lost, the acceptable time, of the first Grace; which was, Not to have convented you. Nay, I will go farther with you. Your last Submission, I con∣ceive to be Satisfactory and Compleat; But then it was too late; The Kings Honour was upon it; It was published, and the Day ap∣pointed, for Hearing: Yet, what preparation, that may be, to the Second Grace of Pardon; that I know not: But I know, my Lords, out of their accustomed favour, will admit you, not only to your Defence, concerning that, that hath been Charged; But to extenuate, your Fault, by any Submission, that now, God shall put, into your mind, to make.
The Charge given, by Sr. Francis Bacon, his Majesties Atturney Generall, against Mr. I.S. for Scandalizing, and Traducing, in the publick Sessions, Letters sent, from the Lords of the Councell, touching the Benevo∣lence. MY Lords, I shall inform you, ore tenus, against this Gentle∣man, Mr. I. S. A Gentleman, (as it seems) of an ancient House, and Name; But for the present, I can think of him, by no other Name, then the Name of a great Offender. The Nature, and Quality of his Offence, in sum, is this. This Gentleman, hath, upon advice, not suddenly, by his Pen; Nor by the Slip of his Tongue; Not privatly, or in a Corner, but publickly; As it were, to the face of the Kings Ministers, and Iustices; Slandered and Tradu∣ced; The King, our Soveraign; The Law of the Land; The Parliament; And infinite Particulars, of his Majesties worthy, and loving Subjects. Nay, the Slander is, of that Nature, that it may seem, to interest, the People, in Grief, and Discontent, against the State; whence mought have ensued, Matter of Murmur, and Se∣dition. So that it is not a Simple Slander, but a Seditious Slander; like to that, the Poet speaketh of; —Calamos{que} armare Veneno. A Venemous Dart, that hath both Iron, and Poyson To open, to your Lordships, the true State, of this Offence, I will set before you; First, the Occasion, whereupon Mr. I. S. wrought: Thn the Offence, it self, in his own words: And lastly, the Points, of his Charge. My Lords, you may remember, that there was the last Parlia∣ment, an Expectation, to have had the King, supplied, with Treasure, although the Event failed. Herein, it is not fit for me to give opinion, of an House of Parliament: But I will give testimony of Truth, in all places. I served, in the Lower House, and I observed somewhat. This I do affirm; That I never could perceive, but that there was, in that House, a generall Dispositi∣on to give; And to give, largely. The Clocks in the House, per∣chance, might differ; Some went too fast, some went too slow: But the Disposition to give, was generall; So that I think, I may truly say; Solo tempore lapsus Amor. This Accident, happening thus, besides expectation: It stirred up, and awaked, in divers of his Majesties worthy Servants, and Subjects; of the Clergy, the Nobility, the Court, and others here nea at hand, an Affection loving, and cheerfull; To present the King, some with Plate, some with Money, as a Freewill offering; (A Thing, that God Almighty loves; A Cheerfull Givr; what an Evill Eye doth, I know not.) And (my Lords) let me speak it, plainly
unto you; God forbid, any Body should be so wretched, as to think, that the Obligation of Love, and Duty, from the Subject, to the King, should be Joynt, and not severall: No, my Lords it is both. The Subject petitioneth, to the King, in Parliament. He Petitioneth likewise, out of Parliament. The King, on the other side, gives Graces, to the Subjects, in Parliament: He gives them likewise, and poureth them, upon his People, out of Parliament: And so, no doubt, the Subject, may give, to the King, in Parlia∣ment, and out of Parliament. It is true, the Parliament, is Intercur∣sus Magnus; The great Intercourse, and main Current, of Graces, and Donatives, from the King, to the People; from the People, to the King: But Parliaments are held, but at certain times: Where∣as the Passages, are alwayes open, for Particulars: Even as you see, great Rivers, have their Tides; But particular Springs, and Fountains, run continually. To proceed therefore; As the Occasion, (which was the failing of Supply, by Parliament,) did awake the Love, and Benevolence, of those, that were at hand, to give: So it was apprehended, and thought fit, by my Lords of the Councell, to make a proof, whether the occasion, and Example both, would not awake, those in the Country, of the better sort, to follow. Whereupon, their Lord∣ships devised, and directed Letters, unto the Sheriffs, and Iustices, which declared what was done here above, and wished, that the Country might be moved, especially Men of value. Now, My Lords, I beseech you, give me favour, and attention, to set forth, and observe, unto you, five Points: (I will number them, because other Men may note them; And I will but touch them, because they shall not be drowned, or lost in discourse;) which I hold worthy, the observation, for the Honour of the State, and Confusion of Slanders: Whereby, it will appear, most evidently; What care was taken, that that, which was then done, might not have the effect, no nor the shew, no nor so much as the shadow, of a Tax: And that it was, so far, from breeding, or bringing in, any ill president, or Example, As, contrary wise, it is a Corrective, that doth correct, and allay, the Harshness, and Danger, of former Examples. The first is; That what was done, was done, immediately after such a Parliament, as made generall Profession to give, and was interrupted by Accidet; So as, you may truly, and justly esteem it; Tanquàm Posthuma Proles Parliamenti; As an After Child of the Parliament; And in pursuit, (in some small measure,) of the firm Intent, of a Parliament past. You may take it also, if you will, as an Advance, or Provisionall Help, untill a Future Parliawent: Or, as a Gratification simply, without any Relation, to a Parliament; you can, no wayes, take it amisse. The Second is, That it wrought, upon Example; As a Thing, not devised; Or projected; Or required; No, nor so much as re∣commended, untill many, that were never moved, nor dealt
with, Ex mero motu, had freely and frankly, sent in their presents. So that, the Letters, were rather like Letters of Newes, what was done a London, then otherwise: And we know, Exempla ducun, non traunt; Examples, they do but Lead, they do not Draw, nor Drive. The Third is, Tht it was not done, by Commission, under the Great Seal; A Thing warranted, by a Multitude of Presidents, both ancient, and of late time, as you shall hear anon; And no doubt, warranted by Law; So that, the Commissions, be of that Stile, and Tenour, as that they be to move, and not to levy: But this was done, by Letters of the Councell, and no higher Hand, or Form. The Fouth i, That these Letters, had no manner of Shew, of any Binding Act, of State. For they contai not any speciall Frame of Direction, how the Businesse should be Mannaged; But were written, as upon trust; Leaving the matter, wholy, to the Industry, and Confidence, of those in the Country; So that it was, an absque Compoto; Such a form of Letter, as no Man could, fitly, be called to accompt upon. The Fift, and last Point is; That the whole Carriage of he Bu∣siness, had no Circumstance compulsory. There was no Proporti∣on, Or Rate, et down, not so much as by way of a Wish: There was no Menace of any that should deny: No Reproof of any that did deny, No certifying, of the Names of any, that had denied. Indeed, if Men could not content themselves to deny, but that they must censure, and inveigh; Nor to excuse themselves, but they must accuse the State, that is anoher Case. But, I say, for Denying, no Man was apprehended, no nor noted. So that, I verily think, that there is none so subtill a Disputer, in the Con∣troversie of Liberum Arbitrium, that can, with all his Distinctions, fasten, or carp, upon the Act, but that there was Free Will, in it. I conclude therefore, (My Lords,) that this was a True, and pure, Benevolence; Not an Imposition, called a Benevelence, which the Statute speaks of; As you shall hear, by one of my Fellows. There is a great Difference, I tell you, (though Pilate would not see it,) between Rex Iudaeorum and se dcens Regem Iudaeorum; And there is a great difference, between a Benevolence, and an Ex∣action, called a Benevolence, which the Duke of Buckingham, speaks of, in his Oration to the Citty: And defineth it, to be, not what the Subject, of his good will, would give, but what the King, of his good will, would take. But this, I say, was a Benevolence, wherein every man, had a Princes Prerogative; A Negative Voyce: And this word, (Excuse moy,) was a Plea peremptory. And there∣fore, I do wonder, how Mr. I. S. could foul, or trouble, so clear a Fountain; Certainly, it was but his own Bitterness, and unsound Humours. Now to the particular Charge. Amongst other Countries, these Letters, of the Lords, came to the Iustices of D—shire, Who sig∣nified, the Contents thereof; And gave Directions, and Ap∣pointments,
for meetings, concerning the Business, to severall Towns, & Places, within that County: And amongst the rest, notice was given, unto the Town, of A: The Majour of A; conceiving, that this Mr. I. S. (being a Principall Person, and a Dweller, in that Town;) was a Man, likely to give, both money, and good Example: Dealt with him, to know his mind. He, intending, (as it seems,) to play prizes, would give no Answer, to the Ma∣jour, in private, but would take Time. The next day then, be∣ing an Appointment of the Iustices to meet, he takes occasion, or pretends occasion, to be absent, because he would bring his Pa∣pers, upon the Stage: And thereupon, takes Pen in hand, and, in stead, of excusing himself, sets down, and contriveth, a sediti∣ous, and libellou, Accusation, against the King, and State; which your Lordships shall now hear; And sends it to the Majour: And witall, because the Feather of his Quill, might fly abroad, he gives authority, to the Majour, to impart it to the Iustices, if he so thought good. And now, my Lords, because I will not mistake, or mis-repeat, you shall hear the Seditious Libell, in the proper termes, and words thereof. Here the Papers were read. MY Lords, I know, this Paper, offends your Ears, much, and the Eares of any good Subject: And sorry I am, that the Times, should produce Offences, of this nature: But since they do, I would be more sorry, they should be passed, without severe punishment: Non tradite factum, (as the Verse sayes, altered a lit∣tle;) Aut si tradatis, Facti quoque tradite poenam. If any man, have a mind, to discourse, of the Fact; let him likewise, discourse, of the punishment, of the Fact. In this Writing, (my Lords,) there appears, a Monster, with four Heads; Of the progeny, of him, that is the Father of Lies, and takes, his Name, from Slander. The first is, a wicked, and seditious, Slander; Or, (if I shall use the Scripture phrase,) a Blaspheming of the King himself; Setting him forth, for a Prince, perjured, in the great, and solemne, Oath, of his Coronation; which is, as it were, the Knot of the Dia∣deme: A Prince, that should be a Violatour, and Infringer, of the Liberties, Lawes, and Customes, of the Kingdome: A mark, for an H. the 4th. A Match, for a R. the 2d. The Second is, a Slander, and Falsification, and wresting, of the Law, of the Land, grosse, and palpable: It is truly said, by a Civi∣lian; Tortura Legum pessima: The Torture of Lawes, is worse, then the Torture of Men. The Third is, a slander, and false charge, of the Parliament; That they had denied, to give to the King: A Point, of notori∣ous untruth. And the last is, a Slander, and Taunting, of an infinite Number,
of the Kings loving Subjects, that have given, towards this Bene∣volence, and free Contribution: Charging them, as Accessary, and Coadjutours, to the Kings Perjury. Nay, you leave us not there; But you take, upon you, a Pontificall Habite; And couple, your Slander, with a Curse: But thanks be to God, we have learned suf∣ficiently, out of the Scripture; That, as the Bird flies away, so the causelesse Curse shall not come. For the first of these, which concerns the King, I have taken to my self, the opening, and Aggravation, thereof: The other three, I have distributed, to my Fellows. My Lords,  cannot, but enter, into this part, with some Wonder and Astonishment; How it should come, into the Heart, of a Sub∣ject, of England to vapour forth, such a wicked, and venemous slan∣der against the King; whose Goodness, & Grace, is comparable (if not incomparable,) unto any the Kings, his Progenitors. This there∣fore, gives me a Just, & necessary, occasion, to do two things. The one to make, some Representation, of his Majesty; Such as truly he is found to be, in his Government, which Mr. I. S. chargeth, with Violation of Lawes, and Liberties. The other, to search, and open the Depth of Mr. I.S. his Offence. Both which, I will do briefly; Because, the one, I cannot expresse, sufficiently; And the other, I will not presse, too far. My Lords, I mean to make, no Panegyrick, or Laudative: The Kings delights not in it, neither am I fit for it: But if it were, but a Councellor, or Noble-man, whose Name had suffered, and were to receive, some kind of Reparation, in this High Court, I would do him that Duty, as not to pass his Merits, and just Attributes, (e∣specially, such as are limitted with the present Case) in silence: For, it is fit, to burn Incense, where evill Odours, have been cast, and raised. Is it so, that King Iames shall be said to be a Violater, of the Liberties, Lawes, and Customes of his Kingdomes? Or is he not, rather, a noble, and Constant, Protector, and Conservator, of them all? I conceive, this consisteth, in maintaining Religion, and the true Church; In maintaining the Lawes of the Kingdom which is the Subjects Birth-right; In temperate use, of the Prerogative; In due, and free, Administration of Iustice; And Conservation, of the Peace, of the Land. For Religion, we must ever acknowledge, in first place, that we have a King, that is, the Principall Conservator of true Relgion, through the Christian World. He hath maintained it, not only, with Scepter and Sword; But likewise by his Pen, wherein also he is Potent. He hath Awaked, and Reauthorized, the whole Party, of the Reformed Religion, throughout Europe; which through the Inso∣lency, and diverse Artifices, and Inchantments, of the advers part, was grown, a little Dull, and Dejected. He hath summon∣ed, the Fraternity of Kings, to infranchise Themselves, from the Usurpation, of the see of Rome. He hath made himself a Mark, of Contradiction for it.
Neither can I omit, when I speak of Religion, to remember, that excellent Act of his Majesty; which though it were done, in a Forraign Country, yet the Church of God is one; And the Contagion of these things, will soon pass Seas, and Lands: I mean, in his constant, and holy, proceeding against the Heretick Vorstius; whom, (being ready, to enter into the Chair, and there to have authori∣zed, one of the most pestilent, and Heathenish Heresies, that ever was begun;) His Majesty, by his constant opposition, dismounted, and pulled down. And I am perswaded, there sits, in this Court one, whom God doth the rather blesse, for being his Majesties Instru∣ment, in that Service. I cannot remember Religion, and the Church, but I must think, of the seed-plots of the same, which are the Vniversities. His Majesty, as for Learning amongst Kings, he is incomparable, in his Person; So likewise, hath he been in his Government, a benig, or bene∣volent planet, towards Learning. By whose influence, those Nur∣series, and Gardens of Learning, (the Vniversities) were never, mor in Flower, nor Fruit. For the Maintaining, of the Lawes, which is the Hedge, and Fence, about the Liberty of the Subject, I may truly affirm, it was ne∣ver in better repair. He doth concur, with the Votes, of the Nobles; Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare. He is an Enemy of Innova∣tion. Neither doth the Universality, of his own Knowledge, car∣ry him, to neglect, or pass over, the very Formes of the Lawes, of the Land. Neither was there ever King, (I am perswaded) that did consult, so oft, with his Iudges; As my Lords, that sit here, know well. The Iudges, are a kind of Councell, of the Kings, by Oath, and ancient Institution; But he useth them so indeed. He confers regularly, with them, upon their Retrnes, from their Visitations, and Circuits. He gives them Liberty, both to enform him, and to debate matters with him; And in the Fall, and Conclusion, commonly, relyeth, on their Opinions. As for the use, of the Prerogative, it runs within the ancient Channels, and Banks; Some Things, that were conceived, to be in some Proclamations, Commissions, and Pattents, as Over∣flowes, have been, by his Wisedom, and Care, reduced; whereby, no doubt, the Main Channell, of his Prerogative, is so much the stronger. For evermore, Overflowes, do hurt the Chan∣nell. As for Administration of Iustice, between Party and Party, I pray observe these points. There is no Newes, of Great Seal, or Signet, that flies abroad, for Countenance, or Delay of Causes: Prote∣ctions rarely granted, and only upon great Ground, or by Con∣sent: My Lords, here of the Councell, and the King himself, meddle not, (as hath been used in former times) with Matters, of Meum and Tuum; except they have apparent mixture with Mat∣ters of Estate, but leave them to the Kings Courts of Law, or Equity. And for Mercy, and Grace, (without which, there is no standing,
before Iustice;) we see, the King now hath raigned 12. years, in his White Robe, without, almost any Asprsion of the Crimsn Die, of lood. There sits my Lord Hobrt, hat served Aturney seven years. I served with him. We were so happy, as there passed not, through our hands, any one Arraignment for Treason; And but one, for any Capitall Offence; which was that, of the Lord Sanquier; The Noblest piece of Iustice, (one of them) that ever came orth in any Kings Times. As for Penall Lawes, which lie, as Snares, upon the Subjects: And which were, as a Nemo seit, to King Henry 7. It yeelds a Revenue, that will scarce pay, for the Parchment, of the Kings Records, at Wstminster. And lastly for Peace; we see, manifestly, his Majesty, bears some Resemblance, of that great Name; A Prince of Peace: He hah preserved his Subjects, during his Raign, in Peace, both within, and wihout. For the Peace, with States abroad, We have it, us∣que ad Satietatem: And for Peace, in the Lawyers phrase, which count Trespasses, and Forces, and Riots, to be Contra pacem; Le me give your Lordships, this Token, or Tast; That this Court, where they should appear, had never lesse to do. And certainly, there is no better Sign, of Omnia benè, then when this Court, is in a Still. But, (my Lords,) this is a Sea of Matter; And therefore, I must give it over, and conclude; That there was never King, raigned, in this Nation, that did better keep Covenant, in preserving the Liberties, and procuring the Good, of his People. So that, I must needs say, for the Subjects of England; O Fortunatos nimium, sua si bona nôrint: As, no doubt, they do, both know, and acknow∣ledge it: Whatsoever, a few turbulent Discoursers, may, through the Lenity of the time, take Boldness to speak. And as for this particular, touching the Benevolence, wherein, Mr. I.S. doth assign, this breach of Covenant; I leave it, to others, to tell you; what the King may do; Or what other Kings, have done: But I have told you, what our King, and my Lords, have done: Which, I say, and say again, is so far, from introducing, a new President; As it doth, rather, correct, and mollifie, and qua∣lifie, former presidents. Now, (Mr. I. S.) let me tell you your fault in few words; For that, I am perswaded, you see it already; Though I wooe no Mans Repentance; But I shall, as much as in me is, cherish it, where I find it. Your Offence hath three parts knit together, Your Slander; Your Menace; and Your Comparison. For your Slander, it is no lesse, then that the King is perjured, in his Coronation Oath. No greater Offence then Perjury: No grea∣ter
Oath, then that of a Coronation. I leave it; It is too great to ag∣gravate. Your Menace, that if there were a Bulling-broke, or I cannot tell what, there were Matter for him, is a very seditious Passage. You know well, that howsoever Henry the fourths Act, by a secret Pro∣vidence of God, prevailed, yet it was but an Vsurpation: And, if it were possible, for such a one, to be, this day, (wherewith, it seemes, your Dreames are troubled,) I do not doubt, his End would be upon the Block; And that he would, sooner, have the Ravens, sit upon his Head, at London Bridge, then the Crown at Westminster. And it is not your interlacing, of your (God for∣bid,) that will salve these seditious Speeches; Neither could it be a Fore-warning, because the Matter was past, and not revoca∣ble; But, a very Stirring up, and Incensing, of the People. If I should say to you, (for Example,) if these times, were like some former times, of King H. 8; Or some other times, which God forbid, Mr. I. S, it would cost you your life. I am sure, you would not think this, to be a gentle warning, but rather, that I incensed the Court against you. And for your Comparison, with R. the 2. I see you follow the Example of them, that brought him upon the Stage, and into Print, in Queen Elizabeths time; A most prudent; and admirable, Queen; But let me entreat you, that when ou will speak, of Queen Elizabeth, or King Iames; you would compare them to K. H. the 7th, or K. Ed. 1. Or some other Paralels, to which they are like. And this I would wish, both you, and all, to take heed of; How you speak seditious Matter in Parables, or by Tropes, or Examples. There is a thing, in an Indictment, called an Innuendo; You must beware, how you becken, or make Signs upon the King, in a Dangerous sense: But I will contain my self, and Press this no further: I may hold you, for Turbulent, or Pre∣sumptuous, but I hope you are not Disloyall: You are gracious∣ly, and mercifully, dealt with. And therefore having now o∣ened to my Lords, and, (as I think,) to your own Heart, and Conscience, the principall part of your Offence, which concerns the King;) I leave the rest, which concerns the Law, Parliament, and the Subjects that have given, to Mr. Serjeants, and Mr. Solli∣citour. The Charge of Owen, indicted of High Treason, in the Kings Bench, by Sir Francis Bacon, Knight, his Ma∣jesties Atturney Generall. THe Treason, wherewih, this Man standeth Charged, is, for the Kind, and Nature, of it, Ancient; As Ancient, as there is, any Law of England: But, in the particular, Late, and Upstart:
And again, in the Manner, and Boldness, of the present Case, New, and almost unheard of, till this Man. Of what mind he is now, I know not, but I take him as he was, and as he standeth charged. For High Treason, is not written in Ice; That when the Body relenteth, the Impression should go away. In this Cause, the Evidence it self, will spend little Time: Time therefore, will be best spent, in opening, fully, the Nature of thi Treason, with the Circumstances thereof; Because the Example, is more then the Man. I think good, therefore, by way of Induce∣ment, and Declaration, in this Cause, to open unto the Court, Iu∣ry, and Hearers, five Things. The first is, the Clemency, of the King; Because, it is Newes, and a kind of Rarety, to have a proceeding, in this place, upon Treason: And perhaps, it may be marvelled by some, why after, so long an Intermission, it should light upon this Fellow: Being a person, but contemptible; A kind of venemous fly; And a Hang by of the Seminaries. The Second is, the Nature of this Treason, as concerning the Fact; which, of all kinds, of compassing the Kings Death, I hold to be the most perillous; And as much differing from other Con¦spiracies, as the lifting up of a 1000 Hands, against the King, (like the Giant Briareus,) differs, from lifting up one, or a few Hands. The Third Point, that I will speak unto, is, the Doctrine, or Opinion; Which is the Ground of this Treason; Wherein, I will not argue, or speak, like a Divine, or Scholler; But, as a Man, bred, in a Civill Life: And to speak plainly, I hold the Opinion to be such, that deserveth, rather, Detestation, then Contesta∣tion. The Fourth Point, is the Degree, of this Mans Offence; which is more presumptuous, then I have known, any other, to have fal∣len into, in this kind: And hath, a greater Overflow, of Malice and Treason. And Fifthly, I will remove somewhat, that may seem to quali∣fie, and extenuate, this Mans Offence; in that, he hath not affir∣med, simply; That it is lawfull to kill the King, but conditional∣ly; that if the King be Excommunicate, it is lawfull to kill him; which maketh little Difference, either in Law, or Perill. For the Kings Clemency, I have said it, of late, upon a good Oc∣casion; And I still speak it, with comfort: I have now, served his Majestie, Solliciter, and Atturney, eight years, and better: yet, this is the first time, that ever I gave in Evidence, against a Tray∣tor, at this Barr, or any other. There hath not wanted Matter, in that Party, of the Subjects, whence this kind of Offence floweth, to irritate the King: He hath been irritated, by the Powder Trea∣son, which might have turned Judgement, into Fury: He hath been irritated, by wicked, and monstrous, Libels; Irritated, by a generall Insolency, and presumption, in the Papists, throughout the Land; And yet, I see, his Majesty keepeth Caesars Rule: Nil
malo, quam os esse similes sui, & memei. He leaveth them, to be like themselves; And he remaineth, like Himself; And striveth, to o∣vercome Evill, with Goodness. A strange thing, Bloudy Opi∣nions, Bloudy Doctrines, Bloudy Examples, and yet the Govern∣ment, still, unstained with Bloud. As for this Owen, that is brought in question, though his Person be, in his Condition, contempti∣ble; yet we see, by miserable Examples; That these Wret∣ches, which are but the Scum of the Earth, have been able, to stir Earth-quakes, by Murthering of Princes: And, if it were, in case of Contagion; (As this is a Contagion, of the Heart, and Soul;) A Raskall, may bring in a Plague, into the Citty, as well as a great Man: So it is not the Person, but the Matter, that is to be consi∣dered. For the Treason it self, which is the second Point, my Desire is, to open it, in the Depth thereof, if it were possible, But it is bot∣tomelesse: And so the Civill Law saith: Conjurationes, omnium po∣ditionum, odiosissimae, & perniciosissimae. Against Hostile Invasi∣ons, and the Adherence of Subjects, to nemies, Kings can arm: Rebellions, must go over, the Bodies, of many good Subjects, be∣fore they can hurt the King: but Conspiracies, against the Persons of Kings are like Thunder-bolts, that strike upon the suddain, hardly to be avoyded: Major metus à singulis, (saith he,) quam ab universis. There is no Preparation against them. And that Pre∣paration, which may be, of Guard, or Custody, is a perpetuall Misery. And therefore, they that have written, of the Privi∣ledges of Ambassadours, and of the Amplitude of SafeConducts, have defined; That if an Ambassadour, or a Man, that commeth in, up∣on the highest safe-Conducts, do practise, Matter of Sedition, in a State, yet, by the Law of Nations, he ought to be remanded: But, if he conspire, against the Life of a Prince, by violence, or Poyson, he is to be justiced: Quia odium est omni Privilegio Majus. Nay, even amongst Enemies, and in the most deadly Wars, yet, ne∣verthelesse, Conspiracy, and Assassinate of Princes, hath been accounted villanous, and execrable. The Manners, of Conspiring, and compassing the Kings Death, are many: But it is most apparent, that amongst all the rest, this sur∣mounteth. First, because it is grounded, upon pretenced Reli∣gion; which is a Trumpet, that enflameth the Heart, and Powers of a Man, with Daring, and Resolution, more than any Thing else. Secondly, it is the Hardest to be avoided; For when a particu∣lar Conspiracy, is plotted, or Attempted, against a King, by some one, or some few Conspiratours, it meets with a Number of Impe∣diments. Commonly, he that hath the Head to devise it, hath not the Heart to undertake it: And the Person, that is used, some∣time faileth in Corage, sometime faileth in Opportunity, sometimes is touched with Remorce. But to publish, and maintain, that it may be lawfull, for any Man living, to attempt the Life of a King; this Doctrine, is a Venomous Sop; Or, as a Legion of Malign Spi∣rits;
Or an universall Temptation; Doth enter, at once, into the Hearts of all, that are any way prepared, or of any Predisposition, to be Traytors: So that whatsoever faileth in any one, is supplied in Many: If one Man faint, another will dare: If one man hath not the Opportunity, another hath: If one Man Relent, another will be Desperate. And Thirdly, particular Conspiracie, have their Periods of Time, within which, if they be not taken, they vanish. But this is endless, and importeth, Perpetuity, of springing Conspiracies. And so much, concerning the Nature, of the Fact. For the Third Point, which is the Doctrine; That upon an Ex∣communication of the Pope, with sentence of Deposing; A King by any Son of Adam, may be slaughtered; And that, it is Iustice, and no Murther; And that their Subjects, are absolved, of their Alle¦geance; And the Kings themselves, exposed to spoyl and Prey. I said before, that I would not argue, the subtilty of the Question: It is rather, to be spoken too, by way of Accusation of the Opini∣on, as Impious; then by way of Dispute of it, as Doubtfull. Nay, I say, it deserveth, rather, some Holy-war, or League, amongst all Christian Princes, of either Religion; for the Extirpating and Razing of the Opinion, and the Authors thereof, from the face of the Earth; Then the Stile of Pen, or Speech. Therefore in thi kind I will speak to it, a few words and not otherwise. Nay. I protest, if I were a Papist, I should say as much. Nay, I should speak it, perhaps with more ndignation, and Feeling. For this Horrible Opinion, is our Advantage; And it is their Reproach; And will be their Ruine. This Monster of Opinion, is to be accused, of Three most evi∣dent, and most miserable Slanders. First, of the Slander, it bringeth, to the Christian Faith; Being a plain plantation, of Irreligion and Atheism. Secondly, the Subversion, which it introduceth, into all Pollicy, and Government. Thirdly, the great Calamity, it bringeth, upon Papists them∣selves; Of which, the more Moderate sort, as Men misled, are to be pittied. For the First, if a Man doth visit, the foul, and polluted Opi∣nions, Customes or Practices, of Heathenism, Mahometism, and Heresie, he shall find they do not attain to this Height. Take the Examples of damnable Memory, amongst the Heathen. The Pro∣scriptions, in Rome, of Sylla; And afterwards of the Triumvirs, what were they? They were, but of a finite Number of Persons, and those not many, that were exposed, unto any Mans Sword. But what is that, to the proscribing of a King, and all that shall take his Part? And what was the Reward of a Souldier that a∣mongst them, killed one of the proscribed? A small piece of Mo∣ney: But what is now the reward of one, that shall kill a King? The Kingdom, of Heaven. The Custome, among the Heathen, that
was most scandalized was, that sometimes the Priest sacrificed Men; But yet, you sall not read, of any Priesthood, that sacrificed Kings. The Mahometns, make it, a part of their Religion, to propagate their Sect, by the Sword: But yet still, by Honourable Wars never by Villanies, and secret Murthers. Ny, I find, that the Saracen Prine of whom, the Name, of the ssassins, is derived; which had di∣vers Votaies at Commandement; which he sent, and imploy∣ed, to the Killing, of divers Princes, in the East; (By one of whom, Amurath the First was slain; And Edward the First of England, was wouned;) was put down, and rooted out, by common Consent of the Mahometan Princes. The Anabaptists (it is true) come nearest. For they professe, the pulling down of Magistrates; And they can chaunt, the Psalm; To bind their Kings in Chaines, and their Nobles in fetters of Iron. This is, the Glory of the Saints, mch like, the Temporall Authority, that the Pope Challengeth over Princes. But this is the difference; That that is a Furious, and Fanaticall, Fury; And this is a sad, and solemn Mischief. He imagineth Mischief as a Law; A Law-like Mischief. As for the Defence, which they do make, it doth aggravate the sin; And turneth it from a Cruelty towards Man to a Blaphemy to∣wards God. For to say, that all this, is, in ordine ad spirituale; And to a good End; And for the salvation of Soules; It is, directly, to make God, Author of Evill; And to draw him, into the likenesse, of the Prince, of Darknesse; And to say with those that Saint Paul speaketh of; Let us do Evill, that good may come thereof. Of whom, the Apostle saith dfinitively; That their damnatio is Iust. For the Destroying of Government, universally, it is most evident; That it is not the Case, of Protestant Princes, onely, But of Catholick Princes likewise: As the King hath excellently set forth. Nay, it is not the Case of Princes onely, but of all Subjects, and private Per∣sons. For touching Princes, let History be perused, what hath been the Causes of Excommunication; And namely, this Tumour of it; (the Deposing of Kings;) It hath not been for Heresie, and Schism, alone, but for Collation, and Investitures, of Bishopricks, and Benefies, Intruding upon Ecclesiasticall Possessions, violating of any Ecclesiasticall Person, or Liberty. Nay, generally, they maintain it, that it may be for any sin: So that, the Difference, wherein their Doctors vary; That some hold; That the Pope, hath his Temporall power, immediatly; And others, but in ordine ad spiritude, is but a Delusion, and an Abuse. For all commeth to one. What is there, that may not be made, spirituall, by Consequence? specially, when He, that giveth the Sentence, may make the Case? And accor∣dingly, hath the miserable Experience followed. For this Mur∣thering of Kings, hath been put in practise, as well against Papist Kings, as Protestants. Save that, it hath pleased God, so to guide it by his admirable providence; As the Attempts, upon Papist
Princes, have been executed, And the Attempts, upon Protestant Princes, have failed: Except that of the Prince Aurange. And not that neither, untill such time, as he had joyned, too fast, with the Duke of Anjou, and the Papists. The rest is wanting. The Charge, of Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Atturney Generall, against M. L. S. W. and H. I. for Scandall, and Traducing, of the Kings Justice, in the proceedings against Weston: In the Star-Chamber, 10. Novemb. 1615. THe Offence, wherewith I shall charge, the three Offenders, at the Bar, is a Misdemeanour, of a High Nature; Tending, to the Defacing, and Scandall, of Iustice, in a great Cause Capitall. The particular Charge is this. The King, amongst many his Princely vertues, is known, to excell, in that proper vertue, of the Imperiall Throne, which is Iustice. It is a Royall Vertue, which doth employ, the other three Cardinall Vertues, in her Service. Wisdome, to discover, and dis∣cern, Nocent, or Innocent: Fortitude, to prosecute, and execute: Temperance, so to carry Iustice, as it be not passionate, in the pur∣suit, nor confused, in involving persons, upon light suspicion; Nor precipitate in time. For this his Majesties Vertue of Iustice, God hath of late raised an occasion, and erected, as it were, a Stage, or Theater, much to his Honour, for him to shew it, and act it, in the pursuit, of the untimely Death of Sir Thomas Overbury; And there∣in cleansing the Land from Bloud. For, (my Lords) if Bloud spilt, Pure, doth cry to Heaven, in Gods Eares, much more Bloud defiled with Poyson. This Great Work, of his Majesties Iustice, the more excellent it is, your Lordships will soon conclude, the greater is the Offence of any, that have sought, to Affront it, or Traduce it. And there∣fore, before I descend, unto the Charge, of these Offenders, I will set, before your Lordships, the weight of that, which they have sought to impeach: Speaking somewhat of the generall Crime of Impoysonment; And then, of the particular Circumstances, of this Fact, upon Overbury: And thirdly, and chiefly, of the Kings great, and worthy, Care, and Carriage, in this Business. This Offence of Impoysonment, is most truly figured, in that De∣vise, or Description, which was made, of the Nature, of one, of the Roman Tyrants; That he was Lutum Sanguine maceratum; Mire, mingled, or cymented, with Bloud: For, as it is, one of the highest Offences in Guiltiness; So it is, the Basest, of all others, in the Mind of the Offenders. Treasons, Magnum aliquid spectant: They aym at great thing But this, is vile, and base. I tell your Lordships,
what I have noted; That in all Gods Book, (both of the Old, and New Testament,) I find Examples, of all other Offences, and Offen∣dours, in the world, but not any one, of an Impoyonment, or an Im∣poysoner. I find mention, of Fear, of casuall Impoysonment, when the Wild Vine, was shred, into the Pot, they came complaining, in a fearfull manner; Maister; Mors in ollâ. And, I find menti∣on, of Poysons, of Beasts, and Serpents; The Poyson of Aspes is un∣der their Lips. But I find no Example, in the Book of God, of Im∣poysonment. I have, sometime, thought, of the Words, in the Psalm; Let their Table be made a Snare: Which certainly, is most True of Impoysonment: For the Table, the Daily Bread, for which we pray, is turned to a deadly Snare: But I think rather, that that was meant, of the Treachery of Friends, that were participant, of the same Table. But let us go on. It is an Offence, (my Lords,) that hath the two Spurs, of Offending: Spes Perficiendi, and Spes Celandi. It is easily committed, and easily concealed. It is an Offence, that is, Tanquam Sagitta nocte volans; It is the Arrow that flies by Night. It discerns not, whom it hits: For, ma∣ny times, the Poyson is laid for one, and the other takes it: As in Sanders Case, where the Poysoned Apple was laid for the Mother, and was taken up by the Child, and killed the Child. And so, in that notorious case, whereupon the Statute, of 22o H. 8, Cap. 9o, was made; where the Intent, being to poyson, but one, or two; Poyson was put, into a little Vesell, of Barm, that stood, in the Kitchin, of the Bishop of Rochesters House; Of which Barm, Pottage, or Gruell, was made, wherewith 17, of the Bishops Family were Poysoned: Nay, Divers of the Poor, that came to the Bishops Gate, and had the broken Pottage, in Alms, were likewise Poysoned; And therefore, if any Man, will comfort himself, or think with himself, Here is great Talk of Impoysonment, I hope I am safe, For I have no Enemies; Nor, I have nothing, that any Body, should long for; why? that is all one, For he may sit, at Table, by one, for whom Poyson is prepared, and have a Drench, of his Cup, or of his Pottage. And so, as the Poet saith; Concidit infelix alieno vulnere; He may die another Mans Death. And therefore, it was most, gravely, and judiciously, and properly, provided by that Sta∣tute; That Impoysonment should be High Treason; Because, what∣soever Offence, tendeth, to the utter Subversion, and Dissolution, of Human Society, is, in the nature, of High Treason. Lastly, it is an Offence, that I may truly say of it; Non est nostri Generis, nec Sanguinis. It is, (Thanks be to God,) rare, in the Isle of Brittanny: It is neither of our Country, nor of our Church; you may find it, in Rome, or Italy. There is a Region, or perhaps a Religion, for it: And if it should come amongst us, certainly, it were better living in a Wildernesse, than in a Court. For the particular Fact, upon Overbury First for the Person, of Sir Thomas Overbury: I knew the Gentleman. It is true, his Mind
was great, but it moved not, in any good Order; yet, certainly, it did, commonly, fly, at good Things. And the greatest Fault, that I ever heard by him, was, that he made, his Friend, his Idoll. But I leave him, as Sir Thomas Overbury. But then, take hi, as he was the Kings Prisoner, in the Tower; And then see, how the Case stands. In that place, the State is, as it were, Respondent; to make good, the Body, of a Prisoner: And, if any thing, happen to him there, it may, (though not in this Case, yet in some others,) make an Aspersion, and a Reflexi∣on, upon the State it self. For the Person is utterly out of his own Defence; His own Care, and Providence, can serve him nothing. He is in Custody, and Preservation, of Law. And, we have a Maxime, in our Law, (as my Lords, the Iudges, know,) that when a State is, in preservation of Law, nothing can destroy it, or hurt it. And God forbid, but the like should be, for the Persons of those, that are in Custody, of Law; And therefore, this was a Cir∣cumstance, of great Aggravation. Lastly, to have a Man, chaced to Death, in such manner, (as it appears now by Matter of Record; For other Privacy, of the Cause, I know not;) By Poyson after Poyson; first Roseaker, then Arsenick, then Mercury Sublimate, then Sublimate again; It is a Thing, would astonish, Mans Nature, to hear it. The Poets faign, that the Furies had whips, and that they were corded, with Poysonous Snakes; And a Man would think, that this were the ve∣ry Case; To have a Man, tied to a Poast, and to scourge him to Death, with Snakes: For so, may truly be termed, Diversity of oysons. Now, I will come unto that, which is the Principall; That is, his Majesties Princely, yea, and as I may truly term it, Sacred pro∣ceeding, in this Cause. Wherein, I will first Speak, of the Tem∣per of his Iustice, and then of the Strength thereof. First, it pleased my Lord Chief Iustice, to let me know; (That, which I heard, with great Comfort;) Which was, the Charge, hat his Majesty gave to Himself first; And afterwards, to the Commissioners, in this Case; worthy, certainly, to be written in Letters of Gold; wherein, his Majesty did fore-rank, and make it his prime Direction, that it should be carried, without touch, to any, that was innocent. Nay more, not onely without Im∣peachment, but without Aspersion: which was a most Noble, and Princely Caution, from his Majesty: For Mens Reputations, are tender Things; And ought to be, like Christs Coat, without Seam. And it was, the more to be respected, in this Case, because it met, with two great Persons; A Noble Man, that his Majesty, had fa∣voured, and advanced; And his Lady, being of a Great, and Honourable House: Though, I think it be true, that the Writers say, that there is no Pomgranate, so fair, or so sound, but may have a perished Kernell. Nay, I see plainly, that in those excellent Papers, of his Majesties, own Hand writing; Being, as so ma∣ny
Beams of Iustice, issuing from that Vertue, which doth shine in him; I say, I see it was so evenly carried, without prejudice; (whither it were a true Accusation, of the one part, or a Practise, of a false Accusation on the other;) As shewed plainly, that his Majesties, Judgement, was tanquam Tabula Rasa, as a clean pair of Tables; And his Ear, tanquam Ianua aperta; As a Gate, not side open, but wide open, to Truth, as it should be, by lit∣tle and little, discovered. Nay I see plainly, that at the first, (till further Light did break forth,) his Majesty, was little mo∣ved, with the First Tale; which he vouchsafeth not so much, as the Name of a Tale; But calleth it a Rumour, which is an Headless Tale. As for the Strength, or Resolution, of his Majesties Iustice, I must tell your Lordships plainly. I do not marvell, to see Kings, thunder out Iustice, in Cases of Treason, when they are touched Themselves; And that, they are Vindices Doloris Proprij: But that a King, should, pro Amore Iustitiae, onely; Contrary to the Tide of his own Affection, for the preservation of his People, take such Care of a Cause of Iustice; That is rare, and worthy, to be cele∣brated, far, and near For, I think, I may truly affirm, that there was never, in this Kingdome, nor in any other Kingdome, the Bloud of a private Gentleman, vindicated, Cum tanto Mou Regni; or to say better, Cum tanto Plausu Regni. If it had concerned, the King, or Prince, there could not have been, Greater, nor Better, Com∣missioners, to examine it. The Term, ath been, almost, turned, into a Iustitium, or Vacancy: The People themselves, being more willing, to be Lookers on, in this Business, then to follow their own. There hath been, no Care of Discovery omitted, no Mo∣ment of Time lost. And therefore, I will conclude this Part, with the Saying of Salomon; Gloria Dei celare rem, & gloria Regis Scruta∣ri rem. And his Majesties Honour, is much the greater, for that, he hath shewed, to the World, in this Businesse, as it hath Rela∣tion to my Lord of Sommerset; (whose Case, in no sort I do pre∣judge, being ignorant of the Secrets, of the Cause, but taking him, as the Law takes him, hitherto, for a Suspect;) I say, the King hath, to his great Honour, shewed; That were any Man, in such a Case of Bloud, as the Signet upon his Right Hand, (as the Scripture sayes,) yet would He put him off. Now will I come, to the particular Charge, of these Gentle∣men, whose Qualities, and Persons, I respect, and love: For they are all my particular Friends: But now, I can only do, this Duty, of a Friend, to them, to make them know, their Fault to the full. And therefore first, I will, by way of Narrative, declare to your Lordships, the Fact, with the occasion of it; Then you shall have their Confessions read, upon which you are to proceed; Together, with some Collaterall Testimonies, by way of Aggravation: And lastly, I will note, and observe to your Lordships, the Materiall
points, which I do insist upon, for their Charge; And so leave them to their Answer. And this I will doe, very briefly, for the Case is not perplexed. That wretched Man Weston, who was the Actor, or Mechanicall Party, in this Impoysonment, at the first day, being indicted, by a very substantiall Iury, of Selected Cittizens, to the number of 19. who fond illa vera; yet neverthelesse, at the first, stood mute. But, after some dayes Intermission, it pleased God, to cast out the Dumb Devill; And that he did put himself, upon his Tryall; And was, by a Jury also, of great Value, upon his Confession, and other Testimonies, found guilty. So as 31. sufficient Iurours, have passed upon him; whereupon Judgement, and Execution, was awaded against him. After this, being in preparation for ano∣ther World, he sent for Sr. Thomas Overburies Father, and falling down upon his knees, with great Remorce, and Compunction, asked him forgivenesse. Aftrwards, againe, of his own Motion, desired, to have his like prayer of forgivenesse recommended to his Mother, who was abent. And at boh times, out of the a∣bundance of his Heart, Confssd that he was to die justly, and that he was wothy of Deth. And after again, at his Execution (which is a kind, of sealing tme, of Confessions) evn at the point of Death; (Although there were Tempters about him, as you shall hear by and by) yet he did again, confirm publickly, that his Examinations wee rue; And that, he had been, justly, and ho∣nourably, dealt with. Here is the Narrative, which enduceth the Charge. The Chage it self is this. M. L. Whose Offence stands alone single, (the Offence of the other two, being in consort; And yet, all three, meeting in their End, and Center, which was to interrupt, or deface, this Ex∣cellent piece of Iustice) M. L. (I say) mean while, between Westons standing mute, and his Tryall; Takes upon him, to mke a most False, Odious, and Libellous, Relation; Containing, as many Untruths, as Lines; And sets it down, in writing, with his own Hand; And delives it, to Mr. Henry Gibb, of the Bed-chamber, to be put into the Kings Hand. In which writing, he doth falsifie, and pervert, all that was done, the first day, at the Arraignment of Weston; Turning the Pike, and Point, of his Imputations, principally, upon my Lord Chief Iustice of England. Whose Name, (thus occurring) I cannot pass by, And yet, I can, not skill to flatter. But this I will say of him, and I would say as much to Ages, if I should write a Story: That never Mans Person, and his place, were better met, in a Businesse, then my Lord Cooke, and my Lord Chief Iustice, in the Cause of Overbury. Now, My Lords, in this Offence, of M. L; For the particulars, of these slanderous Articles, I will observe them unto you, when the Writings, and Examinations, are read, For, I do not love, to set the Gloss, before the Text. But, in general, I noe to your Lordships; First the Person of M. L. I know, he is a Scottish Gentle∣man,
and thereby, more ignorant, of our Lawes, and Formes. But, I cannot tell, whither this doth extenuate his Fault, in rspect of Ignorance; Or aggravate it much, in respect of Presumptiou; That he would meddle in that, that he understood not: But I doubt, it came not out, of his Quiver; Some other Mans Cunning wrought upon this Mans Boldnesse. Secondly, I may note unto you, the Greatnesse of the Cause; Wherein, he being a private mean Gentleman, did presume to deal. M. L could not but know, to what great, and grave Commissioners, the King had committed this Cause: And that, his Majesy, in his Wiedom, would expect, return of all things, from them, to whose trust he had committed this Businesse. For it is the part of Commissioners, as well to report the Businesse, as to mannage the Businsse; And then his Majesty, mought have been sure, to have had, all thing, well weighed, and truly informed: And therefore, it should have been far from M. L. to have presumed, to have put frth his Hand, to so high, and tender a Businesse; which was not to be touched, but by Employed Hands. Thirdly, I note to your Lordships, that this Infusion, of a Slander, into a Kings Ear, is, of all Formes of Libells, and Slanders, the worst. It is true, that King may keep secret their Informations, and then no Man ought to enquire after them, while they are shrined in their Breast. But where a King is pleased, that a Man shall answer, for his false In∣formation; There, I say, the false Information, to a King; xceeds in Offence, the false Information, of any other kind; Being a kind (since we are in matter of Poyson,) of Impoysonment, of a Kings Ear. And thus much, for the Offence, of M. L. For the Offence, of S. W. and H. I. which I said was in consort, it was shortly this. At the ime, and Place, of the Execution of Weston; To upplant his Christian Resolution, and to Scandalze he Iustice, already past; & perhap, to cut off the thred of tht which is to come; These Gentlemen, with others, came mounted on Horseback; And in a Ruffling, and Facing manner, put them∣selves forward to re-examine Weston, upon Questions; And what Questions? Directly, crosse to that, that had been tryed, and judg∣ed: For what was the point tried? That Weston had poysoned Over∣bury: What was S. W. Question; Whether Weston, did poyson Ovr∣bury or no? A Contradictory directly: Weston answered only, that he did him wrong: And turning to the Sheriffe, said; You promi∣sed me, I should not be troubled, at this time. Neverthelesse, He pres∣sed him to answer; saying; He desired to know it, that he mought pray with him. I know not that S. W. is an Ecclesiastick, that he should cut any Man, from Communion of Prayer: And yet, for all this vexing, of the Spirit, of a poor Man, now in the Gates of Death; Weston, neverthelesse, stood constant, and said; I die not unwor∣thily: My Lord Chief Iustice, hath my mind, under my hand, and he is an Honourable and just Iudge. This is S. W. his Offence. For H. I. he was not so much a Questionist; but wrought upon
the others Questions; And like a kind of Confessor, wished him to discharge his Conscience, and to satisfie the World. What World I marvaile? It was sure the World at Tyburn: For the World at Guild-Hall, and the World at London was satisfied before; Teste the Bells that rang: But men have a got fashion, now a dayes, that two or three busie Bodies, will take upon them the Name of the World; And broach their own Conceits, as if it were, a general Opinion: Well, what more? When they could not work upon Weston, then H.I. in an Indignation, turned abont his Horse, (when the other, was turning over the Ladder;) And said, he was sorry of such a Conclusion: That was, to have the State, honoured, or justified; But others took, and reported his words, in another degree: But that I leave, seeeing it is not Confessed. H. I. his Offence, had another Appendix, before this, in time; which was, that, at the day, of the Verdict given up, by the Iury, He also, would needs give his Verdict; Saying openly that if he were of the Iury, he would doubt what to do. Marry (he saith,) he cannot tell well, whether he spake this, before the Ju∣ry, had given up the Verdict, or after; Wherein there is little gained. For whether, H. I. were a Pre-Jurour, or a Post-Jurour; The one was as to prejudge the Iury, the other, as to taint them. Of the Offence, of these two Gentlemen, in generall, your Lord∣ships must give me leave, to say, that it is an Offence, greater, and more dangerous, then is conceived. I know well, that as we have no Spanish Inquisitions, nor Iustice in a Corner; So we have, no Gagging, of Mens Mouths, at their Death; But that they may speak freely, at the last Hour; But then, it must come, from the free Motion, of the Party, not by Temptation of Questions. The Questions, that are to be asked, ought to tend, to furher Reveal∣ing, of their own, or others Guiltiness; But to use, a Question, in the Nature, of a false Interrogatory, to falsifie that, which is Res Iu∣dicata, is intollerable. For that were, to erect a Court, or Com∣mission, of Review, at Tyburn, against the Kings Bench, at Westmin∣ster. And besides, it is a Thing, vain, and idle: For if they answer, according to the Iudgement past, it adds no Credit; Nor if it be contrary, it derogateth nothing. But yet, it subjecteth, the Majesty of Iustice, to popular, and vulgar Talk, and opinion. My Lords, these are great, and dangerous, Offences; For if we do not maintain Iustice, Iustice will not maintain us. But now, your Lordships shall hear, the Examinations them∣selves; upon which, I shall have occasion, to note, some parti∣cular Things, &c.
The Effect of that, which was spoken, by the Lord Keeper, of the Great Seal of England, at the taking, of his place, in Chancery; In performance of the Charge, his Maje∣sty had given him, when he received the Seal, 1617. BEfore I enter, into the Business, of the Court, I shall take ad∣vantage, of so many Honourable witnesses, to publish, and make known, summarily, what charge the Kings most excellent Majesty, gave me, when I received the Seal; And what Orders, and Reso∣lutions, my Self have taken, in Conformity, to that charge; That the King may have, the Honour of Direction; And I the part of Obedience: Whereby, Your Lordships, and the Rest, of the Pre∣sence, shall see, the whole Time, of my sitting in the Chancery (which may be, longer, or shorter, as please God, and the King;) contrcted into one Houre. And this I do, for three Causes. First, to give Account, to the King, of his Commandement. Secondly, that I may be a Guard, and Custody, to my self, and mine own Doings; That I do not swerve, or recede, from any Thing, that I have professed, in so Noble Company. And thirdly, that all men, that have to do, with the Chancery, or the Seal, may know, what they shall expect; And both set their Hearts, and my Ears, at rest; Not moving me, to any Thing, a∣gainst these Rules: Knowing, that my Answer, is now turned, from a Nolumus, into a Non possumus. It is no more, I will not; But, I cannot; After this Declaration. And this, I do also, under three Cautions. The first is, that there be some Things, of a more Secret, and Counsell like, Nature, which are rather, to be Acted, then Pub∣lished. But these Things, which I shall speak of, to day, are of a more publick Nature. The second is, that I will not trouble this Presence, with eve∣ry Particular; which would be too long; But select, those Things, which are of greatest efficacy, and conduce most, ad summas Re∣rum: Leaving may other Particulars, to be set down, in a Pub∣lick Table; According, to the good Example, of my last Predeces∣sour, in his Beginning. And lastly, that these Imperatives, which I have made, but to my Self, and my Times, be without prejudice, to the Authority of the Court, or Wiser Men, that may succeed me: And chiefly, that they are wholy submitted, unto the great Wisdom, of my Soveraign (The absolutest Prine, in Iudicature, that hath been, in the Christian World:) For if any of these Things, which I in∣tend, to be Subordinate, to his Directions, shall be thought by his Majesty, to be Inordinate, I shall be, most ready, to reform them. These things, are but, tanquam Albm Praetoris; For so did the
Roman Praetors; (which have the greatest Affinity, with the Iuris∣diction, of the Chancellor here;) who used to set down, at their Entrance, how they would use their Iurisdiction. And this I shall do, (my Lords,) in verbis Masculis; No flourishing, or Pain∣ted, Words, but such, as are fit, to go before Deeds. The Kings Charge, which is my Lanthorn, rested upon four Heads. THe first was, that I should contain, the Iurisdiction of the Court, within his true, and due, Limits, without Swelling, or Excesse. The second, that I should think, the putting, of the Great Seal to Letters Patents, was not a Matter of Course after precedent Warrants; But that I should take it to be, the Maturity, and Ful∣ness, of the Kings Intentions: And therefore, that it was one, of the greatest Parts, of my Trust, if I saw, any Scruple, or Cause of stay, that I should acquaint him; Concluding with a, Quod du∣bites, ne feceris. The third was, that I should retrench, all unnecessary de∣layes; That the Subject mought find, that he did enjoy, that same Remedy, against the Fainting of the Seal, and against the Con∣sumption of the Means, and estate; which was speedy Iustice. Bis dat, qui citò dat. The fourth was, that Iustice might passe, with as easie charge, as mought be: And that those same Brambles, that grow about Iustice, of needlesse Charge, and Expence; And all manner, of Exacti∣ons, mought be rooted out, so far as mought be. These Commandements, (my Lords,) are Righteous; And, (as I may term them,) Sacred; And therefore, to use a Sacred Form: I pray God, blesse the King, for his great care, over the Iustice of the Land; And give me, his poor Servant, Grace, and Power, to observe his Precepts. Now for a Beginning towards it, I have set down, and applied, particular Orders, to every one of these four Generall Heads. For the Excesse, or Tumour, of this Court of Chancery, I shall di∣vide it, into five Natures. The first is, when the Court, doth embrace, or retain, Causes, both in Matter, and Circumstance, meerly Determinable, and Fit, for the Common Law. For, (my Lords,) the Chancery, is or∣dained, to supply the Law, and not to subvert the Law. Now to describe unto you, or delineate, what those Causes are, (and upon what differences,) that are fit for the Court, were too long a Lecture. But I will tell you, what Remedy, I have prepared. I will keep the Keyes of the Court, my self, and I will never refer, any Demurrer, or Plea, (tending to discharge, or dismisse the
Court, of the Cause,) to any Mr. of the Chancery; But judge o it my self, or, at least, the Mr. of the Rowles. Nay further, I will appoint regularly, that on the Tuesday, in every week; (which is the Day of Orders,) first to hear all Motions, of that Nature, be∣fore any other; That the Subject, may have his Vale, at first, with∣out further attending; And that the Court, do not keep, and ac∣cumulate, a Miscellany, and Confusion, of Causes, of all Na∣tures. The scond Point, concerneth the time of the Complaint; And the late Commers into the Chancery: which stay, till a Iudge∣ment be passed against them, at the Common Law, and then com∣plain: Wherein your Lorships, may have heard, a great Ratle, and a Noyse, of a Premunire, and I cannot tell what. But that Question the King hath setled, according to the ancient president, in all times continued. And this I will say, that the Opinion, not to relieve any Case, afer Iudgement would be a guilty Opinion: Guil∣ty, of the Ruine, and Naufrage, and perishing, of infinite Subjects: And as the King found it well out; why should a Man fly, into the Chancery, before he be Hurt? The whole need not the Physician, but the sick. But (My Lords,) the Power would be preserved, but then, the Practise would be moderate. My Rule, shall be, therefore, that in Case of Complaints, after Iudgement; (except the Iudge∣ments be upon Nihil dicit, which are but Disguises of udgement; Obtained, in Contempt, of a preceding Order, of this Court;) yea, and after Verdicts also, I will have the Party Complainant, en∣ter into good Bod, to prove his Suggestion: So that if he will be relieved, against a Iudgement, at Common Law, upon Matter of Equity; He shall do it, Tanquam in Vinculis, at his Perill. The Third Point of Excesse, may be, the over Frequent, and Facile Granting of Injunctions for the staying of the Common Lawes; Or the Altering Possessions; wherein these shall be my Rules. I will grant no Injunction, mereely, upon, Priority of suit: That is to say; Because this Court, was first possessed: A Thing, that was well reformed in the late Lord Chancellers time, but used in Chanceller Broomeleyes time; Insomuch, as I remember, that Mr. Dalton, the Councellor at Law, put a Pasquill upon the Cort, in Na∣ture of a Bill; For seeing it was no more, but, My Lord, the Bill came in on Munday, and the Arrest at Common Law, was on Tuesday; I pray the Injunction, upon Priority of Suite; He caused his Clent, that had a Loose Debte, to put a Bill into the Chancery, bfor the Bond, due to him, was forfeited, to desire an Order, that he might have his Money, at the Day; Because he would be sure, to be be∣fore the other. I do not mean to make it, a Matter of an Horse-Race, or Poasting, who shall be first, in Chancery, or in Courts of Law. Neither will I grant an Injunction, upon Mater, conained, in the Bill only, be it never so smooth, and Specious: But upon Matter confessed, in the Defendants Answer; Or Matter pregnant
in Writing, or of Record; Or upon Contempt, of the Defendant, in not Appearing, or not Answering, or Trifling, with the Court by in∣sufficient Answering. For then, it may be thought, the Defendant stands out, upon purpose, to get the start, at the Common Law; And so, take Advantage of his own Contempt, which may not be suffered. As for Injunctions for possession, I shall maintaine possessions, as they were, at the time, of the Bill, exhibited; And for the space, of a year before: Except the possession, were gotten by Force, or by any Trick. Neither will I alter Possession, upon Interlocutory Orders, untill a Decree: Except, upon Matter, plainly confessed, in the Defendants Answer, joyned, with a plain Disability, and Insolvency of the De∣fendants to answer the Profits. As for taking the Possession away, in respect of Contempts, I will have all the proceedings of the Court, spent first, and a Seque∣stration of the Profits, before I come to an Injunction. The Fourth Part of Excesse, is, concerning the Communicating of the Authority, of the Chanceller too far; And making, upn the matter, too many Chancellors, by relying too much, upon Reports of the Masters of the Chancery, as concludent. I know, my Lords, the Masters of the Chancery, are Reverend Men; And the great Mass, of Businesse, of the Court, cannot be sped, without them; And it is a Thing, the Chanceller may soon fall into, for his own Ease, to re∣ly too much upon them. But the Course, that I will take, gene∣rally, shall be this: That I will make no Binding Order, upon any report of the Masters, without giving a seven nights day, at the least, to shew cause, against the Report; (which nevertheless, I will have done modestly, & with due reverence, towards them:) And again, I must utterly discontinue, the Making, of an Hypothe∣ticall, or Conditionall Order; That if a Master of the Chancery, do certifie thus, that then it is Ordered, without further Motion: For that is a Surprise, and gives no time, for Contradiction. The last Point of Excesse, is: If a Chanceller, shall be so much of himself, as he should neglect, Assistance of Reverend Iudges, in Cases of Difficulty, (especially if they touch upon Law:) or Cal∣ling them, shall do it, but Pro formâ tantùm, and give no due re∣spect, to their Opinions: Wherein, (my Lords) preserving the Dignity, and Majesty, of the Court; (which I count, rather increas∣ed, then diminished, by grave, and due Assistance) I shall never be found so Soveraign, or abundant, in mine own sense, but I shall both desire, and make true use, of Assistants. Nay I assure, your Lordships, if I should find, any main Diversity of Opinion, of my Assistants, from mine own; Though I know well the Iudicature, wholy resides in my self; yet, I think, I should have Recourse, to the Oracle of the Kings own Judgement, before I should pro∣nounce. And so much, for the temperate use, of the Authority, of this Court; wherein, the Health of the Court, doth much con∣sist, As that of the Body, consists in Temperance.
For the Second Commandement of his Majesty, touching staying of Grants, at the Great Seale: There may be just Cause of Stay: Either, in the Matter of the Grant: Or, in the Manner of pssing the same. Out of both which, I extract, these 6. principall Cases, which I will now make known. All which, neverthelesse, I un∣derstand, to be wholly submitted, to his Majesties Will, and Plea∣sure, after by me, he shall have been informed? For if Iteratum Mandatum do come, Obedience is better then sacrifice. The First Case is, where any Matter of Revenew, or Treasure, or Profit, passeth from his Majesty; My First Duty shall be, to ex∣amine, whether the Grant, hath passed, in the due, and naturall Course, by the Great Officers of the Revenew; (The Lord Treasurer, and Chanceller of the Exchequer;) And with their privity: which if I find it not to be, I must presume it, to have passed, in the dark, and by a kind of surreption; And will make stay of it, till his Majesties pleasure, be further known. Secondly, if it be a Grant, that is not meerly vulgar, And hath not, of Course, passed at the Signet, by a Fac Simile; But needeth Science, my Duty shall be, to examine, whether it hath passed, by the Learned Counsell; and had their Dockets: which is that, which his Majesty reades, and that leades him. And if I find it o∣therwise, (although the Matter, were not, in it self inconveni∣ent) yet I hold it, Just Cause of Stay, (for Presidents sake,) to keep Men, in the right way. Thirdly, if it be a Grant, which I conceive, (out of my little knowledge) to be against the Law; Of which nature, Theodosius was wont to say, when he was pressed; I said it, but I granted it not, if it be unlawull: I will call the learned Counsell to it; (As well him, that drew the Book, as the Rest) or some of them; And if we find cause, I will enform his Majesty, of our Opinion, either by my self, or some of them. For as for the Iudges, they are Iudges of Grants past, but not of Grants to come, except the King call them. Fourthly, if the Grants be against the Kings Booke, of Bounty; I am expresly Commanded, to stay them; untill the King, either Revise his Booke in Generall, or give Direction in the par∣ticular. Fiftly, if as a Counseller of Estate, I do foresee inconvenience, to ensue by the Grant, in reason of Estate, in respect of the Kings Honour, Or Discontent, or Murmur of the People; I will not trust mine own Judgement, but I will either acquaint his Majesty with it, or the Cousell Table, or some such of my Lords as I shall think fit. Lastly, for Matter of Pardons; If it be of Treason, Misprision of Treason, Murther, either expressed, or involute, by a non Obstante; Or of a Pyracy, or Premunire, or of Fines, Or Exemplary punishment, in Star-Chamber; Or of some other natures; I shall, by the grace of God stay them, untill his Majesty, (who is the Fountain of Grace)
may resolve, between God, and him, (understanding the Case,) how far Grace shall abound, or superabound. And if it be of Persons, attainted, and Convicted, of Robbery, Bur∣glary &c. Then will I examin, whether the Pardons, pased the Hand, of any Justice of Assise; Or other Commissioners, before whom the Triall was made; And if not, I think it my duty, also, to stay them. Thus your Lordships see, in this Matter of the Seal, agreeable to the Commandement, I have received, I mean to walk in the Light; So that Men, may know, where to find me; And this publishing, thereof, plainly, I hope, will save the King, from a great deal of Abuse; And Me from a great deal of Envy; When Men shall see that no particular Turn, or end, leades me, but a Generall Rule. For the Third Generall Head, of his Majesties Precepts, concerning Speedy Iustice, I am resolved, that my Decree, shall come speedily, (if not instantly) after the Hearing; And my signed Decree pronounced. For it hath been a Manner, much used of late in my last Lords time (o whom, I learn much to Imitate; and with due reverence, to his memory, let me speak it, Much to avoid;) That upon the Solemn, & Full, Hearing, of a Cause, nothing is pronounced in Court; But Bre∣viates, are required to be made: Which I do not dislike, in it self, in Causes perplexed. For I confess, I have somwhat of the Cunctative; And I am of Opinion, that whosoever is not wiser, upon Advice, then upon the suddain; The same Man, is no wiser at 50. yeares old, then he was at 30. And it was my Fathers ordinary Word; You must give me time. But yet I find, that when such Breviates were taken, the Cause was, sometimes, forgotten, a Terme or two; And then set down, for a New hearing, or a Rehearing, three or four Termes after. Of which kind, of Intermission, I see no Use; And therefore I will promise, regularly, to pronounce my Decree, within few dayes, after my Hearing; And to sign my De∣cree, at least, in the Vacation, after the pronouncing. For fresh Iustice, is the sweetest. And besides Iustice ought not to be delayed; And it will also avoid, all Meanes-making, or Labouring; For there ought to be, no Labouring in Causes, but the Labouring of the Counsell, at the Barr. Again, because Iustice is a Sacred Thing; And the end, for which I am called, to this place; And therefore is my way to Heaven; (And if it be shorter, it is never a whit the worse,) I shall by the grace of God, (as far as God will give me strength) add the After∣noon, to the Forenoon; And some Fourth night, of the Vacation, to the Term; For the expediting, and clearing, of the Causes, of the Court: Only, the depth of the Three long Vacations, I would re∣serve, in some measure, free, for Business of Estate; And for Studies of Artes and Sciences, to which, in my Nature, I am most incli∣ned. There is another Point, of true Expedition, which resteth much
in My self; And that is, in the Manner of giving Orders. For I have seen, an Affectation of Dispatch, turn utterly to Delay, and Lengh: For the manner of it, is, to take the Tale, out of the Coun∣sellor, at Bar, his Mouth, and to give a Cursory Order; nothing tending, or conducing, to the end, of the Businesse. It makes me remember, what I heard one say, of a Judge, that sae in the Chancery; That he would make, 80. Orders, in a Morning, out of the way; And it was out of the way, indeed; For it was nothing, to the End of the Businesse; And this is that, which makes 60, 80, 100. Ordrs, in a Cause, too and fro, begetting one another; and like, Penelopes Web, doing and undoing. But, I mean not, to pur∣chase, the Praise, of Expeditive, in that kind: But as one, that have a Feeling of my Duty, and of the Case of others, my Endea∣vour shall be, to hear patiently; And to cast my Order, into such a mould, as may soonest bring the Subject to the End of his Iour∣ney. As for such Delayes, as may concern Ohers; the great Abuse is, that if the Plaintiffe have got an Injunction, to stay sutes at Com∣mon Law, then he will Spin on his Cause, at length. But, by the grace of God, I will make Injunctions, an hard Pillow, to sleep on: For if I find, that he prosecutes not with effect, he may hap, when he is awake, find, not onely his Injunction dissolved, but his Cause dismissed. There be other particular Orders, I mean to take, for Non Prosecu∣tion, or faint Prosecution, wherewith I will not trouble you now, Because, Summa sequar Fastigia Rerum. And so much for Mattr of Expedition. Now for the fouth, and last Point, of the King Commandement; For the cutting off, of unnecessary charge, of the Subject; A great part of it, is fulfilled, in the precedent Article, touching Expedi∣tion: For it is, the Length of Suits, that doth multiply Charge, chiefly: But yet, there are some other Remedies, that conduce thereunto. First therefore, I shall maintain strictly, and with Severity, the Former Orders, which I find, made, by my Lord Chanceller, for the immoderate, and needles prolixity, and length of Bills, and An∣swers, and so forth; As well in punishing the party, as fining the Counsell, whose hand I shall find, at such Bills, Answers, &c. Secondly, for all the Examinations, taken in the Court, I do give charge, unto the Examiners, (upon perill of their places,) that they do not, use idle Repetitions, or needless Circumstances, in set∣ting down, the Depositions, taken by them; And I would, I could help it, likewise, in Commissions, in the Countrey; But that is al∣most unpossible. Thirdly, I shall take a diligent Survey, of the Ceppies in Chancery; That they have their just number of Lines, and with∣out open, or wastfull, writing. Fourthly, I shall be carefull, that there be no Exaction, of any
new Fees, but according, as they have been, heretofore, set, and Tabled. As for Lawyers Fees, I must leave, to the Conscience, and Merit, of the Lawyer; And the Estimation, and Gratitude, of the Client; But yet this I can do. I know, there have used to attend this Barr, a Number of Lawyers, that have not been heard, sometimes, scarce once, or twice, in a Term; And that, makes the Client, seek to Great Counsell, and Favourites, (as they call them: A Term, fit∣ter for Kings, then Iudges;) And that, for every Order, that a mean Lawyer mought dispatch, and as well. Therefore, to help the Generality of Lawyrs; And therein, to ease the Client; I will, constantly, observe, that every Tuesday, and other Dayes of Orders, after nine a Clock strucken, I will hear the Bar, untill 11, or half an Hour, after 10, at the least. And since, we are upon the point, whom I will hear, your Lordships will give me leave, to tell you a Fancy. It falls out, that there be three of us, the Kings ser∣vants, in great place, that are Lawyers by Descent: Mr. Atturney, Son of a Iudge; Mr. Solliciter, likewise, Son of a Iudge: And my self, a Chancellers Son. Now because, the Law, roots so well, in my time, I will water it at the Root, thus far; As besides these great Ones, I will hear any Iudges Sonn, before a Sergeant, And any Sergeants Sonn, before a Reader. Lastly, for the better Ease, of the Subjects; And the Brideling of contentious Sutes, I shall give better, (that is greater,) Costs, where the Suggestions are not proved then hath been hitherto used. There be divers other Orders, for the better Reiglement, of this Court; And for Granting of Writs; And for Granting of Benefices; And other Things, which I shall set down in a Table. But I will deal with no oher, to day, but such, as have a proper Relation, to his Majsties Commandement: It being my Comfort, that I serve such a Master, that I shall need to be but a Conduit, for the conveying onely, of his Goodness, to his People. And it is true, that I do affect, and aspire, to make good that Saying; That Optimu Magistratus praestat optimae Legi; which is true in his Majesty. But for my self, I doubt, I shall not attain it. But yet, I have, a Do∣mesticall Example, to follow. My Lords, I have no more to say, but now, I will go on, to the Businesse, of the Court.
The Speech, which was used, by the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, in the Star-Chamber, before the Summer Cir∣cuits, the King being then in Scotland, 1617. THe King, by his perfect Declaration, published in this place, concerning Iudges, and Iustices; Hath made the Speech of his Chanceller, accustomed before the Circuits, rather of Ceremo∣ny, than of use. For, as in his Book to his Son, he hath set forth a true Character, and Platform, of a King; So, in this his Speech, he hath done, the like, of a Iudge, and Iustice: Which sheweth, that as his Majesty, is excellently able, to Govern, in chief; So, he is likewise well seen, and skilfull, in the inferiour Offices, and Sta∣ges, of Justice, and Government: which is a Thing, very rare in Kings. Yet, neverthelesse, somewhat must be said, to fulfill an old Observance; But yet, upon the Kings Grounds, and very briefly: For as Salomon saith, in another Case; In these things, who is he, that can come, after the King. First, you that are the Iudges of Circuits, are, as it were, the Planets of the Kingdome; (I do you no Dishonor, in giving you that name;) And, no doubt, you have a great stroak, in the Frame, of this Government; As the other have, in the great Frame, of the World. Do therefore, as they do; Move alwayes and be carried, with the Motion of your first Mover, which is your Soveraign. A popular Iudge is a Deformed Thing: And Plaudite's, are fitter for Players, then for Magistrates. Do good to the peo∣ple; Love them, and give them Justice. But let it be, as the Psalm saith, Nihil inde Expectantes; Looking for nothing, neither Praise, nor Profit. Yet my Meaning is not, when I wish you, to take heed of Po∣pularity, that you should be imperious, and Strange, to the Gen∣tlemen, of the Countrey: You are, above them, in Power, but your Rank is not much unequall: And learn this; That Power, is ever of greates strength, when it is civilly carried. Secondly, you must remember, that besides your ordinary Ad∣ministration, of Iustice, you do carry the two Glasses, or, Mirrours, of the State: For it is your Duty, in these your Visitations; To repre∣sent, to the people, the Graces, and Care, of the King. And again, upon your Return; To present, to the King, the Distastes, and Griefs, of the People. Mark, what the King sayes, in his Book: Procure reverence to the King and the Law: Inform my people truly of me; (which we know is, hard to do, according to the Excellency of his Merit, but yet En∣deavour it;) How zealous I am for Religion; How I desire, Law may
be maintained, and flourish; That every Court, should have his Iurisdi∣ction; That every Subject, should submit himsel, to the Law. And of this, you have had, of lte, no small Occasion of Notice, and Re∣membrance, by the great, and strait Charge, that the King hah given me, as Keeper of his Seal, for the Governing of the Chancery, without Tumour, or Excesse. Again, è re natae, you, at this present, ought to make the People know, and consider, he Kings Blssed Care, and Povidence, in govening this Realm, in his Absence. So tht, sitting at the Helm, of another Kingdom; Nt without geat Affairs, and Busi∣ness; yet, he governs all things, here, by his Letters, and Dire∣ctions, as punctually, and perfectly, as if he were present. I assure you, my Lords of the Counsell and I, do much admire, the Extention, and Latitude of his Care, in all Things. In the High Commission, he did conceive, a Sinnw of Government, was a little shrunk; He recommended the care of it. He hath called, for the Accounts, of the last Circuit, from the Judges, to be transmitted unto him, into Scotland. Touching the Infestation of Pyrates, he hath been carefull, and is, and hath put things, in way. All things that concern the Reformation, or the Plantation, of Ireland; He hath given, in them, punctuall, and resolute, Diecti∣ons. All this in Absence. I give but a few Instances, of a publique Nature; The Secrets of Counsell, I may not enter into; Though, his Dispatches into France, Spain, and the Low-Countries, now in his absence, are also Noto∣rious, as to the outward sending. So that, I must conclude, that his Majesty, wants but more Kingdomes; For I see, he could suf∣fice, to all. As for the other Glasse, I told you of; Of representing to the King, the Griefs, of his People; without doubt, it is properly your Part: For the King, ought to be informed, of any thing, amisse in the state, of his Countries, from the Observations, and Relations, of the Iudges; (That, indeed, know the Pulse of the Country;) Rather then from Discourse. But for this Glasse, (thanks be to God,) I do hear, from you all; That there was never greater Peace, Obedience, and Contentment, in the Country: Though the best Governments, be, alwayes, like the fairest Crystals; wher∣in, every little Isicle, or Grain, is seen; which in a Fouler Stone, is never perceived. Now to some Particulars, and not Many. Of all other things, I must begin, as the King begins; That is, with the Cause of Re∣ligion; And especially, the Hollow Church Papist. Saint Aug. hath a good Comparison, of such Men, affirming; That hey are like the Roots of Nettles, which themselves sting not, but yet hey bear all the Stinging Leaves. Let me know of such Roots, and I will root them, out of the Country. Next, for the Matter of Religion: In the principall place, I re∣commend,
both to you, and the Iustices, the Countenancing, of Godly, and Zealous, Preachers. I mean, not Sectaries, or Novel∣lists; But those, which are sound, and conform; But yet pious, and Reverend. For there will be a perpetuall Defection, ex∣cept you keep Men in, by Preaching, as well as Law doth, by punishing: And commonly, Spirituall Diseases, are not Cured, but by Spirituall Remedies. Next, let me commend unto you, the Repressing, (as much as may be,) of Faction in the Countrys; of which ensue, infinite In∣conveniences, and perturbations, of all good Order; And Cros∣sing, of all good Service, in Court, or Country, or wheresoever. Cicero, when he was Consul, had devised, a fine Remedy; (A Milde one, but an effectuall, and an apt one;) For he saith, Eos qui otium perturbant, reddam otiosos. Those, that trouble, others Quiet, I will give them Quiet; They shall have nothing to do; Nor no Authority, shall be put into their Hands. If I may know, from you, of any who are in the Country, that are Heads, or Hands, of Faction; Or Men, of turbulent Spirits; I shall give them Cicero's Reward, as much as in me is. To conclude; study the Kings Book; And study your selves, how you profit by it; And all shall be well. And you, the Iu∣stices of Peace, in particular; Let me say this to you; Never King, of this Realm, did you so much Honour, as the King hath done you, in his Speeeh; By being, your immedite Directors; And by sor∣ting you, and your sevice, with the Service of Ambassadours, and of his nearest Attendants. Nay more, it seems his Majesty, is wil∣ling to do, the state of Iustice of Peace, Honour, actively also; By bringing in, with time, the like Form of Commission, into the Go∣vernment of Scotland, As that Glorious King, Edward the third, did plant this Commission, here in this Kingdome. And therefore, you are not fit to be Coppies, except you be Fair Written, without Blots, or Blurs, or any thing, unworthy your Authority. And so, I will trouble you no longer, for this time. The Speech, used by Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Keeper, of the Great Seal of England, to Sir William Jones, up∣on his calling, to be Lord Chief Justice, of Ireland. 1617. Sir WILLIAM IONES, THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, being duly informed, of your sufficiency, every way; Hath called you, by his Writ, now returned, to the State, and Degree, of a Serjeant, at Law;
But not to stay there, but being so qualified, to serve him, as his Chief Iustice, of his Kings Bench, in his Realm of Ireland. And there∣fore, that which I shall say to you, must be applied, not to your Srjeants place, (which you take but in passage,) But to that great place, where you are to settle; And because, I will not spend Time, to the Delay, of the Businesse, of Causes, of the Court, I will lead you the short Iourney by Examples, and not the Long by Precepts. The Place, that you shall now serve in, hath been fortunate, to be well served in, four successions before you. Do but take unto you, the Constancy, and integrity, of Sir Robert Gardiner: The Gravity, Temper, and Direction, of Sir Iames Lea: The Quick∣nese, Industry, and Dispatch, of Sir Humphry Winch: The Care, and Affection, to the Common-wealth, and the Prudent, and Poli∣tick Administration, of Sir Iohn Denham; And you shall need no other Lessons. They were all Lincolns Inn Men, as you are; You have known them, as well in their Beginnings, as in their Ad∣vancement. But because, you are to be there, not only Chief Iustice, but a Counseller of Estate, I will put you in mind, of the great Work, now in hand; that you may raise your thoughtes, according unto it, Ireland is the last, Ex Filiis Europae, which hath been reclaimed, from Desolation, and a Desert, (in many parts,) to Population, and Plantation; And from Savage, and Barbarous, Customes, to Humanity, and Civility. This is the Kings Work in chief. It is his Garland, of Heroicall Vertue, and Felicity; Denied to his Proge∣nitors, and Reserved to his Times. The Work, is not yet con∣ducted, to perfection, but is in fair Advance. And this I will say confidently, that if God blesse this Kingdom with Peace, and Ju∣stice; No Usurer, is so sure, in seven years space, to double his Prncipall with Interest; And Interest upon Interest; As that King∣dom is, within the same time, to double the stock, both of Wealth, and People. So as that Kingdom; which once within these Twenty years, Wise men were wont to doubt, whether they should wish it, to be in a Poole; Is like now to become, almost a Garden; And younger Sister, to Great Britain. And therefore, you must set down with your self, to be, not only a just Governer, and a good Chief Iustice (as if it were in England;) But under the King, and the Deputy, you are to be a Master Builder, and a Master Planter, and Reducer, of Ireland. To which end, I will trouble you, at this time, but with Three Directions. The First is, that you have speciall care, of the Three Plantati∣ons. That of the North, which is in part acted: That of Weshford, which is now in Distribution: And that of Longford, and Letrim, which is now in survey. And take this from me; That the Bane, of a Plantation, is, when the Vndertakers, or Planters, make such hast, to a little Mechanicall present profit, as disturbeth the whole Frame, and noblenesse of the work, for Times to come. Therefore, hold them to their Covenants, and the strict Ordinances of Plantati∣on.
The Second is, that you be carefull, of the Kings Revenew; And by little and little, constitute him, a good Demeasn, if it may be; Which hitherto is little, or none. For the Kings Case is hard, when every Mans Land, shall be improved, in value, with increase ma∣nifold; And the King shall be tied, to his Dry Rent. My last Direction, (though first in weight,) is, that you do all good Endeavours, to proceed resolutely, and constantly (and yet with due Temparance, and Equality) in Matters of Religion; least Ireland Civill, become more dangerous to us, then Ireland Savage. So God give you Comfort of your Place. After Sir William Iones Speech. I had forgotten one Thing, which was this. You may take, exceeding great Comfort, that you shall serve, with such a Depu∣ty: One, that (I think) is a Man, ordain'd of God, to do great Good, to that Kingdome. And this, I think good, to say to you; That the true Temper, of a Chief Iustice, towards a Deputy, is; Neither ser∣villy to second him, nor factiously to oppose him. The Lord Keepers Speech, in the Exchecquer; to Sir John Denham; when he was called to be one of the Barons of the Exchecquer. SIR Iohn Denham; the King, of his grace, and favour, hath made choice of you, to be one of the Barons, of the Exchecquer; To succeed, to one of the gravest, and most Reverend Iudges, of this Kingdome; For so I hold Baron Altham was. The King takes you not upon Credit, but Proof, and great Proof of your former Service; And that, in both those kinds, wherein you are now to serve: For as you have shewed your self a good Iudge beween party and par∣ty; so you have shewed your self a good Administer, of the Reve∣nue; Both when you were Chief Baron; And since as Counseller of Estate, there in Ireland; where the Counsell (as you know) doth in great part, mannage, and messuage, the Revenew. And to both these Parts, I will apply some Admonitions; But not vulgar, or discursive; But apt for the Times, and in few words: For they are best remembred. First therefore, above all, you ought to maintain, the Kings Prerogative, And to set down with your self that the Kings Preroga∣tive, and the Law, are not two Things; But the Kings Pre∣rogative is Law; And the Principall Part of the Law: The First-Born, or Pars Prima, of the Law: And therefore, in conserving, or maintaining that, you conserve and maintain, the Law. There is not, in the Body of Man, one Law of the Head, and another of the Body, but all is one Entire Law. The next Point, that I would now advise you, is, that you ac∣quaint your self, diligently, with the Revenew; And also with
the Ancient Record, and Presidents, of this Court. When the fa∣mous Case, of the Copper Mines, was argued in this Court; And judged for the King; It was not, upon the fine Reasons, of Witt; As that, the Kings Prerogative, drew to it, the chief, in quaque spe∣cie: The Lion is the chief of Beasts; The Eagle the chief of Birds; The Whale, the chief of Fishes; And so Copper, the chief of Mi∣nerals; For these are but Dalliances of Law, & Ornaments; But it was the grave Records, and Presidents, that grounded, the Iudgement, of that Cause: And therefore, I would have you, both guide, and arm, your self with them, against these Vapours, and Fumes, of Law; which are extracted, out of Mens Inventions, and Con∣ceits. The third Advice, I will give you, hath a large Extent: It is, that you do your Endeavour, in your place, so to mannage the Kings Iustice, and Revenue, as the King may have most Profit, and the Subject, least vexation: For when there is much vexation to the Subject, and little Benefit to the King then the Exchecquer is Sick: And when there is, Much Benefit to the King, with lesse Trouble, and vexation, to the Subject, then the Exchecquer is sound: As for Example; If there shall be much Racking, for the Kings old Debts; And the more Fresh, and Late Debts shall be, either more negli∣gently called upon, or over easily discharged, or over indulgent∣ly stalled: Or if the Number of Informations be many; and the Kings Part, or Fines for Compositions, a Trifle: Or if there be, much ado, to get the King new Land, upon Concealments, and that which he hath already, be not well known, and surveyed; Nor the woods preserved; (I could put you many other Cases,) this fals within that, which I term, the sick Estate of the Exchecquer. And this is that, which makes every Man ready, with their Undertakings, and their Projects, to disturb, the ancient Frame of the Exchecquer; (Then the which, I am perswaded, there is not a better;) This being the Burthen of the Song; That much goeth out of the Sub∣jects Purse; And little commeth, to the Kings Purse. Therefore, give them not, that Advantage, so to say. Sure I am, that be∣sides your own Associates, the Barons; you serve, with two su∣periour, Great Officers, that have Honourable, and true, Ends; And desire, to serve the King, and right the Subject. There resteth, that I deliver you, your Patent.
His Lordships Speech, in the Common Pleas, to Justice Hutton, when he was called, to be one of the Judges, of the Common Pleas. Mr. Serjeant Hutton; THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, being duly enformed, of your Learning, Integrity, Discretion, Experience, Meanes, and Reputation in your Countrey; Hath thought fit not to leave you these Talents, to be employed upon your self onely; But to call you, to serve Himself, and his People, in the place, of one of his Iustices, of the Court, o Common Pleas. This Court, where you are to serve, is the Locall Center, and Heart, of the Laws, of this Realm: Here the Subject hath his assu∣rance, By Fines, and Recoveries: Here he hath his Fixed, and In∣variable, Remedies by Precipes, and Writs of Right: Here Iustice o∣pens not, by a By-gate of Priviledge, but by the great Gate of the Kings originall Writs, out of the Chancery. Here issues Processe of Utlawry; If men will not answer Law, in this Center of Law, they shall be cast out. And therefore, it is proper for you, by all means, with your Wisdome, and Fortitude, to maintain, the Laws of the Realm: Wherein, neverthelesse, I would not have you Head-strong, but Heart-strong; And to weigh, and remember, with your self, that the 12. Iudges, of the Realm, are, as the 12. Lions, under Salomons Throne; They must shew their Stoutnesse, in Elevating, and Bearing up the Throne. To represent unto you, the Lines, and Portraitures, of a Good Iudge. The 1. is, That you should draw your Learning, out of your Books, not out of your Brain. 2. That you, should mix well, the Freedom, of your own Opini∣on, with the Reverence, of the Opinion, of your Fellows. 3. That you should continue, the Studying of your Books, and not to spend on, upon the old Stock. 4. That you should fear no Mans Face; And yet, not turn Stout∣ness, into Bravery. 5. That you should be truly Impartiall, and not so, as Men may see Affection, through fine Carriage. 6. That you be a Light, to Iurours, to open their Eyes; But not a Guid, to Lead them, by the Noses. 7. That you affect not, the Opinion, of Pregnancy, and Expedi∣tion, by an impatient, and Catching, Hearing, of the Counsellours at the Barre. 8. That your Speech, be with Gravity, as one of the Sages of the Law; And not Talkative, nor with impertinent Flying out, to shew Learning. 9. That your Hands, and the Hands of your Hands; (I mean, those about you,) Be Clean, and Vncorrupt, from Gifts; From
Medling in Titles; And from Serving of Turns; Be they, of Great Ones, or Small Ones. 10. That you contain, the Iurisdiction of the Court, within the ancient Meere-stones, without Removing the Mark. 11. Lastly, that you carry such a Hand, over your Ministers, and Clarks, as that they may rather be in awe of you, then presume upon you. These, and the like Points, of the Duty, of a Iudge, I forbear to enlarge; For the longer, I have lived with you, the shorter shall my speech be to you; Knowing, that you come so Furnished, and Prepared, with these Good Vertues, as whatsoever I shall say, cannot be New unto you. And therefore, I will say no more un∣to you, at this time, but deliver you your Patent. His Lordships Speech, in the Parliament, being Lord Chanceller, To the Speakers Excuse. Mr. Serjeant Richardson; THe King hath heard, and observed, your grave, and decent, Speech; Tending, to the Excuse, and Disablement, of your self, for the place of Speaker. In answer whereof, his Majesty, hath commanded me, to say to you; That he doth, in no sort, admit of the same. First, because, if the Parties own Iudgement, should be admitted, in case of Elections, Touching himself, it would follow, that the most confident, and over-weening, Persons, would be received; And the most considerate Men, and those that understand them∣selves best, should be rejected. Secondly, his Majesty, doth so much rely, upon the Wisdomes, and Discretions, of those, of the House of Commons, that have chosen you, with an unanimous consent, that his Majesty thinks not good, to swerve, from their Opinion, in that, wherein them∣selves, are principally interessed. Thirdly, you have disabled your Self, in so good, and decent, a Fashion; As the Manner, of your Speech, hath destroyed, the Mat∣ter of it. And therefore, the King, doth allow of the Election, and ad∣mits you for Speaker. To the Speakers Oration. Mr. Speaker; THe King hath heard, and observed, your eloquent Dis∣course, containing, much good Matter, and much good
will: Wherein, you must expect from me, such an Answer, one∣ly, as is pertinent to the Occasion, and compassed, by due respect of Time. I may divide, that which you have said, into four parts. The first was, a Commendation, or Laudative, of Monarchy. The second was, indeed, a large Field; Containing, a thank∣full Acknowledgement, of his Majesties, Benefits, Attributes, and Acts of Government. The third was, some Passages, touching the Institution, and Vse of Parliaments. The fourth, and last was, certain Petitions, to his Majesty; on the behalf, of the House, and your self. For your Commendation of Monarchy,1. Part. and preferring it, before other Estates, it needs no Answer. The Schools may dispute it; But Time hath tryed it; And we find it to be the Best. Other States, have curious Frames, soon put out of order; And they, that are made fit to last, are not, commonly, fit to grow, or spread: And contrarywise, those that are made fit to spread, and enlarge, are not fit, to continue, and endure. But Monarchy, is like a Work of Nature, well composed, both to grow, and to continue. From this I passe. For the second part,2. Part. of your Speech, wherein you did, with no lesse Truth, then Affection, acknowledge, the great Felicity, which we enjoy, by his Majesties Reign, and Government; His Ma∣jestie, hath commanded me, to say unto you: That Praises, and Thanks-givings, he knoweth, to be the true Oblations, of Hearts, and loving Affections: But that, which you offer him, he will joyn with you, in offering it up to God, who is the Authour of all Good; who knoweth also, the uprightness, of his Heart; who, He hopeth, will continue, and encrease, his Blessings, both upon Himself, and his Posterity; And likewise, upon his Kingdomes, and the Generations of them. But I, for my part, must say unto you, as the Grecian Orator said, long since, in the like case: Solus dignus harum rerum Laudator Tem∣pus. Time, is the onely Commender, and Encomiastique, worthy of his Majesty, and his Government. Why Time? For that, in the Revolution, of so many years, and Ages, as have passed over this Kingdome; Notwithstanding, ma∣ny Noble, and excellent, Effects, were never produced, untill his Majestys dayes; But have been reserved, as proper, and pecu∣liar, unto them. And because, this is no part of a Panegyrick, but meerly Story, and that they be, so many Articles of Honour, fit to be recorded, I will onely mention them; extracting part of them, out of that, you, Mr. Speaker, have said. They be, in Number, Eight. 1. His Majesty, is the first, (as you noted it well,) that hath laid Lapis Angularis, the Corner Stone, of these two mighty Kingdomes, of England, and Scotland; And taken away, the Wall of Separation:
Whereby his Majesty, is become, the Monarch, of the most puissan, and Militar, Nations, of the World: And if one, of the Ancient wise Men, was not deceived, Iron commands Gold. Secondly, the Plantation, and Reduction, to Civility, of Ireland, (the second Island, of the Ocean Atlantique,) did, by Gods Provi∣dence, wait, for his Majesties Times: Being a work, resembling, indeed, the Workes of the ancient Heröes: No new piece, of that kind, in Modern Times. Thirdly, this Kingdom, now first, in his Majesties Times, hath gotten a Lot, or Portion, in the New World, by the Plantation of Virginia, and the Summer Islands. And certainly, it is with the Kingdomes on Earth, as it is, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Some∣times, a Grain of Mustardseed, proves a great Tree. Who can tell? Fourthly, his Majesty, hath made that Truth, which was be∣fore Titulary; In that he hath verified the Stile, of Deender of the Faith; Wherein, his Majesties Pen, hath been so happy, as though, the Deaf Adder, will not hear, yet he is charmed, that he doth not Hiss. I mean, in the graver sort of those, that have answered, hi Majesties Writings. Fiftly, it is most certain, that since the Conquest, yee cannot as∣sign Twenty years, (which is the Time, that his Majesties Raign, now drawes fast upon,) of Inward, and Outward Peace. Inso∣much, as the Time of Queen Eliz. of happy memory; And alwaies magnified, for a peaceable Raign, was, nevertheless, interrupted, the first Twenty years, with a Rebellion, in England. And both first, and last, Twenty years, with Rebellions, in Ireland. And yet, I know, that his Majesty will make good, both his Words; As well that, of Nemo me lascesset impunè As that other, of Beati pacifici. Sixthly, that true, and primitive, Office, of Kings, which is, t sit in the Gate, and to judge the People, was never performed, in like perfection, by any of the Kings Progenitors: Whereby, his Majesty hath shewed himself, to be Lex loquens; And to sit upon the Throne, not as a dumb statua, but as a Speaking Oracle. Seventhly, for his Majesties Mercy, (as you noted it well,) shew me a time, wherein a King, of this Realm, hath Reigned, almost 20. years, (as I said,) in his White Robes, without the Blood, of any Peer, of this Kingdom: The Axe, turned, once or twice, towards a Peere, but never strook. Lastly: The Flourishing, of Arts, and Sciencs, recreated by his Majesties Countenance, and Bounty, was never in that Heighth; especially, that Art of Arts, Divinity: For that, we may, truly, to Gods great glory, confess; That since the Primitive times, there were never, so many Stars, (for so the Scripture calleth them,) in that Firmament. These Things, Mr. Speaker, I have, partly, chosen, out of your Heap; and are so far, from being vulgar, as they are, in effect, singular, and proper, to his Majesty, and his Times. So that, I have made good, as I take it, my first Assertion; That the only wor∣thy
Commender of his Majesty is Time: Which hath so set off, his Majesties Merits, by the Shadowes of Comparison, as it passeth the Lustre, or Commendation, of Words. How then shall I conclude? Shall I say, O Fortunatos nimium sua si Bona nôrint: No, For I see, ye are happy, in injoying them, and happy again, in knowing them. But, I will conclude, this part, with that Saying, turned to the Right Hand; Si gratum dixeri, omnia dixeris. Your gratitude containes, in a word, all that I can say to you, touching this Parliament. Touching the Third Point, of your Speech, concerning Parlia∣ments,3. Part. I shall need to say little: For there was never, that Honour done, to the Institution of Parliament, that his Majesty did it, in his last Speech; making it, in effect, the perfection of Monarchy: For that, although Monarchy, was the more Ancient, and be indepen∣dant; yet by the Advice, and Assistance of Parliament, it is the stronger, and the surer built. And therefore, I shall say no more, of this Point, but as you, (Mr. Speaker,) did well note: That when the King sits in Parliament, and his Prelates, Peeres, and Commons, attend him, he is in the Exalta∣tion of his Orb: So, I wish things, may be so carried, that he may be then, in greatest Serenity, and Benignity, of Aspect; shining upon his People, both in Glory, and Grace. Now you know well, that that the shining of the sun, fair upon the ground, whereby all things exhilarate, and do fructifie; is either hindered by Clouds above, or Mists below; perhaps by Brambles, and Briars, that grow upon the Ground it self. All which, I hope, at this time, will be dispelled, and removed. I come now, to the last part of your Speech, concerning the Peti∣tions:4. Part. But before, I deliver, his Majesties Answer, respectively, in particular; I am to speak unto you, some few words in gene∣rall: Wherein, in effect, I shall but glean; His Majesty, having so excellently, and fully, expressed himself. For that, that can be spoken, pertinently, must be, either touching the Subject, or Matter, of Parliament Businesse; Or of the Manner, and Carriage of the same; Or lastly, of the Time, and the Husbanding, and Marshalling, of Time. For the Matters, to be handled, in Parliament, they are, either of Church, State, Lawes, or Grievances. For the First two, concerning Church, or State ye have heard, the King himself speak, and as the Scripture saith; Who is he, that in such things shall come after the King? For the other two, I shall say somewhat, but very shortly. For Lawes, they are Things proper, for your own Element: And therefore therein, ye are rather to lead, then to be led. Only, it is not amisse, to put you in mind, of two Things: The one, that you do not multiply, or accumulate, Lawes, more then ye need. There is a Wise, and Learned, Civilian, that applies, the Curse of the Prophet, Pluet super eos Laqueos, To Multiplicity of Lawes; For
they do but ensnare, and entangle the People. I wish rather, that ye should either revive good Lawes, that are fallen, and disconti∣nued; Or provide, against the slack execution, of Lawes, which are already in Force; Or meet, with the subtile Evasion, from Lawes, which Time, and Craft, hath undermined; then to make, Novas Creaturas Legum, Lawes upon a new Mould. The other Point, touching Lawes, is; That ye busie not your selves, too much, in private Bills; except it be in Gases, wherein the Help, and Arm, of ordinary Iustice, is too short. For Grievances, his Majesty, hath with great Grace, and Benigni∣ty, opened himself. Neverthelesse, the Limitations, which may make up your Grievances, not to beat the Air only, but to sort, to a desired effect, are principally, two. The one, (to use his Maje∣sties term,) that ye do not Hunt after Grievances; Such as may seem, rather, to be stirred here, when ye are met, then to have sprung, from the desires of the Country: Ye are to represent the People; ye are not to personate them. The other, that ye do not, heap up Grievances, as if Numbers should make a shew, where the Weight is small; Or as if, all things amiss, (like Plato's Common wealth,) should be remedied at once. It is certain, that the best Governments, yea and the best Men, are like the best precious Stones, wherein every Flaw, or Isickle, or Grain, are seen, and noted more, then in those, that are, generally, foul, and corrupted. Therefore, contain, your selves, within that Moderation, as may appear to bend, rather to the Effectuall Ease of the People, then to a Discursive Envy, or scandall upon the State. As for the Manner, of Carriage, of Parliament Businesse, ye must know, that ye deal with a King, that hath been longer King, then any of you, have been Parliament Men; And a King, that is no lesse sensible, of Formes, then of Matter; And is as far, from induring Diminution, of Majesty, as from regarding lattery, or Vain Glory; And a King, that understandeth, as well, the Pulse, of the Hearts, of People, as his own Orb. And therefore, both let your Grievan∣ces, have a decent, and Reverent Form, and Stile; And (to use the words of former Parliaments,) let them be, Tanquam Gemitus Columbae, without Pique, or Harshnesse; And on the other side, in that ye do for the King, Let it have a Mark, of Vnity, Alacrity, and Affection; which will be of this Force; That whatsoever ye do, in substance, will be doubled in Reputation abroad, as in a Crystall Glass. For the Time, if ever Parliament was to be measured by the Houre-glass, it is this; In regard of the instant Occasion, flying away irrecoverably. Therefore let your Speeches, in the House, be the Speeches of Counsellors, and not of Oratours: Let your Committees, tend to dispatch, not to dispute; And so marshall the Times, as the publique Businesse, especially the proper Businesse, of the Parliament be put first; And private Bills be put last, as time
shall give leave, or within the spaces, of the Publique. For the Foure Petitions, his Majesty is pleased to grant them all, as liberally, as the Ancient, and true Custom, of Parliament, doth warrant; And with the cautions, that have ever gon with them; That is to say; That the priviledge, be not used, for Defrauding of Creditours, and Defeating of ordinary Justice: That Liberty of, Speech, turn not into License; but be joyned, with that Gravity, and Discretion, as may tast of Duty, and Love, to your Soveraign, Reverence to your own Assembly, and Respect to the Matters ye handle. That your Accesses, be at such fit Times, as may stand best with his Majesties pleasure, and Occasions. That Mistakings, and Misunderstandings, be rather avoided, and prevented, (as much as may be,) then salved, or cleared.
CERTAIN TREATISES VVritten, or Referring, TO Queen Elizabeths TIMES: BEING, OBSERVATIONS UPON A LIBELL, Published in Anno, 1592. A true Report of Doctour LOPEZ his TREASON. An Advertisement, touching the Controversies, of the Church of ENGLAND. A Collection, of the Felicities, of Queen ELIZABETH. By the Right Honourable FRANCIS BACON Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban. LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks-head, neer the Mitre Tavern, 1657.
CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS, UPON A LIBELL, Published this present year, 1592. INTITULED; A DECLARATION Of the TRVE CAVSES, OF THE GREAT TROVBLES, Presupposed to be intended, against the REALM, of ENGLAND. IT were Just, and Honourable, for Princes, being in Warrs together, that howsoever, they pro∣secute their Quarrels, and Debates, by Arms, and Acts of Hostility; yea, though the Warrs be such, as they pretend the utter Ruine, and Overthrow, of the Forces, and States, one of another; yet they so limit their Passions, as they preserve, two Things, Sacred, and Invio∣lable; That is, The Life, and good Name, each of other. For the Warrs, are no Massacres, and Confusions; But they are, the Highest Trials of Right; when Princes, and States, that acknowledge no Superior upon Earth, shall put themselves, upon the Iustice of God, for the Deciding of their Controversies, by such Successe, as it shall please him, to give, on either side. And as, in the Pro∣cesse,
of particular Pleas, between private Men, all things, ought to be ordered, by the Rules, of Civill Lawes: So, in the Procee∣dings, of the Warre, nothing ought to be done, against the Law of Nations, or the Law of Honour; Which Lawes, have ever pro∣nounced, those two Sorts, of Men; The one, Conspiratours, against the Persons of Princes; The other, Libellers, against ther good Fame, to be such Enemies, of common Society, as are not to be cherished, no not by Enemies. For, in the Examples, of Times, which were lesse corrupted, we find, that when, in the greatest Heats, and Extremities of Warrs, there have been made Offers of Murderous, and Traiterous, Attempts, against the Person, of a Prince, to the Enemy, they have been, not onely Rejected, but also Revea∣led. And, in like manner, when Dishonourable Mention, hath been made, of a Prince, before an Enemy Prince, by some, that have thought, therein, to please his Humour, he hath shewed himself, contrarywise, utterly distasted therewith, and been ready, to contest, for the Honour, of an nemy. According to which Noble, and Magnanimous, Kind of Pro∣ceeding, it will be found, that, in the whole Couse, of her Ma∣jesties Proceeding, with the King of Spain; since the Amity inter∣upted; There was never any project, by her Majesty, or any of her Ministers, either moved, or assented unto, for the Taking a∣way, of the Lie, of the said King: Neither, hath there been, any Declaration, or Writing, of state; No, nor Book allowed, wherein his Honour, hath been touched, or taxed, otherwise then for his Ambition; A point, which is, necessarily, interlaced, with her Majesties, own Justification. So that no Man, needeth to doubt, but that those Warrs, are grounded, upon her Majesties part, up∣on just, and Honourable Causes, which have so Just, and Ho∣nourable, a prosecution; Considering, it is a much harder Mat∣ter, when a Prince is entred into Warrs, to hold respect then, and not to be transported with Passion; than, to make Moderate, and Iust Resolutions, in the Beginnings. But now, if a Man look, on the other part, it will appear, that rather, as it is to be thought, by the Solicitation of Traitorous Sub∣jects, (which is the onely Poyson, and Corruption, of all Honoura∣ble Warr, between Forrainers;) Or by the Presumpton of his Agents, and Ministers, then, by the proper Inclination, of that King, there hath been, if not plotted, and practised, yet, at the least, comforted, Conspiracies, against her Majesties Sacred Person; which, neverthelesse, Gods Goodnesse, hath used, and turned, to shew by such miraculous Discoveries, into how near, and pre∣cious, Care, and Custody, it hath pleased him, to receive her Ma∣jesties Life, and Preservation. But, in the other Point, it is strange; what a number, of Libellous, and Defamatory, Bookes, and Writings, and in what Variety, with what Art, and cunning, handled, have been allowed to pass through the World, in all Languages, against her Majesty, and her Government; Sometimes, pretending, the
Gravity, and Authority, of Church Stories, to move Belief; some∣times, formed into Remonstrances, and Advertisements of state, to move Regard; Sometimes, presented, as it were, in Tragedies, of the Persecutions of Catholicks, to move Pitty; Sometimes, contrived, into pleasant Pasquils and Satyres, to move sport: So as, there is no shape, whereinto, these Fellowes, have not transformed them∣selves; Nor no Humor, nor affection, in the mind of Man, to which they have not applyed themselves; Thereby, to insinuate, their Untruths, and abuses, to the World. And, indeed, let a Man look into them, and he shall find them, the only Triumphant Lies, that ever were confuted, by Circumstances, of Time, and Place; Confuted by Contrariety, in themselves; Confuted, by the Wit∣ness, of infinite Persons, that live yet, and have had, particular Knowledge, of the Matters: But yet avouched, with such Asse∣veration, as if, either they were fallen, into that strange Disease of the Mind, which a Wise Writer, describeth, in these words; Fingunt simul creduntque; Or as if, they had received it, as a princi∣pall Precept, and Ordinance, of their Seminaries; Audacter calumni∣are, semper aliquid haeret; Or as if, they were of the Race, which in old time, were wont, to help themselves, with Miraculous Lies; But, when the Cause of this, is entred into; Namely, that there passeth over, out of this Realm, a number of Eager, and Unquiet, Schollers, whom, their own Turbulent, and Humourous, Na∣ture, presseth out, to seek their Adventures abroad; And that, on the other side, they are nourished, rather in Listening after News, and Intelligences, and in Whisperings, then in any Commenda∣ble Learning; And after a time, when either their Necessitous Estate, or their Ambitious Appetites, importune them, they fall on devising, how to do, some acceptable service, to that side, which maintaineth them; So as ever, when their Credit, waxeth Cold with Forrain Princes; Or that their Pensions, are ill pay'd; Or some Preferment, is in sight, at which they levell; Strait∣wayes, out commeth a Libell, pretending thereby, to keep in life the party, which within the Realm, is contrary to the State: (Wherein, they are as wise, as he, that thinketh, to kindle a Fire, by blowing the dead Ashes;) When, I say, a man looketh into the Cause, and Ground, of his plentifull yield of Libells, he will cease, to marvaile, considering the Concurrence, which is, as well, in the Nature of the eed, as in the travell of Tilling, and dressing; yea, and in the Fitnesse, of the Season, for the Bringing up of those infectious weeds. But, to verefie, the Saying, of our Saviour, Non est Discipulus su∣per Magistrum; As they have sought to deprave, her Majesties Go∣vernment, in her self; So, have they not forgoten, to do the same, in her principall Servants, and Counsellers; Thinking belike, that as the Immediate Invectives, against her Majesty, do best satisfie, the Malice, of the Forreiner; So the slander, and Calumniation, of her principall Counsellours, agreed best, with the Humours, of some
Male-contents, within the Realm; Imagining also, that it was like, they should be more scattered here, and freelier dispersed; And also should be lesse odious, to those Forrainers, which were not meerely partiall, and passionate; who have, for the most part in detestation, the Traiterous Libellings, of Subjcts, directly against their Naturall Prince. Amongst the Rest, in this kind, there hth been publisd, this present year, of 1592. a Libel, that giveth place, to none of the Res, in Malice, and untruths; Though inferior, to most of them, in pen∣ning, and Sile; The Authour, having chosen, the vaine of a Luci∣nist; And yet, being a Counterfeit, even in that kind. The Libell, is intituld; A Declaration, of the true Causes, of the great Troubles, presupposed to be intended, against the Realm of England. And hath a Semblance, as if it were bent, against the Doings, of her Maj∣sties, Ancient, and Worthy Counsellor, the Lord urghley; Whose Carefuness, and Paines, her Majesty, hath used, in her Counsells, and Actions, of this Realm, for these 34. years space, in all danger∣ous Times; And amidst many, and mighty, practises; And with such succsse, as our Enemies, are put still, to their Paper-shot, of such Libels, as these: The memory, of whom, will remain, in this Land, when all these Libels, shall be extinct, and forgoten; Ac∣cording to the Scripture; Memoria Iusti cum landibus, at Impiorum Nomen putrescet. But it is more then evident, by the parts of the same Book, that the Authors Malice, was to her Majesty, and her Covernment; As may especially appear, in this, That he charged not, his Lordship, with any particular Actions, of his pri∣vate Life; (Such power had Truth;) whereas, the Libels, made against other Counsellors have, principally, insisted upon that part: ut hath only, wrested, and detorted, such Actions of Sate, as in Times, of his Service, have been Mannaged; And depraving them, hath ascribed, and imputed to him, the Effects, that have followed; Indeed, to the Good of the Realm, and the Honour of her Majesty; Though, sometimes, to the Provoking of the Malie, but Abridging of the Power, and Meanes, of Desperate, and Incor∣igible, Subjects. All which Slanders, as his Lordship, might justly despise; Both, for their Manifest Vntruths, and for the Basenesse, and Obscurity, of the Authour; So neverthelesse, according to the Moderation, which his Lordship useth, in all Things; Never claiming the Pri∣viledge, of his Authority, when it is Question, of satisfying the World; He hath been content, that they be not passed over, al∣together, in Silence: Whereupon, I have, in particular Duty, to his Lordship, amongst others, that do Honour, and Love, his Lordship; And that have, iligently, observed his Actions; And in Zeal of Truth, collected upon the Reading, of the said Libell, certain Observations; Not in Form, of a just Answer, lest, I should fall into the Error, whereof Salomon, speaketh thus; An∣swer not a Foole, in his own kind, least thou also be like him; But only,
to discover the Malice, & to reprove, and convict the Untruths, thereof. The Points, that I have observed, upon the Reading, of this Libell, are these following. 1. Of the Scope, or Drift, of the Libeller. 2. Of the present Estate, of this Realm, of England; whether it may be, truly avouched, to be Prosperous, or Afflicted. 3. Of the Proceedings, against the pretended Catholiques, whether they have been Violent; or Moderate, and necessary. 4. Of the Disturbance, of the Quiet, of Christendom; And to what Causes, it may be, justly, imputed. 5. Of the Cunning, of the Libeller, in Palliation, of his Malicious Invective, against her Majesty, and the State, with pretence, of tax∣ing onely, the Actions, of the Lord Burleigh. 6. Certain true Generall Notes, upon the Actions, of the Lord Burleigh. 7. Of diverse particular Vntruhs, and Abuses, dispersed through the Libell. 8. Of the Height, of Impudency, that these Men, are grown unto, in Publishing, and Avouching, Vntruths; with particular Recitall, of some of them, for an Assay. 1. Of the Scope, or Drift of the Libeller. It is good Advice, in dealing, with Cautelous, and Malicious, persons; Whose Speech, is ever at distance, with their Meanings; Non quid dixerint, sed quò spectârint, videndum: A Man, is not to regard, what they affirm, or what they hold; But, what they would convey, under their pretended Discovery, and what turn they would serve. It soundeth strangely, in the Eares, of an English Man; That the Miseries, of the present State, of England, exceed them, of former times, whatsoever. One would, strait-way, think with himself; Doth this Man beleeve what he saith? Or not beleeving it, doth he think it possible, to make us beleeve it? Surely, in my conceit, neither of both; But his End, no doubt, was, to round the Pope, and the King of Spain, in the Eare, by seeming, to tell a Tale, to the People of England. For such Bookes, are ever wont, to be translated, into diverse Languages: And, no doubt, the Man, was not so simple, as to think, he could perswade, the People of England, the Contrary, of what they tast, and feele. But he thought, he might better abuse, the States, abroad, if he directed his Speech to them, who could best convict him, and disprove him, if he said untrue: So that, as Livy saith, in the like case; AEtolos, magis, coram quibus verba facerent, quam ad quos, pensi habere: That the Aaetolians, in their Tale, did more respect those, which did over-hear them, then those, to whom they directed their Speech: So, in this matter, this Fellow, cared not, to be counted a Lier, by all
English, upon Price, of Deceiving, of Spain, and Italy: For it must be understood, that it hath been, the generall Practise, of this kind of Men, many years, of the one side, to abuse, the for∣raine Estates, by making them believe, that all is out of Joynt, and Ruinous, here in England. And that, there is a great part ready, to joyn with the Invader: And, on the other side, to make, the Evill Subjects, of England, believe, of great Preparations abroad, and in great readinesse, to be put in Act; And so to deceive, on both sides: And this, I take to be, his Principall Drift. So again, it is an extravagant, and incredible, Conceit, to Imagine, that all the Conclusions, and Actions, of Estate, which have passed, during her Majesties Raign, should be ascribed, to one Counseller alone; And to such an one, as was never noted, for an Imperious, or Over∣ruling, Man: And to say, that though, He carried them, not by Violence, yet he compassed, them by Devise; There is no Man of Iudgement, that looketh into the Nature of these Times, but will easily descry, that the Wits, of these Dayes, are too much re∣fined, for any Man, to walk Invisible: Or to make, all the World, his Instruments; And therefore, no not in this point, as¦suredly, the Libeller spake, as he thought; But this he foresaw; That the Imputation, of Cunning, doth breed Suspicion; And the Imputation, of Greatnesse, and Sway, doth breed Envy: And there∣fore, finding, where he was most wrung, and by whose pollicy and Experience, their plots were most crossed, the mark he shot at, was to see, whether he could heave, at his Lordships Authority, by making him suspected, to the Queen; or generally odious, to the Realm: Knowing well enough, for the one point, that there are not only Iealousies, but certain Revolutions, in Princes Minds: So that, it is a rare Vertue, in the Rarest Princes, to continue constant to the End, in their Favours, and Employments. And knowing, for the other point, that Envy, ever accompanieth Greatness, though never so well deserved: And that his Lordship, hath alwaies mar∣ched, a Round, and a Reall Course, in service: And as, he hath not moved Envy, by Pomp, and Ostentation; so, hath he never ex∣tinguished it, by any Popular, or Insinutive, Carriage of Himself: And this, no doubt, was his Second Drit, A Third Drift, was, to assay, if he could supplant, and weaken, (by this violent kind of Libelling, and turning the whole Imputa∣tion, upon his Lordship,) his Resolution, and Courage; And to make him proceed more cautelously, and not so throughly, and strongly, against them; Knowing his Lordship, to be a Politick Man, and one, that hath, a great Stake to leese. Lastly, least while I discover Cunning, and Art, of this Fellow, I should make him wiser then he was, I think, a great part of this Book, was Passion; Difficile est tacere, cùm doleas. The Humours, of these Men being, of themselves, eager, and Fierce, have, by the Abort, and Blasting, of their Hopes; been blinded and enra∣ged. And surely, this Book, is, of all that Sort, that have been
written, of the meanest work-man-ship; Being fraughted, with sundry base Scoffs, and cold Amplifications, and other Characters, of Despite; But void, of all Iudgement, or Ornament. 2. Of the presents Estate, of this Realm, of England; whether it may be, truly, avouched, to be prospe∣rous, or Afflicted. THe Benefits, of Almighty God, upon this Land, since the time, that in his singular providence, he led, as it were, by the hand, and placed, in the Kingdome, his Servant, our Queen Eliza∣beth, are such, as not in Boasting, or in Confidence of our selves, but in praise of his Holy Name, are worthy, to be, both considered, and confessed; yea, and registred, in perpetuall Memory: Not∣withstanding, I mean not, after the manner of a Panegyrique, to Extoll the present Time. It shall suffice onely, that those Men, that through the Gall, and Bitterness, of their own Heart, have lost their Tast, and Iudgement; And would, deprive God, of his Glory, and us, of our sences, in affirming our Condition, to be Miserable, and ull of Tokens, of the Wrath, and Indignation of God, be repro∣ved. If then, it be true, that, Nemo est Miser, aut Felix, nisi comparatus; Whether we shall, (keeping our selves, within the Compasse, of our own Island,) look, into the Memories, of Times past; Or, at this present time, take a view, of other States, abroad, in Europe; We shall ind, that we need not give place, to the Happinesse, either of Ancestours, or Neighbours For, if a Man weigh well, all the Parts, of State, and Religion, Lawes, Aministration of Iustice, Pollicy of Government, Manners, Civility, Learning and Liberall Sciences, Industry and Manuall Arts, Armes and Provisions of Wars, for Sea, and Land, Treasure, Traffique, Improvement of the Soyle, Population, Honour and Reputation: It will appear, that taking, one part, with Another, the State, of this Nation, was never more Flourish∣ing. It is easie, to call to Remembrance, out of Histories, the Kings, of England, which have, in more ancient times, enjoyed greatest Happinesse; Besides her Majesties Father, and Grand father, that raigned in rare Felicity, as is fresh in Memory. They have been, K. Henry 1. K Hen 2. K. Hen. 3. King Edw the 1. K. Edw. the 3. K. Henry the 5. All which, have been Princes, of Royall Vertue, Great Felicity, and Famous Memory. But it may be truly af∣firmed, without derogation, to any of these worthy Princes, that whatsoever we find in Libels, there is not to be found, in
the English Chronicles, a King, that hath, in all respects, laid to∣gether, raigned with such Felicity, as her Majesty hath done. For as for the First 3. Henries; The First, came in, too soon, after a Conquest: The Second, too soon, after an Vsurpation; And the Third, too soon, after a League, or Barons War; To raign, with Security, and Contentation. King H. 1. also, had unnaturall Wars, with his Brother Robert, wherein much Nobility was consumed: He had therewithall, tedious Wars, in Wales; And was not, with∣out some other Seditions, and Troubles; As namely, the great Contestation, of his Prelates. King Henry 2. his Happinesse, was much deformed, by the Revolt of his son Henry, after he had asso∣ciated him, and of his other Sonnes. King Hen. 3, besides his con∣tinuall Wars, in Wales, was after 44. years raign, unquieted, with Intricate Commotions, of his Barons; As may appear, by the Mad Parliament, held at Oxford, and the Acts thereupon en∣suing. His Son, King Ed. 1. had a more flourishing Time, then any of the other; Came to his Kingdom, at ripe years, and with great Reputation, after his voyage, into the Holy Land; And was much loved, and obeyed; contrived his Wars, with great Judgement; First, having reclaimed Wales, to a setled Allegeance; And being, upon the point, of Vniting Scotland. But yet, I sup∣pose, it was more honour, for her Majesty, to have, so impor∣tant a piece of Scotland, in her hand; And the same, with such Justice, to render up; Then it was, for that worthy King, to have advanced, in such Forwardnesse, the Conquest, of that Na∣tion. And for King Edward 3. his Raign was visited, with much Sicknesse, and Mortality, So as they reckoned, in his dayes, 3. severall Mortalities: One in the 22. year: Another in te 35. year: And the last, in the 43. year, of his Raign: And being otherwise, Victorious, and in Prosperity, was by that onely Crosse, more afflicted, then he was, by the other Prosperities, com∣forted. Besides, he entred hardly: And again, according to the Verse; Cedebant ultima primis: His Latter Times, were not so prosperous. And for King Henry 5. as his Successe was wonderfull, so he wanted Continuance; Being extinguished, after 10. years Raign, in the Prime, of his Fortunes. Now for her Majesty, we will, first, speak, of the Blessing of Continuance,Contiuance as that, which wanted, in the Happiest, of these Kings: And is not only, a great favour of God, unto the Prince, but also, a singular Benefit, unto the People: For that Sentence of the Scripture: Misera Natio, cùm multi sunt principes eius: is inter∣preted, not only, to extend, to Divisions, and Distractions, in Go∣vernment, but also, to Frequent Changes, in Succession: Conside∣ring, that the Change of a Prince, bringeth in, many Charges, which are Harsh, and Vnpleasant, to a great part of Subjects. It appeareth then, that of the Line, of Five hundred, and foure∣score years, and more, containing the Number of 22. Kings, God hath already prolonged, her Majesties Raign, to exceed six∣teen,
of the said Two and Twenty: And, by the end, of this pre∣sent year, (which God prosper,) she shall attain, to be equall, with two more: During which time, there have deceased, four Empe∣rours; As many French Kings; Twice so many Bishops of Rome. Yea, every State, in Christendome, except Spain, have received sundry Successions: And, for the King of Spain, he is waxed so infirm, and thereby so Retired, as the Report of his Death, serveth for every years News: whereas her Majesty, (Thanks be given to God,) being nothing decayed, in vigor of Health, and strength, was never more able, to supply, and sustain, the weight of her Affairs; And is, as far as standeth, with the Dignity, of her Ma∣jesties Royall State, continually to be Seen, to the great comfort, and Hearty Ease, of her People. Secondly, we will mention, the Blessing of Health: I mean,Health. ge∣nerally, of the People, which was wanting, in the Raign, of ano∣ther of these Kings: which else deserved, to have the second place, in Happinesse; which is one, of the great Favours, of God, towards any Nation. For, as there be three, Scourges of God, War, Famine, and Pestilence; so are there three Benedictions, Peace, Plenty, and Health. Whereas therefore, this Realm, hath been visited, in times past, with sundry kinds of Mortalities; (as Pestilences, Sweats, and other Contagious Diseases;) it is so, that in her Maje∣sties Times, being of the continuance, aforesaid, there was on∣ly, towards the Beginning of her Raign, some Sicknesse, between Iune, and February, in the Citty, but not dispersed, into any other pat, of the Realm, as was noted; which we call yet, the Great Plague; Because, that though it was nothing so Grievous, and so Sweeping, as it hath been, sundry times heretofore; yet it was great, in respect of the Health, which hath followed since; Which hath been such, (especially of late years,) as we began to dispute, and move Questions, of the Causes, whereunto it should be ascribed; Untill such time, as it pleased God to teach us, that we ought, to ascribe it, onely to his Mercy; By touch∣ing us, a little, this present year; but with a very Gentle Hand; And such, as it hath pleased him, since, to remove. But certain it is, for so many years together, notwithstanding, the great Pe∣stering of people, in Houses; The great Multitude of Strangers, and the sundry Voiages by Seas; (All which, have been noted, to be Causes of Pestilence.) The Health Vniversall, of the People, was ne∣ver so good. The third Blessing is that, which all the Politick, and Fortunate Kings, before recited, have wanted; That is, Peace:Peace. For there was never Forreiner, since her Majesties Raign, by Invasion, or In∣cursion of Moment, that took any footing, within the Realm of England. One Rebellion, there hath been onely, but such an one, as was repressed, within the space, of seven weeks; And did not wast, the Realm, so much, as by the Destruction, or Depo∣pulation, of one poor Town. And for wars abroad, taking in
those of Leeth, those of New-Haven, the second Expedition into Scotland, the wars of Spain, which I reckon, from the year 86, or 87; (before which time, neither had the King of Spain, with∣drawn his Embassadours, here residing; neither had her Majesty, re∣ceived into protection, the united Provinces, of the Low Countries;) And the Aid of France; They have not occupied, in time, a third part of her Majesties Rign; Nor consumed, past two, of y Noble House; whereof France took one, and Flanders another: And very few, besides, of Quality, or Appearance. They have scarce, mowed down, the overcharge of the People, within the Realm. It is therefore true, that the Kings aforesaid, and others her Maisties Progenitours, have been Victorious, in their Wars; And have made, many Famous, and Memorable, Voyages, and Expeditions, into sundry parts; And that her Majesty, contrarywise, from the bginning, put on, a firm Resolution, to content her self, within those Limits of her Dominions, which she received; And to entertain Peace, with her Neighbour princes; which Reso∣lution, she hath ever since, (notwithstanding, she hath ha Rare Opportunities, Iust Claims, and pretences, and great, and mighty Means,) sought to continue. But if, this be objected, to be the lesse Honourable Fortune; I answer, that ever, amongst the Heathen, who held not, the Expence of Blood, so precious, as Christians ought to do; The peaceable Government of Augustus Caesar, was ever, as highly esteemed, as the Victories, of Iuliu, his Uncle; and that the Name, of Pater Patriae, was ever as Honourable, as that of propagator Imperii. And this, I adde further, that during this in∣ward Peace of so many years, in the Actions of War, before men∣tioned, which her Majesty, either in her own Defence, or in Iust, and Honourable Aides, hath undertaken; The Service hath been such, as hath carried, no Note, of a People, whose Militia, were degenerated, through Long Peace; But hath, every way, answer∣ed, the ancient Reputation, of the English Arms. Pleny and Wealth.The fourth Blessing, is Plenty, and Abundance: And first for Grain, and all Victualls, there cannot be, more evident Proof, of  the Plenty, then this. That, whereas England, was wont, to be ed, by oher Countries, from the East, it sufficeth now, to feed, other Countries. So as we do, mny times, transport, and serve, sundry Forrain Countries; And yet, there was never, the like Multitude of People, to eat i, within the Realm. Another evident Proof theref, may be, that the good yields of Corn, which have been, together with some Tolleration of Vent, hath, of late time, invited, and enticed Men, to break up more Ground, and to con∣vert it to Tillage, then all the Penal Laws, for that purpose, made, and enacted, could ever, by Compulsion, effect. A third Proof may be, that the Prices of Grain, and Victuall, were never, of late years, more Reasonable. Now for Arguments of the great wealth, in all other Respects, let the Points following be considered. There was never, the like Number, of fair, and Stately Hu∣ses,
as have been built, and set up, from the Ground, since her Majesties Raign: Insomuch, that there have been reckoned, in one Shire, that is not great, to the Number, of 33; Which have been all, new built, within that time: And whereof the Mea∣nest, was never built, for two Thousand pounds. There were never, the like Pleasures, of goodly Gardens, and  Orchards, Walks, Pooles, and Parks, as do adorn, almost, every Man∣sion House. There was never, the like Number, of Beautifull, and Costly, Tombes, and Monuments, which are erected, in sundry Churches, in Honourable Memory, of the Dead. There was never, the like Quantity of Plate, Iewels, Sumptuous  Moveables, and Stuff, as is now, within the Realm. There was never, the like Quantity, of Wast, and unprofitable  Ground, Inned, Reclaimed, and Improved. There was never, the like Husbanding, of all Sorts of Ground, by Fencing, Manuring, and all kinds, of good Husbandry. The Towns, were never better built, nor peopled; Nor the  principall Faires, and Markets, never better customed, nor fre∣quented. The Commodities, and Ease, of Rivers, cut by hand, and  brought into a new Channell; Of Peeres, that have been built; Of Waters, that have been forced, and brought, against the Ground, were never so many. There was never, so many excellent Artificers, nor so many  new Handy-Crafts, used, and exercised; Nor new Commodities, made witin the Realm; Sugar; Paper; Glasse; Copper; divers Silks; and the like. There was never, such Compleat, and Honourable Provision, of Horse; Armour, Weapons, Ordnance of the Warr. The Fifth Blessing,Increase o People. hath been, the great Population, and Multi∣tude, of Families, encreased within her Majesties dayes: For which Point, I refer my Self, to the Proclamations, of Restraint, of Buil∣ding, in London; The Inhibition, of Inmates, of sundry Citties; The Restraint, of Cottages, by Act of Parliament; And sundry other To∣kens, of Record, of the Surcharge, of People. Besides these parts of a Government, blessed from God,Reforma∣tion in Religi∣on. wherein, the Condition of the People, hath been more happy, in her Maje∣sties Times, then in the Times, of her Progenitours; There are certain Singularities, and Particulars, of her Majesties Raign, wherei, I do not say, that we have enjoyed them, in a more am∣ple Degree, and Proportion, then in former Ages; (As it hath fallen out, in the Points, before mentioned;) But such, as were, in Effect, unknown, and untasted, heretofore. As first, the Puri∣ty of Religion, which is a Benefit Inestimable; And was, in the time, of all former Princes, untill the dayes, of her Majesties Father, of Famous Memory, unheard of. Out of which Purity of Religion, have since ensued, beside the principall Effect, of the true Know∣ledge,
and Worship of God,The speciall  es∣lished among u by he pu∣ity of Religi∣on. three Points, of great Consequence, unto the Civill Estate. One, the stay of a mighty Treasure, within the Realm, which, in foretimes, was drawn sorth, to Rome. Another, the Dispersing and Distribution of those Revenues; (Amounting, to a Third part,  of the Land, of the Realm;) And that, of the goodliest, and the richest sort, which heretofore, was unproitably spent, in Mona∣steries; Into such Hands, as by whom, the Realm, receiveth, at this day, Service, and Strength; And many Great Houses, have  been set up, and augmented. The Third, the Mannaging, and Enfrnchising, of the Regall Dignity, from the Recognition, of a For∣raign Superior: All which Points, though begun by her Father, and continued by her Brother, were yet, neverthelesse, fter an Eclipse, or Intemission, Restored, and Reestablished, by her Majesties Self. Finenesse o Money.Secondly, the Fineness of Money: For as the Purging away, of the Drosse of Religion, the Heavenly Treasure, was common to her Majesty, with her Father, and her Brother: So the Purging, of the Bae Mony, the arthly Treasure, hath been, altogether, proper, to her Majesties own Times; Whereby our Moneys, bearing the Na¦turall Estimation, of the Stamp, or Mark, both every Man resteth assured of his own vallew, and free from the losses, and Deceits, which fall out in other places, upon the Rising, and Falling, of Moneys. The Might o the Nav.Thirdly, the Might of the Navy, and Augmentation, of the Ship∣ping, of the Realm: which, by politique Constitutions, for Mainte∣nance of ishing; And the Encouragement, and Assistance, given, to the undertakers, of New Discoveries, and Trades by Sea, is so advan∣ced, as this Island is become, (as the Naturall Scite thereof deser∣veth,) the Lady of the Sea. Now to passe, from the Comparison, of Time, to the Comparison, of place; We may find, in the States abroad; Cause of Pitty, and Compassion in some; But of Envy, or Emulation, in none; Our Con∣dition being, by the good Favour of God, not Inferiour to an. Compaison of the state of England with the state a∣broad.The Kingdome of France, which, by reason, of the Seat of the Empire, of the West, was wont, to have the precedence, of the Kingdomes of Europe, is now fallen, into those Calamities, that as the Prophet saith; From the Crown of the Head, to the Soal of the Foot, there is no whole place.Afflicted in France. The Divisions, are so many, and so intri∣cate, of Protestants, and Catholicks; Royalists, and Leaguers; Burbo∣nists, and Lorainists; Patriots, and Spanish; As it seemeth, God hath some great Work, to bring to passe, upon that Nation: yea, the Nobility divided, from the Third Estate; And the Towns, from the Field: All which Miseries, truly to speak, have been wrought by Spain, and the Spanish Faction. Low-Coun¦tries.The Low-Countries, which were, within the Age of a young Man, the Richest, the best Peopled, and the best Built, Plots of
Europe, are in such Estate, as a Countrey is like to be in, that hath been the Seat, of thirty years War; And although, the Sea-Pro∣vinces, be rather encreased, in Wealth, and Shipping, then other∣wise; yet, they cannot but mourn, for their Distraction, from the rest of their Body. The Kingdome of Portugall,Portugall. which, of late times, through their Merchandizing, and places in the East Indies, was grown, to be an Opulent Kingdome, is, now at the last, after the unfortunate journey of Affrick, in that State, as a Countrey is like to be, that is reduced, under a Forreiner, by Conquest; And such a Forreiner, as hath his Competitour in Title, being a Naturall Portugall, and no Stranger; And having been once in possession, yet in Life: wher∣by his Iealousie, must necessarily be encreased, and through his Jealousie, their Oppression: which is apparent, by the Carry∣ing, of many Noble Families, out of their Naturall Countries, to live in Exile: And by putting to Death, a great Number of Noble-Men, naturally born, to have been principall Governers, of their Countries. These are three Afflicted, parts of Christendome; The Rest of the States, enjoy, either Prosperity, or tolerable Condition. The Kingdome of Scotland,Prosperou as Scotland. though at this present, by the good Regiment, and wise proceeding, of the King, they enjoy good qui∣et; yet, ince our Peace, it hath passed, through no small Troubles; And remaineth, full of Boyling, and Swelling, Humours; But like, by the Maturity, of the said King, every day encreasing, to be re∣pressed. The Kingdome of Poland,Poland. is newly recovered, out of great Wars, about an Ambiguous Election. And besides, is a State, of that Com∣position, that their King being Elective, they do, commonly, chuse, rather a Stranger, then one of their own Countrey. A great Ex∣ception, to the Flourishing Estate, of any Kingdome. The Kingdome of Swedeland,Sweden. besides their Forrain Warrs, upon their Cousins, the Muscovites, and the Danes; Hath been, also, sub∣ject, to divers Intestine Tumults, and Mutations, as their Stories do record. The Kingdome of Denmark,Denmark. hath had good Times, specially, by the good Government, of the late King, who maintained, the pro∣fession, of the Gospell; But yet, greatly, giveth place, to the King∣dome of England, in Climate, Wealth, Fertility, and many other Points, both of Honour, and Strength. The Estates of Italy,Italy. which are not, under the Dominion of Spain, have had peace, equall in continuance with ours; Except, in re∣gard of that, which hath passed between them, and the Turk; Which hath sorted, to their Honour, and Commendation: But yet, they are so brideled, and over-awed, by the Spaniard, that possesseth the two principall Members thereof; And that, in the two extream parts, as they be like Quillets of Freehold, being in∣termixed, in the midst, of a great Honour or Lordship. So as their Quiet, is intermingled, not with Iealousie alone, but with Re∣straint.
The States of Germany,Germany, have had, for the most part, peaceable Times; But yet they yeeld, to the State of England; Not only, in the great Honour, of a great Kingdome, (they being, of a mean Stile, and Dignity,) but also in many other Respects, both of Wealth, and Pollicy. The State of Savoy,Savoy. having been, in the old Dukes Time, governed, in good Prosperity, hath since, notwithstanding, their new great Alliance, with Spain, whereupon they waxed in∣solent, to design, to snatch up, some piece of France; After the dishonourable Repulse, from the Seige of Geneva; deen often di∣stresed, by a particular Gentleman of Daulphny; And at this pre∣sen day, the Duke feeleth, even in Piedmont, beyond the Moun∣taines, of the weight, of the same Enemy: Who hath lately shut up his Gates, and common Entries, between Savoy, and Pied∣mont. So as hitherto, I do not see, but that we are, as much bound, to the Mercies of God, as any other Nation; Considering, that the Fires of Dissention, and Oppression, in some Parts of Christendom, may serve us, for Lights; to shew us our Happinesse: And the good states, of other places, which we do congratulate with them for, is such, neverthelesse, as doth not stain, and exceed ours: But rather, doth still leave somewhat, wherein we may acknowledge, an ordinary Benediction, of God. Lastly, we do not much emulate, the Greanesse, and Glory, of the Spaniards;Spi Who, having not only Excluded, the Purity of Religion, but also Fortified against it, by their Devise, of the Inqui∣sition; which is a Bulwark, against the Entrance, of the Truth of God: Having, in recompence, of their new Purchase of Porugal, lost, a great part, of their ancient Patrimonies, of the Low-Coun∣tries; (Being of far greater Commodity, and Valew;) or, at the least, holding part thereof, in such sort, as most of their other Revenewes, are spent there, upon their own: Having lately, with much Difficulty, rather smoothed, and skinned over, then Healed, and extinguished, the Commotions of Arragon; Having rather sowed Troubles in France, then reaped Assured Fruit there∣of, unto themselves: Having, from the Attempt, of England, re∣ceived Scorn, and Disreputation; Being, at this time, with the States of Italy, rather suspected, then either Loved, or Feared: Having, in Germany, and else where, rather much practise, then any Sound intelligence, or Amity: Having no such clear succession, as they need object, and Reproach, the Incertainty thereof, unto another Nation: Have, in the end, won a Reputation, rather of Ambition, then Iustice; And in the pursuit, of their Ambition, rather of Much Enterprising, then of Fortunate Atchieving; And, in their Entrprising, rather, of Doing Things, by Treasure, and Ex∣pence, then by Forces, and Valour. Now, that I have given the Reader, a Tast of England, respe∣ctively, and in Comparison, of the Times past, and of the States
abroad; I will descend, to examine, the Libellers, own Divisions; Whereupon, let the World judge, how easily, and clean, this Inke, which he hath cast in our faces, is washed off. The First Branch, of the pretended Calamities, of England, is the great, and wonderfull, Confusion, which, he saith, is in the State, of the Church; which is subdivided, again, into two parts: The one, the Prosecutions, againg the Catholicks; The other, the Dis∣cords, and Controversies, amongst our selves: The former, of which 2. parts, I have made, an Article by it self; Wherein, I have set down, a clear, and simple, Narration, of the proceedings, of State, against that sort of Subjects; Adding this by the way: That there are 2. Extremities, in State, concerning the Causes, of aith, and Reli∣gion: That is to say, the Permission, of the Exercises, of more R∣ligions, then one, which is a dangerous Indulgence, and Toleration; the other, is the Entring, and Sifting, into Mens Consciences, when no Overt Scandall is given; which is Rigorous, and Straineable, In∣quisition: And I avouch, the proceedings, towards the intended Catholicks, to have been a Mean, between these two Extremities; Referring, the Demonstration thereof, unto the aforesaid Narra∣ion, in the Articles following. Touching the Divisions, in our Church,Ccrning the Conro∣ in our Church. the Libeller affirmeth, hat the Protestanticall Caluinism, (For so it pleaseth him, with very good grace, to term the Religion, with us established;) is grown, Contempible, and Detected, of Idolatry, Heresie, and many other superstitious Abuses, by a Purified sort of Professors, of the same Gospell. And this Conention is yet grown, to be more intri∣cate, by reason of a Third Kind, of Gospellers, called Brown∣ists. Who, being directed, by the great Fervour, of the Vnholy Ghost, do expresly affirm, that the Protestanticall Church of England, is not gathered, in the name of Christ, but of Anti∣christ: And that, if the Prince, or Magistrate, under her, do refuse, or defer, to reform the Church, the people may, with∣out her Consent, take the Reformation, into their own Hands: And hereto, he addeth, the Fanaticall Pageant of Hacket: And this is the Effect, of this Accusation, in this point. For Answer whereunto; First, it must be remembred, that the Church of God, hath been, in all Ages, subject to Contentions, and Schismes. The Tares were not sown, but where the Wheat was sown before. Our Saviour Christ, delivereth it, for an Ill Note, to have Outward Peace, Saying; When a strong Man, is in possession, of the House, (meaning the Devill,) all Things are in Peace. It is te Condition, of the Churh, to be, ever, under Trials: And there are, but Two Trials: The one, of Persecution; The other, of Scandall, and Contention: And when the One ceaseth, the other succeedeth: Nay, there is scarce, any one Epistle, of St. Pauls, unto the Churches, but containeth some Reprehension, of unnecessary, & Schismaticall, Controversies. So likewise, in the Raign, of Constantine the Great, after the time, that the Church, had obtained Peace from persecuti∣on,
strait entred, sundry Questions, and Controversies, about no lesse Matters, then the Essentiall Parts, of the Faith, and the High Mysteries of the Trinity. But Reason teacheth us, that in Igno∣rance, and Implyed Belief, it is easie, to agree, as Colours agree in the Dark: Or if any Countrey decline into Atheism, then Contro∣versies, wax dainty, because Men do think Religion, scarce worth, the Falling out for: So as, it is weak Divinity, to account Contro∣versies, an ill Sign, in the Church. It is true, that certain Men, moved with an inconsiderate De∣testation, of all Ceremonies, or Orders, which were in use, in the time, of the Roman Religion; (As if, they were, without difference, superstitious, or polluted;) And led, with an affectionate Imita∣tion, of the Government, of some Protestant Churches, in Forrain States; Have sought, by Bookes, and Preaching, indiscreetly, and sometimes undutifully, to bring in, an Alteration, in the Extern Rites, and Pollicy, of the Church; But neither, have the Grounds, of the Controversies, extended unto any Point of Faith; Neither hath the Pressing, and Prosecution, exceeded, in the generality, the Na∣ture of some Inferiour Contempts; So as, they have been, farr from Heresie, and Sedition; And therefore, rather Offensive, then Dan∣gerous, to the Church, or State. And as for Those, which we call Brownists, being, when they were at the most, a very small Number, of very silly, and base, people, here and there, in Corners, dispersed; They are now, (thanks be to God,) by the good Remedies, that have been used, suppressed, and worn out; So as, there is scarce, any Newes of them. Neither, had they been, much known, at all, had not Brown, their Leader, Written a Pamphlet; Wherein, as it came in∣to his Head, he inveighed more, against Logick, and Rhetorick, then against the State, of the Church; (which Writing was much read;) And had not, also, one Barrow, (being a Gentleman, of a good House, but one that lived in London, at Ordinaries; And there lear∣ned, to argue, in Table-Talk; And so, was very much known, in the Citty, and abroad;) made a Leap, from a vain, and Libertine, youth, to a preciseness, in the Highest Degree; The strangeness, of which Alteration, made him very much spoken off; The Matter, might long before, have breathed out. And here I note, an Honesty, and Discretion, in the Libeller, which I note, no where else; In that, he did forbear, to lay, to our charge, the Sect, of the Family of Love: For about 12. years since, there was creeping, in some secret places, of the Realm, indeed, a very great Heresie, derived from the Dutch, and named, as before was said: which since, by the good Blessing of God, & by the good strength, of our Church, is banished, and Extinct. But so much we see, that the Diseases, wherewith our Church hath been visited, whatso∣ever these Men say, have, either, not been, Maligne, and Dange∣rous; Or else, they have been as Blisters, in some small Ignoble part of the Body, which have soon after fallen, and gone away.
For such also, was the Phreneticall, and Fanaticall, (For I mean not to determine it,) Attempt of Hackett; Who must needs have been thought, a very Dangerous Heretick, that could never get, but two Disciples; And those, as it should seem, perished in their Brain; And a Dangerous Commotioner, that in so great, and popu∣lous, a Citty, as London is, could draw, but those same two Fel∣low, whom the People, rather laughed at, as a May game, then took ay heed, of what they did, or said: So as it was very true, that an honest Poor Woman said, when she saw Hackett, out of a Window, passe to his Execution: Said she to her Self; It was fore∣told, tht, in the latter dayes, there should come those, that have deceived many; but, in faith, thou hast deceived, but a Few. But it is manifest Vntruth, which he Libeller, setteth down, that there hath been no Punishment, done upon those, which, in any, of the foresaid kinds, have broken the Lawes, and disturbed, the Church, and State; And that the Edge of the Law, hath been, one∣ly, turned, upon the pretended Catholicks: For the Examples are ve∣ry many, where, according to the Nature, and Degree, of the Of∣fence, the Correction of such Offenders, hath not been neglected. These be the great Confusions, whereof he hath accused our Church; which I refer, to the Judgement, of an indifferent, and understanding, person, how true they be: My Meaning is not, to blanch, or excuse, any Fault of our Church; Nor, on the other side, to enter into Commemoration, how flourishing it is, in Great, and Learned Divines; or painfull, and excellent Preachers: Let Man, have the Reproof, of that, which is amisse, and God, the Glory, of that, which is good. And so much, for the First Branch. In the Second Branch, He maketh great Musters, and Shewes, of the strength, and Multitude, of the Enemies, of this State;Concerning the Forrain E∣nemies of this State. Declaring, in what evill Termes, and Correspondence, we stand, with For∣raign States; And how desolate, and destitute, we are, of Friends, and Confederates Doubting belike, how he should be able, to prove, and justifie his Assertion, touching the present Miseries: And therefore, endeavouring, at the least, to maintain; That the good Estate, which we enjoy, is yet, made somewhat bitter, by reason, of many Terrours, and Feares. Whereupon, entring into Consideration, of the Security, wherein, not by our own Pollicy, but by the good Providence, and Protection, of God, we stand at this Time; I do find it, to be a Security, of that Nature, and Kind, which Iphicrates, the Athenian, did commend; who being, a Commissio∣ner, to treat, with the State of Sparta, upon Conditions of Peace; And hearing, the other side, make many Propositions, touching Security; Interrupted them, and told them; There was but one maner of Security, whereupou the Athenians could rest; which was, if the Deputies of the Lacedemonians, could make it plain unto them, that after these and these things parted withall, the Lacedemonians should not be able, to hurt them, though they would. So it is with us; As we
have not, justly provoked, the Hatred, or Enmity, of any other State; so, howsoever that be, I know not, at this time, the Ene∣my, that hath the Power, to offend us, though he had the Will. And whether, we have given, just Cause of Quarrell, or Offence, it shall be afterwards touched, in the feurth Article; Tou∣ching the true Causes, of the Disturbance of the Quiet, of Christen∣ome; As far, as it is fit, to justifie the Actions, of so High a Prince, upon the Occasion, of such a Libell, as this. But now, con∣cerning the Power, and Forces, of any Enemy, I do find, that Eng∣land, hath sometimes apprehended with Jealousie, the Confe∣deration, between France and Scotland: The one, being upon the same Continent that we are, and breeding, a Souldier, of Pu∣issance, and Courage, not much differing from the English; The other, a Kingdom very Opulent, and thereby able, to sustain Wars, though at very great Charge; And having a brave Nobili∣ty; And being a Near Neighbour. And yet, of this Conjuncion, there never came, any Offence, of Moment. But Scotland, was e∣ver, rather used by France, as a Diversion, of an English Invasion, upon France, then as a Commodity, of a French Invasion, upon England. I confesse also, that since the Vnions, of the Kingdom of Spain: and during the time, the Kingdom of France, was in his Entire; A Conjunction, of those two potent Kingdoms, against us, might have been, of some Terrour to us. But now it is evi∣dent, that the State of France is such, as both those Conjunctions, are become Impossible: It resteth, that either Spain, with Scotland, should offend us, or Spain alone; For Scotland, (thanks be to God,) the Amity, and Intelligence, is so sound, and secret, be∣tween the the two Crowns; Being strengthened, by Consent in Religion, Nearnesse of Blood, and Continuall good Offices, reciprocal∣ly, on either side; as the Spaniard himself, in his own Plot, hin¦keth it easier, to alter, and overthrow, the present State of Scot¦land, then to remove, and divide it, from the Amity of England. So, as it must be, Spain alone, that we should fear: which should seem, by reason, of his Spacious Dominions, to be, a great Over∣match. The Conceit whereof, maketh me call to mind, the Resemblance, of an Ancient writer, in Physick; who labouring, to perswade, that a Physician, should not doubt, sometimes, to purge his Patient, though he see him very weak; Entreth into a Distin∣ction, of Weakness, and saith; there is a Weakness of Spirit; and a Weakness of Body: The latter whereof, he compareth, unto a man, that were otherwise very strong, but had a great pack on his Neck: So great as made him double again; So as one, might thrust him down, with his Finger: Which Similitude, and Di∣stinction, both, may be fitly applyed, to matter of State: For some States, are Weak, through want of Means; and some VVeak, through Excesse of Burthen: In which rank, I do place, the State of Spain, which having, outcompassed it self in embracing too much; And being, it self, but a barren Seed-plot of Souldiers; And
much Decayed, and Exhausted, of Men, by the Indies, and by continuall wars: and, so to the State of their Treasure, being en∣debted, and engaged, before such times, as they waged, so great Forces in France; (And therefore, much more since;) Is not, in brief, an Enemy to be feared, by a Nation, Seated, Manned, Furnish∣ed, and Pollyced, as is England. Neither, is this spoken by guesse; For the Experience, was Substantiall enough, and of Fresh Memoy, in the late Enterprise of Spain, upon England: What Time, all that Goodly Shipping, which, in that Voyage, was consumed, was Compleat; what Time, his Forces, in the Low Countries, was also full, and Entire, which now, are wasted, to a fourth part: What time also, he was not entangled, with the Matters of France; But was, rather like to receive Assistance, then Impediment, from his Friends there; In respect, of the great Vigour, wherein the League, then was, (while the Duke of Guise then lived: and yet, neverthelesse, this great preparation, passed away like a Dream. The Invincible Navy, neither took, any one Barque of ours; Neither yet, once offe∣red, to land; But after, they had been well Beaten, and Chased, made a Perambulation, about the Northern Seas; Ennobling, many Coasts, with VVracks, of Mighty ships; and so, returned home, with greater Derision, then they set forth, with Expectation. So as, we shall not need, much Confederacies, and Succours; (which, he saith, we want, for the breaking, of the Spanish Inva∣sion;) No, though the Spaniard, should nestle in Brittain, and sup∣plant the French, and get some Port-Townes into their hands there, (which is yet far off;) yet, shall he, never, be, so commodiously seated, to annoy us, as if he had kept, the Low-Countries; And we shall rather fear Him, as a wrangling Neighbour, that may Trespass, now and then, upon some Stragling ships of ours, then as an Inva∣der. And as for our Confederacies, God hath given us, both Meanes, and Minds, to tender, and relieve, the States, of others. And therefore, our Confederacies, are rather of Honour, then such as we depend upon. And yet, nevertheless the Apostata's, and Huguonets, of France, on the one part; (For so he termeth, the whole Nobility, in a manner, of France; Among the which, a great part, is of his own Religion; which maintain the clear, and unblem∣ished Title, of their Lawfull, and Naturall King, against the sediti∣ous popular;) And the Beere-Brewers, and Basket-Makers, of Hol∣land, and Zealand, (As he also termes them) on the other, have, almost, banded away, between them, all the Duke of Parma's For∣ces: And, I suppose, the very Mines, of the Indies, will go low, or ever the one be Ruined, or the other recovered. Neither, again, desire we, better Confederacies, and Leagues, then Spain it self, hath provided for us: Non enim verbis faedera confirmantur, sed jisdem vtilitatibus: We know, to how many States, the King of Spain, is odious, and suspected; And for our selves, we have in∣censed none, by our Injuries; Nor made, any Jealous, of our
Ambition: These are, in Rules of Pollicy, the Firmest Con∣tracts. Let thus much be said, in Answer, of the Second Branch, concer∣ning the Number, of Exteriour Enemies: Wherein, my Meaning, is nothing lesse, then to attribute, our Felicity, to our Pollicy; Or to nourish our selves, in the Humour of Security. But, I hope, we shall depend upon God, and be vigilent; And then, it will be seen, to what end, these False Alarums will come. In the Third Branch, of the Miseries of England, he taketh upon him, to play the Prophet, as he hath, in all the rest, play'd the Poet: And will needes Divine, or Prognosticate, the great Troubles, whreunto this Realm shall fall, after her Majesties Times: As if he, that hath so singular a Gift, in Lying, of the present Time, and Times past, had, nevertheless, an extra-ordinary Grace, in telling Truth, of the Time to come: Or as if, the Effect, of the Popes Curses, of Eng∣land, were, upon better Ad-vise, adjourned, to those dayes. It is true, it will be Misery enough, for this Realm, (whensoever it shall be,) to leese, such a Soveraign: But for the rest, we must repose our selves, upon the good pleasure, of God: So it is, an unjust Charge, in the Libeller, to impute, an Accident of State, to the Fault, of the Government. It pleaeth God, sometimes, to the end, to make Men depend, upon him, the more, to hide, from them, the clear sight, of future Events; And to make them, think, that full of Vncertainties, which proveth, Certain, and Clear: And, sometimes, on the other side, to crosse Mens expectations, and to make them, full of Difficul∣ty, and Perplexity, in that, which they thought, to be Easie, and Assured. Neither is it, any New Thing, for the Titles, of Successi∣on, in Monarchies, to be, at Times, lesse, or more declared. King Sebastian, of Portugall, before his Journey into Affrick, declared no Successor. The Cardinall, though he were of extream Age, and were much importuned, by the King of Spain, and knew, directly, of 6. or 7. Competitours, to that Crown; yet he rather established, I know not, what Interims, then decided the Titles, or de∣signed any certain Successor. The Dukedome of Ferrara, is, at this Day, after the Death, of the Prince, that now liveth, uncertain, in the point of Succession: The Kingdom of Scotland, hath declared no Successor. Nay, it is very rare, in Hereditary Monarchies, by a∣ny Act of State, or any Recognition, or Oath of the People, in the Collaterall Line, to establish a Successor. The Duke of Orleans, suc∣ceeded, Charles the 8th. of France, but was never declared, Succes∣sor, in his time. Monsieur d' Angoulesme, also succeeded him, but without any Designation. Sonnes of Kings, themselves, oftentimes, through desire to raign, and to prevent their Time, wax danger∣ous to their Parents: How much more, Cousens, in a more Remote Degree? It is lawfull, no doubt, and Honourable, if the Case re∣quire, for Princes, to make an establishment. But, as it was said, it is rarely practised, in the Collaterall Line. Trajan, the best Em∣peror
of Rome, of an Heathen, that ever was; At what time, the Emperours, did use, to design Sucessours; Not so much, to avoid, the Vncertainty of Succession, as to the end, to have Participes Cura∣rum, for the present Time, because their Empire, was so vast; At what Time also, Adoptions were in use, and himself had been Adop∣ted, yet never designed a Successour, but by his Last Will, and Testa∣ment; Which also, was thought, to be suborned by his Wife Plotina, in the Favour, of her Lover, Adrian. You may be sure; That nothing hath been done, to prejudice the Right; And there can be, but one Right. But one thing, I am perswaded of, that no King of Spain; nor Bishop of Rome, shall umpire, nor promote, any Beneficiary, or Feodatory, King, as as they designed to do; Even when the Scottish Queen lived, whom they pretended to cherish. I will not retort, the matter of Succession upon Spain, but use that Modesty, and Reverence, that be∣longeth, to the Majesty, of so great a King, though an Enemy. And so much, for this Third Branch. The Fourth Branch, he maketh to be, touching the Overthrow, of the Nobility; And the Oppression, of the People: wherein, though he may, percase, abuse, the Simplicity, of any Forreiner; yet to an English Man, or any, that heareth, of the present Condition, of England, he will appear, to be a Man, of singular Audacity, and worthy to be employed, in the defence of any Paradox. And surely, if he would needs, have defaced, the generall State of England, at this time, he should, in wisdome, rather have made, some Friarly Declamation, against the Excesse of Superfluity, and Delicacy of our Times; then to have insisted, upon the Misery, and Poverty, and Depopulation, of the Land; as may sufficiently appear, by that which hath been said. But neverthelesse, to follow this Man, in his own steps: First, concerning the Nobility:Concerning the State of the Nobility. It is true, that there have been, in A∣ges past, Noblemen, (as I take it,) both of greater Possessions, and of greater Command, and Sway, then any are, at this day. One Reason, why the possessions are lesse, I conceive to be, because certain Sumptuous Veins, and Humours of Expence; (As Apparell, Gaming, Maintaining of a kind of Followers, and the like;) Do raign, more, then they did, in times past. Another Reason is, be∣cause Noblemen, now a dayes, do deal better, with their younger Sons, then they were accustomed to do, heretofore; whereby, the principall House, receiveth many Abatements. Touching the Command, which is not, indeed, so great, as it hath been, I take it, rather, to be a Commendation of the Time, then otherwise: For Men, were wont, factiously, to Depend upon Noblemen; whereof ensued, many Partialities, and Divisions, besides much Interruption of Iustice, while the great Ones, did seek to bear out Those, that did depend upon them. So as the Kings of this Realm, finding, long since, that kind of Commandement, in Noblemen, Vnsafe unto their Crown, and Inconvenient unto their People,
thought meet, to restrain the same, by Provision of Lawes: whereupon grew the Statute of Reteiners: So as men, now, de∣pend upon the Prince, and the Lawes, and upon no other: A Matter, which hath also a Congruity, with the Nature; of the Time; As may be seen in other Countries; Namely in Spain, where their Grandees, are nothing so Potent, and so absolute, as they have been, in Times past. But otherwise, it may be truly affirmed, that the Rights, and preheminences, of the Nobility, were, never, more duly, and exactly, preserved unto them, then they have been, in her Majesties Times; The Precedence of Knights, given to the younger Sons of Barons; No Subpena's, awarded against the Nobility, out of the Chancery, but Letters; No Answer upon Oath, but upon Honour; Besides, a Number of other Priviledges, in Parlia∣ment, Court, and Countrey. So likewise, for the Countenance of her Majesty, and the State, in Lieutenancies, Commissions, Offices, and the like, there was never, a more Honourable, and Gracefull, Re∣gard, had of the Nobility; Neither was there, ever, a more Faith∣full Remembrancer, and exacter, of all these particular preheminen∣ces, unto them; Nor a more Diligent Searcher, and Register, of their Pedegrees, Alliances, and all Memorialls, of Honour, then that MAN, whom he chargeth, to have overthrown the Nobility; Because, a few of them, by immoderate Expence, are decayed, according to the Humor of the time, which he hath not been a∣ble, to resist, no not, in his own House. And as for Attainders, there have been, in 35 years, but Five, of any of the Nobility, where∣of, but Two, came to Execution, and one of them, was accom∣panied, with Restitution of Blood, in the Children: Yea, all of them, except Westmerland, were such, as whether it were, by Favour of Law, or Government, their Heirs have, or are like to have, a great Part of their Possession. And so much, for the No∣bility. Concerning the State o the Common subect.Touching the Oppression, of the People, he mentioneth four points. 1. The Conumption, of People, in the Wars. 2. The Interruption, of Traffick. 3. The Corruption, of Iustice. 4. The Multitude, of Taxations: Unto all which points, there needeth no long Speech. For the first, (thanks be to God;) the Benedi∣ction of Crescite and Multiplicamini, is not so weak, upon this Realm of ngland, but The Population thereof, may afford, such Losse of Men, as were sufficient, for the Making our late Wars; and were, in a perpetuity, without being seen, either in City, or Countrey. We ead, that when the Romans, did take Cense, of their People, whereby the Citizens, were numbred, by the Poll, in the beginning of a great War, and afterwards, again, at the ending, there, sometimes, wanted a Third Part, of the Number: But let our Muster Books be perused, (those, I say, that certifie, the Num∣ber, of all Fighting Men, in every Shire,) of vicesimo of the Queen; At what time, except a Handfull of Souldiers, in the Low Coun∣tries, we expended no Men in the VVars; And now again, at
this present time, & there will appear, small Diminution. There be many Tokens, in this Realm, rather of Presse, and Surcharge, of People, then of Want, and Depopulation, which were before recited. Besides, it is a better Condition, of Inward Peace, to be accompani∣ed, with some Exercise, of no Dangerous Warr, in Forrain parts, then to be, utterly, without Apprentisage, of Warr; whereby, People grow Effeminate, and unpractised, when Occasion shall be. And it is, no small strength, unto the Realm, that in these Warrs of Exer∣cise, and not of Perill, so many of our People, are trained; And so many, of our Nobility, and Gentlemen, have been made, Excellent Leaders, both by Sea, and Land. As for that he objecteth, we have no Provision, for Souldiers, at their Return; Though that Point, hath not been, altogether neglected; yet I wish, with all my Heart, that it were more Ample, then it is; Though, I have read, and heard, that in all Estates, upon Casheering, and Disban∣ding, of Souldiers, many have endured Necessity. For the Stopping of Traffique, as I referred my Self, to the Muster-Books, for the First; So I refer my Self, to the Custome-Books, up∣on this; which will not lye; And do make Demonstration, of no Abatement, at all, in these last years, but rather of Rising, and En∣crease. We know, of many in London, and other places, that are, within a small time, greatly come up, and made Rich, by Mer∣chandizing: And a Man, may speak, within his Compasse, and affirm; That our Prizes, by Sea, have countervailed, any Prizes, upon us. And as to the Iustice, of this Realm, it is true, that Cunning, and Wealh, have bred, many Sutes, and Debates, in Law: But let those Points be considered: The Integrity, and Sufficiency, of those, which supply, the Iudiciall places, in the Queens Courts; The good Lawe, that have been made, in her Majesties time, against Infor∣mers, and Promoters; And for the bettering of Trialls; The Exam∣ple, of Severity, which is used, in the Star-chamber, in oppressing Forces, and Frades; The Diligence, and Stoutness, that is used, by Iustices of Assises, in Encountring, all Countenancing, and Bearing of Causes, in the Countrey, by their Authorities, and Wisedome; The great Favours, that have been used, towards Coppy-holders, and Customary Tenants, which were, in ancient times, meerly, at the Discretion, and Mercy, of the Lord; And are now, continually, re∣lieved, from hard Dealing, in Chancery, and other Courts of Equity: I say, let these, and many other Points, be considered; and Men will, worthily, conceive, an Honourable Opinion, of the Iustice, of England. Now to the Points, of Levies, and Distributions, of Money, which he calleth Exactions. First, very coldly, he is not abashed, to bring in, the Gathering, for Paules Steeple, and the Lottery Trifles: Whereof, the former, being but a Voluntary Collection, of that, Men were freely disposed, to give, never grew, to so great a Sum, as was sufficient, to finish the Work, for which it was appointed:
And so, I imagine, it was converted, into some other use; like to that Gathering, which was, for the Fortifications of Paris, save that, the Gathering, for Paris, came, to a much greater, though, (as I have heard,) no competent Sum. And for the Lottery, it was but a Novelty, devised, and followed, by some particular persons, and onely allowed by the State, being as a Gain of Hazzard: Wherein, if any Gain was, it was, because many Men, thought Scorn, after they had fallen, from their greater hopes, to fetch their odd Money. Then he mentioneth Loanes, and Privy Seales; Wherein, he sheweth great Ignorance, and Indiscretion, consi∣dering the Payments, back again, have been, very Good, and Cer∣tain; And much, for her Majesties Honour. Indeed, in other Prin∣ces Times, it was not wont, to be so: And therefore, though the Name, be not so pleasant, yet the Vse of them, in our Times, have been, with small Grievance. He reckoneth also, new Customes upon Cloathes, and new Impost upon Wines. In that of Cloathes, he is deceived; For the ancient Rate of Custome, upon Cloathes was not raised, by her Majesty, but by Queen Mary, a Catholique Queen: And hath been, commonly, continued by her Majesty; Except, he mean, the Computation, of the odd yards, which, in strict Duty, was ever answerable; Though the Error, were but lately, looked into, or rather, the Tolleration, taken away. And to that of Wines, being a Forrain Merchandize, and but a Delicacy, and of those which might be forborn, there hath been, some Encrease of Imposition, which can rather make, the Price of Wine Higher, hen the Merchant poorer. Lastly, touching the Number of Subsidies, it is true, that her Majesty, in respect, of her great Charges, of her Warrs, both by Sea, and Land, against such a Lord of Treasure, as is the King of Spain: Having, for her part, no Indies, nor Mines; And the Revenues, of the Crown, of England, being such, as they lesse grate, upon the People, then the Revenues, of any Crown, or State in Europe; Hath, by the Assent, of Parliament, according to the an∣cient Customes, of this Realm, received, divers Subsidies, of her Peo∣ple; which, as they have been employed, upon the Defence, and preservation, of the Subject; Not upon Excessive Buildings, nor upon Immoderate Donatives, Nor upon Triumphs and Pleasures; Or any the like veines, of Dissipation, of Treasure; which have been Familiar, to many Kings: So have they been yielded, with great good will, and cheerfulness; As may appear, by other kinds of Benevolence, presented to her, likewise, in Parliament; which her Majesty, neverthelesse, hath not put in Ure. They have been Taxed also, and Asseissed, with a very Light, and Gentle Hand; And they have been spared, as much, as may be; As may appear, in that, her Majesty, now twice, to spare the Subject, hath sold, of her own Lands. But he, that shall look, into other Countries, and conider the Taxes, and Tallages, and Impositions, and Assises, and the like, that are every where in use; Will find, that the English Man, is the most Master, of his own Valuation, and the least bit∣ten
in his Purse, of any Nation, of Europe. Nay, even at this In∣stant, in the Kingdome of Spain, notwithstanding the Pioners, do still work, in the Indian Mines, the Iesuites, most, play the Pioners, and Mine, into the Spaniards Purses; And under the Colour, of a Ghostly Exhortation, contrive the greatest Exaction, that ever was, in any Realm. Thus much, in Answer, of these Calumniations, I have thought good to note, touching the present state, of England: which state is such, that whosoever, hath been, an Architect, in the Frame there∣of, under the Blessing of God, and the Vertues of our Soveraign, nee∣ded not, to be ashamed, of his Work. 3. Of the Proceedings, against the pretended Catho∣liques; Whether they have been Violent, or Mo∣derate, and Necessary. I Find, her Majesties Proceedings, generally, to have been groun∣ded, upon two Principles: The one; That Consciences, are not to be Forced, but to be Wonn, and reduced, by the Force of Truth, by the Aide of Time, and the Vse, of all good Meanes, of Instruction, or Perswa∣sion. The other; That Causes of Conscience, when they exceed their Bounds, and prove to be Matter of Faction, leese their Nature; And that Soveraign Princes, ought, distinctly, to punish the Practise, or Contempt, though coloured, with the Pretences, of Conscience, and Religion. According to these two Principles, her Majesty, at her Comming, to the Crown, utterly disliking, of the Tyranny, of the Church of Rome, which had used, by Terrour, and Rigour, to seek Commande∣ment, over Mens Faiths, and Consciences, Although, as a Prince, of great Wisdome, and Magnanimity, she suffered, but the Exercise of one Religion, yet her Proceedings, towards the Papists, was with great Lenity; Expecting the good Effects, which Time might work in them. And therefore, her Majesty, revived not the Lawes, made in 28o, and 35o, of her Fathers Raign; Whereby, the Oath of Supre∣macy, mought have been, offered, at the Kings Pleasure, to any Subject, though he kept his Conscience, never so modestly to him∣self; And the Refusall, to take the same Oath, without Further Circumstance, was made Treason: But, contrariwise, her Maje∣sty, not liking, to make Windowes, into Mens Hearts, and Secret Thoughts, Except the Abundance of them, did overflow, into Ouvert, and Expresse, Acts, and Affirmations; Tempered her Law so, as it
restraineth, only manifest Disobedience, in impugning, and im∣peaching, advisedly, and ambitiously, her Majesties supream pwer; And Maintaining, and Extolling, a Forrain Iurisdction. And as or the Oath, it was altred, by her Majesty, into a more gratull Form; the Harshesse, of the Name, and Appellation, of Suprm Head was removed; And the Penalty, of the Reusall thereof, ur∣ned, into a Disablement, to take any Promotion, or to exercise any charge; And yet that, with a Liberty, of being Revested, therein, if any Man shall accept thereof, during his Life. But after many years Toleration, of a Multitude, of Factios Pa¦pists; When Pius Quintus, had Excommunicated her Majsty; And the Bill, of Excommunication, was published in London; Whereby, her Majesty, was, in a sort, proscribed, and all her Subjects, drawn, upon pain of Damnation, from her Obediene; And that, ther up∣on, as upon a Principall Motive, or Preparative, followed, the Re∣bellion, in the North; yet, notwithstanding, because many, of those Evill Humours, were, by that Rebellion, partly, purged; And that she feared, at that time, no Forrain Invasion; And much les, the Attempts, of any, within the Realm, not backd, by some Forain Succours, from without; she contented her self, to make a Law, against that speciall Case, of Bringing in, or publishing, of Bulls, or the like Instruments: Whereunto was added, a Prohibi∣tion, not upon Pain of Treason, but of an Inferiour Degree of unish∣ment, against bringing in, of Agnus Dei's, Hallowed Beades, and such other Merchandise, of Rome; As are well known, not to be any Essentiall Part of the Roman Religion; but only to be used, in practise, as Love-Tokens, to enchant, and bewitch, the people Affections, from their Allegeance, to their Naturall Soveraign. In all other Points, her Majesty continued her former Leniy. But, when about the 20th. year of her Raign, she had discove∣red, in the King of Spain, an Intention, to Invade her Dominions; And that a principall Point, of the Plot, was, to prepare, a Party, within the Realm, that mought adhere to the Forrainer: And that the Seminaries, began to blossome, and to send forth, dayly, Priests, and professed Men, who should, by vow, taken at Shrif, reconcile her Subjects, from her Obedience; yea, and bind, many of them, to attempt, against her Majesties, Sacred Person; And tha, by the Poyson they spred, the Humours, of most Papists, were al∣tred; And that, they were no more Papists in Custome, but Ppists, in Treasonable Faction: Then were there, New Lawes made, fo the punishment of such, as should submit themselves, to Re∣concilements, or Renunciations, of Obedience. For it is to be un∣derstood, that this Manner of Reconcilement, in Confession, is of the same Nature, and Operation, that the Bull, it self, was of, with this onely difference; That whereas, the Bull, assoyled the Sub∣jects, from their Obedience, at once, the other doth it, one by one. And therefore it is, both more Secret, & more Insinuative, into the Conscience, being joyned with no lesse Matter, then an Absolution,
from Mortall Sin. And because, it was a Treason, carried in the Cloudes, and in wonderfull Secresie, and came seldome to Light; And that there was no Presumption, thereof so great, as the Recusants, to come to Divine Service, because it was set down, by their Decrees; That to come to Church, before Reconcilement, was to live in Schism; but to come to Church, after Reconcilement, was, absolutely, Hereticall, and Damnable. There∣fore there were added new Lawes, containing a Punishment pecuniary, against the Recusants; Not to enforce Consciences, but to Enfeeble those, of whom it rested Indifferent, and Ambigu∣ous, whether they were reconciled, or no? For there is no doubt, but if the Law, of Recusancy, (which is challeged, to be so Ex∣tream, and Rigorous,) were thus qualified; That any Recusant, that shall, voluntarily, come in, and take his Oath, that He, or She, were never reconciled, should, immediatly, be discharged, of the Penalty, and Forfeiture, of the Law; They would be so far, from liking well, of that Mitigation, as they would cry out, it was made to entrap them. And when, notwithstanding, all this provision, this Poyson was dispersed so secretly, as that there was no Meanes to stay it, but to restrain the Merchants, that brought it in; Then was there lastly added, a Law, whereby such Sediti∣ous Priests, of the New Erection, were exiled; And those, that were, at that time, within the Land, shipped over; And so com∣manded, to keep hence, upon Pain, of Treason. This hath been the Proceeding, with that Sort, though inter∣mingled, not onely, with sundry Examples, of her Majesties Grace, towards such, as, in her wisdome, she knew to be Papists, in Con∣science, and not in Faction; But, also, with an extraordinary Mitigation, towards the Offenders, in the Highest Degree, convict∣ed by Law, if they would protest: That, in Case, this Realm, should be invaded, with a Forrain Army, by the Popes Authority, for the Catholick Cause, (as they term it,) they would, take part, with her Majesty, and not adhere, to her enemies. And whereas he saith, no Priest dealt in matter of State, (Ballard onely excepted,) it appeareth by the Records, of the Confession, of the said Ballard, and sundry other Priests; That all Priests, at that time, generally, were made acquainted, with the Invasion then intended, and afterwards put in Act; And had received Instructions, not onely, to move an Expectati∣on, in the People, of a Change; But also, to take their Vows, and Promises, in Shrift, to adhere to the Forrainer. Insomuch, that one, of their Principall Heads, vaunted himself, in a Letter, of the Devise, saying That it was a Point, the Counsell of Eng∣land, would never dream of; Who would imagine, that they should practise, with some Noble-Man, to make him Head, of their Faction; whereas they took a Course, onely, to deal, with the People; And them so severally, as any One apprehended, should be able to appeal, no more then Himself, except the
Priests; who, he knew, would reveal nothing, that was utered in Confession. So Innocent, was this Princely, Priestly, Functi∣on, which thi Man taketh, to be, but a matter of Conscience; and thinketh it Reason, it should have free Exercise, throughout the Land. 4. Of the Disturbance, of the Quiet, of Christendom; And, to what Causes, it may be justly assigned. IT is indeed a Question, (which those, that look into Matters of State, do well know, to fall out very often; though this Libeller, seemeth to be more ignorant thereof;) whether the Ambition of the more Mighty State, or the Iealousie, of the Lesse Mighty State, be to be charged, with Breach of Amity. Hereof, as there be many Examples, so there is one, so proper, unto the present Matter; As though it were, many years since, yet it seemeth, to be a Parable, of these Times; and namely, of the Proceedings, of Spain, and England. The States, Then, which answered, to these two, Now, were Macedon, and Athens. Consider therefore the Resemblance, between the two Philips, of Macedon, and Spain. He of Macedon, aspired, to the Monarchy, of Greece, as He of Spain, doth, of Eu∣rope: But more apparently then the First; Because, that Design, was discovered in his Father, Charles the fifth, and so left him by Descent: whereas Philip of Macedon, was the first, of the Kings, of that Nation, which fixed, so great Conceits, in his Breast. The Course, which this King, of Macedon, held, was not, so much, by great Armies, and Invasions; (Though these wanted not, when the Case required;) But by Practise; By sowing, of Facti∣ons, in States, and by Obliging, sundry particular persons, of Great∣nesse. The State of Opposition, against his Ambitious procedings, was onely the State of Athens, as now is, the State of England, a∣gainst Spain. For Lacedemon and Thebes, were both low, as France is now; And the rest, of the States of Greece, were, in Power, and Territories, far inferiour. The People of Athens, were ex∣ceedingly, affected to Peace; And weary of Expence. But the Point, which I chiefly make the Compaison, was, that of the Oratours, which were, as Counsellours, to a Popular State; Such as were sharpest fighted, and looked deepest, into the Projects, and and spreading, of the Macedonians, (doubting still, that the Fire, after it licked up, the Neighbour States, and made it self Oppor∣tunity to passe, would at last, take hold, of the Dominions, of Athns, with so great Advantages, as they should not be able to remedy it;) were ever charged, both by the Declarations, of the King of Macedon, and by the Imputation, of such Athenians, as
were corrupted, to be of his Faction, as the Kindlers of Troubles, and Disturbers, of the Peace, and Leagues: But, as that Party, was, in Athen, too Mighty, so as it discountenaced, the true Coun∣sels, of the Oratours; And so bred, the Ruine, of that Stte; And accomplished the Ends, of that Philip: So, it is to be hoped, that i a Monarhy, where there are, commonly, better Intelligences, and Resolutions, then in a popular State, those Plots, as they are d∣tected already, So they will be resisted, and made Frustrate. But, to follow the Libeller, in his own Curse, the Sum, of that, which he delivereth, concerning the Imputation; As well, of the Interruption, of the Amity, between the Crowns, of England, and of Spain; As the Disturbance, of the generall Peace, of Christen∣dome; Unto the English Proceedings, and not, to the Ambitius Ap∣petites of Spain, may be reduced, into Three Points. 1. Touching the Poceeding, of Spain, and England, towards their Neighbour States. 2. Touching the Proceeding, of Spain, and England bewen themselves. 3. Touching the Articles, and Conditions, which it pleaseth him, as it were, in the behalf of England, to Pen, and propose, for the treating, and Concluding, o an Vni∣versall Peace. In the First, he discovereth, how the King, of Spain, ner offered Molestation; Neither, unto the States of Italy, upon which he confineth, by Naples, and Millaine; Neither, unto the States of ermany, unto whom e confineth, by a part of ur∣gundy, and the Low-Countries; Nor unto Portugall, till it was de∣volved, to him, in Title, upon which he confineh, by Spain: But, contrariwise, as one, that had, in precious regad, the Peace of Christendom, he designed, from the beginning, to turn his whole Forces, upon the Turk. Oely, he confesseth, that agreeable to his Devotion, which apprehended, as well the purging of Chri∣stendom, from Heresies, as the Enlarging thereof, upon the In∣fidels; He was ever ready, to give Succours, unto the French King, aginst the Huguonotts, especially being their own Subjects; Whereas, on the other side, England, (as he affirmeth,) hath not only sowed, Toubles, and Dissentions, in France, and Scotland; (The one, their Neighbour, upon the Continent; The other, divi∣ded, onely, by the Narrow Seas;) But also, hath actually invaded both Kingdomes. For, as for the Matters, of the Low-Countries, they belong to the Dealings, which have passed by Spain. In Answer whereof, it is worthy the Consideration, how it pleased God, in tht King, to cross, one Passion, by another; And namely, that Passion, which mought have proved dangerous, unto all urope (which was his Ambition,) by another, which was only hurtfull to himself, and his own; Which was, Wrath, and Indignation, towards his Subjects, the Netherlands. For after that, he was setled in his Kingdom, and freed from some Fear of
the Turk; Revolving his Fathers design, in aspiring to a Monarchy of urope; casting his Eye, principally, upon the two Potent King∣domes, of France, and England; And remembring, how his Father, had once promised unto himself, the Conquest of the one; And how himself, by Marriage, had, lately, had some Possession of the other; And seeing, that Diversity, of Religion, was entered, into both these Realmes; And that France, was fallen unto Princes weak, and in Minority; And England, unto the Government of a Lady, In whom, he did not expect, that Pollicy, of Government, Magnanimity, & Felicity, which since he hath proved; Concluded, (as the Spani∣ards are great Waiters upon Time, & ground their Plots deep;) upon two Points: The one, to profess an extraordinary Patronage, & Defence, of the Roman Religion; making account thereby, to have Factions, in both Kingdoms; (In England, a Faction, directly against the State; In France, a Faction, that did consent, indeed in Re∣ligion, with the King, and therefore, at first shew, should seem un∣proper, to make a Party for a Forreiner. But he foresaw well e∣nough, that the King of France, should be forced, (to the end, to retain Peace, and Obedience,) to yeeld, in some things, to those of the Religion; which would, undoubtedly, alienate, the Fiery, and more violent, sort of Papists: Which Preparation, in the People, added, to the Ambition, of the Family, of Guise, (which he nourish∣ed or an Instrument,) would, in the end, make a Party for him a∣gainst, the State, as since, it proved, and mought well have done, long before: As may well appear, by the Mention, of League, and Associations, which is above 25. years old in France. The other Point, he concluded upon, was; That his Low-Countries, was the aptest place, both for Ports and Shipping; in respect of England; And for Sciuation, in respect of France; ha∣ving goodly Frontier Townes, upon that Realm; And joyning, also, upon Germany, whereby they might receive in, at Peasure, any Forces, of Almaines; To annoy, and offend, either Kingdom. The Impediment was, the Inclination of the People; which receiving, a wonderfull Commodity, of Trades, out of both Realmes, especi∣ally of England; And having been, in ancient League, and Confe∣deracy, with our Nation; And having been, also, Homagers unto rance; He knew, would be, in no wise, disposed, to either War. Whereupon, he resolved, to reduce them, to a Martiall Govern∣ment; Like unto that, which he had established in Naples, and Millain; upon which suppression of their Liberties, ensued the Defection, of those Provinces. And about the same time, the Re∣formed Religion, found entance, in the same Countries; So as the King, enflamed, with the Resistance, he found, in the first Part, of his Plots; And also, because, he mought not dispense, with his other Principle, in yielding, to any Toleration, of Religion; And withall, expecting, a shorter work of it, then he found; Became, passionatly bent, to Reconquer those Countries; Wherein, he hath, consumed, infinite Treasure, and Forces. And this is the true
Cause, if a Man will look into it, that hath made the King of Spain so good a Neigbbour; Namely, that he was so entangled, with the Wars, of the Low-Countries, as he could not intend, any other En∣terprise. Besides, in Enterprizing upon Italy, he doubted, first, the Displeasure, of the See of Rome; with whom, he meant, to run, a Course, of strait Conjunction: Also, he doubted, it might invite, the Turk, to return. And for Germany, he had a fresh Ex∣ample, of his Father; who, when he had annexed, unto the Domi∣nions, which he now possesseth, the Empire of Almaign, neverthe∣lesse, sunck in that Enterprize: whereby, he perceived, that the Nation, was, of too strong a Composition, for him, to deal with∣all: Though, not long since, by practise, he could have been contented, to snatch up, in the East, the Countrey of Emden. For Por∣tugal, first, the Kings thereof, were good Sons, to the See of Rome; Next he had no Colour, of Quarrel, or pretence; Thirdly, they were Officious unto him: yet, i you will believe, the Genuese, (who, otherwise, writeth, much to the Honour, and Advantage, of the Kings of Spain;) It seemeth, he had a good mind, to make himself a way, into that Kingdom; seeing that, for that purpose, (as he reporteth,) he did, artificially, nourish, the yong King Sbastian, in the Voyage of Affrick, expecting that overthrow wch followed. As for his Intention, to warr upon the Inidels, and Turks, it ma∣keth me think, what Francis Guicciardiue, a wise writer of History, speaketh, of his great Grand Father; Making, a Judgement of him, as Historiographers use: That he did, alwayes, mask, and vail, his Appetites, with a Demonstration, of a Devout, and Holy, Intention, to the Advancement, of the Church, and the Publick Good. His Father, also, when he received Advertisement, of the taking of the French King, prohibited, all Ringings, and Bonfires, and o∣ther Tokens of Joy, and said; Those were to be reserved, for Victories, upon Infidels; On whom, he meant, never, to warre. Many a Cruzada, hath the Bishop of Rome, granted to him, and his Predeces∣sours, upon that Colour; Which all, have been spent, upon the Effusion, of Christian Bloud: And now, this year, the Levies of Germans, which should have been made, under hand, for France, were coloured, with the pretence, of Warr, upon the Turk; Which the Princes of Germany, descrying, not onely brake the Levies, but threatned the Commissioners, to hang the next, that should offer, the like Abuse: So that this Form, of Dissembling, is Familiar, and, as it were, Hereditary, to the King of Spain. And as for his Succours, given to the French King, against the Protestants, he could not chuse, but accompany the Pernicious Counsels, which still he gave to the French Kings, of breaking their Edicts, and admitting of no Pacification, but pursuing their Sub∣jects with Mortall Warre, with some Offer of Aides; which having promised, he could not, but in some small Degree, perform; whereby also, the Subject of France, (namely, the violent Papist,) was enured, to depend upon Spain. And so much, for the King of Spaines, proceedings, towards other States.
Now for ours, And first, touching the Point, wherein, he char∣th us, to be the Authours, of Troubles, in Scotland, and France: It will appear to any, that have been well enformed, of the Memo∣is of these Affaires; That the Troubles, of those Kingdomes, were, indeed, chiefly kindled, by one, and the same Family, of the Guise: A Family, (as was partly touched before) as particularly dvoted, now for many years together, to Spain, as the Order, of the Isuies, is. This House of Guise, aving, of late years, extra∣ordinarily flourished, in the eminent Verue, of a few Persons whose Ambition, neverthelesse, was nothing inferiour to their vertue; But being of a House, notwithstanding, which the Princes, of the Bloud, of France, reckoned but as strangers; Aspired, to a Greatness, more then Civill, and proportionable to their Cause, wheresoever they had Authority: And accordingly, under Colour of Consanguinity, and Religion, they brought into Scotland, in the year 1559, and in the Absence, of the King, and Queen, French Forces, in great numbers: whereupon, the Ancient Nobility, of that Realm, seeing the imminent danger, of Reducing that Kingdome, under the Tyranny of Strangers, did pray, (according to the good Intelligence, between the two Crowns,) hr Majesties Neigh ourly orces. And so it is true, that the Action, being very Just, & Honourable, her Majesty undertook it, expelled the Strangers, and restored the Nobility, to their Degrees, and the State to Peace. After when Certain Noble-Men of Scotland, of the same Faction of use; had, during the Minority of the King, possessed them∣selves, of his Person, to the end, to abuse his Authority, many wayes; And namely, to make a Breach, between Scotland, and England, her Majesties Forces, were again, in the year, 1582. by the Kings best, and truest Servants, sought, and required; And, with the Forces of her Maesty, prevailed so far, as to be possessed, of the Castle of Edenborough, the principall part of that Kingdome; which, neverthelesse, her Majesty, incontinently, with all Ho∣nour, and Sincerity, restored; After she had put the King, into good, and faithfull, Hands; And so, ever since, in all the Occasi∣ons, of Intestine Troubles, whereunto that Nation hath been ever subject, she hath performed unto the King, all possible good Of¦fices, and such, as he doth, with all good Affection, acknow∣ledge. The same House of Cuise, under Colour of Alliance, during the Raign, of Francis the second, and by the Support, and pract, of the Queen Mother; who desiring, to retain the Regency, under her own Hands during the Minority of Charles the ninth, used those of uise as a Counterpoise, to the Princes, of the Bloud; obtained also, great Authority, in the Kingdome, of France; whereupon, ha∣ving raised, and moved, Civill Warrs, under preence of Religion; But indeed, to enfeeble, and depresse, the Ancient Nobility, of that Realm; The contrary Part, being compounded, of the Bloud Roy∣all, and the Greatest Officers, of the rown; opposed themselves,
onely, against their Insolency; And, to their Aides, called in, her Majesties Forces, giving them, for security, the Town of New-Ha∣ven: which neverthelesse, when as afterwards, having by the Reputation, of her Majesties Confederation, made their Peace, in Ef∣fect, as they would themselves; They would, without observing any Conditions, that had passed, have had it back again; Then, indeed, it was held by force, and so had been long, but for the great Mortality, which it pleased God, to send amongst our Men. After which time, so far was her Majesty, from seeking, to sowe, or kindle, New Troubles; As continually, by the Sollicitation, of her Embassadours, she still perswaded, with the Kings, both Charles the 9th, and Hen. the 3d, to keep, and observe, their Edicts of Paci∣fication, and to preserve their Authority, by the Union, of their Subjects: which Counsell, if it had been as happily followed, as it was prudently, and sincerely, given, France, had been, at this day, a most Flourishing Kingdome, which is now, a Theater of Mise∣ry. And now, in the end, after that the Ambitious Practises, of the same House, of Guise, had grown to that Ripeness, that gathering further strength, upon the weakness, and Misgovernment, of the said King Hen. 3d; He was fain, to execute, the Duke of Guise, with∣out Ceremony, at Bloys: And yet, neverthelesse, so many Men were embarqued, and engaged, in that Conspiracy, as the Flame there∣of, was nothing asswaged; But, contrarywise, that King Hen. grew distressed, so as he was enforced, to implore, the Succours of England, from her Majesty; Though no way, interessed, in that Quarrell; Nor, any way, obliged, for any good offices, she had received of that King; yet she accorded the same. Before the Arrivall of which Forces, the King, being, by a sacrilegious Iacobine, murthered, in his Camp, near Paris, yet they went on, and came, in good time, for the Assistance, of the King, which now raigneth; The Justice of whose Quarrell, together with the long continued Amity, and good Intelligence, which her Majesty had with him, hath moved her Majesty, from time to time, to supply with great Aides; And yet, she never, by any Demand, urged upon him, the putting into her Hands, of any Town, or Place. So as, upon this, that hath been said, let the Reader judge, whether hath been, the more Just, and Honourable, Proceeding; And the more free, from Ambition, and Passion, towards other States; That of Spain, or that of England? Now, let us examine the proceedings, re∣ciproque, between themselves. Her Majesty, at her Comming to the Crown, found her Realm, en∣tangled, with the Wars of France, and Scotland, her nearest Neigh∣bours: which Wars were grounded, onely, upon the Spaniards Quarrell; But, in the pursuit of them, had lost England, the Town of Calice. Which, from the 21. year, of King Edward 3, had been possessed, by the Kings of England. There was a meeting near Bur∣deaux, towards the end, of Queen Maries Raign, between the Commissioners, of France, Spain, and England; and some Overture,
of Peace was made; But broke off, upon the Article, of the Re∣sitution, of Callice. After Queen Maries Death, the King of Spain, thinking himself, dischaged, of that Difficulty, (though in ho∣our, he was no lesse bound to it, then before,) renewed the like Treaty, wherein her Majesty concurred: so as the Commissio∣ners, for the said Princes, met at Chasteau Cambrassi, near Cam∣bray. In the proceedings, of which Treaty, it is true, that at the first, the Commissioners, of Spain, for form, and in Demonstrati∣on onely, pretended to stand firm, upon the Demand of Callice but it was discerned, indeed, that the Kings Meaning was, after ome Ceremonies, and perfunctory Insisting thereupon, to grow, apart, to a eace, with the French, excluding her Majesty; And so to leave her, to make her own Peace, after her People, Had made his Wars. Which Covert Dealing, being politickly look∣ed into, her Majesty had reason, being newly invested in her Kingdom; And, of her own Inclination, being affected to Peace; To conclude the same, with such Conditions as she mought: And yet, the King of Spain, in his Dissimulation, had so much Advantage, as she was fain, to do it, in a Treaty, apart, with the Frnch; whereby to one, that is not informed, of the Coun∣sels, and Treaties of State, as they passed, it should seem to be, a voluntary Agreement, of her Majesty, whereto the King of Spain, would not be party, whereas, indeed, he left her no other choice. And this was the first Assay, or Earnest penny, of that Kings, good affection, to her Majesty. About the same time, when the King was sollicited, to renew, such Treaties, and Leagues, as had passed, between the two Crowns, of Spain, and England, by the Lord Cobham, sent unto him, to acquaint him, with the Death of Queen Mary; And afterwards, by Sir Thomas Challenor, and Sir Thomas Chamberlain, successive∣ly, Embassadours, Resident in his Low Countries; Who had or∣der; divers times, during their Charge, to make Overtures thereof, both unto the King, and certain principall persons about him, And lastly, those former Motions, taking no effect; By Viscount Montacute, and Sir Thomas Chamberlain, sent unto Spain, in the year 1560; no other Answer, could be had, or obtained, of the King, but that, the Treaties did stand, in as good Force, to all Intents, as new Ratification, could make them. An Answer strange at that time, but very conformable, to his Proceedings since; which belike, even then, were closely smothered, in his own Breast. For had he not, at that time, some hidden Aliena∣tion, of Mind, and Design, of an Enemy, towards her Majesty; So wise a King, could not be ignorant; That the Renewing, and Ratifying, of Treaties, between Princes, and States, do adde great Life, and Force, both of Assurance, to the parties themselves, and Countenance, and Reputation to the World besides; And have, for that cause, been commonly, and necessarily, used, and pra∣ctised.
In the Message, of Viscount Montacute, it was also contained, that he should crave, the Kings Counsell, and Assistance, accor∣ing to Amity, and good Intelligence, upon a Discovery, of cer∣tain pernicious Plots, of the House of Guise, to annoy this Realm, by the way of Scotland: whereunto the Kings Answer, was so Dark, and so cold, as Nothing could be made of it; Till he had made, an Exposition of it, himself, by effects, in the expresse Restraint, of Munition, to be carried, out of the Low-Countries, unto the Siege of Leith; Because our Nation, was to have supply, thereof, from thence. So as, in all the Negotiations, that passed, with that King, still, her Majesty, received no satisfaction, but more and more suspiious, and Bad Tokens, of evill affection. Soon after, when upon that Project, which was disclosed, be∣fore the King had resolved, to disannull the Liberties, and Priviled∣ges, unto his Subjects, the Netherlands, anciently belonging; And to establish amongst them, a Marshall Government; which the People, being very Wealthy; And inhabiting Townes, very strong, and Defensible, by Fortifications, both of Nature, and the Hand, could not endure; there followed the Defection, and revolt, of those Countries. In which Action, being the greatest, of all those, which have passed, between Spain, and England, the Proceeding, of her Majesty, hath been so Just, and mingled, with so many Honourable Regards, as Nothing, doth so much clear, and ac∣quite, her Majesty, not only from Passion, bt also, from all Dis∣honourable Pollicy. For first, at the beginning of the Troubles, she did impart, unto Him, faithfull, and sincere, Advise, of the Course, that was to be taken, for the quietting, and appeasing them; And, expresly, forewarned, both himself, and such as were, in principall Charge, in those Countries, during the Wars of the danger like to ensue, if he held, so heavy a Hand, over that People; le, they should cast themselves, into the Arms, of a Stranger. But finding, the Kings Mind, so exulcerate, as he re∣jcted all Counsell, that tended, to Mild, and Gracious, procee∣ding, her Majesty, neverthelesse, gave not over her Honourable Resolution; (which was, if it were possible, to reduce, and recon∣cile, those Countries, unto the obedience, of their Naturall Sove∣raign, the King of Spain: And if that, mought not be, yet to preserve them, from alienating themselves, to a Ferrain Lord; As namely, unto the French, with whom they much treated; And amongst whom the Enterprise of Flanders, was ever pro∣pounded, as a Mene to unite, their own Civill Dissensions;) Bt, patiently, temporizing, expected the good effect, which Time mought breed: And whensoever, the States grew, into Ex∣tremitie, of Despair, and thereby ready, to embrace the Offer, of any Forrainer; Then would her Majesty, yield them, some Relief of Money or permit, some Supply of Forces, to go over un∣to them; To the end, to interrupt, such violent Resolution: And still continued, to mediate, unto the King, some Just, and Ho∣nourable,
Capitulations, of Grace, and Accord; Such, as where∣by, alwayes, should have been preserved, unto him, such Inte∣rest, and Authority, as He, in Iustice, ould claim; Or a Prince, moderately minded, would seek to have. And this Course she held, interchangeably, seeking to mitigate, the Wrath of the King, and the Despair of the Countries; Till such Time, as, after the Death, of the Duke of Anjou; (Into whose Hands, accor∣ding to her Majesties prediction, but against her good liking, they had put themselves;) The Enemy pressing them, the uni∣ted Provinces, were received, into her Majesties Protection: which was, after such Time, as the King of Spain, had discovered himself, not onely an Implacable Lord to them, but also, a pro∣essed Enemy, unto her Majesty; having, actually, invaded Ireland, nd designed the Invasion of England. For it is to be noted, tha the like Offers, which were then made unto her Majesty; had been made to her, long before; but as long, as her Majesty conceived, any Hope, either of Making, their Peace; Or en∣tertaining her own, with Spain, she would never hearken there∣unto. And yet now, even at last, her Majesty retained, a sin∣gular, and evident Proof, to the World, of her Justice, and Moderation; In that, she refused, the Inheritance, and Soveraign∣ty, of those Goodly rovinces; which by the States, with much Instance, was pressed upon her; and being accepted, would hve wrought, greater Contentment, and Satisfaction, both to her Peo∣ple, and theirs; Being Countries, for the Scite; Wealth; Commodity of Traffick; Affection to our Nation; Obedience of the Subjects, (well used,) most convenient, to have been annexed, to the Crown of England; And withall, one Charge, Danger, and Offence of Spain; onely, took upon her, the Defence, and Protection, of their Liberties: Which Liberties, and Priviledges, are of that Nature, as they may justly, esteem themselves, but Conditionall Subjects, to the King of Spain; More justly then Aragon: And may make her Majesty, as justly esteem, the ancient Confederacies, and Treaties, with Burgundy, to be, of Force, rather, with the People, and Nation, then, with the Line, of the Duke; because it was, never, an Absolute Monarchy. So as, to summe up, her Ma∣jesties Proceedings, in this great Action, they have but this; That, they have sought, first, to restore them to Spain; Then, to keep them from Strangers; And never, to purchase them, to Her Self. But during all that time, the King of Spain, kept one tenour, in his Proceedings, towards her Majesty; Breaking forth, more and more, into Injuries, and Contempts: Her Subjects, trading in∣to Spain, have been, many of them, Burned; Some cast into the Gallies; Others have died in Prison, without any other Crimes committed, but upon Quarrells, pickt upon them, for ther Re∣ligion, here at home. Her Merchants, at the Sack of Antwerpe, were, diverse of them, spoyled, and put to their Ransomes
though they could not be charged, with any Part-taking: Neither, upon the Complaint, of Doctor Wilson, and Sir Edward Horsey, could any Redresse be had. A generall Arrest, was made, by the Duke, of Alva, of English mens, both Goods, and Persons, upon pretence, that certain Ships, stayed in this Realm, laden with Goods, and Money, of certain Merchants, of Genoa, belonged to that King: which Money, and Goods, was, afterwards, to the ut∣termost value, restored, and payed back: Whereas our Men, were far, from receiving, the like Iustice, on their side. Doctor Man, her Majesties Embassadour, received, during his Legation, sundry Indignities, himself, being Removed, out of Madrid, and Lodged, in a Village; As they are accustomed, to use, the Em∣bassadours of Moores: His Sonn, and Steward, forced, to assist, at a Mass, with Tapers in their Hands; Besides sundry other Contume∣lies, and Reproaches. But the Spoyling, or Damnifying, of a Mer∣chant; Vexation, of a Common Subject; Dishonour of an Embassa∣dour; Were rather, but Demonstrations of ill Disposition, then Effects; If they be compared, with Actions of State; Wherein He, and his Ministers, have sought the Overthrow, of this Govern∣ment: As in the year 1569. when the Rebellion, in the North part of England, brake forth; Who but the Duke of Alva, (then the Kings Lievetenant, in the Low-Countries,) and Don Guerres, of Espes, then his Embassador Lieger here, were discovered, to be chief Instruments, and Practisers; Having complotted, with the Duke of Norfolk, at the same time; As was proved, at the same Dukes Condemnation, that an Army, of 20000. Men, should have landed at Harwich, in aid of that Part, which the said Duke had made, within the Realm; And the said Duke, having spent, and imployed, 150000. Crownes, in that Preparation. Not contented thus, to have consorted, and assisted, her Maje∣sties Rebells, in England; He procured, a Rebellion, in Ireland: Ar∣ming, and Sending thither, in the year 1579, an Arch-Rebell, of that Country, Iames Fitz Morrice, which before was fled: And truly to speak, the whole course of Molestation, which her Ma∣jesty hath received, in that Realm, by the Rising, and Keeping on, of the Irish, hath been nourished, and fomented, from Spain but afterwards, most apparently, in the year, 1580, he invaded, the same Ireland,, with Spaish Forces, under an Italian Colonell, By Name San Iesopho, being but the Fore-runners, of a greater Power; Which, by Treaty, between Him, and the Pope, should have followed: But that, by the speedy Defeat, of those for∣mer, they were discouraged, to pursue the Action: Which In∣vasion, was proved, to be done, by the Kings, own Orders; both by the Letters, of Secretary Escouedo, and of Guerres, to the King: And also, by divers other Letters, wherein, the particular Con∣ferences, were set down, concerning this Enterprise, between Cardinall Riario, the Popes Legate, and the Kings Deputy in Spain; Touching the Generall, the Number of Men, the Contribution of Mo∣ney,
and the Manner, of the Prosecuting, of the Action; And by the Confession, of some of the Chiefest, of those, that were taken Prisoners, at the Fort: Which Act, being an Act, of Apparent ostility, added, unto all the Injuries, aforesaid; And accom∣panied, with a continuall Receit, Comfort, and Countenance, by Audences, Pensions, and Employments, which he gave to Traytours, and Fugitives, both English, and Irish; As Westmerlnd, Paget, En∣glfield, Baltinglasse, and Numbers of others; Did, sufficiently, ju∣sifie, and warrant, that pursuit of Revenge, which, (either in the Spyl of Carthagena, and San Domingo, in the Indies, by Mr Drak; Or, in the undertaking, the protection, of the Low-Coun∣reys whn the Earl of Leicester was sent over;) afterwards fol∣lwed. For befoe that time, her Majesty, though she stood up∣on her Guard, in respect, of the just Cause of Jealousie, which, te Sundry Injuries of that King, gave her, yet had entred, into no Oensie Acion, against Him. For oth, the Voluntary Forces, which Don Antonio, had collected, in this Realm, were, by express commandment, restrained; And Offer was made, of Restituti∣on, to the Spanish Embassadour, of such Treasure, as had been bought, into this Realm; upon Proof, that it had been taken by rong; And the Duke of Anjou, was, (as much as could stand, with the near Treaty, of a Marriage, which then, was very fo∣wad, between her Majesty, and the said Duke;) Diverted, from the Enterprise, of landers. But to conclude this Point; when that, some yeares after; the Invasion, and Conquest, of ths Land; Intended long before, but through many Crosses, ad Impediments, which the King o Spain, found in his Plots, deferred; Was, in the year 1588, at∣tempted; Her Majesty, not forgetting her own Nature, was con∣tent, at the same Instant, to Treat of a Peace; Not ignorantly, as a Prince, that knew not, in what forwardness, his preparations were; (For she had discovered them long before;) Nor fearful∣ly, as may appear, by the Articles, whereupon her Majesty, in that Treaty, stood; which were not, the Demands, of a Prince afraid; But onely, to spare the shedding, of Christian Bloud; And to shew, her constant Desire, to make her Raign Renowned, rather by Peace then victories: which Peace, was, on her part, treated sincerely; But, on his part, (as it should seem,) was but an Abuse; Thinking thereby, to have taken us more unprovided: So that the Duke of Parma, not liking, to be used as an Instrument, in such a Case, in regard of his particular Honour, would, sometimes, in Treating, interlace; That the King, his Master, ment to make his Peace, With his Sword in his Hand; Let it then be tried, upon an indifferent view, of the proceedings, of England, and Spain; Who it is, that Fisheth, in Troubled Waters; And hath disturbed, the Peace, of Christendome; And hath written, and described, all his Plots, in Bloud. There follow the Articles, of an Vniversall Peace, which the Li∣beller,
as a Commissioner, for the Estate of England, hath propoun∣ded, and are these: First, that the King of Spain; should recall such Forces, as of great compassion, to the Naturall People of France, he hath sent thither, to defend them, against a Relapsed Huguonott. Secondly, that he suffer, his Rebells, of Holland and Zeland, qui∣etly, to possesse the places, they hold; And to take unto them, all the Rest, of the Low-Countries also; Conditionally, that the English, may still keep, the possession, of such Port-Towns, as they have, and have some half a dozen more, an∣nexed unto them. Thirdly, tht the English Rovers, mought, peaceably, go, to his Indies; And there, take away his Treasure, and his Indies also. And thse Articles, being accorded, (he saith,) might follow that Peace, which passeth all understanding; As he calleth it, in a scurrile, and prophane Mockery, of the Peace, which Christians, enjoy with God, by the Attonement, which is made, by the Bloud of Christ; whereof the Apostle saith; That it passeth all understanding: But these his Articles, are, sure, mistaken; And indeed corrected, are briefly these: 1. That the King of France, be not impeached, in Reducing his Rebels, to obedience. 2. That the Netherlands, be suffered, to enjoy their Ancient Liberties, and Priviledges; And so Forces of Strangers, to be with-drawn, both English, and Spanish. 3. That all Nations, may trade, into the East, and West, Indies; yea discover, and occupy, such parts, as the Spaniard, doth not actually possesse; And are not, under Civill Go∣vernment, notwithstanding any Donation, of the Pope. 5. Of the Cunning, of the Libeller, in Palliation, of his malicious Invectives, against her Majesty, and the State, with pretence, of Taxing, onely the Actions, of the Lord Burghley. I Cannot, rightly, call this Point, Cunning, in the Libeller, but ra∣ther, good will to be Cunning, without skill, indeed, or Judge∣ment: For finding, that it had been, the Usuall, and Ready, pra∣ctise, of Seditious Subjects, to plant, and bend their Invectives, and Clamours; Not against the Soveraigns themselves, but against some such, as had Grace with them, and Authorities under them; He put, in ure, his Learning, in a wrong, and unproper, Case. For this hath some Appearance, to cover undutifull Invectives, when it is used, against Favourites, or New Vpstarts, and suddain-risen Counsellours: But, when it shall be practised, against One,
that hath been Counsellour, before her Majesties Time; And hath continued longer Counsellour, then any other Cousllur in Europe; One, that must needs have, been Great, if it wre but by Surviving alone, though he had no other Excellency; One, that hath passed the Degrees of Honour, with great Travell, and long Time, which quencheh alwayes Envy, except it be joyned, wth extreme Malice; Then, it appeareth, manifestly, to be but a Brick wall, at Tennis, to make the Defamation, and Hatred rebound, from the Counsellour, upon the Prince. And assuredly, they be very simple, to think, to abuse the VVorld, with those Shifts; Since, every Child, can tell the Fable; That the VVolfs Malice, was not to the Shepherd, but to his Dog. It is true, that these Men, have altred their Tune, twice, or thrice: when the Match, was in Treating, with the Duke, of Anjou, they spake Honey, as to her Majesty: All the Gall was uttered, against the Earl of Leicester. But, when they had gotten Heart, upon the Expectation, of the Invasion, they changed stile, and disclosed, all the Venome in the World, immediately, against her Majsty: what New Hope, hath made them return, their Sinons Note, in teaching Troy, how to save it self; I cannot tell. But, in the mean time, they do his Lordship, much Honour: For, the more despitefully, they inveigh, against his Lordship, the more Reason, hath her Majesty, to trust him, and the Realm to honour him. It was wont, to be a Token, of scarce a good Liedgeman, when the Enemy, spoiled the Coun∣trey, and left, any particular Mens Houses, or Fields, unwasted. 6. Certain true generall Notes upon the Actions of the Lord Burleigh. BUT above all the rest, it is a strange Fancy, in the Libeller, that he maketh his Lordship, to be, the Primum Mobile, in e∣very Action, without Distinction. That to him, her Majesty is Accomptant, of her Resolutions. That to him, the Earl of Leicster, and Mr. Secretary Walsingham, both Men, of great Power, and of great wit, and understanding, were but as Instruments; whereas, it is well knownn, that as to her Majesty, there was never a Counseller, of his Lordships long Continuance, that was so ap∣plyable, to her Majesties, Princely Resolutions; Endeavouring, al∣wayes, after Faithfull Propositions, and Remonstrances, and these in the best words, and the most Gratefull Manner; to rest upon such Conclusions, as her Majesty, in her own wisdome, determi∣neth, and them to execute to the best: So far, hath he been, from Contestation, or drawing her Majesty, into any his own Courses. And as, for the Forenamed Counsellours, and others, with whom his Lordship, hath consorted, in her Majesties service; It is rather true, that his Lordship, out of the Greatnesse, of his Experience,
and Wisdome; And, out of the Coldnesse, of his Nature, hath qua∣lified, generally, all Hard, and Extreame, Courses, as far, as the Ser∣vice of her Majesty, and the Safety, of the State, & the Making him∣self, compatible, with those, with whom he served, would permit. So far, hath his Lordship been, from inciting others, or running a full Course with them, in that kind. But yet, it is more strange, that this Man, should be so absurdly Malitious, as he should charge his Lordship, not onely, with all Actions of State, but also, with all the Faults, and Vices, of the Times; As if Curiosity, and Emulation, have bred some Controversies, in the Church; Though, (thanks be to God,) they extend, but to outward Things; As if Wealth, and the Cunning of Wits, have brought forth, Multitudes of Suits, in Law; As If, Excesse in Pleasures, and in Magnificence, joyned with the unfaithfulnesse of Servants, and the Greedinesse of Monied Men, have decayed, the Patrimony, of many Noble Men, and others; That all these, and such like, Conditions of the Time, should be put, on his Lordships accompt; who hath been, as far, as to his Place, appertaineth, a most Religious, and Wise, Mo∣derator in Church Matters, to have Vnity kept; who with great Iustice, hath dispatched, infinite Causes in Law, that have orderly, been brought before him; And, for his own Example, may say that, which few Men can say, but was sometime said, by Cepha∣lus, the Athenian, so much Renowned, in Plato's Works; who ha∣ving lived, near to the age, of an 100 years; And in continull, Affairs, the Businesse, was wont to say of Himself; That he ne∣ver sued any, neither had been sued by any: Who by reason, of his Office, hath preserved, many Great Houses, from Overthrow, by re∣lieving sundry Extremities, towards such, as in their Minority, have been circumvented; And towards all such, as his Lordship, might advise, did ever perswade, Sober, and Limited, Expence. Nay, to make Proof, further, of his Contented Manner of Life, free from Suits, and Covetousnesse; as he never sued, any Man, so did he never raise, any Rent, or put out, any Tenant, of his own; Nor ever gave consent, to have the like done, to any of the Queens Tenants; Matters, singularly, to be noted, in this Age. But however, by this Fellow, as in a False, Artificiall, Glasse, which is able, to make the best Face Deformed, his Lordships Doings be set forth; yet, let his Proceedings, (which be indeed his own,) be indifferently weighed, and considered; And let Men call to Mind, that his Lordship was never a violent, and Tran∣sported Man, in Matters of State, but ever Respective, and Mo∣derate; That he was never Man, in his particular, a Breaker of Necks, no heavy Enemy, but ever Placable, and Mild; That he was never a Brewer, of Holy water in Court, no Dallier, no Abuser, but ever Reall, and Certain; That he was never, a Bearing Man, nor Carrier of Causes, But ever gave way, to Iustice, and Course of Law; That he was never, a Glorious, Wilfull, Proud Man, but e∣ver
Civill, and Familiar, and good to deal withall; That in the Course, of his Service, he hath, rather, sustained the Burthen, then sought the Fruition, of Honour, or Profit; Scarcely sparing any time, from his Cares, and Travailes, to the Sustentation of his Health; That he never had, nor sought to have, for Himself, and his Chil∣dren, any Penny-worth of Lands, or Goods, that appertained to a∣ny, attainted, of any Treason, Felony, or otherwise; That he ne∣ver had, or sought, any kind of Benefit, by any Forfeiture, to her Majesty; That he was never, a Factious Commender, of Men, as he, that intended, any waies, to besiege Her, by bringing in, Men at his Devotion; But was ever, a true Reporter, unto her Majesty, of every Mans Deserts, and Abilities; That he never took he Course, to unquiet, or offend, no nor exasperate her Majesty, but to content her mind, and mitigate her Displeasure; That he ever bare Himself reverently, and without Scandall, in Matters of Religion, and without blemish in his Private Course, of Life; Let Men, I say, without Passionate Mallice, call to mind, these Things; And they will think it Reason, that, though he be not canonized for a Saint, in Rome, yet he is, worthily, celebrated, as Pater Patriae, in England; And though he be Libelled against, by Fugitives, yet he is prayed for, by a Multitude, of good Subjects: Aud lastly, though he be envied, whilest he liveth, yet he shall be deeply wanted, when he is gone. And assuredly, many Pin∣ces, have had, many Servants of Trust, Name, and sufficiency; But where there have been great parts, there hath often wanted, Temper of Affection; Where there have beeu, both Ability, and Moderation, there have wanted, Diligence, and Love of Travaile; Where all Three have been, there have, sometimes, wanted, Faith, and Sincerity; Where some few, have had, all these Four, yet they have wanted Time, and Experience: But where there is a Concurrence, of all these, there is no marvaile, though a Prince of Iudgement, be constant, in the Employment, and Trust, of such a Servant. 7. Of divers paricular Untruths, and Abuses, disper∣sed thrugh the Libel. THE Order which this Man keepeth, in his Libell is such, as it may appear, that he meant but to empty some Note Booke, of the Matters of England; To bring in, (whatsoever came of it,) a Number of Idle Jests: which he thought might fly abroad; And intended nothing lesse, then to clear the Matters, be handled, by the Linht of Order, and Distinct Wri∣ting.
Having therefore, in the Principall Points, namely the Second, Third, and Fourth, Articles, ranged his Scattering, and wandering, Discourse, into some Order, such as may help, the Judgement of the Reader, I am now content, to gather up, some of his By-Matters, and Stragling Untruths, and very briefly, to censure them. Page 9. he saith; That his Lordships could, neither by the Greatness, of his Beades; creeping to the Crosse; Nor exteriour shew to Devotion, be∣fore the High Altar; find his entrance, into high Dignity, in Queen Maries Time. All which, is a meer Fiction, at Pleasure: For Queen Mary, bare that Respect unto him, in regard, of his constant standing, for her Title; As she desired to continue his Service; The Refusall thereof, growing from his own Part: He enjoyed, nevertheless, all other Liberties, & Favours, of the time; Save only, that it was put, into the Queens Head, that it was dangerous, to permit him, to go beyond the Sea, because he had a great Wit of Action, and had served, in so Principall a Place; Which ne∣verthelesse, after, with Cardinall Poole, he was suffered to do Pag. Eadem, he saith; Sir Nich. Bacon, that was Lord Keeper, was a Man of exceeding crafty wit; Which sheweth, that this Fel∣low, in his Slanders, is no good Marks-Man; But throweth out his Words, of Defaming, without all Levell. For all the World, noted, Sir Nich. Bacon, to be a Man, Plain, Direct, and Con∣stant, without all Finenesse, and Doublenesse; And one that was, of the mind, that a Man, in his private Proceedings, and Estate, and in the Proceedings, of State, should ret, upon the Sound∣nesse, and Strength, of his own Courses, and not upon Practise, to Circumvent others According, to the Sentence of Salomon; Vir Prudens aduertit ad Gressus suos, stultus autem divertit ad Dolos: Insomuch, that the Bishop of Rosse, a Subtile, and Observing, Man, said of him; That he could fasten, no words upon him, and that it was impossible to come within him, because he offered no play. And Queen Mother of France, a very politick Princesse, said of him; That he should have been, of the Councell of Spain, be∣cause he despised the Occurrents, and rested upon the First Plot; So that, if He were Crafty, it is hard to say, who is wise. Pag. 10. he saith; That the Lord Burleigh, in the Establishment, of Religion, in the Beginning of the Queens Time, prescribed a Composition, of his own Invention; Whereas the same Form, not fully six years before, had been received, in this Realm, in King Edwards Time: So as his Lordship, being a Christian, Politick, Counseller, thought it better, to follow a President, then to inno∣vate; And chose the President, rather at Home, then Abroad. Pag. 41. he saith; That Catholicks, never attempted, to mur∣ther, any principall person, of her Majesties Court, as did Burchew, (whom he calleth a Puritan) In wounding, of a Gentleman, in∣stead, of Sir Christopher Hatten; But by their great Vertue, Modesty, and Patience, do manifest, in themselves, a far different Spirit,
om the other Sort. For Burchew, it is certain he was Mad; As appeareh, not only by his Mad Mistaking, but by the violence, ht he ffed afer, to his Keeper; And most evidently, by his bhaviour, at his Excution: But of Catholicks, (I mean, th ralrus sort, of them, a Man may say, as Cato, said, sometimes, of Caear; Fum ad evrtendam Remp. sobrium accessisse: They came sober, and well advised, to their Treasons and Conspiracies; And common∣ly, they look not so low, as the Counsellers, but have bent, their murdrur Attempts, immediatly, against her Majesties sacred Person; (Which God have in his precious Custody;) As may ap∣pear, by the Conspiracy, of Sommervile, Parry, Savadge, and Six, and othes; Nay, they have defended it, in Thesi, to be a Lawull Act. Pag. 43. he saith; That his Lordship, whom he calleh the ArchPolitick, hath fraudulently provided, that when any Pries, is arraigned, the Indictment, is enforced, with many odious Mattr: Wherein he sheweth great Ignorance, if it be not Mallice: For the Law, permitteth not, the Ancient Formes of Indicments, to be al∣ered; Like as in an Action of Trespass, although a Mn, take a∣way anothers Goods, in the peaceablest manner, in the World, yet the Writ hath; Quare vi, & Armis; And if a Man enter, upon anothers Ground, and do no more, the Plantife mentioneth; Quod Herbam suam ibidem crescentem, cum Equis, Bobus, porcis, & Biden∣tibus, depastus sit, conculcavit, & consumpsit. Neither is this any Absurdity; For, in the Practise, of all Law, the Formularies, hve been Few, and Certain; And not varied, according to every articular Case. And in Indictmeuts, also, of Treason, it is not so far fetched, as in that of Trespass; For the Law, ever presumeth in Treason, an Intention, of subverting the State, and Impeaching, the Majesty Royall. Pag. 45. and in other places, speaking of the persecuting, of Catholicks, he still mentioneth, Bowellings, and Consuming Mens Entrales, by Fire; As if this, were a Torture, newly devised; Wherein he doth Cauelously, and Maliciously, suppresse, that the Law, and Custom, of this Land, from all Antiquity, hath ordained that Punishment, in Case of Treason, and permitteth no other. And a Punishment, surely, it is, though of great Terrour, ye by reason, of the quick Dispatching, of lesse, Torment far, then either the Wheele or Forcipation, yea, then Simple Burning. Pag. 48. he saith; England, is confederate, with the Great Turk. Wherein, if he mean it, because the Merchants, have an Agent, in Constantinople; How will he answer, for all the Kings, of France, since Francis the First, which were good Catholicks? For the Em∣perour? for the King of Spain, Himself? for the Senate of Venice, and other States, that have had, long time, Embassadours Liedgers, in that Court? If he mean it, because the Turk, hath done, some speciall Honour, to our Embassadour, (if he be so to be termed,) we are beholding, to the King of Spain for that; For that, the Honour, we have won upon Him, by Opposition, hath given us,
Reputation, through the World: If he mean it, because the Turk, seemeth to affect us, for the Abolishing of Images; Let him consider then, what a Scandall, the Matter of Images, hath been, in the Church: As having been, one of the principall Branches, whereby Mahumetisme entred. Page 65. he saith; Cardinall Allen, was, of late, very near, to have been elected Pope. Whereby, he would put, the Catholicks here, in some hope, that once, within Five or Six years, (For a Pope, commonly, sitteth no longer,) he may obtan that, which he mssed narrowly. This is a direct Abuse; For it is certain, in all the Conclaves, since Sixtus Quintus, who gave him his Hat, he was never in possibility: Nay, the King of Spain, that hath pa∣tronized, the Church of Rome, so long, as he is become a right Patron of it; In that, he seeketh to present, to that See, whom he liketh; yet never durst, strain, his Credit, to so desperate a Point, as once, to make a Canvass, for him: No, he never nomi∣nated him, in his Inclusive Narration. And those that know a∣ny Thing, of the Respects, of Conclaves, know, that he is not Papa∣ble; First, because he is, an Vltramontane, of which sort, there hath been none, these Fifty years: Next, because he is a Cardinall, of Almes, of Spain, and wholly, at the Devotion, of that King: Third∣ly, because he is like to employ, the Treasure, and Favours, of the Popedom, upon the Enterprises of England; And the Relief, and Advancement, of English Fugitives, his Necessitous Countrymen; So as, he presumed much, upon the Simplicity, of the Reader, in this point, as in many more. Page 55. and again Page 70. he saith; His Lordship, (Meaning the Lord Burleigh,) Intendeth to match, his Grandchild, Mr. Willi∣am Cecill, with the Lady Arbella. Which being a meer Imaginati∣on, without any Circumstance at all, to enduce it; More then that, they are both unmarried; And that their years, agree well; Needeth no Answer. It is true, that his Lordship, being no Stoicall, Vnnaturall Man, but loving towards his Children; For Charitas Reip. incipit à Familiâ;) Hath been glad, to match them, into Honourable, and Good Bloud; And yet not so, but, that, a private Gentleman, of Northampton shire, that lived altogether, in the Country, was able to bestow his Daughters, higher, then his Lord. hath done. But yet, it is not seen by any Thing past, that his Lordship, ever thought, or affected, to match his Children, in the Bloud Royall: His Lordships Wisedom, which hath been so long of Gathering, teacheth him, to leave to his Posterity, rather Surety, then Danger. And, I marvaile, where be the Combinations, which have been, with Great Men; And the Popular, and Plausible, Courses, which ever accompany such de∣signes, as the Libeller speaketh of: And therefore, this Match, is but like unto that, which the same Fellow, concluded, between the same Lady Arbella, and the Earl of Leicesters Son, when he was, but a Twelve-Moneth old. Pag. 70, he saith; He laboureth, incessantly, with the Queen,
to make, his Eldest Son, Deputy of Ireland. As if, that were such a Catch; Considering, all the Deputi, since her Majesties times, (ex∣cept the Earl of Sussex, and the Lord Grey,) have been persons, of meaner Degree, then Sir Thomas Cecillis: And the most, that is gotten, by that place, is but the Saving, and putting up, of a Mans own Revenue's, during those years, that he serveth their; And this perhaps, to be saved, with some Displeasure, at his Re∣turn. Pag. eadem, he saith; He hath brought in, his Second Son, Sir Robert Cecill, to be of the Counsell, who hath, neither Wit, nor Experience. Which Speech, is as notorious an untruth, as is, in all the Libell: For it is confessed, by all Men, that know the Gentleman, that he hath one, of the Rarest, and most Excellent, Wits, of England; with a singular Delivery, and Application,  the same; whether it be, to use a Continued Speech, Or to Ne∣gotiate, Or to touch in Writing, or to make Report, Or discreet∣ly to consider, of the Circumstances, And aptly, to draw Things, to a Point; And all this, joyned, with a very good Nature, and a great Respect to all Men, as is daily, more and more, revealed. And for his Experience, it is easie to think, that his Trayning, and Helps, hath made it already such, as many, that have served, long prentishood for it, have not attained the like: So as, if that be true; Qui Beneficium Digno dat, omnes obligat; Not his Father onely, but the State, is bound unto her Majesty, for the choice, and Employ∣ment, of so sufficient, and worthy, a Gentleman. There be many other Follies, and Absurdities, in the Book: which, if an Eloquent Scholler, had it in Hand, he would take Advantage thereof, and justly make the Authour, not onely Odious, but Ri∣diculous, and Contemptible, to the World. But I passe them o∣ver, and even this, which hath been said, hath been vouchsafed, to the vallue, and Worth of the Matter, and not the worth, of the Writer; who hath handled a Theam, above his Compasse. 8. Of the Height, of Impudency, that these Men, are grown unto, in publishing, and Avouching, untruths; with a particular Recitall of some of them, for an Assay. THese Men, are grown, to a singular Spirit, and Faculty, in Lying, and Abusing the world; such, as it seemeth, al∣though they are, to purchase a particular Dispensation, for all o∣ther Sins; yet they have a Dispensation Dormant, to lie, for the Ca∣tholique Cause; which moveth me, to give the Reader, a Tast, of
their Vntruths, such as are written, and are not meerly grosse, and palpable; Desiring him, out of their own Writings, when any shall fall, into his Hands, to encrease the Rowle, at least, in his own Memory. We retain, in our Calenders, no other Holy-dayes, but such, as have their Memorials, in the Scriptures: And therefore, in the Ho∣nour of the Blessed Virgin, we onely receive, the Feasts, of the An∣nunciation, and the Purification; Omitting the other, of the Con∣ception, and the Nativity; Which Nativity, was used to be cele∣brated, upon the 8th. of Septemb; the Vigill whereof, hapned to be, the Nativity of our Queen: which though we keep not Holy, yet we use therein, certain Civill Customes, of Ioy, and Gratulation; As Ringing of Bells, Bonfires, and such like; And likewise, make a Memoriall, of the same Day, in our Calender: whereupon they have published; That we have expunged, the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, and put in stead thereof, the Nativity of our Queen. And further, that we sing, certain Hymnes, unto her, used to be sung, unto our Lady: It hapned, that upon some Bloud-shed, in the Church of Paules, according to the Canon Law, yet with us in force, the said Church was interdicted, and so, the Gates shut up, for some few Dayes; whereupon, they published, that, because the same Church, is a place, where People use to meet, to walk and confer, the Queens Majestie, after the manner, of the Ancient Tyrants, had forbidden, all Assemblies, and Meetings, of People, together; And for that Reason, upon extreme Jealousie, did cause, Paules Gates, to be shut up. The Gate of London, called Lud-Gate, being in decay, was pul∣led down; And built anew: And on the one side, was set up, the Image, of King Lud, and his two Sons; who, according to the Names, was thought, to be the First Founder, of that Gate: And, on the other side, the Image of her Majesty, in whose time, it was reedified: whereupon, they published, that her Majesty, after all the Images, of the Saints, were long beaten down, had now, at last, set up her own Image, upon the Principall Gate, of London, to be adored; And that all Men, were forced, to do reverence to it, as they passed by; And a watch, there placed, for that pur∣pose. Mr. Iewell, the Bishop of Salisbury, who, according to his Life, died most godly, and patiently; At the Point of Death, used, the Versicle, of the Hymne, Te Deum; Oh Lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded; Whereupon, suppressing the rest, they published, that the principall Champion, of the Hereticks, in his very last words, cryed, he was confounded. In the Act; of Recognition, of primo, whereby, the Right, of the Crown, is acknowledged, by Parliament, to be in her Majesty; (The like whereof, was used, in Queen Maries time;) The words, of Limitation, are; In the Queens Majesty, and the Naturall Heires, of
her Body, and her lawfull Successours. Upon which word, (Natu∣rall,) they do, maliciously, and indeed villanously, gosse; That it was, the Intention, of the Parliament, in a Cloud, to convey the Crown, to any Issue, o her Majesties, that were Illegitimate; Where∣as he word, (Heire,) doth, with us, so necessarily, and preg∣nantly, import Lawfulness; As it had been, Indecorum and unci∣vill speaking, of the Issues, of a Prince, to have expressed it. They set forth, in the year a Book, with Tables, and Pi∣ctures, of the Persecutions, against Catholiques; Wherein, they have, not onely stories, of 50. years old, to supply their Pages; But al∣so, taken all the persecutions, of the Primitive Church, under the Heathen, and translated them, to the practise of England. As that, of Worrowing Priests, under the Skins, of Bears, by Doggs, and the like. I conclude then, that I know not, what to make, of this Ex∣cesse, in Avouching untruths, save this; That they may truly Chaunt, in their Quires; Linguam nostram magnificabimus, Labia nostra no∣bis sunt: And that they, that have long ago, forsaken, the Truth of God, which is the Touc-stone, must now hold by the Whet-stone; And that their Ancient Pillar, of Lying wonders, being decayed, they must now hold, by Lying Slaunders; And make, their Libells, Successours to their Legend.
A TRUE REPORT, Of the detestable TREASON, INTENDED, By Doctor RODERIGO LOPEZ, A Physician, attending upon the Person of the QVEENES MAIESTY, Whom He, for a Sum of Money, promised, to be paid him, by the King of Spain, did undertake, to have destroyed, by Poyson; with certain Circumstances, both of the Plotting, and Detecting, of the same TREASON. Penned, during the Queens Life. THe King of Spain, having found, by the Enterprise of 88, the Difficulty, of an In∣vasion, of England; And having also, since that time, embraced the Matters of France; (Being a Dessigne, of a more easie nature, and better prepared, to his Hand;) Hath, of necessity, for a time layed aside, the Prosecution of his At∣tempts, against this Realm, by open For∣ces; As knowing, his Meanes unable, to wield both Actions, at once; As well, that of England, as that of France. And therefore, casting at the Fairest, hath, (in a manner,) bent his whole strength, upon France, making, in the mean time, onely a Defensive War, upon the Low-Countries. But finding again, that the Supports, and Aides, which her Majesty hath continued, to the French King, are
a principall Impediment, & Retardation, to his prevailing there, according to his Ends; He hath now, of late, by all means, projected, to trouble the Waters, here, & to cut us out, some work at home; That by practise, without Diverting, and Employing, any gre orce, he mought, neverthelesse, divert, our Succours from France. According to which purpose, he first proved, to move some Innovation in Scotland; Not so much, in hope, to alienate the King, from the Amity, of her Majesty, as practizing, to make a Party, there, against the King himself; Whereby, he should be compelled, to use her Majesties Forces, for his Aistance. Then he sollicited a Subject, within this Realm, (being a Person of great Nobility,) to rise in Arms, and levy War, against her Majesty; which practise was, by the same Nobleman, loyally, and prudent∣ly, revealed. And lastly, (rather (as it is to be thought) by the Instigation, of our Traiterous Fugitives, in Forrain pats; And the corrupter Sort, of his Counsellours, and Ministers; then of his own nature, and Inclination;) either of himself, or his said Counsellours, and Ministers, using his name, have descened to to a course, against all Honour; All Society, and Hu∣manity; Odious to God, and Man; Detested by the Heathen themselves; which is, to take away the Life, of her Majesty, (which God have in his pecious Custody,) by violence, or poy∣son. A Matter, which mought be proved to be, not onely against all Christianity, and Religion, but against Nature, the Law of Nati∣ons, the Honour of Arms, The Civil Law, The Rules of Morality, and Pollicy: Finally, to be the most Condemned, Barbarous, and Ferine, Act, that can be imagined: yea, (supposing the Quarrells, and Hostility, between the Princes, to be never so De∣clared, and so Mortal,) yet, were it not, that it would be a ve∣ry Reproach, unto the Age, that the Matter should be once di∣sputed, or called in question; it could never be defended. And therefore, I leave it to the Censure, which Titus Livius giveth, in the like case, upon Perseus, the last King of the Macedons, after∣wards overthrown, taken with his Children, & led in Triumph by the Romans; Quem, non justū Bellum gerere, Regio Animo, sed per omnia clandestina grassari scelera, Latrociniorū, ac veneficiorum, cernebant. But to proceed, certain it is, that even about this present time, there have been suborned, and sent, into this Realm, di∣vers persons, some English, some Irish, corrupted by Money, and Promises; And resolved, and Conjured, by Priests, in Confesi∣on, to have executed, that most wretched, and horrible Fact: Of which Number certain have been Taken, and some have suffered, and some are spared, because they have, with great sor∣row, confessed these Attempts, and detested their Subornes. And, if I should conjecture, what the reason is, why this cur∣sed enterprise, was at this time so hotly, and with such diligence, pursued; I take it to be, chiefly because the Matters of France, waxe ripe; And the King of Spain, made himself ready, to un∣mask
himself, and to reap that in France, which he had been long in sowing; In regard, that there being like to be, a Divul∣sion, in the League, by the Reconciliation, of some of the Heads, to the King; the more passionate Sort, being destiuted by their Associates, were like, to cast themselves, wholly, into the King of Spains Arms; And to dismember, some important Piece, of that Crown; Though now, upon this fresh Accident, of Receiving the King into Paris, it is to be thought, that both the worst affected, of the League, will ubmit themselves, upon any tolerable Con∣ditions, to their Naturall King, thus advanced, in strength, and Reputation; And the King of Spain, will take take a second Advise, ere he embarque himself too far, in any new Attempt, a∣gainst France. But taking the Affirs, as they then stood, before this Accident unexpected; Especially, of the Councell of Spain, du∣ring this his supposed Harvest in France; His Counsell had rea∣son, to wish, that there were no Disturbance from hence; Where they make account, that if her Majesty, were removed, (upon whose person, God continue, his extraordinary Watch, and Pro∣vidence;) here would be nothing but Confusion; Which they do not doubt, but with some, no great Treasure, and Forces, from without may be nourished, till they can more fully, intend the Ruine, of this State, according to their ancient malice. But howsoever that be, amongst the Number of these execra∣ble Undertakers, there was none, so much built, and relied up∣on, by the Great Ones, of the other side, as was this Physician Lopez; Nor, (indeed,) None so dangerous: whether you con∣sider the Aptnesse of the Instrument; Or the subtilty, and secre∣cy, of thoe, that practised with him; Or the Shift, and Eva∣sion, which he had provided, for a Colour of his Doings, if they should happen, to come into Question. For fist, whereas o∣thers were to find, and encounter, infinite Difficulties, in the ve∣ry obtaining, of an Opportunity, to execute this Horrible Act; And besides, cannot but see, present, and most assured Death, before their eyes; And therefore must be, (as it were,) damna∣ble Votaries, if they undertake it; This Man, in regard of his Faculty, and of his private Accesse, to her Majesty, had both Means, to perpetrate, and Means to conceal; whereby, he mought reap the fruit, of his wicked Treason, without evident perill. And for his Complices, that practised with him, being Portugeses, and of the Retinue of King Antonio, the King of Spains Mortall Ene∣my, they were Men, thereby freed, and discharged from Suspicion; And mought send Letters, and receive Letters, out of Spain, without Jealousie; As those, which were thought, to entertain, Intelligences there, for the good of their Master: And for the Evasion, and Masqe, that Lopez had prepared, for this Treason, if it had not been searched, and sifted to the bot∣tome, It was, that he did intend, but to cousin the King of Spain, without ill Meaning: somewhat in the nature, of that Strata∣gem,
which Parry, a most Cunning, and Artificiall Traytour, had provided for Himself. Neverthelesse, this Matter, by the great Goodnesse of God, fal∣ling into good Hands, of those Honourable, and sufficient, per∣sons, which dealt therein; Was, by their great, and worthy, In∣dustry, so handled, and followed; As this Proteus of a disguised, and Transformed, Treason, did at last, appear, in his own Like∣nesse, and Colours; which were as Foul, and Monstrous, as have been known, in the world. For some of her Majesties Councell, long since, entred into consideration; That the Retinew of King Antonio, (I mean some of them,) were not unlike, to hatch, these kind of Treasons; In regard, they were Needy Strangers, entred into despair of their Masters Fortune, and like enough, to aspire, to make their Peace at home, by some such wicked Sevices, as these. And therefore grew, to have, an extraordina∣ry vigilant Eye upon them. Which Prudent, and Discreet, Pre∣sumption, or Conjecture; Joyned with some Advertisements, of Espialls abroad, and some other Industry; Was, the first Cause, (next under the great Benediction of God, which giveth unto Princes, zealous Counsellours; And giveth to Counsellours, Policy, and Discerning Thoughts;) of the Revealing, and Dis∣covering, of hese Treasons, which were contrived, in Order, and Form, as hereafter is set down. This Lopez, of Nation, a Portugeze, and suspected, to be in sect, secretly, a Iew; (Though here he conformed Himself, to the Rites of Christian Religion;) For a long time, professed physick in this Land; By occasion whereof, (being withall a Man very Observant, and Officious, and of a pleasing, and applyable, be∣haviour; In that regard, rather then for any great Learning, in his Faculty;) He grew known, & favoured in Court; And was, some years since, sworn Physician, of her Majesties Houshold; And by her Majesties Bounty, of whom he had received, divers Gifts, of good commodity, was grown, to good Estate of Wealth. This Man, had insinuated himself, greatly, (in regard he was of the same Nation,) with the King Antonio; Whose Causes, he pretended, to sollicit at the Court; Especially while he suppo∣sed, there was any Appearance, of his Fortune: of whom also, he had obtained, (as one that reserved all his doings to Gain,) an Assignation of 50000 Crowns, to be levied, in Portugall. Bu being a Person, wholly, of a Corrupt, and Mercenary, Nature; And finding his Hopes cold, from that part; He cast his Eyes, upon a more able Paymaster; And secretly, made offer, long since, of his service, to the King of Spain: And accordingly, gave sundry Intelligences, of that which passed here, and imported most, for the King of Spain to know; Having no small Means, in regard of his continuall Attendance at Court, Nearnesse, and Accesse, to learn, many particulars, of great weight. Which Intelligences, he maintained, with Bernardine Mendoza, Antonio Vega, Roderigo Marquez, and divers others.
In the Conveyance, of which his Intelligences, and in the ma∣king known of his Disposition, to do the King of Spain service, he had, (amongst others,) one Manuel Andrada, a Portugeze, re∣volted from Don Antonio, to the King of Spain: One, that was disovered, to have practised the Death, of the said Don Antonio, and to have betrayed him, to Bernardine Mendoza. This Man coming hither, was, for the same his practise, appearing by Letters, intercepted, apprehended, and committed to Prison. Beore which time also, there had been, by good diligence, in∣tercepted, other Letters; whereby, the said Andrada, adver∣vertised Mendoza, that he had won, Dr. Lopez, to the Kings ser∣vice: But Lopez, having understanding thereof; And finding means, to have secret conference, with Andrada, before his ex∣amination; Perswaded with him, to take the Matter upon him∣self, as if he had invented, that Advertisement, touching Lo∣pez, onely to procure himself credit, with Mendoza; And to make him conceive well, of his Industry, and Service. And to move him hereunto, Lopez set before Andrada, that if he did ex∣cuse him, he should have credit, to work his Deliverie; Whereas, if he did impeach him, he was not like, to find, any other Means, of Favour. By which subtil perswasion, Andrada, when he came to be examined, answered, according to the Direction, and Lessoning, which Lopez had given him. And having thus ac∣quitted himself of this suspicion, became Suitour, for Andra∣da's Delivery, craftily suggesting, that he was to do, some nota∣ble Service, to Don Antonio: In which his suit, he accordingly pre∣vailed. When Lopez had thus got Andrada, out of prison, he was suffered, to go out of the Realm, into Spain: In pretence, (as was said,) to do some service to Don Antonio; But, in truth, to continue Lopez Negotiation, and Intelligences, with the King of Spain: which he handled so well, as at his Return hither, for the comforting of the said Lopez, he brought to him, from the King, besides thanks, and words of encouragement, and an A∣brazo, (which is the Complement of Favour,) a very good Jew∣ell, garnished, with sundry stones, of good value. This Jewell, when Lopez had accepted, he cunningly cast with himself; That if he should offer it, to her Majesty, first, He was assured, she would not take it; Next, that thereby, he should lay her asleep, and make her Secure of him, for greater Matters; According to the saying; Fraus sibi fidem in parvis praestruit, ut in magnis opprimat; which accordingly he did, with Protestations of his Fidelity: And her Majesty, as a Princesse of Magnanimity, not apt to fear, or suspicion, returned it to him, with Gracious words. After Lopez, had thus abused her Majesty, and had these Tri∣alls of the Fidelity of Andrada; they fell in conference, (the matter being first moved by Andrada, as he that came freshly out of Spain,) touching the empoysoning of the Queen. Which Lopez; (who saw that Matter of Intelligence, without some such par∣ticular
service, would draw no great Reward, from the King o Spain: such as a Man, that was not Needy, but wealthy, as h was, coul find any Tast in;) assented unto. And to that pur∣pose, procured again this Andrada, to be sent over; As well, to dvertise, and asure, this Matter, to the King of Spain, and hi Ministers; (Namely, to the Count de Fuentes, Assistant to the Ge∣nerall, of the King of Spains Forces, in the Low Countries; as also, to capitulate, and ontract, with him, about the Certainty of hi Reward Andrada, (having received those Instructions, and being furnished with money, by Lopez procurement, from Don Antonio, about whose service, his Employment, was believed to be; Went over to Calais; Where he remained, to be near unto England, and Flandes; Having a Boy, that ordinarily passed to and fro, between him and Lopez; By whom he did also, (the better to colour his Employment,) write to Lopez, Intelligence, as it was agreed he should, between him, and Lopez; Wh bad him, send such Nws, as he should take up, in the Streets. From Calais, he writeth, to Count de Fuentes, of Lopez Promise, and Demands. Upon the Receipt of which Letters, after some Time taken, to advertise this Proposition, into Spain; And to receive direction thereupon; The Count de Fuentes, associated with Stphano Ibarra, Secretary of the Councell of the Wars, in the Low Countries, calleth to im, one, Manuel Louys Tinoco, a Portugese, who had also followed King Antonio; and, of whose good Devo∣tion, he had had Experience, in that he had conveyed unto him, two severall Packets, wherewith he was trusted, by the King An∣tonio, for France. Of this Louys, they first received a Corporall Oath, wih solemn Ceremony, taking his Hands between their Hands, that he should keep secret, that which should be imparted to him; And never reveal the same, though he should be appre∣hended, and questioned, here. This done, they acquint him, with the Letters, of Andrada, with whom, they charge him, to conferre at Calais, in his way, and to passe to Lopez, into Eng∣land; Addressing, him further, to Stephano Ferrera de Gama; And signifying unto the said Lopez, withall, (as from the King,) that he gave no great credence to Andrada, as a person, too sleight, to be usd, in a Cause, of so great weight: And therefore marvel∣led much, that he heard nothing, from Ferrera, of this Matter; From whom, he had, in former time, been advertised, in gene∣rality, of Lopez good affection, to do him service. This Ferre∣ra, had been, sometimes a Man, of great Livelyhood, and wealth in Portugall, which he did forego, in adhering to Don Antonio; And appeareth, to be a Man, of a Capacity, and practise; But hath, some, years since, been secretly won, to the service, of the King of Spain; not travelling, neverthelesse, too and fro, but re∣siding, as his Leiger, in England. Manuel Louys, dispatched with these Instructions, and with all affectionate commendations, from the Count to Lopez; And
with Letters to Ferrera; Took his Journey, first to Calais, where he conferred with Andrada; Of whom, receiving more ample In∣formation, together with a short Ticket of Credence, to Lopez, that he was a Person, whom he mought trust, without scruple, came over into England; And, first, repaired to Ferrera, and ac∣quainted him, with the State of the Businesse, who had, before that time, given some Light, unto Lopez, that he was not a stranger, unto the Practise, between him, and Andrada; where∣with, (indeed,) Andrada, had (in a sort,) acquainted him. And now, upon this new Dispatch, and Knowledge, given to Lopez, of the choise of Ferrera, to continue that, which Andrada, had begun; He, to conform himself the better, to the satisfaction, of the King of Spain: and his Ministers abroad, was content more fully, to communicate, with Ferrera, with whom, from that time forward, he meant, singly, and apertly to deal; And therefore, cunningly forbare, to speak with Manuel Louys himself, but con∣cluded, that Ferrera should be his only runk, and all his Dealings, should pass through his Hands, thinking thereby to have gone Invisible. Whereupon he cast with Himself, that it was not safe, to use, the Mediation, of Manuel Louys, who had been made privy to the matter, as some base carrier, of Letters; which Letters, also, should be written, in a Cyphar; Not of Alphabet, but of Words; Such as mought, if they were opened, import no vehement suspicion. And therefore, Manuel Louys, was sent back, with a short Answer And Lopez purveied himself, of a base Fellow, a ortugeze, called Gomes d' Avila, dwelling hard by Lopez House, o convey his Letters. After this Messenger provided, it was agreed, between Lopez, and Ferrera, that Letters should be sent to the Count de Fuentes, and Secretary Iuarra, written, and signed, by Ferrera (or Lopez, cautelously, did forbear, to write himself,) but directed, and (indeed,) dictated word by word, by Lopez himself. The Contents thereof were; That Lopez was ready, to execute that Service, to the King, which before had been trea∣ted, but required, for his Recompence, the sum of 50000. Crowns, and assurance for the same. These Letters were written obscurely, (as was touched,) in Termes of Merchandise; To which Obscurity, when Ferrera ex∣cepted, Lopez answered; They knew his meaning, by that, which ad passed before. Ferrera wrote also, to Manuel Louys, but charged this Gomez, to deliver the same Letters, unto him, in the presence of Iuarra; As also, the Letter to Iuarra, in the pre∣sence of Manuel Louys. And these Letters, were delivered to Gomez d' Avila, to be carried to Bruxells; And a Pasport procur∣ed, and his charges defrayed, by Lopez. And Ferrera, the more to approve his Industry, writ Letters two severall times; The one conveyed by Emanuel Palacios,) with the privity of Lopez, to
Christofero Moro, a principall Counseller, of the King of Spain, in Spain: Signifying, that Lopez, was won, to the King of Spain: And that, he was ready to receive his Commandement; And re∣ceived a Letter, from the same Christophero Moro, in answer to one o these, which he shewed unto Lopez. In the mean time, Lopez, though a Man (in semblance,) of a heavy wit, yet, indeed, subtile of himself, as one trained in Practise; And besides, as wily, as Fear, and Covetousnesse, could make him; Thought to provide for himself, (as was partly touched before,) as many starting Holes, and Evasions, as he could devise; If any of these Matters, should come to Light. And first, he took his time, to cast forh, some generall words, a far off, to her Majesty, as asking her the Question; Whether a Deceiver might not be deceived? Whereof her Majesty, (not imagining these words, tended to such end, as to warrant him, colourably, in this wretched Conspiracy; But, o∣therwise, of her own naturall Disposition, bent to integrity, and Sincerity,) uttered Dislike, and Disallowance. Next he thought, he had wrought a great Mystery, in demanding the precise sum of 50000. Crowns, agreeing just, with the sum, of Assignation, or Donation, from Don Antonio; Idly, and in that, grosely, imagi∣ning; That if afterwards, he should accept the same sum, he mought excuse it, as made good by the King of Spain, in regard, he desisted, to follow, and favour, Don Antonio: Whereupon, the King of Spain, was, in honour, tied, no to see him a Looser. Third∣ly, in his Conferrences, with Ferrera, when he was apposed, upon the particular manner, how he would poyson her Majesty he purposely, named unto him, a Syrop; Knowing, that her Ma∣jesty, never useth Syrop; And therefore, thinking, that would prove an high point, for his Justification, if Things should come in any Qnestion. But, all this while, disirous after his prey, which he had in hope devoured, He did instantly importune Ferrera, for the an∣swering, of his last Dispatch; Finding the Delay strange, and re∣iterating, the Protestations, of his Readinesse, to do the Service, if he were assured of his Money. Now before the Return, of Gomez d' Avila, into England, this Steven Ferrera, was discovered, to have Intelligence, with the E∣nemy; But so, as the particular, of his Traffique, and Overtures, appeared not. Onely it seemed, there was great account made, of that he managed; And thereupon, he was committed to Pri∣son. Soon after, arrived Gomez d' Avila, and brought Leters, onely, from Manuel Louys, by the Name, of Franceseo de Thores; Because, (as it seemeth,) the great persons, on the other side, had a contra∣ry disposition, to Lopez; And liked not, to write, by so base a Messenger, but continued their Course, to trust, and employ Manuel Louys himself, who, in likelyhood, was retained, till they mought receive, a full Conclusion, from Spain; Which was not, till about two moneths, after. This Gomez, was apprehended,
at his Landing; And about him, were found the Letters afore∣said, written in Iargon, or Verball Cyphar, but yet somewhat sus∣picious, in these words; This Bearer will tell you, the price, in which your Pearles are esteemed, and in what resolution, we rest, about a little Musk, and Amber, which I am determined to buy. Which Words, the said Manuel Louys, afterwards, voluntarily confessed, to be desciphered, in this sort; That by the Allowance of the Pearles, he meant, that the Count de Fuentes, and the Secretary, did gladly accept, the Offer of Lopez, to poyson the Queen, signified by Ferre∣ra's Letter; And for the Provision, of Amber, and Musk, it was meant, that the Count, looked shortly, for a Resolution from the King of Spain: concerning a Matter of importance; Which was, For Burning of the Queens Ships, and another Point, tending to the satisfaction, of their Vindicative Humour. But while the sense, of this former Letter, rested ambiguous; And that, no direct particular, was confessed, by Ferrera; Nor sufficient Light given, to ground, any rigorous examination, of him; Cometh over Manuel Louys, with the Resolution from Spain: Who first understanding, of Ferrera's Restraint; and there∣fore doubting, how far things were discovered, to shadow the matter, like a cunning Companion, gave advertisement, of an Intent he had, to do service, and hereupon obtained a Pasport. But after his comming in, he made no hast, to reveal any thing, but thought to dally, and abuse, in some other sort. And while the Light was thus in the Clouds, there was also intercepted, a little Ticket, which Ferrera, in Prison, had found meanes, to write, in care to conceale Lopez, and to keep him out of danger, to give a Caveat of staying all further Answers, and Advertisements, in these Causes. Whereupon, Lopez was first called in Que∣stion. But in Conclusion, this matter being with all Assiduity, and Pollicy, more and more, pierced, and mined into; First, there was won, from Manuel Louys, his Letters, from the Count de Fu∣entes, and Secretary Iuara, to Ferrera; In both which, mention is made, of the Queens Death. In that of the Counts, under the Term, of a Commission; And in that of the Secretaries, under the Term, of the Great Service, whereof should arise, an univer∣sall Benefit, to the whole World. Also the Letters of Credit, written by Gonzalo Gomez; One to Pedro de Carrera; And the other, to Iuan Pallacio, to take up, a sum of Money, by Emanuel Louys, by the foresaid false Name, of Fr. de Thores; Letters so large, and in a manner, without Limitation, as any sum, by vertue thereof, mought be taken up. Which Letters, were delivered, to Louys, by the Count de Fuentes own hands, with directions, to shew them to Lopez, for his assurance. A matter, of Gods secret work∣ing, in staying the same; For thereupon, rested only, the Exe∣cution, of the Fact of Lopez. Upon so narrow a point, consisted the safety, of her Majesties Life; already, sold by Avarice, to
Mallice and Ambition; But extraordinarily, preserved, by that Watchman, which never slunbreth. This same Emanuel Louys, and Steven Ferrera also; Whereof the one, mannaged the Matter a∣broad; And the other, resided here, to give correspondence, never meeting, after Emanuel had returned, severally examined, without Torture, or Threatning, did, in the end, voluntarily, and clearly, confesse the Matters, above mentioned: And in their Confessions, fully consent, and concur; Not only in sub∣stance, but in all points, particularities, and Circumstances: Which confessions, appear expressed, in their own Naturall Lan∣guage, testified, and subscribed, with their own Hands; And in open Assembly, at the Arraignment of Lopez, in the Guild hall, were, by them confirmed, and avouched, to Lopez his face; And therewithall are extant, undefaced, the Originall Letters, from Count de Fuente, Secretary Iuara, and the Rest. And Lopez himself, at his first Apprehension, and Examinati∣on, did indeed deny; And deny, with deep, and terrible Oathes, and Execrations, the very Conferences, and Treaties, with Fer∣rera, or Andrada, about the Empoysonment. And being deman∣ded, if they were proved against him, what he would say? He an∣swered; That he would yield himself guilty, of the Fact intended. Ne∣verthelesse, being afterwards confronted by Ferrera, who con∣stantly maintained to him, all that he said; Reducing him, to the Times, and places, of the said Conferences, he confessed the Matter; As by his Confession, in writing, signed with his own Hand, appeareth. But then he fell, to that slender Evasion, as his last Refuge; That he meant, onely, to cousen the King of Spain, of the Money; And in that he continued, at his Arraignment; when, notwithstanding, at the first, he did retract his own Con∣fession; And yet, being asked, whither he was drawn, either by Mean of Torture, or promise of Life, to make the same Confession, he did openly testifie, that no such Means, was used towards him. But the Falshood of this Excuse, being an Allegation, that any Traytour may use, and provide for himself, is convicted, by three notable Proofes. The first, That he never opened this Matter, neither unto her Majesty, unto whom he had ordinary Accesse; Nor to any Counseller of State, to have permission, to toll on, and inveagle these Parties, with whom he did treat, if it had been thought so convenient. Wherein, percase, he had opportunity, to have done, some good service, for the further Discovery, of their secret Machinations, against her Majesties Life. The se∣cond, that he came, too late, to this shift; Having first bewray∣ed, his guilty Conscience, in denying those Treaties, and Confe∣rences, till they were, evidently, and manifestly, proved to his Face. The third, that in conferring, with Ferrera, about the manner, of his assurance, he thought it better, to have the Mo∣ney, in the Hands, of such Merchants, as he should name in Ant∣werp;
then to have brought it into England: Declaring his pur∣pose to be, after the Fact done, speedily to fly to Antwerp; And there, to tarry some time, and so to convey himself, to Constanti∣nople; where it is affirmed, that Don Salomon, a Jew, in good cre∣dit, is Lopez his near Kinsman; And that, he is greatly favoured, by the said Don Salomon; whereby, it is evident, that Lopez, had cast his Reckonings, upon the supposition, of the Fact done. Thus may appear, both, how justly, this Lopez is condemned, for the Highest Treason; that can be imagined; And how, by Gods marvellous Goodness, her Majesty, hath been preserved. And surely, if a Man do truly consider, it is hard to say; Whither God, hath done greater things, By her Majesty, or For Her: If you oberve on the one side, how God hth ordained her Govern∣ment, to break, and crosse, the unjust Ambition, of the Two Mighty Potentates, the King of Spain; and the Bishop of Rome, never so straitly, between themselves, combined; And, on the other side, how mightily God hath protected her, both against forrain Invasion, and Inward Troubles; And singularly, against the many secret Conspiracies, that have been made against her Life: Ther∣by declaring, to the world, that he will indeed preserve that In∣strument, which he hath magnified. But the Corruptions, of these Times, are wonderfull, when that Warrs; which are the highest Trialls of Right, between Princes, (that acknowledge no supe∣riour Jurisdiction;) And ought to be prosecuted, with all Ho∣nour, shall be stained, and infamed, with such Foul, and Inhu∣mane Practises. Wherein, if so great a King hath been named, the Rule of the Civill Law, (which is a Rule of Common Reason;) Must be remembred; Frustra Legis auxilium implorat, qui in Legem Committit. He that hath sought, to violate, the Majesty Royall, in the Highest Degree, canno claim, the preheminence thereof, to be exempted, from just Imputation.
AN ADVERTISEMENT, TOUCHING THE CONTROVERSIES, OF THE CHURCH, OF ENGLAND. IT is but Ignorance, if any Man find it strange, that the State of Religion, (especially, in the Dayes of Peace,) should be exercised, and troubled, with Controversies: For as it is, the Condition, of the Church Militant, to be ever under Trials; So it commeth to passe, that when the Fiery Triall, of Persecution, ceaseth, there succeedeth another Triall, which, (as it were,) by contrary Blasts of Doctrine, doth sift, and winnowe, Mens Faith; And proveth, whether they Know God aright; Even as that other, of Afflictions, discovereth, whether they Love him, better, then the World. Accordingly, was it foretold, by Christ, saying; That in the latter times, it should be said; Lo here, loe there is Christ: Which is to be understood, not as if the very Person of Christ, should be assumed, and counterfeitted; But this Authori∣ty, and preheminence, (which is to be Truth it self,) should be challenged, and pretended. Thus have we read, and seen, to be fulfilled, that which followeth, Ecce in Deserto; Ecce in Penetra∣libus: While some have sought the Truth, in the Conventicles, and Conciliables, of Hereticks, and Sectaries; others, in the Externe Face, and Representation, of the Chuch; And both Sorts have been seduced. Were it then, that the Contro∣versies,
of the Church, of England, were such, as they did Divide, the Vnity of the Spirit; And not onely such, as do unswah her, of her Bands, (the Bands of Peace;) yet could it be no Occasion, for any pretended Catholick, to judge us; or for any Irreligious Person, to despise us: Or if it be, it shall but happen to us all, as it hath used to do; To them to be Hardned, and to us to Endure, the good pleasure of God. But now, that our Contentions, are such, as we need not, so much, that generall Canon, and Sentence, of Christ, propounded against Hereticks; Erratis, nescientes Scripturas, & po∣testatem Dei. You do Err, not Knowing the Scripture, & the Power of God; As we need, the Admonition, of S. Iames; Let every Man be swift to hear, slow to speak slow to wrath; And that the Wound, is no way, dangerous, except we poyson it, with our Remedies: As the Former Sort of Men, have lesse Reason, to make themselves Mu∣sick, in our Discord; So I have good hope, that Nothing shall dis∣please our Selves; wch shall be sincerely, & modestly propounded, for the appeasing of these Dissentions. For it any shall be offen∣ded, at this voyce; Vos estis fratres; ye are brethren, why strive Ye? He shall give, a great presumption, against himself, that he is the Party, that doth his Brethren wrong. The Controversies themselves, I will not enter into; As judging, that the Disease, requireth rather Rest, then any other Cure. Thus much we all know, and confess, that they be not of the Highest Nature: For they are not, touching the high Mysteries o Faih, such as detained the Churches, for many yeares, after their first Peace: what time the Hereticks moved curious Questions, and made strange Anatomies, of the Natures, and person, of Christ: And the Catholick Fathers, were compelled to follow them, with all Subtilty of Decisions, and Determinations, to exclude them, from their Evasions, and to take them in their Labyrinths: So as it is rightly said; Illis temporibus, ingeniosa Res fuit, esse Christianum: In those dayes, it was an ingenious, and subtill thing, to be a Christian. Neither are they, concerning the great parts, of the Worship of God; Of which it is true; that, Non servatur unitas in Credendo, nisi eadem sit in Colendo: There will be kept, no unity in Believing, except it be en∣tertained, in worshipping: Such as were the Controversies, of the East, and West, Churches, touching Images: And such, as are many of those, between the Church of Rome, and Vs; As about the Adora∣tion of the Sacrament, and the like: But we contend, about Cere∣monies, and Things Indifferent; About the Extern Pollicy, and Go∣vernment of the Church. In which kind, if we would but remem∣ber, that the Ancient, and True Bounds, of Unity, are, One Faith, One Baptism; And not, One Ceremony, One Pollicy; If we would ob∣serve the League, amongst Christians, that is penned by our Savi∣our; He that is not against us, is with us: If we could but compre∣hend, that Saying; Differentiae Rituum commendant unitatem Do∣ctrinae; The Diversities of Ceremonies, do set forth, the unity of Do∣ctrine; And that, Habet Religio quae sunt AEternitatis, habet quae sunt
Temporis; Religion hath parts, which belong to Eternity, and parts which pertain to Time: And if we did but know, the vertue of si¦lence, and slowness to speak, commended by Saint Iames; Our Controversies, of themselves, would close up, and grow togeher. But most especially, if we would leave, the Overweening, and Turbulent Humours, of these times; And revive, the blessed proceeding, of the Apostles, and Fathers, of the Primitive Church; which was, in the like, and greater Cases, not to enter into As∣sertions, and Positions, but to deliver Counsels, and Advises; we should need no other Remedy at all; Si eadem Conulis, (frater,) quae affirmas, consulenti debetur Reverentia, cum non debeatur Fides affir∣manti: Brother, if that which you set down, as an Assertion, you would deliver, by way of Advise; There were Reverence due to your Counsell, whereas Faith is not due to your Affirmation. Saint Paul, was content, to speak thus, Ego, non Dominus; I, and not the Lord: Et, secun∣dum Consilium meum; According to my Counsell: But now, Me do, too lightly, say; Non ego, sed Dominus; Not I, but the Lord: yea, and bind it, with an Heavy Denunciation of his Judgements, to ter∣rifie the simple, which have not sufficiently understood, out of Salomon; That the Causelesse Curse shall not come. Therefore, seeing the Accidents are they, which breed the peril, and not the Things themselves, in their own Nature; It is meet, the Remedies, be applyed unto them, by Opening, what it is, on either part, that keepeth the Wound Green; And for∣malizeth, both sides, to a further Oppotion; and worketh, an Indisposition, in Mens minds, to be reunited; wherein no Accu∣sation is pretended. But I find in Reason, that Peace, is best built, upon a Repetition, of wrongs; And in Example, that the speech∣es, which have been made, by the wisest Men, De Concordia Or∣dinum, have not abstained, from reducing to Memory, the Ex∣tremities, used on both parts: So as it is true, which is said; Qui pacem tractat non is repetit Conditionibus Dissidiis, is magis Animos Hominum, dulcedine pacis fallit, quam aequitate componit. And First of all, it is more then Time, that there were an End, and surseance, made, of this Immodest, and Deformed, manner of Writing, lately entertained; whereby, Matter of Religion, is handled, in the stile of the Stage. Indeed, bitter, and earnest, Writing, must not hastily, be condemned; For Men cannot contend Coldly, and without affection, about Things, which they hold Dear, and Precious. A Pollitick Man, may write, from his Brain, without Touch, and Sense, of his Heart; As in a Spe∣culation, that appertaineth not unto him: But, a Feeling Chri∣stian, will expresse, in his words, a Character, of Zeal, or Love. The latter of which, as I could wish rather embraced, being more proper for these Times, yet is the Former warranted also, by great Examples. But to leave, all Reverent, and Religious, Compassion, towards Evils, or Indignation towards Faults; and to turn, Religion in∣to
a Comedy, or Satyre; To search, and rip up wounds, with a Laughing Countenance; To intermix, Scripture, and scurrility, sometime, in one Sentence; Is a thing, far from the devout Re∣verence, of a Christian, and scant beseeming, the honest Re∣gard, of a sober Man. Non est major Confusio, quam Scrii, & Ioci. There is no greater Confusion, then the confounding, of Iest and Ear∣nest. The Majesty of Religion, and the Contempt, and Deformity, of things ridiculous, are things as distant, as things may be. Two principall Causes, have I ever known, of Atheisme; Curious Con∣troversies, and prophane Scoffing: Now, that these two, are joyned in one, no doubt, that Sect, will make no small Progression. And here, I do much esteem, the Wisdome, and Religion, of that Bishop, which replied, to the first Pamphlet, of this kind, who remembred, that a Fool, was to be answered, but not, by be∣comming like unto him; And considered, the Matter, which he handled, and not the Person, with whom he dealt. Iob, speaking of the Majesty, and Gravity of a Iudge, in himself saith; If I did smile, they believed it not: As if h should have said; If I diverted, or glanced, upon Conceit of Mirth, yet Mens Minds, were so possessed, with a Reverence, of the Action in hand, as they could not receive it. Much more, ought not this to be, amongst Bishops, and Divines, disputing about Holy Things. And therefore, as much, do I mislike, the Invention of him, who, (as it seemeth,) pleased himself in it, as in no mean Pollicy; That these Men, are to be dealt withall at their own Weapons, and, pledgd in their own Cup. This seemed to him, as profound a Devise, as when the Cardinall Sansovino, counselled Iulius the se∣cond, to encounter the Councell of Pisa, with the Councell of La∣teran; Or as Lawfull a Challenge, as Mr. Iewell made, to con∣fute, the pretended Catholiques, by the Fathers: But those Things, will not excuse, the Imitation, of Evill in another. It should be, contrariwise, with us, as Caesar said; Nil malo, quam eos si∣miles esse sui, Et me mei. But now; Dum de bonis contendimus, de Malis consentimus: While we Differ about good things, we Resemble in evill. Surely, if I were asked, of these Men, who were the more to be blamed, I should, per case, remember the Proverb; That the second Blow maketh the Fray; And the saying of an Obscure Fellow; Qui replicat, multiplicat: He that replieth, multiplieth. But, I would determine, the Question, with this Sentence; Alter principium Ma∣lo dedit, alter Modum abstulit: By the ones Means, we have a Begin∣ning, and by the other, we shall have none End. And truly, as I do marvell, that some of those Preachers which call for Reformation; (whom I am far from wronging; so far, as to joyn them, with these Scoffers;) Do not, publish some Declara∣tion, whereby they may satisfie the world, that they dislike their Cause, should be thus sollicited; So I hope, assuredly, that my Lords of the Clergy, have none Intelligence, with this interlibel∣ling;
But do altogether disallow, that their Credit should be thus defended. For though, I observe, in one of them, many Glos∣ses, whereby the Man, would insinuate himself, into their Fa∣vours; yet I find it to be ordinary, that many Pressing, and Fawning Persons do misconjecture, of the Humours, of Men in Authority; And many times, Veneri immolant suem; they seek to gratifie them, with that, which they most dislike. For I have great Reason, to satisfie my self, touching the Judgement of my Lords, the Bishops, in this Matter, by that which was written by one of hem, which I mentioned before, with honour. Never∣thelesse I note, here is not an indifferent hand carried, towads these Pamphlets, a they deserve; For the one sort, flyeth in the Dark, and the other, is uttered openly. Wherein, I might advise, that side, ou of a Wise witer, who hath set it down, That, punitis In∣geniis gliscit Authoritas. And, indeed, we see, it ever falleth out, that the Forbidden Writing, is alwaies hought, to be certain sparks of a Truth, that fly up ino the faces of those, that seek to choak it, and tread it out; Whereas, a Booke Authorized is thought to be, but Tempo∣ris Voces; The Language of the Time. But in plain Truth, I do find, (to mine understanding,) these Pamphlets, as meet to be suppres∣sed, as the other. First, because, as the former sort, doth deface, the Government, of the Church, in the persons of the Bishops, and Prelates; So the other, doth lead into Contempt, the Exercises of Religion, in the Persons of sundry Preachers: So as it disgraceth an higher matter, though in the meaner Person. Next, I find, certain indiscreet, and dangerous Amplificati∣ons, as if the Civill overnment, it self, of this State, had near lost the Force of her Sinews; And were ready, to enter, into some Convulsion, all things being full of Faction, and Disorder; which is as unjustly acknowledged, as untruly affirmed. I kow, his Meaning is, to enforce, this unreverent, and violent Impugning, of the Government of Bishops, to be, a suspected Forerunner, of a more generall Contempt. And I grant, there is Sympathy, be∣tween the Estates; But no such matter, in the Civill Pollicy, as deserveth so dishonourable a Taxation. To conclude this Point; As it were to be wished, that these Writings, had been abortive, and never seen the Sun; So the next is, since they be commen abroad, that they be cen∣sured, (by all that have Understanding, and Conscience,) as the untemperate Extravagancies, of some Light persons. Yea, further, that Men beware, (except they mean to adventure, to deprive themselves, of all sense of Religion, and to pave their own Hearts, and make them as the High Way,) how they be conversant in them; And much more, how they delight in that Vein; But rather to turn their Laughing, into Blushing; And to be ashamed, as of a short Madnesse; That they have, in matters
of Religion, taken their Disport, and Solace. But this, perchance, is of these Faults, which will be soonest acknowledged; Though I perceive, neverthelesse, that there want not some, who seek to blaunch, and excuse it. But to descend, to a sincere View, and Consideration, of the Accidents, and Circumstances, of these Controversies, wherein, either part, deserveth Blame, or Imputation; I find, general∣ly, in Causes of Church-matters, that Men do offend, in some, or all, of these five Points. The First is, the Giving Occasion, unto the Controversies; And also, the Vnconsiderate, and Vngrounded, Taking of Occasi∣on. The Next is, the Extending, and Multiplying, the Controversies, to a more generall Opposition, or Contradiction, then appeareth, at the first propounding of hem, when Mens Judgements are least partiall. The Third is, the Passionate, and Vnbrotherly Practises, and Pro∣ceedings, of both Parts, towards the Persons, each of others, for their Discredit, and Suppression. The Fourth is, the Courses, holden, and entertained, on either side, for the drawing of their Partizans, to a more straight, Vni∣on within themselves; Which ever importeth, a further Distra∣ction, of the Entire Body. The last is, the Undue, and Inconvenient, Propounding, pub∣lishing, and Debating, of the Controversies. In which Point, the most palpable Error, hath been already spoken of; As that, which through the strangenesse, and Freshnesse of the Abuse, first offereth it self, to the Conceits, of all Men. Now concerning the Occasion, of the Controversies; It cannot be denyed, but that the Imperfections, in the Conversation, and Government of those, which have chief place in the Church, have ever been principall Causes, and Motives, of Schismes, and Divisi∣ons. For whiles the Bishops, and Governers, of the Church, con∣tinue full of Knowledge, and good Works; Whiles they Feed the Flock indeed; Whiles they deal, with the Secular States, in all Liberty, and Resolution, according to the Majesty of their Calling, and the precious care of Souls, imposed upon them; So long, the Church is situated, as it were upon an Hill; No Man ma∣keth question of it, or seeketh to depart from it: But when these vertues, in the Fathers, and Leaders, of the Church, have lost their Light, And that they wax worldly, Lovers of hemselves, and Pleasers of Men; Then Men begin, to groap for the Church, as in the Dark They are in doubt, whether they be the Succes∣sours of the Apostles, or of the Pharises: yea, howsoever they sit in Moses Chair, yet they can never speak, Tanquam Authoritatem habentes, as having Authority, because they have lost their Repu∣tation, in the Consciences of Men, by declining their steps, from the way, which they trace out to others. So as Men, had
need, continually, have sounding in their Eares, this same; Noli∣te Exire: Go not out: So ready are they, to depart from the Church, upon every voice. And therefore, it is truly noted by one, that writeth as a Naturall Man; That the Humility of the Friars, did, for a great time, maintain, and bear out, the Irreligi∣on, of Bishops, and Prelates. For this is the Double Pollicy, of the spirituall Enemy; either by counterfeit Holinesse of Life, to Establish, and Authorize Er∣rours; Or by Corruption of Manners, to discredit, and draw in question, Truth, and Things Lawfull. This concerneth, my Lords the Bishops, unto whom, I am witnesse to my self, that I stand affected, as I ought: No Contradiction hath supplanted, in me, the Reverence, that I owe to their Calling: Neither hath any Detraction, or Calumny, imbased mine Opinion, of their Per∣sons. I know some of them, whose Names are most pierced, with these Accusations, to be Men of great vertues; Although the Indisposition of the times, and the want of Correspondence, many wayes, is enough to frustrate, the best Endeavours, in the Edifying of the Church. And for the rest, generally, I can con∣demn none. I am no Judge of them, that belong, to so High a Master; Neither have I two Witnesses. And I know, it is truly said, of Fame, that —Pariter Facta, a{que} Infecta Canebat. Their Taxations, arise not, all, from one Coast; They have many, and different, Enemies; Ready to invent Slaunder, more ready o amplifie it, and most ready to beleeve it. And Magnes Mendacii Credulitas; Credulity is the Adamant of Lies. But if any be, against whom, the supream Bishop, hath not a few Things, but many Things; If any have lost his first Love; If any be neither Hot, nor Cold; If any have stumbled, too fondly, at the Threshold, in such sort, that he cannot sit well, that entred ill; It is time they return, whence they are fallen, and confirm the Things, that remain. Great is the Weight of this Fault; Et eorum causâ abhorrebant à Sacrficio Domini: And For their Cause, did Men abhor, the Adorati∣on of God. But howsoever it be, Those, which have sought to deface them, and cast Contempt upon them, are not to be excused. It is the precept of Salomo, that the Rulers be not Reproach∣ed; No, not in our Thought. But that, we draw, our very Conceit, into a Modest Interpretation, of their Doings. The Holy Angel, would give no Sentence of Blasphemy, against the Common Slunderer, but said; Increpet te Dominus: The Lord Rebuke thee. The Apostle. Saint Paul, though against him, that did pollute Sa∣cred Justice, with Tyrannous Violence, he did justly denounce he Judgement of God, saying; Perutiet te Dominus: The Lord
will strike thee: yet in saying, Paries dealbate, he thought he had gone too far, and retracted it. Whereupon a Learned Fa∣ther said; Ipsum, quamvis inane nomen, & umbram Sacerdotis, ex∣pavit. The ancient Councels, and Synodes, (as is noted by the Ecclesi∣asticall Story,) when they deprived any Bishop, never recorded the Offence, but buried it in perpetuall Silence: Only Cham, purchased, his Curse, by revealing his Fathers Disgrace, And yet a much greter Fault is it, to ascend, from their Person, to their Calling, and draw that in question. Many good Fathers, spake rigourously, and severely, of the unworthinesse of Bishops; As if, presently, it did forfeit, and cease their Office. One saith; Sacerdotes nominamur, & non sumus: We are called Priests, but Priests we are not. Another saith; Nisi bonum Opus amplectais, Episcopus esse non potes: Except thou undertake the good work, thou canst not be a Bishop: Yet they meant nothing less, then to move doubt, of their Calling, or Ordination. The Second Occasion, of Controversies, is the Nature, and Hu∣mour, of some Men. The Church never wanteth, a kind of Per∣sons, which love the Salutation, of Rabbi, Master; Not in Cere∣mony, or Complement, but in an Inward Authority, which they seek, over Mens Minds, in drawing them, to depend, upon their Opinions, and to seek Knowledge, at their Lips. These Men, are the true Successours, of Diotrephes, the Lover of Prehemi∣nence; And not, Lord Bishops. Such Spirits do light upon ano∣ther sort of Natures, which do adhere to these Men; Quorum gloria in Obsequio; Stiffe Followers, and such, as zeal mervailously, for those, whom they have chosen, for their Masters. This lat∣ter sort, for the most part, are Men, of young years, and superfi∣ciall Understanding; Caried away, with pariall respects of Per∣sons; Or with the Enticing Appearance, of Godly Names, and Pretences: Pauci res ipsas sequuntur, plures nomina Rerum, plurimi nomina Magistrorum. Few follow the things themselves, more the names of the Things, and most the Names of their Masters. About these generall Affections, are wreathed, and interlaced, accidentall, and private Emulations, and Discontentments; All which, together, break forth into contentions; Such as either violate Truth, Sobriety, or Peace. These generalities apply themselves. The Vniversities, are the Seat, or the Continent, of this Disease; Whence it hath been, and is derived, into the Rest of he Realm. There Men, will no longer be, é numero, of the Numeber. There, do others side themselves, before they know, their Right Hand, from their Left. So it is true, which is said; Transeunt ab Ignorantiâ, ad praejudicium. They skip from Ignorance to a prejudicate Opinion; And never take, a sound Jugement, in their way. But, as it is well noted; Inter Iuvenile Iudicium, & senile praejudicium, omnis veritas corumpitur: Through want of years, when Men are not indifferent, But partiall, then their Judgement, is weak, and unripe.
And when it groweth, to Strength, and Ripenesse, by that time, it is forestalled, with such a Number of prejudicate Opini∣ons, as it is made unprofitable: So as, between these two, all Truth is corrupted. In the mean while, the Honourable Names, of Sincerity, Reformation, and Discipline, are put in the fore Ward; So as, Contentions, and Evill Zeals, cannot, be touched, except these Holy Things, be thought first to be violated. But howsoever, they shall infer, the Sollicitation, for the Peace, of the Church, to proceed, from Carnall Sense, yet, I will conclude, ever, with the Apostle Paul; Cum sit inter vos, Zelus, & Contentio, nonne carnales estis? While there is amongst you, Zeal, and Contention, are ye not carnall? And howsoever, they esteem, the Compound∣ing of Controversies, to savour of Mans Wisedom, and Human Pollicy; And think themselves led, by the Wisedom, which is from above; yet I say with Saint James; Non est ista sapientia de sursum descen∣dens; sed Terrena, Animalis, Diabolica. Vbi enim Zelus, & Conten∣tio, bi Inconstantia, & omne opus pravum. Of this Inconstancy, it is said by a Learned Father; Procedere volunt, non ad perfctionem, sed ad permutationem: They seek to go forward still, not to perfection, but o change. The Third Occasion of Controversies, I observe to be, an Extream and unlimitted, Detestation, of some former Heresie, or Corup∣tion, of the Church, already acknowledged, and convicted. This was the Cause, that produced, the Heresie of Arrius, grounded, e∣specially, upon Deestation of Cntilism; least the Christians, should seem, by the Assertion, of the equall Divinity, of our Savi∣our Christ, to approach, unto the Acknowledgement, of more ods, then One. The Detestation, of the Heresie, of Arrius, pro∣duced that of Sabellius; who holding or Excable, the Dissimi∣litude, which Arrius pretended in the Trinity, fled so far from him, as he fell upon that other extremity, to deny the Distincti∣on of Persns: And to say, they were, but onely Names, of se∣vrall Offices, and Dispensations. Yea, most of the Heresies, and chsmes, of the Church, have sprung up, of this Root; While Mn, have made it, as it were, their Sale, by which, to measure the Bounds, of the most perfect Religion; Taking it, by the fur∣thst distance, from the Errour, last condemned. These be Posthumi Haeresium Filii; Heresies, that arise, out of the Ashes, of other Heresies, that are extinct, and amortized. This Manner of Apprehension, doth, in some degree, possesse many in our Times. They think it the true Touchstone, to try what is good and evill, by measuring, what is more, or lesse, op∣posite, to the Institutions, of the Church, of Rome; Be it Ceremony; Be it Pollicy, or Government; yea, be it other Institutions of greater Weight; That is ever most perfect, which is removed, most de∣gees, from that Church: And that, is ever polluted, and blemish∣ed, which participateth, in any Appearance, with it. This is a subtile, and dangerous, Conceit, for Men to entertain; Apt to
delude themselves, more apt to delude the People, and most apt of all, to calumniate their Adversaries. This surely, (but that a Notorious Condemnation, of that Position, was before our Eyes,) had, long since, brought us, to the Rebaptization of Chil∣dren, baptized according to the Pretended Catholick Religion. For I see that, which is a Matter, of much like reason; Which is the reordaining of Priests, is a Matter, already, resolutely maintained. It is very meet, that Men beware, how they be abused by this Opinion; And that they know, that it is a Consideration, of much greater Wisedom, and Sobriety, to be well advised; whether, in generall Demolition, of the Institutions, of the Church, of Rome, there were not, (as Mens Actions are imperfect,) some Good purged with the Bad; Rather, then to purge the Church as they pretend, every day anew: Which is the way, to make a wound in the Bowels, as is already begun. The Fourth, and Last, Occasion, of these Controversies, (a Matter, which did, also, trouble the Church, in former times,) is the par∣tiall, Affectation, and Imitation, of Forraign Churches. For many of our Men, (during the time of persecution, and since,) having been Conversant, in Churches abroad; And received, a great Im∣pression, of the form of Government, there ordained, have vio∣lently sought, to intrude the same, upon our Church. But I an∣swer; Consentiamus in eo quod convenit, non in eo quod receptum est: Let us agree in this, that every Church do that, which is convenient, for the State, of it self, and not in particular Customes: Although thei Churches, had received, the better Form, yet, many times, it is to be sought; Non quod Optimum, sed é bonis quid roximum: Not tat which is Best, but of good Things, which is the Best, and Readiest, to be had. Our Church is not now to plant; It is setled, and e∣stablished. It may be in Civill States, a Republicke, is a better Pollicy, then a Kingdom; Yet God forbid, that lawfull Kingdomes should be tyed to innovate, and make Alterations. Qui mala introducit, voluntatem Dei oppugnat, revelatam in verbo; Qui Nova in∣troucit, voluntatem Dei oppugnat, revelatam in Rebus. He that bring∣eth in Evill Customes, resisteth the will of God, revealed in his Word; He that bringeth in new Things, resisteth the Will of God, revealed in the Things themselves. Consule providentiam Dei cum verbo Dei; Take Counsell, of the Providence of God as well as of his Word. Neither yet do I admit, that their Form, although it were possi∣ble, and convenient, is better then ours, if some Abuses were ta∣ken away. The Parity, and Equality, of Ministers, is a Thing, of wonderfull great Confusion: And so is An Ordinary Govern∣ment by Synods; which doth, necessarily, ensue upon the o∣ther. It is hard, in all Causes, but especially in Religion, when Voyces, shall be Numbred, and not Weighed: Equidem, (saith a Wise Father,) ut verè quod res est scribam, prorsus decrevi fugere omnem Conven∣tum Episcoporum; Nullus enim Concilii bonum exitum unquam vidi; Con∣cilia
enim non minuunt Mala, sed augent potiùs. To sy the truth, I am utterly determined, never to come, to any Councell of Bishops. For I never yet saw, good end, of any Councell; For Councels abae not ill things, but rather encrease them. which is to be understood, not so much of Generall Councels, as of Synods, gathered, for the ordinary Government of the Church. As for the Deprivaion of Bishops, and such like causes; This mischief hath taught the use of Arch Bishops, Patriarchs, and Primates; as the abuse of them since, hath taught Men to mislike them. But it will be said; Look to the Fruits, of the Churches abroad, and Ours. To which I say, that I beseech the Lord, to multiply his Blessings, and Graces, upon those Churches, an hundred fold. But yet, it is not good, that we fall, on the numbring of them. It may be, our peace, hath made us more wanton. It may be al∣so, (though I would be loath, to derogate, from the Honour, of those Churches, were it not to remove Scandalls,) that their Fruits, ae, as Torches, in the Dark, which appear greatest, afar off. I know, they may have some strict Orders, for the repressing of sundy Excesses: But when I consider, of the Censures of some persons, as well upon particular Men, as upon Churches; I think on the saying of a Platonist, who saith; Certe vitia Irasci∣bilis partis Animae sunt gradu praviora, quam concupiscibilis, ametsi occultiora: A matter, that appeared much, by the Ancient Con∣tentions, of Bishops. God grant, that we may contend, with other Churches, as the Vine with the Olive, which of us shall bear the best Fruit; And not, as the Briar with the Thistle, which of us is most unprofitable. And thus much, touching the occasions of these Controversies. Now, briefly, to set down, the Growth and Progrssion, of the Controversies: whereby will be verified, the saying of Salomon; That the Couse of Contention, is to be stopped, at the first; Being else as the waters, which if they gain a Breach, it will hardly ever be recovered. It may be remembred, that on that part, which call for Refor∣mation, ws first, propounded, some Dislike, of certain Ceremo∣nies, supposed to be Superstitious; some complaint of Dumb Mi∣nisters, who possesse Ric Benefices; And some Invectives, against the Idle, and Monstill, Continuance, within the Vniversiies, by those, who had Livings to be resident upon, and such like Abuses. Thence, they went on, to condemn, the Government, of Bisops, as an Hierarchy, Remaining to us, of the Corruptions, of the Romane Church; And to except, to sundry Institutions, in the Church; As not sufficiently, delivered, from the pollutions, of for∣mer Times. And lastly, they are advanced, to define, of an onely, and per∣petuall Form, of Pollicy, in the Church; which, without Conside∣ration, of possibility, and foresight of Perill, and perturbati∣on of the Church, and State, must be erected, and planted, by the Magistrate. Here they stay. Others, not able, to keep foot∣ing
in so steep Ground, descend further; That the same must be entred into, and accepted of the people, at their perill, with∣out the Attending, of the Establishment, of Authority. And, so in the mean time, they refuse to communicate with us, reputing us to have no Church. This hath been, the progression, of that side. I mean of the Generality. For I know, some persons, (be∣ing of the Nature, not only to love Extremities, but also, to fall to them, without degrees) were at the highest strain, at the first. The other Part, which maintaineth, the present Governmnt of the Church, hath not kept, one Tenour, neither. First those Ceremonies, which were pretended, to be corrupt, they main∣tained, to be things indifferent; and opposed, the examples, of the good Times, of the Church, to that challenge, which was made unto them, because they were used, in the latter supersitious Times. Then were they also content, mildly, to acknowledge, many Imperfections, in the Church; As Tares, commen up, amongst the Corn; which yet, (according to the wisdome, taught by our Saviour,) were not, with strife, to be pull'd up, lest it might spoil, and supplant, the good Corn; But to grow on together till the Harvest. After, they grew, to a more absolute Defence, and Main∣tenance, of all the Orders, of the Church; And stiffely, to hold, that nothing was to be innovated; partly because it needed not, part∣ly because it would make a Breach, upon the Rest. Hence, (exaspe∣cted through Contentions,) they are fallen, to a direct Condemna∣tion of the Contrary part, as of a Sect. Yea, and some ndiscreet persons, have been bold, in open Preaching, to use dishooura∣ble, and Derogatory, Speech, and censure, of the Churches abroad: And that so far, as some of our Men, (as I have heard,) ordained in Forrain parts, have been pronounced, to be no lawfull Ministers. Thus we see, the Beginnings were modest, but the Extremes, are violent. So as there is, almost, as great a Distance, now, of either side, from it self, as was, at the first, of one, from the other. And surely, though my Meaning, and Scope, be not, (as I said before,) to enter into the Controversies themselves, yet I do admonish, the Maintainers, of the alone Discipline, to weigh, and consider, seriously, and attentively, how near they are unto them, with whom, I know, they will not joyn. It is very hard to affirm, that the Discipline, which, they say, we want, is one of the essentiall parts, of the worship of God; And not, to affirm withall, that the People themselves, upon pe∣rill of Salvation, without staying for the Magistrate, are to gather themselves into it. I demand, if a Civill State, should receive the Preaching, of the Word, and Baptisme; And interdict, and exclude the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: were not Men bound, upon danger of their souls, to draw themselves, to Congregations, wherein they might celebrate this Mystery? And not to content themselves, with that part of Gods worship, which the Magistrate, had authorised? This I speak, not to draw them, into the mis∣like
of others, but into a more deep Consideration, of themselves: Fortasse non redeunt, quia suum progressum, non intelli∣gunt. Again, to my Lords, the Bishops, I say; That it is hard, for them, to a voyd Blame, (in the Opinion of an indifferent person,) in standing, so precisely, upon Altering nothing. Leges, novis Le∣gibus, non recreatae, acescunt. Lawes, not refreshed, with new Lawes; wax soure. Qui mala non permutat, in bonis non persevera: Without change of ll, a Man cannot continue the Good. To take away many Abuses, Supplanteth not good orders, but establisheth them. Morosa Moris Retentio, Res turbulenta est, aeque ac Novitas: A contentious Retaining of Custom is a Turbulent hing, as well as In∣novation. A good Husband, is ever proining in his Vineyard, or his Field; Not unseasonably, indeed, not unskilfully, but lightly he findeth, ever somewhat to do. We have heard, of no Offers of the Bishops, of Bills in Parliamet; which, no doubt, proceeding from them, to whom it properly belongeth, would have every where received Acceptation. Their own Constitutions, and Or∣ders, have reformed them little. Is nothing amiss? Can any Man defend, the use of Excommunication, as a Base Processe, to lackay up, and down, for Duties, and Fees; It being, a precurso∣ry Judgement, of the latter day? Is there no Mean, to train, and nurse up, Ministers? (For the yield, of the Vniversities, will not serve, though they were never so well govened:) To train them, I say, not to Preach, (For that, every Man, confidently, adventureth, to do;) But to preach soundly, and to handle the Scriptures, with Wisedom, and Judg∣ment? I know, Prophecying, was subject to great Abuse; And would be more abused now, because Heat of Contentions, is en¦creased: But I say, the only Reason, of the Abuse, was, because, there was admitted to it, a Popular Auditory; And it was not con∣tained, within a private Conference, of Ministers: Other things, might be spoken of. I pray God, to inspire the Bishops, with a fervent Love, and Care, of the People; And that they may not, so much, urge Things in Controversie, as Things out of Contro∣versie; Which all Men, confesse to be Gracious, and Good. And thus much, for the Second Point. Nw as to the Third Point, of Vnbrotherly Proceeding, on either Part; It is, directly, contrary to my Purpose, to amplifie wrongs. It is enough, to note, and number them; Which I do also, to move Compassion, and Remorse, on the Offending Side; And not, to animate Challengers, and Complaints, on the other. And this Point, (as Reason is,) doth chiefly touch that side, which can do most: Injuriae potentiorum sunt: Injuries, come from them, that have the upper hand. The Wrongs of them, which are possessed, of the Government, of the Church, towards the other, may, hardly, be dissembled, or Excused. They have charged them, as though, they denied Tri∣bute
to Caesar; And with-drew, from the Civill Magistrate, the Obedience, which they have ever performed, and taught. They have sorted, and coupled them, with the Family of Love, whose Heresies, they have laboured, to destroy, and Confute. They have been swift of Credit, to receive Accusations against them, from those, that have quarrelled with them, but for speaking, against Sin, and Vice. Their Accusations, and Inquisitions, have been strict, Swearing Men to Blanks, and Generalities; Not included within compass of Matter certain; Which the Party, which is to take the Oath, may comprehend, to be, a Thing Captious, and Strainable. Their urging of Subscription, to their own Articles, is but Lacessere, & irritare, Morbos Ecclesiae; Which o∣therwise, would spend, and exercise, themselves. Non concessum quaerit, sed dissidium, qui, quod factis praestatur, in verbis eigit. He seeketh not unity, but Division, which exacteth that in words, which Men are content to yield in Action. And it is true, there are some, which, (as I am perswaded,) will not, easily, offend, by Incon∣formity, who, notwithstanding, make some conscience, to subscribe. For they know, this Note, of Inconstancy, and Defecti∣on, from that, which they have long held, shall disable them, to do that good, wch otherwise they mought do: For such is the weak∣ness of Many, that their Ministery, should be thereby discredit∣ed. As for their easie Silencing of them, in such great scarcety of Preachers, it is to punish the People, and not them. Ought they not, (I mean the Bishop,) to keep one Eye open, To looke upon the Good, that the Men do; but to fix them both, upon the Hurt, that they suppose commeth by them? Indeed, such as are intemperate, and Incorrigible, God forbid they should be permitted to Preach: But shall every inconsiderate Word, some∣times, captiously watched, and for the most part, hardly enfor∣ced, be as a Forfeiture, of their voice, & Gift, in preaching? As for sundry particular Molestations, I take no pleasure to recite them. If a Minister, shall be troubled, for saying in Baptisme; Do you believe, for, Dost thou believe? If another, shall be called in question, for praying for her Majesty, without the Additions, of her Stile; whereas, the very form of Prayer, in the Book of Common Prayer, hath, Thy Servant Elizabeth, & no more: If a Third, shall be accu∣sed, upon these words, uttered touching the Controversies, Tol∣latur Lex, & fiat Certamen: (Whereby was meant, that the preju∣dice, of the Law, removed, either Reasons should be equally compared;) Of calling the People, to Sedition, and Muti∣ny; As if he had said; Away with the Law, and try it out with Force: If these, and other like particulars, be true, which I have, but by Rumour and cannot affirm; It is to be lamented, that they should labour, amongst us, with so little comfort. I know, Restrained Governments, are better, then Remisse; And I am, of his mind, that said; Better is to live where nothing is lawfull, then where all Things are lawfull. I dislike, that Lawes should not be con∣tinued,
or Disturbers be unpunished: But Lawes, are likened to the Grape, that being too much pressed, yields, an hard, and un∣wholsome, Wine. Of these Things, I must say; Ira Viri non operatur Iusticiam Dei. The Wrath of Man worketh not the Righteousnesse of God. As for the Injuries, of the other Part, they be Ictus inermes; As it were, Headlesse Arrowes: They be Fiery, and Eager, In∣vecives; And, (in some fond Men,) ucivill, and unreverent, Behaviour, towards their Superiours. This last invention also, which exposeth them, to Derision, and Obloquy, by Libels, chargeth not (as I am perswaded,) the whole side: Nei∣her doth that other, which is yet more odious, practised by the worst sort of them; which is, to call in, (as it were, to their Aides, (certain Merceary Bands, which impugn Bishops, and other Ecclesiasticall Dignities, to have the spoyle, of their Endow∣ments, and Livings; Of those I cannot speak too hardly. It is an Intelligence, between Incendiaries, and Robbers; The one to Fire the House, the other to Rifle it. The Fourth Point, wholly pertaineth to them, which im∣pugn, the present Ecclesiasticall Government; who, although, they have not cut Themselves off, from the Body, and Communion, of the Church; yet do they affect, certain Cognizances and Differences, wherein they seek to correspond amongst themselves, and to be seperate from others. And it is truly said; Tam sunt Mores qui∣dam Schismatici, quam Dogmata Schismatica: There be as well Schis∣maticall Fashions, as Opinions. First, they have impropriated, unto themselves, the Names of Zealous, Sincere, and Reformed; As if, all others, were Cold, Minglers of Holy Things, and Prophane, and Friends of Abuses: Yea, be a man indued, with great Vertues, and fruitfull in good workes; yet if he concur not with them, they term him, (in Derogation,) a Civill, and Morall, Man; And com∣pare him, to Socrates, or some Heathen Philosopher: Whereas the Wisedom of the Scriptures, teacheth us otherwise: Namely, to judge, and denominate Men Religious, according to their Works, of the Second Table: Because they of the First, are often Counterfeit, and practised in Hypocrisie. So Saint Iohn saith; That a Man, doth vainly boast, of Loving God, whom he never saw, if he love not his Bro∣ther, whom he hath seen. And Saint Iames saith; This is true Religi∣on, to visite the Fatherlesse, and the Widow. So as that, which is, with them, but Philosophicall, and Morall, is, in the Apostles Phrase, True Religion, and Christianity. As in Affection, they challenge, the said Vertues of Zeal, and the rest; So in Knowledge, they attri∣bute unto themselves, Light, and Perfection. They say, the Church of England, in King Edwards time, and in the Beginning of her Majesties Raign, was but in the Cradle; And the Bishops, in those times, did somewhat, for Day-Break; But that, Maurity and Fulnesse, of Light, proceeded from themselves. So Sabinius, Bishop of Heraclea, a Macedoniam Heretick, said; That the Fathers, in the Councell of Nice were but Infants, and Ignorant Men: That the
Church, was not so perfect in their Decrees, as to refuse, that Fur∣ther Ripeness, of Knowledge, which Time had revealed. And as they censure, vertuous Names, by the Names, of Civill, and Morall; So do they censure Men, truly, and godly wise, (who see into the vanity of their Affections,) by the name of Politicks: saying, that their Wisdome, is but Carnall, and savuring of Mans Brain. So likewise, if a Preacher, preach with Care, and Meditation; (I speak not, of the vain, Scholasticall, Manner of Preaching; But soundly indeed, ordering the Matter, he handleth, disinctly, for Memory; Deducting, and drawing it down, for Direction; and authorizing it, with strong proofs, and warrants;) They censure it, as a Form of Speaking, not becomming, the Simplicity of the Gospell; And refer it, to the Reprehension, of Saint Paul, speaking, of the Enticing Speech, of Mans Wisdome. Now, for their own Manner of Preaching, what is it? Surely, they exhort well, and work Compunction of Mind; And bring Men well to the Question; Viri, Fratres, quid aciemus? But that is not enough; Except they resolve the Question. They handle, Matters of Controversie, weakly, and obiter, and as before a People, that will accept of any Thing. In Doctrine of Manners, there is little, but Generality, and Repetition. The word, (the Bread of Life,) they tosse up and down, they break it not: They draw not, their Directions down, ad Casus Conscientiae: That a Man may be warranted, in his perpetuall Actions, whether they be Lawfull, or not. Neither, indeed, are many of them, able, to do it; What through want, of Grounded knowledge; What through want, of Study, and Time. It is a Compendious, and easie Thing, to call for the Observation of the Sabbath Day; or to speak against unlawfull Gaine: But what Actions, and works, may be done upon the Sabbath, and what not; And what Courses, of Gain, are Lawfull, and in what Cases? To set this down, and to clear the whole Matter, with good Distinctions, and Decisions, is a Matter of great Knowledge, and Labour; And asketh much Meditation, and Conversing, in the Scriptures, and other Helps, which God hath provided, and peserve, for Instruction. Again, they carry not, an equall Hand, in Teaching the People, their lawfull Liberty, as well, as their Restraints, and Prohibitions: But they think, a Man, cannot go too far, in that, that hath a shew of a Commandement. They forget, that there are Sins, on the Right Hand, as well as o the Left; And that, the word is double edged, and cutteth on both Sides; As well the Profane Trangressions; as the supersti∣tious Observances. Who doubteth, but that, it is as unlawfull, to shut, where God hath opened, as to open, where God hath shut: To bind, where God hath loosed, as to loose, where God hath bound. Amongst Men, it is, commonly, as ill taken, to turn back Favs, as to disobey Commandements. In this Kind of Zeal, (for Example,) they have pronounced, generally, and with∣out
difference, all Untruths, unlawfull; Notwithstanding, that the Midwives, are directly reported, to have been blessed, for their Excuse: And Rahab, is said, by Faith, to have concealed the Spies: And Salomons selected Iudgement, proceeded upon a Simula∣tion: And our Saviour, the more to touch the Hearts, of the two Disiples, with an holy Dalliance, made, as if he would have pas∣sed Emaus. Further, I have heard some Sermons of Mortification, which, I think, with very good Meaning, they have preached, out of heir own Exprience, and Exercise; And Things, in pri∣vate Counsels, not unmeet: But surely, no Sound Conceits, Much like to Parsons Resolution, or not so good; Apt, to breed in Men, rather weak Opinions, and perplexed Despaires, then Fi∣liall, and True Repentance, which is sought. Another Point, of great Inconvenience, and perill, is, to enti∣tle the People, to hear Controversies, and all Kinds of Doctrine. They say, no part, of the Counsell, of God, is to be suppressed, nor the People defrauded. So as the Difference, which the Apostle ma∣keth, between Milk, and Strong Meat, is confounded: And his Precept, that the weak, be not admitted, unto Questions, and Controversies, taketh no place. But most of all is to be suspected, as a Seed of further Inconve∣nince, their Manner, of Handling the Scriptures. For whilest, they seek expresse, Scripture, for every Thing; And that they have, in a manner, deprived themselves, and the Church, of a speciall Help, and Support, by Embasing, the Authority, of the Fathers; They resort to Naked Examples, Conceited Inferences, and Forced Allusions; such, as do mine, into all Certainty, of Religion. Another Extremity, is the Excessive Magnifying of that, which though it be a principall, and most holy Institution; yet hath it Limits, as all things else have. We see, wheresoever, in a man∣ner, they find in the Scriptures; The Word, spoken of, they ex∣pound it of Preaching. They have made it, in a manner, of the Essence, of the Sacrament, of the Lords Supper, to have a Sermon pre∣cedent. They have, in a sort, annihilated the use of Liturgies, and Formes of Divine Service; Although, the House of God be deno∣minated, of the Principall, Domus Orationis; A House of Prayer, and not a House of Preaching. As for the Life, of the good Monks, and Hermits, in the Primitive Church, I know, they will condemne a Man, as half a Papist, if he should maintain them, as other then Prophane, because they heard no Sermons. In the mean time, what Preaching is, and who may be said to Preach, they move no Question. But, (as far, as I see,) every man, that presumeth to speak in Chair, is accounted a Preacher. But I am assured, that not a few, that call hotly, for a Preaching Ministery, deserve to be the First themselves, that should be expelled. All which Errours, and Misproceedings, they do fortifie, and intrench, by an ad∣dicted Respect, to their own Opinions; And an Impience, to hear Contradiction, or Argument; yea, I know some of them, that
that would think it, a Tempting of God, to hear, or read, what may be said against them: As if there could be, A, Quod bonum est, tenete; without an Omnia probate, going before. This may suffice, to offer unto themselves, a Thought, and Consideration, whether, In these things, they do well, or no? And to correct, and asswage, the Partiality, of their Followers. For as for any Man, that shall, hereby, enter into a Contempt of their Ministery; it is but his own Hardness of Hart. I know, the work of Exhortation, doth chiefly rest, upon these Men, and they have Zeal, and Hate, of Sin. But again, let them take Heed, that it be not true, which one of their Adversaries said; That they have but two small wants; Knowledge, and Love. And so I conclude this Point. The last Point, touching the due Publishing, and Debating, of these Controversies, needeth no long Speech. This strange Abuse, of Antiques, and Pasquils, hath been touched before. So like∣wise, I repeat that, which I said; That a Character of Love, is more proper for Debates, of this Nature, then that of Zeal: As for all direct, or indirect, Glaunces, or Levels, at Mens Persons, they were ever, in these Causes, disallowed. Lastly, whatsoever be pretended, the People is no meet Arbi∣trator; but rather the quiet, modest, and private Assemblies, and Conferences, of the Learned. Qui apud Incapacem loquitur, non disceptat, sed calumniatur. The Presse, and Pulpit, would be freed, and discharged, of these Contentions: Neither Promotion, on the one Side; nor Glory, and Heat, on the other Side, ought to continue those Challenges, and Cartells, at the Crosse, and other Places. But rather, all Preachers, especially such as be of good temper, and have Wisdome with Conscience, ought to inculcate, and beat upon a Peace, Silence, and Surseance. Neither let them fear Solons Law, which compelled, in Factions, every parti∣cular Person, to range himself, on the one side; Nor yet, the fond Calumny of Neutrality. But let them know, that is true, which is said by a wise Man; That Neuters, in Contentions, are either better, or worse, then either Side. These things have I, in all sincerity, and simplicity, set down, touching the Controversies, which now trouble, the Church of England. And that, without all Art, and Insinuation. And ther∣fore, not like to be gratefull, to either Part. Notwithstanding, I trust, what hath been said, shall find a Correspondence, in their minds, which are not embarqued in Partiality; And which love the Whole, better then a Part. Wherefore, I am not, out of hope that it may do good; At the least, I shall not repent my self, of the Meditation. FINIS.
IN HAPPY MEMORY, OF ELIZABETH, QUEEN of ENGLAND. OR, A COLLECTION, OF THE FELICITIES, OF Queen Elizabeth. Written by his Lordship in Latin; AND Englished by the Publisher. QVeen Elizabeth, both in her Naturall Endowments, and her Fortune, was Admirable amongst Women, and Memorable amongst Princes. But this is no Sub∣ject, for the Pen of a meer Scholler, or any such Cloistred Writer. For these Men, are eager in their Expressions, but shallow in their Judgements; And perform the Schollers part well, but transmit Things but unfaith∣fully to Posterity. Certainly, it is a Scienc, belonging to States∣men,
and to such as sit at the Helmes of great Kingdoms; and have been acquainted with the weight, and Secrets, of Civil Business; to handle this matter dextrously. Rare, in all Ages, hah been the Raign of a Woman: More rare, the Felicity of a Woman, in her Raign: But most rare, a Permanency, and Lasting, joyned with that Feliciy. As for this Lady, she raigned Four and Fourty years, compleat, and yet she did not survive her Felicity. Of this Felici∣ty, I am purposed to say somewhat; yet without any Excursion into Praises. For Praises are the Tribute of Men, but Felicity the Gift of God. Fist, I reckon it as a part of her Felicity, that she was advanced to the Regal Throne, from a Private Fortune. For this is ingenerate, in the Natue, and Opinions, of Men, to ascribe that, to the greatest Felcity, which is not counted upon, and cometh unlooked for But this is not that I intend. It is this. Princes, that are trained up, in their Fathrs Courts, and to an immediate, and Apparent, Hope of Succession, do get this, by the Tendernesse, and remisse∣ness, of their Education, that they become (commonly) lesse capable, and lesse Temperae, in their Affections. And there∣foe, you shall find those, to have been the ablest, and most ac∣cmlished Kings, that were Tutoured, by both Fortunes. Such was with us, King Henry the Seventh; An with the French, Lewis the Twelh: Both which, in recent Memory, and, almost, about the same time, obtained their Crowns, not onely, from a Private, but also from an Adverse, and Afflicted, Fortune; And did both excell, in their severall wayes; The former in Prudence; And the other in Iustice. Much like was the Condition of this Princesse, whose Blosomes, and Hopes, were unequally aspect∣ed by Fortune; That afterwards, when she came to the Crown, Fortune might prove, towards her, alwayes Mild, and Constant. For Quen Elizabeth, soon after she was born, was entituled to the Succession, in the Crown; upon the next turn disinherited a∣gain; Then layed aside, and slighted: During the Raign, of her Brother, her Estate, was most Prosperous, and Flourishing; Du∣ring the Raign, of her Sister, very Tempestuous, and full of Hazard. Neither yet, did she passe, immediately, from the Pri∣son, to the Crown; (which sudden Change, might have been enough, to make her cast off all Moderation;) But first she regain∣ed her Liberty; Then there budded forth some probable Hopes of Succession; And lastly, in a great Still, and Happiness, she was advanced to the Imperiall Crown, without either Noise, or Com∣petitour. All which I alledge, that it may appear, that the Divine Providence, intending to produce, a most exquisite Princesse, was pleased, to prepare, and mould Her, by these Degrees, of Disci∣plie. Neither ought the Misfortune of her Mother, justly to stain, the pure Stream of her Blood; especially, seeing it is very evi∣dent, that King Henry the eighth did fist burn, with new Loves, before he was enflamed, with Indignation, against Queen Anne:
Neither is it unknown, to the Ages, since, that he was a King, naturally prone, to Loves, and Jealousies; And not containing himself, in thoe cases, from the effusion of Blood. Besides, the very person, for whom she was suspected, sheweth, the Accusa∣tion, to be lesse probable, and built upon weak, and frivolous, Suppositions: Which was, both secretly whispered, in many Mens ears, at that Time; And which, Queen Anne her self, testi∣ied, by her undaunted courage, and that memorable Speech of hers, at the Time of her Death. For having gotten, (as she suppo∣sed,) a faithfull and friendly, Messenger, in the very Hour before her Death, she delivered him these words, to relate unto the King; That she had ever found the King, very constant and firm, to his purpose of Advancing her; For first, from the estate of a Gentlewoman, onely, and no way pretending to Noble Titles, He raised Her, to the Honour of a Marchioness; Next, he vouchsafed to make her his Consort, both of his Kingdom, and Bed; And now, that there remained no higher earth∣ly Honour, he meant to crown her Innocency, with the Glory of Martyr∣dome. But though, the messenger durst not relate these words to the King, who was already enflamed with new Loves; yet cer∣tain Tradition, the Conserver of Truth, hath conveyed them to Posterity. Another principall thing, which I cast into Queen Elizabeths Felicity, was the Time, and Period of her Raign; Not onely for that it was Long, but also, because it fell, into that season, of her Life, which was most Active, and Fittest, for the swaying of a Scepter. For she was fully Five and Twenty years old, (at which age, the Civill Law freeth from a Curaour,) when she came to the Crown; And raigned to the Seventieth year of her Life. So that she never suffered, either the Detriments, of Pupillage, and Check of an Over-awing Power; Or the Inconveniencies of an Im∣potnt, and unwieldy, Old-age. And Old-age, is not, without a competent portion of miseries, even to private men; But to Kings, besides the Common Burthen of years, it brings, for the most part, a Declining, in the Estates, they govern, and a Con∣clusion of their Lives, without Honour. For there hath scarce been known a King, that hath lived, to an Extreame, and Im∣potent Old-age, but he hath suffered some Detriment, in his Territories, and gone lesse in his Reputation. Of which Thing, there is a most eminent Example, in Philip the Second, King of Spain, a most puissant Prince, and an Excellent Governer; Who, in the last years of his Life, and Impotent Old-age, was sensible of this, whereof we speak; And therefore, with great circumspection, submitted Himself, to Natures Law; Volun∣tarily surrendred the Territories he had gotten in France; Esta∣blished a Firm Peace in that Kingdom; Attempted the like in o∣ther Places; That so, He might transmit his Kingdoms, Peacea∣ble, and Entire, to his next Heir. Contrary-wise, Queen Eliza∣behs Fortune, was so constant, and deeply rooted, that no
Disaster in any of her Dominions, accompanied, her inded de∣clining, but still able, years: Nay further, for an undeniable Token of her Felicity, she died not, before the Rebellion in Ireland, was ortunately decided, and quashed, by a Battel there; Least otherwise, it might have defalked, from the Totall Summe, of her Glory. Now the Condition also, of the People, over whom she raigned, I take to be a Matter, worthy our Observation. For i her Lot had fallen, amongst the desolate lmyrens, or in Asia, a soft, and effeminate Race of Men, a Woman-Prince, might have been sufficient, for a Womanish People; But for the English, a Na∣tion, stout, and war-like, to be ruled by the Check of a Woman, and to yield so humble Obedience to her, is a Thing deserving the highest Admiration. Neither was this Disposition of her People, (Hungy of War, and unwillingly bowing to Peace,) any Impediment to her, but that she enjoyed, and maintained, Peace, all her Dayes. And this Desire, in her, of Peace, together with her fortunate accom∣plishment thereof, I reckon to be one, of her chiefest Praises. For this was Happy for her Times, Comely for her Sex, and Comfor∣table to her Conscience. Indeed, about the Tenth year of her Raign, there was an Offer of a Commotion, in the Northern Parts; But it was soon laid asleep, and extinguished: But all her Raign beside, was free from the least Breath, or Air, of Civil Broyles. Now I judge the Peace, maintained by her, to be the more emi∣nent, for two causes; Which indeed make nothing for the Merit of that Peace, but much for the Honour. The one, that it was set off, and made more cospicuous, by the Broyls, and Dissensi∣ons, of Neighbouring Nations; As it were, by so many Lights, and Torches: The other, that amidst the Benefits of Peace, she lost not the Honour of Arms: Insomuch, that the Reputation, of the English Arms, was not onely preserved, but also advanced by her, upon many glorious Occasions. For the Succours, sent in∣to the Netherlands, France, and Scotland; The Expeditions by Sea into both the Indies, whereof some circled the whole Globe of the Earth; The Fleets sent into Portugall and to annoy the Coasts of Spain; And lastly, the often Suppressions, and Overthrows, of the Rebells in Ireland; did both shew the warlike Prowesse of our Nation, to be no whit diminished; And did much encrease the Renown of the Queen. There was another Thing, that did greatly advance her Glo∣ry: That both by her timely Succours, her Nighbour Kings were settled in their Rightull Thrones; and the Suppliant People, (who by the ill Advisednesse of their Kings, were abandoned, and given over, to the Cruely, of their Ministers; And to the Fury, of the Multitude; and to all manner, of Butchery, and Desola∣tion; were relieved by Her; By reason whereof, they subsist unto this Day. Neither was She a Princesse, lesse Benigne, and For∣tunate in the Influence of her Counsells, then of her Succours;
As being One, that had, oftentimes, interceded to the King of Spain, to mitigate his wrath, against his Subjects, in the Nether∣lands, and to reduce them to his Obedience, upon some tolerable Conditions; And further, as being one, that did perpetually, and upon all occasions, represent to the French Kings, the Observa∣tion of their own Edicts, so often declaring, and promising, peace to their Subjects. I cannot deny, but that these good Counsells of hers, wanted the Effect: In the former, I verily believe, for the Univesall good of Europe; Least happily, the Ambition of Spain, being unloosed from his Fetters, should have poured it self, (as things then stood,) upon the other Kingdoms, and States of Chri∣stendom: And for the latter, the Blood of so many Innocents, with their Wives, and Children; Slain, within their own Harbours, and Nests, by the Scumme of the People, (who like so many Mastifes, were let loose, and heartened, and even set upon them, by the State;) would not suffer it; which did continually cry unto God for Vengeance, that so Blood-sucking a Kingdom, might have her fill thereof, in the intestine, Slaughters, and Con∣sumption, of a Civill War. Howsoever she persisted, to perform the part of a wise, and loving, Confederate. There is another Cause also, for which we may justly admire, this Peace, so constantly pursued, and maintained, by the Queen. And that is, that it did not proceed, from any Bent, or Inclinati∣on, of those Times; But from the Prudency, of her Government, and discreet Carriage of Things. For whereas, she her self, was not without manifest Danger, from an ill affected Party at home, for the Cause of Religion; And that the Strength and Forces of this Kingdom, were in the Place of a Bulwark, to all Europe, a∣gainst the then dreadfull, and overflowing, Ambition, and Pow∣er, of the King of Spain; She might have apprehended just Cause of a War: But, as she was still ready, with her Councell, so she was not, behind hand, with her Forces. And this we are taught by an Event, the most Memorable, of any in our time, if we look upon the Felicity thereof. For when as the Spanish Navy, (set forth with such wonderfull Preparations, in all kinds; the Terrour, and Amazement of all Europe; Carried on with almost Assu∣rance of victory;) came braving upon our Seas; It took not so much, as one poor Cock-boat of ours, nor fired any one Village, nor landed one Man upon English Ground; But was utterly defeated, and after a shamefull Flight, and many shipwracks, quite dispersed; So as the Peace, of this Kingdome, was never more Firm, and Solid. Neither was her Felicity lesse, in Escaping Treacherous Attempts at home, then in subduing, and Defeating, forrain Invasions. For not a few Treasons, plotted a∣gainst her Life, were, most fortunately, discovered, and disap∣pointed. And this was no cause, to make her lead, a more fear∣full, or diffident, life, then before. No new Encrease of her Guard; No Immuring her self within her own Walls, or Forbearing to be
seen abroad; But as one assured, and confident; And that was more mindfull of her Escape from Danger, then of the Danger it self, she was constant, to her former Customes, and Fashi∣ons. Furthermore, it is worth our labour, to consider the Nature of the Times, in which she Raigned. For there are some Times, so Bar∣barous, and Ignorant, that it is no greater matter, to govern People, then to govern a Flock of Sheep. But this Queen, fell upon Times, of singular Learning, and Sufficiency; In which, it was not possible, to be eminent, without admirable Endowments of wit, and a Rare Temper of Vertue. Again, the Raignes of Women, are, For the most part, obscured by their Husbands: Upon whom, all their Praises, and worthy Acts, do relect: As for those, that continue unmarried, it is they that impropriate, the whole glory, and meri, to themselves. And this was the peculiar Glory of this Princesse; That she had no Props, or Supports, of her Govern∣ment, but those, that were, of her own making. She had no Bro∣ther, the Son of her Mother; No Vnckle; None other of the Royall Bloud and Linage, that might be Partner in her Cares, and an Vphold∣er of the Regall Dignity. And as for those, whom she raised to Ho∣nour, she carried such a discreet Hand over them, and so enter∣changed her Favour, as they all strived in Emulation, and De∣sire, to please her best, and she her self remained, in all Things, an Absolute Princesse. Childlesse she was, and left no Issue behind Her; which was the Case of many, of the most fortunate Princes; A∣lexander the reat, Iulius Caesar, Trajan, and others. And this is a Case, that hath been often controverted, and argued, on both ides; Whilest some hold, the want of Children, to be a Diminuti∣on, of our Happinesse; As if it should be an Estate, more then Hu∣man, to be happy, both in our own Persons, and in our Descend∣ants: But others, do account, the want of Children, as an Addition to arthly Happinesse; In as much, as that Happinesse, may be said, to be compleat, over which Fortne hath no Power, when we are gone: Which, if we leave Children, cannot be. She had also many Outward Gifts of Nature. A tall Staure; A comely and strait Making; An extraordinary Majesty of Aspect, oyned with a Sweetnesse; A most Happy, and Constant, Health∣fulnesse of Body. Unto which I may add, that in the full Possession, both of her Limms, and Spirits, untill her last Sicknesse; (Ha∣ving received no Blow from Fortune Nor Decay from Old Age;) she obtained that, which Augustus Caesar, so importunately prayed for; An easie and undistempered passage, out of this VVorld. Which also is reported of Antoninus Pius, that Excellent Emperour; Whose Deah, had the Resemblance, of some soft, and pleasing Slumber. So in Queen Elizabeths Disease, there was no ghastly, or fearfull Ac∣cident; No Idlenesse of Brain; Nothing unaccustomed to Man in generall: She was not transported, either with desire of Life, or Tediousnesse of Sicknesse, or extremity of Pain; She had no
grievous, or uncomely, Symptomes; But all things were of that kind, as did rather shew, the Frailty of Nature, then a Deordination, or Reproach of it. For some few Dayes, before her Death, being much pined, with the extream Drought, of her Body, and those Cares, that accompany a Crown; And not wonted, to refresh her Self with VVine, or any Liberall Die; she was strook with a Torpour, and Frigidity in her Nerves; Notwithstanding, which is rare in such Diseases, she retained both her Speech, and Memory, and Motion though but flow and weak, even to the end. And in this Case, she continued, but a few dayes; So as it cannot be called, the Last Act of her Life, but the First step to her Death. For as it is, a Miserable Condition, to see the Facultie, of our Body, buried before us; And to survive long after them; So it is a Faire, and Naturall, Conclusion of our Life, when the Senses, are, by little and little, layd asleep, that the Dissolution of the whole, should immediatly follow. I will adde one Thing more, to make up, the full Measure, of her Felicity: which is, that she was not only most Happy, in her own Person, but in the Abilities, and vertues of her Servants, and Ministers For she was served by such Persons, as, I suppose, this Island never brought forth the like, before her Times. Now when God beareth a love to Kings, no doubt, he raiseth up, the Spirits, of Wise Servants, as a concurrent Blessing. There are two faire Issues, of her Happinesse, born to her, since her Death; I conceive, not lesse Glorious, and Eminent, then those she enjoyed a live. The one of her Successour; The other of her Memory. For she hath gotten such a Successour, who although for his Masculine Vertues, and Blessing of Posterity, and Addition of Territories, he may be said, to exceed her Greatnesse, and some∣what to obscure it; Notwithstanding, he is most zealous, of her Name, and Glory; And doth even give, a Perpetuity to her Acts; Considering both in the Choice of the Persons, and in the Orders, & Institutions of the Kingdome, he hath departed so little from her. So as, a Son could hardly succeed a Father, with lesse Noise, or Inno¦vation. As for her Memory, it hath gotten such Life, in the Mouths, and Hearts, of Men, as that, Envy being put out by her Death, and her Fame lighted, I cannot say, whether the Felicity of her Life, or the Felicity of her Memory, be the greater. For if (per∣haps) there fly abroad, any factious Fames, of Her, raised either by Discontented Persons, or such, as are averse in Religion; (which notwithstanding dare now scarce shew their Faces, and are every where cryed down;) The same, are neither true, nei∣ther can they be long liv'd. And for this cause especially, have I made this Collection, (such as it is,) touching her Felicity, and the Marks of Gods Favour towards Her; That no malicious Person, should dare to interpose a Curse, where God hath given a Blessing. Now if any Man, shall alledge that against me, which was once said to Caesar; We see what we may admire, but we would fain see what
we can commend; Certainly, for my part, I hold true Admiration, to be the highest Degree of Commendation. And besides, such Felicities as we have recounted, could not befall any Princesse, but such an one, as was extraordinarily supported, and cherished by Gods Favour; And had much in her own Person, & Rare Vertues, to create, and work out, unto her self, such a Fortune. Notwithstan∣ding, I have thought good, to insert something now, concer∣ning her Morall Part; Yet only in those things, which have mi∣nistred occasion, to some Mallicious Tongues, to traduce her. This Queen, as touching her Religion, was Pious; Moderate; Con∣stant, and an Enemy to Novelty. First for her Piety; Though the same were most conspicuous, in her Acts, and the Form of her Government; yet it was Pourtrayed also, in the common Course of her Life, and her daily Comportment. Seldome would she be absent, from Hearing Divine Service, and other Duties of Religion, either in her Chappell, or in her Privy Closet. In the reading of the Scriptures, and the writings of the Fathers, especially of Saint Augustine, she was very Frequent: She composed certain Prayers, her self, upon emergent occasions. Whensoever she named God, though it were in common discourse, she would, for the most part, adde, The Title of Maker; saying; God my Maker: And compose, both her Eyes, and Countenance, to a Submisnesse, and Reverence. This I have often (my self) observed, being in her presence. Now whereas some have divulged her unmind∣fulnesse of Mortality, in that she would never endure any Menti∣on, either of her Age, or Death, it is most false: For she would of∣ten, and that, many years, before her Death, with a great deal of Meeknesse, professe, that she found her self grown, an old Woman; And she would, sometimes, open her self, what she liked best, for an Inscription upon her Tombe; Saying; That she loved no pompous, or vain-glorious, Titles, but would onely have, a Line, or two, for her Memory; wherein, her Name; and her Virginity; and the years of her Raign; and her Establishing of Religion; and her Maintaining of Peace; should be, in the fewest words, comprehended. It is true, that whilest she was in her vigorous years, and able to bear Children, if at any time she were moved, to declare her Successour, she would make Answer; That she would never endure, to see her winding sheet, before her Eyes. And yet notwithstanding, some few years, before her death, one day, when she was in a deep Meditation, and, (as it may be ghessed,) in that of her Mortality, One, that might be bold, said unto her; Madam, there are divers Offices, and great places in the state, which you keep too long void;. She arose up, in some displeasure, and said; I am sure, my Office will not be long void. As for her Moderateness in Religion, I shall seem to be at a stand, in regard of the Severe Lawes, made against her Subjects, of the Romish Religion. Notwithstanding, that which I shall say, is no more, then what I know for certain, and diligently observed.
Most certain it is, that it was the Firm Resolution, of this Prin∣cesse, not to offer any violence to Consciences: But then, on the o∣ther Side, not to suffer the State of her Kingdome, to be ruined, under pretence of Conscience, and Religion. Out of this Fountain, she concluded; First, That to allow Freedome, and Toleration, of two Religions, by publick Authority, in a Nation Fierce, and Warlike; And that would easily fall, from Dissention of Minds, to Siding and Blowes, would bring inevitable Ruin to this King∣dome. Again, in the Newnesse of her Raign, when there was a generall distrust, she singled out some of the Bishops, of the most Turbulent, and Factious, Spirits, and commited them to free Custody; And this not without the warrant of Former Lawes; As for the Rest, either of the Cleargy, or Laity, she did not ransack their Consciences, by any Sevre Inqusition, but rather secured them, by a gracious Connivency. And this was the State of Things, at the first. Neither did she depart, from this Clemen∣cy, when the Excommunication of Pius Quinus, came Thunding against her; which might both justly have provoked her, and have ministred occasion, to new Courses; But howsoever, she followed her Royall Nature still. For, as a wise Lady, and of a high Courage, she was not a whit terrified, at the Roaring of a Bull; Being well assured, of her Peoples Love, and Fidelity, to¦wards her; As also of the Disability, of the Popish Faction, within the Kingdome, to do her Hurt, if no Forraign Enemy joyned with them. But then, about the three and twentieth year of her Raign, there followed a Mighty Change. And this Distinction of the Times, is not any Device of mine, but it is expressed in the publick Acts of that Time, and, as it were, cut in Brasse. For be∣fore that year, was there never any Capitall or severe Punishment, in∣flicted upon any of her Subjects, as they had Relation to the Romish Religion, by the Lawes formerly made. But just then, be∣gan that proud, and vast Intention of Spain, to conquer this King∣dome, by little and little, to shew it Self. Of this, the principall Part was, to stir up, by all means, a Party within the Kingdome, of such, as were ill affected to the State, and desirous of Innovation, that might adhere to the Forrainer, at his Landing. For this, they had no other Hopes, then the Difference in Religion. Where∣fore, they set it down, to pursue this Course, with all their power. And the Seminaries, at that time, budding, Priests were sent into England, to plant, and disperse, a Love, to the Romish Religion; To teach, and inculcate, the power, of the Popes Excom∣munication, in freeing Subjects from their Allegeance; And to a∣waken, and prepare, the minds of Men, to an Expectation, of a Change. About the same time, Ireland also was attempted by an Invasion; And the Queens Name, and Government, traduced, by sundry, and scandalous Libells: To be short, there was an unusu∣all Swelling in the State, the Forerunner of greater Troubles. Yet I will not affirm, that every Priest, which was sent over, was made
of the Counsell, or Privy to the Enterprise; But that, some of them, became the wicked Instruments onely, of other Mens Mal∣lice. Notwithstanding, this is true, and witnessed, by the Con∣ssions of many, that almost all the Priests, which were sent into this Kingdome, from that aforenamed year, unto the Thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeths Raign; (At what time, that Design of the Pope, and Spain, was put into execution, by those memorable Preparations, of the Navy, and Land-Forces,) Had in their In∣structions, besides other Parts of their Function, to distill, and in∣sinuate, ito the People, these Particulars; It was impossible Things should continue, at this stay; They should see, ere long, a great change, in this State; That the Pope, and Catholick Princes, were carefull for the English, if they would, not be wanting to themselves. Again, sundry of he Priests, did manifestly interpose themselves, into those Consultations, and Plots, which tended, to the undermining, and Ruining, of this Kingdome: And, (which especially moved her,) Letters were intercepted, out of divers parts, that discove∣red, the true Face of the Plot; In which was written, that they doubted not, to go beyond, the vigilancy, of the Queen, and State, in the Matter of Catholicks: For the Queen would onely have an eye, least there should arise, any Fit Head, in the Person of some Lord, or other Eminent Gentleman of quality, under whom the Catholicks might unite: But they had thought upon another course; As namely, by private Men, and those but of mean Rank, that should not confer, nor scarce know, of each others employ∣ment, to prepare, and mature, the Businesse, by the Secrecy of Confession. And these were their Engines then, which, (as hath appeared since, in a case not much unlike,) are usuall, and fami∣liar, to that Ordr of Men. In this great Deluge of Danger, there was a Necessity imposed, upon Queen Elizabeth, to restrain, by some sharper Bands of Lawes, that part of her Subjects, which were alienated from her, and had drunk, too deep a Draught, of this Poyson, ever to recover; And further, which by their reti∣red Living, and Exemption from publick Offices, were grown very Rich: And moreover, the Mischief daily growing, when as the Cause thereof, was ascribed, to none other, then the Seminary Priests; Who had been nourished, in Forrain Parts, and received Exhibition, from the Bounty, and Almes, of Forrain Princes, professed Enemies to this State; And who had conversed in such places, where the Name of Queen Elizabeth, was never heard, but as of an Heretick, and Excommunicate, and Accursed Person; And who, though themselves, (sometimes,) had no hand in Treason, yet they were known, to be the intimate Friends, of them that had; And lastly, who by their Arts, and Poysons, had infected, and soured, the Masse, and Lump, of the Catholicks, which, be∣fore, was more Sweet, and Harmlesse, with a new kind of Leven, and desperate Maliciousnesse; There could no other Remedy be devised, but by forbidding such Persons, to enter into this King∣dome,
upon pain of their Lives: Which, at last, in the 27th. year of her Raign, was done accordingly. Nay, and when the event it self, had confirmed this to be true; (I mean, immediatly after that the dreadfull Tempest, arose from Spain, threatning no lesse then utter desolation;) yet did it nothing mollifie, or turn, the edge, of these Mens, Mallice, and Fury; but rather whetted it; As if they had cast off, all Naturall Affection to their Country. As for the Times succeding, (I mean after the Thirtieth year of her Raign,) though indeed our Fear of Spain, which had been the Spur to this Rigour, had fairely breathed out, or was well aba∣ted; yet considering the Memory of Times past, had made so deep Impression, in Mens Hearts, and Cogitations; And that it would have seemed, either Inconstancy, to repeal those former Lawes, or Sloath, to neglect them; The very Constitution of Things, did suggest to the Queen, that it was not safe, to reduce them unto that State, wherein they had continued, untill the three & twentieth year of her Raign. Hereunto may be added, the Industry of some Persons, in improving the Revenues of the Ex∣chequer; And the Zeal of some other Ministers of Iustice, which did never think their Country safe, unlesse the Lawes were ri∣gorously executed; All which, did importune, and presse, the Execution, of the Lawes. Notwithstanding the Queen, for a manifest Token, of her Royall Nature, did so dull, the edge of the Lawes, that but a very few Priests, in respect of their Number, did suffer death. Now all this, which I have said, is not by way of Defence: For the Matter needes it not: For neither, could this Kingdom, have been safe without it; Neither were the Proceed∣ings, any way, comparable, or of kinn, to those bloody, and un∣christianly Massacres, in the Catholick Countries; Which proceed∣ed, meerely, from Rancour, and Pride, and not from any neces∣sity of State. Howsoever, I hope, I have made my first Assertion good; That she was Moderate in the Point of Religion; And that the Change, which happened, was not in her Nature, but up∣on the Necessity of the Times. Now for the Constancy, of Queen Elizabeth, in Religion, and the observance thereof, I know no better Argument then this; That although she found the Romish Religion, confirmed, in her Sisters dayes, by Act of Parliament; And established, by all strong, and potent, Meanes, that could be devised; And to have taken, deep Root, in this Kingdom; And that all those, which had any Authority, or bare Office in the State, had subscribed to it; yet for that she saw, it was not agreeable, to the Word of God, nor to the Primitive Purity, nor to her own Conscience, she did, with a great deal of Courage, and with the assistance, of a very few Per∣sons, quite expell, and abolish it. Neither, did she this, by pre∣cipitate, and Heady Courses, but Timing it wisely, and soberly. And this may well be conjectured, as from the Thing it self, so also by an Answer of hers, which she made upon occasion. For
within a very few dayes, of her Comming, to the Crown, when many Prisoners, were released, out of Prison; (as the Custome is at the Inauguration of a Prince;) There came to her, one day, as she was going to Chappell, a certain Courtier, that had the Liberty of a Buffone; And either, out of his own Motion, or by the Instigation, of a wiser Man, presened her with a Petition; And before a great number of Courtiers, said to her, with a loud voice; That there were yet four or five Prisoners, unjustly detained in Prison; He came, to be a Suter, to have them set at Liberty: Those were, the four Evangelists, and the Apostle Saint Paul; who had been long shut up, in an unknown tongue, as it were in Prison, so as they could not converse, with the com∣mon People. The Queen answered very gravely; That it was best first, to enquire of them, whether they would be set at liberty, or no? Thus she silenced, an unseasonable Motion, with a doubtfull An∣swer; As reserving the Matter wholly, in her own Power. Nei∣ther did she bring in this Alteration, timorously, or by pieces, but in a grave, and mature, Manner, after a Conference betwixt both Sides, and the Calling, and Conclusion of a Parliament. And thus, within the Compasse of one year, she did so establish, and settle, all Matters, belonging to the Church, as she departed not, one Haires Breadth, from them, to the end of her Life. Nay, and her usuall Custom was, in the beginning of every Parliament, to forewarn the Houses, not to question, or innovate, any thing, al∣ready established, in the Discipline, or Rites of the Church. And thus much of her Religion. Now if there be any Severer Nature, that shall tax her, for that she suffered her self, and was very willing, to be courted, wooed, and to have Sonnets made in her Commendation; And that she conti∣nued this, longer, then was decent for her years; Notwith∣standing, if you will take this Matter at the best, it is not without singular Admiration; Being much like unto that, which we find in Fabulous Narrations, of a certain Queen, in the Fortunate Islands, and of her Court, and Fashions, where Faire purpose, and Love-making was allowed, but Lasciviusnesse banished: But if you will take it at the worst, even, so it amounteth, to a more high Admiration; Considering that these Courtships, did not much eclipse her Fame, and not at all her Majesty; Neither, did they make her, lesse Apt for Government, or check, with the affaires, and businesses, of the Publick. For such passages as these, do often entertain the time, even with the greatest Princes. But to make an end of this Discourse. Certainly, this Princesse was Good, and Morall: And such, she would be acknowledged: She Detested Vice; And desired, to purchase Fame, only by honourable Courses: And indeed, whilest I mention her Morall Parts, there comes a cer∣tain pasage into my mind, which I will insert. Once, giving order, to write to her Embassadour, about certain Instructions, to be delivered, apart, to the Queen Mother, of the House of Valois; And that her Secretary, had inserted a certain Clause, that the Em∣bassadour
should say, as it were, to endear her, to the Queen Mo∣ther; That they two, were the only paire, of Female Princes, from whom, for experience, and Arts of Government, there was no lesse expected, then from the greatest Kings: She utterly disliked the Comparison, and commanded it to be put out, saying; That she practised, other principles, and Arts of overnment, then the Queen Mother did. Be∣sides, she was not a little pleased, if any one should fortune to tell her, that suppose, she had lived in a private Fortune, yet she could not have escaped, without some Note of Excellency, and Singula∣rity, in her Sex. So little did she desire, to borrow, or be behold∣ing to her Fortune, for her Praise. But if I should wade further, into this Queenes Praises, Morall, or Politick, either, I must slide into certain Common places, and Heads of Vertue, which were not worthy of so great a Princesse; Or if I should desire, to give her Vertues, the true Grace, and Lustre, I must fall into a History of her Life; Which requireth, both better Leisure, and a better Pen, then mine is. Thus much in brief, according to my ability: But to say the Truth; The only Commender, of this Ladies vertues, is Time; Which, for as many Ages, as it hath runn, hath not yet shewed us, one of the Female Sex, equall to Her, in the Administra∣tion of a Kingdom.
SEVERALL DISCOURSES VVritten, in the Dayes OF KING JAMES, Whereof, some of them, PRESENTED TO His Maiesty. BEING, A brief Discourse, of the Vnion, of England and Scotland. Articles, and Considerations, touching the Vnion, aforesaid. A Beginning of the History of Great Britain. A Letter, and Discourse, to Sir Henry Savill, touching Helps, for the Intellectuall Powers. Certain Considerations, touching the better Pacification, and E∣dification, of the Church of England. Certain Considerations, touching the Plantation, in Ireland. Advice to the King, touching Suttons Estate. A Proposition, to the King, touching the Compiling and Amend∣ment, of the Lawes, of England. A Fragment, of an Essay, of Fame. By the Right Honourable FRANCIS BACON Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban. LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks-head, neer the Mitre Tavern, 1657.
A BRIEFE DISCOURSE, Of the Happy UNION, OF THE KINGDOMES, OF ENGLAND, and SCOTLAND; Dedicated, in Private, TO HIS MAJESTY. I Do not find it strange, (excellet King,) that when Heraclitus, (he that was surnamed the Obscure,) had set forth a certain Book, (which is not now extant,) many Men took it, for a Discourse of Nature; And many others took it, for a Treatise of Pollicy. For there is a great Affinity, and Consent, between the Rules of Nature, and the true Rules of Pollicy: The one being nothing else, but an Order, in the Government, of the World; And the other, an Order, in the Government, of an Estate. And therefore the Education, and Erudition, of the Kings of Persia, was in a Science, which was termed, by a Name then, of
great Reverence; but now degenerate, and taken in the ill part. For the Persian Magick, which was the secret Literature of their ings, was an Application, of the Contemplations, and Observa∣tons of Nature, unto a sense Politick; Taking the Fundamentall Lawes of Nature, and the Branches, and Passages of them, as an O∣rigiall, or fist Modell, whence to take, and describe, a Coppy, and Imitation, for Government. After this manner, the foresaid Instructours, set before their Kings, the Examples of the Celestiall Bodies; The Sun, the Moon, and the rest; which have great Glory, and veneration, but no Rest or Intermission: Being in a perpetuall Office of Motion, for the Cherishing, (in turn, and in Course) of Inferiour Bodies: Ex¦pressing, lkewise, the true manner, of the Motions, of Govern∣ment; which, though they ought to be, Swift, and Rapide, in re∣spect of Dispatch, and Occasions; yet are they to be, Constant, and Regular, without Waveing, or Confusion, So did they rpresnt unto them, how the Heavens, do not en∣ich themselves, by the Earth, and the Seas; Nor keep no dead Stock, nor untouched Treasures, of that they draw to them from below; But whatsoever Moisture, they do levy, and take, from both lements, in Vapours, they do spend, and turn back again, in Showers; Onely holding, and storing them up, for a time, to the End, to isue, and distribute them, in Season. But, chiefly, they did expresse, and expound unto them, that Fundamentall Law of Nature; whereby all things do subsist, and are preserved: which is, that every Thing in Nature; although it hath his private, and paticular, Affection, and Appetite; And doth follow, and pursue the same, in small Moments; And when it is free, and delivered, from more generall, and common, Re∣spects; yet, neverthelesse, when there is Question, or Case, for Sustaining of the more General, they fosake their own Particula∣rities, and attend, and conspire, to uphold the publick. So we see, the Iron, in small Quantity, will ascend, and ap∣proach, to the Load-stone, upon a particular Sympathy: But if it be, any Quantity of moment, it leaveth his Appetite, of Amity to the Loadstone, and like a good Patriott, falleth to the Earth; which is the Place, and Region, of Massy Bodies. So again the Waer, and other like Bodies, do fall, towards the Center of the Earth; which is, (as was said,) their Region, or Coun∣trey: And yet we see, nothing more usuall, in all Water Works, and Engines, then that the Water, (rather then to suffer any Distraction, or Disunion, in Nature) will ascend, Forsaking the Love, to his own Region, or Countrey, and applying it self, to the Body, next adjoyning. But it were, too long a Digression, to proceed, to more Exam∣ples, of this Kind. Your Majesty, your self, did fall, upon a Pas∣sage, of this Nature, in your gracious speech of Thanks unto your Counsell; when acknowledging, Princely, their Vigilancies, and
well Deservings, it pleased you to note, that it was a successe, and Event, above the Course of Nature, to have so great Change, with so great a Quiet. Forasmuch, as sudden Mutations, as well in State, as in Nature, are rarely, without violence, and pertur∣bation. So as still I conclude, there is, (as was said,) a Congru∣ity, between the Principles of Nature, and Policy. And lest that Instance, may seem to oppone, to this Assetion, I may, even in hat particular, with your Majesties favour, ofer unto you, a Type, or Pattern in Nature, much resembling, this Event, in your State; Namely Earthquakes, which many of them, bring ever, much Terrour, and wonder, but no Actuall Hurt; The Earth trembling for a Moment, and suddenly stablishing, in perfect Quiet, as it was before. This Knowledge then, of making, the Government of the World, a Mirrour, for the Government of a State, being a Wisdome al∣most lost, (Whereof the Reason, I take to be, because of the Dif∣ficulty, for one Man, to embrace both Philosophies;) I have thought good, to make some proof, (as far as my weaknesse, and the Straights, of Time, will suffer,) to, revive, in the Handling, of one particular, wherewith now I most humbly present your Ma∣jesty: For surely, as hath been said, it is a Form of Discourse, an∣ciently used towards Kings; And to what King, should it be more proper, then to a King that is stvdious, to conjoyn contem∣plative Vertue, and Active Vertue ogether? Your Majesty, is the first King, that had the Honour, to be Lapis Angularis, to unite, these two Mighty, and warlike, Na∣tions, of England, and Scotland, under one Soveraignty, and Mo∣narchy. It doth not appear, by the Records, and Memories, of any true History; Or scarcely by the Fiction, and Pleasure, of any Fabulous Narration, or Tradition; That ever, of any Antiquity, this Island, of Great Brittain, was united, under one King, before this day. And yet there be no Mountains, nor Races, of Hills; There be no Seas, or great Rivers; There is no Diversity, of Tongue, or Language, that hath invited, or provoked, this an∣cient separation, or Divorce. The Lot of Spain was, to have the severall Kingdoms, of that Continent, (Portugall onely except,) to be united, in an Age, not long past; And now, in our Age, that of Portugall also, which was the last that held out, to be in∣corporate, with the rest. The Lot of France, hath been, much about the same time, likewise, to have reannexed, unto that Crown, the severall Dutchies, and Portions, which were in former times, dismembred. The Lot of this Island, is the last, reserved for your Majesties happy times, by the speciall Providence, and Favour, of God; who hath brought your Majesty, to this happy Conjun∣ction, with great Consent of Hearts, and in the strength of your years, and in the Maturity of your Experience. It resteth, but that, (as I promised,) I set before your Majesties Princely Con∣sideration, the Grounds of Nature, touching the Vnion, and Com∣mixture,
of Bodies; And the Correspondence, which they have, with the Grounds of Policy, in the Conjunction, of States, and Kingdoms First, therefore, that Position; Vis unita fortior; Being one of the common Notions of the Mind, needeth not much, to be nduced, or illustrate. We see the Sunne, when he entreth, and while he continueth, under the sign of Leo, causeth more vehement Heats, then when he is in Cancer; what time, his Beams, are, neverthelesse, more perpendicular. The Reason whereof, in great part, hath been truly ascribed, to the Conjunction, and Cor-Radi-ation, in that place of Heaven, of the Sunne, with the four Stars, of the first Magnitude; Syrius, Canicula, Cor Leonis, and Cauda Leonis. So the Moon, likewise, by ancient Tradition, while she is in the same Sign, of Leo, is, said, to be at the Heart; which is not, for any Affinity, which that place of Heaven, can have, with that part, of Mans Body; But onely, because the Moon is then, by reason of the Conjunction, and Nearness, with the Stars afore∣named, in greatest strength of Influence; And so, worketh upon that part, in Inferiour Bodies, which is most Vitall, and rincipall. So we see, Waters, and Liquours, in small Quantity, do, easily, putrifie, and corrupt; but in large Quantity, subsist long, by reason, of the Strength, they receive, by Vnion. So in Earthquakes, the more generall, do little hurt, by reason, of the united weight, which they offer to subvert; but narrow, and particular, Earthquakes, have, many times, overturned, whole Towns, and Cities. So then, this Point, touching the Force of Vnion, is evident. And therefore, it is more fit, to speak, of the Manner of Vnion: wherein, again, it will not be pertinent, to handle one Kind of Union, which is Vnion by Victory, when one Body, doth, meer∣ly, subdue another, and converteth the same, into his own Na∣ture; Extinguishing, and Expulsing, what part soever of it, it cannot overcome. As when the Fire, converteth the Wood, into Fire, purging away the Smoak, and the Ashes, as unapt Matter to enflame: Or when the Body, of a Living Creature, doth convert, and assimilate, Food, and Nourishment, purging, and expelling, whatsoever it cannot convert. For these Representations, do an∣swer, in matter of Policy, to Vnion of Countries, by Conquest; where the Conquering State, doth extinguish, extirpate, and ex∣pulse, any part of the State Conquered, which it findeth so con∣trary, as it cannot alter, and convert it. And therefore, leaving violent Vnions, we will consider, onely, of Naturall Vnions. The Difference is excellent, which the best Observers, in Nature, do take, between Compositio, and Mistio; Putting together, and Mingling: The one, being but a Conjunction, of Bodies, in place, the other, in Qualiy, and Consent: The one, the Mo∣ther of Sedition, and Alteration, The other, of Peace, and
Continuance: The one, rather a Confusion, then an Vnion, the other, properly, an Vnion. Therefore, we see, those Bodies, which they call Imperfectè mista, last not, but are speedily dissolved. For take, for Example, Snow or Froath, which are Compositions, of Air, and Water; And in them, you may behold, how easily they sever, and dissolve, the Water, closing together, and excluding the Air. So those three Bodies, which the Alchymists do so much cele∣brate, as the three Principles of Things; That is to say; Earth, Water, and Oyl; (which it pleaseth them to term, Salt, Mercu∣ry, and Sulphur;) we see, if they be united, onely, by Composi∣tion, or putting together, how weakly, and rudely, they do incorporate: For Water, and Earth, maketh, but an unperfect slime: And if they be forced together, by Agitation, yet upon a little setling, the Earth resideth in the Bottome. So Water, and Oyl, though by Agitation, it be brought into an Ointment, yet af∣ter a little setling, the Oil will float on the Top: So as such Im∣perfect Mistures, continue no longer, then they are forced; And still, in the end, the worthiest getteth above. But otherwise it is, of perfect Mistures. For we see, these three Bodies, of Earth, Water, and Oil, when they are joyned, in a Ve∣getable, or Minerall, they are so united, as without great subtil∣ty of Art, and Force of Extraction, they cannot be separated, and reduced, into the same simple Bodies, again. So as the Diffe∣rence, between Compositio, and Mistio, clearly set down, is this: That Compositio, is the Joyning, or putting together, of Bodies, without a new Form; And Mistio, is the Joyning, or putting to∣gether, of Bodies, under a new Form. For the new Form, is Com∣mune Vinculum: And without that the old Forms, will be at Strife, and Discord. Now to reflect, this Light of Nature, upon Matter, of Estate: There hath been, put in practise, in Government, these two seve∣rall kinds, of Pollicy in Vniting and Conjoyning, of States, and Kingdoms: The one to retain the ancient Form, still severed, and onely conjoyned in Soveraignty: The other, to super induce a new Form, agreeable, and convenient, to the entire Estate. The former of these, hath been more usuall, and is more Easie; but the latter is more Happy. For if a Man, do attentively revolve, Histo∣ries of all Nations, and judge truly thereupon, he will make this Conclusion: That there was never any States, that were good Com∣mixtures, but the Romans. Which, because it was the best State of the World, and is the best Example of this Point, we will chiefly insist thereupon. In the Antiquities of Rome, Virgill bringeth in Iupiter, by way of Oracle, or Prediction, speaking of the Mixture, of the Trojans, and the Italians.
Sermonem Ausonii Patrium, moresque tenebant, Vtque est Nomen crit; Commixti Corpore tantum, Subsident Teuci, Morem, Ritusque Sacrorum, Adjiciam; faciamque omnes uno ore Latinos. Hinc Genus Ausonio mistum, quod sanguine surget, Supra Homines, supra ire Deos, pietate videbis. Wherein, Iupiter, maketh a kind of Partition, or Distributi∣on; That, Italy should give the Language, and the Lawes; Troy should give a Mixture, of Men, and some Religious Rites; And both People, should meet in one Name, of Latines. Soon after the Foundation, of the City of Rome, the People of the Romans, and the Sabines, mingled upon equall Terms. Where¦in, the Interchange, went so even, that, (as Livy noteth,) the one Nation gave the Name, to the Place, the other to the People. For Rome continued the Name, but the people were called Quirites; which was the Sabine word, derived of Cures, the Countrey of a∣tius. But that, which is chiefly to be noted, in the whole Continu∣ance, of the Romane Government; they were so liberall, of their Naturalizations, as, in effect, they made perpetuall Mixtures. For the manner was, to grant the same, not onely to particular per∣sons, but to Families, and Lineages; And not onely so, but to whole Cities, and Countries. So as, in the end, it came to that, that Rome was Communis Patria, as some of the Civilians call it. So we read of Saint Paul, after he had been beaten with Rods, and thereupon charged the Officer, with the violation, of the Priviledge, of a Cittizen, of Rome; The Captain said to him; Art thou then a Romane? That Priviledge hath cost me dear. To whom Saint Paul replied; But I was so born, And yet, in ano∣ther place, Saint Paul, professeth himself, that he was a Iew, by Tribe: So as it is manifest, that some of his Ancestors, were na∣turalized; and so it was conveyed to him, and their other De∣scendants. So we read, that it was one, of the first Despites, that was done, to Iulius Caesar; That whereas he had obtained Naturaliza∣tion, for a City in Gaule, one of the City was beaten with Rods, of the Consul Marcellus. So we read, in Tacitus, that in the Emperour Claudius time, the Nation of Gaule, (that part which is called Comata, the wilder part,) were Suitours, to be made capable, of the honour, of being Senatours, and Officers, of Rome. His words are these: Cum de supplendo Senatu aitaretur, primoresque Galliae, quae Comata appellatur, foedera & Civitatem Romanam pridem assecuti, Ius adipis∣cendorum in urbe Honorum, expeterent; multus, câ super re, variusque Rumor, & studiis diversis, apud Principem, certabatur. And in the end, after long debate, it was ruled, they should be admitted. So likewise, the Authority of Nicholas Matchiavell, seemeth not to be contemned; who, enquiring the Causes, of the Growth,
of the Romane Empire, doth give Judgement; There was not one greater then this; That the State, did so easily compound, and incorporate with strangers. It is true, that most Estates, and Kingdomes, have taken the other Course. Of which this effect hath followed; That the Ad∣dition, of further Empire, and Territory, hath been, rather, matter of Burthen, then matter of Strength, unto them: yea and fur∣ther, it hath kept alive, the Seeds, and Roots, of Revolts, and Rebellions, for many Ages: As we may see, in a fresh, and no∣table Example, of the Kingdome, of Aragon: Which, though it were united, to Castile, by Marriage, and not by Conquest; And so descended in Hereditary Union, by the space of more then an 100. years; yet because it was continued, in a divided Go∣vernment, and not well Incorporated, and Cemented, with the other Crowns; Entred into a Rebellion, upon point of their Fueros, or Liberties, now of very late years. Now to speak briefly, of the severall parts, of that form, whereby States, and Kingdomes, are perfectly united; They are, (besides the Soveraignty it self,) four in Number: Vnion in Name; Vnion in Language; Vnion in Lawes; Vnion in Employ∣ments. For Name, though it seem, but a superficiall, and Outward Matter, yet it carrieth much Impression, and Enchantment: The Generall, and common Name, of Grecia made the Greeks, al∣waies apt to unite, (though otherwise full of Divisions, amongst themselves,) against other Nations, whom they called Barbarous. The Helvetian Name, is no small Band, to knit together, their Leagues, and Confederacies, the faster. The common Name of Spain; (no doubt,) hath been, a speciall meanes, of the better union, and Conglutination, of the severall Kingdomes, of Castile, Aragon, Granada, Navarre, Valentia, Catalonia, and the rest; Com∣prehending also now lately Portugall. For Language, it is not needful to insist upon it; because both your Majesties Kingdomes, are of one Language, though of severall Dialects; And the Difference, is so small, between them, as pro∣miseth, rather an inriching, of one Language, then a continuance of two. For Lawes, which are the Principall Sinnewes of Government, they be of three Natures; Iura, which I will term Freedomes, or Abilities; Leges; and Mores. For Abilities, and Freedomes, they were amongst the Romans, of four Kinds, or rather Degrees. Ius Connubii; Ius Civitatis; Ius Suffragii; and Ius Petitionis, or Honorum. Ius Connubii, is a thing in these times, out of Use: For Marriage is open, between all Di∣versities, of Nations. Ius Civitatis, answereth to that, we call Deni∣zation, or Naturalization. Ius Suffragii, answereth to the Voice in Parliament. Ius Petitionis, answereth to place in Counsell, or Office. And the Romans, did, many times, sever these Freedomes, granting
Ius Connubii, sine Civitate; And Civitatem, sine suffragio; And suffragium, sie Iure Petitionis, which was, commonly, with them, the last. For those, we called Leges, it is a Matter of Curiosity, and In∣conveniency, to eek, either to extirpate all particular Customes; Or to draw all Subjects, to one Place, or resort, of Iudicature, and Session. It sufficeth, there be an Uniformity, in the Principall, and Fundamentall Lawes, both Ecclesiasticall, and Civill: For in this Point, the Rule holdeth, which was pronounced by an An∣cient Father, touching the Diversity, of Rites, in the Church: For finding the Vesture, of the Queen, in the Psalm, (which did pre∣figure the Church,) was of divers Colours; And finding again, hat Christs Coat, was withut a seam, he concludeth well; In veste varietas sit, Scissura non sit. For Manners, a Consent in them, is to be sought industriously, but not to be enforced: For Nothing amongst People, breedeth so much peinacy, in holding their Customes, as suddain, and violent, ofer to remove them. And as for Employments, it is no more, but in indifferent Hand, nd Execution of that Verse; Trs, Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur. There remaineth, only, to remember, out of the Grounds of Nature, the two Conditions, of Perfct mixture; Whereof the for∣mer is Time. For the Naturall Philosophers say well; that Compo∣sitio is Opus Hominis; and Mistio Opus Naturae. For it is the Duty of Man, to make a fit Application, of Bodies together: But the perfect Fermentation, and Incorporation, of them, must be left to Time, and Nature; And Vnnaturall Hasting thereof, doth disturb the work, and not dispatch it. So we see, after the Graft, is put into the Stock, and bound, it must be left to Time, and Nature, to make that Continuum, which, at the first, was but Contiguum. And it is not any continuall pres∣sing, or Thrusting together, that will prevent Natures season, but rather hinder it. And so in Liquours, those Commixtures, which are, at the first, troubled, grow after, clear, and setled, by the benefit, of Rest, and Time. The Second Condition is; That the greater draw the lesse. So we see, when two Lights do meet, the greater, doth darken, and, dim the lesse. And when a smaller River, runneth into a greater, it looseth both his Name, and Stream. And hereof, to conclude, we see an excellent Example, in the Kingdomes, of Iudah, and Israel. The Kingdom of Iudah, contained Two Tribes; The Kingdom, of Israel, contained Ten: King David, raigned, over Iudah, for certain years; And after the Death of Isbosheth, the Son of Saul, obtained, likewise, the Kingdom of Israell This Union continued in him, & likewise in his Son Salomon, by the space of 70. years, at least, between them both: But yet, because the Seat, of the King∣dom,
was kept still in Iudah, and so the lesse sought to draw he greater; upon the first occasion offered, the Kingdomes brake again, and so continued ever after. Thus having, in all Humblenesse, made Oblation, to your Majesty, of these simple Fruits, of my Devotion, and Studies; I do wish, and do wish it, not in the Nature, of an Impossibility, (to my Apprehenion;) That this happy Vnion, of your Maje∣sties two Kingdomes of England, and Scotland, may be in as good an Houre, and under the like Divine Providence, as that was, between the Romans, and the Sabines.
CERTAIN ARTICLES, OR, CONSIDERATIONS, TOUCHING THE UNION, OF THE KINGDOMES, OF ENGLAND, and SCOTLAND; Collected, and dispersed, for His MAIESTIES better Service. YOUR Majesty, being, (I do not doubt,) directed, and conducted, by a better Oracle, then that, which was given for Light, to AEneas, in his Peregrination; (Antiquam exquirite Matrem;) hath a Royall, and, indeed, an Heroicall, Desire, to reduce these two Kingdomes, of Eng∣land, and Scotland, into the Unity, of their Ancient Mother Kingdome of Brit∣tain. Wherein, as I would gladly ap∣plaud unto your Majesty, or sing aloud that Hymne, or Antheme; Sic itur ad Astra; So, in a more soft, and submisse, voice, I must,
necessarily, remember, unto your Majesty, that Warning, or Ca∣veat; Ardua, quae Pulchra; It is an Action, that requireth, yea nd needeth much, not only of your Majesties Wisedome, but of our Felicity. In this Argument, I presumed, at your Majesties first Entrance, to write a few Lines, indeed Scholastically, and Specu∣latively, and not Actively, or Politickly, as I held it fit for me, at that time; when neiher your Majesty, was, in that your desire, declared; Nor my self, in that Service, used, or trusted. But now that both your Majesty, hath opened your desire, and purpose, with much Admiration, even of those, who give it not, so full an Approbation; And that my self, was, by the Commons, graced, with the first Vote, of all the Commons, Selected, or that Cause; Not in any Estimaion of my Ability, (For therein so wise an Asembly could not be so much deceived,) but in an ac∣knowledgement, of my Extream Labours, and Integrity, in that Businesse; I thought my self, every wayes bound; Both in Duty to your Majesty; And in rust, to that House of Parliament; And in Consent to the Matter it self; And in Conformity, to mine own Travailes, and Beginnings; Not to neglect, any paines, that may tend, to the furtherance, of so excellent a work: Wherein I will endeavour, that that which I shall set down, be Nihil mi∣nus quam verba: For Length, and Ornament, of Speech, are to be used, for perswasion of Multitudes, and not for Information of Kings: especially, such a King, as is the only instance, that ever I knew, to make a Man of Plato's Opinion, That all Knowledge is but Remembrance; And that the Mind of Man, knoweth all Things, and demandeth only, to have her own Noions, excited, and awaked. Which your Majesties rare, and indeed singular, Gift, and faculty, of swift Apprehension, and infinite Expansi∣on, or Multiplication, of anoher Mans Knowledge, by your own, as I have often observed, so I did extreamly admire in Goodwins Cause, Being a matter full of Secets, and Mysteries, of our Lawes, meerly new unto you, and quite out of the Path of your Education, Reading, and Conference: Wherein, never∣thelese, upon a Spark of Light given, your Majesty took in so Dexterously, and Profoundly, as if you had been indeed Anima Legis; Not only in Execution, but in understanding: The Remem∣brance whereof, as it will never be out of my mind, so it will al∣wayes be a warning to me, to seek rather to excite your Judge¦mnt briefly, then to enform it tediously; And if in a Matter, of that Nature, how much more in this, wherein your Princely Cogitations have wrought themselves, and been conversant; And wherein, the principall Light, poceeded from your self. And, therefore, my Purpose is, onely to break, this Matter, of the Vnion, into certain short Articles, and Questions; And to make, a certain kind, of Anatomy, or Analysis, of the Parts, and Members thereof; Not that I am of Opinion, that all the Questions, which I now shall Open, were fit to be, in the Consultation, of the Com∣missioners,
propounded. For I hold nothing, so great an Enemy, to good Resolution, as the Making, of too many Questions; Spe∣cially in Assemblies, which consist of many. For Princes, for Avoy∣ding of Distraction, must take many Things by way of Admit∣tance; And if Questions, must be made of them, rather to suffer them, to arise from others, then to grace them, and authoize them, as propounded from themselves. But unto your Maje∣sties private Consideration, to whom it may better sort with me, rather to speak as a Remembrancer, then as a Counceller; I have thought good, to lay before you, all the Branches, Lineaments, and Degrees, of this Vnion; that upon the Viw, and Consideration, of them, and their Circumstances, your Majesty may the more clear∣ly discern, and more readily call to mind, which of them is to be embraced, and which to be rejected; And of these, which are to be accepted, which of them is presently to be proceeded in, and which to be put over to further time; And again, which of them, shall require Authority of Parliament, and which are fitter, to be effected, by your Majesties Royall Power, and Prerogative, or by o∣ther Pollicies, or Means; And lastly, which of them, is liker to Passe, with Difficulty, and Contradiction, and which, with more Facility, and Smoothnesse. First therefore, to begin with that Question, that I suppose will be out of question. Statutes con∣cerning Scot∣land, and the Scotish Nati∣on.Whether it be not meet, that the Statutes, which were made touching Scotland, or the Scottish Nation, while the Kingdomes stood severed, be repealed? It is true, there is a Diversity in these; For some of these Lawes, consider Scotland as an Enemy Countrey; Oher Lawes consider it, as a Forrain Countrey onely: As for Example, the Law of Rich. 2. Anno 7o, which Prohibiteth, all Armour, or Vi∣ctuall, to be carried to Scotland; And the Law of 7o of K. H. the 7. that Enacteth, all the Scottish Men, to depart the Realm, within a time prefixed; Both these Lawes, and some others, re∣sepct Scotland, as a countrey of hostility: But the of Law of 22 of Ed. 4, that endueth Barwick, with he Liberty, of a Staple, where all Scottish Merchandizes, should resort, that should be uttred for England: And likewise all English Merchandizes, that should be uttered for Scotland; This Law beholdeth Scotland, onely, as a Forrain Nation; And not so much neither; For there have been erected, Staples, in Towns of ngland, for some Commo∣dities, with an Exclusion, and Restriction, of other Parts, of England. But this is a Matter of the least Difficulty; your Msty, shall have a Calender made, of the Lawes, and a Brief of the Ef∣fect; And so you may judge of them:Lawes, Cu∣stomes, Com∣missions, Offi∣ers of the Borders, or Marches. And the like, or Reci∣proque, is to be done by Scotland, for such Lawes, as they have concerning England, and the English Nation. The Second Question is, what Lawes, Customes, Commissi∣ons,
Officers, Garrisons, and the like, are to be put down, dis∣continued, or taken away, upon the Borders of both Realms. This Point, because I am not acquainted, with the Orders of the Marches, I can say the lesse. Herein falleth that Question, whether that the Tennants, who hold their Tennant Rights, in a greater Freedome, and Exemp∣tion, in Consideration of their Service, upon the Borders; And that the Countreys themselves, which are, in the same respect, discharged, of Subsidies, and Taxes; should not now be brought, to be, in one degree, with other Tennants, and Countreys; Nam cessante caussâ tollitur Effectus; Wherein, in my Opinion, some time would be given; Quia adhùc eorum Messis in Herbâ est: But some present Ordinance, would be made, to take effect, at a future time; considering, it is one of the greatest Points, and Marks, of the Division, of the Kingdomes. And because Rea∣son doth dictate, that where the Principall Solution of Conti∣nuity was, thee the Healing, and Consolidating Plaister, should be chiefly applyed; There would be some further De∣vice, fo the utter, and perpetuall, Confounding, of those Ima∣ginary Bounds, (as your Majesty termeth them;) And therefore, it would be considered, whether it were not convenient, to Plant, and Erect, at Carleil, or Barwick, some Counsell, or Court of Iustice, the Iurisdiction whereof, might extend, part into England, and part into Scotland; With a Commission, not to pro∣ceed precisely, or meerly, according to the Lawes, and Customes, either of England, or Scotland; But mixtly, according to In∣structions, by your Majesty, to be set down, after the Imitation, and Precedent, of the Counsell, of the Marches, here in England, Erected, upon the Vnion, of Wales. The third Question is that,Further Uni∣on besides the Removing of Inconvenient and dissenting Lawes and Usages. which many will make a great Que∣stion of, though, perhaps, your Majesty, will make no Question of it; And that is, Whether your Majesty, should not make, a stop, or stand here, and not to proceed, to any urther Vnion; Conten∣ting your Self, with the two former Articles, or Points. For it will be said, That we are now well, (thanks be to God;) And your Majesty, and the State, of neither Kingdome, is to be repented of; And that it is true, which Hippocrates saith; That, Sana Corpora difficilè medicationes serunt: It is better, to make Alterations in sick Bodies, then in sound. The Conside∣ration of which Point, will rest upon these two Branches: What Inconveniencies will ensue, with time, if the Realmes stand, as they are, divided, which are yet not found, nor sprung up. For it may be, the sweetnesse, of your Majesties first Entrance, and the great Benefit, that both Nations have felt thereby, hath covered many Inconveniencies; Which, neverthelesse, be your Majesties Government, never so gracious, and Pollitick, Con∣tinuance of Time, and the Accidents of Time, may breed, and discover, if the Kingdomes stand divided.
The Second Branch is; Allow no manifest, or important, Perill, or Inconvenience, should ensue, of the Continuing o the Kingdomes Divided; yet, on the other Side, whether that, upon the further Vniting of them, there be not like to follow, that Addition, and Encrease, of Wealth, and Reputation, as is worthy your Majesties Vertues, and Fortune, to be the Au∣thour, and Founder of, for the Advancement, and Exaltation, of Your Majesties Royall Posterity, in time to come. Points where∣in the Nations stand already united.But admitting, that your Majesty should proceed, to this more perfect, and entire, Vnion; Wherein your Majesty may say, Majus Opus moveo; To enter, into the Parts, and Degrees thereof, I think fit, first, to set down, as in a brief Table, in wht Points, the Nations, stand now, at this present time, already united; And in what Points, yet still severed, and divided; that your Majesty may the better see, what is done, and what is to be done; And how that which is to be done, is to be inferred, upon that which is done. The Points, wherein the Nations, stand already united, are; In Soveraignty. In the Relative thereof, which is Subjection. In Religion. In Continent. In Language. And now, lastly, by the Peace, by your Majesty conclu∣ded, with Spain In Leagues, and Confederacies; For now, both Nations, have the same Friends, and the same Ene∣mies. Yet notwithstanding, there is none of the six Points, wherein the Vnion, is perfect, and Consummate; But every of them, hath some scruple, or rather Grain of separation, enwrapped, and in∣cluded in them. Soveraignty; Line Royall.For the Soveraignty, the Vnion is absolute in your Majesty, and your Generation; But if it should so be, (which God, of his infinite Mercy, defend,) that your Issue should fail, then the Descent, of both Realmes, doth resort to the severall Lines, of the Severall Blouds Royall. Sujection Obedience.For Subjection, I take the Law of England, to be clear, (what the Law of Scotland, is I know not;) That all Scottishmen, from the very Instant of your Majesties Raign begun, are become De∣nizons; And the Post-Nati, are naturaliz'd Subjects, of England, for the time forwards: For, by our Lawes, none can be an A∣lien,Alien Naturalization but he that is, of another Allegeance, then our Soveraign Lord the Kings; For there be but two Sorts of Aliens, whereof we find mention in our Law; An Alien Ami, and an Alien En∣my: Whereof the former, is a Subject, of a State, in Amity with
the King, And the latter, a Subject, of a State, in Hostility: But whether he be one, or other, it is an Essentiall Difference, un∣to the Definition of an Alien, if he be not of the Kings Allege∣ance; As we see it evidently, in the precedent of Ireland; who since they were Subjects, to the Crown, of England, have ever been Inheritable, and capable, as Naturall Subjects; And yet, not by any Statute, or Act of Parliament, but meerly by the Common Law, and the Reason thereof. So as, there is no doubt, that every Subject of Scotland was and is, in like Plight, and Degree, since your Majesties Comming in, as if your Majesty, had gran∣ted, particularly, your Letters of Denization, or Naturalization, To every of them; And the Post-Nati, wholly Naturall. But then, on the other Side, for the time Back-wards, and or those that were Ante-Nati, the Bloud is not, by Law, natura∣lized; So as they cannot take it, by Descent from their Ance∣stours, without Act of Parliament. And therefore, in this Point, there is a Defect, in the Vnon, of Subjection. For Matter of Religion, the Vnion is perfect,Religion, Church-Go∣vernment. in points of Doctrine; but in Matter of Discipline, and Government, it is imperfect. For the Continent;Continent Borders. It is true, there are no Naturall Bounda∣ries of Mountains, or Seas, or Navigable Rivers; But yet thee are Badges, and Memorialls, of Borders; Of which Point, I have spoken before. For the Language;Language, Dilect. It is true, the Nations are unius Labii, and and have not the first Curse of Disunion, which was Confusion of Tongues, whereby one understood not another. But yet the Dialect is differing, and it remaineth, a kind of Mark, of Di∣stinction. But for that, Tempori permittendum, it is to be left to Time: For considering, that both Languages, do concur, in the principall Office, and Duty, of a Language, which is to make a Mans self understood; For the rest, it is rather to be accounted, (as was said) a Diversity of Dialect, then of Lan∣guage: and as I said in my first Writing, it is like to bring forth, the enriching of one Language, by compounding, and taking in the proper, and significant Words, of either Tongue, rather then a Coutinuance, of two Languages. For Leagues, and Confederacies;Leagues, Con∣federacies, Treaties. It is true, that neither Na∣tion, is now in Hostility, with any State, wherewith the other Nation, is in Amity: but yet so, as the Leagues, and Treaties, have been concluded, with either Nation, respectively, and not with both, jointly; which may contain, some Diversity of Articles, of strainess of Amity, with one, more then with the other. But many of these Matters, may, perhaps, be of that kind, as may fall within that Rule; In veste varietas sit, scissura non sit. Now to descend to the particular Points, wherein the Realms, stand, severed, and divided, over and besides, the for∣mer
six Points of separation, which I have noted, and placed, as de∣fects, or Abatements, of the six Points of the Vnion; And therfore, shall not need to be repeated. The Points, I say yet remaining, I will divide, into Externall,Externall points of the Separation and Union. and into Internal. The Externall Points, therefore, of the Separation, are four. 1. The severall Crowns; I mean the Ceremoniall, and Ma∣teriall, Crowns. 2. The second is, the severall Names, Stiles, or Appellations. 3. The third is, the severall Prints, of the Seals. 4. The fourth is, the severall Stamps, or Marks of the Coins, or Monies. It is true, that the Externall, are, in some respect, and parts, much mingled, and interlaced, with Considerations Internall; And that they may be as effectuall, to the rue Vnion, which must be the work of Time, as the Inernall; Because, they are Operative, upon the Conceits, and Opinions, of the People: The Vnitg, of whose Hearts, and Affectons, is the Life, and true End of this Work. The Ceremo∣niall or Mate∣iall Crowns.For the Ceremoniall Crowns, the Question will be, whether there shall be framed, one, new, Imperiall Crown, of Britain, to be used for the times to come? Also, admitting that to be thought Convenient, whether in the Frame thereof, there shall not be some Reference, to the Crowns, of Ireland, and France. Also, whether your Majesty, should repeat, or iterate, your own Coronation, and your Queens; or onely ordain, that such new Crown, shall be used, by your Posterity, hereafter. The Difficulties will be, in the Conceit, of sme Inequaliy, whereby the Realm of Scotland, may be thought, to be made an Accession, unto the Realm of England. But that resteth in some Circumstances: for the Compounding, of the two Crowns, is equall; The Calling of the new Crown, the Crown of Brit∣tain is equall. Onely the Place of Coronation, if it shall be at Westminster, which is the Ancient, August, and Sacred place, for the Kings of England, may seem to make an Inequality: And a∣gain, if the Crown of Scotland, be discontinued, then that Ceremony, which, I hear, is used in the Parliament, of Scotland; in the absence of the Kings, to have the Crowns carried in solemnity, must likewise cease. The Stiles and Names.For the Name, the main Question is, whether the Contracted Name, of Brittain, shall be, by your Majesty, used, or the Divi∣ded Names of England, and Scotland. Admitting there shall be an Alteration, then the Case will re∣quire, these Inferiour Questions. First, whether the Name of Brittain, shall, not onely, be used, in your Majesties Stile, where the entire Stile is reci∣ted; And in all other Forms, the Divided Names to remain, both of the Realms, and of the People; Or otherwise, that the ve∣ry Divided Name, of Realms, and People, shall, likwise, be chan∣ged,
or turned into special or subdivided Names, of the Ge∣nerall Name; That is to say, for Example; whether your Majesty, in your Stile, shall denominate your self, King of Brit∣tain, France, and Ireland; &c. And yet, neverthlesse, in any Commission, Writ, or otherwise, where your Majesty mentio∣neth, England, or Scotland, you shall retain the ancient Names, as Secundum Conuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae; or whether, those Divided Names, shall be, for ever, lost, and taken away, and turned, into the subdivisions, of South-Britain, and North-Britain; and the People to be South-Brittains, and North-Brit∣tains; And so, in the Example aforesaid, the Tenour of the like clause, to run, Secundum Consuetudinem Britanniae Australis. Also, if the former of these, shall be thought convenient, whether it were not better, for your Majesty, to ake, that Al∣teration of Stile, upon you, by Proclamation, as Edward the third did, the Stile of France, then to have it enacted by Par∣liament. Also in the Alteration, of the Stile, whether it were not better, to transpose the Kingdom, of Ireland, and put it, immediatly, after Britain, and so place the Islands together; And the King∣dom of France, being upon the Continent, last: In regard, that these Islands, of the Western Ocean, seem, by Nature, and Provi∣dence, an entire Empire in themselves; And also, that there was never King of England, so entirely possest of Ireland, as your Majesty is: So as your Stile to run, King of Britain, Ireland, and the Islands Adjacent, and of France, &c. The Difficulties in this, have been, already, throughly beat∣en over, but they gather but to two Heads. The one, Point of Honour, and Love, to the former Names. The other, Doubt, lest the Alteration, of the Name, may in∣duce, and involve, an Alteration of the Lawes, and Pollicies, of the Kingdom; Both which, if your Majesty shall assume, the Stile, by Proclamation, and not by Parliament, are in themselves satisfied: For then, the usuall Names, must needs remain, in Writs, and Records; The Formes whereof, cannot be altered, but by Act of Parliament; And so the point of Honour satisfi∣ed. And again, your Proclamation altereth no Law; And so, the Scruple, of a tacite, or implyed, Alteration of Lawes, like∣wise satisfied. But then, it may be considered, whether it were not a Form, of the greatest Honour, if the Parliament, though they did not enact it, yet should become Suiters, and Petitioners to your Majesty, to assume it. For the Seales;The Seales. That there should be but one Great Seal of Britain, and one Chanceller; And that their should only be a Seal in Scotland; for Processes, and ordinary Iustice; And that all Patents, of Graunts, of Lands, or otherwise, as well in Scot∣land, as in England, should passe under the Great Seal here, kept about your Person; It is an Alteration internall, whereof  do not now speak.
But the Question, in this Place, is; whether the Great Seales, of England, and Scotland, should not be changed, into one, and the same Form, of Image, and Superscription, of Britain; which, Neverthelesse, is requisite, should be, with some one plain, or manifest, Alteration, lest there be a Buz, and suspect, that Grants of Things in England, may be passed, by the Seal of Scot∣land; Or è converso. Also, whether this Alteration, of Form, may not be done, without Act of Parliament, as the Great Seales, have used, to be heretofore changed, as to their Impressions. The Stan∣dards, and Stamps, Mo∣neys.For the Moneys, as to the Reall, and Internall Consideration thereof, the Question will be, whether your Majesty, should not continue two Mints; which, the Distance of Territory conside∣red,) I suppose, will be of Necessity. Secondly, how the Standards, (if it be not already done, as I hear some doubt made of it, in popular Rumour,) may be re∣duced, into an Exact proportion, for the time to come; And likewise, the Compuation, Tale, or Valuation, to be made exact, for the Moneys, already beaten. That done, the last Question is, (which is onely proper to this place,) whether the Stamp, or the Image, and Superscripti∣on, of Britain, for the time forwards, should not be made, the self same, in both places, without any Difference at all. A Matter also, which may be done, as our Law is, by your Maje∣sties Prerogative, without Act of Parliament. These Points, are Points, of Demonstration, Ad faciendum populum; But so much the more, they go, to the Root, of your Majesties In∣tention; which is to imprint, and inculcate, into the Hearts, and Heads, of the People; that they are one People, and one Nation. In this kind, also, I have heard it, passe abroad in Speech, of the Erection, of some new Order, of Knighthood, with a Reference to the Vnion, and an Oath appropriate thereunto; which is a Point, likewise, deserveth a Consideration. So much for the Externall Points. Internall Points of Uni∣on.The Internall Points, of Separation, are as followeth. 1. Severall Parliaments. 2. Severall Councels of Estate. 3. Severall Officers of the Crown. 4. Severall Nobilities. 5. Severall Lawes, 6. Severall Courts of Iustice, Trialls, and Processes. 7. Severall Receipts, and Finances. 8. Severall Admiralties, and Merchandizings: 9. Severall Freedomes, and Liberties. 10. Severall Taxes, and Imposts.
As touching the Severall States Ecclesiasticall; and the seve∣rall Mints, and Standards; and the severall Articles, and Trea∣ties, of Intercourse, with Forrain Nations, I touched them be∣fore. In these Points, of the straight, and more inward, Vnion, there will interveyn, one principall Diffiulty, and Impediment, growing from that Root, which Aristotle, in his Politicks, maketh, to be the Root, of all Division, and Dissention, in Common Wealths; And that is Equality, and Inequality. For the Realm of Scotland, is now, an Ancient, and Noble, Realm, substantive of it self. But when this Island, shall be made Britain, then Scotland, is no more to be considered, as Scotland, but as a part of Britain; No more then England, is to be considered, as England, but as a part, like∣wie, of Britain: And consequently, neither of these, are to be considered, as Things entire of themselves, but in the Proporti∣on that they bear to the Whole. And therefore, let us imagine, (Nam id Mente Possumus, quod actu non Possumus,) that Britain, had never been divided, but had ever been one Kingdome; Then that part, of Soyl, or Territory, which is comprehended under the Name of Scotland; is, in quantity, (as I have heard it esteemed, how truly I know not;) Not past, a third pat of ritain; And that part of Soyl, or Territory, which is comprehended, under the Name of England, is two parts of Britain; Leaving to speak, of a∣ny Difference, of Wealth, or Population, and speaking onely of Quantity. So then, if, for Example, Scotland, should bring to Parliament, as much Nobility, as England, then, a Third part, should countervail two parts; Nam si Inaequalibus aequalia addas, omnia erunt naequalia. And this, I protest before God, and your Majesty, I do speak, not as a Man born in England, but as a Man born in Britain. And therefore, to descend, to the particulars. For the Parliaments,Parliament. the Consideration of that Point, will fall into four Questions. 1. The first, what proportion shall be kept, between the Votes of England, and the Votes of Scotland. 2. The Second, touching the Manner of Proposition, or possessing, of the Parliament, of Causes there to be handled; Which in England, is used to be done, immedialy, by any Member, of the Parliament, or by the Prolocutor; And in Scot∣land, is used to be done, immediatly, by the Lords, of the Ar∣ticles; Whereof, the one Form, seemeth to have, more Liberty, and the other, more Grvity, and Maturity: And therefore, the Question will be, whether of these, shall yield to other; Or whether there should not be, a Mixture of both, by some Commissions, precedent, to every Parliament, in the Nature, of Lords, of the Articles; And yet not Excluding, the Liberty,
of propounding, in full Parliament, afterwards. 3. The Third, touching the Orders of Parliament, how they may be compounded, and the best, of either, taken. 4. The Fourth, how those, which by Inheritance, or other∣wise, have Offices of Honour, and Ceremony, in both the Parlia∣ments, as the Lord Steward, with us, &c. may be satisfied, and Duplicity accommodated. For the Councells of Estate,Cousell o Estate. while the Kingdomes stand divided, it should seem necessary, to continue severall Coun∣cells; But, if your Majsty should proceed to a strict Vnion, then, howsoever your Majesty, may establish, some Provinciall Councells, in Scotland, as there is here, of Yorke, and in the Marches of Wales; Yet the Question will be, whether it will not be, more convenient, for your Majesty, to have but one Trivy Councell, about your Person; Whereof, the Principall officers, of the Crown, of Scotland, to be, for Dignity sake, howsoever, their Abiding, and Remaining, may be, as your Majesty, shall imploy their Service. But this Point, belongeth, meerely, and wholy, to your Majesties Royall Will, and Pleasure. For the Officers, of the Crown,Offcers of the Crown the Consideration thereof, will fall into these Questions. First, in regard, of the Latitude, of your Kingdom, and the Distance of Place, whether it will not be Matter of necessity, to continue the severall Officers, because of the Impossibility, for the service, to be performed, by one. The Second, admitting, the Duplicity, of Officers, should be continued, yet, whether there should not be a Difference, that one should be the Principall Officer, and the other, to be, but Speciall, and Subalterne: As for example, one to be Chancel∣lour of Britain, and the other, to be Chancellour, with some spe∣ciall Addition; As here of the Dutchy, &c. The Third, if no such specialty, or Inferiority, be thought fit, then whether both Officers, should not have the Tile, and the Name, of the whole Island, and Precincts: As the Lord Chanceller of England, to be, Lord Chanceller of Britain; And the Lord Chnceller of Scotland, to be, Lord Chanceller of Britain; But with severall proviso's, that they shall not, intromit them∣selves, but within their severall precincts. For the Nobilities,Nobilities. the Consideration thereof, will fall in∣to these Questions. The First, of their Votes, in Parliament, (which was touch∣ed before,) what proportion they shall bear, to the Nobility of England: Wherein, if the Proportion, which shall be thought it, be not full, yet your Majesty may, out of your Prerogative, supply it: For although, you cannot make fewer, of Scotland, yet you may make more of England. The Second is, touching the Place, and Precedence; where∣in, to marshall them, according to the Precedence of England,
in your Majesties Stile; And according, to the Nobility, of Ire∣land; That is, all English Earles first, and then Scottish, will be thought unequall, for Scotland. To marshall them, according to Antiquity, will be thought unequall for England. Because I hear, their Nobility, is, generally, more ancient: And there∣fore, the Question will be, whether the indifferentest way, were not, to take them enterchangeably; As for Example; First, the Ancient Earl of England; And then, the Ancient Earl of Scotland; And so, Alternis Vicibus. For the Lawes, to make an intire, and perfect, Vnion,Law. it is a Matter of great Difficulty, and Length; Both in the Collecting of them, and in the Passing of them. For first, as to the Collecting of them, there must be made, By the Lawyers, of either Nation, a Disgest, under Titles, of their severall Lawes, and Customes Aswell Common Lawes, as Stautes; That they may be Collated, and Compared; And that, the Diversities, may appear, and be discerned of. And for the Passing of them, we see, by experience, that Patrius Mos, is dear to all men; And that Men are bred, and nourished up, in the Love of it; And therefore, how harsh, Changes, and Innovations, are. And we see, likewise, what Disputation, and Argument, the Alteration, of some one Law, doth cause, and bring forth; How much more, the Alteration, of the whole Corps, of the Law? Therefore, the first Question will be, whether it be not good, to proceed by parts, and to take that, that is most necessary, and leave the rest, to Time? The Parts therfore, or Subject, of Lawes are, for this purpose, fitliest distributed, according to that ordinary Division, of Cri∣minall, and Civill; And those of Criminall Causes, into Capitall, and Penall. The Second Question, therefore, is; Allowing the Generall Vnion of Lawes, to be too great a Work, to embrace, whether it were not convenient, that Cases Capitall, were the same, in both Nations? I say, the Cases; I do not speak, of the Proceed∣ings, or Trials; That is to say; whether the same Offences, were not fit, to be made Treason, or Felony, in both places? The Third Question is, whether Cases Penall, though not Capitall, yet if they concern the Publick State, or otherwise, the Discipline of Manners, were not fit, likewise, to be brought, in∣to one Degree? As the Case, of Misprision of Treason; The Case of Premunire; The Case of Fugitives; The Case of Incest; The Case of Simony; and the rest. But the Question, that is more urgent, then any of these, is; Whether these Cases, at the least, be they of an higher, or infe∣riour, degre; Wherein the Fact committed, or Act done in Scotland, may prejudice, the State, and Subjects, of England, or é converso; Are not, to be reduced, into one Vniformity, of Law, and Punishment? As for Example; A perjury, committed, in a Court of Iustice, in Scotland, cannot be prejudiciall, in Eng∣land;
Because Depositions, taken in Scotland, cannot be pro∣duced, and used, here in England. But a Forgery, of a Deed, in Scotland, I mean, with a false Date of England, may be used, and given in Evidence, in England. So likewise, the Depopu∣lating, of a Town in Scotland, doth not, directly, prejudice, the State of England: But if an English Merchant, shall carry Silver, and Gold, into Scotland, (as he may,) and thence transport it, into forrain parts, this prejudiceth the State of England: And may be, an Evasion, to all the Lawes, of England, ordained in that Case: And therefore, had need to be bridled, with as se∣vere a Law, in Scotland, as it is here in England. Of this kind, there are many Lawes. The Law, of the 50, of Rich. the 2. of going over without li∣cence, if there be not the like Law in Scotland, will be fru∣strated, and evaded: For any Subject of England, may go first into Scotland, and thence into forrain parts. So the Lawes, prohibiting Transportation of sundry Com∣modities, as Gold, and Silver, Ordnance, Artillery, Corn, &c. if there be not, a Correspondence of Lawes, in Scot∣land, will, in like manner, be deluded, and frustrate: For any English Merchant, or Subject, may carry such Commodities, first into Scotland, as well, as he may carry them, from Port, to Port, in England. And out of Scot∣land, into Forrain Parts, without any Perill of Law. So Libells, may be devised, and written, in Scotland, and published, and scattered in England. Treasons, may be plotted in Scotland, and executed in England. And so, in many other Cases, if there be not, the like Severity, of Law, in Scotland, to restrain Offences, that there is in England; (whereof, we are here ig∣norant, whether there be, or no,) It will be, a Gap, or Stop, even for English Subjects, to escape, and avoid, the Lawes, of England. But for Treasons, the best is, that by the Statute, of 26. K. Hen. the 8'h. Cap. 13. any Treason, committed in Scotland, may be proceeded with, in England, as well, as Treasons committed, in France, Rome, or elsewhere. For Courts of Iustice, Trialls, Processes, and other Administra∣tion of Lawes,Courts of Justice, and Administrati∣on of Lawes. to make any Alteration, in either Nation, it will be a Thing, so new, and unwonted, to either People; That it may be doubted, it will make, the Administration of Iustice; (Which, of all other Things, ought to be known, and certain, as a beaten way;) To become intricate, and uncertain: And besides, I do not see, that the Severalty, of Administration of Iu∣stice, though it be by Court Soveraign, of last Resort; (I mean, without Appeal, or Errour;) Is any Impediment at all, to the V∣nion
of a Kingdom: As we see by Experience, in the severall Courts of Parliament, in the Kingdome of France: And I have been, alwayes, of Opinion, that the Subjects of England, do, al∣ready, fetch Iustice, somewhat far off, more then in any Nation, that I know, the largeness of the Kingdome Considered, though it be holpen, in some part, by the Circuits, of the Iudges; And the two Councels, at York, and in the Marches of Wales, establi∣shed. But it may be a good Question, whether, as Commune Vincu∣lum, of the Iustice, of both Nations, your Majesty, should not e∣rect, some Court about your person, in the Nature, of the Grand Councell, of France; To which Court, you might, by way of Evo∣cation, draw Causes, from the ordinary Iudges, of both Nations; For so doth the French King, from all the Courts, of Parliament, in France; Many of which, are more remote, from Paris, then any part of Scotland, is from London. For Receits, and Finances,Receits, Fi∣nances, and Patrimonies of the Crown. I see no Question will arise; In re∣gard it will be Matter of Necessity, to establish in Scotland, a Receit of Treasure, for Payments, and Erogations, to be made, in those parts: And for the Treasure of Spare, in either Receipts, the Custodies thereof, may well be severall; considering, by your Majesties, Commandement, they may be, at all times, removed, or disposed, according to your Majesties Occasions. For the Patrimonies, of both Crowns, I see, no Question will arise; Except your Majesty would be pleased, to make one compounded Annexation, for an Inseparable Patrimony, to the Crown, out of the Lands, of both Nations; And so, the like, for the Principality of Britain, and for other Appennages, of the rest of your Children; Erecting, likewise, such Dutchies, and Honours, compounded, of the Possessions, of both Nations, as shall be thought fit. For Admiralty, or Navy, I see, no great question, will arise:Admiralty, Navy, and Merchandi∣zing. For I see no Inconvenience, for your Majesty, to continue Shipping, in Scotland. And for the Iurisdictions, of the Admiral∣ties, and the Profits, and Casualties, of them, they will be re∣spective, unto the Coasts, over against which, the Seas lye, and are situated; As it is here, with the Admiralties, of England. And for Merchandizing, it may be a Question, whether that the Companies, of the Merchant Adventurers, of the Turky Mer∣chants, and the Muscovy Merchants, (if they shall be continued,) should not be compounded, of Merchants, of both Nations, English, and Scottish. For to leave Trade free, in the one Nation, and to have it restrained, in the other, may, percase, breed some Inconvenience. For Freedomes, and Liberties,Freedomes and Liberties. the Charters of both Nations, may be reviewed: And of such Liberties, as are agreeable, and convenient, for the Subjects, and People, of both Nations, one
Grea Charter, may be made, and confirmed, to the Subjects, of Britain; And those Liberties, which are peculiar, or proper, to either Nation, to stand in State, as they do. But for Imposts, and Customes, it will be a great Question, how to accommodate them, and reconcile them: For, if they be much easier in Scotland, then they be here in England, (which is a Thing, I know not,) then this Inconvenience will follow; That the Merchants of England, may unlade, in the Ports of Scotland; And this Kingdome, to be served, from thence, and your Majesties Customes abated. And for the Question, whether the Scottish Merchants, should pay Strangers Custome, in England, that resteth, upon the Point, of Naturalization, which I touched before. Thus have I made your Majesty, a brief, and naked, Memo∣riall, of the Articles, and Points, of this great Cause; which may serve, onely, to excite, and stir up, your Majesties Royall Iudgement, and the Iudgement of Wiser Men, whom you will be pleased to call to it: Wherein, I will not presume, to perswade, or disswade any thing; Nor to interpose mine own Opinion; But do expect light, from your Majesties Royall Directions; Unto the which, I shall ever submit my Iudgement, and apply my Travailes: And I most hum∣bly pray your Majesty, in this which is done, to pardon my Er∣rours, and to cover them, with my good Intention, and Mea∣ning, and Desire I have, to do your Majesty Service; And to ac∣quie the Trust, that was reposed in me; And chiefly, in your Majesties benign, and gracious Acceptation. FINIS.
THE BEGINNING OF THE HISTORY, OF GREAT BRITAIN. BY the Decease, of Elizabeth, Queen of Eng∣land, the Issues, of King Henry the 8th, failed; Being spent, in one Generation, and three Successions. For that King, though he were one, of the goodliest Persons, of his time, yet he left, onely by his Six Wives, three Children; who Raigning successively, and Dying Childe∣lesse, made place, to the Line, of Marga∣ret, his eldest, Sister, Married, to Iames the 4th, King of Scotland. There succeeded therefore, to the King∣dome of England, Iames the 6th, then King of Scotland, descended of the same Margaret, both by Father, and Mother: So that, by a rare Event, in the Pedegrees of Kings, it seemed, as if the Divine Providence, to extinguish, and take away, all Note of a Stranger, had doubled upon his Person, within the Circle of one Age, the Royall Bloud of England, by both Parents. This sucession, drew towards it, the Eyes of all Men; Being one, of the most memora∣ble Accidents, that had hapned, a long time, in the Christian World. For the Kingdome, of France, having been re-united, in the Age before, in all the Provinces thereof, formerly dismem∣bred: And the Kingdome, of Spain, being, of more fresh memory, united, and made entire, by the Annexing of Portugall, in the Person, of Philip the second; There remained, but this Third, and last Vnion, for the counterpoizing, of the Power, of these three
great Monarchies; And the disposing, of the Affaires, of Europe, thereby, to a more assured, and universall, Peace, and Concord. And this Event, did hold Mens Observations, and Discourses, the more; Because, the Island, of Great Britain, divided from the Rest of the World, was never before united, in it self, under one King; Notwithstanding the People be of one Language, and not se∣parate, by Mountains, or great Waters: And, notwithstanding al∣so, that the uniting of them, had been, in former times, industri∣ously attempted, both by Warre, and Treaty. Therefore, it see∣med, a manifest work of Providence, and Case of Reservation, for these times; Insomuch, as the vulgar conceived, that now there was an End given, and a Consummation, to superstitious Pro∣phecies; (The Belief of Fooles, but the Talk, sometimes, of Wise Men;) And to an ancient tacite Expectation, which had by Tra∣dition, been infused, and inveterated, into Mens Minds. But, as the best Divinations, and Predictions, are the Politick, and probable, Foresight, and Conjectures, of wise Men; So, in this Matter, the Providence, of King Hen. the 7th, was in all Mens Mouths; Who, being one, of the Deepest, and most prudent Prin∣ces, of the World, upon the Deliberation, concerning the Marri∣age, of his Eldest Daughter, into Scotland, had, by some Speech, ut∣tered by him, shewed himself sensible, and almost Prescient, of this Event. Neither did there want, a Concurrence, of divers Rare, ex∣ternall Circumstances, (besides the Vertues, and Conditions, of the Person,) which gave great Reputation, to this Succession. A King, in the strength of his years, supported with great Alliances a∣broad, established with Royall Issue at home, at Peace with all the World, practised, in the Regiment, of such a Kingdome, as mought rather enable a King, by variety of Accidents, then corrupt him, with Affluence, or vain glory; And One, that besides his univer∣sall Capacity, and Judgement, was notably exercised, and practi∣sed, in Matters of Religion, and the Church; Which, in these times, by the confused use, of both Swords, are become so intermixed, with Considerations of Estate, as most of the Counsailes, of Sove∣raign Princes, or Republiques, depend upon them: But nothing, did more fill, Forraign Nations, with Admiration, and Expectati∣on, of his Succession, then the wonderfull, and (by them,) unex∣pected, Consent, of all Estates, and Subjects, of England, for the receiving of the King, without the least scruple, Pause, or Questi∣on. For it had been generally dispersed, by the Fugitives, be∣yond the Seas, (who partly, to apply themselves, to the Ambiti∣on, of Forreiners; And partly, to give Estimation, and value, to their own Employments; used to represent, the state of England, in a false light;) That after Queen Elizabeths Decease, there must follow, in England, nothing but Confusions, Interregs, and pertur∣bations of Estate; likely, for to exceed, the Ancient Calamities, of the Civill Wars, between the Houses, of Lancaster, and York: By how
much more, the Dissentions, were like to be more Mortall, and Bloudy, when Forraign Competition, should be added, to Dome∣sticall; And Divisions for Religion, to Matter of itle, to the Crown. And in speciall, Parsons the Iesuite, under a disguised Name, had, not long before, published, an expresse Treatise; Wherein, whether his Malice, made hm believe his own Fancies; Or whether, he thought it the fittest way, to move Sedition; Like evill Spirits, which seem, to foretell, the Tempest, they mean to move; He laboured to display, and give colour, to all the vain Pretences, and Dreams, of Succession, which he could imagine; And thereby, had possessed Many abroad, that knew not the Af∣faires here, with those his Vanities. Neither wanted there, here, within this Realm, divers Persons, both Wise, and well affected, who, though they doubted not, of the undoubted Right; yet, setting befoe themselves, the waves of peoples Hearts; (Gui∣ded, no lesse, by suddain, and temporary, Winds, then by the na∣turall Course, and Motion, of the Waters;) Were, not without fear, what mought be the Event? For Queen Elizabeth, being a Prince, of extream Caution; and yet One, that loved Admiration, above Safety; And knowing, The Declaration of a Successour, mought, in point of Safety, be disputable; But in point of Ad∣miration, and Respect, assuredly to her Disadvantage; Had, from the beginning, set it down, for a Maxime, of Estate, to impose a Si∣lence, touching Succession. Neither was it onely Reserved, as a Secret of Estate, but Restrained, by severe Lawes; That no Man, should presume, to give Opinion, or maintain Argument, tou∣ching the same; So, though the Evidence of Right, drew all the Subjects of the Land, to think one Thing; yet the Fear of Danger of Law, made no Man privy, to others Thought. And therefore, it rejoyced all Men, to see so fair a Morning of a Kingdome, and to be throughly secured, of former Apprehensions; As a Man, that awaketh, out of a Fearfull Dream. But so it was, that not onely the Consent, but the Applause, and Joy, was infinite, and not to be expressed, thronghout the Realm of England, upon this Succession: Whereof, the Consent, (no doubt,) may be truly as∣cribed, to the Clearnesse of the Right; But the generall Joy, Alacrity, and Gratulation, were the Effects, of differing Causes. For Queen Elizabeth, although she had the use, of many, both Ver∣tues, and Demonstrations, that mought draw, and knit unto her, the Hearts of her People; Yet neverthelesse, carrying a Hand, Restrained in Gift, and strained, in Points of Prerogative, could not answer the Votes, either of Servants, or Subjects, to a full Content∣ment; especially in her latter Dayes, when the Continuance of her Raign, (which extended to Five and Forty years,) mought discover, in People, their Naturall Desire, and Inclination, towards Change; So that a new Court, and a new Raign, were not, to many, unwelcome. Many were glad, and especially, those of Setled state, and Fortunes, that the Feares, and Incertainties were Over-blown,
and that the Dye was cast: Others that had made their way, with the King, or offered their Service, in the Time of the former Queen, thought now the Time was come, for which they had prepared: And generally, all such, as had any dependance, upon the late Earl of Essex; (Who had mingled, the Secrecy of his own Ends, with the Popular pretence, of advancing the Kings Title;) Made account, thei Cause was amended. Again, such as ought misdoubt, they had given the King, any occasion of Distast, did continue, by their Forwardnesse, and Con∣fidence, to shew, it was but their Fastness, to the Former Go∣vernment; And that, those Affections, ended with the Time. The Papists, nourished their hopes, by collating, the Case, of the Papists in England, and under Queen Elizabeth, and the Case, of the Papists, in Scotland, under the King: Interpreting, that the Condi∣tion, of them, in Scotland, was the lesse Grievous; And divining, of the Kings Government here accordingly: Besides, the Comfor, they ministred themselves, from the Memory, of the Queen his Moher. The Ministers, and those which stood, for the Presbyte∣ry, thought their Cause, had more Sympathy, with the Discipline of Scotland, then the Hierarchy of England; And so, took them∣selves, to be, a Degree nearer their Desires. Thus had every Con∣dition of Persons, some Contemplation of Benefit, which they promised themselves; Over-reaching, perhaps, according to the Nature of Hope; But yet, not without, some probable Ground, of Conjecture. At which time also, there came sorth, in Print, the Kings Book, entitled : Containing, Matter of Instruction, to the Prince, his Son, touching the Ofice of a King; Which Booke, falling into every Mans Hand, filled the whole Realm, as with a good Perfume, or Incense, before the Kings comming in: For being excellently written, and having no∣thing of Affectation, it did not only satisfie better, then particu∣lar Reports, touching the Kings Disposition; But far exceeded, a∣ny formall, or curious, Edict, or Declaration, which could have been devised, of that Nature, wherewith Princes, in the begin∣ning of their Raignes, do use, to grace themselves, or at least, ex∣presse themselves gracious, in the Eyes of their People. And this was, for the generall, the State, and Constitution, of Mens Minds, upon this Change: The Actions themselves, passed in this Man∣ner, &c. The Rest is wanting.
A LETTER, AND DISCOURSE, TO Sir HENRY SAVILL, TOUCHING HELPS, FOR THE INTELLECTVAL POWERS. SIR, COming back from your Invitation at E∣ton, where I had refreshed my Self, with Company, which I loved; I fell, into a Consideration, of that Part, of Policy, whereof Philosophy speaketh too much and Lawes too little; And that is, of Edu∣cation of Youth. Whereupon, fixing my mind a while, I found strait wayes, and noted, even in the Discourses of Philoso∣phers, which are so large in this Argu∣ment, a strange Silence, concerning one principall Part, of that Subject: For as touching, the Framing, and Seasoning, of Youth, to Morall Vertue; (As Tolerance of Labours, Continency from Pleasures, Obedience, Honour, and the like; They handle it; But touching
the Improvement, and Helping, of the Intellectuall Powers; As of Conceit, Mmory, and Iudgement, they say nothing. Whether it were, that they thought it, to be a Matter, wherein Nature onely prevailed; Or that they intended it, as referred, to the severall, and Proper, Arts, which teach, the use, of Reason, and Speech. But or he former of these two Reasons, howsoeve, it pleaseth them, to distinguish, of Habits, and Powers; The Experience is manifest nough, that the Motions, and Faculties, of the Wit, and Memory, may be, not onely governed, and guided, but also confimed, and nlarged, b Custome, and Exercise, duly applyed: As if a Man exercise shootig, he shall not onely shoot nearer the Mark, but also draw a stronger Bow. And as for the Latter, of Compre∣hending, these precepts, within the Arts, of Logick, & Rhetorick; If it be rightly considered, their Office is distinct, altogether, from this Point: For it is no part, of the Doctrine, of the Use, or Hand∣ling, of an Instrument, to tech, how to Whet, or grinde, the Instru∣ment, to give it a sharp edge; Or how to quench it, or otherwise, whereby to give it a stronger Temper. Wherefore, finding this part of Knowledge, not broken, I have, but tanquam aliud agens, entred into it, and salute you with it; Dedicating it, afer the an∣cient manner, first as to a dear Friend; And then as to an Apt Person; For as much, as you have, both place, to practise it, and Judgement, and Leysure, to look deeper into it, then I have done. Herein you must call to mind, . Though the Argu∣ment, be not of great Heigth, and Dignity, neverthelesse, it is of great, and universall use: And yet, I do not see, why, to consi∣der it rightly; That should not be a Learning of Heigth, which teacheth to raise, the Highest, and Worthiest, Part of the Mind. But howsoever that be, if the World take any Light, and Use by this Writing, I will, the Gratulation be, to the good Friendship, and Acquaintance, between us two. And so I commend you, to Gods Divine Protection. A DISCOURSE, touching HELPS, for the INTELLECTUALL POWERS. I did ever hold it, for an Insolent, and unlucky, Saying; Faber quisque Fortunae suae; except it be uttered, onely, as an Horta∣tive, or Spur, to correct Sloth. For otherwise, if it be believed, as it soundeth; And that a Man, entreth into an high Imaginati∣on, that he can compass, and fathom, all Accidents; And ascri∣beth, all Successes, to his Drifts, and Reaches; And the contrary,
to his Errours, and Sleepings: It is commonly seen, that the E∣vening Fortune, of that Man, is not so prosperous, as of him, hat without slackning, of his Industry, attributeth much to Felicity, and Providence above him. But if the Sentence were turned to this; Faber quisque Ingenii sui, it were somewhat more True, and much more Profitable: Because it would teach Men, to bend themselves, to Reform, those Imperfections, in themselves, which now they seek but to Cover: And to attain, those Vertues, and Good Parts, which now they seek, but to have, onely, in shew, and Demonstration. Yet notwithstanding, every Man attempt∣eth to be, of the first Trade, of Capenters; And Few bind them∣selves to the Second: whereas, neverthelesse, the Rising in For∣tune, seldome, amendeth the Mind; But, on the other side, the Removing of the Stonds, and Impediments, of the Mind, doth often clear, the passage, and Current, to a Mans Fortune. But certain it is, whether it be believed, or no, that, as the most excellent of Mettalls, Gold, is, of all other, the most Pliant, and most Enduring to be wrought; So, of all Living, and Breathing Substances, the Perfectest, (Man,) is the most susceptible of Help, Improvement, Impression, and Alteration; And not only in his Body, but in his Mind, and Spirit; And there again, not only, in his Apptite, and Affection, but in his Powers of Wit, and Reason. For as to the Body of Man, we find many, and strange, Experi∣ences, how Nature is overwrought by Custome, even in Actions, that seem of most difficulty, and least possible. As first in Volun∣tary Motion; Which though it be termed Voluntary, yet the high∣est Degrees of it, are not Voluntary; For it is, in my Power, and Will, to Run; But to Run faster, then according to my Light∣nesse, or Disposition of Body, is not in my Power, nor Will. We see the Industry, and Practise, of Tumblers, and Funambulo's, what Effects, of great Wonder, it bringeth, the Body of Man, unto. So for suffering of Pain, and Dolour, which is thought so contrary to the Nature of Man, there is much Example of Penances, in stric Orders, of superstition, what they do endure; Such as may well verifie, the Report, of the Spartan Boyes, which were wont, to be scourged, upon the Altar so bitterly, as sometimes they dyed of it; And yet were never heard to complain. And to pass to those Faculties, which are reckoned more Involuntary; As Long Fasting, and Abstinenee; and the contrary Extream, (Voracity;) The Leaving, and Forbearing, the Vse, of Drink, for altogether; The Enduring vehement Cold, and the like; There have not wanted, neither do want, divers Examples, of strange Victories, over the Body, in every of these. Nay in Respiration, the proof hath been of some, who by continuall use of Diving, and Working, under the Water, have brought themselves, to be able, to hold their Breath, an incredible time; And others, that have been able, without Suffocation, to endure, the Stifling Breath, of an Oven,
or Furnace, so heated; As though, it did not scal, nor burn; Yet it was, many Degrees, too ho, for any Man, not made to it, to Breath, or take in. And some Impostours, and Counterfeits, like∣wise, have been able, to wreat, and cast their Bodies, into strange Formes, and Motions: Yea, and others, to bring themselves, in∣to rances, and Astonishments. All which Examples, do demon∣strate, how variously, and how to High, Points, and Degrees, the Body of Man, may be, (as it were,) moulded, and wrought. And if any Mad conceive, than it is some secret propriety of Nature, that hath been in those Persons, which have attained to those Points; And that it is not open, or every Man, to do the like, though he had been put to it; For which Cause, such Things, come but very rarely to passe; It is true, no doubt, but some Persons, are apter then others; But so, as the more aptnesse, causeth Perfection, but the lesse Aptnese, doth not disable: So that, for Example, the more apt Child, that is taken, to be made a Funambulo, will prove more excellent in his Feates; But the lesse apt will be Gregarius Funambulo also. And there is small Que∣stion, but that these Abilities, would have been more common; And others, of like sort, not attempted, would, likewise, have been brought, upon the Stage, but for two Reasons: The one, because of Mens Diffidence, in prejudging them, as Impossibili∣ties; For it holdeth, in those things, which the Poet saith; Pos∣sunt, quia posse videntur: For no Man shall Know, how much may be done, except he Believe, much may be done. The other Rea∣son is, because they be, but Practises, base, and inglorious, and of no great use; And therefore sequestred from Reward of Va∣lue; And on the other side, painfull; So as the Recompence ballanceth not with the Travaile, and Suffering. And as to the Will of Man, it is that, which is most Maniable, and O∣bedient; As that, which admitteth most Medicines, to cure, and alter it. The most Soveraign, of all, is Religion; which is able to change, and transform it, in the deepest, and most inward in∣clinations, and Motions: And next to that is Opinion, and Appre∣hension; Whether it be infused by Tradition, and Institution; or wrought in, by Disputation, and Perswasion: And the Third is Example, which transformeth the Will of Man, into the Simi∣litude of that, which is most obversant, and familiar towards it. And the Fourth is, when one Affection, is healed, and corrected, by another: As when Cowardise, is remedied by Shame, and Dis∣honour; Or Sluggishnesse, and Backwardnesse, by indignation, and Emulation; And so of the like. And lastly, when all these Meanes, or any of them, have new framed, or formed, Humane Will; Then doth Custome, and Habite, Corroborate, and confirm, all the rest. Therefore, it is no marvaile, though this Faulty, of the Mind, (of Will, and Election;) which inclineth Affection, and Ap∣petite, being but the Inceptions, and Rudiments, of Will; May be so well governed, and managed; Because, it admitteth accesse, to
so divers Remedies, to be applyed to it, and to work upon it. The Effects whereof are so many, and so known, as require no Enu∣meration; But, generally, they do issue, as Medicines do, in∣to two Kinds, of Cures; whereof the one, is a Iust, or True, Cure; And the other, is called Palliation. For, either the Labour, and Intention is, to reform the Affections, really, and truly; Re∣straining them, if they be too violent; And raising them, if they be too Soft, and Weak; Or else, it is to cover them; Or, if oc∣casion be, to pretend them, and represent them. Of the former Sort whereof, the Examples, are plentifull, in the Schooles, of Philosophers, and in all other Institutions, of Morall Vertue; And of the other sort, the Examples, are, more plentifull, in the Courts of Princes, and in all Politick Traffique: Where it is ordinary to find, not only profound Dissimulations, and Suffocating the Affections, that no Note, or Mark, appear of them, outwardly; But also, lively Simulations, and Affecations, carrying the To∣kens of Passions, which are not; As Risus Iussus, and Lachrymae Coactae, and the like. Of Helps, of the Intellectuall Powers. THe Intellectual Powers, have fewer means, to work upon them, then the Will, or Body of Man; But the one, that prevaileth, that is Exercise, worketh more forcibly in them, then in the Rest. The Ancient Habite,These that follow, are but indisge∣sted Notes. of the Philosophers; Si quis quaerat, in utram∣que partem, de omni Scibili. The Exercise, of Schollers, making Verses extempore; Stans pede in uno. The Exercise, of Lawyers, in Memory Narrative The Exercise, of Sophists, and Io. ad Oppositum, with manifest effect. Artificiall Memory greatly holpen by Exercise. The Excercise, of uffons, to draw all things, to Conceits Ridi∣culous. The Meanes that help the Vnderstanding, and Faculties thereof, are. (Not Example, as in the Will, by Conversation; And here, the Conceit of Imitation, already disgested; with the Confutation, Obiter, si videbitur, of Tullies Opinion, advising a Man, to take some one to Imitate. Similitude of Faces analysed.)
Arts, Logick, Rhetorick: The Ancients, Aristotle, Plato, Thaetetus Gorgias, Litigiosus, vel Sophista, Protagoras, Aristotle, Schola sua. To∣picks, Elenchs, Rhetoricks, Organon, Cicero, Hermogenes. The Neote∣ricks, Ramus, Agricola. Nil sacri Lullius. his Typocosmia, studying Coopers Dictionary; Mattheus Collection, of proper words for Me∣taphors; Agrippa, de vanitat. &c. Que. if not here, of Imitation. Collections preparative. Aristotles Similtude of a Shoomakers Shop, full of Shoes, of all Sorts: Demosthenes Exordi Concionum. Tullis precept, of Theses of all sorts, preparative. The Relying upon Exercise, with the Difference, of Vsing, and tempering, the Instrument; And the Similitude, f prescribing, a∣gainst the Lawes, of Nature and of Estate. 5. Points. That Exercises, are to be framed, to the Life: That is to say, to work Ability, in that kind, whereof a Man, in the Course of Action, shall have most Vse. The indirect, and Oblique Exercises, which do, per partes, and per consequentiam, inable these Faculties; which perhaps, direct Exercise, at first, would but distort. And these, have chiefly place, where the Faculty is weak, not per se, but per Accidens. As if Want of Memory, grow through Lightnesse of Wit; and want of stayed Attention; Then the Mathematiques, or the Law, helpeth: Because, they are Things, wherein if the Mind once roam, it can∣not recover. Of the Advantages of Exercise; As to dance with heavy Shoes; To march with heavy Armour, and Carriage; And the contrary Advantage, (in Natures, very dull, and unapt,) of working Ala∣crity, by framing an Exercise, with some Delight, or Affection; —Veluti pueris dant Crustula blandi Doctores, Elementa velint ut discere prima. Of the Cautions of Exercise; As to beware, lest by evill doing, (as all Beginners do weakly,) a Man grow not, and be invete∣rate, in an ill Habit; And so take, not the Advantage of Custome in perfection, but in confirming ill. Slubbering on the Lute. The Marshalling, and Sequele of Sciences, and practises: Logick, and Rhetorick should be used, to be read, after Poesy, History, and Philosophy. First, Exercise, to do things well, and clean; after, promptly, and readily. The Exercises, in the Vniversities, and Schooles, are of Memory, and Invention; Either to speak by Heart, that which is set down verbatim; Or to speak Extempore. Whereas, there is little use, in Action, of either of both: But most things, which we utter, are neither verbally premeditate, nor meerly Extemporall. Therefore
Exercise, would be framed to take a little Breathing, and to con∣sider of Heads; And then to fit, and form, the Speech, Ex tempore. This would be done, in two manners; Both with writing, and Tables; And without. For, in most Actions, it is permitted, and passable, to use the Note; Whereunto, if a Man be not accustom∣ed, it will put him out. There is no use, of a Narrative Memory, in Academiis, viz, with Circumstances of Times, Persons, and Places, and with Names; And it is one Art, to discourse, and another to Relate, and De∣scribe: And herein Vse, and Action, is most conversant. Also, to Summe up, and Contract, is a Thing, in Action, of ve∣ry generall Vse.
CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS, Touching the Better, PACIFICATION, AND EDIFICATION, OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND Dedicated, to His most Excellent MAJESTY. THE Vnity of your Church, (excellent Soveraign,) is a Thing, no lesse precious, then the Vnion of your Kingdomes; Being both Works, wherein your Happiness, may contend, with your Worthiness: Having therefore presumed, not without your Majesties gracious Acceptation, to say somewhat of the one; I am, the more encouraged, not to be silent, in the o∣ther: The rather, because it is an Argument, that I have travel∣led in heretofore: But Salomon, commendeth a Word spoken in
Season, And as our Saviour; (speaking of the Discerning of Seasons,) saith; When you see a Cloud, rising in the West, you say, it will be a shower: So your Majesties Rising, to this Monarchy, in the West Parts, of the World, doth promise, a sweet, and fruitfull, Shower, of ma∣ny Blessings, upon this Church, and Common-wealth; A Shower, of that Influence, as the very first Deaws, and Drops thereof, have, already, layed the Stormes, and Winds, throughout Christendom; Reducing, the very Face, of Europe, to a more peaceable, and A∣miable, Countenance. But to the Purpose. It is very true, that these Ecclesiasticall Maters, are Things, not properly appertaining, to my Profession; which, I was not, so in∣considerate, but to object to my Self: But finding, that it is, ma∣ny times, seen, that a Man, that standeth off, and somewhat re∣moved, from a Plot of Ground, doth better survey it, and disco∣ver it, then those which are upon it; I thought it not impossible, but that I, as a Looker on, might cast mine Eyes, upon some Things, which the Actours themselves, (especially, some being interessed, some led and addicted, some declared and engaged,) did not, or would not see. And that, knowing in my Conscience, (wheretoo God beareth witnesse,) that the Things which I shall speak, spring out of no Vein of Popularity, Ostentation, Desire of Novelty, Partiality to either Side, Disposition to intermed∣dle, or any the like Leven; I may conceive hope, that what I want, in depth of Judgement, may be countervailed, in Simpli∣city, and Sincerity, of Affection. But of all Things, this did most animate me; That I found, in these Opinions, of mine, (which I have long held, and embraced, as may appear by that, which I have, many years since, written of them, according to the proportion, neverthelesse, of my weakness,) a Consent, and Confomity, with that, which your Majesty hath published, of your own, most Christian, most Wise, and Moderate Sense, in these Causes: wherein you have well expressed, to the World, that there is inused, in your Sacred Brest, from God, that High principle, and Position of Government; That you ever hold the Whole, more dear, then any Part. For who seeth not, that Many are affected, and give Opinion, in these Matters, as if they had not, so much a desire, to purge the Evill, from the Good, as to countenance, and protect, the E∣vill, by the Good? Others speak, as if their Scope, were onely, to set forth, what is Good, and not to seek, what is Possible; which is to Wis, and not to Propound. Others proceed, as if they had rather, a Mind of Removing, then of Reforming: But howsoever, either Side, as Men, (though excellent Men) shall run into Ex∣tremities; yet your Majesty, as a most Wise, Equall, and Christian Moderator, is disposed, to find out, the Golden Mediocrity, in the Establishment, of that which is Sound; And, in the Reparation, of that, which is Corrupt, and decayed. To your Princely Iudge∣ment, then, I do, in all Humblenesse, submit, whatsoever I shall
propound; offering the same, but as a Mite into the Treasury, of your Wisedom: For, as the Astronomers, do well observe; That when three, of the Superior Lights, do meet in Conjunction, it bringeth forth, some admirable Effects: So, there being joyned, in your Ma∣jesty, the Light of Nature, the Light of Learning, and above all, the Light of Gods Holy Spirit; It cannot be, but your Government, must be as a Happy Constellation, over the states of your Kingdomes. Neither is there wanting, to your Majesty, that Fourth Light; which though it be, but a borrowed Lght, yet is, of singular E∣ficacy, and Moment, added to the rest; which is, the Light, of a most wise, and well compounded, Councell; To whose Honourable, and Grave, Wisdomes, I do likewse submit, whatsoever I shall speak: Hoping, that I shall not need, to make Protestation, of my Mind, and Opinion; That untill your Majesty, doth other∣wise determine, and order, all Actuall, and Full Obedience, is to be given, to Ecclesiasticall Iurisdicton, as it now standeth; And when your Majesty, hath determined, and ordered, that every good subject ought to rest satisfied, and apply his Obedience, to your Majesties Lawes, Ordinances, and Royall Commandements: Nor, of the Dislike, I have, of all Immodest Bitternesse, peremptory presumption, Popular handling; And other Courses, tending rather to Rumour, and Impression, in the vulgar Sort, then to likely-hood of Effect, joyned with Observation of Duty. But before, I enter, into the Points controverted, I think good to remove, (if it may be,) two Opinions, which do directly con∣front, and oppone, to Reformation: The one, bringing it to a Nullity; And the other, to an Impossibility. The First is; That it is against good Policy, to innovate any hing, in Church Matters; The other; That all Reformation, must be, after one Platform. For the First of these, it is excellently said, by the Prophet; State super vias antiquas, & videte, quaenam sit via recta, & vera, & am∣bulate in eâ. So as, he doth not say; State super vias antiquas, & am∣bulate in eis: For it true, that with all VVise, and Moderate, Persons, Custom, and Vsage, obtaineth that Reverence, as it is sufficient Matter, to move them, to make a stand, and to discover, and take a View; But it is no warrant, to guide, and conduct them: A just Ground, I say, it is, of Deliberation, but not of Direction. But, on the other side, who knoweth not, that Time, is truly compared, to a Stream, that carrieth down, fresh, and pure Waters, into that salt Sea of Corruption, which invironeth all Human Actions? And there∣fore, if Man shall not, by his Industry, Vertue, and Policy, as it were, with the Oare, row against the Stream, and inclination of Time; All Institutions, and Ordinances, be they never so pure, will corrupt, and degenerate. But not, to handle this matter, Common-place like, I would only ask, why the Civill State, should be purged, and restored, by Good, and Wholesome, Lawes, made every Third, or Fourth, year, in Parliament assembled; Devising Remedies, as fast as Time, breedeth Mischief; And contrariwise,
the Ecclesiasticall State, should still continue, upon the Dreggs of Time, and receive, no Alteration now, for this Five and Forty years, and more? If any Man, shall object, that if the like Inter∣mission, had been used, in Civil Causes also, the Errour had not been great; Surely the Wisedome of the Kingdome, hath been other∣wise, in Experience, for Three Hundred years space, at the least. But, if it be said to me, that there is a Difference, between Civill Causes, and Ecclesiasticall, they may as well tell me, that Churches, and Chappels, need no Reparations, though Castles, and Houses, do; Whereas commonly, to speak truth, Dilapidations, of the Inward, and Spirituall, Edifications, of the Church, of God, are, in all times, as great, as the Outward, and Materiall. Sure I am, that the very word, and Stile, of Reformation, used by our Saviour; Ab initio non fuit sic; was applyed, to Church Matters; And those, of the high∣est Nature, concerning the Law Morall. Neverthelesse, He were both unthankfull, and unwise, that would deny, but that the Church, of England, during the time of Queen Elizabeth, of famous Memory, did flourish. If I should com∣pare it, with Forrain Churches, I would ather, the Comparison should be, in the Vertues, then, as some make it, in the Defects; Rather, I say, as between the Vine, and the Olive, which should be most fruitfull, And not, as between the Briar, & the Thistle, which should be most unprofitable. For that Reverence, should be used, to the Church, which the good Sons of Noah, used, to their Fathers Nakedness; That is, as it were, to go backwards, and to help, the Defects thereof, and yet to dissemble them. And it is to be acknowledged, that scarcely any Church, since the Primitive Church, yielded, in like Number of Years, and Latitude of Coun∣try, a greater Number, of Excellent Preachers, Famous Writers, and Grave Governers: But for the Discipline, and Orders, of the Church, as many, & the chiefest, of them, are Holy, and Good; So yet, i Saint Iohn, were to indite an Epistle, to the Church of England, as he did, to them of Asia, it would, sure, have the Clause; Habeo adversus te pauca. And no more, for this Point; Saving that, as an Ap∣pendix thereunto, it is not amisse, to touch that Objection, which is made to the Time, and not to the Matter; Pretending, that if Reformation, were necessary, yet it were not now seasonable, at your Majesties First Entrance: Yet Hippocrates saith; Si quid mo∣ves, à principio move: And the wisedom, of all Examples, do shew, that the wisest Princes, as they have ever been, the most sparing, in Removing, or Alteration, of Servants, and Officers, upon their Coming in; So, for Removing of Abuses, and Enormities; And for Reforming of Lawes, and the Policy of their States, they have, chiefly, sought to ennoble, and commend, their Beginnings there∣with; Knowing, that the first Impression, with People, conti∣nueth long; And when Mens Minds, are most in Expectation, and Suspence, then, are they best wrought, and mannaged: And therefore it seemeth to me, that as the Spring of Nature, (I mean,
the Spring of the year,) is the best Time, for purging, and Me∣dicining, the Naturall Body; So the Spring of Kingdoms, is the most proper Season, for the purging, and Rectifying, of Politick Bodies. There remaineth yet, an Objection, rather of Suspition, then of Reason; And yet such, as I think, maketh a great Impressi∣on, in the minds, of very wise, and well affected, Pesons; which is; That if way be given, to Mutation, though it be in taking away A∣buses, yet it may so acquaint Men, with sweetnesse of change, as it will undermine, the Stability, even of that, which is sound, and good. This, surely, had been a good, and true, allegation, in the Ancient Contentions, and Divisions, between the People, and the Senate, of Rome: where things were carried, at the Appetites of Multi∣tudes; which can never keep, within the Compasse, of any Mo∣deration: But thee Things, being with us, to have an orderly passage, under a King, who hath a Royall power, and appro∣ved Judgement; And knoweth, as well the Measure of Things, as the Nature of them; It is, surely, a needlesse, Fear. For they need not doubt, but your Majesty, with the advise of your Councell, will discern, what Things are intermingled, like the Tares, amongst the wheat; which have their Roots, so enwrapped, and entangled, as the one, cannot be pulled up, without en∣dangering the other; And what, are mingled, but as the Chaffe, and the Corn, which need but a Fanne, to sift, and sever them. So much therefore, for the first Point, of no Reformation, to be ad∣mitted, at all. For the Second Point, that there should, be but one form, o Discipline, in all Churches; And that, imposed, by necessity, of a Commandement, and prescript, out of the word of God; It is a Matter, Volumes have been compiled of, and therefore cannot receive a brief Redargution. I, for my part, do confesse, that in Revolving the Scriptures, I could never find, any such Thing; But that God, had left, the like Liberty, to the Church Government, as he had done to the Civill Government; To be varied, according to Time, and Place, and Accidents; which, neverthelesse, his high, and Divine, Providence, doth order, and dispose. For all Civil Governments, are restrained, from God, unto the general Grounds, of Justice, and Manners; But the Policies, and Forms, of them, are left Free; So that Monarchies, and Kingdoms; Senates, and Seignories, Popular States, and Communalties; are lawfull; And where they are planted, ought to be maintained inviolate. So likewise, in Church Matters, the Substance of Doctrine, is Immutable; And so are, the generall Rules, of Government; But for Rites, and Ceremonies; And for the particular Hierarchies, Po∣licies, and Disciplines, of Churches, they be left at large. And therefore, it is good, we return, unto the ancient Bounds of V∣nity, in the Church of God; which was, One Faith, One Baptisme; And not, one Hierarchy, one Discipline: And that we observe the
League of Christians, as it is penned by our Saviour, which is, in substance of Doctrine, this; He that is not with us, is against us: But in Things indifferent, and but of circumstance, this; He that is not against us, is with us. In these things, so as the gene∣rall Rules be observed; That Christs Flock be fed; That there be, a Succession, in Bishops, and Ministers, which are the Prophets of the new Testament; That here be a due, and reverent, use, of te power, of the Keyes; That those that preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel; That all things tend to edification; That all things be done, in order, and with decency; And the like; The rest, is left, to the Holy widome, and Spirituall Discretion, of the Master Builders, and ineriour Builders, in Christs Church; As it is excellently alluded, by that Father, that noted; That Christs Garment, was without Seam, and yet, the Churches Grment, was of divers Colours; And thereupon, setteth down for a Rule; In veste varietas sit, scissura non fit. In which Variety, neverthelesse, it is a safe, and wise, Course, to follow good Examples, and Presidents; But then, by the Rule of Imitation, and Example, to consider, not onely, which are Best, but which are the Likeliest; as namely, the Goverment, of the Church, in the purest Times, of the first Good Emperours, that embraced the Faith. For the Times of Persecution, before Temporall Princes, received our Faith; As they were, excellent Times, for Doctrine, and Manners; so they be unproper, and un∣like Examples, of outward Government, and Policie. And so much, for this Point: Now to the particular Points, of Controversies, or rather of Reformation. Circumstances, in the Government, of Bishops. FIrst therefore for the Government of Bishops, I for my part, not prejudging, the Presidents of other Reformed Churches, do hold it warranted, by the Word of God, and by the Practise, of the Ancient Church, in the better Times; And much more con∣venient, for Kingdoms, then Parity of Ministers, and Government by Synods. But then further, it is to be considered, that the Church, is not now to plant, or Build; But onely, to be proied, from Corruption; And to be repaired, and restored, in some decayes. For it is worth the Noting, that the Scripture saith; Translato Sacerdotio, necesse est, ut & Legis fiat Translatio. It is not possible, in respect of the great, and neer Sympathy, between the State Civill, and the State Ecclesiasticall, to make so main an alteration, in the Church, but it would have a perillous operation, upon the King∣doms: And therefore, it is fit, that Controversie, be in Peace, and Silence. But there be two Circumstances, in the Administration, of Bishops,
Wherein, I confesse, I could never be satisfied; The one, the sole Exercise, of their Authority; The other, the Deputation, of their Authority. For the First, the Bishop giveth Orders alone; Excommunicateth alone; Iudgeth alone. This seemeth, to be a Thing, almost, with∣out Example, in good Government; and therefore, not unlikely, to have crept in, in the degenerate, and corrupt, Times. We see, the greatest Kings, and Monarchs, have their Councells: There is no Temporall Court, in England, of the Higher sort, where the Authority, doth rest in one person: The Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and the Exchequer, are Benches, of a certain Number, of Judges. The Chancellour of England, hath an Assistance, of twelve Masters, of the Chancery. The Master of the Wards, hath a Councell, of the Court: So hath, the Chancellour of the Dutchy. In the Exchecquer Chamber, the Lord Treasurer, is joyned, with the Chancellour, and the Barons. The Masters of the Requests, are e∣ver, more then One. The Iustices of Assise, are two. The Lord Presidents, in the North, and in Wales, have Councells of divers; The Star-Chamber, is an Assembly, of the Kings Privy Counell, aspersed, with the Lords, Spirituall, and Temporall: So as in Courts, the principall Person, hath ever, eithe Colleagues, or Assessours. The like, is to be found, in other, well governed, Common-Wealths, abroad, where the Iurisdiction is yet more dispersed; As in the Court of Parliament of France; And in other places. No man will deny, but the Acts, that passe the Bishops Iurisdiction, are of as great Importance, as those, that passe, the Civil Courts; For Mens Souls, are more precious, then their Bodies, or Goods; And so are their Good Names. Bishops have their Infirmities, & have no Exception, from that generall Malediction, which is pronoun∣ced against all Men Living; Vae Soli, nam si ceciderit; &c. Nay, we see; that the fist Warrant, in Spirituall Causes, is directed to a Number; Dic Ecclesiae; which is not so, in Temporall Matters: And we see, that in generall Causes, of Church Government, there are, as well Assemblies, of all the Clergy, in Councells, as of all the States in Parliament: Whence should this sole exercise, of Jurisdiction come? Surely, I do suppose, and I think, pon good Ground; That Ab Initio non fuit ita: And that the Deans, and Chapters, were Councells, about the Sees, and Chairs, of Bishops, at the first; And were, unto them a Presbytery, or Consistory; And intermed∣led, not onely, in the Disposing, of their Revenues, and En∣dowments; but much more, in Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall. But, it is probable, that the Deans, and Chapters, stuck close to the Bishops, in Matters of Profit, and the World, and would not loose their Hold; But, in Matters of Jurisdiction, (which they accounted but Trouble, and Attendance,) they suffered the Bishops to en∣croach, and usurp; And so the one continueth, and the other is lost. And we see, that the Bishop of Rome, (Fas enim & ab
Hoste doceri; And, no question, in that Church, the first Institui∣ons, were excellent,) performeth, all Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, as in Consistory. And whereof consisteth tis Consisory, but of the Parish Priests, of Rome, which term themselves Cardinals, à Cardinibus Mundi; Because, the Bishop, pretendeth to be universall, over the whole World. And hereof again, we see many shadowes, yet remaining: As that the Dean, and Chapter, pro formâ, chooseth the Bishop, which is the Highest Point, of Iurisdiction. And that, the Bishop, when he giveth Orders, if there be any Ministers, casually present, cal∣leth them, to joyn with him, in Imposition of Hands, and some o∣ther Particulars. And therefore it seemeth to me, a Thing Rea∣sonable, and Religious, and according to the first Institution, that Bishops, in the greatest Causes, and those which require a Spirituall Discerning; Namely in Ordaining, Suspending, or Depriving Mini∣sters; In Excommunication, (being restored, to the true, an pro∣per Use; As shall be afterwards touched;) In sentencing, the Va∣lidity, of Marriages, and Legitimations, In Iudging Causes Crimi∣nous, as Symony, Incest, Blasphemy, and the like; Should not pro∣ceed sole, and unassisted. Which Point, (as I understand it,) is a Reformation, that may be planted, sine Strepiu, without any Perturbation, at all: And is a Matter, which will give strength to the Bishops; Countenance to the inferior Degrees of Pelates, or Mini∣sters; And the better Issue, or proceeding, to those Causes, tha shall pse. And, as I wish, this strength, given to the Bishops, by Councell, so it is not unworthy, your Majesties Consideration, whether you sall not think fit, to give strength, to the generall Councell, of your Clergy, (the Convocation House;) which was then restrained, when the State of the Clergy, was thought, a Suspected Part, to the Kingdome, in Regard, of their late Homage, to the Bishop of Rome; Which State, now, will give place to none, in their Loyalty, and Devotion, to your Majesty. For the Second Point; which is, the Deputation of their Authority; I see, no perfect, and sure Ground, for that neither; Being some∣what different, fom the Examples, and Rules, of Government. The Bishop, exerciseth his Iurisdiction, by his Chanceller, and Com∣missary, Officiall, &c. We see, in all Lawes, in the world, Offices o Confidence, and skill, cannot be put over, nor exercised by Deputy Except it be, especially, contained, in the Originall Graunt; And in that case, it is dutifull. And for Experience, there was never, any Chanceller of England, made a Deputy. There was never any Iudge, in any Court, made a Deputy. The Bishop, is a Iudge, and of a high Nature; whence commeth it, that he should depute Considering, that all Trust, and Confidence, (as was said,) is per∣sonall, and Inherent; And cannot, nor ought not, be transpo∣sed? Surely, in this again; Ab Initio non fuit sic; But it is proba∣ble, that Bishops, when they gave themselves, too much, to the
Glory of the World, and became Grandees in Kingdomes, and great Councellers to Princes, then did they deleague, their proper Iurisdicti∣ons, as Things, of too inferiour a Nature, for their Greatnesse; And then, after the Similitude, and Imitation, of Kings, and Counts Palatine, they would have their Chancellers, and Iudges. But that Example, of Kings, and Potentates, giveth no good De∣fence. For the Reasons, why Kings, administer, by their Iudges, although themselves are Supream Iudges, are two. The one, be∣cause the Offices of Kings are, for the most part, of Inheritance; And it is a Rule, in all Lawes, that Offices of Inheritance, are rather Matters, that Ground in Interest, then in Confidence; For as much, as they may fall upon Women, upon Infants, upon Lunaticks, and Ideots, persons incapable, to Execute Iudicature, in Person; And therefore, such Offices, by all Lawes, might, ever, be exercised, and administred, by Delegation. The Second Reason is, because of the Amplitude of their Jurisdictions; Which is a great, as either their Birth-right, from their Ancestours, or their Sword-right from God, maketh it. And therefore, if Moses, that was Governer, over no great People, and those collected together, in a Camp; And not scattred, in Provinces, and Cities; Himself of an extraordinary Spirit; Was, neverthelesse, not able, to suffice, and hold out, in person, to judge the People; But did, by the advise of Iethro, approved from God, substitute Elders, and Iudges, how much more, other Kings, and Princess? There is a Third Reason, likewise, though not much to the pre∣sent purpose; And that is; That Kings, either in respect of the Common-wealth, or of the Greatnesse of their own Patrimonies, are, usually, Parties in Suites; And then, their Iudges, stand indifferent, between Them, and the Subject. But in the Case of Bishops, none of these Reasons hold. For first, their Office is Elective, and for Life, and not Patrimoniall, or Hereditary: An Office, meerly of Con∣fidence, Science, and Qualification: And for the Second Reason, it is true, that their Iurisdiction, is Ample, and Spacious; And that their Time, is to be divided, between the Labours; As well, in the Word, and Doctrine, as in Government, and Iurisdiction. But yet, I do not see, (supposing, the Bishops Courts, to be used, incor∣ruptly, and without any indirect course held, to multiply Cau∣ses for gain of Fees;) But that the Bishop, might very well, for Causes of Moment, supply, his Iudiciall Function, in his own Person. For we see, before our Eyes, that one Chanceller of England di∣spatcheth, the Suites in Equity, of the whole Kingdome; which is not so much, by reason, of the Excellency, of that Rare Honoura∣ble Person, which now holdeth the place; But it was ever so, though, more, or lesse, burdenous, to the Suiter, as the Chancel∣ler, was more, or lesse, able, to give dispatch. And if Hold be taken, of that which was said before, that the Bishops Labour in the Word, must take up, a principall Part of his Time; so, I may say again, that Matters of State, have, ever, taken up, most of the
Chancellers Time; Having been, for the most part, Persons, upon whom the Kings, of this Realm, have most relyed, for Matters of Councell. And therefore, there is no Doubt, but the Bishop, whose Circuit is lesse ample, and the Causes, in Nature, not so multi∣plying; with the Help, of References, and Certificates, to, and from, fit Persons, for the better Ripening of Causes, in their mean pro∣ceedings; And such ordinary Helps, incident to Iurisdiction; May, very well, suffice his Office. But yet, there is another Help; For the Causes, that come before him, are these: Tithes; Legacies; Administrations, and other Testamentary Causes; Causes Matrimo∣niall; Accusations against Ministers, tending to their Suspension, De∣privation, or Degrading; Simony; Incontinency; Heresy; Blasphemy; Breach of the Sabboth; And other, like Causes, of Scandall. The first two of these, in mine Opinion, differ from the Rest; That is, Tithes, and Testaments; For those, be Matters of profit, and, in their nature, Temporall; Though, by a Favour, and Connivence, of the Temporall Iurisdiction, they have been allowed, and permit∣ted, to the Courts Ecclesiasticall: The one, to the end, the Clergy, might sue for that, that was their Sustentation, before their own Iudges; And the other, in a kind of Piety, and Religion, which was thought incident, to the performance, of Dead Mens Wills. And surely, for these two, the Bishop, in mine opinion, may, with lesse danger, discharge himself, upon his Ordinary Iudges. And I think, likewise, it will fall out, that those Suites, are in the grea∣test number. But for the rest, which require a Spirituall Science, and Discretion, in respect of their Nature or of the Scandall, it were reason, in mine Opinion, there were no Audience given, but by the Bishop Himself; He being also assisted, as was touched before: But it were necessary also, he were attended, by his Chanceller, or some others, his Officers, being learned, in the Civill Lawes; for his better Instruction, in Points, of Formality, or the Courses, of the Court: which if it were done, then were there lesse use, of the Of∣ficials Court; Whereof, there is now, so much Complaint. And Causes, of the Nature aforesaid, being onely drawn, to the Audi∣ence, of the Bishop, it would represse, frivoulous, and Prowling Suites; And give, a Grave, and Incorrupt, Proceeding, to such Causes, as shall be fit, for the Court. There is a Third Point also, not of Iurisdiction, but of Form of Proceeding, which may deserve Reformation. The rather, because it is contrary, to the Lawes, and Customes, of this Land, and State; which, though they do not rule those Proceedings, yet may they be advised with, for better Directions; And that is, the Oath ex Officio; Whereby Men, are enforced, to accuse themselves; And that, that is more, are sworn unto Blancks, and not unto Accusa∣tions, and Charges declared. By the Law of England, no man is bound, to accuse himself. In the Highest Cases, of Treason, Tor∣ture is used, for Discovery, and not for Evidence. In Capitall Mat∣ters, no Delinquents, Answer, upon Oath, is required; No, not per∣mitted.
In Criminall Matters, not Capitall, handled in the Star-Chamber; And in Causes of Conscience, handled in the Chancery, for the most part, grounded, upon Trust, and Secrecy, the Oath of the Party, is required. But how? Where there is an Accusation, and an Accuser, which we call, Bills of Complaint; (From which the Complainant cannot vary; And, out of the Compasse, of the which, the Defendant may not be examined,) Exhibited unto the Court, and, by Processe, notified, unto the Defendant. But to examin a Man, upon Oath, out of the Insinuation of Fame; Or out, of Accusations, secret, and undeclred; Though it have, some Coun∣tenance, from the Civill Law; yet it is, so opposite, Ex Diametro, to the Sense, and Course, of the Common-Law, as it may well re∣ceive, some Limitation. Concerning the Liturgy, the Ceremonies, and Subscription. FOr the Liturgy, great Respect, and Heed, would be taken, least, by inveighing against the Dumb Ministery, due Reve∣rence, be not withdrawn, from the Liturgy. For though the Gift of Preaching, be far above that of Reading; Yet, the Action of the Liturgy, is as High, and Holy, as that of the Sermon. It is said; Domus mea Domus Orationis Vocabitur: The House of Prayer, Not the House of Preaching: And whereas the Apostle saith; How shall Men call upon him, on whom they have not believed? And how shall they be∣lieve, unlesse they hear? And how shall they hear, without a Preacher? It appeareth, that as Preaching is the more Originall, so Prayer is the more Finall: As the Difference is, between the Seed, and the Fruit; For the Keeping of Gods Law, is the Fruit, of the Tea∣ching, of the Law; And Prayer, or Invocation, or Divine Service, or Liturgy; (For these, be but Varieties, of Termes;) Is the Imme∣diate Hallowing, of the Name of God; And the principall work, of the first Table; And, of the great Commandement, of the Love, of God. It is true, that the Preaching, of the Holy Word, of God, is the Sowing of the Seed; It is the Lifting up, of the Brazen Serpent; The Ministery of Faith; And the Ordinary Means, of Salvation; But yet, it is good, to take Example, how that the best Actions, of the Worship of God, may be extolled, excessively, and superstitiously. As the Extolling, of the Sacrament, bred the Superstition of the Masse; The Extolling of the Liturgy, and Prayers, bred the Superstition, of the Monasticall Orders, and Oraisons; And so, no doubt, Preaching likewise, may be magnified, and extolled, superstitiously; As if, all the whole Body, of Gods Worship, should be turned into an Ear. So as none, (as I suppose,) of sound Iudgement, will derogate from
the Liturgy, if the Form thereof, be, in all parts, agreeable, to the Word of God; The Example of the Primitive Church; And that holy Decency, which Saint Paul commendeth. And therfore, first, that there be a Set form of Prayer; And that, it be not lef, either to an Extemporall Form, or to an Arbitrary Form. Secondly, that it consist, as well of Laudes, Hymnes, and Thanksgivings, as of Petitions, Prayers, and Supplications. Thirdly, that the Form thereof be quickned, with some shortnesse, and Diversities, of Prayers, and Hymnes, and with some Interchanges, of the Voyce of the People, as well as of the Minister. Fourthly, that it adimit some Distincti∣ons, of Times, and Commemorations, of Gods principall Benefits, as well Generall, as particular. Fifthly, that Prayers, likewise, be approprited, to severall Necessities, and Occasions, of the Church. Sixthly, that there be a Form, lkewise, of Words, and Liturgy, in the Administration of the Sacraments, and in the Denouncing of the Censures, of the Church, and othe Holy Actions, and Solemnities: These things, I think, will not be much controverted. But for the Particular Exceptions, to the Liturgy, in form, as it now standeth; I think, divers, of them, allowing they were Iust, yet seem they not to be Weighty; Otherwise, then that nothing ought to be accounted Light, in Matters of Religi∣on, and Piety; As the Heathen himself could say; Etiam vultu sepè laediur Pietas. That the word, (Priest,) should not be con∣tinued, especially with Offence, the word, (Minister,) being all∣ready made familiar. This may be said, that it is a good Rule in Translation, never to confound that in one word, in the Translation, which is precisely distinguished, in two words in the Original; for doubt of Equivocation, and Traducing. And therefore, seeing the word , & , be alwaies distiguished, in the Original; And the one used for a Sacriicer, the orher for a Minister; The word, Priest, being made common to both, (whatsoever the De∣rivation be,) yet, in use, it confoundeth the Minister, with the Sacrificer. And for an Example, of this kind; I did ever allow, the Discretion, and Tendernesse, of the Rhemish Translation, in this Point; That finding, in the Originall, th word , and ne∣ver , do ever translate Charity, and never Love; Because of of the Indifferency, and Equivocation, of the word, with Impure Love. Touching the Absolution, it is not unworthy Consideration, whether it may not be thought, unproper, and unnecessary? For there are, but two sorts, of Absolution; Both supposing, an Obli∣gation, precedent: The one, upon an Excommunication, which is Religious, and Primitive; The other, upon Confession, and Penance, which is Superstitious, or, at least, Positive; And both Particula, neither Generall. Therefore, since the one is taken away, and the other hath his proper case, what doth a generall Absolution, wherein, there is neither Penance, nor Excommunication, prece∣dent? For the Church, never looseth, but where the Church hath
bound. And surely, I may think, This, at the first, was allowed, in a kinde, of spirituall Discretion; Because the Church thought, the people, could not be suddainly weaned, from their Con∣ceit of Assoyling; To which they had been, so long accustomed. For Confirmation, to my understanding, the State of the Questi∣on is, whether it be not, a matter mistaken, and altred by Time; And whether, that be not now made, a Subsequent to Baptisme, which was, indeed, an Inducement, to the Communion. For whereas in the Primitive Church, Children were examined of their Faith before they were admitted to the Communion, Time may seem to have turned it, to refer, as if it had been, to receive, a Con∣firmation of their Baptisme. For Private Baptisme, by Women, or Lay-Persons, the best Divines, do utterly condemne it; and I hear it not generally defended; And I have often marvailed, that where the Booke, in the Pre∣face, to Publicke Baptisme, doth acknowledge, that Baptisme, in the Practise, of the Primitive Church, was Anniversary, and but at certain Times; which sheweth, that the Primitive Church, did not attribute, so much, to the Ceremony, as they would break an outward, and generall, Order for it; The Booke, should after∣wards, allow of Private Baptisme; As if the Ceremony, were of that Necessity, as the very Institutiou, which committed Baptisme onely to the Ministers, should be broken, in regard, of the sup∣posed Necessity. And therefore this Point, of all others, I think, was, bt a Concessum proper Duritiam Cordis. For the Form, of Celebrating Matrimony, the Ring seemeth to many, even of vulgar Sense, and Understanding, a Ceremony not Grave; Especially, to be made, (as the words make it,) the essen∣tial Part, of the Action? Besides, some other of the words, are no∣ted, in Speech, to be, not so Decent, and Fit. For Musick in Churches; That there should be Singing of Psalmes, and Spirituall Songs, is not denyed: So the Question is, de Modo; Wherein, if a Man, will look attentively, into the Order, and Observation, of it, it is easie to discen, between the Wisedome, of the Institution, and the Exercise of the late Times. For first, there are no Songs, or Verses, sung, by the Quire, which are not supposed, by continuall use, to be so familiar with the People, as they have them without Booke; Whereby, the Sound, hurteth not the Understonding; And those, which cannot read, upon the Booke, are yet Pertakers of the Sense, and may follow it with their mind. So again, after the Reading of the Word, it was thought fit, there should be, some pause, for Holy Meditati∣on, before they proceeded, to the Rest, of the Service: Which Pause, was thought fit, to be filled, rather with some grave sound, then with a still silence; Which was the Reason, of the Playing upon the Organs, after the Scriptures read. All which was De∣cent, and tending to Edisicatirn. But then, the Curiosity of Devi∣sion, and Reports, and other Figures of Musick, have no Affinity,
with the Reasonable Service of God, but were added, in the more pompous Times. For the Capp, and Surplisse, since they be Things, in their Na∣ture, indifferent; And yet, by some, held superstitious; And that the Question is, between Science, and Conscience; It seem∣eth to fall, within the Compass, of the Apostles Rule; Which is, That the stronger, do descend, and yield, to the Weaker. Only, the Dfference is, that it will be materially said, that the Rule hold∣eth, between Privat Man, and Privat Man, But not between the Conscience, if a Private Man, and the Order, of a Church. But yet since the Question, at this time, is of a Tolleration; Not by Connivence, which may encourage Disobedience; But by Law, which may give  Liberty; It is good, again, to be advised, whether it fall not, within the Equity, of the Former Rule: The rather, because the Silencing of Ministers, by this Occasion, is, in this scarcity of good preacher, a punishment, that lighteth upon the People, as well as upon the Party. And for the Subscription, it seemeth to me, in the Nature of a Confession; And therefore, more proper to bind, in the Vnity of Faith; And to be urged, rather, for Articles of Do∣ctrine, then for Rites, and Ceremonies, and Points of ouward Govern∣ment. For howsoever, Politick Considerations, and Reasons of State, may require Vniformity, yet Christian, and Divine Grounds, look, chiefly, upon Vnity. Touching a Preaching Ministery. TO speak of a Learned Ministery; It is true, that the Worthiness, of the Pastours, & Ministers, is, of all other points of Religion, the most Summary; I do not say, the Greatest, but the most Effectual, towards the rest: But herein to my Understanding, while Men, go on, in Zeal, to hasten this work, they are not aware, of as great, or greater Inconvenience, then that, which they seek to remove. For while, they in veigh, against a Dumb Ministery, they make, too easie, and too promiscous, an Allowance of such, as they account Preachers; Having not Respect enough, to their Learnings, in o∣ther Arts, which are Handmaides, to Divinity; Not Respect e∣nough, to Years, except it be, in Case, of Extraordinary Gift; Not Respect enough, to the Gift it self, which, many Times, is none at all. For God forbid, that every Man, that can take unto him∣self Boldnesse, to speak an Hour together, in a Church upon a Text, should be admitted for a Preacher, though he mean never so well. I know, there is a great Latitude, in Gifts; And a great Va∣riety in Auditories, and Congregations; But yet so, as there is, Aliquid Infimum, below which, you ought not to descend. For you
must, rather, leave the Arke, to shake, as it shall please God, then put, unworthy Hands, to hold it up: And when we are, in Gods Temple, we are warned, rather, to put our Hands, upon our Mouth, then to offer, the Sacrifice, of Fooles. And surely, it may be justly thought, that amongst many Causes of Atheisme; which are mi∣serably met in our Age; As Schismes, and Controversies; Profane Scoffings, in Holy Matters; and others; It is not the least, that di∣vers do adventure, to handle the Word of God, which are unfit, and unworthy. And herein, I would have, no man, mistake me, as if I did extoll, curious, and affected, Preaching; which is, as much, on the other side, to be disliked; And breedeth Atheism, and Scandall, as well as the other; (For who, would not be offen∣ded, at one, that cometh into the Pulpit, as if he came upon the Stage, to play Parts, or Prizes?) Neither, on the other side, as if I would discourage any, who hath any tollerable Gift. But upon this Point, I ground three Considerations: First, whether it were not requisite, to renew, that good Exercise, which was practised, in this Church, some years; And afterwards, put down, by order, indeed, from the Church; In regard, of some Abuse thereof; Inconvenient, for those Times; And yet, against the Advice, and Opinion, of one, of the Greatest, and Gravest, Prelates, of this Land; And was commonly called Prophecying. Which was this; That the Ministers, within a Precinct, did meet, upon a week day, in some principall Town; where there was, some ancient, Grand Minister, that was President; And an Audi∣tory, admitted, of Gentlemen, or other Persons of Leysure. Then every Minister, successively, beginning with the youngest, did handle one, and the same part, of Scripture, spendng, several∣ly, some Quarter of an Hour, or better, And, in the whole, some two Hours: And so, the Exercise, being begun, and concluded, with Prayer; And the President, giving a Text, for the next meet∣ing, the Assembly was dissolved. And this was, as I take it, a Forthnights Exercise: which in my Opinion, was the best way, to frame, and train, up Preachers, to handle the Word of God, as it ought to be handled, that hath been practised. For we see, Oratours, have their Declamations; Lawyers, have their Moots; Logicians their Sophems; And every practise of Science, hath an Exercise of Erudition, and initiation, before Men come to the Life; Onely Preaching, which is the worthiest; And where∣in it is most danger to be amisse; Wanteth an Introduction, and is ventred, and rushed upon, at the first: But unto this Exercise of the Prophecy, I would wish, these two Additions; The one, that after this Exercise, which is, in some sort, Publick, there were, immediately, a Private Meeting, of the same Ministers; Where they might, brotherly admonish, the one, the other; And specially the elder sort, the younger, of any Thing, that had passed, in the Exercise, in Matter, or Manner, unsound, and uncomely; And, in a word, might, mutually, use such Advise,
Instruction, Comfort, or Encouragement, as Occasion might minister; For publick Reprehension, were to be debarred. The o∣ther Addition, that I mean, is, That the same Exercise, were u∣sed in the Vniversities, for young Divines, before they presumed to Preach, as well, as in the Countrey, for Ministers. For they have, in some Colledges, an Exercise, called a Common Place; Which can, in no Degree, be so profitable, being but the Speech, of one Man, at one time. And if it be feared, that it may be Oc∣casion, to whet Mens Speeches, for Controversies, it is easily re∣medied, by some strict Prohibition, that Matters of Controver∣sie, tending, any way, to the violating, or Disquieting, the Peace of the Church, be not handled or entred into; Which Prohibition, in regard, there is ever to be, a Grave person, Pre∣sident, or Moderatour, cannot be frustrate. The second Considera∣tion is, whether it were not convenient, there should be a more exact Probation, and Examination, of Ministers; Namely, that the Bishops, do not ordain alone, but by Advise; And then, that Ancient, Holy Orders of the Church might be revived: By the which, the Bishop did ordain Ministers, but at foure set times, of the year; which were called, Quatuor Tempora; which, are, now, cal∣led Ember-weeks; It being thought fit, to accompany, so High an Action, with generall Fasting, and Prayer, and Sermons, and all Holy Exercises; And the Names, likewise, of those, that were to be Ordained, were published, some dayes, before their Ordi∣nation; To the end, Exceptions might be taken, if just Cause were. The Third Consideration, is, that if the Case of the Church of England be, that where a Computation is taken, of all the Parochian Churches, (allowing the Vnion of such, as were too small, and adjacent;) And again, a Computation, to be taken, of the persons, who are worthy to be Pastours; And, upon the said Account, if it fall out, that there are many more Churches, then Pastours; Then of Necessity, Recourse must be had, to one of these Remedies; Either, that Pluralities, must be allowed; (specially, if you can by permutation, make the Benefices more compatible:) Or that there be Allowed Preachers, to have a more generall Charge, to supply, and serve, by turn, Parishes unfur∣nished: For that some Churches, should be provided, of Pastours, able to teach; and others wholy Destitute, seemeth, to me, to be against the Communion of Saints, and Christians; And against the Practice, of the Primitive Church.
Touching the Abuse, of Excommunication. EXcommunication, is the greatest Iudgement, upon Earth; Be∣ing that, which is ratified in Heaven; And being, a Precursory, or Prelusory Iudgement, of the great Iudgement, of Christ, in the End of the World. And therefore, for this, to be used unreverently, and to be made, an Ordinary Processe, to lackey up and down, for Fees, how can it be, without Derogation, to Gods Honour, and making, the power of the Keyes, contemptible? I know, very well, the Defence thereof, which hath no great Force; That it issu∣eth forth, not for the Thing it self, but for the Contumacy. I do not deny, but this Iudgement is, (as I said before,) of the Nature, of Gods Iudgements, of the which, it is a Modell. For, as the Iudge∣ment of God, taketh hold, upon the least sin, of the Impenitent; And taketh no hold, of the greatest Sin of the Convert, or Penitent: So Excommunication, may, in case, issue, upon the smallest Of∣fence; And, in Case, not issue, upon the greatest: But is this Contumacy, such a Contumacy, as Excommunication is now used for? For the Contumacy, must be such, as the Party, (as far, as the Eye, and Wisdom, of the Church, can discern,) standeth in State, of Re∣probation, and Damnation: As one, that for that time, seemeth given over, to Finall Impenitency. Upon this Observation, I ground two Considerations: The one, that this Censure, be restored, to the true Dignity, and Vse, thereof; which is, that it proceed not, but in Causes, of great weight; And that it be decreed, not by any Deputy, or Substitute, of the Bishop, but by the Bishop, in Per∣son; And not by him alone, but by the Bishop Assisted. The other Consideration, is, That in liew, thereof, there be given, to the Ecclesiasticall Court, some ordinary Processe, with such Force, and Coercion, as appertaineth; That so the Dignity, of so high a Sentence, being, retained, and the Necessity, of Mean Processe sup∣plyed, the Church, may be, indeed, restored, to the Ancient Vigour, and Splendour. To this purpose, joyn'd with some other Ho∣ly, and Good, purposes, was there a Bill, drawn in Parliament, in the Three and Twentieth Year, of the Raign, of the Queen decea∣sed; (which was the Gravest Parliament, that I have known; And the Bill, recommended, by the gravest, Counsellor of Estate, in Parliament; Though afterwards, it was stayed, by the Queenes, speciall Commandement, the Nature of those Things considered.
Touching, NON-RESIDENTS, And PLURALITIES. FOR Non-Rsidence, except it be, in Case of necessary Ab∣sence, it seemeth, an Abuse, drawn out of Covetousnesse, and Sloth: For that Men, should Live of the lock, that they do not Feed; Or of the Altar, at which they do not Serve; Is a Thing, that can hardly receive, just Defence. And to Exercse, the Office, of a Pastour, in Matter of the Word, and Doctrine, by Deputies; Is a Thing not warranted, as hath been touched before. The Questions upon this Point, do arise, upon the Cases of Exception, and Excusation; Which shall be thought Reasonable, and Suffici∣ent; And which not. For the Case of Chaplaines, let me speak that with your Majesties pardon, and with Reverence, towards the other Peres, and Grave Persons, whose Chaplaines, by Sta∣tutes, are priviledged: I should think, that the Attendance which Chaplaines give, to your Majesties Court, and in the Hses, & Families, of their Lords, were a juster Reason, why they should have no Benefice, then why, they should be quallified, to have Two: For, as it standeth, with Christian Policy, that such Atten∣dance, be, in no wise, neglected; Because that good, which en∣sueth thereof, to the Church of God, may exceed, or countervaile, that, which may follow of their Labours, in any, though never so large, a Congregation; So it were reasonable, that their Main∣tenance should Honourably, and Liberally, proceed thence, whence their Labours be imployed. Neither, are there wanting, in the Church, Dignities, and Peserments, not joyned, with any exact Cure of Soules; By which, and by the Hope of which, such Atten∣dants in Ordinary, (who ought to be, as for the most part they are, of the best Gifts, and Sort,) may be, further, encouraged, and rewaded. And as for Extraordinary Attendants, they may, very well, retain the Grace, and Countenance, of their places, and Duties, at times incident thereunto, without Discontinuance, or Non-Residence, in their Pastorall Charges. Next, for the Cae, of intending, Studies in the Vniversities, it will, more easily, receive an Answer; For Studies, do but serve, and tend, to the Practise, of those Studies; Ad therefore, for that, which is most Princi∣pall, and Finall, to be left undone, for the Attending, of that, which is Subservient, and Subministant, seemeth to be, against proportion, of Reason. Neither do I see, but that, they proceed right well, in all Knowledge, which do couple Study, with their Practice; And do not first Study altogether, and then Practise alto∣gether; And therefore, they may, very well, Study, at their Bene∣fices. Thirdly, for the Case, of Extraordinary Service of the
Church; As if some Pastour, be sent, to a Generall Councell; Or here, to a Convocation; And likewise, for the Case of Necessity, as in the particular, of Infirmity of Body, and the like; No man will contradict, but there may be, some Substitution, for such a Time. But the Generall Case, of Necessity, is the Case of Pluralities; the Want of Pastours, and Insufficiency, of Livings, considered, Posi∣to, that a Man, doth, faithfully, and incessantly, divide, his Labours, between two Cures; Which kinde of Necessity, I come now, to speak of, in the Handling, of Pluralities. For Pluralities, in Case, the Number, of Able Ministers, were suffi∣cient, and the Valew of Benefices were sufficient, then Pluralities, were, in no sort, tollerable. But we must take heed, we desire not Contraries. For to desire, that every Parish, should be furnished, with a sufficient Preacher; And to desire, that Pluralities, be, forthwith, taken away, is to desire Things contrary; Conside∣ring, De Facto, there are not, Sufficient Preachers, for every Pa∣rish: Whereto adde likewise, that there is not, Sufficient Living, and Maintenance, in many Parishes, to maintain a Preacher; And it maketh, the Impossibility, yet much the greater. The Reme∣dies, in Rerum Naturâ, are but Three; Vnion, Permutation, and Sup∣ply. Union, of such Benefices, as have the Living, too small, and the Parish not too great, and are Adjacent. Permutation, to make Benefices more compatible, though men be over ruled, to some losse, in changing a Better, for a Nearer. Supply, by Stipen∣dary Preachers, to be rewarded, with some Liberall Stipends, to supply, as they may, such places, which are unfurnished, of suf∣ficient Pastours. As Queen Elizabeth, amongst other, her Gracious Acts, did erect, certain of them, in Lancashire; Towards which Pensions, I see no reason, but Reading Ministers, if they have rich Benefices, should be charged. Touching the Provision, for sufficient Maintenance, in the Church. TOuching Church Maintenance, it is well to be weighed, what is, Iure Divino, and what, Iure Positivo. It is a Constitution, of the Divine Law, from which humane Lawes, cannot derogate; That those, which feed the flock, should live of the Flock; That those, that serve, at the Altar, should live of the Altar; That those, which dispense spirituall things, should Reap Temporall Things; Of which, it is also an Appendix, that the Proportion, of this Maintenance, be not small, or necessitous, but Plentifull, and Liberall. So then, that all the Places, and Offices, of the Church, be provided, of such a Dota∣tion, that they may be maintained, according to their severall
Degrees, is a Constitution, permanent, and perpetuall: But for particu∣larity, of the Endowment, whether it should consist of ithes, or Lands, or Pensions, or Mixt, might make a Question, of Convenience, but no Question, of precise Necessity. Again, that the Case, of the Church, de facto, is such, that there is want, in the Church, of Patri∣mony, is confessed. For the Principall Places, namely, the Bi∣shops Livings, are, in some particulars, not sufficient; And there∣fore, enforced, to be supplyed, by Tolleration of Commendams, Things, of themselves, unfit, and ever held of no good Report. And as for the Benefices, and Pastours Places, it is manifest, that very many of them, are very weak, and penurious. On the o∣ther side, that there was a Time, when the Church, was rather burthened, with Superfluity, then with Lack, that is likewise ap∣parent; But it is long since; So as the Fault, was in others, the Want redoundeth unto us. Again, that it were to be wished, that Impropriations, were returned to the Church, as the most Pro∣per, and Naturall, Endowments thereof, is a Thing likewise, wher∣in Mens Judgements, will not much vary. Neverthelesse, that it is an Impossibility, to proceed now, either to their Resumption, or Redemption, is as plain on the other side. For Men are stated in them, by the Highest Assurance, of the Kingdome, which is, Act of Parliament; And the value of them, amounteth, much above ten Subsidies: And the Restitution must, of Necessity, passe their Hands, in whose Hands they now are, in possession, or Interest. But of these things, which are manifestly true, to infer, and ground, some Concluions. First, in mine own Opinion, and Sense, I must confesse, (let me speak it with Reverence,) that all the Parliaments, since 27o. and 31o. of H. 8. (who gave away Im∣propriations, from the Church,) seem to me, to stand, in a sort, ob∣noxious, and obliged, to God, in Conscience, to do somewhat for the Church; To reduce the Patrimony thereof, to a Competency. For since, they have debarred, Christes Wife, of a great part, of her Dowry, it were Reason, they made her, a competent Ioynture. Next to say, that Impropriations, should be onely charged; That carrieth, neither Possibility, nor Reason. Not Possibility, for the Reasons touched before: Not Reason, because, if it be concei∣ved, that if any other Person be charged, it should be a Re-charge, or Double-charge, in as much, as he payeth Tithes, already, that is a Thing mistaken. For it must be remembred, that as the Realm, gave Tithes, to the Church; So the Realm, since again, hath given Tithes, away from the Church, unto the King: As they may give their 8th Sheaf, or Ninth Sheaf. And therefore, the fist Gift, be∣ing evacuated, it cannot go, in defeazance, or discharge, of that perpetuall Bond, wherewith Men are bound, to maintain Gods Ministers. And so, we see, in Example, that divers Godly, and well Disposed, People, not Impropriatours, are content, to encrease, their Preachers Livings; which, though in Law, it be but a Benevo¦lence, yet, before God, it is a Conscience. Further, that Impropri∣ations,
should not be, somewhat, more deeply, charged, then o∣ther Revenues, of like value, me thinks, cannot well be denied; Both, in regard, of the Ancient claim of the Church; And the In∣tention, of the first Giver; And again, because they have passed, in valuation, between Man and Man, somewhat, at the lesse rate, in regard, of the said pretence, or Claim, of the Church, in Conscience, before God. But of this Point, touching Church-Maintenance, I do not think fit, to enter into further Particularity, but reserve the same, to a fitter Time. Thus have I, in all Humblenesse, and Sincerity of Heart, to the best of my understanding, given your Majesty, Tribute, of my Cares, and Cogitations, in this Holy Businesse; So highly tending to Gods Glory, your Majesties Honour, and the Peace, and Welfare, of your States. Insomuch, as I am perswaded, that the Papists them∣selves, should not need, so much, the Severity of Penall Lawes, if the Sword of the Spirit, were better edged, by strengthening the Authority, and suppressing the Abuses, in the Church. To conclude, renewing my most Humble Submission, of all that I have said, to your Majesties, most High Wisdome; And again, most humbly, craving pardon, for any Errours, committed in this Writing; which, the same weakness, of Judgement, that suffered me to commit them, would not suffer me to discover them; I end, with my Devout, and Fervent, Prayer to God; That, as he hath, made your Majesty, the Corner-stone, in joyning, your two Kingdomes; So you may be also, as a Corner-stone, to unite, and knit together, these Differences, in the Church, of God; To whose Heavenly Grace, and never erring, Direction, I commend your Ma∣jesties Sacred Person, and all your Doings.
CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS, TOUCHING THE PLANTATION IN IRELAND PRESENTED TO His Maiesty, 1606, IT seemeth God, hath reserved, to your Majesties Times, two Works; which amongst the Works of Kings, have the supream Preheminence; The Vnion, and Plantation, of Kingdoms. For although it be a great Fortune, for a King, to deliver, or recover, his Kingdom, from long continued Calamities; yet, in the Judgement of those, that have distinguished, of the De∣grees, of Soveraign Honour; To be a Founder, of Estates, or King∣doms, excelleth all the rest? For, as in Arts, and Sciences, to be the first Inventer, is more, then to Illustrate, or Amplifie: And as, in the Works of God, the Creation, is greater, then the Preservation; And as, in the Works of Nature, the Birth, and Nativity, is more then
the Continuance: So in Kingdoms, the first Foundation, or Plantati∣on, is of more Noble Dignity, and Merit, then all that followeth. Of which Foundations, there being but two Kinds; The first that maketh One of More; And the Second, that maketh, One of None; The Latter, resembling, the Creation of the World, which was, De Nihilo ad Quid; And the Former, the Edification of the Church, which was de Multiplici ad Simplex, vel ad unum: It hath pleased the Divine Providence, in singular Favour to your Majesty, to put, both these Kinds of Foundations, or Regenerations, into your Hand; The one, in the Vnion, of the Island, of Britain; The other, in the Plantation of Great and Noble Parts, of the Island, of Ireland: Which Enterprises, being once happily accomplished; Then that, which was uttered, by One of the Best Oratours, in one of the Worst verses; O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam: May be, far more truly, and properly, applied to your Majesties Act: Natam te Rege Britanniam; Natam Hiberniam. For He spake, unproper∣ly, of Deliverance, and Preservation; But, in these Acts of yours, it may be verified, more naturally. For indeed, Vnions, and Plantations, are the very Nativities, or Birth-Dayes of Kingdomes. Wherein, likewise, your Majesty hath yet a Fortune extraordina∣ry, and Differing, from former Examples, in the same Kind. For most Part of Vnions, and Plantations, of Kingdoms, have been foun∣ded, in the ffusion of Bloud; But your Majesty shall build, in Solo puro, & in Areâ purâ, that shall need no Sacrifices Expiatory, or Bloud; And therefore, (no doubt,) under a Higher, and more As∣sured, Blessing. Wherefore, as I adventured, when I was lesse known, and lesse particularly bound, to your Majesty, then since, by your undeserved Favour, I have been, to write somewhat touching the Vnion; which your Majesty was pleased to accept; And which since, I have, to my power, seconded by my Travels; Not onely, in Discourse, but in Action: So I am, thereby, encou∣raged, to do the like, touching this Matter of Plantation; Hoping, that your Majesty, will, through the weakness of my Ability, is∣cern the strength of my Affection; And the Honest, and fervent, Desire I have, to see your Majesties Person, Name, and Times, Blessed, and Exalted, above those, of your Royall Progenitours. And I was, the rather, invited this to do, by the Remembrance, that when the Lord chief Iustice, deceased, Popham, served in the place, wherein I now serve; And afterwards, in the Atturney Place, he laboured greatly, in the last Project, touching the Plan∣tation of Munster. Which neverthelesse, as it seemeth, hath gi∣ven more light, by the Errours thereof, what to Avoyd; Then, by the Direction of the same, what to Follow. First therefore, I will speak somewhat, of the Excellency of the Work; And then, of the Means to compass, and effect it. For the Excellency of the Work, I will divide it, into four Noble, and Worthy, Consequences, that will follow thereupon. The First of the four, is Honour; whereof I have spoken enough alrea∣dy,
were it not, that the Harp of Ireland, puts me in mind, of that Glorious Embleme, or Allegory, wherein the wisdome of Anti∣quity, did figure, and shadow out, works of this Nature. For the Poets feigned, that Orpheus by the vertue, and sweetnesse, of his Harp, did call, and assemble, the Beasts, and Birds, of their Nature, wild, and savage, to stand about him, as in a Theater; Forgetting their Affections, of Fierceceness, of Lust, and of Prey; and listening to the Tunes, and Harmonies, of the Harp: and soon after, called likewise the Stones, and the Woods, to re∣move, and stand in order about him: which Fable, was anci∣ently interpreted, of the Reducing, and Plantation, of Kingdoms; when People of Barbarous Manners, are brought, to give over, and discontinue, their Customs, of Revenge, and Blood, and of dis∣solute Life, and of Theft, and of Rapine; And to give Ear, to the wisdome of Lawes, and Governments, whereupon, imme∣diately followeth, the Calling of Stones, for Building, and Ha∣bitation; and of Trees, for the seats of Houses, Orchards, and Enclosures, and the like. This Work, therefore, of all other, most Memorable, and Honourable, your Majesty hath now in Hand; specially, if your Majesty joyn, the Harp of David, in casting out, the Evill Spi∣rit, of Superstition; with the Harp of Orpheus, in casting out De∣solation, and Barbarisme. The second Consequence, of this Enterprise, is the Avoiding, of an Inconvenience, which commonly attendeth upon Happy Times, and is an evill effect, of a good Cause. The Revolu∣tion of this present Age, seemeth to encline to Peace, almost generally in these Parts; And your Majesties, most Christian, and vertuous, affections, do promise the same, more specially, to these your Kingdomes. An effect, of Peace, in Fruitfull Kingdoms, (where the stock of People, receiving no Consumption, nor Dimi∣nution, by warre, doth continually multiply, and encrease;) must, in the end, be a Surcharge, or Overflow of People, more then the Territories can well maintain; Which, many times, insinua∣ting a generall Necessity, and want of Means, into all estates; Doth turn, Externall Peace, into Internall Troubles, and Seditions. Now what an excellent Diversion, of this Inconvenience, is ministred, by Gods Providence, to your Majesty, in this Planta∣tion of Ireland? wherein, so many Families, may receive, Su∣stentations, and Fortunes; And the Discharge of them, also, out of England, and Scotland, may prevent many Seeds of Future perturbations? So that it is, as if a Man were troubled, for the Avoidance of water, from the place, where he hath built his House; And afterwards, should advise with himself, to cast those waters, and to turn them, into Fair Pools, or Streams, for plea∣sure, provision, or use. So shall your Majesty, in this Work, have a double Commodity; In the Avoidance of People here, and in Making use of them there.
The third Consequence, is the great Safety, that is like to grow, to your Majesties Estate, in generall, by this Act; In discomfit∣ing all Hostile Attempts of Forreiners; which the Weaknesse of that Kingdome, hath heretofore invited: Wherein, I shall not need, to fetch Reasons, afar off, either for the generall, or particu∣lar. For the generall, because nothing is more evident, then that, which one of the Romans, said of Peloponnesus; Testudo intra tegumen tuta est. The Tortoise is safe within her shell: But, if she put forth, any part of her Body, then it endangereth, not onely the part that is so put forth, but all the Rest. And so, we see in Ar∣mour, if any part be left naked, it puts in hazard the whole Per∣son. And, in the Naturall Body of Man, if there be any weak, or Affected, part, it is enough, to draw Rheums, or Maligne Hu∣mours unto it, to the Interruption, of the Health, of the whole Body. And for the Particular, the Example is too Fresh, that the in∣disposition of that Kingdome, hath been a contial Attractive, of Troubles, and Infestations, upon this Estate; and though your Majesties Greatnesse, doth, in some sort, discharge this Fear, yet with your encrease of Power, it cannot be, but Envy is like∣wise encreased. The fourth, and last Consequence, is the great Profit, and Strength, which is like to redound, to your Crown, by the wor∣king, upon this unpolished Part thereof: Whereof, your Majesty, (being in the strength of your years,) are like, by the good plea∣sure of Almighty God, to receive, more then the First Fruits; And your Posterity, a growing, and Springing Veine of Riches, and Power. For this Island, being another Britain; As Britain was said, to be another World; Is endowed, with so many Dowries of Nature, (considering the Fruitfullnesse of the Soil, the Ports, the Rivers, the Fishings, the Quarries, the Woods, and other Materialls; And specially, the Race, and Generation of Men, va∣liant, hard, and active) As it is not easie, no not upon the Conti∣nent, to find, such Confluence of Commodities, if the Hand of Man, did joyn with the Hand of Nature. So then for the Excellency, of the work, in point of Honour, Policy, Safety, and Vtility, here I cease. For the Means, to effect this Work; I know your Majesty shall not want, the Information of Persons expert, and industrious, which have served you there, and know the Region: Nor the Advise, of a Grave, and Prudent Counsell, here; which know the Pulses, of the Hearts, of People, and the wayes, and Passages, of conducting great Actions: Besides that, which is a∣bve all; which is, that Fountain, of Wisdome, and Universa∣lity, which is in your self: yet notwithstanding, in a thing, of so publick a Nature, it is not amisse, for your Majesty, to hear va∣riety of Opinion. For as Demosthenes saith well; The good Fortune, of a Prince, or State, doth, sometimes, put a good Motion, into a Fools Mouth. I do think therefore, the Means, of accomplishing this
Work consisteth of two principall Parts. The first, the Invita∣tion, and Encouragement, of Vndertakers: The second, the Order, and Policy of the Project, it self. For as in all Engines of the Hand, there is somewhat, that giveth the Motion and Force, and the rest, serveth to guide, and govern, the same: So it is in these Enterprises, or Engines, of Estate. As for the former of these, there is no doubt, but next unto the Providence, and inger of God, which writeth these Vertuous, and Excellent, De∣sires, in the Tables, of your Majesties Heart, your Authority, and Affection, is Primus Motor, in this Cause: And therefore, the more strongly, and fully, your Majesty shall declae your self in it, the more shall you quicken, and animate, the whole procee∣ding. For this is is an Action, which as the worthinesse of it, doth bear it, so the Nature of it requireth it, to be carried in some Heighth of Reputation; And fit, in mine Opinion, for Pulpits, and Parliaments, and all places, to ring, and resound of it. For that, which may seem Vanity, in some Things; (I mean, Matter of Fame;) is of great efficacy, in this Case. But now, let me descend, to the inferiour Sphears, and speak, what Cooperation, in the Subjects, or undertakers, may be raised, and kindled, and by what Means. Therefore, to take plain Grounds, which are the surest; All Men are drawn into Actions, by three Things, Pleasure, Honour, and Profit. But before I pur∣sue the three Motives, it is fit, in this place, to enterlace, a word, or two, of the Quality, of the Vndertakers; wherein my Opinion simply is, that if your Majesty, shall make these Portions of Land, which are to be Planted, as Rewards, or as Suits, or as Fortunes for those, that are in want; And are likest to seek after them; That they will not be able, to go through, with the Charge, of good substantiall Plantations; But will Desicere, in Opere medio; And then, this Work will succeed, as Tacitus saith; Acribus iiis, Fine incurioso. So that, this must rather be an Adventure, fr such as are full; Then a setting up, of those, that are low of Means; For those Men, are fit, indeed, to perform these Vndertakings; Which were fit, to purchase dry Reversions, after Lives, or years; Or such, as were fit, to put out Money, upon long Returns. I do not say, but that I think, the Vndertakers themselves, will be glad to have some Captains, or Men of Service, intermixed a∣mong them, for their safety; But I speak, of the Generality of Vn∣dertakers; which, I wish, were Men of Estate, and Plenty. Now therefore, it followeth well to speak, of the aforesaid three Motives: For it will appear the more, how necessary it is, to allure, by all means, Vndertakers; Since those Men, will be least it, which are like to be, most in Appetite, of themselves; And those most fit, which are like, least to desire it. First therefore, for Pleasure, in this Region or Tract of Soyl, there is no Warm Winters, nor Orenge Trees, nor strange Beasts, or Birds, or other Points of Curiosity, or Pleasure, as there are in the Indies,
nd the like; So as, there can be found, no Foundation, made upon Mater of Pleasure, otherwise, then that the very Desire of Novely, and Experiment, in some stirring Natures, may work some∣what; And therefore, it is the other two Points, of Honour, and Prfit, whereupon we are wholly to rst. For Honour, or Counenance, if I shall mention to your Majsty, whether, in wisdome, you shall think convenient, the better to expresse your Affection to the Enterprise, and for a Pledge there of, to adde he Earldome of Vlster, to the Princes Titles; I shall, but learn it, out of the practice, of King Edward the First; Who first used the like course, as a mean, the better to restrain, the untrey of Wales: And, I take it, the Prince of Spain, hath the Addition, of a Province, in the Kingdome of Naples; And other Prsients, I think, there are, and it is like, to put more life, and Encuragement, into the Vndertakers. Also, considering the large Territories, which are to be Planted, it is not unlike, your Majesy will think, of raising some Nobi∣liy there; which, if it be done meerly, upon new Titles, of Dignity, havig no manner of Reference to the Old; And if it be done al∣so, without putting, to many Portions, into one Hand; And lastly, if it be done, without any great Franchises, or Commands; I do not see, any Perill, can ensue thereof: As, on the other side, it may draw some Persons, of great Estate, and Means, into the A∣cion, o the great Furtherance, and Supply, of the charges hereof. And lastly, for Knighthood, to such Persons, as have not attai∣ned it; Or otherwise, Knighthood, with some new Difference, and Precedence; It may, no doubt, work with Many. And if any Man think, that these Things, which I propound, are A∣liquid nimis, for the roportion, of this Action; I confesse, plain∣ly, that if your Majesty, will have it, really, and effectually, per∣formed; My Opinion is, you cannot bestow too much Sunshine upon it. For Lunae Radiis non maturescit Botrus. Thus much for Honour. For Prit, it will consist in Three parts: Fist, the asie Rates, that your Majesty, shall be pleased, to give, the Vndertakers of the Land, they shall receive. Secondly, the Liberties, which you may be pleased, to con∣er pon them. When I speak of Liberties, I mean not, Liber∣tes of urisdiction; As Counties palatine, or the like; (which it seemeth, hath been the Errour, of the ancient Donations, and Platations, in that Counry;) But I mean, only Liberties, tending to Commodity: As Libery, to transport, any of the Commodities, growing upon the Counry, new Planted; Liberty to Import, from hence, all Things, appertaining to their necessary use, Custome free; Liberty, to take Timber, or other Materialls, in yor Maje∣sties Woods, there, and the like. The Third is, Ease of Charge; That the whole Masse, of
Charge, doth not rest, upon the Private Purse, of the Under∣takers. For the Two Former of these, I will pass them over; because, in the Project, which with good diligence, and providence, hath been presented to your Majesty by your Ministers of that Kingdome, they are, in my Opinion, well handled. For the Third, I will never despaire, but that the Parliament, of England, if it may perceive, that this Action, is not a Flash, but a Solid, and Setled pursuit, will give aid, to a Worke, so Religious, so Politique, and so Profitable. And the Distribution of Charge, (if it be oserved,) falleth, naturally, into Three Kindes of Charge; And every, of those Charge, respectively, ought to have, his pro∣per Fountain, and Issue. For as, there proceedeth, from your Majesties Royall Bouny, and Munificence, the Gift of the Land, And the other Materialls; Together with the Endowment of Liberties; And as the Charge, which is Private; As Building of Houses, Stcking of Grounds, Victuall, and the like, is to rest upon the Particular Vn∣dertakers; So whatsoever is Publicke; As Building of Churches, Walling of Townes, Town-Houses, Bridges, Cawsies, or High-wayes, and the like; Ought not, so properly, to lye upon particular Persons, but to come, from the Publicke Estate, of this, Kingdom; To which, this Work, is like to return, so great an Addition, of Glory, Strength, and Commodity. For the Project it self, I shall need to speak the lesse, in regard, it is so considerately digested already, for the County of Tyrone; And Therefore, my Labour shall be, but in those Things, where∣in, I shall either Adde to, or Dissent from, that which is set down; Which will include, Five Points, or Articles. First, hey mention a Commission, for this Plantation; Which, of all Things, is most necessary, both to Direct, and Appease, Controversie, and the like. To this I adde Two Propositions. The one, that which, per∣haps, is meant, though not expressed; That the Commissioners, should, for certain times, reside, and abide, in some Habitable Town, of Ireland, near in Distance, to the Country, where the Plantation shall be; To the end; Both that they may be more at Hand, for the Execution of the Parts, of their Commission; And withall, it is like, by drawing of Concourse of People, and Trades Men, to such Townes, it will be some Help, and Commodi∣ty, to the Vndertakers, for Things, they shall stand in need of. And likewise, it will be a more safe place of Receit, and Store, wherein to Unlade, and Deposite, such Provisions, as are after to be employed. The Second is, that your Majesty, would make a Correspon∣dency, between the Commission there, and a Councell of Plantation, here. Wherein I warrant, my self, by the President, of the like Councell, of Plantation, for Virginia; An enterprise, in my Opi∣nion, differing as much from this, as Amadis de Gaule, differs from
Caesars Commentaries. But when I speak of a Councell of Plantati∣on I mean, some Persons, chosen, by way of Reference; Upon whom the Labour, may rest; To prepare, and report, Things, to the Councell of Estate, here, that concern that Businesse. For al∣though, your Majesty, have a grave, and sufficient, Councell in Ieland: From whom, and upon whom, the Commissioners, are to have Assistance, and Dependance; yet that supplies not the Purpose, whereof I speak. For considering, that upon the Advertisements, as well of the Commissioners, as of the Councell of Ireland, it self; There will be many Occasions, to crave Directi∣ons, from your Majesty, and your Privy Councell here, which are busid with a world of Affaires; It cannot but give greater Ex∣pedition, and some better Perfection, unto some Directions, and Resolutious; If the Matters, may be considered of afore hand, by such, as may have a continuall Care, of the Cause. And it will be, likewise, a Comfort, and Satisfaction, to some Principall Vnderta∣kers, if they may be admitted of that Councell. Secondly, there is a Clause, wherein the Vndertakers, are restrain∣ed, that they shall execute the Plantation, in Person; from which I must dissent, if I will consent, with the Grounds, I have al∣ready taken. For it is not probable, that Men, of great Meanes, and Plentifull Estates, will indure the Travaile, Diseasements, and Adventures, of going thither in Person; But rather, I suppose, Many will undertake Portions, as an Advancement, for their Younger Children, or Kinsolks; Or for the Sweetnesse, of the Ex∣pectation, of a great Bargaine, in the end, when it is overcome. And therefore, it is like, they will imploy Sons, Kinsfolks, Servants, or Tenants; And yet be glad, to have the Estate, in themselves. And, it may be, some again, will joyn their Purses, together; And make, as it were, a Partner-ship, or Ioynt-Adventure; And yet man forth, some one Person, by consent, for the Executing of the Plantation. Thirdly, there is a Main Point, wherein, I fear, the Project, made, hath two much of the Line, and Compass; And will not be, so naturall, and easie, to Execute; Nor yet, so Politick, and Convenient: And that is, that the Buildings, should be, Sparsim, upon every Portion; And the Castle, or Principall House, should draw the Tenements, and Farmes about it, as it were into Villages, Hamlets, or ndships; And that there should be, only, Foure Corporate Townes, for the Artificers, and Trades-Men. My Opinion is, that the Building, be altogether in Townes, to be compounded, as well of Husbandries, as of Arts. My Reasons are. First, when Men come into a Country, Vast, and Void of all Things necessary, for the use of Mans Life; If they set up toge∣ther, in a Place, one of them, will the better supply, the wants of another Work Folkes of all sorts, will be the more continually on work, without Losse of Time; When, if Work faile in one
Place, they may have it fast by; The Wages will be mae, more passible, for Carriages, to those Seats, or Townes, then they can be, to a Number of dispersed, Solitary, Places; And infinite other, helps, and Easements, scarcely to be comprehended, in Cogitation, will ensue, in Vicinity, and Society of People; Whereas, if they build scattered, (as is projected,) Every Man, must have a Cornu-Copia, in himself, for all Things he must use; Which cannot but breed, much Difficulty, and no lesse Wast. Secondly, it will draw out, of the Inhabited Country, of Ireland, Provisions, and Victualls, and many necessaries, because they shall be sure of Utterance; Whereas, in the Dispersed Habitations, e∣very Man must reckon, onely, upon that, that he brings with him; As they do, in Provisions, of Ships. Thirdly, the Charge of Bawnes, as they call them, to be made, about every Castle, or House, may be spared, when the Habitations, shall be congregated, onely into Towns. And lastly, it will be a Means, to secure the Country, against fu∣ture Perils, in case, of any Revolt, and Defection. For, by a slight Fortification, of no great Charge, the danger of any Attempts, of Kierns, and Sword-Men, may be prevented: The Omission of which Point, in the last Plantation, of Munter, made the Work of years, to be but the Spoyle of Dayes. And if any Man think, it will Draw People, too far off; from the Grounds, they are to labour; It is to be understood, that the Number, of the Towns, be encreased ac∣cordingly; And likewise, the Situation of them, be, as in the Cen∣ter, in respect of the Portions assigned to them. For in the Cham∣pian Countries of England, where the Habitation, useth to be in Towns, and not dispersed, it is no new Thing, to go two Miles off, to Plow, part of their Grounds: And two Miles Compasse, will take up a good Deal of Countrey. The fourth Point, is a Point, wherein, I shall differ, from the Project, rather in Quantity, and Proportion, then in Matter. There is allowed to the undertaker, within the five years of Restraint, to alien a third part, in Fee Farm; And to Demise, another for fourty years; which, I fear, will mangle the Portions; And, will be, but a shift, to make money, of two parts: Whereas, I am of Opinion, the more, the first undertaker, is forced to keep, in his own Hands, the more the Work is like to prosper. For First, the Person, lia∣ble, to the State here, to perform the Plantation, is the Immediate Vndertaker. Secondly, the more, his Profit dependeth, upon the Annuall, and Springing, Commodity; The more Sweetnesse, he will find, in putting forward, Manurance, and Husbanding of the Grounds; And therefore is like to take more care of it. Thirdly, since the Natives, are excluded, I do not see, that any persons, are like to be drawn over, of that Condition, as are like to give Fines, and un∣dertake the Charge of Building: For I am perswaded, that the People transported, will consist of Gentlemen, and their Servants; And of Labourers, and Hindes; And not of Yeomen, of any wealth;
And therefore, the Charge of Building, as well of the Tenements, and Farmes, as of the Capitall Houses, themselves, is like to rest, upon the Principall Vndertakers, which will be recompenced, in the end, to the full, and with much advantage, if they make no long Estates, or Leases. And therefore this Article, to receive some Qualification. Fifthly, I should think it requisite, that Men of Experience, in that Kingdome, should enter, into some particular Consideration, of the Charges, and Provisions, of all kindes, that will be incident to the Plantation; To the end, that thereupon, some Advise, may be taken, for the Furnishing, and Accommodating them, most conveniently; Aiding private Industry, with publick Care, and Order. Thus I have expressed to your Majesty, those simple, and weak Cogitations, which I have had in my Self, touching this Cause; Wherein, I most humbly desire your pardon, and gracious ac∣ceptance, of my good Affection, and Intention. For I hold it for a Rule, that there belongeth to great Monarchs, from Faithull Servants, not onely the Tribute of Duty, but the Oblations of cheer∣fulnesse of Heart. And so I pray the Almighty, to blesse this great Action, with your Majesties Care; And your Care; with Happy Successe.
ADVICE TO THE KING, TOUCHING Mr. SUTTONS ESTATE. May it please Your MAIESTY; I Find it, a Positive Precept, of the Old Law; That there should be n Sacrifice without Salt. The Morall whereof, (besides the Ceremony,) may be; That God is not pleased, with the Body of a good Intenti∣on; Except it be seasoned, with that Spirituall Wise∣dome, and Iudgement, as it be not easily Subject, to be corrupted, and perverted. For Salt, in the Scripture, is a Figure, both of Wisedome, and Lasting. This commeth into my Mind, upon this Act of Mr. Sutton; Which seemeth to me, as a Sacrifice without Salt; Having the Materials, of a Good Intention, but not powdred, with any such Ordinances, and Institutions, as may pre∣serve the same from turning Corrupt; Or, at least, from becom∣ming Vnsavoury, and of little Vse. For though, the Choice of the Feoffees, be of the best; yet neither can they alwayes live;
And the very Nature, of the Work it self, in the vast, and unf, Proportions thereof, being apt to provoke a Mis-imployment; It is no Diligence of theirs, (except there be a Digression from that Modell,) that can excuse it, from running the same way, that Gifts of like Condition, have heretofore done. For to desig the Charter-house, a Building fit for a Princes Habitaion, for an Hospitall; Is all one, as if one should give in Almes, a Rich Embroydeed loak, to a Beggar. And certainly, a Man may see, Tanquam quae Oculs Cernuntur, that if such an Edifice, with Six Thousand pounds Reve∣nue, be erected into one Hospitall; It will, in small time, degene∣rate, to be made a preferment, of some great Person, to be Master, and he to take all the sweet, and the Poor, to be stinted, and take but the Crums: As it comes to passe, in divers Hospitals, of this Realm; Which have but the Names of Hospitalls, and are but weal∣thy Benefice, in respect of the Mastership; But the Poor, which is the Propter quid, little relieved. And the like, hath been the For∣tune, of much of the Almes, of the Roman Religion, in the Great Foundations; which being begun in Vain-Glory, and Ostentati∣on have had their Judgement, upon them, to end in Corruption, and Abuse. This Meditation, hath made me presume, to write these few Lines to your Majesty; Being no better hen good Wishes, which your Majesties great Wisedom, may make some thing, or Nothing, of. Wherein, I desire, to be thus understood; That if this Founda∣tion, (such as it is,) be perfect, and Good in Law; Then I am too well acquainted, with your Majesties Disposition, to advise, any Course, of power, or Profit, that is not grounded upon a Right: Nay further, if the Defects be such, as a Court of Equiy may Reme∣dy, and Cure; Then I wish, that as Saint Peter shadow, did cure Diseases; So the very shadow, of a Good Intention, may cure De∣fects of that Nature. But if there be a Right, and Birth-right, planted in the Heir; And not Remediable by Courts of quity; And that Right, be submitted to your Majesty; Whereby it is both, in your power, and Grace, what to do; Then I do wish, that this rude Masse, and Chaos of a Good Deed, were directed, ra∣ther to a Solide Merit, and Durable Charity, then to a Blaze of Glory, that will but crackle, a little, in Talk, and quickly extinguish. And this may be done, observing the Species, of Mr. Suttons In∣tent, though varying in Individuo. For it appeares, that he had, in Notion, a Triple Good; An Hospitall; And a Schoole; And Maintaining of a Preacher; Which Individualls, refer to these Three Generall Heads. Relief of Poore; Advancement of Learning; And Propagation of Religion. Now then, if I shall set before your Ma∣jesty, in every of these Three Kindes, what it is, that is most want∣ing in your Kingdome; And what is like, to be the most Fruitfull, & Effectuall use, of such a Beneficence, and least like to be perverted: That I think, shall be no ill Scope of my Labour, how meanly soever performed; For out of Variety, represented, Election may be best grounded.
Concerning the Relief of the Poore; I hold some Number, of Hospitalls, with Competent Endowments, will do far more good, then one Hospitall, of an Exorbitant Greatnesse. For though the one Course, will be the more Seene, yet the other will be the more Felt. For if your Majesty erect many, besides the observing the Ordinary Maxime; Bonum, quo communius, eo melius, choice may be made, of those Townes, and Places, where there is most Need; And so the Remedy, may be Distributed, as the Disease, is Dispersed. Again, Greatnesse of Reliefe, accumulate in one place, doth rather invite a Swarm, and Surcharge, of Poore, then relieve those, that are, naturally, bred in that place: Like to ill tempred Medicines, that draw more Humour to the Part, then they Evacuate from it. But chiefly, I rely, upon the Reason, that I touched in the Beginning; That in these Great Hospitalls, the Revenues, will draw the Vse, and not the Vse, the Revenues; And so, through the Masse of the Wealth, they will swiftly tumble down, to a Misem∣ployment. And if any Man say, that in the Two Hospitalls in London, there is a President of Greatnesse, concurring with Good Employment; Let him consider, that those Hospitalls, have Annuall Governers; That they are under the Superiour Care, and Policy, of such a state, as the City of London; And chiefly, that their Re∣venues, consist not upon Certainties, but upon Casualties, and Free Gifts; Which Gifts would be with-held, if they appeared once to be perverted: So as, it keepeth them, in a continuall Good Behaviour, and Awe, to employ them aright: None of which Points, do match, with the present Case. The next Consideratiō may be, whether this intended Hospital, as it hath a more ample Endowment, then other Hospitals have, should not likewise work, upon a better Subject, then other Poore: As that it should be converted, to the Relief of Maimed Souldiers, Decayed Merchants, Householders Aged, and Destitute Church-men, and the like; Whose Condition, being of a better sor, then loose People, & Beggars, deserveth, both a more Liberal Stipend, & Allowance, and some proper place of Relief, not intermingled, or coupled, with the Basest Sort of Poore: Which Project, though Specious, yet, in my Judgement, will not answer the Designment, in the Event, in these our Times. For certainly, few Men in any Vocation, which have been some Body, and beare a Mind, somewhat according to the Conscience, and Remembrance, of that they have been, will ever descend, to that Condition, as to professe, to live upon Almes, and to become, a Corporation, of Declared Beggars; But rather will choose, to live Obscurely, and as it were, to hide them∣selves, with some private Friends: So that the End, of such an Institution, will be, that it will make the Place, a Receptacle of the Worst, Idlest, and most dissolute Persons, of every Profession; And to become a Cell of Loyterers, and Cast Serving Men, and Drunkards, with Scandall rather then Fruit, to the Common Wealth. And of this kinde, I can find but one Example with us; Which is,
the Almes Knights of Windsor; Which particular, would give a Man, small encouragement, to follow that President. Therefore, the best Effect of Hospitals, is, to make the King∣dome, if it were possible, capable of that Law; That there be no Beggar in Israel. For it is that kind of People, that is a burthen, an Eye sore, a scandall, and a Seed, of Perill, and Tumult, in the State. But chiefly, it were to be wished, that such a Bene∣ficence, towards the Relief of the poor, were so bestowed; As not onely, the Meere, and Naked, Poore, should be sustained; But also, that the Honest Person, which hath hard means to live, upon whom the Poore are now charged, should be in some sort eased. For that were a Work, generally acceptable, to the Kingdome, if the Publick Hand, of Alms, might spare, the Private Hand, of ax. And therefore, of all other Employments, of that kind, I com∣mend most, Houses of Relief, and Correction; which are Mixt Hospi∣talls, where the Impotent Person, is relieved, and the Sturdy Beg∣gar, buckled to work; And the unable Person also, not main∣tained to be Idle, (which is ever joyned with Drunkennesse, and Impurity,) But is sorted, with such work, as he can mannage, and perform; And where the uses, are not distinguished, as in other Hospitals; Whereof some, are for Aged, and Impotent; and some for Childrn; And some, for Correction of Vagabonds; But are generall, and promiscuous. So that, they may take, off Poore, of every sort, from the Countrey, as the Countrey breeds them. And thus, the Poore themselves, shall find the Provision, and other People the sweetnesse, of the Abatement, of the Tax. Now if it be objected, that Houses of Correction, in all places, have not done the good expected; (as it cannot be denied, but in most places, they have done much Good;) It must be remembred, that there is a great Difference, between that, which is done, by the Distracted Government, of Iustices of Peace; And that, which may be done by a setled Ordinance, subject to a Regular Visitation, as this may be; And besides, the Want hath been, commonly, in Houses of Corre∣ction, of a competent, and Certain, Stock, for the Materialls of the Labour, which, in this case, may be likewise supplied. Concerning the Advancement of Learning, I do subscribe, to the Opinion, of one, of the Wisest, and Greatest, Men, of your Kingdome. That for Grammar Schools, there are already too many; and therefore, no Providence, to adde, where there is Ex∣cesse. For the great Number of Schools, which are in your High∣nesse Realm, doth cause a Want, and doth cause likewise an Over∣flow; Both of them, Inconvenient, and one of them Dange∣rous. For by Means thereof, they find Want in the Countrey, and Towns, both of Servants for Husbandry, and Apprentices for Trade; And, on the other side, there being more Schollers bred, then the State, can prefer, and Employ; And the Active part, of that life, not bearing a proportion, to the Preparative; It must needs fall out, that many Persons, will be bred, unfit, for other
Vocations, And unprofitable for that, in which they are brought up; Which fills the Realm, full of Indigent, Idle, and Wanton Peo∣ple, which are but Materia Rerum novarum. Therefore, in this Point, I wish, Mr. Suttons Intention, were exalted a Degree; That that, which he meant, for Teachers of Children, your Majesty should make for Teachers of Men; where∣in, it hath been, my ancient Opinion, and Observation; That in the Vniversities of this Realm, (which I take to be, of the best endowed Vniversities of Europe,) there is Nothing more want∣ing, towards the flourishing State of Learning, then the Honoura∣ble, and plentifull, Salaries, of Readers, in Arts, and Professi∣ons. In which Point, as your Majesties Bounty, already, hath made a Beginning; So this Occasion, is offered of God, to make a Proceeding. Surely, Readers in the Chair, are, as the Parents in Sciences, and deserve, to enjoy a Condition, not inferiour to their Children, that embrace the Practicall Part. Els, no Man, will sit longer, in the Chair, then till he can walk, to a better prefer∣ment: And it will come to passe, as Virgil saith, Et Patrum invalidi referent Iejunia Nati. For, if the Principall Readers, through the Meannesse, of their Entertainment, be but Men, of superficiall Learning; And that, they shall take their place, but in passage; It will make the Masse of Sciences, want the chief, and solid Dimension, which is Depth; and to become, but Pretty, and, compendious, Habits of practice. Therfore, I could wish, that in both the Vniversities, the Lectures, as well of the three Professions, Divinity, Law, and Physick; As of the three Heads of Science, Philosophy, Arts of Speech, and the Mathematicks, were raised in their Pensions, unto a 100 l. per Annum, a piece; Which though it be not near so great, as they are in some other Places, where the Greatnesse of the Reward, doth whistle for the Ablest Men, out of all Forrain par, to supply the Chair; yet it may be a Portion, to content a Wor∣thy, and Able, Man; If he be, likewise, Contemplative in Nature; As those spirits are, that are Fittest for Lectures. Thus may Lear∣ning, in your Kingdome, be advanced, to a further Heighth; Learning, (I say,) which, under your Majesty, the most Learned of Kings, may claim some Degree, of Elevation, Concerning Propagation of Religion, I shall in few words, set before your Majesty, three Propositions; None of them, Devises, of mine own, otherwise, then that I ever approved them: Two of which, have been in Agitation, of Speech, and The third acted. The first is, a Colledge for Controversies; Whereby, we shall not still proceed Single, but shall, as it were, double our Files; Which, certainly, will be found, in the Encounter. The second is, a Receipt, (I like not the word Seminary, in respect, of the Vain Vowes, and implicite Obedience, and other
Thing, tending to the perturbation of States, involved in that Term;) for Converts to the Reformed Religion, either of Youth, or otherwise; For, I doubt not, but there are in Spain, Italy, and other Countries, of the Papists, many, whose Hearts are touched, with a sense of those Corruptions, and an acknowledgment of a better Way; which Grace, is, many times, smothered, and choaked, through a worldly Consideration of Necessity, and want; Men not knowing, where to have Succour, and Refuge. This, like∣wise, I hold a Work of great Piety, and a Work, of great Conse∣quence; That we, also, may be Wise, in our Generation; And that, the Watchfull, and Silent Night, may be used, as well for sowing of good Seed, as of Tares. The third is, the Imitation of a Memorable, and Religious Act, of Queen Elizabeth; Who finding, a part of Lancashire, to be extreamly Backward, in Religion; And the Benefices, swallowed up, in Impropriations, did, by Decree, in the Dutchy, erect four sti∣pends, of 100 l. per Annum, a piece, for Preachers, well chosen, to help the Harvest; which have done, a great deal of Good, in the Parts, where they have laboured. Neither do there want, o∣ther Corners, in the Realm, that would require, for a time, the like Extraordinary Help. Thus have I, briefly, delivered, unto your Majesty, mine O∣pinion, touching the Employment, of this Charity: whereby, that Masse of wealth, which was in the Owner, little better, then a Stack, or Heap, of Muck, may be spread, over your Kingdome, to many fruitfull purposes; your Majesty planting, and watering, and God giving the Encrease.
A PROPOSITION, TO His Maiesty, BY Sir FRANCIS BACON, Knight, HIS MAIESTIES ATTVRNEY GENERALL; AND One of His PRIVY COUNSELL; Tou∣ching the Compiling, And Amendment, Of the LAWES, of ENGLAND. YOVR MAIESTY, OF Your Favour, Having Made me Privy Councellor: And Continuing me, in the Place, of your Atturney Generall, (which is more then was these hundred years before,) I do not understand it to be, that by putting off, the dealing, in Causes, between party and party, I should keep Holy-day the more: But that, I should dedicate my time, to your Service, with lesse di∣straction. Wherefore, in this plentifull Accession of Time,
which I have now gained, I take it, to be my duty; Not onely to speed your Commandements, and the Businesse, of my place; But to meditate, and to excogitate, of my self, wherein I May best, by my Travels, derive your Vertues, to the Good of your People; And return, their Thanks, and Increase of Love, to you again. And after I had thought, of many things, I could ind, in my Judgement, none more proper, for your Majesty, as a Master; Nor for me, as a Workman, then the Reducing, and Recompiling, of the Lawes of England. Your Majesty is a King, blessed with Posterity; And these Kings, sort best, with Acts of Perpetuity; When they do not leave them, instead of Children; but transmit, both Line, and Merit, to Fu∣ture Generations. You are a great Master, in Iustice, and Iudica∣ture: And it were pitty, that the fruit of that Vertue, should dye with you. Your Majesty, also Raigneth, in Learned Times; The more, in regard, Of your own perfections, and patronage of Learning; And it hath been the mishap, of Works, of this Na∣ture, that the lesse Learned Time, hath wrought upon the more Learned; Which now will not be so. As for my self, the Law is my profession, to which I am a debter. Some little helps I May have, of other Learning, which may give Form to matter; And your Majesty hath set me, in an Eminent place, whereby, in a Work, which must be the Work of many, I may the better have Coadjutors. Therefore, not to hold your Majesty, with any long preface, in that, which I conceive to be, nothing less then Words; I will proceed to the Matter: Which matter, it self, neverthe∣lesse, requireth, somewhat briefly to be said, both of the Dignity, and likewise of the Safety, and Convenience, of this Work; And then to go to the main; That is to say, to shew, how the work is to be done: Which incidently, also, will best Demonstrate, that it is no vast, nor speculative, Thing; But a Reall, and feizable. Callisthenes, that followed Alexanders Court, and was grown, in some displeasure, with him; Because he could not well brook the Persian Adoration; At a Supper, (which, with the Graecians, was, ever, a great part, Talk,) was desired, because he was an Elo∣quent Man, to speak of some Theam; which he did; And chose, for his Theam, The praise, of the Macedonian Nation; which, though it were, but a illing Thing, to praise men, to their Faces; yet he did it, with such Advantage of Truth; and avoydance of Flat∣tery, and with such life; As the Hearers were so ravished with it, that they plucked the Roses off from their Garlands, and threw them upon him: As the Manner of Applauses, then, was: A∣lexander was not pleased with it, and, by way of Discountenance, said, It was easie, to be a good Oratour, in a pleasing Theam. But, (saith he to Callisthenes,) turn your stile, and tell us now of our Faults, that we may, have the profit, and not you onely the praise. Which he pre∣sently did, with such a force, and so piquantly, that Alexander said; The Goodnesse of his Theam had made him Eloquent before: But
now it was the Malice of his heart, that had inspired him: 1. Sir, I shall no fall, into either of those two Extreames, Con∣cerning the Lawes of England: They commend themselves, best to them, that understand them: And your Majesties, Chief Iustice of your Bench, hath, in his Writings, magnified them, not with out Cause: Certainly, they are Wise, they are Just, and Mode∣rate, Lawes; They give to God; They give to Caesar; They give to the Subjects; that which appertaineth. It is true, They are as mixt, as our Language, compounded of British, Rman, Saxon, Danish, Norman, Customes. And as our Language, is so much the Richer, so the Lawes, are the more compleat; Neither doth this attribute lesse to them, then those, that would have them, to have stood out the same, in all Mutations; For no ree, is so good, first set, as by Transplanting. 2. As for the Second Extream; I have nothing to do with it, by way, of Taxing the Lawes. I speak, only, by way of Perfitting them: Which is easiest in the bst things; For that, which is farr amisse, hardly receiveth Amendment; But that, which hath already; To that, more may be Given. esides, what I shall propound, is not, to the Matter of the Lawes, but to the Manner, of their Registry, Expression, and Tradition: So tht, it giveth them rather Light, then any new Nture. This being so, for the Dignity, of the Worke, I know, scarcely, where to find the like; For, surely, that Scale, and those Degrees, of Soveraign Ho∣nour, are true, and rightly marshalled. First, the Founders of E∣states; Then the Law givers; Then the Deliverers, and Saviours, after long Calamities; Then the Fahers of their Countries; Which are Just, and Prudent, Prince; And Lastly, Conquerors, which Honour, is not to be received, amongst the rest; Except it be, where there is an addition of more Country, and Territo∣ry, to a better Government, then that was of the Conquered. Of these in my Judgement, your Majesty, may, with more truth, then flattery, be intituled, to the first; because of your Vniting of Britain, & Planting Ireland; Both which savou of the Founder. That, wch I now propound to you, may adopt you, also, into the Second: Law-givers, have Been called, Principes Perpeui; Because, as Bishop Gard∣ner said, in a bad Sense, that he would be Bishop, an hundred years, after his death, in respect of the Long Leases he made: So Law-givers, are still Kings, and Rulers, after their Decease, in their Lawes. But this Worke, shining so in it self, needes no Taper. For the safety, and convenience, thereof; It is good to consider, and to answer those Objectious, or Scruples, which may arise, or be made, against this Worke. Obj. 1. That it is a Thing needlesse; And that the Law, as it now is, is in good Estate; Comparable to any Forrain Law; And that, it is not possible, for the Wit of Man, in respect of the Frailty thereof, to provide, against the Incertainties, and Eva∣sions, or Omissions, of Law.
Resp. For the Comparison, with Forraine Lawes, it is in vaine, to speak of it; For men will never agree about it. Our Lawyers, will maintain, for our Municipall Lawes; Civilians, Schollars, Travail∣lers, will be of the other Opinion. But Certain it is, that our Lawes, as they now stand, are sub∣ject to great Incertainties, and variety of Opinion, Delayes, and Evasions; Whereof ensueth. 1. That the Multiplicity, and length of Suites, is great. 2. That the Contentious Person, is armed, and the Honest Subject, Wearied, and Oppressed. 3. That the Iudge, is more Absolute; Who, in doubtfull Cases, hath a greater stroak, and Liberty. 4. That the Chancery Courts, are more filled, the Remedy of Law, being often obscure, and dfll. 5. That the ignorant Lawyr, shrowdeth his Ignorance of Law, in that, doubts are so frequent, and many. 6. That Mens Assurances, of their Lands, and stae, by Patents, Deedes, Wills, are often subject to question, and hollow; And many the like Inconveninces. It is a good Rule, and Direction, (For that all Lawes, Secundum Magis & Minus, do participate of Incertainties,) That folow∣eth: Mark, whether the Doubts, that arise, are, only, in Cases of Ordinary Experience, Or, which hapen not every day? f in the first, Only, impute it to frailty, of Man oresight, that cannot reach, by Law, to all Cases: But if in the Lttr; be assured, there is a fault in the Law. Of this, I say no more, but, that, (To give every Man his Due,) Had it not been, for S. Edward Cookes Reports, (which, though they may have Errors, and some peremp∣tory, and Extrajudiciall Resolutions, more then are warranted: Yet they containe, infinite good Decisions, and Rulings over, of Cases.) The Law, by this Time, had been, almost, like a Ship, without ballast; For that the Cases, of Modern Experience, are fled from those, that are adjudged, and ruled, in Former time. But the Ne∣cessity, of this Worke, is yet greater, in the Statute Law. For First, there are a number, of Ensnaring, Penall Lawes, which lay upon the Subject; And if, in bad times, they should be awaked, and put in Execution, would grinde them to powder. There is a learned Civilian, that expoundeth, the Curse of the Prophet: Pluet super eos Laqueos, of Multitude, of Penall Lawes: Which are worse, then showres of Hayle, or Tempest, upon Cattle; for they fall upon Men. There are some Penall Lawes, fit to be retained, but tir e∣nalty too great, And it is ever a Rule, that any ov great Penalty, (besides the Acerbity of it,) deads the Execution of the Law. There is a further Inconvenience, of Penall Lawes, Obsolete, and out of Vse; For that it brings a Gangrene, Neglect, and Habite Diso∣bedience,
upon other wholesome Lawes, that are fit to be continu∣ed, in Practise, and Execution: So that our Lawes, endure the Tor∣ment of Mezentius. The living die in the Armes of the dead. Lastly, there is, such an Accumulation, of Statutes, concerning one matter; And they so crosse, and intricate, as the Certainty of Law, is lost in the Heape; As your Majesty, had Experience, last day, upon the Point: Whether the Incendary of New-market, should have the benefit, of his Clergy. Obj. 1. That it is a great Innovation; And Innovations, are dan∣gerous, beyond foresight. Resp. All Purgings, and Medecines, either in the Civile, or Naturall, Body, are Innovations. So as that Argument, is a Common place, a∣gainst all Noble Reformations. But the trth is, that this work, ought not to be termed, or held, for any Innovation, in the suspected sense. For those are the Innovations, which are quarrelled, and spoken against, that concern the Consciences, Estates, and For∣tunes, of particular persons: But this of General Ordinance, pricketh not particulars, but passeth Sine Strepiu. Besides, it is on the favourable part: For it easeth, it presseth not: And last∣ly, it is, rather, matter, of Order, and explanation, then of Altera∣tion. Neither is this, without President, in former Govern∣ments. The Romans, by their Decemvirs, did make their Twelve Tables; But that was, indeed, a new Enacting, or Constituting, of Lawes, Not a Registring, or Recompiling: And they were made, out of the Lawes, of the Graecians, not out of their own Customes. In Athens, they had Sexvir, which were standing Commission∣ers, to watch, and to discern, what Lawes, waxed unproper, for the Time; And what new Law, did, in any branch, crosse, a for∣mer Law, and so, Ex Officio, propounded their Repeales. King Lewis, the 11th. of France, had it in his intention, to have made, one perfite, and uniform, Law, out of the Civil Law Ro∣man, and the Povinciall Customes, of France. Iustinian, the Emperour, by Commissions, directed, to divers persons, Learned in the Lawes, reduced the Roman Lawes, from Vastness of Volume, and a Labyrinth of incertainties, Unto that course, of the Civill Law, which is now in use. I find, here at home, of late years, That King Henry the 8th. in the Twenty seventh of his Raign, was authorized, by Parliament, to nominate Thirty two Commissioners, part Ecclesiasticall, part Temporall, to purge the Canon Law, and to make it agreeable, to the Law of God, and the Law, of the Realm; And the same was revived, in the Fourth year, of Edward the 6th. though neither took effect. For the Lawes of Lycurgus, Solon, Ninos, and others, of ancient time, they are not the worse, because Grammer Schollars, speak of them. But things too ancient, wax Children, with us a∣gain.
Edgar, the Saxon King, collected, the Lawes of this Kingdome, and gave them the Strength, of a Faggot bound, which formerly were dispersed. The Statutes, of King Edward, the First, were fundamentall; But I doubt I err, in producing so many Examples; For, as Cicero saith to Caesar, so may I say, to your Majesty: Nil Vulgare te Dignum Videri possit. Obj. 3. In this purging, of the course, of the Common Lawes, and Statutes, much good may be taken away. Resp. In all Purging, some good Humours, may pass away; But that, is largely recompensed, by Lightning, the Body, of much bad. Obj. 4. Labour were better bestowed, in bringing the Common Lawes, of England, to a Text Law, as the Statutes are; And setting, both of them down, in Method, and by Titles. Resp. It is too long a Businesse, to debate, whether Lex Scripta, aut non Scripta, A Text Law, or Customes well registred, with received, and approved Grounds, and Maximes, and Acts, and Resolutions Judiciall, from Time to Time, duely entred, and reported; Be the better Form, of Declaring, and Authorizing, Lawes: It was the principall Reason, or Oracle, of Lycurgus; That none, of his Lawes, should be written. Customes, are Lawes written, in Living Tables: And some Traditions, the Church doth not disauthorize. In all Sciences, they are the soundest, that keep close to Particulars; And sure I am, there are more Doubts, that rise upon our Statutes, which are a Text Law, then upon the Common Law, which is no Text Law. But, howsoever that Que∣stion be determined, I dare not advise to cast the Law, into a new Mould. The work, which I propound tendeth to proyning, and Grafting, the Law; And not, to Plow up and Planting it again: for such a Remove, I should hold, indeed, for a perillous Innovation. Obj. 5. It will turn the Iudges, Counsellors of Law, and Students of Law, to schoole again; And make them, to seek, what they shall hold, and advise for Law; And, it will impose, a new charge, upon all Lawyers, to furnish themselves, with new Bookes of Law. Resp. For the Former of those, ouching the new Labour; It is true, it would follow, if the Law, were new moulded, into a Text Law; For then, Men must be new to begin: And that, is one of the Reasons, for which, I disallow that Course. But in the way, that I shall now propound, the entire Body, and Substance of Law, shall remain; Onely discharged, of Idle, and Unprofitable, or Hurtfull, Matter: and Illustrated, by Order, and other Helps, towards the better Understanding of it, and Judgement thereupon.
For the Latter, touching the new charge, it is not worth the speaking of, in a matter, of so high importance; It mought have been used, of the New Translation, of the Bible, and such like Workes. Bookes must follow Sciences, and not Sciences, Bookes. The Work it Self; And the Way to Reduce, And Recompile, the Lawes of England. THIS Work, is to be done, (to use some few words, which is the Language of Action, and Effect,) in this manner. It consisteth of two parts: The Digest, or Recompiling, of the Common Lawes: And that of the Statutes. In the first of these, Three Things are to be done. 1. The Compiling of a Booke, De Antiquitatibus Iuris. 2. The Reducing, or Perfecting, of the Course, or Corps, of the Common Lawes. 3. The Composing, of certain Introductive, and Auxiliary Bookes, touching the Study, of the Lawes. For the first of these. All Auncient Records, in your Tower, or else where, Containing Acts of Parliament, Lords Patents, Commissions, and Iudgements, and the like, are to be Searched, Perused, and Weighed. And out of these, are to be selected, those that are of most Worth, and Weight; And in order of Time, not of Titles, (for the more Conformity, with the Yeare-Bookes;) to be set Down, and Registred; Rarely, in haec Verba; But summed with Judge∣ment, not omitting any materiall part: These are to be used, for Reverend Presidents, but not for Binding Authorities. For the Second, which is the Maine; There is to be made, a perfect Course, of the Law, in Serie Temporis, or Yeare-Bookes, (As we call them,) from Edward the First, to this Day; In the Com∣piling, of this Course, of Law, or Yeare-Bookes, The points follow∣ing, are to be observed. First, all Cases, which are, at this Day, clearely, no Law; but constantly ruled, to the contrary, are to be left out: They do but fill the Volumes, and season the Wits of Students, in a contrary sense of Law. And so likewise, all Cases, wherein that is solemnly, and long debated, whereof there is now no Question at all, are to be entred, as Iudgements only, and Resolutions; But without the Arguments, which are now become but frivolous: Yet for the Observation, of the deeper sort of Lawyers, that they may see, how the Law hath altered, out of which they may pick sometimes good use; I do advise; That upon the first in time, of those Obso∣lete Cases, there were a Memorandum set; That, at that time, the
Law, was thus taken, untill such a time. &c. Secondly, omonymiae, (as Iustinian calleth them;) That is Cases meerly, of Iteration, and Repetition, are to be purged away; And the Cases, of Identity, which are best Reported, and Argued, to be retained, instead of the Rest; The Iudgements, neverthe∣lesse, to be set down, every one, in time, as they are; But with a Quotation, or Reference, to the Case, where the Point, is ar∣gued at large; but if the Case, consist, part of Repetition, part of new Matter, The Repetition, is, onely, to be omitted. Thirdly, as to the Antinomiae, Cases Judged to the Contrary; It were too great a trust, to refer, to the Judgement, of the Composers, of this work; to decide the Law either way; except there be, a currant stream, of Judgements, of later times: and then, I reckon the Contrary Cases, amongst Cases Obsolete; of which I have spoken before: Neverthelesse, this diligence would be used, that such Cases of Contradiction, be specially noted, and collcted; to the end, those Doubts, that have been so long Mi¦litant, May either, by assembling, All the Iudges, in the Exche∣quer Chamber, or by Parliament, be put into certainty. For to do it, by bringing them in question, under fained parties, is to be disliked. Nil habeat Forum ex scenâ. Fourthly, All Idle Quaeries, which are but Seminaries, of Doubts, and Incertainties, are to be left out, and omitted, and no Quae∣ries set down, but of great Doubts, well debated, and left un∣decided, for difficulty; But no doubting, or upstarting, Quaeries: Which, though they be touched in Argument, for Explanation; yet were better to die, then to be put into the Bookes. Lastly, Cases Reported, with too great prolixity, would be drawn, into a more Compendious Report; Not in the Nature of an A∣bridgement,This Consti∣tution, of Re∣porters, I ob∣tained of the King, after I was Chancel∣lour, and there are two, ap∣pointed, with a 100. l. a year, a peece, sipend. but Tautoligies, and Impertinences, to be cut off: As for Misprinting, and Insensible Reporting, which, many times, confound the Students, that will be, Obiter, amended; But more principally, if there be any thing in the Report, which is is not well warranted, by the Record, that is also to be rectified; The Course being thus Compiled, Then it resteth, but for your Maje∣sty to appoint some grave, and sound, Lawyers, with some honour∣able stipend, to be Reporters, for the Time to come; And then, this is setled, for all times. FOR the Auxiliary Books, that Conduce, to the Study, and Science, of the Law, they are three: Institutions; A Treatise, de Regulis Iuris; And a better Book, De verborum significationibus, or Terms of the Law. For the Institutions, I know well there be Books of Introductions, (wherewith Students begin) of good
worth; Specially Littleton, and Fitzherbert; Natura Brevium, But hey ae, no wayes, of the Nature, of an Institutions; The Office whereof, is, to be a Key, and generall preparation, to the Reading, of the Course. And principally, it ought to have, wo Properties; The one, a perspicuous, and clear, Order, o Method; And, the other, an Vniversall Latitude, or Comprehension; That the Students, may have a little Prae-Notion, of every Thing, Like a Modell, towards a great Building. For the Treatise, de Regulis Iuris, I hold it, of all other Things, the most important, to the Health, (as I may term it,) and good Institutions, of any Laws. It is, indeed, like the ballast of a Ship, to keep, all up∣right, and stable: But I have seen little, in this kind, either in our Law, or other Lawes, that satisfieth me. The naked Rule, or Maxime, doth not the Effect. It must be made usefull, by good Differences, Ampliations, and Limitations, warranted by good Authorities; And this, not by Raising up, of Quotations, and Re∣ferences, but by Discourse, and Deducement, in a Iust Tractate. In this, I have travelled my elf, at the first, more cursorily; since, with more Diligence; And will go on with it, if God, and your Majesty, will give me leave. And I do assure your Majesty, I am in good hope, that when, Sir Edward Cookes Reports, and my Rules, and Decisions, shall come to Posterity, there will be, (whatso∣ever is now thought,) Question, who was the greater Lawyer? For the Bookes, of the Termes, of the Law, There is a poore one But I wish, a Diligent one, wherein, should be comprised, not onely, the Exposition, of the Termes, of Law; but of the Words, of all aunci∣ent Records, and Presidents. For the Abridgements, I could wish, if it were possible, that none mought use them, but such, as had read the Course; First, that they mought serve, for Repertories, to Learned Lawyers, and not, to make a Lawyer, in hast; But since, that cannot be, I wish there were a good Abridgement, composed, of the Two that are exstant, and in better order. So much for the Common Law. Statute Law. FOR the Reforming, and Recompiling, of the Statute Law, It con∣sisteth of Foure parts. 1. The First, to discharge, the Bookes, of those Statutes, where as, the Case, by Alteration of time, is vanished; As Lombard Iewes, Gauls halfe Pence; &c. Those may, neverthelesse, remaine, in the Libraries, for Antiquities, but no Reprinting of them. The like, of Statutes, long since expired, and clearly repealed; For if
the Repeale be doubtfull, it must be so propounded to the Parlia∣ment. 2. The next is, to repeale all Statutes, which are Sleeping, and not of use, but yet snaring, and in Force; In some of those, it will, perhaps, be requisite, to substitute, some more Reasonable Law, instead of them, agreeable to the time; In others, a simple Re∣peale may suffice. 3. The Third, that the Grievousnesse, of the Penalty, in many Statutes, be mitigated, though the Ordinance stand. 4. The last is, the Reducing, of Concurrent Statutes, heaped one upon another, to one clear, and uniform, Law. Towards thi, there hath been, already, upon my motion, and your Majesties Direction, a great deal, of good paines taken: My Lord Hoert, My Self, Sergant Finch, Mr. Hennage Finch, Mr. Noye, Mr. Hackwell, and others: Whose Labours, being of a great bulk, it is not fit, now, to trouble your Majesty, with any further particularity, therein: Onely, by this, you may perceive, the Worke is already advanced: But because, this part of the Worke, which concern∣eth the Statute Lawes, must of necessity, come to Parliament; And the Houses, will best like that, which themselves guide; And the Persons, that themselves imploy; The way were, to Imitate, the president, of the Commissioners, for the Canon Lawes, in 27. Hen. 8. and 4. Edw. 6. And the Commissioners, for the Vnion, of the two Realmes. Primo, of your Majesty; And so, to have the Com∣missioners, named, by both Houses; but not, with a precedent power, to Conclude; But only, to prepare, and propound to Paliament: This is the best way, I conceive, to accomplish, this Excellent Worke, of Honour, to your Majesties Times, and of Good to all Times: Which I submit, to your Majesties better Judgement.
A FRAGMENT, OF AN ESSAY, OF FAME. THe Poets make Fame a Monster. They describe her, in Part, finely, and ele∣gantly; and, in part, gravely, and sen∣tentiously. They say, look how ma∣ny Feathers she hath, so many Eyes she hath underneath: So many Tongues; So many Voyces; She pricks up so ma∣ny Ears. This is a flourish: There follow excellent Parables; As that, she ga∣thereth strength in going; That she goeth upon the ground, and yet hideth her head in the Clouds. That, in the day time, she sitteth in a Watch Tower, and flyeth, most, by night: That she mingleth Things done, with things not done: And that she is a Terrour to great Citties: But that, which passeth all the rest, is: They do recount, that the Earth, Mother of the Gyants, that made War against Iupiter, and were by him destroyed, thereupon, in an anger, brought forth Fame: For certain it is, That Rebels, fi∣gured by the Gyants, and Seditious Fames, and Libels, are but Bro¦thers, and Sisters; Masculine, and Feminine. But now, if a Man can tame this Monster, and bring her to feed at the hand, and go∣vern her, and with her fly other ravening Fowle, and kill them it is somewhat worth. But we are infected, with the stile of the
Poets. To speak now, in a sad, and serious manner: There is not, in all the Politiques, a Place, lesse handled, and more wor∣thy to be handled, then this of Fame. We will, therefore, speak of these points. What are false Fames; And what are true Fames; And how they may be best discerned; How Fames, may be sown, and raised; How they may be spread, and multiplyed; And how they may be checked, and layed dead. And other Things, con∣crning the Nature of ame. Fame, is of that force, as there is, scarcely, any great Action wherein, it hath not, a great part; Especilly, in the War. Mucianus undid Vitellius by a Fame, that he scattered; That Vitellius had in purpose, to remove the Legi∣ons of Syria, into Germany; And the Legions of Germany, into Sy∣ria: whereupon the Legions of Syria were infinitely inflamed. Iu∣lius Csar, took ompey unprovided, and layed asleep his industry, and preparations, by a Fame that he cunningly gave out; How Caesars own Souldiers loved him not; And being wearied with the Was, and Laden with the spoyles of Gaul, would forsake him, as soon as he came into Italy. Livia, setled all things for the Succession, of her Son Tiberius, by continuall giving out, that her husband Augustus, was upon Recovery, and amendmet. And it is an usuall thing, with the Basshawes, to conceale the Deah of the great Turk from the Iannizaries, and men of War, to save the Sacking of Constantinople, and other Towns, as their Manner i. Themistocles, made Zerxes, King of Persia poasr a pace out of rcia, by giving out, that the Graecians, had a purpose, to break his Bridge, of Ships, which he had made athwart Hellespont. There be a thousand such like Examples; And the more they are, the lesse they need to be repeated; Because a Man, meeteth with them, every where: Therefore, let all Wise Governers, have as great a watch, and care, over Fames, as they have, of the Acti∣ons, and Designes themselves. The rest was not Finished.
Faults Escaped in the Printing. PAg. 16. linea. 4. or Gulcis, lege, Dulcis: Pag. 3. lin. 34. mst, lege, most: p. 37. l. 30 fit, l. fiat: p, 54. l. 18. vel. l. Duel. p. 55. l. ult. Thnnaus. l. Thuanus: p. 118. l. 10. deen. l. been: Eadem. l. 23. Ordinary. l. more then Ordinary. p. 132. l 34. peasure. l. pleasure. p. 137. l. 38. ferraine, l. forraine, Ead. l. 4. Mene. l. Meane: p. 138. l. 46. ther. l. their: p. 144. l. ult. be. l. he: Ead. lin. linht, l. light: p. 147. l. 37. Lord: l. Lordship. p. 164. l. 32. Non is repetit Conditionibus Dissidiis l. Non repetitis Conditionibus Dissidii: p. 208. l. 43. Mesty. l. Majesty: p, 212. l. 14. rue. l. true: p: 218. l. 9. Mad. l. Man: Ead. l. 14. how to l. to how: p. 241. l. 16. a. l. as: p. 246. l, 10. if l. of: pag. 266. l. 5, Desig. lge Designe: 275. l. 28, Sexvir. l. Sexviri. Ead. l. 45: Ninos. l. Minos.
SEVERAL LETTERS, WRITTEN BY THIS Honourable Authour, TO QUEEN ELIZABETH, KING IAMES, DIVERS LORDS, AND OTHERS. LONDON, Printed by F. L. for William Lee, at the sign of the Turks-Head, in Fleetstreet, 1657.
A LETTER To the LORD TREASURER, BVRGHLEY, In Excuse of his SPEECH, in PARLIAMENT, Against the TRIPLE SVBSIDIE. It may please your Lordship, I Was sorry, to find, by your Lordships Speech, yesterday, that my last Speech, in Parliament, delivered, in discharge of my Conscience, and Duty to God, her Majesty, and my Countrey, was offensive. If it were misre∣ported, I would be glad, to attend your Lordship to disavow any thing, I said not; If it were misconstrued, I would be glad, to expound my self, to exclude any sense, I meant not. If my Heart be misjudged, by Imputation of Po∣pularity, or Opposition, by any envious, or officious Informer, I have great wrong; And the greater, because the Manner of my Speech, did most evidently shew, that I spake simply; And onely, to satisfie my Conscience, and not with any Advantage, or Poli∣cy, to sway the Cause: And my Terms, carried all signification, of Duty, and Zeal, towards her Majesty, and her Service. It is true, that from the Beginning, whatsoever was above a Double Sub∣sidy, I did wish, might, (for president sake) appear to be extraor∣dinary; And, (for Discontents sake,) mought not have been
levied, upon the Poorer sort: Though otherwise, I wished it as Rising, as I think this will prove, and more. This was my mind, I confesse it. And therefore, I most humbly pray, your good Lordship; First, to continue me in your own good Opinion; And then, to perform the part, of an Honourable Friend, towards your poor Servant, and Alliance; In drawing her Majesty, to ac∣cept, of the Sincerity, and Simplicity, of my Heart; And to bear with the rest, and restore me, to her Majesties Favour. A Letter to the Lord Treasurer Burghley, recommending his first Sute, touching the Sollicitors place. After the remembrance of my most humble Duty, THough I know, by late Experience, how mindfull your Lord∣ship vouchsafeth to be of me, and my poor Fortunes; since it pleased your Lordship, during your Indisposition, when her Ma∣jesty came, to visit your Lordship, to make mention of me, for my Employment, and preferment; yet being now in the Countrey, I do presume, that your Lordship, who of your Self, had so Ho∣nourable care of the matter, will not think it a Trouble, to be sol∣licited therein. My hope is, that whereas your Lordship told me, her Majesty was somewhat gravelled, upon the Offence, she took, at my Speech in Parliament, your Lordships favourable, and good word, (who hath assured me, that for your own part, you constru∣ed, that I spake, to the best,) will be as a good Tide, to remove her from that Shelf. And it is not unknown to your Lordship, that I was the first, of the Ordinary Sort, of the Lower House, of Parlia∣ment, that spake for the Subsidy; And hat, which I after spake in difference, was but in Circumstances of Time, and Manner, which methinks should be no great Matter, since there is Variety allowed in Counsel, as a Discord in Musick, to make it more per∣fect. But I may justly doubt, not so much her Majesties Impres∣sion, upon this particular, as her Conceit, otherwise, of my In∣sufficiency; which though I acknowledge to be great, yet it will be the lesse, because I purpose, not to divide my self, between her Majesty, and the Causes of other Men, (as others have done,) but to attend her Businesse only; Hoping, that a whole Man, meanly able, may doe as well as Half a Man, better able. And if her Majesty think, that she shall make an Adventure, in using one, that is rather a Man of Study, than of Practice, and Experience; Sure∣ly, I may remember, to have heard, that my Father, (an Exam∣ple, I confesse, rather Ready, than Like; was made Sollicitor, of the Augmentation, (a Court of much Businesse,) when he had ne∣ver practiced, and was but 27 years old: And Mr. Brograve, was now, in my time, called to be Atturney of the Dutchy, when he had
practised, little, or nothing: And yet discharged his place, with great Sufficiency. But these Things, and the like, are, as her Maesty shall be made capable of them: wherein, knowing what Auhority, your Lordships Commendation, hath with her Maje∣sty I conclude with my Self, that the Substance of Strength, wich I may receive, will be from your Lordship. It is true, my Life hath been so private, as I have had no means, to do your Lord∣ship service; but yet, as your Lordship knoweth, I have made offer, of such, as I could yield: For as God, hath given me a mind, to love the Publick; so incidently, I have ever had your Lordship, in sin∣gular Admiration; whose happy Ability, her Majesty hath so long used, to her great Honour, and yours. Besides, that Amend∣ment, of State, or Countenance, which I have received, hath been from your Lordship. And therefore, if your Lordship shall stand, a good Friend, to your poo Allie, you shall but Tueri Opus proprium, which you have begun. And your Lordship, shall be∣stow your benefit upon one, that hath more sense of Obligation, than of Self-love. Thus humbly desiring pardon, of so long a Letter, I wish your Lordship all Happinesse. This 7th of Iune, 1595. A Letter to Queen Elizabeth, upon the sending of a New-years Gift. It may please your Majesty, ACcording to the Ceremony, of the Time, I would not forget, in all humblenesse, to present your Majesty, with a small New-years Gift: Nothing to my Mind. And therefore to supply it, I can but pray to God, to give your Majesty, his New-years Gift; that is, a New year, that shall be, as no year, to your Body; And as a year, with 2. Harvests to your Coffers; And every other way, pros∣perous, and gladsom. And so I remain. A Letter to Queen Elizabeth, upon the sending of a New-years Gift. Most excellent Soveraign Mistris, THe onely New-years Gift, which I can give your Majestie, is that, which God hath given to me: which is, a Mind, in all Hum∣blenesse, to wait upon your Commandements, and Businesse: Wherein I would to God, that I were hooded, that I saw lesse; Or, that I could perform more: For now I am like a Hawk, that bates, when I see occasion of service, but cannot fly, because I am
tyed to anothers Fist. But mean while, I continue my presump∣tion, of making to your Majesty, my poor Oblation, of a Garment, as unworthy the Wearing, as his service that sends it: But the Approach, to your Excellent Person, may give Worth to both: which is all the Happinesse I aspire unto. A Letter, of Advice, to th Earl of Essex, to take upon him, the Care, of Irish Causes, when Mr. Secretary Cecill was in Fraunce. My singular good Lord, I Doe write, because I had no time, fully to expresse my Conceit, to your Lordship, touching Irish Affairs; considering them, as they may concern, your Lordship; Knowing, that you will con∣sider them, as they may concern the State. That it is one of the aptest particulars, that hath come, or can come upon the Stage, for your Lordship, to purchase Honour upon, I am moved to think, for 3. Reasons. Because, it is ingenerate, in your House, in re∣spect of my Lord, your Fathers, Noble Attempts: Because, of all the Actions, of State, on foot, at this time, the Labour resteth most, in that particular; And because, the World, ill make a kinde of Comparison, between those, that set it out of Frame, and those that bring it into Frame: which kind of Honour, giveth the quick∣est kind of Reflection. The Transferring this Honour, upon your self, consisteth in 2. points: The one, if the Principal Persons em∣ploy'd, come in by you, and depend upon you: The other, if your Lordship, declare your self, and profess to undertake, a Care of that Kingdom. For the Persons, it falleth out well, that your Lordship, hath had no Interest, in the Persons of Imputation: For neithr, Sir William Fitz-Williams, nor Sir Iohn Norrice, was yours. Sir William Russell, was conceived yours, but was curbed. Sir Coniers Clifford, (as I conceive it,) dependeth on you, who is said to do well. And if my Lord of Ormond, in this Intrim, doth accommodate things well, (as it is said he doth,) I take it, h hath, alwayes, had good Understanding, with your Lordship: So as all Things, hitherto, are not only whole, and entire, but of favourable Aspect, towards your Lordship, if hereafter you choose well. Concerning the Care of Businesse, the general, and popular Conceit hath been, that Irish Causes have been much neglected; wereby, the Repu∣tation, of better Care, will put Life into them. But for a Be∣ginning, and Key, to that which shall follow; It were good, your Lordship, would have, some large, and serious, Conference, with Sir William Russell, Sir Richard Bingham, the Earl of Toumond, and Mr. Wilbraham; To know their Relation of the past; Their Opinion of the present; and Their Advise for the future.
For the Points, of Apposing them, I am too much a Stranger, to the Businesse, to deduce them: But, in a general Topique, me∣thinks, the pertinent Interrogations, must be; Either, of the Pos∣sibility, and Means, of Accord; or of the Nature, of the Warre; or of the Reformation, of Abuses; Or of the joyning, of Practice with Force, in the Disunion, of the Rebells. If your Lordship doubt, to put your Sickle, into anothers Harvest; First, Time brings it to you, in Mr. Secretaries Absence: Next, being mixt, with matter of Warre, it is fittest for you: And lastly, I know, your Lordship, will carry it, with that Modesty, and Respect, towards Aged Dignity; And that good Correspondence, towards my dear Kinsman, and your good Friend, now abroad, as no Inconveni∣ence, may grow that way. Thus have I played, the Ignorant Statesman; Which I doe, to No Body, but your Lordship; except to the Queen, sometimes, when she traine's me on. But your Lordship will accept my Du∣ty, and good Meaning; And secure, me, touching the private∣nesse, of that I write. A Letter, of Advice, to the Earl of Essex, upon the first Trea∣ty, with Tyrone, 1598, before the Earl was nominated, for the Charge of Ireland. My very good Lord, COncerning the Advertisements, which your Lordship impart∣ed to me, touching the State of Ireland, for willing Duties sake, I will set down, to your Lordship, what Opinion, sprang in my Minde, upon that I read. The Letter, from the Counsel, there, leaning to mistrust, and disswade the Treaty, I do not much rely on, for 3. Causes. First, because it is alwayes, the Grace, and the Safety, of such a Coun∣sell, to erre in Caution: whereunto add, that it may be, they, or some of them, are not without Envy, towards the Person, who is used, in treating the Accord. Next, because the Time of this Treaty, hath no shew of Dissimulation; For that Tyrone, is now in no straights; but he is more like a Gamester, that will give over, because he is a Winner, than because, he hath no more Money, in his Purse. Lastly, I do not see, but those Articles, whereupon they ground their Suspicion, may as well proceed out of Fear, as out of Falsehood. For the Retaining, the Dependance, of the Vrights; The protracting, the Admission, of a Sheriff; The Re∣fusing, to give his Sonne, for an Hostage; The Holding off, from present Repair, to Dublin; The Refusing, to goe presently to Ac∣cord, without including Odonnell, and other his Associates; May
very well come, of an Apprehension, in case he should receive hard measure; And not out of Treachery. So as, if the great Per∣son, you write of, be faithfull; And that you have not heard, some present Intelligence, of present Succours, from Spain; (For the Expectation whereof, Tyrone would win time;) I see no deep Cause, of Distrusting, this Course of Treaty, if the main Conditi∣ons may be good. For her Majesty seemeth to me, to be a Win∣ner thereby, 3. wayes; First, her Purse shall have some Rest: Next, it will divert, the Forein Designes, upon the Place: Third∣ly, though her Majesty, be like, for a time, to govern but precariò, in the North; And be not, (as to a true Command,) in better state there, than before; yet, besides the two respects, of Ease of Charge, and Advantage of Opinion, abroad, before mentioned, she shall have a time, to use her Princely policy, in 2. points to weaken them. The one, by Division, and Disunion, of the Heads; The other, by Recovering, and Winning the People, from them, by Iustice; which, of all other Courses, is the best. Now for the Athenian Question; you discourse well; Quid igitur agendum est? I will shoot my Fools Bolt, since you will have it so. The Earl of Ormond, to be incouraged, and comforted. Above all Things, the Garrisons to be instantly provided for. For Opportunity maketh a Theef: And if he should mean never so well now; yet such an Advantage, as the Breaking, of her Majesties Garrisons, might tempt a true Man. And because, he may as well waver, upon his own Inconstancy, as upon Occasion; (And wanton Variablenesse, is never restrai∣ned, but by Fear;) I hold it necessary, he be menaced, with a strong Warr: Not by Words, but by Musters, and preparations of For∣ces, here, in case the Accord proceed not: But none to be sent o∣ver, lest it disturb the Treaty, and make him look to be over-run, as soon as he hath laid away Arms. And but that your Lord∣ship, is too easie, to passe in such Cases, from Dissimulation, to Verity; I think, if your Lordship lent your Reputation, in this Case; That is, To pretend, that if Peace go not on, and the Queen mean to make, not a Defensive Warr, as in times past, but a full Re∣conquest of those parts, of the Countrey, you would accept the Charge; I think, it would help, to settle Tyrone, in his seeking Ac∣cord, and win you, a great deal of Honour, gratis. And that, which most properly concern's, this Action, if it prove a Peace; I think, her Majesty shall doe well, to cure the Root of the Disease; And to Professe, by a Commission, of Peace∣able Men, of Respect, and Countenance, a Reformation of Abuses, Extortions, and Injustices there; And to plant, a stronger, and surer Government, than heretofore, for the Ease, and Protection, of the Subject. For the Removing of the Sword, or Government in Arms, from the Earl of Ormond; Or the sending of a Deputy, (which will ecclipse it,) if Peace follow, I think it unseasonable.
Lastly, I hold still my Opinion, (both for your better Inor∣mation, and the fuller Declaration, of your Care, in Medling, in this urgent, and meriting Service,) That your Lordship, have a set Conference, with the persons, I named, in my former Letter. A Letter of Advice, to my Lord of Essex, immediately, before his going into Ireland. My sigular good Lod, YOur late Note of my Silence, in your Occasions, hath made me set down, these few wandring Lines, as one that would say somewhat, and can say nothing, touching your Lordships in∣tended Charge for Ireland; Which my Endeavour, I know, your Lordship will accept graciously; whether your Lordship take it, by the Handle of Occasion, ministred from your Self; or of the Af∣fection, from which it proceeds. Your Lordship, is designed to a Service, of great Merit, and great Peril: And as the Greatness of the Peril must needs include, a like proportion of Merit: So the Greatnesse of the Merit, may in∣clude, no small Consequence of Peril, if it be not temperately go∣verned. For all immoderate Successe, extinguisheth Merit, and stirreth up, Distast, and Envy; The assured Forerunners, of whole Charges of Peril. But I am at the last point first; Some good Spirit, leading my Penn, to presage, to your Lordship, successe: Wherein, it is true, I am not without my Oracles, and Divinations; None of them Superstitious, and yet not all Natural. For first, loo∣king into the Course of Gods Providence, in Things now depen∣ding; And calling to consideration, how great things God hath done, by her Majesty, and for her: I collect, he hath disposed, of this great Defection, in Ireland, thereby, to give an urgent occasi∣on, to the Reduction, of that whole Kingdom; As upon the Rebellion of Desmond, there insued, the Reduction of that whole Province. Next, your Lordship goeth against, three of the unluckiest Vi∣ces, of all others; Disloyalty, Ingratitude, and Insolency: Which three Offences, in all Examples, have seldom their Doom, adjourn'd to the world to come. Lastly, he that shall have had the Honour, to know your Lordship, inwardly, as I have had, shall find Bona Exta, whereby he may better ground, a Divination of Good, than upon the Dissecti∣on, of a Sacrifice. But that part I leave: For it is fit or others, to be confident upon the cause; The Goodnesse, and Justice, where∣of, is such, as can hardly be matched, in any Example It being no Ambitious Warr, against Forreiners, but a Recovery of Subjects; And that, after Lenity of Conditions, often tryed; And a Re∣covery of them, not onely to Obedience, but to Humanity, and
Policy, from more than Indian Barbarism. There is yet another Kinde of Divination, familiar to Matters of State; Being that, which Demosthenes, so often relyed upon, in his time; when he said; That, which for the time past, is worst of all, is, for the time to come, the best; which is, that things go ill, not by Accident, but by Errours; Wherein, if your Lordship have been, heretofore, an Awaking Censour, you must look or no other now, but, Medice Cura teipsum: And though, you shall not be the Hap∣py Physician, that commeth in the Declination of the Disease; yet you embrace that Condition, which many Noble Spirits have ac∣cepted for Advantage; which is, that you goe, upon the greater Peril, of your Fortune; and the lesse, of your Reputation; And so the Honour countervaileth the Adventure; Of which Honour, your Lordship is in no small possession; when that her Majesty, (known to be, one of the most judicious Princes, in discerning of Spirits, that ever governed,) hath made choice of you, (meerly out of her Royal Iudgement; her Affection inclining rather to continue your Attendance;) into whose hand, and trust, to put the Com∣mand, and Conduct, of so great Forces; The Gathering the Fruit of so great Charge; The Execution of so many Counsels; The Redeeming, of the Defaults, of so many former Governers; The clearing of the Glory, of her so many happy years Reign, onely, in this part, eclipsed: Nay further, how far forth, the peril of that State, is interlaced with the peril of England; And therefore, how great the Honour is, to keep, and defend, the Approaches, or Ave-newes, of this Kingdom, I hear many discourse; And there is a great Difference, whether the Tortoise, gathereth her self, within her shell, hurt, or unhurt. And if any Man be of Opinion, that the Nature of the Enemy, doth extenuate, the Honour of the Service, being but a Rebell, and a Savage; I differ from him; For I see, the justest Triumphs, that the Romans, in their greatnesse, did obtain; And that, whereof the Emperours, in their Stiles, took Addition, and Denomination, were of such an Enemy, as this: That is, People Barbarous, and not reduced to Civility, magnifying a kind of lawlesse Liberty, and prodigal of Life, hardned in Body, fortified in Woods and Boggs, and placing both Justice and Felicity in sharpnesse of their Swords: Such were the Germans, and auncient Brittons, and di∣vers others. Upon which kinde of People, whether the Victory were a Conquest; or a Reconquest, upon a Rebellion, or a Revolt; It made no difference, (that ever I could find,) in Honour. And therefore, it is not the Enriching Predatory Warr, that hath the pre∣heminence in Honour; Else should it be more Honour, to bring in a Carick of rich Burthen, than one of the 12. Spanish Apostles. But then, this Nature of People, doth yield, a higher point of Ho∣nour, considered in Truth, and Substance, than any warr can yield, which should be atchieved, against a Civil Enemy; If the
End may be; Paci{que} imponere morem, to replant, and refound, the policy of that Nation; To which nothing is wanting, but a just, and Civil, Government: which Design, as it doth descend unto you, rom your Noble Father, who lost his life in that Action, (though he paid Tribute to Nature, and not to Fortune;) So, I hope your Lordship, shall be, as Fatal a Captain to this warr, as Afri∣canus was to the Warr of Carthage; After that both his Uncle, and Father, had lost their Lives, in Spain, in the same warr. Now, al∣though it be true, that these Things, which I write, (being but Representations, unto your Lordship, of the Honour, and Appea∣rance of Successe, of the Enterpris;) Be not much, to the purpose, of any Advice; yet it is that, which is left to me, being no Man of Warr, and ignorant in the particulars of Estate. For a Man may, by the Eye, set up the VVhite, in the midst of the But, though he be no Archer. Therefore I will onely add this VVish, accor∣ding to the English Phrase, which termeth, a well-willing Advice, a Wish: That your Lordship, in this whole Action, looking for∣ward, would set down this Position; That Merit is worthier than Fame; And looking back hither, would remember this Text, That Obedience is better than Sacrifice. For Designing to Fame, and Glory, may make your Lordship, in the Adventure of your Person, to be valiant, as a private Souldier, rather than as a General: It may make you, in your Commandements, rather to be Gracious, than Disciplinary: It may make you presse Action, (in respect of the great Expectation conceived,) rather hastily, than seasona∣bly, and safely: It may make you, seek rather, to atchieve the war, by force, than by Intermixture of Practice: It may make you, (if God shall send prosperous Beginnings,) rather seek the Fruition of that Honour, than the Perfection, of the work, in hand. And for the other point, that is the Proceeding, like a good Pro∣testant, upon expresse warrant, and not upon good Intention; your Lordship knoweth, in your wisdom; That as it is most fit for you, to desire convenient Liberty of Instructions; so it is no lesse fit for you, to observe the due Limits of them: Remembring, that the Exceeding of them, may not onely procure, in case of adverse Accident, a dangerous Disavow; But also, (in case of prospe∣rous Successe;) be subject to Interpretation, as if all were not re∣ferred, to the right End. Thus have I presumed, to write these few Lines, to your Lord∣ship, in Methodo Ignorantiae; which is, when a Man speaketh of a Subject, not according to the Matter, but according to the Model, of his own Knowledge And most humbly desire your Lordship, that the weaknesse thereof, may be supplyed, in your Lordship, by a benign Acceptation, as it is in me, by my best VVishing.
A Letter to the Earl of Essex, in offer of his Service, when he was first enlarged, to Essex House. My Lord; NO Man can expound my Doings better, than your Lordship; which makes me need to say the lesse: Onely, I humbly pray you to beleeve, that I aspire to the Conscience, and Commenda∣tion, of Bonus Civis, and Bonus Vir; And that, though I love some Things, better, (I confesse,) than I love your Lordship, yet I love few Persons better; Both for Gratitudes sake, and for your Ver∣tues; which cannot hurt, but by Accident; Of which my good Affection, it may please your Lordship, to assure your self; And of all the true Effects, and Offices, I can yield. For as I was ever sorry, your Lordship should fly, with waxen Wings, doubting Icarus Fortune; So for the growing, up of your own Feathers, be they Estridges, or other kinde, no man shall be more glad. And this is the Axill-Tree, whereon I have turned, and shall turn. Which having already signified, to you, by some near mean, ha∣ving so fit a Messenger, for mine own Letter, I thought good, also, to redouble by Writing. And so I commend you to Gods Protection. From Graies Inn, this 9th of Iuly, 1600. An Answer, of my Lord of Essex, to the immediately preceding Letter, of Mr. Bacons. Mr. Bacon; I Can neither Expound, nor Censure, your late Actions; Being ignorant, of all of them, save one; And having directed my Sight inward onely, to examine my Self. You doe pray me to be∣lieve, that you only aspire, to the Conscience, and Commenda∣tion, of Bonus Civis, and Bonus Vir; And I doe faithfully assure you, that while that is your Ambition, (though your Course be Active, and Mind Contemplative,) yet we shall both, Convenire in eodem Tertio; And, Convenire inter Nosipsos. Your Profession of Affection, and Offer of good Offices, are welcom to me: For an∣swer to them, I will say but this; That you have believed, I have been kind to you; And you may beleeve, that I cannot be other, either upon Humour, or mine own Election. I am a stranger, to all Poetical Conceits, or else I should say somewhat, of your Poetical Example. But this I must say; That I never flew, with other Wings, than Desire to merit; And Confidence in my Soveraigns Favour; And when one of these Wings failed me, I would light no where, but at my Soveraigns Feet, though she suffered me, to be
bruised, with my fall. And till her Majesty, that knows, I was never Bird of Prey, finds it to agree with her will, and her Service, that my Wings should be imped again, I have committed my Self, to the Mue. No power, but my Gods, and my Soveraigns, can al∣ter this Resolution, of Your Retired Friend, ESSEX. Two Letters framed, the one, as from Mr. Anthony Bacon, to the Earl of Essex; The other, as the Earls Answer thereunto, delivered to Sir Francis Bacon, with the Advice of Mr. An∣thony Bacon, his Brother, to be shewed to the Queen, upon some fit occasion; As a Mean, to work her Majesty, to receive the Earl again, to Favour and Attendance, at Court: They were devised, whils my Lord remained Prisoner, in his own House. My singular good Lord; THis standing at a stay, in your Lordships Fortunes, doth make me, in my Love towards your Lordship, jealous, lest you doe somewhat, or omit somewhat, that amounteth to a new Error. For I suppose, of all former Matters, there is a full Expiation: wherein, for any thing that your Lordship doth, I, for my part, (who am remote,) cannot cast, nor devise, wherein any Errour should be; except in one point, which I dare not censure, nor disswade: which is, that (as the Prophet saith,) In this Affliction, you look up, ad Manum Percutientem, and so make your peace with God. And yet I heard it noted, that my Lord of Leicester, (who could never get to be taken for a Saint, neverthelesse in the Queens Disfavour,) waxed seeming Religious: which may be thought by some, and used by others, as a Case resembling yours; If Men do not see, or will not see, the difference between your two Dis∣positions. But to be plain with your Lordship, my Fear rather is, because I hear, how some of your good, and wise, Friends, not unpractised in the Court, and supposing themselves, not to be un∣seen, in that deep, and unscrutable, Center of the Court, which is her Majesties Minde, doe not onely toll the Bell, but even ring out Peals, as if your Fortune were dead, and buried; And as if, there were no possibility, of recovering her Majesties Favour; And as if, the best of your Condition, were to live, a private, and reti∣red Life, out of Want, out of Peril, and out of manifest disgrace; And so in this perswasion of theirs, include a perswasion to your Lordship, to frame, and accommodate your Actions, and Mind, to that End: I fear, I say, that this untimely Despair, may,
in time, bring forth, a just Despair, by causing your Lord∣ship, to slacken, and break off your wise, loyal, and Seasona∣ble, Endeavours, and Industries, for Reintegration to her Ma∣jesties favour: In Comparison whereof, all other Circumstan∣ces, are but as Atomi; or rather, as Vacuum, without any Sub∣stance at all. Against this Opinion, it may please your Lord∣ship, to consider, of these Reasons, which I have collected; And to make judgement of them; Neither out of the Melancholy, of your present Fortune; nor out of the Infusion of that, which commeth to you, by others Relation, (which is subject to much Tincture;) But ex Rebus ipsis, Out o the Nature, of the Persons, and Actions, themselves; As the trustiest, and least deceiving Grounds, of Opinion. For though I am so unfortunate, as to be a stranger to her Majesties Eye, and to her Nature; yet by that which is apparent, I doe manifestly discern, that she hath the Character, of the Divine Nature, and Goodnesse; Quos amavit, amavit usque ad sinem; And where she hath a Creature, she doth not deface, nor defeat it: Insomuch, as if I observe rightly, in those persons, whom heretofore she hath honoured, with her special Favour, she hath covered, and remitted, not only Defects, and Ingratitudes, in Affection, but Errours in State, and Service. Secondly, if I can spell, and Scholar-like put together, the parts of her Majesties proceeding, now towards your Lordship; I cannot but make this Construction; That her Majesty, in her Royal In∣tention, never purposed, to call your Lordships Doings, into pub∣lick Question; But onely, to have used a Cloud, without a Shower, in censuring them, by some temporary Restraint onely, of Liberty, and debarring from her presence. For first, the Hand∣ling the Cause in the Starr-Chamber, you not called, was enfor∣ced, by the Violence, of Libelling, and Rumours; (wherein the Queen thought to have satisfied the world, and yet spared your Lordships Appearance;) And after, when that Means, which was intended, for the Quenching, of malicious Brutes, turned to kin∣dle them; (Because it was said, your Lordship, was condemned unheard; And your Lordships Sister wrote that piquant Letter,) then her Majesty saw plainly, that these winds of Rumours, could not be commanded down, without a Handling of the Cause, by Making you Party, and Admitting your Defence. And to this purpose, I doe assure your Lordship, that my Brother, Francis Ba∣con, who is too wise, (I think) to be abused, and too honest, to abuse; Though he be more reserved, in all particulars, than is needful; yet, in generality, he hath ever constantly, and with asse∣veration, affirmed to me, that both those Dayes; That of the Starr-Chamber, and that at my Lord Keepers, were wonne from the Queen, meerly upon necessity, and point of Honour, against her own In∣clination. Thirdly, in the last proceeding, I note 3. points; which are directly signiicant, That her Majesty, did expresly forbear,
any point, which was Irreparable, or might make your Lordship, in any degree, uncapable, of the return of her favour; Or might fix, any Character Indeleble, of disgrace upon you: For she spared, the Publick Place, of the Starr-Chamber: She limited the Charge, precisely, not to touch Disloyalty; And no Record re∣maineth to Memory, of the Charge, or Sentence. Fourthly, the very Distinction, which was made, in the Sentence, of Sequestra∣tion, from the places of Service in State; And leaving to your Lordship, the Place, of Master of the Horse, doth, to my understan∣ding, indicativè, point at this; That her Majesty meant, to use your Lordships Attendance in Court, while the Exercises, of the o∣ther places, stood suspended. Fifthly, I have heard, and your Lordship knoweth better, that now, since you were in your own Custodie, her Majesty, in Verbo Regio, and by his Mouth, by whom she committeth, her Royal Graunts, and Decrees, hath assured your Lordship, she will forbid, and not suffer, your Ruine. Sixth∣ly, as I have heard, her Majesty, to be a Prince, of that Magnani∣mity, that she will spare, the Service, of the ablest Subject, or Peer, when she shall be thought, to stand in need of it: So she is, of that Policy, as she will not loose, the Service, of a meaner than your Lordship, where it shall depend, meerly, upon her Choice, and Will. Seventhly, I hold it for a Principle; That those Dis∣eases, ae hardest to cure, whereof the Cause is obscure; And those easiest, whereof the Cause is manifest: VVhereupon I conclude, that since it hath been your Errour, in your Courses, towards her Majesty, which hath prejudiced you; That your Reforming, and Conformity, will restore you; So as you may be Faber Fortunae propriae. Lastly, considering your Lordship, is removed, from Dealing in Causes of State, and left onely to a Place of Atten∣dance; Methinks, the Ambition of any Man, who can endure no Partners, in State-Matters, may be so quenched, as they should not, laboriously, oppose themselves, to your Being in Court: So as upon the whole Matter, I cannot find, neither in her Majesties Person, nor in your own Person, nor in any third Person; Nei∣ther in former Presidents, nor in your own Case, any Cause, of dry, and peremptory, Despair. Neither do I speak this, but that if her Majesty, out of her Resolution, would design you, to a private Life, you should be as willing, upon her Appointment, to goe into the Wilderness, as into the Land of Promise. Onely, I wish your Lordship, will not preoccupate Despair, but put trust, next to God, in her Majesties Grace; and not to be wanting to your Self. I know your Lordship, may justly interpret, that this, which I perswade, may have some reference to my particular; because I may truly say; Te Stante, Non Virebo, (For I am withered in my self;) but Manebo, or Tenebo; I shall, in some sort, be, or hold out. But though your Lordships Years, and Health, may expect return of Grace, and Fortune; yet your Eclipse for a time,
is an Vltimum Vale, to my Fortune: And were it not, that I desire, and hope, to see my Brother established, by her Majesties favour; (as I think him well worthy, for that he hath done, and suffred,) it were time, I did take that Course, from which I disswade your Lordship. But now in the mean time, I cannot choose, but per∣form, those honest Duties, unto you, to whom I have been so deeply bounden. A Letter, framed, as from the Earl, in answer, of the former Letter. Mr. Bacon, I Thank you, for your kind, and carefull Letter. It perswades me that, which I wish strongly, and hope for weakly; That is, Possibility of Restitution, to her Majesties Favour: Your Argu∣ments, that would cherish Hope, turn to Despair. You say the Queen, never meant, to call me to Publick Censure, which shew∣eth her Goodnesse: But you see I passed it, which sheweth others Power. I beleeve most stedfastly, her Majesty never intended, to bring my Cause, to a Sentence; And I beleeve as verly, that since that Sentence, she meant to restore me, to attend upon her Person. But they that could use occasions (which was not in me to let,) and amplifie Occasions, and practise Occasions, to repre∣sent to her Majesty, a Necessity, to bring me to the one, can, and will, do the like, to stop me from the other. You say, my Er∣rours, were my Prejudice, and therefore I can mend my Self: It is true; But they that know, that I can mend my Self; And that if ever, I recover the Queen, that I will never loose her again; will never suffer me, to obtain Interest, in her favour. And you say, the Queen never forsook utterly, where she inwardly favoured: But I know not, whether the Hour-glasse of time, hath altered her; But sure I am, The false Glasse, of others Informations, must alter her, when I want accesse to plead mine own Cause. I know, I ought doubly, to be her Majesties; Both Iure Creationis; For I am her Creature: And Iure Redemptionis; For, I know, she hath saved me, from Overthrow. But for her first Love, and for her last Protection, and all her great Benefits, I can but pray for hr Majesty; And my Endeavours, are now, to make, my Prayers for her Majesty, and my Self, better heard. For thanks be to God, they that can make, her Majesty beleeve, I counterfeit with her, cannot make God beleeve, that I counterfeit with him: And they which can let me, from comming near unto her, cannot let me, from drawing near unto him, as I hope I doe daily. For your Brother, I hold him an honest Gentleman, and wish him all good;
Much rather, for your Sake. Your self, I know, hath suffered more for me, than any Friend I have: But I cannot but lament freely, as you see I do; And advise you, not to doe that, which I doe; which is, to despair. You know Letters, what hurt they have done me; And thereore make sure of this: And yet I could not, (as having no other Pledge of my Love,) but communicat freely with you, for the Ease of my Heart, and yours. A Letter to Mr. Secretary Cecill, after the Defeating, of the Spanish Forces, in Ireland; Inciting him, to emrace the Care, of Reducing that Kingdom, to Civility; with some rea∣sons sent, enclosed. It may please your Honour, AS one, that wisheth you, all Encrease of Honour; And as one, that cannot leave, to love the State, (what Interest soever I have, or may come, to have in it;) And as one, that now this dead Vacation time, hath some Leisure, ad aliud agendum; I will presume, to propound unto you, that, which though you cannot but see, yet I know not, whether you apprehend, and esteem it, in so high a degree; That is, for the best Action, of Importation to your self; Of sound Honour and Merit, to her Majesty, and this Crown; without Ventosity, and Popularity, that the Riches, of any Occasion, or the Tide, of any Opportunity, can possibly mi∣nister, or offer. And that is, the Causes of Ireland, if they be taken, by the right Handle. For if the Wound, be not ripped up again, and come to a Recrudency, by new Forein Succours, I think, that no Physician, will goe on much, with letting Bloud, In Decli∣natione Morbi; But will intend, to Purge, and Corroborate. To which purpose, I send you mine Opinion, without Labour of Words, in the Enclosed; And sure I am, that if you shall enter into the matter, according to the Vivacity, of your own Spirit, no∣thing can make unto you, a more gainfull return. For you shall make the Queens Felicity compleat, which now, (as it is,) is incom∣parable; And for your Self, you shall shew your self, as good a Patriot, as you are thought a Politick; And make the World per∣ceive, you have not lesse Generous Ends, than Dexterous Delivery, of your self, towards your Ends; And that you have, as well true Arts, & Grounds of Government, as the Facility, & Felicity, of Practice, and Negotiation; And that you are as well seen, in the Periods, and Tides, of Estates, as in your own Circle, and Way: Than the which, I suppose, nothing, can be a better Addition, and Accu∣mulation, of Honour, unto you. This, I hope, I may in private∣nesse, write, either as a Kinsman, that may be bold; or a Scho∣lar, that hath Liberty of Discourse, without Committing any
Absurdity. But if it seem any Error in me, thus to intromit my self; I pray your Honour, beleeve, I ever loved her Majesty, and the State, and now love your Self; And there is never any ve∣hment Love, without some Absurdity; As the Spaniard well sayes; Desuario con la Calentura. So desiring your Honours pardon, I ever continue. Considerations, touching the Queens Service, in IRELAND. THe Reduction, of that Country, as well to Civility, and Justice, as to Obedience, and Peace, (which things, as Affairs now stand, I hold to be Inseparable,) consisteth in 4. Points. 1. The Extinguishing, of the Relicks, of the Warr. 2. The Recovery, of the Hearts, of the People. 3. The Removing, of the Root, and Occasions, of new Troubles. 4. Plantations, and Buildings. For the first: Concerning the Places, and Times, and Particu∣larities, of further Prosecution, in fact, I leave it, to the Opinion, of Men of VVarr; Onely the Difficulty is, to distinguish, and discern, the Propositions, which shall be, according to the Ends, of the State here; (That is, final, and summary, towards the Extir∣pation, of the Troubles;) From those, which though they pretend Publick Ends, yet may referr, indeed, to the more Private, and Compendious Ends, of the Council there; or the particular Go∣verners, or Captains. But still, (as I touched in my Letter,) I doe think, much Letting Bloud, In Declinatione Morbi, is against Method of Cure; And that it will, but enduce Necessity, and exasperate Despair; And, percase, discover the Hollownesse of that, which is done already, which now blazeth to the best show. For Iag∣lia's, and Prosriptions, of 2. or 3. of the principal Rebels, they are, no doubt, Iure Gentium, lawfull; In Italy, usually practiced, upon the Banditi; Best in season, where a Side goeth down: And may do good, in two Kinds; The one, if they take Effect; The other, in the Distrust, which may follow, amongst the Rebells themselves. But of all other points, to my Understanding, the most Effectual is, the well Expressing, or Impressing, the Design of this State, up∣on that miserable, and desolate, Kingdom; Containing the same, between these two Lists, or Boundaries: The one, that the Queen, seeketh not, an Extirpation of that People, but a Reduction; And that now, she hath chastised them, by her Royal Power, and Arms, according to the Necessity of the Occasion; Her Majesty, taketh no pleasure, in Effusion of Bloud, or Displanting of Auncient Genera∣tions. The other, that hr Maesties Princely Care, is, principal∣ly, and intentionally, bent, upon the Action of Ireland: And that
she seeketh not, so much, the Ease of Charge, as the Royal per∣formance, of the Office of Protection, and Reclaim, of those her Subjects: And, in a word, that the Case is altered so far, as may stand, with the Honour, of the Time past. And again, I doe repeat, that if her Majesties Design be, ex Professo, to Reduce Re∣bells to Obedience, it makes weaknesse turn Christianity; and Con∣ditions Graces: And so hath a Finenesse, in Turning Utility, upon Point of Honour; which is agreeable, to the Humor, of these Times. And besides, if her Majesty, shall suddainly abae, the Lists of their Forces, and shall doe nothing to countervail it, in point of Reputation, of a Politick Proceeding, I doubt, Things may, too soon fall back, into the state they were in. Next to this. Adding Reputation to the Cause, by Imprinting an Opini∣on, of her Mjesties Care, an Intention, upon this Action, is the Taking away, of Reputation, from the Contrary side, by Cut∣ting off, the Opinion, and Reputation, of Forein Succours; To which purpose, this Enterprise of Algiers, (if it hold according to the Advertisement, and if it be not wrapped up, in the Period of this Summer,) seemeth, to be an Opportunity, coelitùs dimissa. And to the same purpose, nothing can be more fit, than a Treaty, or a Shadow, of a Treaty, of a Peace, with Spain; which, methinks, should be in our Power to fasten, at least Rumore tenus, to the Deluding, of as wise People, as the Irish. Lastly, for this point; That which the Auncients called, Potestas facta, redeundi ad Sani∣tatem; And, which is but a Mockery, when the Enemy is strong, or proud, but Effectual in his Declination; That is, A liberal Proclamation, of Grace, and Pardon, to such as shall submit, and come in within a time prefixed; And of some other Reward, to such, as shall bring others in; That one's Sword may be sharp∣ned by anothers; Is a Matter of good Experience, and now, I think, will come in time. And percase though I wish the Ex∣clusions, of such a pardon, exceeding few, yet it will not be safe, to continue some of them, in their Strength; But to translate them, and their Generations, into England: And give them Recom∣pence, and Satisfaction here, for their Possessions there; As the King of Spain did, by divers Families, of Portugal. To the Effect∣ing, of all the points, aforesaid; And likewise, those which fall, within the Divisions following, nothing can be in priority, (ei∣ther of Time, or Matter,) better, than the sending of some Com∣mission, of Countenance, Ad Res inspiciendas, & componendas: For it will be a very significant Demonstration, of her Majesties Care, of that Kingdom; A Credence, to any, that shall come in, and sub∣mit; A Bridle, to any, that shall have their Fortunes there, and shall apply, their Propositions, to private Ends; And an Evi∣dence, that her Majesty, after Arms laid down, speedily pursueth, a Politick Course, without Neglect, or Respiration: And it hath been the Wisdom of the best Examples of Government.
Towards the Recovery, of the Hearts of the People, there be but 3. things in Naturâ Rerum. 1. Religion. 2. Iustice, and Protection. 3. Obligation, and Reward. For Religion, (to speak first of Piety, and then of Policy,) all Di∣vines doe agree; That if Consciences, be to be enforced, at all, (wherein yet they differ) two Things must precede their Inforce∣ment: The one, Means of Instruction; The other, Time of Operati∣on: Neither of which they have yet had. Besides, till they be more like Reasonable Men, than they are, their Society, were ra∣ther Scandalous to the true Religion, than otherwise; As Pearls cast before Swine; For till they be clensed, from their Bloud, Incon∣tinency, and Theft, (which are now, not the Lapses, of particu∣lar Persons, but the very Lawes of the Nation,) they are Incom∣patible, with Religion Reformed. For Policy, there is no doubt, but to wrestle with them now, is directly opposite to their Reclai∣ming, and cannot but continue, their Alienation of Minde, from this Goverment. Besides, one of the principal Pretences, whereby the Heads of the Rebellion, have prevailed, both with the People, and with the Forreiner, hath been, the Defence, of the Catho∣lick Religion: And it is that likewise, hath made the Forreiner, re∣ciprocally, more plausible with the Rebell. Therefore a Tolera∣tion of Religion, (for a Time, not definite,) except it be in some Principal Townes, and Precincts; After the manner of some French Edicts, seemeth to me, to be a Matter, warrantable by Reli∣gion, and in Policy, of absolute Necessity. And the Hesitation, in this point, (I think,) hath been, a great Casting back, of the Af∣fairs there. Neither if any English Papit, or Recusant, shall for Liberty of his Conscience, transferre his Person, Family, and Fortunes thither, doe I hold it, a Matter of Danger, but expedi∣ent, to draw on Undertaking, and to further Population. Nei∣ther if Rome, will cozen it Self, by Conceiving, it may be some Degree, to the like Toleration, in England, doe I hold it, a matter of any Moment; But rather, a good Mean, to take off, the Fierce∣nesse, and Eagernesse, of the Humour of Rome; And to stay, fur∣ther Excommunications, or Interdictions, for Ireland. But there would goe, hand in hand, with this, some Course of Advancing Religion, indeed, where the People is capable thereof: As the sen∣ding over, some good Preachers, especially of that Sort, which are vehement, and zealous Perswaders, and not Scholastical; To be resident in principal Towns; Endowing them, with some Stipends, out of her Majesties Revenues; As her Majesty hath, most religi∣ously, and graciously done, in Lancashire: And the Recontinuing, and Replenishing the College, begun at Dublin; The placing of good Men, to be Bishops there; And the Taking Care, of the Ver∣sions, of Bibles, Catechisms, and other Books of Instruction, into the
Irish Language; And the like Religious Courses; Both for the Ho∣nour of God, and for the Avoiding of Scandal, and Insatisfacti∣on here, by the shew of a Toleration of Religion, in some parts there. For Iustice, the Barbarism, and Desolation of the Country, conside∣red, it is not possible, they should find, any Sweetness at all, of Justice; If it shall be, (which hath been the Errour, of Times past,) Formal, and fetched far off from the State; Because, it will require, running up and down, for Process; And give Occasion, for Polling, and Exactions by Fees; And many other Delayes, and Charges. And therefore, there must be an Interim, in which, the Iustice must be onely Summary; the rather, because it is fit, and safe, for a time, the Country do participate of Martial Go∣vernment: And therefore, I could wish, in every principal Town, or Place, of Habitation, there were a Captain, or Governer; And a Iudge; such as Recorders, and Learned Stewards, are here in Corporations; who may have a Prerogative Commission, to hear, and determine, Secundum sanam Discretionem; And as near, as may be, to the Laws, and Customes of England; And that, by Bill, or Pleint, without Original Writ; Reserving from their Sentence, matter of Freehold, and Inheritance, to be determined, by a superiour Iudge, Itinerant: And both Sentences, as well of the Bayliffwick Iudge, as Itinerant, to be reversed, (if Cause be,) before the Counsel, of the Province, to be established there, with fit Instructions. For Obligation, and Reward; It is true, (no doubt,) which was aunciently said; That a State, is contained, in two Words, Praemi∣um, and Poena. And I am perswaded, if a Penny in the Pound, which hath been spent i Poenâ, (For this kinde of Warr is but poena, a chastisement of Rebells, without Fruit, or Emolument, to this State;) had been spent in praemio, that is, in Rewarding, Things had never grown to this Extremity. But to speak forwards. The kee∣ping of the Principal Irish persons, in Terms of Contentment, and without Cause of particular Complaint; And, generally, the Carrying of an even Course, between the English, and the Irish; Whether it be in Competition; or whether it be in Controver∣sie; as if they were one Nation; (without that same partial Course, which hath been held, by the Governers, and Counsellers, there, that some have favoured the Irish, and some contrary;) Is one of the best Medicines of State. And as for other Points of Contentment; As the Countenancing of their Nobility, as well in this Court, as there; The Imparting of Knighthood; The Care, of Education, of their Children; And the like points of Comfort; They are Things, which fall into every Mans Consideration. For the Extirping, of the Seeds, of Troubles, I suppose, the main Roots are but three. The first, the Ambition, and Absolutenesse, of the Chief of the Families, and Septs; The second, the licentious Idlenesse, of their Kernes, and Souldiers, that lie upon the Coun∣try,
by Sesses, and such like Oppressions. And the Third, the barbarous Laws, Customs, their Brehen Laws, Habits of Apparel, their Poets or Heralds, that enchaunt them in Savage Manners, and sun∣dry other such Dreggs, of Barbarism, and Rebellion; Which, by a Number, of Politick Statutes, of Ireland, meet to be pu in Exe∣cution, are already forbidden; Unto which, such Additions may be made, as the present Time requireth. But the Deducing of this Branch, requireth a more particular Notice, of the State, and Manners there, than fall's within my Compasse. For Plantations, and Buildings, I doe find it strange, that in the last Plot, for the Population of Munster, there were Limitations, how much in Demesn, and how much in Farm, and how much in Tenancy: Again, how many Buildings should be erected; How many Irish, in Mixture, should be admitted; And other things foreseen almost to Curiosity; But no Restraint, that they might uot build, sparsim, at their pleasure; Nor any Condition, that they should make place Fortified, and Defensible: Which Omis∣sion was a strange Neglect, and Securenesse, to my understan∣ding. So as, for this last Point, of Plantations, and Buildings, there be two Considerations, which I hold most material; The one, for Quickning; And the other, for Assuring. The first is, that choice be made, of such Persons, for the Government, of Towns, and Pla∣ces; And such Vndertakers be procured, as be Men gracious, and well beloved, and are like to be well followed. Wherein, for Munster, it may be, (because it is not Res integra; but that the for∣mer Vndertakers, stand interessed,) there will be some Difficulty: But surely, in mine Opinion, either by Agreeing with them, or by Over-ruling them, with a Parliament, in Ireland; (which in this Course, of a Politick Proceeding, infinite Occasions, will require, speedily, to be held;) It will be fit, to supply, fit quali∣fied Persons, of Vndertakers. The other, that it be not left, (as here∣tofore,) to the Pleasure, of the Vndertakers, and Adventurers, where, and how, to build, and plant; But that they doe, according to a Prescript, or Formulary: For first, the Places, both Mari∣time, and Inland, which are fittest, for Colonies, or Garrisons; As well, for doubt of the Foreiner, as for the Keeping the Countrey, in Bridle, would be found, surveyed, and resolved upon: And that the Patentees, be tyed, to build, in those places onely, and to fortify, as shall be thought convenient. And lastly, it followeth of Course, in Countries, of new Populations, to invite, and provoke Inhabitants, by ample Liberties, and Charters.
A Letter, of Recommendation, of his Service, to the Earl, of Northumberland, a few dayes, before Queen Elizabeths death. It may please your good Lordship, AS the Time, of Sowing a Seed, is known, but the Time of Comming up, and Disclosing, is casual, or according to the Season; So, I am a Witnesse to my Self, that there hath been co∣vered, in my mind, a long time, a Seed of Affection, and Zeal, to∣wards your Lordship, sown by the Estimation of your Vertues, and your particular Honours, and Favours, to my Brother Deceased, and my Self: Which Seed still springing, now bursteth forth, in∣to this Profession. And to be plain, with your Lordship, it is ve∣ry true; (And no Winds, or Noyses, of Civil Matters, can blow this, out of my Head, or Heart;) That your great Capacity, and Love, towards Studies, and Contemplations, of an higher, and worthier Nature, than Popular; (A Nature rare in the World, and in a person, of your Lordships Quality, almost singular;) is to me, a great, and chief Motive, to draw my Affection, and Admi∣ration, towards you. And therefore, good my Lord, if I may be, of any use, to your Lordship, by my Head, Tongue, or Penn, Means, or Friends, I humbly pray you, to hold me your own; And herewithall, not to doe so much Disadvantage to my good Mind, nor Partly to your own VVorth, as to conceive, that this Commendation, of my humble Service, proceedeth, out of any Streights, of my Occasions, but meerly, out of an Election, and indeed, the Fulnesse of my Heart: And so wishing your Lordship; all prosperity, I continue. A Letter, of Offer, of his Service, to his Majesty, upon his firs Comming in. It may please your most excellent Majesty, IT is observed, upon a place, in the Canticles, by some; Ego sum Flos Campi, et Lilium Convallium, that à Dispari, it is not said, Ego sum Flos Horti, et Lilium Montium, because the Majesty of that Person, is not enclosed for a Few, nor appropriate to the Great. And yet, notwithstanding, this Royal Vertue of Accesse, which Nature, and Judgement, hath planted, in your Majesties Minde, as the Portal of all the rest, could not, of it Self, (my Imperfecti∣ons considered,) have animated me, to have made Oblation, of my Self, immediately, to your Majesty, had it not been joyned,
with an Habit, of the like Liberty, which I enjoyed, with my late dear Soveraign Mistris; A Princesse, happy in all things else; but most happy in such a Successor. And yet further, and more near∣ly, I was not a little encouraged, not only, upon a Supposal, that unto your Majesties Sacred Ear, (open to the Air of all Vertues,) there might come, some small Breath, of the good Memory of my Father, so long, a Principal Counsellor, in your Kingdom; But al∣so, by the particular Knowledge, of the infinite Devotion, and in∣cessant Endeavours, (beyond the strength of his Body, and the nature of the Times;) which appeared, in my good Brother, to∣wards your Majesties Service; And were, on your Majesties part, through your singular Benignity, by many, most gracious, and lively, Significations, and Favours, accepted, and acknowledged, beyond the merit, of any thing, he could effect. Which Endea∣vours, and Duties, for the most part, were common, to my Self, with him, though, by design, (as between Brethren,) dissembled. And therefore, most high, and mighty King, my most dear, and dread, Soveraign Lord; since now, the Corner Stone, is laid, of the mightiest Monarchy, in Europe; And that God above, who hath ever a Hand, in brideling the Flouds, and Motions of the Seas, and of Peoples Hearts, hath, by the miraculous, and universal con∣sent, (the more strange, because it proceedeth, from such Diver∣sity of Causes, in your comming in;) Given a Sign, and Token, of great Happinnesse, in the Continuance of your Reign; I think, there is no Subject, of your Majesties, which loveth this Island, and is not hollow, or unworthy, whose Heart is not set on fire; Not onely, to bring you Peace-Offrings, to make you propitious; But to sacrifice himself, a Burnt-Offring, or Holocaust, to your Majesties Service: Amongst which number, no Mans Fire, shall be more pure, and fervent, than mine. But how farr forth it shall blaze out, that resteth, in your Majesties Imployment. So thirst∣ing, after the Happinesse, of Kissing your Royal Hand, I conti∣nue ever. To Mr. Faules, in Scotland, upon the Entrance, of his Majesties Reign. SIR, The Occasion awaketh in me, the Remembrance, of the constant, and mutual, good Offices, which passed, between my good Brother, and your Self: wherunto, (as you know,) I was not, altogether, a Stranger; Though the Time, and Design, (as be∣tween Brethren,) made me more reserved. But well doe I bear in minde, the great opinion, which my Brother, (whose Judgement I much reverence,) would often expresse to me, of your Extraor∣dinary Sufficiency, Dexterity, and Temper, which he had found
in you, in the Business, and Service, of the King, our Soveraign Lord: This latter, bred in me, an Election, as the former gave an Inducement, for me, to address my Self, to you; And to make this Signification, of my Desire, towards a mutual Entertain∣ment, of good Affection, and Correspondence, between us; Ho∣ping, that both some good Effect, may result of it, towards the Kings Service; And that, for our particulars, though Occasion give you the precedence, of furthering my being known, by good note, unto the King; So no long time will intercede, before I, on my part, shall have some means given, to requite your Favours, and to verify your Commendation. And so, with my loving Commendations, good Mr. Faules, I leave you to Gods Goodness. From Graies Inne, the 25th of March. A Letter, commending his Love, and Occasions, to Sir Thomas Challoner, then in Scotland, upon his Majesties En∣trance. SIR, For our Money matters, I am assured, you received no In∣satisfaction: For you know my Minde; And you know my Means; which now, the Openness of the time, caused, by this blessed Consent, and Peace, will encrease; And so our Agree∣ment, according to your time, be observed. For the present, ac∣cording to the Roman Adage; (That one Cluster of Grapes, ripeneth best besides another;) I know, you hold me not unworhty, whose muual Friendship, you should cherish: And I, for my part, con∣ceive good hope, that you are likely to become, an acceptable Servant, to the King, our Master: Not so much, for any way made heretofore, (which, in my Judgement will make no great difference,) as for the Stuff and Sufficiency, which, I know, to be in you; And whereof, I know, his Majesty, may reap great Ser∣vice. And therefore, my general Request is, that according to that industrious Vivacity, which you use, towards your Friends, you will further his Majesties good Conceit, and Inclination, to∣wards me; To whom words, can not make me known; Nei∣ther mine own, nor others; but Time will, to no Disadvantage, of any, that shall fore-runn, his Majesties Experience, by your Testimony, and Commendation. And though, Occasion give you the Precedence, of Doing me this special good Ofice; yet, I hope, no long time will intercede, before I shall have some means, to requite your Favour, and acquit your Report. More particularly, having thought good, to make Oblation, of my most humble Service, to his Majesty, by a few Lines, I doe desire your loving care, and help, by your Self, or such Means, as I referr to
your Discretion, to deliver, and present the same, to his Majesties Hands. Of which Letter, I send you a Copy, that you may know, what you carry; And may take, of Mr. Matthew, the Let∣ter it Self; if you be pleased, to undertake the Delivery. Lastly, I doe commend to your Self, and such your Curtesies, as Occasi∣on may require, this Gentleman, Mr. Matthew; eldest Sonne, to my Lord Bishop, of Duresm, and my very good Friend; Assuring you, that any Curtesy, you shall use towards him, you shall use, to a very worthy young Gentleman, and one, I know, whose Ac∣quaintance, you will much esteem. And so I ever conti∣nue. A Letter, to Mr. Davis, then gone to the King, at his first Entrance. MR. Davis, Though you went, on the sudden, yet you could not goe, before you had spoken with your Self, to the purpose, which I will now write: And therefore, I know, it shall be alto∣gether needless, save that I meant to shew you, that I was not asleep. Briefly, I commend my Self to your Love, and the well using my Name; As well in repressing, and answering for me, if there be any Biting, or Nibling at it, in that Place; As by im∣printing a good Conceit, and Opinion of me, chiefly in the King; (of whose favour, I make my Self, comfortable Assurance;) As otherwise in that Court: And not onely so, but generally, to perform to me, all the good Offices, which the Vivacity of your Wit, can suggest, to your minde, to be performed to one, with whose Affection, you have so great Sympathy; And in whose Fortune, you have so great Interest. So desiring you to be good, to concealed Poets, I continue. A Letter, to Mr. Faules. 28 Martii, 1603. MR. Faules, I did write unto you, yesterday, by Mr. Lake, (who was dispatched hence, from their Lordships,) a Letter, of Re∣vivour, of those Sparks of former Acquaintance, between us, in my Brothers time: And now, upon the same Confidence, finding so fit a Messenger, I would not fail to salute you; Hoping it will fall out so happily, as that you shall be one, of the Kings Servants, which his Majesty, will first employ, here with us: where, I hope, to have some means, not to be barren, in Friendship, towards you. We all thirst, after the Kings Comming, accounting all this, but as the Dawning, of the Day; before the Rising, of the Sun, till we
have his Presence. And though, now, his Majestie, must be Ia∣nus Bifrons, to have a Face to Scotland, as well as to England, yet, Quod nunc instat agendum: The Expectation is here, that he will come in State, and not in Strength. So for this time, I commend you to Gods Goodness. A Letter, to Mr. Robert Kempe, upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth. MR. Kempe, This Alteration is so great, as you might justly conceive, some Coldness of my Affection towards you, if you should hear nothing from me, I living in this Place. It is in vain to tell you, with what wonderfull Still, and Calm, this Wheel is turned round: Which, whether it be, a Remnant, of her Felicity, that is gone, or a Fruit, of his Reputation, that is comming, I will not determine. For I cannot, but divide my Self, between her Memory, and his Name: Yet we account it, but a fair Morn before Sun-rising, before his Majesties Presence; Though, for my part, I see not, whence any VVeather should arise. The Papists are con∣tained, with Fear enough, and Hope too much. The French, is thought to turn his Practice, upon procuring, some Disturbance in Scotland, where Crowns may doe wonders: But this Day, is so welcom to the Nation, and the time so short, as I doe not fear the Effect. My Lord of Southampton, expecteth Release, by the next Dispatch, and is already much visited, and much well wish∣ed. There is continual poasting, by Men of good Quality, to∣wards the King. The rather, I think, because this Spring time, it is but a kinde of Sport. It is hoped, that as the State here, hath performed the part, of good Atturneys, to deliver the King, quiet Possession, of his Kingdoms: So the King, will re-deliver them, qui∣et Possession of their Places; Rather filling Places void, than re∣moving Men placed. So, &c. A Letter, to my Lord of Northumberland, mentioning a Proclamation, drawn for the King, at his Entrance. It may please your Lordship, I Doe hold it, a Thing formal, and necessary, for the King, to fore-runn his Comming, (be it never so speedy,) with some Gracious Declaration, for the Cherishing, Entertaining and pre∣paring, of Mens Affections. For which purpose, I have concei∣ved a Draught, it being a thing familiar in my Mistris her times, to have my Penn used, in Publick Writings, of Satisfaction. The
Use of this, may be, in two sorts: First, properly, if your Lrd∣ship hink it convenient, to shew the King any such Drght, be∣cause the Veins, and Pulses, of this Stte, cannot bin be be known here; which if your Lordship should doe, then I would desire you, to withdraw my Name, and onely signifie that you ave some Heads of Direction, of such a Matter, to one, o whose Stile, and Penn, you had some Opinion. The other, Collateral The though your Lordship, make no other use of it, yet it is a Kine o Portraicture, of that, which I think, worthy to be advised, by your Lordship, to the King; And, perhaps, more compendious, and significant, than if I had set them down in Articles. I would have attended your Lordship, but for some little Physick, I took. To morrow morning, I will wait on you. So I ever, &c. A Letter, to the Earl of Southampton, upon the Kings Comming in. It may please your Lordship, I Would have been very glad, to have presented, my humble Ser∣vice, to your Lordship, by my attendance, if I could have fore∣seen, that it should not have been, unpleasing unto you. And therefore, because I would commit no Error, I chose to write; Assuring your Lordship, how credible soever, it may seem to you, at first, yet it is as true, as a Thing, that God knoweth; That this great Change, hath wrought in me, no other Change, towards your Lordship, than this; That I may safely be now, that which I was truly before. And so craving no other pardon, than for troub∣ling you, with my Letter, I doe not now begin to be, but continue to be, Your Lordships humble and much devoted. A Letter, to the Earl of Northumberland, after he had been with the King. It may please your good Lordship, I Would not have lost this Journey, and yet I have not that I went for. For I have had no private Conference, to purpoe with the King. No more, hath almost any other English: For the Speach, his Majesty admitteth, with some Noblemen, is rather, Matter of Grace, than Matter of Business; With the Atturney he spake, urged by the Treasurer of Scotland, but no more than needs must. After I had received his Majesties first Welcom, and was
promised private Access, yet not knowing, what matter of Ser∣vice, your Lordships Letter carried, (for I saw it not;) And well knowing, that Primeness in Advertisement, is much, I chose, ra∣ther, to deliver it to Sir Tho. Heskins, than to cool it, in mine own Hands, upon Expectation of Access. Your Lordship shall finde a Prince, the furthest from Vain-Glory, that may be; And rather, like a Prince, of the auncient Form, than of the latter Time: His Speech is swift, and Cursory, and in the full Dialect of his Country, And in Speech of Business short, in Speech of Discourse large: He affecteth Popularity, by gracing such, as he hath heard, to be Popular, and not by any Fashions of his own. He is thought somewhat general, in his Favours; And his Vertue of Access, is rather, because he is much abroad, and in Press, than that he gi∣veth easie Audience. He hastneth, to a mixture, of both King∣dms, and Occasions, faster perhaps, than Policy will well bear. I told your Lordship, once before, that (methought) his Majesty rather asked Counsel, of the time past, than of the time to come. But it is yet early, to ground any Setled Opinion. For the parti∣culars, I referr to conference, having in these generals, gone fur∣ther, in so tender an Argument, than I would have done, were not the Bearer hereof so assured. So I continue, &c. A Letter, to Mr. Pierce, Secretary, to the Deputy of IRELAND. Mr. Pierce, I Am glad to hear of you, as I doe; And for my part, you shall find me ready, to take any Occasion, to further your credit, and preferment: And I dare assure you, (though I am no Underta∣ker,) to prepare your way with my Lord of Salisbury, for any good Fortune, which may befall you. You teach me to complain of Business; whereby I write the more briefly; And yet I am so unjust, as that which I allege for mine own Excuse, I cannot ad∣mit for yours. For I must, by Expecting, exact yor Letters, with this Fruit, of your Sufficiency, as to understand, how things pass, in that Kingdom. And therefore, having begun, I pray you con∣tinue. This is not meerly Curiosity, for I have ever, (I know not by what Instinct,) wish'd well, to that impollish'd part of this Crown. And so, with my very loving Commendations, I remain.
A Letter, to the King, upon presenting the Discourse, touching the Plantation, of Ireland. It may please your excellent Majesty, I Know not better how to express, my good wishes of a New Year, to your Majesty, than by this little Book, which in all humble∣ness, I send you. The Stile, is a Stile of Business, rather than Cu∣rious, or Elaborate. And herein, I was encouraged, by my Ex∣perience, of your Majesties former grace, in accepting of the like poor Field-Fruits, touching the Vnion: And certainly, I reckon this Action, as a Second Brother, to the Vnion. For I assure my Self, that England, Scotland, and Ireland, well united, is such a Trifoile, as no Prince, except your Self, (who are the worthiest) weareth in his Crown, Si potentia reducatur in Actum. I know well, that for me, to beat my Brains, about these things, they be Majo∣ra quam pro Fortuna; But yet they be, Minora quam pro Studio, as Voluntate. For as I doe yet bear, an extreme Zeal, to the Memo∣ry, of my old Mistris, Queen Elizabeth; To whom, I was rather bound, for her Trust, than her Favour; So I must acknowledge my Self, more bound, to your Majesty, both for Trust, and Favour; whereof, I will never deceive the one, as I can never deserve the other. And so in all humbleness, kissing your Majesties sacred hands, I remain. A Letter, to the Lord Chancellor, touching the History, of Britaine. It may please your good Lordship, SOme late Act of his Majesty, referred to some former Speech, which I have heard from your Lordship, bred in me, a great De∣sire; And the strength of Desire, a Boldness, to make an humble Proposition, to your Lordship; Such, as in me, can be no better, than a Wish: But, if your Lordship should apprehend it, it may take, some good, and worthy, Effect. The Act, I speak of, is the Order, given by his Majesty, for the Erection of a Tomb, or Monu∣ment, for our late Soveraign, Queen Elizabeth; Wherein I may note much, but onely this, at this time; that as her Majesty, did alwayes right, to his Majesties Hopes; So his Highness, doth, in all things, Right to her Memory; A very just, and Princely Retribution. But from this Occasion, by a very easie Ascent, I pas∣sed further, being put in minde, by this Representative, of her Person, of the more true, and more vive, Representation, which is of er Life, and Government: For as Statues, and Pictures, are dumb
Histories, so Histories, are speaking Pictures: wherein, if my Affecti∣on, be not too great, or my Reading too small, I am of this Opini∣on; That if Plutarch, were alive, to write Lives, by Parallels, it would trouble him, for Vertue, and Fortune both, to finde for her, a Parallel, amongst Women. And though she was of the Pas∣sive Sexe, yet her Government, was so Active, as in my simple Opi∣nion, it made more Impression, upon the several States of Europe, than it received from thence. But, I confess, unto your Lordship, I could not stay there, but went a little further, into the Conside∣ration of the Times, which have passed, since King Henry the 8th; wherein I find the strangest Variety, that, in so little Number, of Successions of any Hereditary Monarchy, hath ever been known: The Reign of a Child: The offer of an Vsurpation, though it were but as a Diary Ague; The Reign, of a Lady, married, to a Foreiner; And the Reign, of a Lady, Solitary, and Unmarried; So that, as it commeth to pass, in Massive Bodies; That they have certain Tre∣pidations, and Waverings, before they fix, and settle; So it see∣meth, that by the Providence of God, this Monarchy, (before it was to settle in his Majesty, and his Generations; In which, I hope, it is now established, for ever;) Hath had these Prelusive changes, in these Barren Princes. Neither, could I contain my Self here; (As it is easier to multiply, than to stay a Wish;) But calling to Remembrance, the Unworthiness, of the History of England, in the main continuance thereof; And the Partiality, and Obliqui∣ty, of that of Scotland, in the latest, and largest Offer, that I have seen; I conceived, it would be Honour, for his Majesty, and a work very memorable, if this Island of Great Britain, as it is now joyned, in Monarchy, for the Ages to come; so it were joyned in History, for the Times past; And that one Just, and compleat, History, were compiled, of both Nations. And if any Man think, it may refresh the Memory, of former Discords, he may satisfy himself with the Verse; Olim haec meminisse juvabit. For the Case being now altered, it is Matter of Comfort, and Gratulation, to remember former Troubles. Thus much, if it may please your Lordship, is in the Optative Mood. It is time, that I did, Look a lit∣le, into the Potential: wherein the Hope, which I conceived, was grounded, upon 3. Observations. The First, the Nature of these Times, which flourish in Learning, both of Art, and Language: which giveth Hope, not onely that it may be done, but that it may be well done. Secondly, I doe see that, which all the World see's, in his Majesty, both a wonderfull Judgement in Learning, and a singular Affection towards Learning; And works, which are of the Mind, and not of the Hand. For there cannot be, the like Honour sought, in building of Galleries, and Planting of Elmes, along high-wayes, and the outward Ornaments, wherein France now is busie; (Things rather of Magnificence, than of Magnani∣mity;) As there is, in the Vniting of States, Pacifying of Controver∣sies,
Nourishing, and Augmenting, of Learning, and Arts, and the particular Actions appertaining unto these; Of which kind, Ci∣cero judged truly, when he said to Caesar; Quantum Operibus tuis de∣trahet Vetustas, tantum addet laudibus. And lastly, I call to minde, that your Lordship, at some times, had been pleased, to express unto me, a great desire, that something of this Nature should be performed; Answerable, indeed, to your other noble, and wor∣thy, Courses, and Actions: Joyning, and adding, unto the great Services, towards his Majesty; (which have, in small Compass of Time, been put upon your Lordship,) other great Deservings, both of the Church, and Commonwealth, and Particulars: So as the Opini∣on, of so great, and wise a Man, doth seem to me, a good War∣rant, both of the Possibility, and Worth, of this Matter. But all this while, I assure my Self, I cannot be mistaken, by your Lordship, as if I sought an Ofice, or Employment for my Self: For no Man knowes better, than your Lordship, that if, there were in me, any Faculty thereunto, yet neither my Course of Life, nor Profession, would permit it: But because there be so many good Painters, both for Hand, and Colours, it needeth but Encourage∣ment, and Instructions, to give Life unto it. So, in all Humble∣ness, I conclude, my presenting unto your Lordship, of this Wish; which, if it perish, it is but a loss of that, which is not: And so craving pardon, that I have taken so much time, from your Lord∣ship, I remain. A Letter to the King, upon the sending unto him, a Beginning, of an History, of his Majesties Times. It may please your Majesty, HEaring, that you are at leisure, to peruse Stories, a desire took me, to make an Experiment, what I could doe, in your Maje∣sties times; which being, but a Leaf, or two, I pray your pardon, if I send it, for your Recreation; Considering, that Love must creep, where it cannot goe. But to this, I add, these Petitions. First, that if your Majesty doe dislike any thing, you would con∣ceive, I can amend it, upon your least beck. Next, that if I have not spoken, of your Majesty, Encomiastically, your Majesty, would be pleased, only to ascribe it, to the Law, of an History; which doth not cluttr together praises, upon the first mention of a Name, but rather disperseth, and weaveth them, through the whole Nar∣rative. And as for the Proper place, of Commemoration, (which is in the Period of Life,) I pray God, I may never live, to write it. Tirdly, that the reason, why I presumed to think of this Obla∣tion, was because, whatsoever my Disability be, yet I shall have that Advantage, which, (almost) no Writer of History, hath had;
In that, I shall write of Times, not onely since I could Remem∣ber, but since I could observe. And lastly, that it is onely, for your Majesties Reading. A Letter, to the Earl of Salisbury, upon sending of him, one of his Books, of Advancement of Learning. IT may please your good Lordship; I present your Lordship, with a Work, of my vacant time; which if it had been more, the Work had been better. It appertaineth to your Lordship, (besides my particular respects,) in some Propriety; In regard, you are a great Governer, in a Province of Learning. And (that which is more) you have added to your Place, Affection towards Lear∣ning; And to your Affection, Judgement. Of which, the last, I could be content, were, (for the time,) less, that you might the less exquisitely Censure, that which I offer unto you. But sure I am, the Argument is good, if it had lighted upon a good Author. But I shall content my self, to awake better Spirits; Like a Bell∣ringer, which is first up, to call others to Church. So with my humble Desire, of your Lordships good Acceptation, I re∣main. A Letter, to the Lord Treasurer, Buckhurst, upon the like Argument. MAy it please your good Lordship; I have finish'd a Work, tou∣ching the Advancement, or Setting forward of Learning; which I have dedicated to his Majesty; the most learned, of a Soveraign, or Temporal Prince, that Time, hath known. And upon reaon, not unlike, I humbly present, one of the Books, to your Lordship: Not onely, as a Chanceller, of an Vniversity, but as one, that was ex∣cellently bred, in all Learning; which I have ever noted, to shine, in all your Speeches, and Behaviours. And therefore your Lord∣ship, will yield a gracious Aspect, to your first Love; And take pleasure, in the Adorning of that, wherewith your self are so much adorned. And so humbly desiring your favourable Acceptation therof, with Signification of humble Duty, I remain.
A Letter, of the like Argument, to the LORD CHANCELLER. MAy it please your good Lordship; I humbly present your Lord∣ship, with a Work; wherein, as you have much Commande∣ment, over the Authour: So your Lordship, hath also great Inte∣rest, in th Argument: For to speak without Flattery, few have like use of Learning, or like Judgement in Learning, as I have ob∣served in your Lordship. And again, your Lordship, hath been a great Planter of Learning; Not onely, in those places, in the Church, which have been in your own Gift; But also, in your Com∣mendatory Vote, no man hath more constantly held; Detur Dig∣niori: And therefore, both your Lordship, is beholding to Lear∣ning, and Learning beholding to you; Which maketh me presume, with good Assurance, that your Lordship, will accept well of these my Labours; The rather, because your Lordship, in private Speech, hath often begun to me, in expressing, your Admirati∣on, of his Majesties learning, to whom I have dedicated this Work And whose Vertue, and Perfection, in that kinde, did chiefly move me, to a Work of this Nature. And so, with Significa∣tion, of my most humble Duty, and Affection, to your Lordship, I remain. A Letter, of like Argument, to the Earl of Northampton, with request, to Present the Book, to his Majesty. It may please your good Lordship; HAving finished a Work, touching the Advancement of Learning, and dedicated the same, to his Sacred Majesty, whom I dare a∣vouch, (if the Records of Time err not,) to be the learnedest King, that hath reigned; I was desirous, in a kinde of Congruity, to present it, by the learnedest Counsellor, in this Kingdom; To the end, that so good an Argument, lighting upon so bad an Author, might receive some Reputation, by the Hands, into which, and by which, it should be delivered. And therefore, I make it, my humble St, to your Lordship, to present this mean, but well meant Writing, to his Majesty, and with it, my humble, and zea∣lous Duty; And also, my like humble request of Pardon, if I have too often, taken his name in Vain; Not onely in the Dedication, but in the Voucher, of the Authority, of his Speeches, and Wri∣tings. And so I remain.
A Letter, of Request, to Dr. Playfer, to Translate the Book, of Advancement of Learning, into Latine. Mr. Dr. Playfer: A Great Desire, will take a small Occasion; to hope, and put in Trial, that which is desired. It pleased you, a good while since, to express unto me, the good Liking, which you conceived, of my Book, of the Advancement of Learning; and that more Sig∣nificantly, (as it seem'd to me,) than out of Curtesie, or Civil Respect. My Self, as I then took Contentment, in your Appro∣bation thereof; So I should esteem, and acknowledge, not onely my Contentment encreased, but my Labours aduanced, if I might obtain your help, in that nature which I desire. Wherein, be∣fore I set down, in plain Terms, my request unto you, I will open my Self, what it was, which I chiefly sought, and propounded, to my Self, in that Work; That you may perceive, that which I now desire, to be pursuant thereupon. If I doe not much erre, (For any Judgement, that a Man maketh, of his own Doings, had need be spoken, with a Si nunquam fallit Imago,) I have this Opi∣nion, that if I had sought mine own Commendation, it had been, a much fitter Course or me, to have done, as Gardeners used to doe, by taking their Seed, and Slipps, and rearing them first into Plants, and so uttering them in Pots, whn they are in Flower, and in their best State. But for as much, as my End, was Merit, of the State of Learning, (to my Power,) and not Glory; And be∣cause my purpose was, rather to Excite, other Mens Wits, than to magnify mine own; I was desirous, to prevent the uncertainness, of mine own Life, & Times, by uttering rather Seeds, than Plants: Nay, and further, (as the Proverb is,) by sowing with the Basket, rather than with the Hand: Wherefore, since I have only taken upon me, to ring a Bell, to call other wits together, (which is the meanest Office,) it cannot but be consonant to my Desire, to have that Bell heard, as farr as can be. And since they are but Sparks, which can work but upon Matter prepared, I have the more rea∣son, to wish, that those Sparks may fly abroad, That they may the better find, and light, upon those Minds, and Spirits, which are apt to be kindled. And therefore, the Privateness of the Lan∣guage considered, wherein it is written, excluding so many Rea∣ders; As on the other side, the Obscurity of the Argument, in many parts of it, excludeth many others; I must accompt it, a Second Birth, of that Work, if it might be translated into Latine, without manifest loss, of the Sense, and Matter. For this purpose, I could not represent to my Self, any Man, into whose hands, I doe more earnestly desire, that Work should fall, than your Self: For by that, I have heard, and read, I know no Man, a greater
Master, in Commanding Words, to serve Matter. Nevertheless, I am not ignorant of the worth of your Labours; Whether such as your Place, and Profession imposeth; Or such, as your own Vertue, may, upon your Voluntary Election, take in hand. But I can lay before you, no other perswasions, than either the Work it Self, may affect you with; Or the Honour, of his Majesty, to whom it is dedicated; Or your Particular Inclination to my Self; who, as I never took so much comfort, in any Labours of mine own, so I shall never acknowledge my Self, more obliged, in any thing, to the Labour of another, than in that, which shall assist it. Which your labour, if I can, by my Place, Profession, Means, Friends, Travel, Work, Deed, requite unto you, I shall steem my Self, so streightly bound thereunto, as I shall be ever most ready, both to take, and seek, occasion of Thankfulness. So leaving it, neverthe∣less, Salv amicitiâ, (as reason is,) to your own good Liking, I remain, A Letter, to Sir Thomas Bodley, upon sending of him, his Book, of Advancement of Learning. I Think, no Man, may more truly say, with the Psalm, Mul∣tùm Incola fuit Anima mea, than my Self, For I doe confesse, since I was of any Understanding, my Minde, hath, in Effect, been absent from that I have done: And in Absence, are many Er∣rours, which I doe willingly acknowledge; And amongst the rest, this great one, that ledd the rest; That knowing my Self, by inward Calling, to be fitter, to hold a Book, than to play a part, I have led my life in Civil Causes; For which I was not very fit by Nature, and more unfit, by the preoccupation of my Minde. Therefore calling my Self home, I have now, for a time, enjoyed my Self; whereof, likewise, I desire, to make the World partaker. My Labours, (if I may so term that, which was the Comfort, of my other Labours,) I have Dedicated to the King; Desirous, if there be any Good in them, it may be, as the Fat of a Sacrifice, incensed to his Honour; And the second Copy, I have sent unto you; Not onely, in good Affection, but in a kinde of Con∣gruity, in regard, of your great, and rare desert, of Learning. For Bocks, are the Shrines, where the Saint is, or is beleeved to be. And you, having built an Ark, to save Learning, from Deluge, de∣serve Propriety, in any new Instrument, or Engine, whereby Lear∣ning, should be improved or advanced.
A Letter, to the Bishop of Ely, upon sending his Writing, entituled, Cogitata, & Visa. MY very good Lord: Now your Lordship, hath been so long in the Church, and the Palace, disputing, between Kings, and Popes; Methinks, you should take pleasure, To look into the Field, and refresh your minde, with some Matter, of Philosophy; Though that Science, be now, through Age, waxed a Childe again, and left to Boyes, and young men. And because you were wont to make me beleeve, you took liking to my Writings, I send you some of this Vacations Fruits; And thus much more, of my minde, and purpose. I hasten not to Publish; perishing I would prevent. And I am forced, to respect, as well my Times, as the Matter. For with me it is thus; and I think with all Men in my Case: If I bind my Self, to an Argument, it loadeth my Minde: But if I rid my Mind, of the present Cogitation, it is rather a Recreati∣on. This hath put me into these Miscellanies; which I purpose to suppress, if God give me leave, to write, a just, and perfect Vo∣lume, of Philosophy, which I goe on with, though slowly. I send not your Lordship, too much, lest it may glutt you. Now let me tell you, what my Desire is: If your Lordship be so good now, as when you were, the good Dean of Westminster, my request to you is; That not by Pricks, but by Notes, you would mark unto me, whatsoever shall seem unto you, eithr not current in the Stile; Or harsh to credit, and Opinion; Or inconvenient, for the Per∣son, of the Writer. For no Man, can be Judge, and Party: And when our Minds judge, by Reflexion of our Selves, they are more subject to Error. And though, for the Matter it self, my Judge∣ment, be, in some things, fixed, and not Accessible by any Mans Judgement, that goeth not my way; yet even in those Things, the Admonition of a Friend, may make me, express my Self, diversly. I would have come to your Lordship, but that I am haste∣ning to my House, in the Country. And so I commend your Lord∣ship to Gods Goodness. A Letter, to Sir Tho: Bodley, after he had imparted to him, a VVriting, entituled, Cogitata, & Visa: SIR, in respect of my Going down, to my House, in the Coun∣try, I shall have misse of my Papers; which I pray you there∣fore o return unto me. You are, I bear you witness, Slothfull, and you help me nothing: So as I am half in conceit, that you affect not the Argument: For my Self, I know well, you love,
and affect. I can say no more to you, But, Non canimns Surdis, respondent omnia Sylvae. If you be not of the Lodgings, chaulked up, (whereof I speak in my Preface,) I am but to pass by your Door. But if I had you, but a Fortnight, at Gorhambury, I would make you tell me another Tale; or else, I would add a Cogita∣tion, against Libraries, and be revenged on you, that way. I pray, send me some good News, of Sir Tho: Smith; And commend me very kindly to him. So I rest. A Letter, to Mr. Matthew, upon sending to him, a part, of Instauratio Magna. MR. Matthew; I plainly perceive, by your affectionate writing, touching my Work, that one, and the same Thing, affecteth us both; which is, the good End, to which it is dedicate. For as to any Ability of mine, it cannot merit, that Degree, of Appro∣bation. For your Caution for Church Men, and Church Matters; As for any Impediment, it might be, to the Applause, and Cele∣brity, of my Work; It moveth me not; But as it may hinder the Fruit, and Good, which may come, of a quiet, and calm, passage, to the good Port, to which it is bound, I hold it a just respect; So as to fetch a fair Winde, I go not too farr about. But the Troth is, that I, at all, have no occasion, to meet them, in my way; Ex∣cept it be, as they will needs confederate themselves, with Ari∣stotle, who, you know, is intemperately magnifyed, by the School-Men; And is also allyed, as I take it, to the Iesuits, by Faber, who was a Companion, of Loyola, and a great Aristotelian. I send you, at this time, the onely part, which hath any Harshness; And yet, I framed to my Self, an Opinion, that whosoever allowed well, of that Preface, which you so much commend, will not dislike, or at least ought not to dislike, this other Speech of Preparation: For it is written, out of the same Spirit, and out of the same Ne∣cessity: Nay, it doth more fully lay open, that the Question be∣tween me, and the Antients, is not, of the Vertue, of the Race, but of the Rightness, of the Way. And to speak truth, it is to the other, but as Palma to Pagnus, part of the same Thing, more large. You onceive a rigt, that in this, and the other, you have Commissi∣on, to impart, and communicate them, to others, According to your Discretion. Other Matters I write not of. My self, am like the Miller of Grancester, that was wont to pray, for Peace, a∣mongst the Willows; For while the winds blew, the Wind-mils wrought, and the Water-mill, was less customed. So I see, that Conroversies of Religion, must hinder the Advancement of Sciences. Let me conclude, with my perpetual Wish, towards your Self; That the Approbation of your Self, by your own discreet, and
temperate, Cariage, may restore you to your Country, and your Friends, to your Society. And so I commend you, to Gods Good∣ness. Graies Inn, 10 Octob. 1609. A Letter, to Mr. Matthew, touching Instauratio Magna. MR. Matthew, I heartily thank you, for your Leter, of the 10th of February; And am glad, to receive, from you, Matter, both of Encouragement, and of Advertisement, touching my Writings. For my part, I doe wish, that since there is, no Lumen-siccum, in the World; But all Madidum, and Maceratum, infused in Affecti∣ons, and Blouds or Humours, that these Things of mine, had those Separations, that might make them more acceptable: So that they claim not, so much Acquaintance, of the present times, as they be thereby, the less apt to last. And to shew you, that I have some Purpose, to new mould them; I send you, a Leaf, or two, of the Preface, carrying some Figure of the whole Work. Wherein, I purpose, to take that, which I count real, and ffe∣ctual, of both Writings; And chiefly, to add a Pledge, (if not Pay∣ment,) to my Promises, I send you also, a Memorial, of Queen Elizabeh; To requite your Elogy, of the late Duke of Florences, Fe∣licity. Of this, when you were here, I shewed you some Mo∣del; At what time, (methought,) you were more willing, to hear Iulius Caesar, than Queen Elizabeth, commended. But this, which I send, is more full, and hath more of the Narrative. And further, hath one part, that, I think, will not be disagreeable, ei∣ther to you, or that Place; Being the true Tract, of her Procee∣dings, towards the Catholiques, which are infinitely mistaken. And though I doe not imagine, they will pass allowance there, yet they will gain upon Excuse. I finde Mr. Le-Zure, to use you well, (I mean his Tongue of you,) which shews you, either honest, or wise. But this I speak merrily. For in good faith, I doe conceive hope, that you will so govern your Self, as we may take you, as assuredly for a good Subject, and Patriot, as you take your Self for a good Christian And so we may again enjoy your Company, and you your Conscience, if it may no other wayes be. For my part, assure your Self, (as we say in the Law,) mu∣tatis mutandis, my love, and good wishes to you, are not dimini∣shed. And so I remain.
A Letter, to Mr. Matthew, imprisoned for RELIGION. MR. Matthew; Doe not think me forgetfull, or altered towards you. But if I should say, I could doe you any good, I should make my Power, more than it is. I doe hear that, which I am right sorry for; That you grow more Impatient, and Busie, than at first: which maketh me exceedingly fear the isue of that, which seemeth not to stand at a stay. I my Self, am out of doubt, that you have been miserably abused, when you were first sedu∣ced: But that, which I take in Compassion, others may take in Severity. I pray God, that understandeth us all, (better than we understand one another,) contain you, (even as I hope he will,) at the least, within the Bounds of Loyalty to his Majesty, and Natural Piety towards your Country. And I entreat you much, sometimes, to meditate, upon the extreme Effects of Superstition, in this last Powder Treason; fit to be tabled, and pictured, in the Chambers of Meditation, as another Hell, above the Ground; And well justifying, the Censure of the Heathen; That Supersti∣tion is farr worse than Atheism: By how much it is less evil, to have no Opinion, of God at all; than such as is impious, towards his Divine Majesty, and Goodness. Good Mr. Matthew, receive your Self back, from these Courses, of Perdition: Willing to have written a great deal more, I continue. A Letter, to Mr. Matthew, upon sending his Book, De Sapientiâ Veterum. MR. Matthew, I do very heartily thank you, for your Letter of the 24. of August, from Salamanca; And, in recompence therof, I send you, a little Work of mine, that hath begun, to pass the World. They tell me, my Latin, is turn'd into Silver, and become current: Had you been here, you should have been my Inquisitour, before it came forth. But I think, the greatest Inquisitour in Spain, will allow it. But one thing, you must pardon me, if I make no hast to beleeve, Tat the World should be grown to such an Ecstasy, as to reject Truth in Philosophy, because the Author dissenteth in Religion: No more than they doe, by Aristotle, or Averroës. My great Work goeth forward; And after my manner, I alter ever, when I add. So that nothing is finished, till all be finished. This I have writ∣ten, in the midst, of a Term, and Parliament; Thinking no time so possessed, but that I should talk of these Matters, with
so good, and dear a Friend. And so, with my wonted Wishes, I leave you to Gods Goodness. From Graies Inn, 27th of Febr. 1610. A Letter, of Expostulation, to the Atturney General, Sir Edward Cook. MR. Atturney, I thought best, once for all, to let you know, in plainness, what I finde of you, and what you shall find of me: You take to your self, a Liberty, to disgrace, and disable my Law, my Experience, my Discretion: What it pleaseth you, I pray, think of me; I am one, that know's both mine own wants, and other Mens: And it may be, perchance, that mine mend, others stand at a stay. And surely, I may not endure, in publick place, to be wronged, without repelling the same, to my best advantage, to right my Self. You are great, and therefore have the more Enviers; which would be glad, to have you paid, at anothers cost. Since the time, I missed the Solliciters place, (the rather I think by your means,) I cannot expect, that you, and I shall ever serve, as Atturney, and Solliciter, together; But either, to serve with another, upon your Remove, or to step into some other Course: So as, I am more free, than ever I was, from any Occasion, of un∣worthy Conforming my Self to you; More than general good manners, or your particular good Usage, shall provoke. And if you had not been, short sighted, in your own Fortune, (as I think,) you might have had more use of me. But that Tide is passed. I write not this, to shew my Friends, what a brave Letter, I have written, to Mr. Atturney: I have none of those Humours: But that I have written, is to a good End; That is, to the more de∣cent Carriage, of my Masters Service; And to our particular, bet∣ter Understanding One of Another. This Letter, if it shall be answered by you, in deed, and not in word, I suppose, it will not be worse, for us both: Else it is but a few Lines lost; which, for a much smaller Matter, I would have adventured. So this being to your Self, I for my part rest. A Letter, to my Lord of Salisbury, touching the Solliciters Place. It may please your good Lordship, I Am not ignorant, how mean a Thing, I stand for, in desiring to come, into the Solliciters Place: For I know well, it is not the Thing it hath been; Time having wrought Alteration, both in
the Profession, and in that special Place. Yet because, I think, it will encrease my practice, and that it may satisfy my Friends; And because I have been voiced to it, I would be glad it were done. Wherein, I may say to your Lordship, in the Confidence, of your poor Kinsman, and of a Man, by you advanced; Tu idem fer opem, qui Spem dedist: For, I am sure, it was not possible, for a Man Living, to have received, from another, more significant, and comfortable, words of Hope; your Lordship being pleased, to tell me, during the Course of my last Service, that you would raise me; And that, when you had resolved, to raise a Man, you were more carefull of him, than himself; And that, what you had done for me, in my Marriage, was a benefit to me, but of no use, to yor Lordship; And therefore, I might assure my Self, you would not leave me there; with many like Speeches, which I knew, my Duty too well, to take any other hold of, than the Hold, of a Thankfull Remembrance. And I acknowledge, and all the World knoweth, that your Lordship, is no Dealer, of Holy Water, but No∣ble, and Real; And, on my part, I am of a sure ground, that I have committed nothing, that may deserve alteration. And therfore, my Hope is, your Lordship, will finish a good Work, and consider, that Time groweth pretious with me, and that I am now in Vergenti∣bus Annis. And although I know, that your Fortune is not to need, an Hundred such as I am, yet I shall be ever ready, to give you my best, and First fruits; And to supply, (as much as in me lieth,) Worthiness, by Thankfulness A Letter, of like Argument, to the LORD CHANCELLOR. It may please your good Lordship, AS I conceived it to be a Resolution, both with his Majesty, and your Lordships of his Council, that I should be placed Sollic, and the Solliciter, to be removed, to be the Kings Serjeant: So I most thankfully acknowledge, your Lordships furtherance, and for∣wardness therin; your Lordship, being the Man, that first devi∣sed the Mean: Wherefore, my humble Request, to your Lord∣ship is, that you would set in, with some Strngth, to finish this your Work: VVhich I assure your Lordship, I desire the rather, be∣cause being placed, I hope, for many Favours, at last, to be able, to doe you some better Service. For as I am, your Lordship cannot use me; nor scarcely indeed know me: Not that I vainly think, I shall be able, to doe any great Matters, but certainly, it will rame me to use a nearer Observance, and Application, to such, as I honour so much, as I doe your Lordshp; And not, (I hope) without some good Offices, which may, now and then, desere
your Thanks. And herewithall, (good my Lord,) I humbly pray your Lordship, to consider, that Time groweth precious with me, and that a Married Man, is 7. years elder, in his thoughts, the first day. And therefore, what a discomfortable Thing it is for me, to be unsetled still? Certainly, were it not, that I think my Self born, to doe my Soveraign Service; And therefore, in that Stati∣on, I will live and dye; Otherwise, for mine own Private com∣fort, it were better for me, that the King, did blot me out of his Book; Or that I should turn my Course, to endeavour, to serve, in some other kinde, than for me, to stand thus at a stopp; And to have that little Reputation, which by my Industry I gather, to be scattered, and taken away, by continual Disgraces, every new Man comming above me. Sure I am, I shall never have fairer Promises, and Words, from all your Lordships. For I know not what my Services are, (saving that your Lordships told me, they were good;) And I would beleeve you, in a much greater Matter. Were it nothing else, I hope the Modesty of my Sute, deserveth somewhat; For I know well, the Solliciters Place, is not as your Lordship, left it; Time working Alteration, somewhat in the Pro∣fession, much more in that special Place. But to conclude, as my Honourable Lady, your Wife, was some Mean, to make me, to change the Name of Another; So if it please you, to help me, to change mine own Name, I can be, but more and more bounden to you: And I am much deceived, if your Lordship, finde not the King, well inclined, and my Lord of Salisbury forward, and af∣fectionate. A Letter, to the King, touching the Solliciters Place. HOw honestly ready I have been (most gracious Soveraign,) to doe your Majesty humble Service, to the best of my power, and in a manner, beyond my power, (as I now stand,) I am not so un∣fortunate, but your Majestie knoweth. For both, in the Com∣mission of Vnion, (the Labour whereof, for Men of my Profession, rested most upon my hand;) And this last Parliament, in the Bill of the Subsidy; Both Body and Preamble; In the Bill of Attainders, both Tresham, and the rest; In the Matter of Purveyance; In the Ecclesiastical Petitions; In the Grievances; And the like; as I was ever carefull, (and not without good Success,) sometimes to put forward, that which was good; sometimes to keep back, that which was not so good; So your Majesty was pleased, kindly to accept of my Services, and to say to me; Such Conflicts were the Warrs of Peace; And such Victories the Victories of Peace; And therefore such Servants, that obtained them, were by Kings,
that reign in Peace; no less to be esteemed, than Services of Com∣manders in the Warrs. In all which, nevertheless, I can chal∣lenge, to my Self, no Suficiency, but that I was diligent, and reasonable happy, to execute those Directions, which I received, either immediately from your Royal Mouth, or from my Lord of Sa∣lisbury. At what time, it pleased your Majesty also, to promise, and assure me, that upon the Remove of the then Atturney, I should not be forgotten, but brought into Ordinary Place. And this was after confirmed to me, by many of my Lords, and towards the end of the last Term, the manner also, in particular, spoken of; That is, that Mr. Solliciter, should be made your Majesties Ser∣jeant, and I Solliciter: For so it was thought best, to sort, with both our Gifts, and Faculties, for the good of your Service: And of this Resolution, both Court, and Country, took knowledge. Neither was this, any Invention, on Project, of mine own; but moved from my Lords, I think, first from my Lord Chanceller: whereupon resting, your Majesty well knoweth, I never opened my Mouth, for the Greater Place; Though I am sure, I had 2. Circumstances, that Mr. Atturney, that now is, could not allege: The one, Nine years Service of the Crown: The other, the being Cousin Germain, to the Lord of Salisbury, whom your Majesty esteemeth, and trusteth so much. But for the less Place, I conceive it was meant me. But after that, Mr. Atturney Hobert was placed, I heard no more of my Preferment; but it seemed to me at a stopp, to my great Dis∣grace, aud Discouragement. For (gracious Soveraign,) if still, when the Waters are stirr'd, another shall be put in before me, your Majesty had need work a Miracle, or else, I shall be still, a ame Man, to doe your Service. And therefore, my most humble sute, to your Majesty, is; That this, which seemed to me intended, may speedily be perormed: And, I hope, my former Service, shall be, but as Beginnings to better, when I am better strengthened: For sure I am, no Mans Heart is fuller, (I say not, but many may have greater Hearts, but I say not fuller,) of Love, and Duty, towards your Majesty, and your Children; As, I hope, Time will manifest, against Envy, and Detraction, if any be. To conclude, I most humbly crave pardon for my boldness, and rest. A Letter, to the Earl of Salisbury, of Curtesy, upon a New-years Tide. It may please your good Lordship, HAving no Gift, to present you with, in any degree proportio∣nable to my minde; I desire, nevertheless, to take the Ad∣vantage, of a Ceremony, to express my Self, to your Lordship; it be∣ing
the first time, I could make the like Acknowledgement, when I stood, out of the person of a Suter: wherefore, I most humbly pray your Lordship, to think of me, tha now it hath pleased you, by many Effectual, and great Benefits, to add the Assurance, and Comfort, of your Love, and Favour, to that prcedent Dispositi∣on, which was in me, to admire, your Vertue and Merit; I doe esteem, whatsoever I have, or may have, in this World, but as Trash, in comparison, of having the Honour, and Happiness, o be a near, and well accepted, Kinsman, to so rare, and worthy, a Counseller, Govern, and Patriot. For having been a studious, if not, a Curious Observer, of Antiquittes of Vertue, as of late Pieces; I forbear to say to your Lordship, what I find and conceive; But to any other, I would think, to make my Self, beleeved. But not to be tedious, in that, which may have the shew of a Comple∣ment, I can but wish your Lordship, many happy years; Many more, than your Father had; Even so many more, as we may need you more. So I remain. A Letter, of Thanks, to the King, upon Mr. Attur∣ney's Sickness. It may please your most excellent Majesty, I Doe understand, by some of my good Friends, to my great com∣fort, that your Majesty, hath in minde, your Majesties Royal Pro∣mise, (which to me is Anchora Spei,) touching the Atturney's place. I hope, Mr. Atturney shall doe well. I thank God, I wish no Mans Death, Nor much mine own Life, more than to doe your Maje∣sty Service. For I account my Life the Accident, and my Duty the Substance. But this, I will be old to say. If it please God that ever I serve your Majesty, in the Atturney's place, I have known an Atturney Cooke, and an Atturney Hober; Both worthy Men, and far above my Self; But if I should not find, a Middle way, be∣tween their two Dispositions, and Carriages, I should not sa∣tisfy my Self. But these things, are farr, or near, as it shall please God. Mean while, I most humbly pray your Majesty, to ac∣cept, my Sacrifice of Thanksgiving for your Gracious Favour. God pre∣serve your Majsty I ever remain.
A Letter, to the King, of Sute, to succeed, in the Aturney's Place. It may please your Majesty, YOur great, and Princely, Favours towards me, in Advancing me to Place; And that, which is to me, of no less comfort, your Majesties benign, and gracious Acceptation, from time to time, of my poor Services, much above the Merit, and Valew of them; Hath, almost, brought me to an Opinion, that I may soo∣ner, (perchance,) be wanting, to my Self, in not asking; Than finde your Majesties Goodness wanting to me, in any my reasona∣ble, and modest desires. And therefore, perceiving, how at this time, Preferments of Law fly about mine Ears; To some above me, and to some below me; I did conceive, your Majesty may think it, rather a Kinde of Dulness, or want of Faith, than Mode∣sty, if I should not come, with my Pitcher, to Iacobs Well, as others doe. VVherein I shall propound to your Majesty, that which ten∣deth not so much, to the Raising of my Fortune, as to the setling of my Minde; Being sometimes assailed with this Cogitation; That by reason of my Slowness, to see, and apprehend suddain Occasions; Keeping on one plain Course of painfull Service; I may, (in fine Dierum,) be in danger, to be neglected, and forgot∣ten. And if that should be, then were it much better for me, now while I stand in your Majesties good Opinion, (though unwor∣thy,) and have some little Reputation, in the VVorld, to give o∣ver the Course I am in, and to make proof, to doe you some Ho∣nour, by my Pen, either by writing, some faithfull Narrative, of your Happy, (though not untraduced,) Times; Or by recompi∣ling your Laws, (which, I perceive, your Majesty laboureth with; And hath in your Head, as Iupiter had Pallas;) Or some other the like work: (For without some Endeavour to doe you Ho∣nour, I would not live;) Than to spend my Wits, and Time, in this laborious place, wherein I now serve; If it shall be deprived, of those outward Ornaments, which it was wont to have, in re∣spect of an Assured Succession, to some Place, of more Dignity, and Rest: which seemeth now, to be an Hope, altogether Casu∣al, if not wholly intercepted. VVherefore, (not to hold your Majesty long,) my humble Sute, to you, is that, than the which, I think, I cannot well goe lower; which is, that I may obtain, your Royal promise, to succeed, (if I live,) into the Atturneys place, whensoever it shall be void: It being, but the Natural, and m∣mediate Step, and Rise, which the Place, I now hold, hath ever, (in sort) made claim to, and almost never failed of. In this Sute, I make no Friends to you Majesty, but rely upon no other Motive, but your Grace; Nor any other Assurance, but your Word; where∣of
I had good Experience, when I came to the Sollicites Place; That it was like, to the Two great Lights, which in their Motions, are never Retro rd. So with my best Prayers, for your Maje∣sties Happiness, I rest. A Letter, to Sir George Carey, in France, upon sending him, his Writing, In Felicem Memoriam Elizabethae. My very good Lord; BEing asked the Question, by this Bearer, an old Servant, of my Brother Anthony Bacons, whether I would command him any thing into France; And being, at better leisure, than I would, in regard of Sickness; I began to remember, that neither your Bu∣siness, nor mine, (though great, and continual,) can be, upon an an exact account, any just Occasion, why so much good will, as hath passed between us, should be so much discontinued, as hath been. And therefore, because one must begin, I thought to provoke, your Remembrance of me, by a Letter: And think∣ing to fit it, with somewhat, besides Salutations, it came to my Minde, that this last Summer Vacation, by occasion of a Factious Book, that endeavoured to verefy, Misera emina, (The Addition of the Popes Bull,) upon Queen Elizabeth, I did write, a few Lines, in her Memorial; which I thought, you would be pleased to read; both for the Argument; And because, you were wont, to bear Affection, to my Penn. Verum, ut aliud ex alio, if it came handsom∣ly to pass, I would be glad, the President deThuanus. Thou, (who hath written an History, as you know, of that Fame, and Diligence,) saw it: Chiefly, because I know not, whether it may not serve him, for some use, in his Story: wherein, I would be glad, he did right to the Truth, and to the Memory, of that Lady, as I perceive, by that he hath already written, he is well enclined to doe. I would be glad also, it were some Occasion, (such as Absence may permit,) of some Acquaintance, or mutual Notice between us. For though he hath, many wayes, the precedence, (chiefly in worth,) yet this is common to us both, that we serve our Soe∣raigns, in places of Law, eminent: And not our Selves onely, but our Fathers, did so before us: And lastly, that both of us, love Learning, and Liberal Sciences, which was ever, a Bond of Friend∣ship, in the greatest Distance, of Places. But of this, I make no further Request, than your Occasions, and Respects, (to me unknown,) may further, or limit; My Principal Purpose being, to salute you, and to send you this Token. Whereunto I will add, my very kinde Commendations, to my Lady; And so commit you both, to Gods Holy Protection.
A Letter, to my Lord Mayour, upon a Proceeding, in a Private Cause. MY very good Lord; I did little expect, when I left your Lord∣ship last, that there would have been, a Proceeding against Mr. Barnard, to his Overthrow. Wherein I must confess my Self, to be, in a sort, Accessary: Because, he relying upon me, for Counsel, I advised that Course, which he followed. Wherein now I begin, to question my self, whether in preserving my Re∣spects, unto your Lordship, and the Rest, I have not failed, in the Duty, of my Profession, towards my Client, For certainly, if the words had been hainous, and spoken in a malicious fashion, and in some publick place, and well proved; And not a Prattle, in a Tavern, caught hold of by one, who, (as I hear) is a detected Sy∣cophant (Standish I mean;) yet I know not, what could have been done more, than to impose upon him, a grievous Fine; And to require, the Levying of the same; And to Take away his means of Life, by his Disfranchisement; And to commit him, to a Defa∣med Prison, during Christmass; In Honour whereof, the Priso∣ners, in other Courts, doe, commonly, of grace, obtain some En∣largement. This Rigor of Proceeding, (to tell your Lordship, and the rest, as my good Friends, my Opinion, plainly,) tendeth not to strengthen Authority, which is best supported, by Love, and Fear, intermixed; But rather, to make People discontented, and Servile; especially, when such Punishment is inflicted, for words, not by Rule of Law, but by a Iurisdiction of Discretion, which would evermore, be moderately used. And I pray God, whereas Mr. Recorder, when I was with you, did well, and wisely, put you in mind, of the Admonitions, you often received from my Lords, that you should bridle unruly Tongues; That those kind of Spee∣ches, and Rumours, whereunto those Admonitions doe referr, which are concerning the State, and Honour thereof, doe not pass too licentiously, in the City, unpunished; while these Words, which concern your particular, are so straightly enquired into, and pu∣nished with such Extremiy. But these Things, your own wis∣dom, (first, or last,) will best represent unto you. My writing unto you at this time, is, to the end, that howsoever I doe take it some∣what unkindly, that my Mediation prevailed no more; yet I might preserve, that further Respect, that I am willing to use, unto such a State, in delivering my Opinion, unto you, freely, before I would be of Counsel, or move any thing, that should cross your Procee∣dings; which, notwithstanding, (in case, my Client, can receive no Relief, at your hands,) I must, and will doe. Continuing, ne∣vertheless, in other Things, my wonted good Affection, to your Selves, and your Occasions.
A Letter, to my Lord Treasurer Salisbury, upon a New-years Tide. It may please your good Lordship, I Would Entreat, the New year, to answr for the Old, in my hum¦ble Thanks to your Lordship; Both for many your Favours, and chiefly, that upon the Occasion, of Mr. Atturneys Infirmity, I found your Lordship, even as I could wish. This doth encrease a desire in me, to express my Thankfull minde, to your Lordship; Hoping, that though I finde Age, and Decayes, grow upon me, yet I may have a Flash, or two, of Spirit, left to doe you Service. And I doe protest before God, without Complement, or any light Vanity of Minde, that if I knew, in what Course of Life, to doe you best Service, I would take it, and make my Thoughts, which now fly to many Pieces, to be reduced to that Center. But all this, is no more, than I am; which is not much: But yet the Entire of him, that is, &c. A Letter, to his Majesty, concerning Peachams Cause, January 21. 1614. It may please your Excellent Majesty, IT grieveth me exceedingly, that your Majesty, should be so much troubled, with this Matter of Peacham; whose Raging Devil, see∣meth to be turn'd, into a Dumb Devil. But although, we are dri∣ven, to make our way, through Questions, (which I wish were o∣therwise,) yet I hope well, the End will be good. But then, every Man, must put too; his Helping Hand; For else, I must say to your Majesty, in this, and the like Cases, as St. Paul said, to the Centurion, when some of the Mariners, had an Eye, to the Cock∣boat; Except these stay in the Ship, ye cannot be safe. I finde, in my Lords, great, and worthy, Care, of the Business. And for my part, I hold my Opinion, and am strengthned in it, by some Re∣cords, that I have found. God preserve your Majesty. Your Majesties, most humble, and devoted Subject, and Servant.
A Letter, to the King, touching Peachams Cause. January 27. 1614. It may please your excellent Majesty, THis Day, in the Afternoon, was read, your Majesties Letters, of Direction, touching Peacham; which because it concerneth properly the Duty of my Place, I thought it fit, for me, to give your Majesty, both a speedy, and a private, Account thereof; That your Majesty knowing Things, clearly, how they pass, may have the true Fruit, of your own Wisdom, and clear-Seeing Judgement, in Governing the Business. First, for the Regularity, which your Majesty, (as a Master in Business of Estate,) doth prudently prescribe, in Examining, and taking Examinations, I subscribe to it; Onely, I will say for my Self; that I was not, at this time, the Principal Exami∣ner. For the Course, your Majesty directeth, and commandeth, for the feeling of the Iudges, of the Kings Bench, their Several Opini∣ons, by distributing our Selves, and enjoyning Secrecy; we did first, finde an Encounter, in the Opinion, of my Lord Cooke; who seemed to affirm, that such particular, and, (as he call'd it,) Au∣ricular Taking of Opinions, was not according to the Custom of this Realm; And seemed to divine, that his Brethren, would never doe it. But when I replyed, that it was our Duty, to pursue your Majesties Directions; And it were not amiss, for his Lordship, to leave his Brethren, to their own Answers; It was so concluded; and his Lordship, did desire, that I mought conferr with Himself; And Mr. Serjeant Mountague, was named, to speak with Iustice Crooke; Mr. Serjeant Crew, with Iustice Houghton; and Mr. Solliciter, with Iustice Dodderidge. This done, I took my Fellows aside, and advi∣sed, that they should presently speak with the 3. Iudges, before I could speak with my Lord Cooke, for doubt of Infusion; And that they should not, in any case, make any doubt to the Iudges, as if they mistrusted, they would not deliver any Opinion apart, but speak resolutely to them, and onely make their Comming to be, to know, what time they would appoint, to be attended with the Papers. This sorted not amiss; For Mr. Solliciter, came to me, this Evening, and related to me, that he had found Iudge Dod∣deridge, very ready, to give Opinion, in secret; And fell upon the same reason, which upon your Majesties first Letter, I had used to my Lord Cooke, at the Council Table; which was, that every Iudge, was bound, expresly, by his Oath, to give your Majesty Counsel, when he was called; And whether he should doe it, joyntly, or severally, that rested, in your Maiesties good pleasure, as you would require it. And though the Ordinary Course, was to
assemble them, yet there mought intervene Cases, wherein the other Course was more convenient. The like Answer made Iustice Crook. Iustice Houghton, who is a soft Man, seemed desirous, first, to conferr; Alleging, that the other 3. Iudges, had all served the Crown, before they were Iudges, but that he had not been much acquain∣ted, with Business, of this Nature. We purpose therefore, orthwith, they shall be made acquain∣ted with the Papers; And if that could be done, as suddainly, as this was, I should make small doubt of their Opinions: And howsoever, I hope, Force of Law, and President, will bind them to the Truth: Neither am I wholly out of hope, that my Lord Cooke himself, when I have, in some dark manner, put him in doubt, that he shall be left alone, will not continue singu∣lar. For Owen, I know not the reason, why there should have been no Mention made thereof, in the last Advertisement: For I must say for my Self, that I have lost no moment of Time in it, as my Lord of Canterbury can bear me witness. For having received, from my Lord, an Additional, of great Importance; which was, that Owen, of his own Accord, after Examination, should compare the Case of your Majesty, (if you were Excommunicate,) to the Case, of a Prisoner, Condemned at the Barr; which Additional was subscribed by one Witness; but yet I perceived it was spo∣ken aloud, and in the Hearing of others; I presently sent down a Copy thereof, which is now come up, attested with the Hands, of 3. more, lest there should have been, any Scruple, of Singularis Testis; So as for this Case, I may say, Omnia parata; And we ex∣pect, but a Direction, from your Maesty, for the Acquainting the Iudges severally; Or the 4. Iudges, of the Kings Bench, as your Ma∣jesty shall think good. I forget not, nor forslow not, your Majesties Commandement, touching Recusants; Of which, when it is ripe, I will give your Majesty, a true Account, and what is possible to be done, and where the Impediment is. Mr. Secretary, bringeth Bonam Voluntatem, but he is not versed much, in these things; And sometimes urgeth the Conclusion, without the premises, and by haste hindreth. It is my Lord Treasurer, and the Exchequer, must help it, if it be holpen. I have heard more wayes than one of an ofter of 20000 l. per An∣num, for farming, the Penalties of Recusants, not including any Offence Capital, or of Premunire; wherein I will presume to say, that my poor Endeavours, since I was, by your great, and sole grace, your Atturney, have been no small Spurrs, to make them feel your Laws, and seek this Redemption; Wherein, I must also say, my Lord Cooke hath done his part: And I doe assure your Majesty, I know it, somewhat inwardly, and groundedly, that by the Cour∣ses we have taken, they conform daily, and in great Numbers; And I would to God, it were as well a Conversion, as a Conformity;
But if it should die, by Dispensation, or Dissimulation, then I fear, that whereas your Majesty, hath now, so many ill Subjects, poor, and detected, you shall then have them, rich and dissem∣bled. And therefore, I hold this offer, very considerable, of so great an Increase, of Revenew; If it can pass, the fiery Trial, of Re∣ligion, and Honour; which I wish, all Projects may pass. Thus, in as much, as I have made to your Majesty, somewhat a naked, and particular account, of Business, I hope your Majesty, will use it accordingly. God preserve your Majesty. Your Majesties, most humble, and devoted Subject, and Servant. A Letter, reporting the State, of my Lord Chancellers Health. Jan. 29. 1614. It may please your excellent Majesty, BEcause I know your Majesty, would be glad, to hear, how it is, with my Lord Chanceller; And that it pleased him, out of his antient and great Love, to me; which, many times, in Sickness, appeareth most; To admit me, to a great deal of Speech, with him, this afternoon; which, during these three dayes, he hath scarcely done to any; I thought it mought be pleasing to your Majesty, to certify you, how I found him. I found him in bed, but his Spirits fresh, and good, speaking stoutly, and without be∣ing spent, or weary; And both willing, and Beginning of himself, to speak, but wholly of your Majesties Business. Wherein I can∣not forget, to relate, this particular; That he wished, that his Sentencing of I. S. at the day appointed, mought be his last Work, to conclude his Services, and express his Affection, towards your Majesty. I old him, I knew your Majesty, would be very de∣sirous, of his Presenc, that day, So it mought be, without pre∣judice; But otherwise, your Majesty, esteemed a Servant, more than a Service; specially such a Servant. Not to trouble your Majesty; Though good Spirits, in Sickness, be uncertain Kalen∣ders, yet I have very good Comfort of him, and I hope by that day, &c.
A Letter, to the King, giving him an Account of Peachams Business, and some others, Jan. 31. 1614. It may please your excellent Majesty, I Received, this Morning, by Mr. Mrray, a Message, from your Majesty, of some warrant, and confidence, that I should adver∣tise your Majesty, of your business, wherein I had part. Where¦in, I am first, humbly, to thank your Majesty, for your good accep∣tation, of my Endeavours, and Service; which I am not able to furnish, with any other Quality, save Faith, and Diligence. For Peachams Case, I have, since my last Letter, been with my Lord Cooke, twice; Once before Mr. Scretaries going down, to your Majesty; And once since, which was yesterday: At the For∣mer, of which times, I delivered him Peachams papers; And at this Latter, the Presidents, which I had, with care, gathered, and selected: For these Degrees, and order, the Business requi∣red. At the former, I told him, that he knew my Errand, which stood upon two points: The one to inform him, of the particu∣lar Case, of Peachams Treasons; (For I never give it, other word, to him;) The other, to receive his Opinion, to my Self, and in se∣cret, according to my Commission, from your Majesty. At the former time, he fell, upon the same Allegation, which he had begun, at the Council Table; that Iudges, were not to give Opinion, by Fractions, but entirely, according to the Vote, whereupon they should settle, upon conference: And that, this Auricular Taking of Opinions, single, and apart, was new, and dangerous; And other words, more vehement, than I re∣peat. I replyed, in Civil, and plain, Terms; That I wisht his Lord∣ship, in my love to him, to think better of it; For that this, that his Lordship was pleased, to put into great Words, seemed to me, and my Fellows, when we spake of it, amongst our selves, a rea∣sonable, and familiar Matter, For a King to consult with his Iudges, either assembled, or selected; or one, by one. And then, to give him a little Outlet, to save his first Opinion, (wherewith he is most commonly in love,) I added, that Iudges, some times, might make a Sue, to be spared, for their Opinion, till they had spoken with their Brethren; But, if the King, upon his own Prince∣ly Judgemet, for Reason of Estate, should think it fit, to have it otherwise, and should so demand it, there was no declining: Nay, that it touched, upon a Violation, of their Oath, which was, to counsel the King, without Distinction, whether it were joynt∣ly, or severally. Thereupon, I put him the Case, of the Privy Council; As if your Majesty, should be pleased, to command any
of them, to deliver their Opinion, a part, and in private; whe∣ther it were a good Answer, to deny it, otherwise, than if it were propounded, at the Table. To this he said, That the Cases were not alike, because this concern'd Life. To which I replyed, That Questions of Estate, mought concern Thousands of Lives, and ma∣ny Things more precious, than the Life, of a particular; As Warr, and Peace, and the like. To conclude, his Lordship, tanquam Exitum quaerens, desired me, for the time, to leave with him, the Papers, without pressing him, to consent, to deliver a private Opinion, till he had perused them. I said, I would; And the more willingly, because I thought his Lordship, upon due consideration, of the Papers, would finde the Case, to be so clear a Case, of Treason, as he would make no dif∣ficulty, to deliver his Opinion, in private; And so I was perswaded, of the rest, of the Iudges, of the Kings Bench; who likewise, (as I partly understood,) made no Scruple, to deliver their Opinion, in private. Whereunto he said, (which I noted well,) That his Brethren were wise Men; And that, they might make a shew, as if they would give an Opinion, as was required; But the end would be, that it would come to this; They would say, they doubt∣ed of it, and so pray advice, with the rest. But to this I answe∣red, that I was sorry, to hear him say so much, lest, if it came so to pass, some that loved him not, might make a Construction, that that, which he had foretold, he had wrought. Thus your Majesty see's, that as Solomon saith; Gressus nolentis tanquam in Sepi spinarum; It catcheth upon every Thing. The latter Meeting, is yet, of more Importance; For then, com∣ming armed, with divers presidents, I thought, to set in, with the best strength, I could, and said; That before I descended, to the Record, I would break the Case, to him thus. That it was true, we were to proceed, upon the antient Statute of King Edward the 3. because other Temporary Statutes were gone; And therefore, it must be said in the Indictment; Imaginatus est, et Compassavit, Mortem, et finalem Destructionem, Domini Regis: Then must the particular Trea∣sons follow in this manner; viz. Et quod, ad perimplendum nefandum Propositum suum, composuit, & conscripsit, quendam detestabilem, et ve∣nenosum libellum, sive scriptum, in quo inter alia proditoria, continetur, &c. And then the principal passages of Treason, taken forth of the Papers, are to be entred, in haec Verba; And with a Conclusion, in the End; Ad Intentionem, quod Ligeus Populus, et Veri Subditi, Do∣mini Regis, cordia em suum amorem,  Domino Rege retraherent, et ipsum Dominum Regem relinquerent, & Guerram, et Insurrectionem, contra e∣um, levarent, et facerent, &c. I have, in this former, followed the antient Stile, of the Indictments, for brevity sake, though when we come to the Business it self, we shall enlarge it, according to the use of the later times. This I represented to him, (being a thing he is well acquainted with,) that he might perceive, the
Platform of that was intended, without any Mistaking, or Ob∣scurity. But then I fell to the matter it self, to lok him in, as much as I could, viz. That there be 4. Means or manners, whereby the Death of the King, is compassed, and imagined. The first, by some particular Fact, or Plot. The second, by Disabling his Title; As by affirming, that he is not lawfull King; Or that another ought to be King; Or that hee is an Vsurper; Or a Bastard; Or the like. The third, by Subjecting his Title, to the Pope; and thereby Making him, of an Absolute King, a Conditional King. The fourth, by Disabling his Regiment, and making him appear, to be incapable, or indign, to reign. These things, I relate to your Majesty, in summ, as is fit; which when, I opened to my Lord; I did insist a little more upon, with more efficacy and edge, and Authority of Law, and Record, than I can now express. Then I placed Peachams Treason, within the last Division, agree∣able to divers presidents, whereof I had the Records ready; And concluded, that your Majesties Safety, and Life, and Authority, was thus by Law inscansed, and quartered; And that it was in vain, to fortify, on Three of the sides, and so leave you open on the Fourth. It is true, he heard me, in a grave fashion, more than accustomed, and took a Pen, and took notes of my Divisions; And when he read the Presidents, and Records, would say; This you mean falleth within your first, or your second, Division. In the end, I expresly demanded his Opinion, as that, whereto both he, and I was en∣joyned. But he desired me, to leave the Presidents, with him, that he might advise upon them. I told him, the rest of my Fellows, would dispatch their part, and I should be behinde with mine; which I perswaded my Self, your Majesty would impute, rather to his Backwardness, than my Negligence. He said, as soon as I should understand, that the rest were ready, he would not be long after, with his Opinion. For I. S. your Majesty knoweth, the day draweth on; And my Lord Chancellers Recovery, the Season, and his Age, promising, not to be too hasty. I spake with him, on Sunday, at what time, I found him in Bed, but his Spirits strong, and not spent, or weari∣ed; And spake wholly of your Business, leading me from one Matter, to another. And wished, and seemed to hope, that hee might attend the day, for I. S. and it were, (as he said,) to be his last work, to conclude his Services, and express his Affection, towards your Majesty. I presumed to say to him, that I knew your Majesty, would be exceeding desirous, of his being present that day,
so as that it mought be, without prejudice, to his continuance; But that, otherwise, your Majestie esteemed a Servant, more than a Service; especially such a Servant. Surely, in mine Opinion, your Majesty were better, put off the day than want his presence, considering the Cause of the putting off, is so notorios; And then the Capital, and the Criminal, may come together, the next Term. I have not been unprofitable, in helping to discover, and exa∣mine, within these few dayes, a late Patent, by Surreption obtai∣ned from your Majesty, of the greatest Forest, in England, worth 30000 l. under Colour, of a Defective Title, for a matter of 400 l. The Person must be named, because the Patent, must be questio∣ned. It is a great Person, my Lord of Shrewsbury; Or rather, (as I think,) a greater than he, which is my Lady of Shrewsbury. But I humbly pray your Majesty, to know this first, from my Lord Trea∣surer; who, methinks, groweth even studious, in your Business. God preserve your Majesty. Your Majesties most humble and devoted, Subject, and Servant. The rather, in regard of Mr. Murray's Absence, I humbly pray your Majesty, to have a little regard, to this Let∣ter. A Letter, to the King, touching my Lord Chancellers A∣mendment, and the putting off, of J. S. his Cause, February 7. 1614. It may please your excellent Majesty, MY Lord Chanceller, sent for me, to speak with me, this Mor∣ning, about 8. of the clock. I perceive, he hath now, that Sig∣num Sanitatis, as to feel better his former weakness. For it is true, I did a little mistrust, that it was but a Boutade, of Desire, and good Spirit, when he promised himself, strength for Friday, though I was wonn, and carried with it. But now, I finde him, well inclined, to use, (should I say) your Liberty, or rather your Interdict, signifyed by Mr. Secretary, from your Majesty. His Lord∣ship, shewed me also, your own Letter, whereof he had told me be∣fore, but had not shewed it me. What shall I say? I doe much admire, your Goodness, for writing such a Letter, at such a time. He had sent also, to my Lord Treasurer, to desire him, to come to him about that time. His Lordship came; And, not to trouble
your Majesty, with circumstances, both their Lordships concluded, my Self present, and concurring; That it could be no prejudice, to your Majesties Service, to put off the day, for I. S. till the next Term. The rather, because there are Seven, of your Privy Council, which are at least, Numerus, and part of the Court, which are by Infirmity, like to be absent; That is, my Lord Chanceller, my Lord Admiral, my Lord of Shrewsbury, my Lord of Exceter, my Lord Zouch, my Lord Stanhope, and Mr. Chanceller of the Dutchy: wherefore they agreed, to hold a Council, too morrow, in the af∣ternoon, for that purpose. It is true, that I was alwayes of Opinion, that it was no time lost; And I doe think so, the rather, because I could be content, that the Matter of Peacham, were first setled, and put to a point. For there be, perchance, that would make the Example upon I.S. to stand for all. For Peacham, I expect, some account, from my Fellows, this day. If it should fall out otherwise, then, I hope, it may not, be left so. Your Majesty, in your last Letter, very wisely, put in a Disjunctive, that the Iudges, should deliver an Opinion, pri∣vately, either to my Lord Chanceller, or to our Selves, distributed: His Sickness, made the later way, to be taken: But the other may be reserved, with some Accommodating, when we see, the success of the Former. I am appointed, this day, to attend my Lord Treasurer, for a Proposition, of Raising Profit; and Revenew, by Infranchising Co∣pyholders. I am right glad, to see the Patrimonial part of your Reve∣new, well look'd into, as well as the Fiscal. And I hope it will so be, in other parts, as well as this. God preserve your Ma∣jestie. Your Majesties, most humble, and devoted, Subject, and Servant. A Letter, to the King, of account, of Owens Cause, &c. 11 February, 1614. It may please your excellent Majesty, MY Self, with the rest, of your Counsel Learned, confered with my Lord Cooke, and the rest of the Iudges, of the Kings Bench, onely, being met at my Lords Chamber, concerning the business of Owen. For although it be true, that your Maiesty, in your Letter; did mention, that the same Course, might be held, in the Taking of Opinions, apart, in this, which was prescribed, and used, in Peachams Cause; yet both my Lords of the Council, and we amongst our Selves, holding it, in a Case so clear, not needfull; But ra∣that it would import, a diffidence in us, and deprive us, of the means, to debate it, with the Iudges, (if cause were) more strong∣ly,
(which is somewhat,) we thought best, rather to use this Form. The Iudges desired us, to leave the Examinations, and Papers, with them, for some little time, to consider, (which is a thing they use;) But, I conceive, there will be, no manner of Question, made of it. My Lord Chief Iustice, to shew forwardness, (as I interpret it,) shewed us passages of Suarez, and others, thereby to prove, that though your Majesty, stood not Excommunicate, by particu∣lar Sentence, yet by the General Bulls, of Coena Domini, and others, you were, upon the matter, Excommunicate; And therefore, that the Treason was, as De praesenti. But I, that foresee, that if that Course should be held, when it commeth to a publick day, to disseminate to the Vulgar, an Opinion, that your Majesties Case is all one, as if you were de Facto, particularly, and exprsy, Ex∣communicate, it would but encrease, the danger of your Person, with those, that are Desperate Papists; And that it is needless; Commended my Lords Diligence, but withall, put it by; And fell upon the other Course, (which is the true way;) That is, that whosoever shall affirm, in Diem, or sub Conditione, that your Majesty, may be destroyed, is a Traytor, de praesenti; For that, he maketh you, but Tennant for Life, at the will of another. And I put, the Duke of Buckinghams Case, who said; That if the King, caused him to be arrested, of Treason, he would stab him; And the Case, of the Imposturess, Elizabeth Barton, that said, That if King Henry the 8. took not his Wife again, Katharine Dowager, he should be no longer King; And the like. It may be, these particulars, are not worth the Relating. But because, I find nothing in the World, so important to your Service, as to have you throughly inormed, (the Ability of your Directi∣on considered,) it maket me thus to doe; Most humbly praying your Majesty, to admonish me, if I be over-troublesom. For Peacham, the rest of my Fellowes, are ready, to make their Report, to your Majesty, at such time, and in such manner, as your Majsty shall require it. My Self yesterday, took my Lord Cooke a∣side, after the rest were gone, and told him, all the rest were rea∣dy, and I was now to require, his Lordships Opinion, according to my Commission. He said, I should have it; And repeated that, twice, or thrice, as thinking he had gone too farr, in that kinde of Negative, (to deliver any Opiion apart,) before; And said, he would tell it me, within a very short time, though he were not that instant ready. I have tossed this Business, in omnes partes, whereof I will give your Majesty knowledge, when time ser∣veth. God preserve your Majesty. Your Majesties, most humble, and devoted, Subject, and Servant.
A Letter, to the King, about a Certificate, of my Lord Cooke. Feb. 14. 1614. It may please your excellent Majesty, I Send your Majesty, enclosed, my Lord Cookes Answers. I will not call them Rescripts; Much less Oracles. They are of his own hand, and offered to me, as they are, in writing, though I am glad of it, for mine own Discharge. I thought it my duty, as soon as I received them, instantly, to send them to your Majesty; And forbear, for the present, to speak further of them. I, for my part, (though this Muscovia Weather, be a little too hard, for my Constitution;) was ready, to have waited, upon your Majesty, this day, all respects set aside; But my Lord Treasurer, in respect of the sea∣son, and much other Business, was willing to save me. I will only conclude, touching these Papers, with a Text, Divided, I can not say; Oportet isthaec fieri; But I may say; Finis autem nondum. God preserve your Majesty. Your Majesties, most humble, and devoted Subject, and Servant. A Letter, to the King, touching Matter, of his Revenew, and Profit. April 25. 1615. It may please your Majesty, I May remember, what Tacitus saith, by occasion, that Tiberius, was often, and long, absent, from Rome; In Vrbe, et parvâ et magnâ Negotia, Imperatorem simul premunt; But saith He, In recessu, dimissis rebus, minoris momenti, summae rerum magnrum magis agitan∣tur. This maketh me think, it shall be no Incivility, to trouble your Majesty, with business, during your aboad from London; Knowing, that your Majesties Meditations, are the principal wheel, of your Estate; And being warranted, from a former Com∣mandement, which I received from you. I doe now, onely send your Majesty, these Papers enclosed; be∣cause I doe greatly desire, so farr forth, to preserve my credit with you, as thus; That whereas lately, (perhaps, out of too much Desire, which induceth too much beleef,) I was bold to say, that I thought it as easie for your Majesty, to come out of Want, as to goe forth of your Gallery; your Majesty, would not take me, for a Dreamer, or a Projectour; I send your Majesty therefore, some Grounds of my Hopes. And for that Paper, which I have gathe∣red, of Increasments sperate, I beseech you, to give me leave, to think,
that if any of the particulars, doe fail, it will be rather, for want of workmanship, in those that shall deal in them, than want of Ma∣terials, in the Things themselves. The other Paper, hath many Discarding Cards; And I send it chiefly, that your Majesty, may be the less surprized, by Projectors; who pretend, sometimes great Discoveries, and Inventions in Things, that have been propound∣ed, and, perhaps, after a better fashion, long since. God Almigh∣ty preserve your Majesty. Your Majesties, most humble, and devoted, Subject, and Servant. A Letter, to the King, reporting the Day of Hearing, of I. S. his Cause, in the Starre-Chamber. 29 April 1615. It may please your excellent Majesty, I. S. his Day is past, and well past. I hold it to be Ianus Bifrons; It hath a good Aspect, to that which is past; And to the Future: And doth both atisfie, and prepare. All did well: My Lord Chief Iustice, delivered the Law, for the Benevolence, strongly; I would he had done it timely. Mr. Chanceller of the Exchequer spake finely, somewhat after the manner, of my late Lord Privy Seal; Not all out so sharply, but as elegantly. Sir Thomas Lake, (who is also new, in that Court,) did very well, familiarly, and Coun∣seller-like. My Lord of Pembroke, (who is likewise a stranger there,) did extraordinarily well, and became himself well, and had an evident Applause. I meant well also; And because my In∣formation, was the Ground; having spoken out of a few Heads, which I had gathered; (For I seldom doe more,) I set down, as soon, as I came home, cursorily, a Frame of that, I had said; Though I perswade my self, I spake it, with more life. I have sent it to Mr. Murray, sealed; If your Majesty, have so much idle time, to look upon it, it may give some light, of the Dayes work: But I most humbly pray your Majesty, to pardon the Errours. God preserve you ever. Your Majesties, most humble Subject, and devoted Servant.
A Letter, to the King, concerning the New Company: August 12. 1615. It may please your most excellent Majesty, YOr Maesty, shall shortly receive the Bill, for the Incorporation, of the New Company; together with a Bill, for the Privy Seal, be∣ing a Dependancy thereof. For this Morning, I subscribed, and dokeed, them both. I think it therefore now time, to represent to your Majesties high wisdom, that which I conceive, and have had long in my minde, concerning your Majesties service, and honourable profit in this Business. This Project, which hath proceeded, from a worthy Service, of the Lord Treasurer, I have, from the beginning, constantly affect∣ed; As may well appear, by my sundry Labours, from time to time, in the same. For I hold it, a worthy character, of your Majesties Reign, and Times; Insomuch, as though your Majesty, mought have, at this time, (as is spoken,) a great Annual Bene∣fit, for the Quitting of it, yet I shall never be the Man, that should wish your Majesty, to deprive your Self, of that Beatitude; Beatius est dare, quam accipere; In this cause; But to sacrifice your profit, (though as your Majesties State is, it be precious to you,) to so great a Good of your Kingdom: Although this Project, is not with∣out a Profit, immediate, unto you, by the encreasing of Customes, upon the materials, of Dyes. But here is the Case. The New Company, by this Patent, and Privy Seal, are to have two Things, wholly diverse, from the first Intention; Or rather, Ex Diametro, opposite unto the same; which nevertheless, they must, of necessity have, or else the Work is over∣thrown. So as I may call them Mala Necessaria, but yet withall Temporarie. For, as Men make Warr, to have Peace, so these Merchants, must have license, for Whites, to the end, to banish Whites; And they must have license, to use Teyntours, to the end to banish Teyntours. This is therefore that I say; your Majesty, upon these two points, may justly, and with honour, and with preservation of your first Intention, inviolate, demand Profit, in th Interim, as long as these unnatural points continue, and then to cease: For your Ma∣jesty, may be pleased to observe, that they are to have all the Old Companies Profit, by the Trade of Whites; They are, again to have, upon the proportion of Cloathes, which they shall vent, died, and dressed, the Flemmings profit, upon the Teyntour. Now then I say; As it had been, too good Husbandry, for a King, to have taken profit of them, if the Project could have been effected at once, (as was voiced;) So on the other side, it might be, perchance, too lit∣tle
Husbandry, and Providence, to take nothing of them, for that, which is meerly lucrative to them, in the mean time. Nay, I say further, this will greatly conduce, and be a kinde of Securi∣ty, to the End desired. For I alwayes feared, and doe yet fear, that when Men, by condition Merchants, though never so honest, have gotten into their Hands, the Trade of Whites, and the Dispen∣sation to Teyntour; wherein they shall reap profit, for that, which they never sowed; But have gotten themselves Certainties, in re∣spect of the States hopes; They are like enough, to sleep upon this, as upon a Pillow; And to make no haste, to goe on with the rest. And though it may be said, that that is a thing, will easi∣ly appear to the State, yet, (no doubt,) means may be devised, and found, to draw the Business in length. So that I conclude, that if your Majesty, take a profit of them, in the Interim, (consi∣dering you refuse profit, from the Old Company,) it will be both Spurr, and Bridle, to them, to make them Pace aright, to your Majesties End. This in all humbleness, according to my vowed Care, and Fi∣delity, being no Mans Man, but your Majesties, I present, leave, and submit, to your Majesties better Judgement; And I could wish, your Majesty would speak, with Sir Thomas Lake in it; who, be∣sides his good Habit, which he hath in business, beareth, (me∣thinks,) an indifferent Hand in this particular; And (if it please your Majesty,) it may proceed, as from your Self, and not as a Motion, or Observation, of mine. Your Majesty, need not, in this, to be streightned in time; As if this must be demanded, or treated, before you sign their Bill. For I, foreseeing this, and foreseeing, that many things mought fall out, which I could not foresee, have handled it so, as with their good Contentment, there is a Power of Revocation, inserted into their Patent. And so commending your Majesty, to Gods blessed, and precious Custody; I rest, Your Majesties, most humble, and devoted, Subject, and Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching Ropers place. January 22. 1615. SIR, Sending to the King, upon Occasion, I would not fail, to salute you, by my Letter; which, that it may be more than two lines, I add this for News; That as I was sitting, by my Lord Chief Iustice, upon the Commission, for the Indicting, of the Great Person; One of the Iudges asked Him, whether Roper were dead?
He said, He, for his part, knew not; Another of the Iudges an∣swered; It should concern you, my Lord, to know it. Whereup∣on he turned his Speech to me, aud said; No, Mr. Atturney, I will not wrastle, now in my latter times. My Lord, (said I,) you speak like a wise Man. Well, (saith he,) they have had no luck with it, that have had it. I said again, Those dayes be past. Here you have the Dialogue, to make you merry. But in sadness, I was glad to perceive he meant not to contest. I can but honour, and love you, and rest, Your assured Friend and Servant. A Letter, to the King, advising, how to break off, with the New Company. February 3. 1615. It may please your excellent Majesty, I Spake, yesternight, long, with my Lord Cooke; And for the Rege inconsulo, I conceive by him, it will be, An ampliùs deliberandum censeo, (as I thought at first,) so as, for the present, your Majesty, shall not need, to renew your Commandement of Stay. I spake with him, also, about some Propositions, concerning your Maje∣sties casual Revenew; wherein, I found him, to consent with me, fully; Assuming, nevertheless, that he had thought of them be∣fore: But it is one Thing, to have the Vapour of a Thought; A∣nother, to digest Business aright. He, on his part, imparted to me, diverse Things, of great weight, concerning the Reparaton, of your Majesties Means, and Finances, which I heard gladly; Inso∣much, as he perceiving the same, I think, was the readier, to open himself to me, in one Circumstance, which he did much inculcate. I concurr fully with him, that they are to be held secret: For I never saw, but that Business, is like a Child, which is framed in∣visibly in the Wombe; And if it come forth too soon, it will be abortive. I know, in most of them, the Prosecution must rest, much, upon my Self. But I, that had the Power, to prevail, in the Farmers Case, of the French Wines, without the help, of my Lord Cooke, shall be better able, to goe through these, with his help, the ground being no less just. And this I shall ever add of mine own, that I shall ever respect your Majesties Honour, no less than your Profit; And shall also take care, according to my pen∣sive manner, that that, which is good, for the present, have not in it, hidden Seeds of future Inconveniences. The Matter, of the New Company, was referred, to me by the Lords, of the Priv Council; wherein, after some private Speech, with Sir Lionel Cranfield, I made that Report, which I held, most agreeable to Truth, and your Maiesties Service. If this New Com∣pany,
break, it must either, be put upon the Patent, or upon the Or∣der, made by themselves. For the Patent, I satisfied the Board, that there was no Title in it, which was not, either Verbatim, in the Patent, of the Old Company; Or by special warrant, from the Table, inserted. My Lord Cooke, with much respect to me, acknow∣ledged, but disliked the Old Patent it self, and disclaimed, his be∣ing at the Table, when the Additions were allowed. But, in my Opinion, (howsoever my Lord Cooke, to magnify his Science in Law, draweth every thing, (though sometimes unproperly, and unseasonably,) to that kinde of Question,) it is not convenient, to break the Business, upon those Points. For considering, they were but Clauses, that were in the former Patents, and in many other Patents, of Companies; And that the Additions, likewise, pas∣sed the Allowance, of the Table, it will be, but clamoured, and, perhaps, conceived, that to quarrel them now, is but an Occasi∣on taken; And that the Times are changed, rather than the Mat∣ter. But that, which preserveth entire your Majesties Honour, and the Constancy of your Proceedings, is to put the Breach, up∣on their Orders. For this Light, I gave in my Report, which the Table readily ap∣prehended, and much approved; That if the Table, reject their Orders, as unlawfull, and unjust, it doth free you, from their Con∣tract: For whosoever contracteth, or undertaketh any thing, is alwayes understood, to perform it, by lawfull means; So as, they have plainly abused the State; if that which they have underta∣ken, be either impossible, or unjust. I am bold, to present this Consideration, to that excellent Fa∣culty, of your Majesties Judgement; because, I think, it importeth that future Good, which may grow to your Majesty, in the close, of this Business; That the Falling of, be without all Exception. God have you in his precious Custody. Your Majesties, most humble, and bounden, Subject, and Servant. A Letter, to the King, touching the Lord Chancellers Sickness. Feb. 9. 1615. It may please your most excellent Majesty, I Am glad, to understand, by Mr. Murray, that your Majesty, ac∣cepteth well, of my poor Endeavours, in opening unto you, the passages of your Service; That Business may come the less crude, and the more prepared, to your Royal Iudgement; the perfection whereof, as I cannot expect, they should satisfy, in every parti∣cular,
so I hope, through my Assiduity, there will result a good Total. My Lord Chancellers Sickness, falleth out; dur Tempore. I have alwaies known him, a wise Man, and of just Elevation, for Mo∣narchy: But your Majesties service must not be Mortal. And if you leese him, as your Majesty hath, now of late, purchased many Hearts, by depressing the Wicked: So God, doth minister unto you, a Counterpart, to doe the like, by raising the Honest. God ever∣more preserve your Majesty. Your Majesties, most humble Subject, and bounden Servant. A Letter, to the King, of my Lord Chancellers Amendment, and the Difference begun, between the Chancery, and Kings Bench, Feb. 15. 1615. It may please your excellent Majesty, I Doe find, (God be thanked,) a sensible Amendment, in my Lord Chanceller. I was with him yesterday in private conference, a∣bout half an Hour: And this day again, at such time, as he did seal, which he endured well, almost the space of an Hour, though the Vapour of Wax, be offensive to him. He is free from a Fea∣ver, Perfect in his powers, of Memory, and Speech; And not hol∣low, in his Voice, nor Look; He hath no panting, or labouring, Respiration; Neither are his Coughs dry, or weak: But whosoever thinketh, his Disease is but Melancholy, he maketh no true Judge∣ment of it; For it is, plainly, a formed, and deep Cough, with a Pectoral surcharge; So that, at times, he doth almost, Animam age∣re. I forbear, to advertise your Majesty, of the Care I took, to have Commissions in readiness, because Mr. Secretary Lake, hath let me understand, he signifyed as much, to your Majesty: But, I hope, there shall be no use, for them, at this time. And, as I am glad, to advertise your Majesty, of the Amendment, of your Chan∣cellers Person; So I am sorry, to accompany it, with an Advertise∣ment, of the Sickness, of your Chancery Court, though, (by the Grace of God,) that Cure will be much easier, than the other. It is true, I did lately write to your Majesty, that for the Matter, of the Habeas Corpora, (which was the third Matter in Law, you had given me in charge;) I did think, the Communion in Service, be∣tween my Lord Chanceller, and my Lord Chief Iustice, in the great Business of Examination, would so joyn them, as they would not square, at this time; But pardon me, (I humbly pray your Maje∣sty,) if I have too Reasonable Thoughts.
And yet, that which happened, the last day, of the Term, con∣cerning certain Indictments, in the Nature of Premunire, preferred into the Kings Bench, but not sound; Is not so much, as is voiced abroad; (though I must say, it is omni tempore Nimium, et hoc tempo∣e Alienum;) And therefore, I beseech your Maesty, not to give a∣ny Beleeving Ear, to Reports, but to receive the Truth, from me, that am your Atturney General, and ought to stand indifferent, for Iurisdictions, of all Courts; which Account, I cannot give your Ma∣jesty now, because I was then absent And some are now absent, which are properly, and authentically, to inform me, touching that which passed. Neither let this, any wayes, disjoynt, your other Business; For there is a time, for all things; And this ve∣ry Accidet, may be turned, to Good. Not that I am of Opinion, that that same Cunning Maxim, of Separa, & Impera, which sometimes holdeth in Persons, can well take place in Iurisdictions; But because, some good Occasion, by this Excess, may be taken, to settle that, which would have been more dangerous, if it had gone out, by little and little. God ever preserve your Majesty. Your Majesties, most humble Subject, and most bounden Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching the Difference, between the Court of Chancery, and the Kings Bench. Febr. 19. 1615. SIR, I received, this Morning, from you, two Letters, by the same Bearer; The one written before, the other, after his Ma∣jesty had received my last. In this Difference, between the two Courts, of Chancery, and Kings Bench; (For so I had rather take it, for this Time, than between the Perons, of my Lord Chanceller, and my Lord Chief Iustice,) I marvail not, if Rumour get way, of true Relation. For I know Fame hath swift wings; Specially that, which hath black Feathers: But within these two dayes, (For sooner I cannot be ready,) I will write unto his Majesty, both the Narrative truly, and my Opinion sincerely; Taing much comfort, that I serve such a King, as hath Gods Property, in discerning truly, of Mens Hearts. I purpose, to speak, with my Lord Chanceller, this day; And so to exhibite, that Cordial, of his Majesties Grace; As I hope, that other Accident, will rather rouze, and raise his Spirit, than deject him, or encline him to Relapse. Mean while, I commend the Wit, of a mean Man, that said this other day; Well, the next Term, you shall have an old man, come with a Beesom of Wormwood, in
his Hand, that will sweep away all this. For it is, my Lord Chancellers Fashion, specially towards the Summer, to carry a Posie of Wormwood. I write this Letter in Haste, to return your Mes∣senger with it. God keep you, and long, and happily, may you serve his Majesty. Sir, I thank you for your Inward Letter; I have burned it, as you commanded. But the Fire it hath kindled in me; will never be extinguished. Your true and affectionate Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching a Motion, to swear him Counseller Febr. 21. 1615. SIR, My Lord Chancellers Health, growing with the Dayes, and his Resignation, being an Uncertainty, I would be glad, you went on, with my first Motion, my swearing Privy Counseller. This I desire, not so much, to make my Self, more sure of the other; and to put it past Competition; (For herein, I rest wholly upon the King, and your excellent self,) But, because I finde hourly, that I need this Strength, in his Majesties service; Both or my bet∣ter warrant, and satisfaction of my Conscience, that I deal not in Things, above my Vocation; And for my better Countenance, and Prevailing, where his Majesties service, is, under any pre∣text, opposed, I would it were dispatched. I remember, a greater Matter than this, was dispatched, by a Letter, from Royston; which was, the Placing of the Arch-Bishop, that now is: And I imagine, the King did it on purpose, that the Act mought appear, to be his own. My Lord Chanceller told me, yesterday, in plain Terms, that if the King, would ask his opinion, touching the Person, that he would commend, to succeed him, upon Death, or Disability, he would name me, for the fittest Man. You may advise, whether use, may not be made of this offer. I sent, a pretty while since, a Paper, to Mr. Iohn Murrey; which was, indeed, a little Remembrance, of some Things past; concer∣ning my honest, and faithfull Services to his Majesty; Not by way of Boasting, (from which I am farr,) but as Tokens, of my stu∣dying his Service; uprightly, and carefully. If you be pleased, to call for the Paper, which is with Mr. Iohn Murrey; And to find a fit time, that his Maiesty, may cast an eye upon it, I think it will doe no Hurt: And I have written to Mr. Murrey, to deliver the Paper, if you call for it. God keep you in all Happiness. Your truest Servant.
A Letter, to the King, concerning the Premunire, in the Kings Bench, against the Chancery. Febr. 21. 1615. It may please your most excellent Majesty, I Was yesterday, in the Afternoon, with my Lord Chanceller, ac∣cording to your Commandement, which I received by the Ma∣ster of the Horse; And finde the Old Man, well comforted; Both towards God, and towards the World, and that same middle Comfort, which is Divine, and Humane, proceeding from your Majesty, being Gods Lieutenant, on Earth, I am perswaded, hath been a great Cause, that such a Sickness, hath been portable, to such an Age. I did not fail, in my Conjecture, that this Business of the Chancery, hath stirred him; He sheweth to despise it, but he is full of it; And almost, like a young Duellist, that findeth him∣self behind hand. I will now, as your Majesty requireth, give you a true Relation, of that which hath passed; Neither will I decline, your Royal Commandement, for delivering my Opinion also, though it be a tender Subject, to write on; But I, that account my Being, but as an Accident to my service, will neglect no duty upon Self-Safety. First, it is necessary, I let your Majesty know, the Ground of the Difference, between the Two Courts; that your Majesty, may the better understand the Narrative. There was a Statute made, 27 Edw. 3. Cap. 1. which (no doubt) in the principal Intention thereof, was ordained, against those, that sued to Rome wherein there are Words, somewhat gene∣ral, against any, that questioneth, or impeacheth, any Iudgement, given in the Kings Courts, or in any other Court. Vpon thes doubtfull words (other Courts,) the Controversie groweth. For the sounder Interpretation, taketh them, to be meant, of those Courts, which though, locally, they were not held at Rome, or where the Popes Chair was, but hre within the Realm; yet, in their Iurisdiction, had their Dependance, upon the Court of Rome; As were the Court of the Legate here, and the Courts of the Arch-Bishops, and Bishops, which were then, but subordinate Judgement Seats, to that high Tribunal of Rome. And for this Construction, the Oppo∣sition of the Words (if they be well observed.) between the Kings Cours, and other Courts, maketh very much: For it impor∣teth, as if those other Courts, were not the Kings Courts. Also, the main Scope of the Statute, fortifieth the same: And lastly, the Practice of many Ages. The other Interpretation, (which clea∣veth to the Letter,) expoundeth the Kings Courts, to be the Courts of Law, only, and other Courts, to be Courts of Equity, as the Chancery, Exchequer-chamber, Dutchy, &c. Though this also flyeth, indeed, from the Letter, for that all these, are the Kings Courts.
There is also another Statute, which is but a simple Prohibition, and not with a Penalty, of a Premunire, (as the other is;) That after Iudgements given in the Kings Courts, the parties shall be in Peace, ex∣cept he Iudgement be undone, by Error, or Attaint, which is a Legal form, of Reversal. And of this also, I hold, the Sounder Interpre∣tation to be, to settle Possessions against Disturbances, and not to take away Remedy, in Equity, where those Iudgements, are obtai∣ned, ex Rigore Iuris, and against good Conscience. But upon these two Statutes, there hath been, a late Conceit in some, that if a Judgement, pass, at the Common Law, against any, that he may not, after ue, for Relief in Chancery: And if he doth, both He, and his Counsell, and his Sollicitours, yea and the Iudge in Equity himself, are within the Danger, of those Sta∣tutes. Here your Majesty, hath the true state, of the Question, which I was necessarily to open to you first, because your Majesty, calleth for this Relation; Not as Newes, but as Business. Now to the Hi∣storical part. It is the Course, of the Kings Bench, that they give in Charge to a Grand Iury, offences of all Natures, to be presented within Middlesex, where the said Court is; And the manner is, to enu∣merate them, as it were, i Articles. This was done by Iustice Crook, the Wednesday, before the Term ended. And that Article, (If any Man, after a Iudgement given, had drawn the said Iudgement, to a new Examination, in any other Court) was by him, specially, gi∣ven in charge; which had not used to be given, in charge before. It is true, it was not solemnly dwelt upon, but, as it were, thrown in amongst the rest. The last day, of the Term; (And that which all Men condemn, the supposed last day, of my Lord Chancellers life;) There were two Indictments preferred, of Praemunire, for suing in Chancery, after Iudgement in Common Law; The one by Rich. Glanvile, the other by William Allen: The former against Courtney, the party in Chancery, Gibb the Counseller, and Deurst the Clark; The latter, against Alderman Bowles, and Humfry Smith, parties in Chan∣cery; Serjeant More the Counseller, Elias Wood, Solliciter in the Cause, and Sir Iohn Tindall, Mr. of the Chancery, and an Assessor, to my Lord Chanceller. For the Cases themselves, it were too long, to trouble your Ma∣jesty, with them; But this I will say; If they were set on, that preferred them, they were the worst Marks-men, that ever were, that set them on. For there could not have been chosen; two such Causes, to the Honour, and Advantage, of the Chancery, for the Justness of the Decrees, and the Foulness, and Scandal, both of Fact, and person, in those that impeach the Decrees. The Grand Iury, consisting, (as it seemeth,) of very Substanti∣al, and Intelligent, Persons, would not finde the Bills; Notwith∣standing,
they wre clamoured by he parties, and twice sent back, by the Court; And in Conclusion, resolutely, 17 of 19, found an Ignoramus: wherein, for that time, I think, Ignoramus, was wiser, than those that know too much. Your Majesty will pardon me, if I be sparing, in delivering to you, some other Circumstances, of Aggravation, and of Concur∣rences, of some like Matters, the same day; as if it had been some Fatal constellation. They be not things, so sufficiently tryed, as I dare put them, into your Ear. For my Opinion, I cannot but begin, with this Preface; That I am infinitely sorry, that your Majesty is thus put, to salve, and ure, not onely Accidents of Time, but Errours of Servants: For I account this, a kinde of Sickness, of my Lord Cookes, that comes, al∣most, in as ill a time, as the Sickness, of my Lord Chanceller. And as (I think,) it was one of the wisest parts, that ever he played, when he went down, to your Majesty, to Roiston, and desired, to have my Lord Chanceller, joyned with him; So this was one of the weakest parts, that ever he played, to make all the World perceive, that my Lord Chanceller, is severed from him, at this time. But for that, which may concern your Service, which is my End, (leaving other Men to their own wayes;) First, my Opini∣on is plainly, that my Lord Cooke, at this time, is not to be dis∣graced; Both because, he is so well habituate, for that which remainth, of these Capital Causes; And also, for that, which I inde, is in his Breast, touching your Finances, and Matters of Re∣pair, of your Estate. And, (if I mought speak it,) as I think, it were good, his hopes were at an end, in some kinde, so I could wish, they were raised, in some other. On the other side, this great, and publick Affront, not only to the Reverend, and well deserving, person, of your Chanceller; (And, at a time, when he was thought, to lye, on Dying, which was barbarous;) But to your High Court of Chancery, which is the Court, of your absolute power; May not, (in my Opinion,) pass lightly, nor end, onely, in some Formal Attonement; But Use is to be made thereof, for the setling of your Authority, and strengthning of your Praerogative, according to the true Rules of Monarchy. Now to reconcile, and accommodate these two Advices, which seem almost opposite. First, your Majesty, may not see it, (though I conss it be suspicious,) that my Lord Cooke was, any way, a orehand, privy to that, which was done; Or that he did set it, or animate it; But onely took the Matter, as it came before him; And that his Errour was onely, that at such a time, he did not di∣vert it, in some good manner. Secondly, if it be true, (as is reported,) that any of the Puisne Iudges, did stirr this Business; Or that, they did openly revile,
and menace the Iury, for doing their Conscience; (A they did, honestly, and truly,) I think, that Iudge, is worthy, to leese his place. And to be plain with your Majesty, I do not think, there is any Thing, a greater Polychreston, or ad multa utile, to your Affairs, than upon a just, and fit Occasion, to make some Example, against the Presumption, of a Iudge, in Causes, that concrn your Maje∣sty: whereby the whole Body, of those Magistrates, may be contai∣ned the better in awe; And it may be, this will light, upon no unfit Subject, of a Person, that is Rude, and that no Man cares for. Thirdly, if there be, no one, so much in fault, (which I cannot yet affirm, either way, and there must be a just Ground, God forbid ele;) yet I should think, that the Very Presumption, of Going so far, in so high a Cause, deserveth to have that done, which was done in this very case, upon the Indictment of Sergeant Heale, in Queen Elizabeths time; that the Judges, should answer it, upon their knees, before your Majesty, or your Council, and receive a sharp Admonition: At which time also, my Lord Wray, being then Chief Iustice, slipt the Collar, and was forborn. Fourthly, for the persons themselves, Glanvile, and Allen, which are base Fellowes, and turbulent, I think, there will be discove∣red, and proved against them, (besides the preferring of the Bil's,) such Combinations, and Contmptuous Speeches, and Behavi∣ours; As there will be good Ground, to call them, and perhaps some of their petty Counsellers, at Law, into the Starre-Cham∣ber. In all this, which I have said, your Majesty, may be pleased to observe, that I doe not engage you much, in the main point of the Iurisdiction; For which I have a great deal of Reason, which I now forbear. But two Things, I wish to be done. The one, that your Maiesty, take this occasion, to redouble unto all your Iudges, your antient, and true Charge, and Rule, That you will endure, no Innovating, the Point of Iurisdiction; But will have every Court, empaled, within their own Presidents; And not assume to them∣selves, new Powers, upon Conceits, and Inventions, of Law: The other, that in these high Causes, that touch upon State, and Monar∣chy, your Majesty give them straight Charge, that upon any Oc∣casions intervenient hereafter, they do not make the Vulgar, par∣ty to their Contestations, by publick Handling them, before they have consulted with your Majesty, to whom the Reiglement, of those things, onely appertaineth. To conclude, I am not without hope, that your Majesty, mana∣ging this Business, according to your great Wisdom; (unto which I acknowledge my Self, not to be worthy, to be Card-holder, or a Candle-holder;) will make profit, of this Acci∣dent, as a Thing of Gods sending. Lastly, I may not forget, to represent to your Majesty, that there
is no Thinking of Arraignments, untill these Things, be somewhat accommodate; And some outward, and superficial, Reconcilia∣tion, at least, made, between my Lord Chanceller, and my Lord Chief Iustice. For this Accident, is a Banquet, to all the Delin∣quents Friends. But this is a Thing, that falleth out, naturally, of it Self; In respect, of the Iudges Going Circuit, and my Lord Chancellers Infirmity, with Hope of Recovery. And although this potraction of Time, may breed some doubt of Mutability, yet I have lately learned, out of an excellent Letter, of a certain King; That the Sun sheweth, sometimes, watry, to our Eyes, but when the Cloud is gone, the Sun is as before. God ever preserve your Ma∣jestie. Your Majesties, most humble Subject, and bounden Servant. A Letter, to the King, of Advice, upon the Breach of the New Company. Febr: 25. 1615. It may please your most excellent Majesty, YOur Privy Council, have wisely, and truly, discerned, of the Orders, and Demands, of the New Company, that they are unlaw∣full, and unjust; And themselves, have now acknowledged, the Work impossible, without them, by their Petition in Writing, now registred, in the Council-Book: So as this Conclusion, (of their own making,) is become peremptory, and final to themselves; And the Impossibility confessed, the Practice, and Abuse, reserved to the Judgement, the State shall make of it, This Breach then, of this great Contract, is wholly on their part; which could not have been, if your Majesty, had broken, upon the Patent: For the Patent, was your Maiesties Act; The Orders, are their Act; And in the former Case, they had not been liable, to further Question, now they are. There rest two Things, to be considered: The one if they, (like Proteus, when he is hard held,) shall yet again, vary their shape; And shall quit their Orders, convinced of Injustice, and lay their Imposition onely, upon the Trade of Whites, whether your Majesty, shall further expect? The other, if your Majestie dissolve them, upon this Breach, on their part, what is further to be done, for the setting of the Trade, again, in joynt, and for your own Ho∣nour, and profit? In both which points, I will not presume to give Opinion, but onely, to break the Business, for your Majestis better Judgement. For the first, I am sorry, the Occasion was given, (by my Lord Cookes Speech, at this time, of the Commitment of some of them;) That they should seek, Omnem movere lapidem, to help themselves.
Better it had been, if (as my Lord Penton said to me, that Mor∣ning, very judiciously, and with a great Deal of Foresight;) That, for that time, they should have had, a Bridge, made for tem, to be gone. But my Lord Cooke floweth, according to his own Tides, and not according to the Tides of Business. The thing which my Lord Cook said, was good, and too little, but, at this time, it was too much. But that is past. Howsoever, if they should goe back, and seek again, to entertain your Majesty, with new Orders, or Of∣fers, (as is said to be intended,) your Majesty hath ready; two An∣swers, of Repulse, if it please your Majesty to use them. The one, that this is now the Fourth time, that they have mainly broken, with your Majesty, and contradicted themselves. First, they undertook, to dye, and dress, all the Cloahes of the Realm; Soon after, they wound themselves, into the Trade, of Whites, and came down to the proportion contracted. Secondly, they ought to have performed that Contract according to their Subscription, pro ratâ, without any of these Orders, and Impositions. Soon after, they deserted their Subscription, and had recourse, to these Devices, of Orders. Thirdly, if by Order, and not by Subscrip∣tion, yet their Orders, should have laid it, upon the Whites, which is an Unlawfull, and Prohibited, Trade. Nevertheless, they would have brought in, lawfull, and setled Trades, full Manufa∣ctures, Merchandize of all Natures, Poll-Money, or Brotherhood-Mo∣ney, and I cannot tell what. And now lastly, it seemeth, they would goe Back, to lay it, upon the Whites: And therefore, whe∣ther you Majesty, will any more rest, and build this great Wheel, of your Kingdom, upon these broken, and brittle, Pinns, and try Experiments further, upon the Health, and Body, of your State, I leave to your Princely Iudgement. The other Answer, of Repulse, is a kinde of Apposing them, what they will doe, after the three years, contracted for? Which is a point, hitherto, not much stirred, though Sir Lionell Cranfield, hath ever beaten upon it, in his Speech with me: For after the three years, they are not tyed, otherwayes, than as Trade shall give Encouragement; Of which Encouragement, your Majesty, hath a bitter Tast. And if they should hold on, according to the third years Proportion, and not rise on, by further gradation, your Majesty hath not your End. No, I fear, and have long fea∣red, that this Feeding of the Foreiner, may be dangerous: For as we may think, to hold up our Cloathing, by Vent of Whites, till we can dye, and dresse; So they, (I mean the Dutch,) will think to hold up, their Manufacture, of Dying, and Dressing, upon our Whites, till they can cloath: So as your Majesty, hath the greatest reason, in the World, to make the New Company, to come in, and strengthen that part, of their Contract; And they refusing, (as it is confidently beleeved they will,) to make their Default, more visible, to all Men.
For the second main part, of your Majesties Consultation; That is, what shall be done, supposing an absolute Breach; I have had some Speech, with Mr. Secretary Lake, and likewise with Sir Lio∣nell Cranfield; And, (as I conceive,) tere may be three wayes, ta∣ken into consideration. The first is, that the Old Company be restored, who, (no doubt,) are in Appetite, and (as I finde by Sir Lionell Cranfield,) not unprepared; And that the Licences; The one, that of 30000 Cloathes, which was the old Licence; The other, that of my Lord of Cumberlands, which is, without stint, (my Lord of Cumberland receiving Satisfaction;) be compounded, into one entire Licence, without stint; And then, that they, amongst them∣selves, take order, for that profit, which hath been offered to your Majesty. This is a plain, and known way, wherein your Majesty, is not an Actour; onely it hath his, that the Work, of Dying, and Dressing, Cloathes, which hath been so much glorifyed, seemeth to be wholly relinquished, if you leave there. The second is, that there be a free Trade, of Cloath, with this Difference; That the Dyed, and dressed, pay no Custome, and the Whites double Cu∣stom, it being a Merchandize prohibited, and onely licentiate. This continueth in life, and ame, the ork desired, and will have a popular Applause. But I doe confess, I did ever think, that Trading, in Companies, is most agreeable to the English Nature, which wantet that same general Vein, of a Republick, which run∣neth in the Dutch; And srveth to them, instead of a Company. And threfore, I dare not advise, to adventure, this great Trade, of the Kingdom, (which hath been so long, under Government,) in a free, or loose, Trade. The Third is, a Compounded Way of both, which is; To goe on, with the Trade, of Whites, by the Old Company restored; And that your Majesties Profit be raised, by Or∣der amongst Themselves; Rather than by double Custom, wherein you must be the Actour: And that, nevertheless, there be added a Privilege, to the same Company, to carry out Cloathes, Dyed, and Dressed, Custom-free; Which will still continue, as a glorious Beam, of your Majesties Royal Design. I hope, and Wish, at least, that this, which I have written, may be of some use, to your Majesty, to settle, by the Advice, of the Lords about you, this great Business. At the least, it is the Effect, of my Care, and poor A∣bility, which, if in me be any, it is given me, to no other end, but faithfully, to serve your Majesty. God ever preserve you. Your Majesties, most humble Subject, and bounden Servant.
Another Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching a Motion, to swear him Counseller. February 27. 1615. SIR, I humbly pray you, not to think me over-hasty, or much in Appetite, if I put you in Remembrance, of my Motion, of strengthening me, with the Oath, and Trust, of a Privy Counseller; Not for mine own strength, (For as to that, I thank God, I am ar∣med within,) but for the Strength, of my Service. The Times, I submit to you, who knoweth them best. But sure I am, there were never Times, which did more require, a Kings Atturne, to be well armed, and (as I said once to you,) to wear a Gauntlet, and not a Glove. The Arraignments, when they proceed; The Contention, between the Chancery, and Kings Bench The great Cause, of the Rege inconsulto, which is so precious, to the Kings Prerogative; Diverse other Services, that concern the Kings Revenew, and the Repair of his Estate. Besides, it pleaseth his Majesty, to accept well, of my Relations, touching his Business; which may seem, a kind of Interloping, (as the Merchants call it,) for one that is no Coun∣seller. But I leave all unto you, thinking my Self infinitely boun∣den unto you, for your great Favours; The Beams whereof, I see plainly, reflect upon me, even from others: So that now, I have no greater Ambition, than this; That, as the King, sheweth Him∣self to you, the best Master, so I mought be found, your best Servant. In which Wish, and Vow, I shall ever rest. Most devoted, and affectionate, to obey your Commands. A Letter, to the King, upon some Inclination, of his Majesty, to him, for the Chancellers Place. April 1. 1616. It may please your most excellent Majesty, THe last day, when it pleased your Majesty, to express your Self, towards me, farr above that, I can deserve, or could expect, I was surprized, by the Princes comming in: I most humbly pray your Majesty, to accept these few Lines, of Acknowledgement. I never had great Thought, for my Self, further than to maintain, those great Thoughts, which, I confess, I have, for your Service. I know, what Honour is; And I know, what the Times are. But, I thank God, with me, my Service is the Principal; And it is farr from me, under Honourable Pretences, to cover base Desires; which I account then to be, when Men referr, too much to Them∣selves, especially serving such a King. I am afraid of Nothing,
but that the Master of the Horse, your Excellent Servant, and I, shall fall out, who shall hold your Stirrop best. But were you Mounted, and Seated, without Difficulties, and Distastes, in your Business, as I desire, and hope to see you; I should, ex animo, de∣sire, to spend the Decline, of my years, in my Studies. Wherein also, I should not forget, to doe him Honour, who, besides his Active, and Politique Vertues, is the best Penn of Kings; Much more, the best Subject of a Penn. God ever preserve your Majesty. Your Majesties, most humble Subject, And more, and more, obliged Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching his Swearing Counseller, May 30. 1616. SIR, The time is, as I should think, now, or never, or his Maje∣sty, to finish his good Meaning towards me; If it please him to consider, what is past, and what is to come. If I would tender my Profit, and oblige Men unto me, by my Place, and Practice, I could have more profit, than I could devise; And could oblige all the World, and offend none; which is a brave Condition, for a Mans Private. But my Heart, is not, on these Tings. Yet, on the other side, I would be sorry, that worthless Persons, should make a Note, that I get Nothing, but Pains, and Enemies; And a little Popular Reputation, which followeth me, whether I will, or no. If any thing, be to be done, for your self, I should take infinite Contentment, that my Ho∣nour, might wait upon yours: But I would be loath, it should wait upon any Mans else. If you would put your strength, to this Business, it is done; And that done, many Things more, will be∣gin. God keep you ever; I rest, Your true, and devoted, Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, upon the Choice, his Maje∣sty gave him, whether he would be sworn Counseller, or have Assurance, to succeed the Chanceller, Iune 3. 1616. SIR, The King giveth me a noble choice; And you are the Man, my Heart ever told me, you were. Ambition would
draw me, to the latter part of the Choice; But, in respect of my hearty wishes, that my Lord Chanceller, may live long; And the small Hopes I have, that I shall live long, my Self; And above all, because I see, his Majesties Service, daily, and instantly, blee∣deth; Towards which, I perswade my Self, (vainly perhaps, but yet in mine own thoughts, firmly, and constantly,) that I shall give, when I am of the Table, some effectual Furtherance, (as a poor Thred of the Labyrinth, which hath no other Vertue, but an united Continuance, without Interruption, or Distraction;) I doe accept of the former, to be Counseller, for the present, and to give over pleading at Barr; Let the other Matter rest upon my Proof, and his Majesties Pleasure, and the Accidents of Time. For to speak plainly, I would be loath, that my Lord Chanceller, to whom I owe most, after the King, and your Self, should be locked to his Successour, for any Advancement, or Gracing, of me. So I ever remain. Your true, and most devoted, and obliged, Servant. To his very Honourable good Friend, Sir George Villiers, Ma∣ster of the Horse, to his Majesty, and of the most Noble Order of the Garter. Iune 12. 1616. SIR, I send his Majesty, a Draught, of the Act of Counsel, con∣cerning the Iudges Letter; penned, as near as I could, to his Majesties Instructions, received in your presence. I then told his Majesty, my Memory was not able, to keep way with his; And therefore his Majesty will pardon me, for any Omissions, or Er∣rours; And be pleased; to supply, and reform the same. I am preparing, some other Materials, for his Majesties excellent Hand, concerning Business, that is comming on. For since his Majesty, hath renewed my Heart within me, methinks, I should dou∣ble my endeavours. God ever preserve, and prosper you; I rest. Your most devoted, and bounden, Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, for the Restoring of Do∣ctor Burgis, to preach, Iune 12. 1616. SIR, I doe think, you may doe your self Honour, and, (that which is more,) doe a good Work, if you will assist, and per∣fect, a Motion begun, (and that upon a good Ground, both of
Submission, and Conformity,) for the restoring, of Doctor Bur∣gis, to Preach; And I wish, likewise, that if Graies Inn should think good, (after he is free from the State,) to chuse him, for their Preacher, his Majesty should not be against it; For certain∣ly, we should watch him well, if he should flye forth; So as he cannot be placed, in a more safe Auditory. This may seem a Trifle, bu I doe assure you, I doe scarce know a particular, wherein you may open, more honest Mouthes, to speak Honour of you, than this. And I doe extremely desire, there may be a full Cry, from all sorts of People, (especially the best,) to speak, and to trumpet out, your Commendations.  pray you take it to Heart, and doe somewhat in it. I rest. Your devoted and Bounden Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, of Advice, concerning Ire∣land; From Gorhambury, to Windsore. Iuly 5. 1616. SIR, Because I am uncertain, whether his Majesty, will put to a point, some Resolutions, touching Ireland, now at Windsore; I thought it my duty, to attend his Majesty, by my Letter, and thereby to supply my Absence. For the Renewing, of some for∣mer Commissions, for Ireland; And the Framing, of a new Commis∣sion, for the Wards, and the Alienation, (which appertain pro∣perly to me, as his Majesties Atturney, and have been accordingly referred by the Lords;) I will undertake, that they are prepa∣red, with a greater care, and better applications, to his Majesties Service in that Kingdom, than heretofore they have been. And therefore of that I say no more. And for the Instructions, of the new Deputy, they have been set down, by the two Secretaries, and read to the Board; And being things, of an ordinary nature, I doe not see, but they may pass. But there have been three Pro∣positions, and Counsels, which have been stirred, which seem to me, of very great Importance; wherein, I think my Self bound, to de∣liver to his Majesty, my Advice, and Opinion, if they should now come in Question. The first is, touching the Recusant Magistrates, of the Towns, of Ireland, and the Commonalties themselves, their Electours, what shall be done? Which Consultation ariseth, from the late Ad∣vertisements, of the two Lords Iustices, upon the Instance, of the two Towns, Limrick, and Kilkenny; In which Advertisements, they represent the Danger only, without giving any Light, for the Re∣medy;
Ratner warily or mselves, than agreeable to their Duties, and places. In this point, I humbly pray his Majesty, to remember, that the Refusal is not, of the Oath of Allegiance, (which is not enacted in Ireland;) but of the Oath of Supremacy, which cutteth deep, into Matter of Conscience. Also, that his Majesty will, out of the dept, of his Excellent Wisdom, and Providence, think, and as it were, calculate with himself; Whether Time, will make more, for the Cause of Religion, in Ireland, and be still more, and more, pro∣pitious; Or whether Deferring Remedies, will not make the Case more difficult. For if Time, give his Majesty Advantage, what needeth precipitation, to extreme Remedies? But if Time, will make the case more desperate, then his Majesty, cannot begin, too soon. Now in my Opinion, Time will open, and facilitate Things, for Reformation of Religion there; And not shut up, or lock out, the same. For first, the Plantations going on, and being, prin∣cipally, of Protestants, cannot but mate the other party, in Time: Also, his Majesties Care, in placing good Bishops, and good Divines; In amplifying the Colledge there; And in looking, to the Educati∣on, of Wards, and such like; As they are, the most Natural Means, so are they like, to be the most effectual, and happy, for the Weeding out of Popery, without using the Temporal Sword; So that, I think, I may truly conclude, that the Ripeness of Time, is not yet come. Terefore my Advice is, in all Humbleness, that this hazar∣dous Course, of Proceeding, to tender the Oath to the Magistrates of Towns, proceed not, but dye by degrees: And yet, to preserve the Autority, and Reputation, of the former Council, I would have somewhat done; which is, that there be a proceeding, to Seizue, of Liberties; But not, by any Act of Power, but by Quo Warranto, or Scire facias; which is a Legal Course; An will be the Work of three, or four, Termes; By which time, the Matter will somewhat cool. But I would not, (in any case,) that the Proceedings, should be with both Towns, which stand now in contempt, but with one of them, onely: choosing that, which shall be thought most fit. For if his Majesty, proceed with both, then all the Towns, that are in the like case, will think it a common Cause; And that it is, but their Case too day, and their own too morrow. But if his Majesty pro∣ceed, but with one, the Apprehension, and Terrour, will not be so strong; For they will think, it may be their Case, to be spa∣red, as well, as prosecuted; And this is the best Advice, that I can give to his Majesty, in this Streight; And of this Opinion, se∣med my Lord Chanceller, to be. The Second Proposition is this: It may be, his Majesty will be moved, to reduce, the Number, of his Council, of Ireland, which is now almost Fifty, to Twenty, or the like Number; In respect,
that the Greatness of the Number, doth both embase the Autho∣rity, of the Council, and divulge the Business. Nevertheless, I hold this Proposition, to be rather specious, and solemn than need∣full, at this time; For certainly, it will fill the State, full of Dis∣contentment; which, in a Growing, and unsetled Estate, ought not to be. This I could wish, that his Majesty, would appoint a select Number, of Counsellours there, which might deal, in the Improve∣ment, of his Revenew; (Being a Thing not fit to pass, through too many Hands;) And the said selected Number, should have dayes of Sitting, by themselves. At which, the rest of the Council, should not be present; which being once setled, then other prin∣cipal Business of State, may be handled at those Sittings, and so the rest begin to be disused, and yet retain their Countenance, without Murmur, or Disgrace. The Third Proposition, as it is moved, seemeth to be pretty, if it can keep promise: For it is thus. That a Means, may be found, to re-enforce his Majesties Army, by 500, or a 1000 Men; And that, without any Penny Encrease, of Charge. And the Means should be, that there should be a Commandement of a Local Re∣moving, and transferring some Companies, from one Province, to another: whereupon it is supposed, that many, that are planted, in House, and Lands, will rather leese their Entertainment, than remove; And thereby, new Men may have their Pay, and yet the old, be mingled in the Country, for the Strength therof. In this Proposition, two things may be feared: The one, Discon∣tent of those, that shall be put off: The other, that the Compa∣nies shall be stuffed with Novices, and Tyrones, instead of Veterani. I wish therefore, that this Proposition, be well debated, ere it be ad∣mitted. Thus having performed that, which Duty binds me to; I commend you, to Gods best preservation. Your most devoted, and bounden Servant. A Letter, from the Kings Atturney General, to the Master of the Horse, upon the sending, of his Bill, for Viscount. August 5. 1616. SIR, I send you the Bill, or his Majestis Signature, reformed, ac∣cording to his Majesties Amendments, both in the two places, (which, I assure you, were both altered, with great Judgement;) And in the Third place, which his Majesty termed a Question one∣ly. But he is an idle Body, that thinks his Majesty, asks an idle Question; And therefore, his Majesties Questions, are to be answe∣red,
by Taking away, the Cause of the Question, and not by Reply∣ing. For the Name, his Majesties Will, is a Law, in those things; And to speak Truth, it is a well-sounding, and Noble Name, both here, and abroad: And being your proper Name, I will take it, for a good Sign, that you shall give Honour, to your Dignity, and not your Dignity to you. Therefore I have made it Viscount Villiers: And for your Baronry, I will keep it for an Earldom: For though the other, had been more orderly, yet that is as usual, and both alike good in Law. For Ropers place, I would have it, by all means, dispatched. And therefore, I marvail, it lingreth. It were no good manners, to take the Business, out of my Lord Treasurers hands; And there∣fore, I purpose, to write to his Lordship, if I hear not from him, first, by Mr. Deckom. But if I hear of any Delay, you will give me leave, (especially since the King named me,) to deal with Sir Iohn Roper, my Self; For neither I, nor my Lord Treasurer, can deserve any great thanks of you, in this Business, considering the King hath spoken to Sir Iohn Roper, and he hath promised; And be∣sides, the thing it self, is so reasonable, as it ought, to be as soon done, as said. I am now gotten, into the Countrey, to my House, where I have some little Liberty, to think of that, I would think of, and not of that, which other Men, Hourly break my Head withall, as it was at London. Upon this, you may conclude, that most of my Thoughts, are of his Majesty; And then, you cannot be farr off. God ever keep you, and prosper you. I rest alwayes, Your true, and most devoted, Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, upon the Sending, his Patent, of Viscount Villiers, to be Signed. August 12. 1616. SIR, I have sent you, now, your Patent, of Creation, of Lord Blechley, of Blechly, and of Viscount Villiers. Blechley is your own; And I liked, the sound of the Name, better than Whaddon: But the Name, will be hid, for you will be called Viscount Villiers. I have put them both in a Patent, after the manner of the Patent of Arms, where Baronries are joyned. But the chief Reason was, because I would avoid double Prefaces; which had not been fit: Nevertheless Ceremony of Roabing, and otherwise, must be double: And now, because I am in the Country, I will send you, some of my Country Fruits, which, with me, are good Meditations; which, when I am in the Citty, are choaked with Business.
After that the King, shall have watred, your new Dignities, with his Bounty, of the Lands, which he intends you; And that, some other things, concerning your means, which are now like∣wise in Intention, shall be setled upon you; I doe not see, but you may think, your private Fortunes established; And therefore, it is now time, that you should refer your Actions, chiefly, to the Good, of your Soveraign, and your Country. It is the life, of an Oxe, or a Beast, alwaies to eat, and never to exercise; But Men are born, (especially Christian Men,) not to cramm in their Fortunes, but to exercise their Vertues; And yet, the other, have been the unworthy, and, ometimes, the unlucky humour, of great Persons, in our Times; Neither will your further Fortune, be the further off. For assure your self, that Fortune, is of a womans Nature, that will sooner follow you by slighting, than by too much Woo∣ing: And in this Dedication, of your Self to the Publick, I re∣commend unto you, principally, that which I think, was never done, since I was born; And which not done, hath bred, almost, a Wilderness, and Solitude, in the Kings Service: which is, that you countenance, and encourage, and advance, able, and vertu∣ous Men, in all Kindes, Degrees, and Professions. For in the time of some late great Counsellours, when they bare the Sway, able Men, were by design, and of purpose, suppressed: And though, now since, Choice goeth better, both in Church, and Com∣monwealh, yet Money, and Turn-Serving, and Cunning Canvi∣ses, and Importunity, prevail too much. And in places of Mo∣ment, rather make Able and Honest Men, yours, than advance those, that are otherwise, because they are yours: As for Cun∣ning and Corrupt Men, you must, I know, sometimes use them, but keep them at a distance; And let it appear, that you make use of them, rather than that they lead you. Above all, depend wholly, (next to God,) upon the King; And be ruled, (as hither∣to you have been,) by his Instructions; For that's best for your Self. For the Kings Care, and Thoughts, concerning you, are according to the Thoughts, of a great King; whereas your Thoughts, cocerning your Self, are, and ought to be, accor∣ding to the Thoughts of a Modest Man. But let me not weary you. The Summe is, that you think Goodness, the best part of Greatness; And that you remember, whence your Rising comes, and make return accordingly. God ever keep you.
A Letter, to the King, touching Sir George Villiers Patent, for Baron of Blechley, and Viscount Villiers. August 12. 1616. It may please your most excellent Majesty, I Have sent, Sir George Villiers Patent, drawn again, containing al∣so a Baronry; The Name, Blechley, which is his own; And to my Thinking, soundeth better, than Whaddon. I have included both, in one Patent, to avoid a double Preface, and as hath been used, in the Patents, of Earls, of like nature. Nevertheless, the Ceremony of Roabing, and otherwise, is to be double, as is also used, in like case of Earls. It resteth, that I express unto your Majesty, my great Joy, in your Honouring, and Advancing, this Gentleman: whom to de∣scribe, not with Colours, but with true Lines, I may say this; Your Majesty, certainly, hath found out, and chosen, a safe Nature, a capable Man, and honest Will, Generous and Noble Affections, and a Courage well lodged; And one that, I know, loveth your Majesty, unfeignedly; And admireth you as much, as is in a Man, to admire his Sveraign, upon Earth. Onely, your Majesties School, (wherein, he hath already so well profited, as in this En∣trance upon the Stage, being the Time of greatest Danger, he hath not committed any manifest Errour;) will add Perfection, to your Majesties comfort, and the great Contentment, of your People. God ever preserve, and prosper, your Majesty. I rest in all Humbleness, Your Majesties, most bounden, and most devoted, Subject, and Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, upon the Sending, of his Pa∣tent, for the Creation, of Viscount, Sealed August 20. 1616. SIR, I took much Contentment, in that, I perceive by your Letter, that you took, in so good part, the Freedom of my Ad∣vice; And that your Self, in your own Nature, consented there∣with. Certainly, no Service is comparable, to good Counsell; And the Reason is, because no Man, can doe so much, for another, as a Man, may doe for himself: Now good Counsel, helpeth a Man, to help himself. But you have so happy a Master, as supply∣eth all. My Service, and good will, shall not be wanting.
It was graciously, and kindly, done also, of his Majesty, towards me, to tell you, that you were beholding to me. But it must be then, for Thinking of you, as I doe For otherwise, for Speaking, as I think, it is but the part of an Honest Man. I send you your Patent, whereof God give you Joy: And I send you here, inclosed, a little Note of Remembrance, for that part of the Ceremony, which concerneth the Patent: For as for other Ceremonies, I leave to o∣thers. My Lord Chanceller, dispatcht your Patent, presently, upon the Rceit; And writ to me, how glad he was of it, and how well he wished you. If you writ to him, a few words of Thanks, I think, you shall doe well. God keep you, and prosper you. I ever rest Your true, and most devoted, Servant. A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, acknowledging the Kings Fa∣vour in granting, some Sute of his. August 22. 1616. SIR, I am more, and more, bound, unto his Majesty, who, I think, knowing me, to have other Ends, than Ambition, is contented, to make me Judge, of mine own Desires. I am now beating my Brains, (amongst many Cares, of his Majesties Busi∣ness,) touching the Redeeming the Time, in this Business of Cloath. The great Question is; How to miss, or how to mate the Flem∣mings; How to pass by them, or how to pass over them. In my next Letter, I shall alter your Stile; But I shall never, whilst I breath, alter mine own Stile; In being Your true, and most devoted, Servant. The Lord Keepers Letter, to the University, in answer, of their Congratulation, at his first Comming to that place: To the Renowned University of Cambridge, his Dear, and Reverend, Mother. I Am Debtor to you of your Letters, and of the Time, likewise, that I have taken, to answer them; But as soon as I could chuse, what to think on, I thought good, to let you know, That although,
you may erre much, in your valuation of me, yet you shall not be deceived, in your Assurance: And for the other part also, though the manner be, to mend the Picture, by the Life; yet I would be glad, to mend the Life, by the Picture, and to become, and be, as you express me to be. Your Gratulations, shall be no more welcom to me, than your Business, or occasions; which I will at∣tend; and yet not so, but that I shall endeavour, to prevent them, by my care of your Good. And so I commend you, to God's goodness. Your most loving, and assured Friend, and Sonne, Fr. Bacon. C. S. Gorhambury, Apr. 12. 1617. A Letter of King James, written to his Lordship, when he was Lord Chanceller, with his Majesties own Hand, upon the sending to him, his Book, of Instauratio Magna, then new∣ly published. MY Lord, I Have received your Letter, and your Book, than the which, you could not have sent, a more acceptable Present unto me. How thankfull I am for it, cannot better be expressed by me, than by a firm Resolution, I have taken; First, to read it thorough, with care, and attention; Though I should steal, some Hours, from my Sleep; Having otherwise, as little spare time, to read it, as you had, to write it. And the to use the liberty, of a true Friend, in not sparing, to ask you the question, in any point, whereof I shall stand in doubt; (Nam ejus est Explicare, cujus est Condere;) As, on the other part, I will willingly give, a due commendation, to such places, as; in my opinion, shall deserve it. In the mean time, I can, with comort, assure you, that you could not have made choice, of a Subject, more befitting your place and your universal, and Me∣thodick, Knowledge; And, in the general, I have already obser∣ved, that you jump with me, in keeping the midd way, between the two Extremes; As also in some particulars, I have found, that you agree fully, with my opinion. And so praying God, to give your Work, as good Success, as your Heart can wish, and your La∣bours deserve, I bid you heartily farewell. Iames Rex. Octob. 16. 1620.
OTHER LETTERS, BY THE SAME Honourable Authour, Written in the Dayes of QVEEN ELIZABETH. LONDON, Printed by F. L. for William Lee, at the sign of the Turks-Head, in Fleetstreet, 1657.
OTHER LETTERS, WRITTEN BY THE SAME Honourable Authour. To my Lord of Essex. My singular good Lord, I May perceive, by my Lord Keeper,These Letters following, I find not, in his Lord∣ships Register-Book, of Let∣ters; But I am enduced, by the Stile, and other Chara∣cters, to own them, to be his. that your Lordship, as the time served, signified unto him, an Intention, to conferr with his Lordship, at better opportunity; Which, in regard, of your several, and weighty occasions, I have thought good, to put your Lordship, in remembrance of; That now, at his Comming to the Court, it may bee executed; Desiring your good Lordship, nevertheless, not to conceive, out of this my diligence, in sollici∣ting this matter, that I am, either much in Appetite, or much in Hope. For as for Appetite; The Waters of Parnassus, are not like, the Waters, of the Spaw, that give a Stomach; But rather, they quench Appetite, and Desires. And for Hope; How can he hope much, that can allege no other Reason, than the Reason of an E∣vil Debter; who will perswade his Creditour, to lend him new Summes, and to enter further in with him, to make him satisfie the old? And to her Majesty, no other Reason, but the Reason of a Waterman; I am her first Man, of those, who serve in Counsel of Law. And so, I commit your Lordship, to Gods best preserva∣tion.
To my Lord of Essex. My Lord, COnceiving that your Lordship, came now up, in the person of a good Servant, to see your Soveraign Mistris; which kinde of Complements, are many times, Instar magnorum Meritorum; And therefore, that it would be hard for me, to find you, I have com∣mitted, to this poor Paper, the humble Salutations of him, that is more yours, than any Mans; And more yours, than any Man. To these Salutations, I add, a due, and joyfull Gratulation, con∣fessing that your Lordship, in your last conference with me, before your Journey, spake not in vain, God making it good; That you trusted, we should say, Quis putasset? Which, as it is found true, in a happy sense, so I wish, you doe not find, another Quis putas∣set, in the manner, of taking, this so great a Service. But, I hope, it is, as he said; Nubecula est, citò transibit: And that your Lord∣ships Wisdom, and Obsequious Circumspection, and Patience, will turn all to the best. So referring all, to some time, that I may attend you, I commit you to Gods best preservation. To my Lord of Essex. My Lord, I Am glad, your Lordship, hath plunged, out of your own business. Wherein, I must commend your Lordship, as Xenophon commen∣ded, the State, of his Country; which was this; That having chosen, the worst Form of Government, of all others, they governed the best, in that kinde. Hoc, Pace, et Veniâ tuâ, according to my Charter. Now, as your Lordship is my Witness, that I would not trouble you, whilst your own Cause was in hand; (Though that I know, that the further from the Term, the better the time, was to deal or me;) So that being concluded, I presume, I shall be one, of your next Cares. And having communicated with my Brother, of some course, either to persit the first, or to make me some other way; Or rather, by see∣ming to make me some other way, to perfit the first, wherewith he agreed to acquaint your Lordship; I am desirous, for mine own better satisfaction, to speak with your Lordship, my self; Which I had rather, were somewhere else, than at Court; And as soon, as your Lordship, well assign me, to wait on you. And so in, &c.
To Sir Robert Cecil. SIR, YOur Honour knoweth, my Manner is, though it be not the wi∣sest way, yet taking it for the honestest, to doe, as Alexander did, by his Physician; In drinking the Medicine, and delivering the Advertisement, of Suspition: So I trust on, and yet do not smother, what I hear. I doe assure you, Sir, that by a wise Friend of mine, and not factious toward your Honour, I was told, with asseverati∣on, that your Honour, was bought, by Mr. Coventry, for 2000. Angels; And that you wrought, in a contrary spirit, to my Lord your Father. And he said further, that from your Servants, from your Lady, from some Counsellours that have observed you in my business, he knew, you wrought, under hand, against me. The truth of which Tale, I doe not believe; you know the Event will shew, and God will right. But as I reject this Report, (though the Strangeness of my Case, might make me credulous;) so I admit a Conceit, that the last Messenger, my Lord, and your self used, dealt ill with your Honours; And that VVord, (Speculation,) which was in the Queens mouth, rebounded from him, as a Commen∣dation: For I am not ignorant, of those little Arts. Therefore, I pray, trust not him again, in my matter. This was much to write, but I think my Fortune, will set me at liberty, who am weary of asserviling my Self, to every Mans charity. Thus I, &c. To Sir John Stanhope. SIR, YOur good promises sleep, which it may seem, now, no time to awake. But that I doe not finde, that any general Kalender, of Observation of time, serveth for the Court: And besides, if that be done, which I hope, by this time, is done; And that other matter shall be done, which we wish may be done, I hope to my poor Matter, the one of these great Matters, may clear the way, and the other give the occasion. And though my Lord Treasurer be absent; whose Health, neverthelesse, will enable him, to be sooner at Court, than is expected; especially if this hard weather, (too hard to continue,) shall relent; yet we abroad say, his Lord∣ships spirit may be there, though his person be away. Once I take for a good ground, that her Majesties Business, ought to keep, neither Vacation, nor Holyday; either in the Execution, or in the Care and preparation, of those, whom her Majesty calleth, and useth And therefore, I would think, no time barred, from re∣membring that, with such discretion, and respect, as appertai∣neth.
The Conclusion shall be, to put you in minde, to maintain that which you have kindly begun, according to the Reliaunce, I have, upon the Sincerity, of your Affection, and the Soundnesse of your Judgement. And so I commend you, to Gods preservation. To my Lord of Essex. It may please your good Lordship, I Am very sorry, her Majesty should take my Motion to travail, in offence. But surely, under her Majesties Royal Correction, it is such an Offence, as it should be, an offence to the Sun, when a Man, to avoid the scorching heat thereof, flyeth into the shade. And your Lordship may asily think, that having now these twen∣ty years, (For so long it is, and more, since I went, with Sir A∣mas Paulett, into Frace, from her Majesties royal Hand,) I made Her Majesties Service, the Scope of my life: I shall never finde a greater grief than this, Relinquere Amorem Primum. But since, prin∣cipia Actionum, sunt tantùm, in nostrâ potestate; I hope, her Majesty, of her Clemency, yea and Justice, will pardon me, and not force me, to pine here, with Melancholy. For though mine Heart be good, yet mine Eyes will be sore; So as I shall have no pleasure, to look abroad: And if I should otherwise be affected, her Majesty, in her Wisdom, will but think me, an impudent Man, that would face out a disgrace. Therefore, as I have ever found you, my good Lord, and true Friend, so I pray, open the matter so, to her Majesty, as she may discern the necessity of it, without adding hard Conceit, to her Rejction; Of which, I am sure, the latter I nevr deserved. Thus, &c. To the Lord Treasurer. It may please your good Lordship, I Am to give you humble Tanks, for your favourablr opinion, which by Mr. Secretaries report, I finde, you conceive of me, for the obtaining of a good place, which some of my honourable Friends, have wished unto me, Nec Opinanti. I will use no rea∣son, to perswade your Lordships Mediation, but this; That your Lordship, and my other Frends, shall in this, begg my life, of the Queen; For I see well, the Barr will be my Beer, as I must, and will use it, rather than my poor Estate, or Reputation, shall de∣cay. But I stand indiffrent, whether God call me, or her Majesty. Had I that in possession, which by your Lordships onely means, a∣gainst the greatest opposition, her Majesty graunted me, I would
never trouble her Majesty, but serve her still voluntarily, without pay. Neither, doe I, in this, more, than obey my Friends Con∣ceits, as one that would not be, wholly wanting to my Self. Your Lordships good opinion, doth somewhat confirm me, as that I take comort in, above all others; Assuring your Lordship, that I nvr thought so well of my Self, for any one thing, as that I have found a fitness, to my Tinking, in my Self, to observe, and revere your Vertues. For the Continuance whereof, in the prolong∣ing, of your dayes, I will still be your Beadsman; And accor∣dingly, at this time, commend your Lordship, to the Divine Pro∣tection. To Foulk Grevil. SIR, I Understand of your paines, to have visited me; For which I thank you. My Matter is an endlesse Question. I assure you, I had said; Requiesce anima mea: But now, I am otherwise put, to my psalter; Nolite confidere. I dare go no farther. Her Majesty, had by set speech, more than once, assured me, of her Intention, to call me to her service; which I could not understand, but of the place, I had been named to. And now, whether Invidus Homo hoc fecit; Or whether my Matter, must be an Appendix to my Lo: of Essex sue; Or whether her Majesty, pretending to prove my Ability, meaneth, but to take advantage, of some Errours, which, like enough, at one time, or other, I may commit; Or what it is; But her Majesty, is not ready, to dispatch it. And what though the Mr. of the Rowles, and my Lo: of Essex, and your self, and others, think my case without doubt; yet in the mean time, I have a hard condition, to stand so, that whatsoever service, I do to her Majesty, it shall be thought to be, but servitium viscatum, lime-twiggs, and Fetches, to place my self; And so I shall have Envy, not Thanks. This is a Course, to quench all good spirits, and to Corrupt every Mans Nature; which will, I fear, much hurt, her Majesties Service, in the end. I have been like a pice of Stuff, bespoken in the shopp: And if her Majesty, will not take me, it may be, the selling by par∣cels, will be more gainfull. For to be, as I told you, like a Child, following a Bird, which when he is nearest, flyeth away, and light∣eth a little before, and then the Child after it again, and so in In∣finitum, I am weary of it: As also, of wearying my good Friends; Of whom, Neverthelesse, I hope, in one course or other, gratefully to deserve. And so, not forgetting your Businesse, I leave to trou∣ble you, with this idle Letter, being but Iusta, & Moderata Queri∣monia. For indeed, I do confesse, primus Amor, will not easily be cast off. And thus again, I commnd me to you.
To the Lord Treasurer Burghley. Most Honourable, and my very good Lord. I Know, I may commit an Errour, in writing this Letter, both in a time, of great, and weighty Businesse; As also, when my self, am not induced thereto, by any new particular occasion: And therefore, your Lordship may impute to me, either Levity, or Ig∣norance, wat appertaineth to good respcts, and forwardnesse of Daling; Especially to an Honourable Peson, in whom there is such concurrence, of Magnitudo Honoris, & Oneris; As it is hard to say, whether is the greater. But I answer my self first, that I have ever noted it, as a part, of your Lordships exceent Wisedome, Par∣vis componere Magna; That you do not exclude inferiour matters, of Accesse, amongst the Care of great. And for my self, I thought, it would better manifest, what I desire to expresse, if I did write out of a deep, and settled consideration, of mine own Duty, rather than upon the spurre of a particular Occasion. And therefore, (my singular good Lord) Ex abundantia cordis, I must acknow∣ledge, how greatly, and diversly, your Loodship hath vouchsafed, to tye me unto you, by Many your Benefits. The Reversion of the Office, which your Lordship Onely procured unto me, and carried through great, and vehement, Opposition, though it yet bear no fruit, yet it is one of the fairest Flowers, of my poor Estate; your Lordships constant, and serious Endeavours, to have me Solliciter: your late honourable Wishes, for the place of the Wards: Toge∣ther with your Lordships Attempt, to give me way, by the Re∣move of Mr. Solliciter; Tey be Matters, of singular obligation; Besides many other favours, as well by your Lordships Graunts, from your Self, as by your Commendation to others, which I have had for my help; And may justly perswade my Self, out of the few Denials, I have received, that fewer mought have been; if mine own Industry, and good happ, had been answerable to your Lordships Goodness. But on the other side, I most humbly pray your Lordships pardon, if I speak it. The time is yet to come, that your Lordship did ever use, or command, or employ me, in my profession, in any Services, or Occasions, of your Lordships own, or such as are near unto your Lordship: which hath made me, fear, somtimes, that your Lordship doth more onourably affect me, than throughly discern, of my most humble, and dutifull Affecti∣on, to your Lordship again. Which if it were not in me, I knew not, whether I were unnaturall, unthankfull, or unwise. This causeth me, most humbly to pray your Lordship; (And I know mine own case too well, to speak it as weening, I can do your Lord∣ship servie, but as willing to do it;) To believe, that your Lord∣ship is, upon just Title, a principall Owner, and proprietary, of
that, I cannot call Talent, but Mit, that God hath given me; which I ever do, and shall, devote to your service. And in like humble manner, I pray your Lordship, to pardon mine Errours, and not to impute unto me, the Errours of any other; (which I know al∣so, themselves, have, by this time, left, and forethought:) But to conceive of me, to be a Man, that daily profitteth in Duty. It is true, I do, in part, comfort my self, supposing that it is my Weak∣nesse, and insuficiency, that moveth your Lordship, who hath so generall a command, to use others more able. But lt it be as it is; For Duty onely, and Homage, I will boldly undertake, that Nature, and true Thankfulnesse, shall never give place, to a poli∣tick dependance. Lastly, I most humbly desire your Lordship, to continue unto me, the good favour, and countenance, and Encou∣ragement, in the Course of my poor Travails; whereof I have had, some taste, and experience; For the which, I yield your Lord∣ship, my very humble good thanks. And so again, craving your Honours pardon, for so long a Letter, carrying so empty an offer, of so unpuissant a service; But yet a true, and unfeigned, significa∣tion, of an honest, and vowed duty; I cease, commending your Lordship, to the preservation, of the Divine Majesty. To my Lord of Essex. Most Honourable, and my Singular good Lord, I Cannot but importune your Lordship, with thanks, for your Lordships remembring my name, to my Lord Keeper; which be∣ing done, in such an Article of time, could not, but be exceeding∣ly enriched, both in demonstration, and effect: which I did well discern, by the manner of expressing thereof, by his Lordship, again to me. This accumulating of your Lordships Favours, upon me, hitherto, worketh onely this effect; That it raiseth my mind, to aspire, to be found worthy of them; And likewise, to merit, and serve you, for them. But whether I shall be able to pay my vowes, or no, I must leave that to God, who hath them in deposito. Whom also, I most instantly beseech, to give you fruit of your actions, be∣yond that your Heart can propound. Nam Deus major est corde. E∣ven to the Environing of his Benedictions, I recommend your Lord∣ship.
To Sir Thomas Lucy. SIR, There was no Newes, better welcom to me, this long time, than that, of the good Success, of my Kinsman; wherein, if he be happy, he cannot be happy alone, it consisting of two parts. And I rendr you, no less kinde Thanks, for your aid, and Favour, towards him, than if it had been for my Self; Assuring you, that this Bond of Alliance, shall, on my part, tye me, to give all the Tribute, to your good Fortune, upon all occasions, that my poor Strngth can yield. I send you, so required, an Abstract, of the Lands of Inheritance; And one Lease of great value, which my Kins∣man bringeth; with a Note, of the Tenures, Valews, Contents, and State, truly, and perfectly, drawen; whereby you may perceive, the Land is good Land, and well countenanced, by scope of Acres, oods, and Royalties; Though the Total of the Rents, be set down, as it now goeth, without Improvement: In which respct, it may somewhat differ, from your first Note. Out of this, what he will assure in Ioincture, I leave it, to his own kindness; For I love not to measure Affection. To conclude, I doubt not, your Daughter, mought have married, to a better Living, but never to a better Life; Having chosen a Gentleman, bred to all Honesty, Vertue, and Worth, with an Estate convenient. And if my Brother, or my Self, were either Thrivers, or Fortunate, in the Queens Ser∣vice, I would hope, there should be left, as great an House, of the Cookes, in this Gentleman, as in your good Friend, Mr. Atturney General. But sure I am, if Scriptures fail not, it will have as much of Gods Blessing; and Sufficiency, is ever the best Feast, &c. To Sir Robert Cecil, at his Being in France. It may please your Honourable Lordship, I Know you will pardon, this my Observance, in writing to you, empty of matter, but out of the fulness of my Love. I am sor∣ry, that as your time of Absence, is prolonged, above that was e∣steemed at your Lordships setting forth; So now, upon this last Advertisement, received from you, there groweth an Opinion, amongst better than the vulgar, that the Difficulties also of your Neotiation, are encreased. But because, I know the Gravity, of your Nature, to be, not to hope lightly, it maketh me to despair the less. For you are Natus ad Ardua: And the Indisposition, of the Subject, may honour the Skill of the Workman. Sure I am, udgement, and Diligence, shall not want in your Lordships Self: But this was not my purpose; Being onely to signifie unto your Lordship, my continual, and incessant, love towards you, thir∣sting
after your Return, for many respects. So I commend you ever, to the good preservation, of the Divine Majesty. Grayes Inne. At your Honours Commandement, ever, and particularly. To Sir Robert Cecil. My singulr good Lord, THe Argument of my Letters, to your Lordship, rather encrea∣seth, than spendeth; It being only the Desire, I have, to sa∣lute you: which by your absence is more augmented, than aba∣ted. For me to write your Lordship Occurrences, either of Scotish Braggs, or Irish Plaints, or Spanish Ruffling, or Low-Countrey States, were, (besides that it is alienum quiddam, from mine own humour,) To forget, to whom I write; save that you, that know true Ad∣vertisements, sometimes desire, and delight, to hear common Re∣ports; As we, that know, but common Reports, desire to hear the Truth. But to leave such, as write to your Fortunes, I write to your self, in regard of my love to you; you being as near to me, in Hearts Bloud, as in Bloud of Descent. This day, I had the Contentment, to see your Father, upon Occasion: And methought, his Lordships Countenance, was not decayed, nor his Cough ve∣hement; But his Voice, was as faint, all the while, as at first. Thus wishing your Lordship, a happy, and speedy Return, I com∣mend you, to the Divine Majesty. To the Queen. It may please your sacred Majesty, I Would not fail, to give your Majesty, my most humble, and due Thanks, for your Royal choice, of such Commissioners, in the great Starre-chamber Cause; Being persons, besides their Honour, of such Science, and Integrity. By whose Report, I doubt not, but your Majesty, will finde that, which you have been heretofore enfotmed, (both by my Lord Keeper, and by some much meaner person,) touching the Nature, of that Cause, to be true. This preparatory Hearing, doth already assail me, with new, and en∣larged Offers, of Composition; which if I had born a minde, to have hearkned unto, this matter had been quenched long agoe, without any benefit to your Majesty. But your Majesties Benefit, is to me, in greater regard, than mine own particular: Trusting to your Majesties gracious disposition, and Royal word, that your
Majesty, will include me, in any extraordinary Course, of your Soveraign pleasure, which your Majesty shall like, to take, in this Cause. The other Man, I spoke to your Majesty of, may, within these two Terms, be in the same streights, between your Majesties Justice, and Mercy, that this Man now is, if your Majesty be so pleased. So most humbly craving pardon, for my presuming, to seek accesse, for these few Lines, I recommend your Majesty, to the most precious Custody, and best preservation, of the Divine Majesty. Your Majesties, most humble, and entirely obedient, Servant, and Subject. To the Queen. It may please your Majesty, IT were great simplicity in me, to look for better, than that your Majesty,VVritten by Mr. Bacon, for my Lord of Essex. should cast away my Letter, as you have done Me; were it not, that it is possible, your Majesty, will think to find somewhat in it, whereupon your displeasure may take hold; And so Indignation, may obtain that of you, which Favour could not. Neither mought I, in reason, presume to offer, unto your Majesty, dead lines, my self being excluded as I am; Were it not upon this onely Argument, or Subject; Namely, to clear my self, in point of Duty. Duty, though my State, lye buried in the Sands; And my Favours, be cast upon the Waters; And my Honours, be commit∣ted to the Wind; Yet standeth surely built, upon the Rock, and hath been, and ever shall be, unforced, and unattempted. And therefore, since the World, out of Errour, and your Majesty, I fear, out of Art, is pleased to put upon me; That I have so much, as a∣ny Election, or Will, in this my Absence, from Attendance; I cannot but leave, this Protestation, with your Majesty; That I am, and have been, meerly a patient, and take my self, onely to obey, and execute your Majesties will. And indeed, Madam, I had never thought it possible, that your Majesty, could have so dis-interessed your self of me; Nor that you had been so perfect, in the Art of forgetting; Nor that after a Quintessence of Wormwood, your Majesty would have taken so large a Draught of Poppy; As to have passed, so many Summers, without all Feeling of my Sufferings. But the onely Comfort I have, is this, that I know your Majesty ta∣keth Delight, and Contentment, in executing, this Disgrace up∣on me. And since your Majesty, can find no other use of me, I am glad yet, I can serve for that. Thus making my most humble pe∣tition, to your Majesty, that in Justice, (Howsoever you may by strangeness, untye, or by violence cut Asunder all other Knotts,) your Majesty, would not touch me, in that which is indissoluble;
That is, point of Duty: And that your Majesty will pardon, this my un-warranted presumption, of writing, being to such an end: I cease in all Humblenesse; Your Majesties poor, and never so unworthy Servant, Essex. To my Lord of Essex. It may please your Lordship, THat your Lordship is, in Statu quo prius, no Man taketh greater gladnesse, than I do; The rather, because I assure my self, that of your Eclipses, as this hath been the longest, it shall be the least; As the Comicall Poet saith; Neque illam tu satis noveras, neque te illa, hoc ubi fit, ibi non vivitur. For if I may be so bold, as to say what I think: I believe, neither your Lordship looked to have found her Majesty, in all points, as you have done; Neither her Majesty, per case, looked, to find your Lordship, as she hath done. And therefore, I hope, upon this experience, may grow more perfect Knowledge, and upon Knowledge, more true Consent; VVhich I, for my part, do infinitely wish, as accounting these Accidents to be like the Fish Remora; which, though it be not great, yet hath it a hidden propriety, to hinder the sailing of the ship. And there∣fore, as bearing unto your Lordship, after her Majesty, of all pub∣lick persons, the second Duty, I could not but signifie unto you, my affectionate Gratulation. And so, I commend your good Lordship, to the best preservation, of the Divine Majesty. From Grayes Inne. To my Lord Treasurer Burghley. My Lord, WIth as much confidence, as mine own honest, and faithfull Devotion unto your Service, and your honourable Corre∣spondence unto me, and my poor estate, can breed in a Man, doe I commend my self unto your Lordship. I waxe now somewhat ancient; One and thirty yeares, is a great deal of sand, in the Houre-glasse. My Health, I thank God, I find confirmed; And I do not sear, that Action shall impair it; Because I account, my ordinary course of Study, and Meditation, to be more painfull, than most parts of Action are. I ever bare a mind, (in some middle place, that I could discharge,) to serve her Majesty; Not
as a Man, born under Sol, that loveth Honour; Nor under Iupiter, that loveth Business; (For the Contemplative Planet, carrieth me away wholly,) but as a Man, born under an Excellent Soveraign, that deserveth the Dedication, of all Mens Abilities. Besides, I doe not finde, in my self, so much Self-love, but that the greater parts, of my Thoughts are, to deserve well, (if I were able,) of my Frends, and namely of your Lordship; who being the Atlas, of this Com∣monwealth, the Honour of my House, and the second Founder of my poor Estate, I am tyed, by all duties, both of a good Patriot, and of an unworthy Kinsman, and of an Obliged Servant, to employ whatsoever I am, to doe you Service. Again, the Meanness of my Estate, doth somewhat move me: For though I cannot accuse my Self, that I am either prodigal, or sloathfull, yet my Health is not to spend, nor my Course to get. Lastly, I confesse, that I have, as vast Contemplative Ends, as I have moderate Civil Ends: For I have taken all Knowledge, to be my Province; And if I could purge, it of two sort of Rovers, whereof the one, with frivolous Disputations, Confutations, and Verbosities; The other, with blind Experiments, and Auricular Traditions, and Impostures; hath committed so many spoils; I hope, I should bring in, Industri∣ous Observations, grounded Conclusions, and profitable Inventi∣ons and Discoveries, the best State of that Province. This, whe∣ther it be Curiosity, or Vain-glory, or Nature, or, (if one take it favourably,) Philanthropia, is so fixed in my minde, as it cannot be removed. And I doe easily see, that Place of any Reasonable Coun∣tenance, doth bring commandement, of more Wits, than of a Mans own; which is the Thing I greatly affect. And for your Lordship, perhaps you shall not finde more Strength, and less Encounter, in any other. And if your Lordship, shall finde now, or at any time, that I doe seek, or affect, any place, whereunto any that is nea∣rer unto your Lordship, shall be concurrent, say then, that I am a most dishonest Man. And if your Lordship, will not carry me on, I will not doe as Anaxagoras did, who reduced himself, with Con∣templation, unto voluntary poverty; But this I will doe, I will sell the Inheritance, that I have, and purchase some Lease, of quick Revenew, or some Office of Gain, that shall be executed by Deputy, and so give over, all Care of Service, and become some sorry Book∣maker, or a true Pioner, in that Mine of Truth, which (he said,) lay so deep. This which I have writ unto your Lordship, is rather Thoughts, than Words, being set down without all Art, Disgui∣zing, or Reservation. Wherein I have done honour, both to your Lordships Wisdom, in judging, that that will be best believed of your Lordship which is truest; And to your Lordships good Nature, in retaining nothing from you. And even so, I wish your Lordship, all Happiness, and to my Self, Means and Occasion, to be added, to my faithfull desire, to doe you Service. From my Lodging at Grays Inne.
To the Lord Treasurer Burghley. My singular good Lord, YOur Lordships comfortable Relation, of her Majesties gracious Opinion, and Meaning towards me, though, at that time, your leisure gave me not leave, to shew how I was affected therewith; yet upon every Representation thereof, it entreth, and striketh, more deeply into me, as both my Nature, and Duty, presseth me, to return some Speach of Thankfulness. It must be, an exceeding Comfort, and Encouragement to me; setting forth, and put∣ting my Self, in way, towards her Majesties service, to encounter with an Example, so private, and domestical, of her Majesties gra∣cious Goodness, and Benignity; Being made good, and verified, in my Father, so far forth, as it extendeth, to his Posterity; Accep∣ting them, as commended by his service, during the Nonage, (as I may term it,) of their own Deserts. I, for my part, am very well content, that I take least part, either of his Abilities of Minde, or of his Wordly Advancement; Both which he held, and received, the one of the Gift of God immediately, the other of her Majesties Gift: Yet, in the loyal, and earnest Affection, which he bare to her Majesties Service, I trust, my portion shall not be with the least, nor in proportion with the youngest Birth. For methinks, his Presi∣dent, should be a silent charge, upon his Blessing, unto us all, in our Degrees, to follow him afar off, and to dedicate unto her Majesties Service, both the use, and spending, of our Lives. True it is, that I must needs acknowledge my self, prepared, and furnished thereun∣to, with nothing, but with a Multitude, of Lacks, & Imperfections; But calling to mind, how diversely, and in what particular provi∣dence, God hath declared himself, to tender the State, of her Ma∣jesties Affairs, I conceive, and gather hope, that those, whom he hath, in a manner, prest, for her Majesties Service, by working, and imprinting in them, a single, and zealous minde, to bestow their duties therein; He will see them, accordingly appointed, of Sufficiency convenient, for the Rank, and Standing, where they shall be employed: So as under this her Majesties Blessing, I trust, to receive, a larger allowance, of Gods Graces. And as I may hope for this, so I can assure, and promise, for my Endeavour, that it shall not be in fault: But what Diligence, can entitle me unto, that, I doubt not, to recover. And now seeing, it hath plea∣sed her Majesty, to take knowledge, of this my Mind, and to vouch∣safe, to appropriate me, unto her Service, preventing any desert of mine, with her Princely liberality; First, I am humbly, to be∣seech your Lordship, to present to her Majesty, my more than humble Thanks, for the same: And withall, having regard, to mine own unworthiness, to receive such Favour; And to the small possibility, in me, to satisfie, and answer, what her Majesty concei∣veth;
I am moved to become, a most humble Suter to her Ma∣jesty, that this Benefit also, may be afixed, unto the other: which is; That if there appear in me, no such Towardness, of Service, as it may be her Majesty, doth benignly value, and assess me at; by reason of my sundry wants, and the disadvantage of my Nature, being unapt to lay forth, the Simple Store, of those inferiour Gifts, which God hath allotted unto me, most to view; yet that it would please her Excellent Majesty, not to account my Thankfulness, the less, for that my Disability is great, to shew it; But to sustain me, in her Majesties gracious opinion, whereupon I onely rest, and not upon any expectation of Desert, to proceed from my Self, towards the Contentment thereof. But if it shall please God, to send forth an occasion, whereby my faithfull Affection, may be tryed, I trust, it shall save me labour, for ever making, more protestation of it hereafter. In the mean time, howsoever it be not made known to her Majesty, yet God knoweth it, through the daily sollicitati∣ons, wherewith I address my self unto him, in unfeigned prayer, for the Multiplying, of her Majesties prosperities. To your Lord∣ship also, whose Recommendation, I know right well, hath been material, to advance, her Majesties good opinion, of me, I can be but a bounden Servant. So much may I safely premise, and pur∣pose to be, seeing publick, and private Bonds, vary not, but that my Service, to her Majesty, and your Lordship, draw in a Line. I wish therefore, to shew it, with as good proof, as I can say it, in good faith, &c. Your Lordships, &c. To Sir Robert Cecil. It may please your good Honour; I Am apt enough, to contemn Mendacia Famae; yet it is with this Distinction; As Fame walks among Inferiours, and not as it hath Entrance into some Ears. And yet, nevertheless, in that kinde also, I intend to avoid a suspicious silence, but not to make any base Apology. It is blown about the Town, that I should give opinion, touching my Lord of Essex Cause; First, that it was a Praemunire; And now last, that it reached to High Treason. And this Opinion, should be given, in opposition, to the Opinion, of the Lord Chief Iustice, and of Mr. Atturney General. Sir, I thank God, whatsoever Opinion, my Head serveth me to deliver, to her Majesty, being asked, My Heart serveth me to maintain, the same honest Duty, directing me, and assisting me. But the utter un∣truth of this Report, God, and the Queen can witness; And the Improbability of it, every Man that hath Wit, more or lesse, can conceive. The Root of this, I discern to be not so much, a light,
and humorous Envy, at my Accesses to her Majesty; (which of her Majesties grace, being begun in my first years, I would be sor∣ry she should estraunge in my last years; (For so I account them, reckoning by Health, not by Age;) As a deep Malice, to your Honourable Self; upon whom, by me, through nearness, they think, to make some Aspersion. But as I know no Remedy, a∣gainst Libels, and Lies; So I hope, it shall make, no manner of Disseverance, of your Honourable good Conceits, and Affection towards me; which is the Thing I confesse to fear. For as for a∣ny violence, to be offered to me, wherewith my Friends tell me, to no small terrour, that I am threatned; I thank God, I have the privy Coat, of a good Conscience; And have, a good while since, put off any fearfull care of Life, or the Accidents of Life. So desiring to be preserved, in your goo Opinion, I remain. To the Queen. It may please your most excellent Majesty, I Presume, according to the Ceremony, and good manner of the Time, and my accustomed Duty, in all Humblenesse, to present your Majesty, with a simple Gift; Almost as farre from answering my Mind, as sorting with your Greatnesse; And therewith wish, that we may continue to reckon on, and ever, your Majesties happy yeares of Reign: And they that reckon upon any other Hopes, I would they mought reckon short, and to their Cost. And so craving pardon, most humbly, I commend your Majesty, to the preservation, of the Divine Goodnesse. To the Queen. It may please your most excellent Majesty, I Most humbly entreat your Majesty, not to impute my absence, to any weaknesse of mind, or unworthinesse. But I assure your Majesty, I do find Envy beating so strongly upon me, standing as I do, (if this be to stand,) as it were not Strength of Mind, but Stu∣pidity, if I should not decline the Occasions; Except I could doe your Majesty more Service, than I can, any wayes discern, that I am able to doe. My Course towards your Majesty, (God is my witnesse,) hath been pure, and unleavened: And never poor Gen∣tleman, (as I am perswaded,) had a deeper, and truer desire, and care of your glory, your safety, your Repose of Mind, your ser∣vice: VVherein, if I have exceeded, my outward vocation, I most
humbly crave your Majesties pardon, for my presumption. On the other side, if I have come short, of my inward vocation, I most humbly crave Gods pardon, for quenching the Spirit. But in this mind, I find such solitude, and want of comfort; which I judge to be, because I take Duty too exactly, and not according to the Dreggs, of this Age; wherein the old Antheme, mought never be more truly sung; Totus mundus in maligno positus est. My Life hath been threatned, and my Name libelled, which I count an Honor. But these are the practices of those, whose despairs are dange∣rous; But yet not so dangerous as their Hopes: Or else the De∣vices of some, that would put out, all your Majesties lights, and fall on reckoning, how many years you have reigned; which I beseech our blessed Saviour may be doubled; And that I may never live, to see, any Eclipse of your glory, Interruption of safety, or Indisposition of your person; which I commend to the Divine Ma∣jesty, who keep you, and fortifie you. To my Lord Hen. Howard. My Lord, THere be very few besides your self, to whom I would perform this Respect. For I contemn Mendacia Famae, as it walkes a∣mong Inferiours; Though I neglect it not, as it may have en∣trance, into some Eare. For your Lordships Love, rooted upon good opinion, I esteem it highly, because I have tasted of the Fruits of it; And we both have tasted, of the best waters, in my ac∣compt, to knit minds together. There is shaped a Tale, in Lon∣dons Forge, that beateth apace at this time; That I should deliver opinion, to the Quee, in my Lord of Essex cause. First, that it was premunire; And now last, that it was High Treason; And this opi∣nion, to be in opposition, and Encounter, of the Lord chief Iustices Opinion, and the Atturney Generalls. My Lord, (I thank God) my wit serveth me not, to deliver any Opinion, to the Qeen which my Stomach, serveth me not, to maintain: One, and the same, Con∣science of Duty, guiding me, and fortifying me. But the untruth o this Fable, God, and my Soveraign, can witnesse; And there I leave it: Knowing no more Remedy against lies, than others doe against libells. The Root, no question of it, is; partly, some light∣headed Envy, at my Accesses to her Majesty; Which being begun, and continued, since my childhood, as long as her Majesty, shall think me worthy of them, I scorn those, that shall think the con∣trary. And another Reason is, the Aspersion of this Tale; And the Envy thereof, upon some greatr Man, in regard of my Near∣nesse. And therefore, (my Lord) I pray you, answr for me, to any person, that you think worthy, your own Reply, and my de∣fence.
For my Lord of Essex, I am not servile to him, having re∣gard to my uperiours Duty. I have been much bound unto him. And on the other side, I have spent more time, and more thoughts, about his well-doing, than I ever did about mine own. I pray God, you his Friends, amongst you, be in the right. Nulla Remedia, tam faciunt dolorem, quam quae sunt salutaria. For my part, I have de∣served better, than to have my Name, objected to Envy, or my Life, to a Ruffians violence. But I have the privy Coat, of a good Conscience. I am sure, these Courses, and Bruits, hurt my Lord more than all. So having written to your Lordship, I desire exceed∣ingly, to be preferred, in your good Opinion, and Love. And so leave you, to Gods Goodnesse. The Earl of Essex Letter, to the Councill, at his Embarquing for Spain. Iune 1596. My very good Lords; HAving taken order, for all things, that belong to our Land-Forces; And staying onely, till the Shipps be ready, to take in our Souldiers, I am come aboard, as well to draw other Men, by my example, to leave the shore; As to have time, and leasure, to ask account of my self, what other duty I have to do, besides the Governing of those Troups; And the using of them to good pur∣pose. In which Meditation, as I first study, to please my most gracious Soveraign, as well as to serve her; So my next care is, to leave your Lordships well satisfied, of my passed Carriage, since I was nominated to this Service; And apt, to make favourable Con∣struction, of what I shall do hereafter. In my past Carriage, I will neither plead Merit, nor Excuse Imperfections: For whatsoever, I shall be able to do, I know, is lesse than I owe; And besides, my Faults, my very Faith, and Zeal, (which are the best things in me,) do make me commit Errours. But I would fain, approve the Matter it self, of undertaking this service, to have been good, howsoever my former have been erroneous; Or at least, my Intent, and Ends, unblame∣able, though my Judgement were faulty. Your Lordships know, it hath been the Wisedome of all Times, rather to at∣tempt, and do something, in another Countrey, than to attend an Enemy, and be in danger much, in our own. And if this Rule, among the Ancients, was generally held true, it might be better allowed of us, in particular cases, where a State, little in Territory, not extraordinarily rich, and defended onely with it self, shall have to doe, with another State, that hath Ma∣ny, and ample Dominions, the Treasure of the Indies, and all the Mer∣cenaries, of Christendome, to serve it. For we have, as the Atheni∣ans
had, with the auncient usurping Philip; Praelium Facile, Bellum Difficile. Therefore, it is our Disadvantage, to draw the Warr into Length. And if any Man, in this Kingdom, should be allow∣ed, to perswade to prevention, he might be one, that saw the Spa∣niard at home, apprehend an Invasion, with greater Terrour, than he makes it abroad: And that was a Witness, how an Handfull of Men, neither armed, victualled, nor ordered, as they should be, landed, marched, and had done what they listed, if either the Ships had come up, or they had had any provisions, to make a Hole in a Wall, or to break open a Gate. But though the Counsel be good for some States, and for ours, at some times, yet the Oppor∣tunities ought to be watched, and it must appear, that this it is, which is now taken. The Opportunity, for such Service, I take to be, when either the Enemy, May receive the most hurt; Or when he is likeliest, to attempt against us, if he be not empeach∣ed. The Hurt, that our Estate should seek, to doe him, is; To intercept his Treasure, whereby we shall cut his Sinnews, and make Warr upon him, with his own Money; And to beat, or at least discontinew him, from the Sea, whereby her Majesty shall be, both secured from his Invasions, and become Mistris of the Sea; which is the Greatness, that the Queen of an Island, should most aspire unto. In matter of Profit, we may, this Journey, most hurt him, and benefit our Selves; Since he hath, (as is agreed on by all Men,) more Caracks, to come home now, than ever any year before. Besides many good Advantages, which will be offe∣red, if we command the Coast. And to give him a Blow, and dis∣countenance him by Sea, now is the Time, when he hath declared his Ambition, to command the Seas; And yet, so divided his Fleets; Some appointed to be set out, and yet scant in readiness; others upon point of Comming home, and not fit to defend them∣selves, if either they be met at Sea, or found in Harbour; And all so dispersed, in several places, as if at any time, we might doe good, that way, it is now. And whether he will make Warr up∣on us, if we let him alone; Let his Sollicitations, Offers, and Gifts to the Rebells of Ireland; His besieging, and winning of Ca∣lais, and those parts of France, that front upon us; And his strengthening himself by Sea, by so many means; Let these things (I say,) tell us. So as, if we will, at any time, allow the Coun∣sel of prevention, to be reasonable, we must now confess it, to be opportune. But whatsoever the Counsel were, I am not to be charged with it, For as I was not the Contriver, nor Offerer, of the Project, so if I had refused to joyn with him, that did invite me to it, I should have been thought, both Incompatible, and Backward, in her Majesties Service. I say not this, for that I think the Action such, as it were Disadvantage, to be thought the Projector of it; But I say, and say truly, that my Lord Admi∣ral devised it, presented it to her Majesty, and had as well the Ap∣probation
of her Majesty, and the Assent of such of your Lordships, as were acquainted with it, as my Promise to goe with him. One thing, (I confess,) I above all Men, am to be charged withall: That is; That when her Majesties, the Cities of London, and the States of the Low-Countries charge was past, the Men levied, and marching, to the Rendez-vous; I could not see, how with her Ma∣jesties Honour, and Safety, the Journey might be broken. Whre∣in, although I should be carried with passion, yet I pray your Lord∣ships consider, who, almost, that had been in my Case, named to such an Action, voiced throughout Christendom, and engaged in it, as much as I was worth; And being the Instrument, of draw∣ing, more voluntary Men, of their own charge, than ever was seen these many years: Who (I say,) would not have been so affect∣ed? But farr be it from me, in an Action, of this importance, to weigh my Self, or my particular Fortunes. I must beseech your Lordships, to remember, that I was, from time to time, warrant∣ed, by all your opinions, delivered both amongst your selves, and to her Majesty: Which tieth you all, to allow the Counsel. And that being graunted, your Lordships, will call that Zeal, which maketh a Man constant, in a good Counsel, that would be Pas∣sion, in an evil, or a doubtfull. I confess, her Majesty, offered us Recompence, for all our charges and losses. But, (my Lords,) I pray your Lordships consider, how many Things, I should have sold, at once, for money. I will leave mine own reputation as too small a Matter to be mentioned. But I should have sold; The Honour of her Majesty; The safety of the State; The Contentment of her Confederates; The Fortune and Hope, of many my poor Countrey-Men; And The Possibility, of giving a Blow, to that E∣nemy, that ought ever to be hatefull, to all true English Hearts. I should have sold all this, for private profit. Therefore, though I ask pardon of her Majesty, and pray your Lordships, to mediate it for me, that I was carried by this Zeal so fast, that I forgat those Reverend Forms, which I should have used; yet I had rather, have my Heart, out of my Body, than this Zeal, out of my Heart. And now, as I have laid before your Lordships, my past carriage, and entring into this Action; So I beseech your Lordships, give me leave, to prepare you, to a favourable Construction, of that, which I shall doe hereafter. In which Sute, I am resolved, neither to plead the Hazarding of Life, nor spending of my Substance, in a Publick Service; To the end, that I might find your Lordships, (who are publick persons,) more favourable Iudges: But will con∣fess, that I receive, so much Favour, and Honour, by this Trust, and Employment, as when I have done all I can, I shall still be behind hand. This Sute only I make, that your Lordships, will neither have too great an Expectation, of our Actions, nor too little; Lest all we doe, seem either Nothing, or to be done by Chance. I know, we must be tyed, to doe no more, than shall be
for her Majesties Service, nor no less. In which strait way, though it be hard for so weak a Man as my Self, to walk upright; yet the Example, of our raw Souldiers, may comfort, an unsufficient Ge∣neral. or they, till they grow perfect, in all their Orders, and Motions, are so afraid to be out, and with such a continual heed∣fulness, observe, both themselves, and those that are near them, that they doe keep, almost, as good order, at the first, as ever after. I am sure, I am as distrustfull of my Self, as they. And because I have more Sense of Duty, I shall be more Industrious. For Sea Service, the Judgement of my Honourable Companion, shall be my Compass. And for Land, his Assent, and the Advice of those her Majesty hath named, as Counsellors at Warr, shall be my Warran∣ties. It will be Honour to her Majesty, and a great Assurance to her State, if we either bring home wealth, or give the King of Spain, a blow by Sea. But to have made a continual Diversion, and to have left, as it were, a Thorn, sticking in his Foot, had been a Work worthy, of such a Queen, and of such a Preparation. For then, her Majesty, should have heard no more, of his Intentions for Ireland, and Attempts upon the Coast of France; Or his drawing, of Ships, or Galley's, into these Narrow Seas; But should at once, have delivered all Christendom, from his fearfull Usurpation. Wherein, as She had been great in Fame, for such a general pre∣servation; So she had been as great in Power, in making, all the Enemies of Spain, in Christendom, to depend upon Her. She should be Head of the Party; She onely might be said, to make the Warrs with Spain, because she made them to purpose; And they all, but as her Assistants, and Dependants. And lastly, as the End of the Warrs is Peace; So she might have had Peace, when she would, and with what Conditions she would, and have included, or left out, whom she would. For she only, by this course, should force him, to wish for Peace, and she had the means in her hands, to make the Conditions. And as easie it had been, to have done this, as to have performed lesser Services. The Objections against this, will be, Hazard, and Charge. Hazard, to hold any Thing of his, that is so Mighty a King: And Charge, to send such Supplies, from time to time, as will be needfull. For Hazard, It is not the Ha∣zard, of the State, or the Whole, as are the Hazards, of a Defensive Warr, whensoever we are enforced to fight: But it is onely, a Ha∣zard of some few, and such Commanders, as shall be set out, for such a Service. And those also, that shall be so hazar∣ded, shall be in lesse danger, than if they were put, into any Frontire Places, of Fraunce, or of the Low-Countries. For they should not be left, in any part of the Main, or Continent of Spain, or Portugall, where the Enemy might bring an Army, to attempt them; (Tough I doubt not, but after he had once tried, what it were, to besiege two or three thousand English, in a place, well fortified, and where they had a Port open, he would grow
quickly weary, of those Attempts;) But they should be so lodg∣ed, as the Seat, and Strength, of the place, should warrant their Safety; So that, to pull her Majesties Men, out of it, should be a harder Task, than to conquer any Countrey, that stands on firm land, by him: And to let English quietly possesse it, should so much prejudice him, as he were not able to endure it. And for Charge, there need not so much be expended, but that it might ea∣sily be born. And the Place, being well chosen, and the Warr well conducted, in a short time, there would not onely arise e∣nough, to pay the Charge; But great Profit to her Majesty, and wealth to our Countrey, would grow, from the place, that should be held. For in a short time, a great part, of the Golden Indian Stream, might be turned, from Spain, to England; And her Majesty be made, to give Law, to all the World by Sea, without her Charge. Besides, this fearfull Enemy, which is now a Terrour, to all Chri∣stendome, should be so weakened, in Strength, Reputation, and Purse, as her Majesty should, for ever after, have an easie Enmy of him. It may be your Lordships will desire to know the Place, that should be attempted; The Meanes, first to take it, then to hold it; The Commodity, or Advantage, that might grow, to this Estate by it. But that, with your Lordships leave, shall be reserved till my Next. This is onely to beseech you, for our dear Sovereigns sake, for the Glory, and Wellfare, of Her, and her Estate, that you will think upon this generall Proposition. And if your Lord∣ships find it reasonable, that you will move it to the Queen: By whom if I be commanded, to set down the Hypothesis, or to descend unto particulars, I will offer my Project, with this Condition, that if I advise any Thing, that the Counsell of Warr, shall think dange∣rous, it may be rejected: Or if my self be Actour in any Thing, belonging to this Project, wherein her Majesty receives dishonour, that I may answer it, with my Life. And yet your Lordships know, I am matched with those, in whom I have no particular In∣terest: But I must attribute, their Assenting to me, to my good happ, to take the better part. In my Lord, with whom I am joyn∣ed, I find so much Honour, and Service, as I doubt not, but our U∣nity in Affection, will make an Unity in Counsell, Action, and Government. I have troubled your Lordships, with a tedious Let∣ter, begun in a Day of Leasure, and finished in the midst, of our troublesome Businesse. I pray your Lordships, pardon the Errours in it; And keep so honourable an Opinion of me, as I be not con∣demned by you, upon any Complaints, Advertisements, or Re∣ports, till I have given answer to them. For as the Nature of my Place, is subject to Envy, and Detraction; So a little Body, full of sharp Humours, is hardliest kept in Temper. And all the dis∣contented Humours, of an Army, do make their greatest Quar∣rell, to him that commands the Army; Not so much for his Faults, as for because he bridles theirs. And so com∣mending
your good Lordships, to Gods Divine protection, I rest; At your Lordships commandment, Robert Essex. To my Lord of Essex, from Mr. Bacon My singular good Lord; I Will no longer, dissever part of that, which I meant to have said, to your Lordship, at Barhelmes, from the Exordium, which I then made. Whereunto I will onely adde this; That I humbly desire your Lordship, before you give accesse, to my poor Advice, to look about, even jealously a little, if you will, and to consider: First, whether I have not reason to think, that your Fortune com∣prehendeth mine: Next, whether I shift my Counsell, and doe not constare ihi; For I am perswaded, there are some, would give you the same Counsell now, which I shall, but that they should derogate from that, which they have said heretofore: Thirdly, whether you have taken hurt, at any time, by my carefull and Devoted Counsell: For although, I remember well, your Lord∣ship once told me, that you having submitted, upon my well-meant Motion, at Nonsuch, (the place, where you renewed a Treaty, with her Majesty, of obsquious kindnesse,) she had taken advantage of it; yet I suppose, you do sice believe, that it did much attempr a cold Malignant Humour, then growing upon her Majesty, to∣ward your Lordship, and hath done you good in consequence. And for my being against it, now lately, that you should not estrange your self, although I give place to none, in true Gratulation; Yet neither do I repent me of sae Counsell; Neither do I judge of the whole Play, by the First Act. But whether I counsell you the best, or for the best, Duty bindeth me, to offer to you, my wishes. I said to your Lordship, last time; Martha, Martha, attendis ad pluri∣ma, unum sufficit. Winne the Queen; If this be not the Beginning, of any other Course, I see no end. And I will not now speak, of Favour of Affection, but of other Correspondence, and Agree∣ablensse: which, whensoever it shall be conjoyned, with te o∣ther of Affection, I durst wagr my life, (let them make what Pro∣sopopaeas they will, of her Majesties Nature;) That in you, she will come to the Question of; Quid fiet Homini, quem Rex vult honorare? But how is it now? A Man, of a Nature, not to be ruled; That hath the Advantage, o my Affection, and knoweth it; Of an E∣state, not grounded to his Greatnesse; Of a popular Reputation; Of a Military Dependance: I demand, whether there can be a more dangerous Image, than this, represented to any Monarch li∣ving; Much more to a Lady, and of her Majesties Apprehension? And
is it not more evident, than Demonstration it self, that whilest this Impression continueth, in her Majesties Breast, you can finde, no o∣ther Condition, than Inventions, to keep your Estate, bare, and low; Crossing, and Disgracing your Actions; Extenuating, and Blasting of your Merit; Carping with Contempt, at your Na∣ture, and Fashions; Breeding, nourishing, and fortifying, such Instruments, as are most Factious against you; Repulses, and Scorns, of your Friends, and Dependants, that are true, and sted∣fast; winning, and inveigling away from you, such as are Flexi∣ble, and wavering; Thrusting you into odious Employments, and Offices, to supplant your Reputation; Abusing you, and Feeding you, with Dalliances, and Demonstrations, to divert you, from Descending, into the serious Consideration, of your own Case; yea, and percase Ventring you, in perillous, and desperate, Enterpri∣ses. Herein, it may please your Lordship, to understand me; For I mean nothng less, than that these Things, should be plotted, and intended, as in her Majesties Royal Minde towards you; I know the Excellency, of her Nature, too well. But I say, wheresoever the formerly described Impression, is taken, in any Kings Breast, towards a Subject, these other recited Inconveniences, must of ne∣cessity, of politick consequence, follow; In respect, of such In∣struments, as are never failing, about Princes; which spy into their Humours, and Conceits, and second them; And not only second them, but in seconding encrease them; Yea and, many times, without their knowledge, pursue them, further than Themselves would. Your Lordship, will ask the Question, wherewith the Athe∣nians, were wont to interrupt their Oratours, when they exaggerated their dangers; Quid igitur agendum est? I will tell your Lordship, Quae mihi nunc in mentem veniunt; Sup∣posing, nevertheless, that your Self, out of your own Widom, up∣on the case, with this Plainness, and Liberty, represented to you will finde out, better Expedients, and Remedies. I wish a Cure applied, to every, of the five former Impressions, which I will take, not in order, but as I think, they are of weight. For the removing the Impression, of your Nature, to be Opiniastre, and not Rulable; First, and above all things, I wish, that all Mat∣ters past, which cannot be revoked, your Lordship would turn al∣together, upon Insatisfaction, and not upon your Nature, or pro∣per Disposition. This String you cannot, upon every apt occasion, harp upon too much. Next, whereas I have noted you, to fly, and avoid, (in some respect justly,) the Resemblance, or Imitati∣on, of my Lord of Leicester, and my Lord Chanceller Hatton; yet I am perswaded, (howsoever I wish your Lordship, as distant, as you are, from them, in Points of Favour, Integrity, Magnanimity, and Merit;) That it will doe you much good, between the Queen, and you, to allege them, (as oft as you finde occasion,) for Au∣thours, and Patterns. For I doe not know, a readier mean, to
make her Majesty think, you are in your right way. Thirdly, when at any time, your Lordship, upon occasion, happen in Speeches, to doe her Majesty right, (for there is no such Matter, as Flattery, amongst you all,) I fear, you handle it, Magis in speciem adorna∣tis verbis, quam ut sentire videaris. So that a Man, may read For∣mality, in your Countenance; Whereas your Lordship should doe it, familiarly, Et oratione fidà. Fourthly, your Lordship, should never be, without some Particulars afoot, which you should seem to pursue, with Earnestness, and Affection; And then let them fall, upon taking Knowledge, of her Majesties Opposition, and Dislike. Of which, the weightiest Sort may be, if your Lordship offer to labour, in the behalf of some, that you favour, for some of the Places, now voyd; Chusing such a Subject, as you think hr Majesty, is like to oppose unto: And if you will say, that this is, Conjunctum cum alienâ Injurià; I will not answer; Haec non ali∣ter constabunt; But I say; Commendation from so good a Mouth, doth not hurt a Man, though you prevail not. A less weighty Sort of Particulars, may be, the Pretence of some Iourneys, which, at her Majesties request, your Lordship mought relinquish; As if you would pretend a Iourney, to see your Living, and Estate, to∣wards Wales, or the like: For as for great Forein Iourneys, of Em∣ployment, and Service, it standeth not with your Gravity, to play, or Stratageme, with them. And the lightest sort of particulars, which yet are not to be neglected, are, in your Habits, Apparel, Wea∣rings, Gestures, and the like. The Impression, of greatest prejudice, next, is that, of a Militar Dependance. VVherein, I cannot sufficiently wonder, at your Lordships course; That you say, the Warrs are your Occupation; And goe on, in that course: Whereas, if I mought have advised your Lordship, you should have left that Person, at Plimmouth; More than, when in Counsell, or in commending fit persons, for service for Warrs, it had been in season. And here, (my Lord,) I pray mistake me not. I am not to play now, the Part of a Gown∣man, that would frame you best, to mine own turn. I know what I owe you. I am infinitely glad of this last Iourney, now it is past: The rather, because you may make, so Honourable a full Point, for a time. You have Property good enough, in that Greatness. There is none can, of many years, ascend, near you, in compe∣tition. Besides, the Disposing of the Places, and Affairs, both, concerning the Warrs, (you encreasing in other Greatness,) will, of themselves, flow to you; which will preserve that Depen∣dance, in full measure. It is a Thing, that of all Things, I would have you retain, the Times considered: And the Necessity of the Service, for other reason, I know none. But I say; Keep it in Substance, but abolish it in shewes, to the Queen. For her Ma∣iesty loveth Peace. Next she loveth not Charge. Thirdly, that kinde of Dependance, maketh a Suspected Greatness. Therefore,
Quod instat agamus. Let that be a sleeping Honour a while; And cure the Queens mind in that point. Therefore again, whereas I heard your Lordships designing to your self, the Earl Marshals place, or the place of Master of the Ordnance, I did not, in my mind, so well like of either; Because of their Affinity, with a Martiall Great∣nesse. But of the Places, now void, in my Judgement, and discreti∣on, I would name you, to the place, of Lord Privy Seal. For first, it is the Third Person, of the great Officers, of the Crown. Next, it hath a kind, of Super-Intendence, over the Secretary. It hath also an Affinity, with the Court of Wards, in regard of the Fees, from the Liveries. And it is a fine Ho∣nour, quiet place, and worth a Thousand pounds by year. And my Lord Admiralls Father, had it, who was a Martiall Man. And it fits a Favourite, to carry her Majesties Image in Seal, who beareth it best expressed in Heart. But my chief Reason is, that which I first alleged, to divert her Majesty, from this Impression, of a Martiall Greatnesse. In concurrence whereof, If your Lordship, shall remit any thing of your former diligence, at the Starr-chamber; If you shall continue, such Intelligences, as are worth the cherishing; If you shall pretend, to be as Bookish, and Contemplative, as ever you were; All these Courses, have both their Advantages, and uses in themselves otherwise, and serve exceeding aptly to this pur∣pose. Whereunto, I add one Expedient more, stronger than all the rest; And for mine own confident Opinion, void of any pre∣judice, or danger of Diminution, of your Greatnesse; And that is, the Bringing in, of some Martiall Man, to be of the Councill; Deal∣ing directly with her Majesty in it, as for her Service, and your better assistance; Chusing neverthelesse some Person, that may be known, not to come in against you, by any former Division. I judge the fittest, to be, my Lord Mount-joy, or my Lord Willoughby. And if your Lordship, see deeplier into it, than I do, that you would not have it done, in effect; Yet in my Opinion, you may serve your turn, by the pretence of it, and stay it neverthelesse. The Third Impression is, of a Popular Reputation; which, because it is a Thing, good in it self, being obtained as your Lordship ob∣taineth it, that is, Bonis artibus; And besides, Well governed, is one of the best Flowers, of your Greatnesse, both present, and to come; It would be handled tenderly. The onely way is, to quench it Verbis, and not Rebus. And therefore to take all Occasions, to the Queen, to speak against Popularity, and Popular Courses, vehemently; And to taxe it in all others: But, neverthelesse, to go on, in your Honourable Common-wealth Courses, as you do. And therefore, I will not advise you, to cure this, by dealing in Monopolies, or any Oppressions. Onely, if in Parliament, your Lordship be forward for Treasure, in respect of the Warrs, it becommeth your Person well. And if her Majesty object Popularity to you at any time, I would say to her; A Parliament will shew that; And so feed her with Expecta∣tion.
The Fourth Impression, of the Inequality, between your Estate of Meanes, and your Greatnesse of Respects, is not to be neglected. For believe it, (my Lrd,) that till her Majesty find you, carefull of your Estate, she will not onely think you, more like to continue, chargeable to her, but also have a Conceit, that you have higher Imaginations. The Remedies are; First, to professe it, in all speech∣es to her. Next, in such Sutes, wherein both Honour, Gift, and Profit, may be taken, to communicate freely with her Majesty, by way of enducing her, to grant, that it will be this Benefit to you. Lastly, to be plain with your Lordship; (For the Gentlemen are such, as I am beholding to;) Nothing can make the Queen, or the World, think so much, that you are come, to a provident Care, of your Estate, as the Altering of some of your Officers: Who, though they be as true to you, as One Hand to the Other; Yet Opinio Ve∣ritate major. But if, in respect of the Bonds, they may be entred in∣to, for your Lordship, you cannot so well dismisse your self of them, this cannot be done, but with Time. For the Fifth, and Last, which is, of the Advantage of a Favou∣rite: As severed from the rest, it cannot hurt; So joyned with them, it maketh her Majesty, more fearfull, and shadowy, as not knowing her own strength. The onely Remedy to this, is; To give way, to some other Favourite, as in particular you shall find, her Majesty enclined; So as the Subject hath no ill, nor dangerous Aspect, towards your self. For otherwise, whosoever shall tell me, that you may not have singular use, of a Favourite, at your Devotion; I will say, he understandeth not the Queens Affection, nor your Lordships Condition. And so I rest. October 4. 1596. To Sir Robert Cecil. Sir, I Forbear not to put in Paper, as much as I thought, to have spo∣ken to your Honour, too day, if I could have stayed; Knowing, that if your Honour, should make other use of it, than is due to good meaning; And then I am perswaded you will; Yet to persons of Judgement, and that know me otherwise, it will rather appear, (as it is,) a precise Honesty, and this same, Suum cuique tribuere, than any Hollownesse to any. It is my luck still, to be a kinn to such Things, as I neither like in nature; nor would wil∣lingly meet with, im my Course; But yet cannot avoid, with∣out shew of base Timorousnesse, or else of unkind, or suspicious strangenesse. Some Hiatus in the Copy.
And I am of one Spirit still. I ever liked the Galenists, that deal with good Compositions; And not the Paracel∣sians, that deal with these fine Separations: And in Musick, I ever loved easie Ayers, that goe full, all the parts together; And not these strange points, of Accord, and Diseord. This I write not, I assure your Honour, officiously; Except it be, according to Tullies Offices; that is, Honestly, and Morally. For though, I thank God, I account upon the proceeding, in the Queens Service, or not procee∣ding, both ways; And therefore, neither mean to fawn, not retire; yet I naturally desire good opinion, with any Person, which for Fortune, or Spirit, is to be regarded; Much more with a Secretary of the Queens, and a Cousin Germain; And one, with whom, I have ever thought my Self, to have some sympathy, of Nature, though Accidents have not suffered it to appear. Thus not doubting of your Honourable Interpretation, and usage, of that I have written, I commend you, to the Divine preservation. From Grayes Inn. To my Lord of Essex. It may please your good Lordship, I Pray God, her Majesties weighing, be not like the weight, of a Ballance; Gravia deorsum, Levia sursum. But I am as far, from being altered, in Devotion towards Her, as I am from Distrust, that she will be altered, in opinion towards me, when she know∣eth me better. For my Self, I have lost some Opinion, some Time, and some Means; This is my Account: But then, for Opinion, it is a Blast, that goeth, and commeth; For Time, it is true, it goeth, and commeth not; But yet I have learned, that it may be redeemed. For Means, I value that most; And the rather, because I am pur∣posed, not to follow, the Practice of the Law: (If her Majestie com∣mand me, in any particular, I shall be ready, to do her, willing Ser∣vice;) And my Reason is onely, because it drinketh too much Time, which I have dedicated to better purposes. But even, for that point of Estate, and Means, I partly lean, to Thales Opinion; That a Philosopher may be rich, if he will. Thus your Lordship seeth, how I comfort my Self: To the Encrease whereof, I would fain please my Self, to beleeve that to be true, which my Lord Treasu∣rer writeth; Which is, that it is more, than a Philosopher, morally can disgest. But without any such high Conceit, I esteem it, like the pulling out, of an Aking Tooth, which I remember, when I was a Child, and had little Philosophy, I was glad of, when it was done. For your Lordship, I doe think my Self, more beholding to you, than to any Man. And I say, I reckon my Self, as a Com∣mon; (Not Popular, but Common;) And as much, as is lawfull,
to be enclosed of a Common; So much your Lordship shall be sure to have. Your Lordships, to obey your Honourable Commands, more setled, than ever. To my Lord of Essex. My singular good Lord, YOur Lordships, so Honourable minding my poor Fortune, the last year, in the very Entrance, into that great Action, (which is a time of less leisure;) And in so liberal an Allowance, of your Care, as to write three Letters, to stirr me up Friends, in your ab∣sence; Doth, after a sor, warrant me, not to object to my Self, your present Quantity of affairs, whereby to silence my Self, from Petition of the like Favour. I brake, with your Lordship, my self, at the Tower; And I take it, my Brother, hath since renewed, the same Motion; Touching a Fortune, I was in thought to attempt, in Genere Oeconomico. In Genere Politico, certain Cross Winds, have blown contrary. My Sute to your Lordship is, for your several Letters, to be left with me, dormant, to the Gentlewoman, and either of her Parents. Wherein, I doe not doubt, but as the Beams of your Favour, have often dissolved, the Coldness of my Fortune; So in this Argument, your Lordship will doe the like, with your Penn. My Desire is also, that your Lordship would vouchsafe uto me, as out of your care, a general Letter, to my Lord Keeper, for his Lordships holding me, from you, recommended; Both, in the Course, of my Practice, and in the Course, of my Employment, in her Majesties Service. Wherein, if your Lordship shall, in any Antithesis, or Relation, affirm, that his Lordship shall have no less Fruit of me, than of any other, whom he may cherish, I hope, your Lordship shall engage your Self, for no Impossibility. Lastly, and chiefly, I know not, whether I shall attain, to see your Lord∣ship, before your Noble Iourney: For Ceremonies, are Things, infi∣nitely, inferiour to my Love, and to my Zeal. This let me, with your allowance, say unto you, by Penn. It is true, that in my well-meaning Advices, out of my love to your Lordship, and, per∣haps, out of the State, of mine own minde, I have sometimes per∣swaded, a Course differing: Ac tibi pro tutis insignia Facta place∣bunt: Be it so: yet remember, that the Signing of your Name, is nothing, unless it be, to some good Patent, or Charter, whereby your Country may be endowed, with Good, and Benefit. Which I speak, both to move you, to preserve your Person, for further Me∣rit, and Service of her Majesty, and your Country; And likewise, to referr this Action, to the same end. And so, in most true, and fer∣vent,
prayers, I commend your Lordship, and your Work in and, to the Preservation, and Conduct, of the Divine Majesty; So much the more watchfull, as these Actions, doe, more mani∣festly, in shew, though alike in Truth, depend upon his Divine Pro∣vidence. To my Lord of Canterbury. It may please your Grace; I Have considered the Objections, perused the Statutes, and framed the Alterations; Which I send; Still keeping my self, within the Brevity of a Letter, and Form of a Narration; Not entring, into a Form of Argument, or Dispuation: For, in my poor Conceit, it is, somewhat, against the Majesty, of Princes Actions, to make too curious, and striving Apologies; But rather, to set them forth plain∣ly; And so, as there may appear an Harmony, and Constancy in them, so that one part upholdeth another. And so I wish your Grace all prosperity. From my poor Lodging, this, &c. Your Graces, most dutifull, Pupil, and Servant. To my Lord of Essex. My singular good Lord, THe Message, it pleased your Lordship, to send me, was to me delivered doubtfully. Whether your Lordship said, you would speak with me, at the Starr-chamber, or with Mr. Philip. If with me, it is needless; For Gratitude imposeth upon me Satisfaction: If with Mr. Philipp, it will be too late; Because somewhat must (perchance) be done that day. This Doubt not solved, maketh me Write again; The rather, because I did liberally, but yet private∣ly affirm, your Lordship would write; Which if I make not good, it may be a Discouragement. Your Lordships letter, though it have the Subject, of Honour, and Justice, yet it shall have the Se∣crecy, of a Thing done, upon Affection. I shall ever, in a firm du∣ty, submit my Occasions, though great, to your Lordships Respects, though small: And this is my Resolution; That when your Lord∣ship doth for me, you shall encrease my Obligation; When you re∣fuse to doe for me, you shall encrease my Merit. So leaving the Matter, wholly, to your Lordships pleasure, I commend your Lord∣ship; to the preservation, of the Divine Majesty. From Graies Inn. Your Lordships ever most humbly bounden.
A CONFESSION OF THE FAITH: WRITTEN, By the Right Honourable, FRANCIS BACON, BARON of VERVLAM, VISCOVNT St. ALBAN. LONDON, Printed by F. Leach, for William Lee, at the sign of the Turks-Head, in Fleetstreet, 1657.
A CONFESSION OF THE FAITH. WRITTEN By the Right Honourable FRANCIS BACON, Baron of VERULAM, &c. I Believe, that Nothing is without begin∣ning, but God: No Nature, no Matter, no Spirit, but one, onely, and the same God. That God, as he is Eternally Almighty, Onely Wise, Onely Good, in his Nature; So he is Eternally Father, Sonne, and Spirit in Persons. I believe, that God, is so Holy, Pure, and Iealous, as it is impossible for him, to be pleased in any Creature, though the Work of his own Hands: So that, neither Angel, Man, nor World, could stand, or can stand, one Moment, in his Eyes, without beholding the same, in the Face of a Mediatour: And therefore, that before Him, with whom all Things are present, the Lamb of God, was slain, before all Worlds: Without which eternall Counsell of his, it was impossible for Him, to have descended to any Work of Creation; But He should
have enjoyed, the Blessed, and Individuall Society, of three Persons, in Godhead, onely, for ever. But that, out of his Eternall, and infinite, Goodnesse, and Love, purposing to become a Creatour, and to communicate to his Crea∣tures, He ordained, in his Eternall Counsell, that one Person, of the Godhead, should be united, to one Nature, and to one Particu∣lar of his Creatures; That so, in the Person, of the Mediatour, the true Ladder, mought be fixed, whereby God mought descend to his Creatures, and his Creatures mought ascend to God: So that God, by the Reconcilement, of the Mediatour, turning his Countenance to∣wards his Creatures, (though not in quall Light, and Degree,) made way, unto the Dispensation, of his most holy, and secret Will; whereby some of his Creatures, mought stand, and keep their state; Others mought, (possibly) fall, and be restored; And othrs mought fall, and not be restored, in their Estate, but yet re∣main in Being, though under Wrath, and Corruption; All with Respect, to the Mediatour: VVhich is the great Mystery, and per∣fect Center, of all Gods wayes, with his Creatures; And unto which, all his other Works, and Wonders, doe but serve, and re∣frr. That he chose, (according to his good pleasure,) Man, to be that Creature, to whose Nature, the Person, of the Eternall Son of God, should be united: And amongst the Generations of Men, elected a small Flock, in whom, (by the Participation of Himself,) He pur∣posed, to expresse, the Riches of his Glory; All the Ministration of Angels, Damnation of Devils, and Reprobates, and Universall Ad∣ministration of all Creatures, and Dispensation of all Times, having no other End, but as the VVayes, and Ambages of God, to be fur∣thr glorified in his Saints; who are one with their Head, the Me∣diatour, who is one with God. That by the Vertue of this his Eternall Counsell, He conde∣scended of his own good pleasure, and according to the Times, and Seasons, to himself known, to become a Creatour; And by his eternall Word, created all things; And by his eternall Spirit, doth comfort, and preserve thm. That he made all things, in their first Estate, Good; And remo∣ved from himself, the Beginning of all Evil, and Vanity, into the Liberty, of the Creature; But resrved, in himself, the Beginning, of all Restitution, to the Liberty of his Grace: Using, neverthelesse, and turning, the Falling, and Defection of the Creature, (which to his Prescence was eternally known,) to make way to his eter∣nall Counsell, touching a Mediatour, and the VVork he purpo∣sed to accomplish in Him. That God created Spirits, whereof some kept their standing, and others fell. He created Heaven, and Earth, and all their Ar∣mies, and Genrations; And gave, unto them, constant, and ever∣lasting, Lawes, which we call Nature; which is nothing, but the
Lawes of the Creation; which Lawes, neverthelesse, have had three Changes, or Times; and are to have, a Fourth, or Last. The First, when the Matter of Heaven, and Earth, was created without Forms: The Second, the Interim of Perfection, of every Dayes Work; Te Third, by the Curse; which, notwithstanding, was no new Crea∣tion; And the Last, at the End of the World, the Manner whereof is not yet fully revealed: So as the Lawes of Nature, which now remain, and govern inviolably, till the end of the World, began to be in force, when God first rested from his Works; and ceased to cre∣ate; But received, a Revocation, in part, by the Curse; Since which Time, they change not. That notwithstanding, God hath rested, and ceased from Crea∣ting, since the first Sabbath, yet neverthelesse, he doth accomplish, and fulfill his Divine VVill, in all Things, great and small, singu∣lar, and generall, as fully, and exactly, by Providence, as he could by Miracle, and new Creation; Though his working be not im∣mediate, and direct, but by compass; Not violating Nature, which is his own Law, upon the Creature. That, at the first, the Soul of Man, was not produced by Heaven, or Earth, but was breathed immediately from God; So that the Wayes, and proceedings of God, with Spirits, are not inclu∣ded in Nature; That is, in the Lawes, of Heaven, and Earth; But are reserved, to the Law, of his secret Will, and Grace; where∣in God worketh still, and resteth not, from the Work of Redemp∣tion, as he resteth from the Work of Creation; But continueth working, till the end of the VVorld; What time, that Work al∣so, shall be accomplished, and an eternal Sabbath shall ensue. Likewise, that whensoever God doth transcend, the Law of Nature, by Miracles, (which may ever seem as new Creations,) He never commeth, to that point, or pass, but in regard of the work of Re∣demption; which is the greater, and whereto all Gods Signes, and Miracles, doe referr. That God created Man in his own Image, in a Reasonable Soul, in Innocency, in Free-will, and in Soveraignty: That he gave him a Law, and Commandement, which was in his power to keep, but he kept it not: That Man made a total Defection from God, pre∣suming to imagine, that the Commandements, and Prohibi∣tions of God, were not the Rules, of Good and Evil; But that Good, and Evil, had their own principles, and beginnings: And lust∣ed, after the Knowledge, of those imagined Beginnings; To the end, to depend no more upon Gods will, revealed, but upon him∣self, and his own Light, as a God: Than the which, there could not be a Sinne, more opposite, to the whole Law of God. That yet, neverthelesse, this great Sinne, was not originally moved, by the Malice of Man, but was insinuated, by the Suggestion, and Instigation, of the Devil; who was the First Defected Crea∣ture; and fell of Malice, and not by Temptation.
That upon te Fall of Man, Death, and Vanity, enter'd, by the Iustice of God; And the Image of God, in Man, was defaced; And Heaven, and Earth, which were made for Mans use, were subdued to Corruption, by his Fall; But then that instantly, and without Intrmission of Time, after the Word of Gods Law, became, through the Fall of Man, frustrate as to obedience, there succeed∣ed te greater Word, of the Promise; that the Righteousness of God, mought be wrought by Faith. That as well the Law of God, as the Word of his Promise, endure the samefor ever: But that they have been rvealed, in several mannrs, according to the Dipensation, of Times. For the Law was irst imprinted, in that Remnant of Light, of Nature, which was left after the Fall, being sufficient to accuse: Then it was more manifestly expressed, in the written Law; And was yet more opened, by the Prophets; And lastly expouned, in the true per∣fection, by the Son of God the great Prophet, and perfect Interpre∣ter, as also Fulfiller of the Law: That, likewise, the Word of the Pro∣mise, was manifested, and revealed; First by immediate Revelati∣on, and Inspiration; After by Figures, which were of two Natures: The one, the Rites, and Ceremonies, of the Law; The other, the Con∣tinual History, of the Old World, and Church of the Iewes, which though it be literally True, yet is it, pregnant of a perpetual Alle∣gory, and shadow, of the Work, of the Redemption, to follow. The same Promise, or Euangile, was more clearly revealed, and decla∣red, by te Prophets; And then by the Son himself; And lastly, by the Holy Ghost, which illuminateth the Church, to the end of the World. That, in the Fulness of Time, according to the Promise, and Oath, of a chosen Lignage, decended, the blessed Seed of the Woman, Iesus Christ, te onely begotten Son o God, and Saviour of the World: who was conceived, by the Power, and Overshadowing, of the Holy Ghot And took Flesh of the Virgin Mary: That the Word, did not onely take Flesh, or was joyned to Flesh, but was made Flesh, though without Confusion of Substance, or Nature; So as the Eternal Son of God, and the ever-blessed Son of Mary, was one Person; So one, as the Blessed Virgin, may be truly, and Catholiquely called, Deipara, the Mother of God: So one, as there is no Unity in Universal Nature, not that, of the Soul, and Body, of Man, so perfect: For the three Heavenly Vnities, (wherof that is the second,) exceed all Natu∣ral Viies: That is to say; The Vnity, of the three Persons, in God∣head; The Vnity, of od, and Man, in Christ; And the Vnity, of Christ, and the Church; the Hoy Ghost, being the Worker, of both these latter Vnities; For by the Holy Ghost, was Christ Incarnate, and quickned, in Flesh; And by the Holy Ghost, is Man regenerate, and quickned, in Spirit. That Iesus the Lord, became, in the Flesh, a Sacrificer, and Sacri∣ice for Sin; A Satisfaction, and Price, to the Iustice, of God; A Me∣riter,
of Glory, and the Kingdom; A Pattern, of all Righteousness; A Preacher of the Word, which Himself was; A Finisher of the Cere∣mony; A Corner-Stone, to remove the Separation between, Iew, and Gentile; An Intercessour for the Church; A Lord of Nature, in his Miracles; A Conquerer, of Death, and the Power of Darkness, in his Resurrection; And that he fulfilled the whole Counsel of God; Performed all his Sacred Offices, and Annoynting on Earth; Ac∣complished the whole Work of the Redemption, and Restitution of Man, to a State, Superiour to the Angels; (whereas the State of Man, by Creation, was Inferiour;) And reconciled and establi∣shed, all Things, according to the Eternal VVill, of the Father. That in time, Iesus the Lord, was born, in the dayes of Herod; And suffered, under the Government, of Pontius Pilate, being De∣puty of the Romans; And under the High Priesthood, of Caiphas; And was betrayed by Iudas, one of the twelve Apostles; And was cruci∣fied at Hierusalem; And after a true, and naturall, Death, and his Body layed in the Sepulchre, the third day, He raised Himself, from the Bonds of Death, and arose, and shewed Himself, to many cho∣sen VVitnesses, by the space of divers dayes; And at the end of those dayes, in the sight of many, ascended into Heaven; where he continueth his Intercession; And shall from thence, at the day appointed, come in greatest glory, to judge the World. That the Sufferings, and Merits of Christ, as they are sufficient, to do away the Sinns, of the whole World; so they are onely effectuall to those, which are Regenerate by the Holy Ghost; Who breatheth where he will, of Free Grace; which Grace, as a Seed Incorruptible, quickeneth the Spirit of Man, and conceiveth him anew a Son of God, and Member of Christ: So that Christ, having Mans Flesh, and Man having Christs Spirit, there is an open passage, and Mutuall Imputation; whereby Sin, and Wrath, was conveyed to Christ, from Man; And Merit, and Life, is conveyed to Man, from Christ: VVhich Seed of the Holy Ghost, first figureth in us, the Image of Christ slain, or crucified, through a lively Faith; And then renew∣eth in us, the Image of God, in Holinesse, and Charity; though both imperfectly, and in degrees farre differing, even in Gods Elect; As well, in regard, of the Fire of the Spirit, as of the Illumination there∣of; which is, more, or lesse, in a large proportion; As namely, in the Church before Christ; VVhich yet, neverthelesse, was parta∣ker, of one, and the same Salvation, with us. And of one, and the same Means, of Salvation, with us. That the Work of the Spirit, though it be not tyed, to any Means, in Heaven, or Earth, yet it is ordinarily dispensed, by the Preaching of the Word; The Administration of the Sacraments; The Covenants of the Fathers, upon the Children; Prayer; Reading; The Censures of the Church; The Society of the Godly; the Crosse, and Afflicti∣ons; Gods Benefits; His Iudgements upon others; Miracles; The Con∣templation of his Creatures; All which, (though some be more prin∣cipall,)
God useth, as the Means of Vocation, ad Conversion of his Elect; Not derogating from his power, to call immediately by his Grace; and at all Howers and Moment, of the Day; (That is, of Mans Life,) according to his good pleasure. That the Word of God, whereby his Will is revealed, continued in Revelation and Tradition, untill Moses; And that the Scriptures, were from Moses Time, to the times of the Apostles, and Evange∣lists; In whose Age, aftr the comming of the Holy Ghost, the Teach∣er of all Truth, the Book of the Scriptures, was shut, and closed, so as not to receive any new Addition; And that the Church, hath no power, over the Scriptures, to teach, or command any Thing, contrary to the written Word; But is as the Ark, wherein the Tables of the First Testament were kept, and preserved; That is to say, the Church, hath onely the Custody, and Delivery over, of the Scri∣ptures, committed unto the same; Together with the Interpretation of them, but such onely, as is conceived from themselves. That there is an Universall, or Catholick Church of God, dispersed over the face of the Earth; which is Christs Spouse, and Christs Body; Being gathered, of the Fathers of the old World, of the Church of the Iewes, of the Spirits of the Faithfull Dissolved, and the Spirits of the Faithfull Militant, and of the Names, yet to be born, which are alrea∣dy written, in the Book of Life. That there is also, a Visible Church, distinguished by the outward VVorks of Gods Covenant, and the Receiving of the Holy Doctrine, with the Use of the Mysteries of God, and the Invocation, and Sanctification of his Holy Name. That there is also an Holy Succession, in the Prophets, of the New Testa∣ment, and Fathers of the Church, from the time, of the Apostles, and Disciples, which saw our Saviour in the Flesh, unto the Consum∣mation, of the Work of the Ministry; which persons, are called from God, by Gift, or inward Anointing; And the Vocation of God, followed by an outward Calling, and Ordination of the Church. I believe, that the Soules of those that dye in the Lord, are bles∣sed, and rest from their Labours, and enjoy the Sight of God; yet so, as they are in Expectation of a further Revelation of their Glory, in the last Day. At which time, all Flesh of Man, shall arise, and be changed, and shall appear, and receive, from Iesus Christ, his Eternall Iudgement; And the Glory, of the Saints, shall then be full; And the Kingdome, shall be given up, to God the Father: From which Time, all things shall continue for ever, in that Being, and State, which then they shall receive: So as there are three Times, (if Times they may be called,) or parts of Eternity. The first, the Time before beginnings, when the Godhead was onely, without the Being, of any Creature; The Second, the Time of the Mystery, which continueth from the Creation, to the Dissolution of the World: And the Third, the Time, of the Revelation, of the Sonnes of God; which Time is the last, and is everlasting without change. FINIS.
A Perfect List, of his Lordships true Works, both in English, and Latin. In English. AN Apology, touching the Earl of Essex. The Elments, of the Common Laws, of England. Advancement of Learning. Essayes: with the Colours of Good, and Evil. Charge against Duels. History, of the Reign, of King Henry, the seventh. Counsels Civil, and Moral. Or the Essayes, revised, and enriched. Translation of certain Psalms into Verse. The Natural History; with the Fable, of the New Atlantis. Miscellany Works, containing, A Discourse, of a Warr, with Spain. Miscellany Works, containing, A Dialogue, touching an Holy Warr. Miscellany Works, containing, A Preface, to a Digest, of Laws, Miscellany Works, containing, The Beginning, of the History, of K. Henry, the 8. History, of Life, and Death, translated into English. De Augmentis Scientiarum, translated into English, by Doctour Guil∣bert Watts, of Oxford. This present Volume, with the Particulars, contained in the same. In Latine. DE Sapientiâ Veterum. Instauratio Magna. Historia Ventorum. Historia Vitae & Mortis. De Augmentis Scientiarum. Historia Regni, Henrici Septimi, Regis Angliae. Sermones Fideles, sive Interiora Rerum. Dialogus de Bello Sacro. Nova Atlantis. Historia Naturalis, versa, et evulgata, oper, et curâ, Iacobi Gruteri. Opera Philosophica, et alia, nondum, sed propediem, (Deo favente,) Typis mandanda. As for other Pamphlets, whereof there are severall, put forth under his Lordships Name, they are not to be owned, for his.
Books Printed for VVilliam Lee, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Turks-Head in Fleetstreet. ANnotations upon all the New Testa∣ment. A Systeme, or Body of Divinity in 10. Books, wherein the Fundamental and main Grounds of Religion are opened, in Folio 1654, about 240. Sheets. The Saints Encouragement in Evil times, in 120. 1651. All written by Edward Leigh Esquire, Master of Arts in Magdalen Hall in Oxford. An Exposition of the Prophecie of Haggee, in fifteen Sermons, by that famous Divine Iohn Reynolds, D.D. in 40. 1649. An Exposition of the Psalms of Degrees. The Young mans Tutor, both wri by T. Stint, in 80. Herestography, or a Description of all the Heresies and Sectaies of these later times by Eph. Pagit. 40. with new Additions 1654. of the Ranters and Quakers. Contemplations, Sighs and Groans of a Christian, published by W. Stiles Esquire, of the Inner Temple. 120. The Saints Comfort in Evil times 120. Gods Revenge against Murther, in thirty Tragical Histories, by I. Reynolds, in Fol. the third Edition: Whereunto is newly added the Sculptures & Pictures of the Chief Per∣sons entioned in every Histoy, graven in Copper-plates, and fixed before each Histo∣ry; With a Satisfactory Epistle of the Sta∣tioner. Sylva Sylvarum, or a Natural History, in ten Centuries. Whereunto is newly added, The History of Life and Death, or the Prolon∣gation of Life: Both written by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam, In Foio, 1651. The Magnetique cure of Wounds. The Nativity of Tartar in Wine. The Image of God in Man. Also another Treatise of the Errors o Phy∣sicians concerning Defluxions: both publish∣ed in English 40. 1650. With The Dark∣ness of Aheism dispelled by the light of Na∣ture. All published by Dr. Charleton, Physi∣cian to the late King, 40. 165. A Discourse concening the King of Spins surprizing of the Valtoline. Translated by the Renowned Sir Thomas Re, many times Em∣bassador in Forein parts. 40 The Roman Foot and Denaries, from whence as from two principles, the measure and weights may be deduced, by Iohn Greaves of Oxford. 0. 1647. A Treatise of the Court, Written in French, by that great Counellour De Refuges, many times Embassador for the two lat French Kings, Englished by Iohn Rld. 0. The Hebrew Commonwealth, Translated out of Petrus Cunus, in 120. 1653. Hugo Grotius his two Treatises, Of God and his Providence, and Of Christ and his Mira∣cles; together with the said Authors judge∣ment of sundry Points controverted, in 120. Both Translated by Clem. Barksdal. Certamen Relgiosum, or a Conference be∣tween the late King of England, and the late Lord Marquess of Worcester concerning Re∣ligion, 40 1652. The Battel of Agencourt, fought by Henry the 5th; The Miseries of Queen Margare, with other Poems, by Mic. Drayton Esq 80. The Odes of Horace, Selected and Transla∣ted by Sir Thomas Hawkins, in 120. The Spanish Gallant, instructing men in their Carriage to be beloved of the People. Youths Behaviour, or Decency in Conversati∣on amongst men; with new Additions of a Discourse of Powdring of Hair, of black Pat∣ches, and naked Breasts, 80. 1651. The Tillage of Light, A Treatise of The Philosophers Stone. 80. The Right of Peace and Warr, in 3. Books, written in Latine by the Illustrious Hugo Grotius, together with the Life of the said Author, in English, 80. large. 1654. A Sermon of the Nature of Faith, by Bar∣ten Holyday Doctor of Divinity. 1654. The Innocent Lady, or the Illustrious In∣nocent, written Originally in French by the learned Father de Ceriziers of the Company of Jesus, rendred into English by Sir William Lower Knight, 1654. A Disputation at Winchcomb in Glocester∣shire, wherein much satisfaction given in ma∣ny Fundamental Points of Religion, in the presence of many Eminent Persons. 1654. A brief Discourse of changing Ministers Tithes into Stipends, or into another thing. 1654. Plutarch's Lives in English, with a New Addition of Twenty Lives, never before published in English, in Fol. 1657. FINIS.
