B3306 12076208 53633
Janua Scientiarum: OR, A COMPENDIOUS INTRODUCTION TO Geography, Chronology, Government, History, Phylosophy, And all Genteel sorts of LITERATURE By CHARLES BLOUNT Gent. — Brevis esse Laboro. Printed by Nath. Thompson at the En∣trance into the Old-Spring-Garden near Charing-Cross, MDCLXXXIV.
To His GRACE, Charles Lenox, DUKE of RICHMOND, EARL of MARCH, BARON of SHEDRINGTON, Master of the Horse TO HIS MOST Sacred Majesty, And Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER. This Piece is most humbly Dedicated by the Author, CHARLES BLOUNT.
ERRATA. PAge 2. line 5. read Corcica, p. 2. l. 9. r. Stepha∣nus, p. 31. l. 16. after Luxury put the, p. 32. l. 3. r. Astyages, p. 40. l. 16. r. Antoninus, p. 42. l. 16. r. Constantinus, p. 43. l. 5. r. Heruli, p. 45. l. 16. r. Lygdanus, p. 61. l. 21. r. Antoninus Pius, p. 61. l. 22. r. Aurelius Antoninus, p. 62. l. 19. r. Scythia, p. 63. l. 4. after whom r. he, p. 64. l. 6. r. Antoninus, p. 66. l. 11. after rather r. a, p. 70. l. 17. r. Arnuphis, p. 75. l. 8. for Vices r. Virtues, p. 77. l. 9. r. passages, p. 79. l. 20 for it r. them. p. 80. l. 6. for Porsona r. Porsenna, p. 80. l. 22. r. agreeably, p. 95. l. 15. after attribute r. to, p. 103. l. 6. r. Senecaes, p. 104. l. 6. r. of the Cimbri, p. 105. l. 2. r. Pieces, p. 108. l. 2. r. Antoninus, p. 108. l. 14. for one of r. one and, p. 112. l. 7. r. Eclipses, p. 117. l. 18. r. Wat Tylor, p. 126. l. 13. r. Petronius, p. 135. l. 19. r. quasi; in the great sheet Saesar for Caesar. For these and what other faults occurre; the Au∣thor entreats the Generous Reader to impute them to his remote Abode from the Press.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden near Charing-Cross. A Narrative of the Phanatical Plot, setting forth the Treasonable and Wicked Designs which they have been carrying on against King & Government ever since the last Westminster Parlia∣ment. With an Account of the Trea∣cherous Contrivances against several Worthy Persons, and the Measures which they used to take off the Kings-Evidence by Subornation. To which is added, A Relation of the Evil Practices of John Rowse (who was lately Execu∣ted at Tyburn,) William Lewis, (who stands Convicted,) and others. By John Zeal Gent. Price 1 s.
A Vindication of the Lord Russel's Speech and Innocence; In a Dialogue betwixt Whig and Tory: Being the same that was Promised to the Observator in a Penny-Post-Letter. Price 4 d. Stafford's Memoirs: Or, a Brief and Impartial Account of the Birth and Quality, Imprisonment, Tryal and Prin∣ciples, Declaration, Comportment, De∣votion; Last Speech and Final End of WILLIAM late Lord Viscount STAFFORD, Beheaded on Tower-hill Wednesday the 29th. of December 1680. Whereunto is annexed a short Appen∣dix concerning some Passages in Stephen Colledges Tryal at Oxford. Price Bound 1 s. 6. d. The Lawyer Out-law'd; Or a Brief Answer to Mr. Hunt's Defence of the Charter. With some Useful Remarks on the Commons Proceedings in the last Parliament at Westminster, In a Letter to Friend. Price 6 d. Oates's Manifesto; or the Complaint of TITƲS OATES against the Doctor
of Salamanca: And the same DOCTOR against TITƲS OATES; Compriz'd in a Dialogue between the said Parties, on occasion of some Inconsistent Evidence given about the Horrid and Damnable POPISH PLOT. Price 6 d. A LETTER to Mr. Elkana Settle, oc∣casioned upon his Famous Recanting and Plot-Ridiculing Narrative. Price 4 d. Some Brief Remarks on the Debates of the House of Commons in the last Par∣liament at Oxford, &c. Price 6 d. The Badger in the Fox-Trap, or a Satyr upon Satyr; An Excellent new Satyr. price 6 d. The Arraignment of Co-Ordinate-Power; wherein all Arbitrary-proceed∣ings are laid open to all Honest Abhor∣rers and Addressers: with a Touch at the London Petition and Charter, &c. very useful for all Lawyers and Gentle∣men. Price 1 s.
An Answer to a Scandalous Pamphlet, Entituled, A Character of a Popish Suc∣cessor, and what England may expect from such a One. Price 6 d. The GENEALOGIES of the High∣born Prince and Princess, GEORGE and ANNE, of Denmark, &c. Shewing the Lineal Descent of these two Noble and Illustrious Families: with Their Matches, Issue, Times of Death, Place of Sepulcher, Impresses, Devices, &c. From the Year of Grace M. to this present Year 1683. Extracted from the most Authentick Testimonies of the best Historians and An∣tiquaries of Their times. Price bound 1 s. Anima Mundi: Or, An Historical Narration of the Opinions of the An∣cients concerning Man's Soul after this Life; according to Un-enlightned Nature. Great is Diana of the Ephesians: Or, the Original of Idolatry; Together with the Politick Institution of the Gentiles Sacrifices. Both Bound together, price 1 s. 6 d. Both written by C. Blount Gent.
Kings of The first ASSYRIAN or BABYLONISH MONARCHY. (which began Ano. M. 1788 & lasted 1646 yeares) were NIMROD. Belus Ninus or Ashur Semiramis Ninias Arius & others we known till Sardanapalus After whom ye Empire was di∣vided by Rebellion Ano. M. 3148 between MEDIA Arbaces Mandanes Sosarmus Articas Cardicias Deioces Phraortes Cyaxares Asty ages by Succession BABYLON Belesus Tiglah-Pelesar Salmanasar Senacherib Assarhaddon Merodach-Baladan Nebuchadnezzar Evil Merodack Belshazar. by Conquest Kings of the second or PERSIAN MONARCHY, (which began Ano. M. 3434 and lasted, 228 yeares) were CYRUS Cambyses Darius Hystaspes Xerxes Artaxerxes Longimanus Darius Nothus Artaxerxes Mnemon Artaxerxes Ochus Arsames Darius Codomannus Overcome by
The first King of the third GRECIAN or MACEDONIAN MONARCHY, (wch. began Ano. M. 3642 & lasted 300 yeares) were ALEXANDER THE GREAT. Who dying without sons after him the Empire was divided into these foure parts. MACEDON ridaeus Brother of Alex: M. Cassander Phillippus Antipater Demetrius Poliorcetes Pyrrhus King of Epirus Lysimachus Ptolomaeus Ceraunus Meleager Anti-pater the 2d. Sosthenes Antigonus Gonatus Demetrius the 2d. Antigonus Doson Phillipus the 2d. Perseus who being Over∣come By Paulys Emylius ye Roman Consul, Macedon was herby reduced into a Province Under the ROMANS: Who Ano: M: 3924 began ASIA MINOR 1 Antigonus Phil: of Macadons. Bastard 2 Demetrius Poliorcetes Who being expell'd by his Son in Law Seleucus Nica∣nor. Asia was thereupon A next to Syria, and by con∣sequence fell, Ioyntly with Syria under ye Dominion of The ROMANS: Who Ano: M: 3924 began SYRIA 1 Seleucus Nicanor 2 Antiochus Soter 3 Antiochus Theos 4 Seleuchus Callinachus 5 Seleuchus Ceraunus 6 Antiochus Magnus 7 Seleucus Philopater 8 Antiochus Epiphanes 9 Antiochus Eupater 10 Demetrius Soter 11 Alexander Bala 12 Demetrius Nicanor 13 Antiochus Entheus 14 Tryphon 15 Antiochus Sidetes 16 Demetrius Nicanor, redux 17 Alexander Zebenna 18 Antiochus Grypus 19 Tygranes who being subdued by Pompey, Syria after that became a Province. Under the ROMANS: Who Ano: M: 3924 began EGYPT 1 Ptolomeus lagus Phil: Bastard of Mace 2 Ptolom: Philadelphus 3 Ptolom: Evargetes 4 Ptol: Philopater 5 Ptol: Epiphanes 6 Ptolo: Philometor 7 Ptolo: Physcon 8 Ptolom: Lamyrus 9 Ptolom: Alexander 10 Ptol: Lamyrus redux 11 Ptol: Auletes 12 Ptolom Dijonisius 13 Cleopatra (Daughter of Ptolom: Auletes) who was not only ye Beloved Mistress of Julius Saesar, but also of Mark Anthony, whose Over throw at Actium made her in despair throw away her Life by ye Biting of an Asp & by her Death Egypt was also reduced into a Province Under the ROMANS: Who Ano: M: 3924 began
first Period of ye fourth MONARCHY, or ROMAN EMPIRE (wch. reach'd to Constantine ye Great, & lasted 355 yeares) under 1. JULIUS CAESAR 2 Augustus 3 Tiberius 4 Caligula 5 Claudius 6 Nero 7 Galba 8 Otho 9 Vitellius 10 Flavius Vespasian 11 Tytus Vespasian 12 Domitian 13 Nerva 14 Trajanus 15 Adrianus 16 Antoninus Pius 17 Antoninus Phylosophus 18 Commodus 19 Pertinax 20 Didius Julianus 21 Septimius Severus 22 Carracalla 23 Macrinus 24 Heliogabalus 25 Alexand: Severus 26 Maximinus Thrax 27 Balbinus, & Puppienus 28 Gordianus 29 Phillippus Arabs 30 Decius 31 Tribonianus Gallus 32 Valerian 33 Galienus 34 Claudius Secundus 35 Aurelianus 36 Tacitus 37 Probus 38 Carus 39 Dyoclesian and 40 Constantius Chlorus, The Father of Constantine the Great, Who Removing ye Seat of ye Empire from Rome to Byzantium in Greece, did there after his one Name Erect Constantinople, where (as Historians reckon) began (A. Ch. 306) ye Empire of the East.
LIB. I. OF GEOGRAPHY. Qu. WHat is Geography? Ans. It is the de∣scription of the Globe of the Earth; and differs from Topography, (which is the descripti∣on of particular places) as the whole differs from a part. Qu. Into how many parts is the Earth divided? Ans. Into four; Europe, Asia, Africa, and America both North and South.
Qu. Which are the chief Countreys of Europe? Ans. Europe may be divided into these three parts: I. on the Continent, Scandinavia, which comprehends Sweden, Denmark, and Norway; Muscovy, or Russia, France, Germany, Poland, Spain, Italy, and part of Turkey. II. The British-Isles; as, England, Scotland, and Ireland. III. Isles on the Mediterranean; as, Sardinia, Candia, Sicily, Corcia, Majorca, and Minorca. Qu. Which are the chief Countreys of Asia? Ans. Asia may be divided also into three parts; as, I. On the Continent, part of Turkey, Georgia, Arabia, Persia, India, or Mo∣guls Countrey, China, and Tartaria.
II. Isles on the Ocean; as, Maldivies, Ceylan, Sunda, Molucques, Philippines, and Japan. III. Isles on the Mediterranean; as, Cyprus, Rhodes, Scio, and Metelin. Qu. Which are the chief Countreys of Africa? Ans. Africa in like manner may be divided into three parts; as, I. On the Continent, Barbary, Aegypt, Biledulgerid, Zaara, Countrey of Negroes, Guiney, Nubia, Abissinea, or Ae∣thiopia, Zanguebar, Congo, Monomotapa, Caffares. II. Isles on the Ocean; as, Madera, Canaries, Cape Verde, St. Thomas, St. Helena, Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, and Zocotora. III. an Isle on the Mediterranean-Sea, called Malta.
Qu. Which are the chief Countreys of America? Ans. Which America do you mean? for it is usually divided in∣to North and South. Qu. Which then are the chief parts of the Northern America? Ans. The Northern America may likewise be divided into three parts; as, I. On the Continent, the Arctickland, New north Wales New south Wales New Britain, Canada, New France, New Scotland, New England, New York, New Jersey, or Pennsylvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Florida, Mexico, or New Spain, New Mexico, Land of Jesso, and Anian. II. Isles on the North Sea; as, New-found-land, and the Antilles, which comprehend Jamaica, toge∣ther with all the Lucaif and Caribbe-Isles.
III. an Island in the South Sea, na∣med California. Qu. Which are the chief parts of the Southern America? Ans. The Southern America (ex∣cepting one Island, called Magella∣nick) is all a Continent, having in it these several Countreys, viz. the firm Land, Magellan, Peru, Amazones, Chili, Brasil, and Paraquay. Qu. What is a Continent? Ans. A Continent is one great parcel of Land, wherein are many Countreys joyned together, with∣out being seperated by the Sea. Qu. What is an Island? Ans. An Island is any part of Earth encompassed round with Water; as, Great Britain and Ireland. Qu. Of what extent or circumfe∣rence is the Earth judged to be? Ans. Geographers divide the Globe into 360 parts or degrees;
So that reckoning each Degree to be 73 Italian miles, or 69 English, (which is the same) its Circumfe∣rence will appear to be 26286 miles, and its Diameter 8365 miles. Qu. Of what scituation and extent is Europe? Ans. Europe is for the most part scituate in the Northern Temperate Zone, and contains within its bounds the principal part of the Roman and Graecian Monarchies: whose length, from Cape-finis-terre on the west of Spain, to the River Ianais in Mus∣covy, is 2400 miles; and breadth, from Cape-Metapan in Morea, to the most Northern Promontory of Norway, about 2100 miles. Qu. How is Europe bounded? Ans. Europe is bounded on the North with the Northern Ocean, or frozen Sea; on the West with the Western or Atlantick Ocean; on the South, with the Mediterra∣nean Sea, parting Europe from Afri∣ca;
and lastly, on the East, it is divided from Asia by the Rivers Duina and Tanais. Qu. Of what scituation and extent is Asia? Ans. Asia (from whence sprang the first Monarchies and Religions of the World, and now possess'd by four the greatest Princes of the Earth, (viz.) the Grand Seignior, Sultan of Persia, Great Mogul, and Cham of China and Tartary:) is seated mostly in the Temperate Zone: and extends in length, from Smyrna in the West, to the farthest part of Tartary near Jesso in the East, about 4800 miles; and in breadth, from the lowest part of Malacca in the South, to the Streights of Wei∣gats in the North, near 4200 miles. Qu. How is Asia bounded? Ans. Asia, on the west, is sepera∣ted from Africa by the Red-Sea, and by the Istmhus of Sues; from Europe, by the Rivers Tanais and
Duina; and towards the other part of the World, is environ'd by the Tartarian, Chinean, Indian, Persian, and Arabian Seas. Qu. Of what scituation and extent is Africa? Ans. Africa is scituated under the Torrid Zone: being in length, from Cape-Verde to Gaardafuy, 4300 miles; and in breadth, from Cape-Bon to the Cape of good-hope, 4200 miles. Qu. How is Africa bounded? Ans. Africa is formed like a Tri∣angle, and seperated from all parts of the World but Asia by four Seas: being limited, on the North, by the Mediterranean; on the East, by the Red-Sea, or Arabian-Gulph; on the South, by the Aethiopian; and on the West, by the Atlantick-O∣cean. Qu. How is America bounded? Ans. America (the fourth and last known part of the World, which
Columbus first discovered 190 years ago) is bounded on the East, by the Atlantick and Vergivian Seas, which part it from Europe and Africa; on the West, by Mare Pacificum, which divides it from Asia; on the South, by Terra incognita, seperated by the Streights of Magellan; and on the North, by parts as yet undiscove∣red: so as no extent thereof can certainly be given. Qu. Now, forasmuch as it concerns all Europeans to have a more parti∣cular knowledge of Europe, as well as of the chief Towns in other parts of the World, wherewith we trade: pray tell me first, how many Cities and Parishes there are in England, together with its extent, circumference and limits? Ans. In England there are twen∣ty-five Cities, whereof London, York, Bristol, and Norwich, are the four chief. Also it is divided into fifty-two Shires or Counties, and those again into 9725 Parishes: being in
length, from Barwick in the North, to the Isle of Wight in the South, 386 miles; and from Dover in the East, to the Lands-end in Cornwal in the West, about 279 miles; and 1300 miles in compass round about. Last∣ly, it is bounded on the South with Normandy and France, on the East with Germany and Denmark, on the West with Ireland, and on the North with Scotland. Qu. Which are the chief Cities or Towns in France; and how is it divided? Ans. France may be divided into three parts; 1. the Inland, contai∣ning these Provinces, (viz.) the Isle of France, Champagne, Orleanois, Burgundy, Lyonnois, and Dauphine. 2. on the Ocean, as are Picardy, Nor∣mandy, Bretagne, Guienne, and Gas∣coigne. 3. and lastly, on the Medi∣terranean, Languedock and Provence. As for the chief Cities or Towns of France, they are these; Paris, Ro∣ven,
Lyons, Bourdeaux, Tholouse, Ro∣chel, Aix, Grenoble, Diion, Metz, A∣miens, Orleans, Marseilles and Nants. Qu. How is Italy divided; and which are its principal Cities and Towns? Ans. Italy is likewise usually di∣vided into three parts; 1. the Mid∣land, which comprehends the State of the Church, and State of Tuscany. 2. Lombardy, which consists of Ve∣nice, Milan, Genuoa, Parma, Mode∣na, Mantua, Trente, Lucca, and Piedmont. 3. and lastly, the Ex∣tremes of Italy; as, Naples, &c. which several parts are beautified with these most eminent Cities and Towns, Rome, Venice, Milan, Na∣ples, Turin, Genoa, and Florence. Qu. How is Spain divided; and which are its most eminent Cities or Towns? Ans. Spain is divided into five parts, 1. the Inland, consisting of Castile and Leon. 2. the North-part,
which contains Galicia, Asturies, Biscay and Navarre. 3. the East, comprehending Arragon, Catalogni∣a, and Valencia. 4. in the South are, Murcia, Granada, and Andalousia. 5. and lastly, in the West are, Al∣guares and Portugal. The most e∣minent of the Spanish Cities are, Madrid, Toledo, Burgos, Lisbon, Sevil, Granada, Valencia, Barcelo∣na, Salamanca, Caragoza, Leon, and Cadiz. Qu. How is Germany divided; and which are its chief Towns? Ans. Germany may be divided into three parts; the first belong∣ing to the House of Austria, which contains Austria, Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, Tirol, Bohemia, Silesia, Moravia, Lusatia, French-County, and the Catholick Provinces called Flanders. 2. that part divided a∣mong the Princes of the Empire; as, the Palatinate on the Rhine, the Ecclesiastick Electorates, Franconia,
Hesse, Westphalia, Bavaria, Sovabe, upper-Saxony, Brandenburg, Pome∣rania, and lower-Saxony. 3. and last∣ly, the Ʋnited Provinces; as, Hol∣land, Zealand, Ʋtretch, Guelderland, Zutphen, Overyssel, Friesland, and Groningen. As for the chief Cities and Towns belonging to these se∣veral parts of Germany, they are these, Vienna, Prague, Cologne, Francfort, Hamburg, Nurembourg, Antwerp, Brussels, Ghent, Amster∣dam, and the Hague. Qu. How is Poland usually divi∣ded; and which are its most eminent Towns? Ans. It is divided into several Provinces, whereof the chief are, the great and lesser Polands, toge∣ther with Mozavia, Prussia, &c. As for its Towns, the most eminent are, Cracovia, Warsaw, and Dant∣zick. Qu. How is Turkey in Europe divided; and which are its chief Cities?
Ans. Turkey in Europe may be di∣vided into three parts; as 1. the North Provinces, which are, Roma∣nia, Servia, Bulgaria, Bosnia, Hun∣garia, Croatia, and Dalmatia. 2. South Provinces; as, Macedonia, Epirus, Thessalia, Achaia, and Mo∣rea, or Peleponesus. 3. and lastly, Transilvanian Provinces; as, Tran∣silvania, Valachia, Moldavia, and petit Tartars. As for the chief Ci∣ties in the Europaean Turkey, they are these seven, Constantinople, Adria∣nople, Sophia, Buda, Belgrade, Sa∣lonichi, and Misistra. Qu. How is Muscovy divided; and which is its chief City and Town? Ans. Muscovy, or Russia, (which is all one) may be divided into two parts, North and South, compre∣hending several Principalities and Dukedoms, together with one Re∣publick, called North-Lapland. The chief City of Muscovy is Moscow, but its chief Harbour and place of trade Arch-Angelo.
Qu. How may Sweden be divi∣ded; and which are its chief Towns? Ans. Sweden is divided into ma∣ny considerable Provinces; as, Ʋp∣land, Gothland, West-Lapland, Fin∣land, Livonia, and others: whereof the capital Cities are, Stockholm and Ʋpsal in Ʋpland, and Calmar in Gothland. Qu. How may Denmark and Nor∣way be divided; and which are their chief Towns? Ans. Denmark and Norway are now two Kingdoms united under one Monarch: to which we may add Greenland and the Isles of Ferro and Iseland. The chief Towns are, Copenhagen in Denmark, and Ber∣ghen in Norway. Qu. Which are the chief Towns in Scotland? Ans. Edinburgh, St. Andrews, Glascow, Sterling, Dunbritton, Falk∣land, Perth, and Aberdeen. Qu. How is Ireland divided?
Ans. Into four Provinces, (viz.) Leinster, Ʋlster, Munster, and Con∣naugh; In which Provinces are 32 Counties. Qu. Which are the chief Cities in Ireland? Ans. Dublin, Waterford, Galloway, Limrick, Kingsale, Cork, London∣derry and Armagh. Qu. What is a Peninsula? Ans. Peninsula, quasi pene insula, almost an Island, is a part of Land, which being almost encompassed round with Water, is yet joyned to the firm land by some little Istmhus, or neck of Earth; as Africa is joyn'd to Asia; Peleponesus or Morea to Greece; Molucca to India; Jutland to Holsatia; and Corea to Tar∣tary. Qu. What is an Istmhus? Ans. An Istmhus is any narrow neck of Land betwixt two Seas, joyning the Peninsula to the Con∣tinent; as that betwixt Aegypt and
Arabia, which parts Asia from Afri∣ca; and those of Panama and Da∣riene in America. Qu. What is a Promontory? Ans. A Promontory is an high Hill or Mountain, that shoots it self out as an Elbow of Land into the Sea, the utmost extent whereof is call'd a Fore-land, or Cape; as, the Cape of good-hope in the furthest part of Africa, by which those pass that sail into India: Also Cape-Verde in Africa, the Cape of Victory at the mouth of the Magellanie Seas, & the Cape of S. Vincent in Portugal, with many other. Qu. Which are the most eminent Hills or Mountains upon Earth? Ans. Those of most note are, the Pyrenaean Hills betwixt France and Spain, Mount Cenis and the Alps betwixt France and Italy, Mount Atlas in Mauritania, Mount Athos in Macedon, Mount Caucasus in India, Mount Olympus in Thessaly, Mount Taurus in Asia, Mount Apennine in
Italy, and lastly, el Pico in Tenariff near the Canary Isles, thought to be the highest in the World, being 15 miles high, and visible 100 miles off at Sea. Now, besides all these, there are many other Mountains, no less fa∣mous for their vomiting up of Fire, than for their heighth; as, Aetna in Sicily, Vesuvius near Naples in Italy, Hecla in Iseland, and many others of the like nature in the Mo∣lucca and Japanese Islands, as well as in Peru, Brasil, Congo and the Azores. Qu. Which are the chief Desarts? Ans. Those of Lybia in Africk, that encompass Aegypt; as also those in Arabia, Tartarie, Nova Zembla, Norway, Lapland, Finmarch, Swe∣den, Germany and America. Qu. Where are the best Gold and Silver Mines? Ans. In Peru, Arabia, Guinea, Monomotapa, Japan, Persia, China, Chili, and Potosi, from whence the Spaniards have yearly exhausted 12 millions.
Qu. Having given this general ac∣count of the terra firma, and particu∣lar (because most necessary) relation of Europe: let us in the next place launch into the Ocean, and examine the watry World; for which end, inform us, how the several sorts of Waters may be distinguished? Ans. Into Seas, Streights, Lakes, or Rivers. Qu. Which are the chief Seas? Ans. The Levant, or East Sea; the West, North and South Seas; the Baltick Sea; the Red Sea; the Aethiopian Sea; the Mediterranean Sea; the Archipelago; St. George's Sea; the Euxine Sea; and the Dead, or Caspian Sea, on our Con∣tinent; together with the Magel∣lanick and Mare-pacificum on the Continent of America. Qu. What is a Streight? Ans. A Streight or Gulph is any narrow part or arm of the Ocean, lying between two shoars, and ope∣ning
a way into the Sea, as, the Streights of Jesso, lying between the two Continents; the Streights of Magellan, between North and South America; the Streights of Gibralter on the Coast of Spain, be∣twixt Europe and Africa; the Streights of Babelmandel, between Asia and Africa; the Gulph of Ve∣nice and the Bay of Biscay in Eu∣rope. Qu. What is a Lake? Ans. A Lake is any place that continually retains standing-water in it, as Laggo Major in Italy, the Lake of Lucerna, and Geneva in Switzerland, &c. Qu. What is a River? Ans. A River is any small branch of the Sea flowing up into a Land; as, the Thames, Severn, Trent and Humber in England; the Seine, Loyre and Rhosne in France; the Rhine and Elbe in Germany; the Po and Tyber in Italy; the River
Volga of Muscovy, the greatest in Europe; the Danube of Turkey in Europe; Euphrates, Tigris and Jor∣dan of Turkey in Asia; the Indus and Ganges of India; and the Nile of Aegypt. Qu. Which are the best Authors for Geography? Ans. Ptolomy, Strabo, Stephanuus, Ortelius, Mercator, Scaliger, Ferra∣rius, Varenius and Munster; with Bleau's, Johnson's and Sanson's Maps. LIB. II. OF CHRONOLOGY. Qu. WHat is Chronology? Ans. Chronology is the knowledge of Times past. Qu. What is an Age, or Century? Ans. The space of an hundred years.
Qu. In what Age of the World was our Saviour born? Ans. About the middle of the one and fortieth Age. Qu. What is a Year? Ans. It consists of twelve months, and is the space of time wherein the Sun passes thorow the twelve Signs of the Zodiack. Qu. What is the Zodiack? Ans. An imaginary great Circle in the Heavens, which (as Astrolo∣gers pretend) containeth the twelve Signs. Qu. Name the twelve Signs. Ans. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitari∣us, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. Qu. What is that which the Greeks call Galaxia, the Latines, Via Lactea, and we, the Milky-way? Ans. 'Tis nothing but a number of little Stars, which give but a con∣fused light, and are not perceptible to the eye without a Prospective-glass.
Qu. How many days are there in a year? Ans. Three hundred three score and five days and six hours, accor∣ding to Caesar's Reformation of the Kalendar. Qu. What becomes of these odd six hours that remain every year? Ans. Why, in the space of four years they make up a day; so that every fourth year hath one day more then ordinary, and is therefore called Bissextile, or Leap-year. Qu. What is a Month? Ans. Of months there are two sorts; First, a Lunary month, con∣sisting of four weeks, which is the space of time wherein the Moon passes thorow the twelve Signs of the Zodiack; and secondly, a Sola∣ry month, consisting of thirty days, ten hours and an half, the space of time wherein the Sun passes thorow the twelfth part, or one Sign of the Zodiack.
Qu. How many days are there in each Solary month? Ans. Thirty days hath September, April, June, and November; February hath twenty eight alone, And the rest have thirty one. Qu. How did the Ancients divide their months? Ans. Into Calends, Nones and Ides; calling the first day of every month the Calends. Qu. How did the Ancients divide their weeks? Ans. Into seven days, which they called by the name of the seven Planets; the Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn. Qu. What makes the Day and Night? Ans. When the Sun is above the Horizon, it makes day; and when it is under the Horizon, it makes night. Qu. What are the Aequinoxes and Solstices?
Ans. There are yearly two Aequi∣noxes and two Solstices; a Vernal and Autumnal Aequinox, and a Summer and Winter Solstice, which begin the four several seasons of the year. The Aequinoxes are so called from the Latine-word Aequinoctium, because the days and nights are then of equal length, the Sun rising and setting at six, which is upon the 10th. of March and 12th. of September. Also the Solstices are named from the Latine-word Solstitium, which signifies a stop of the Sun; because, as it comes no nearer us than the Tropick of Cancer in the Summer, so goes it not further from us than the Tropick of Capricorn in the Winter; which Summer-Solstice, as it makes the longest day on the 11th. of June, so doth the Winter-Solstice make the shortest day on the 11th. of December. Qu. What makes the several Chan∣ges of the Moon?
Ans. The Moon shines more or less according to the proportion of light it receives from the Sun. As for example: We call it New Moon when it is in conjunction with the Sun; and then it gives us no light, because the dark part of it is to∣wards us: But four days after it makes its first appearance in the shape of two bright Horns, (the rest of her Body being dark) and then is the first quarter. Being a week old, half of it appears bright, and the other half dark; at which time it is called a Crescent, or Half-moon. Thus it increases a week more, till it comes to be Full; and then being diametrically opposite to the Sun, this strikes its Beams upon that more fully, till four days after full Moon it begins to decrease, and lose its light, which is called the Wain; three days after which, it appears in the form of a Crescent; and so loses its light gradually till New Moon a∣gain.
Qu. What makes an Eclipse of the Sun? Ans. The interposition of the Moon betwixt the Sun and the Earth, which happens when the Moon is the same Sign and Degree with the Sun; for then the Sun, Moon and Earth are diametrically opposite. Qu. What makes an Eclipse of the Moon? Ans. The interposition of the Earth betwixt the Sun and the Moon, which happens generally up∣on the full of the Moon; at which time this Planet is diametrically op∣posite to the Sun. Qu. What is an Epocha? Ans. It is some remarkable point of time, from the which Chronolo∣gers begin to reckon, in reference to the changes of their own Nation: Thus, the Jews reckoned, from their departure out of Aegypt; the Gre∣cians, from their Olympiads institu∣ted
by Iphitus; The Romans, from the building of their City; the Christians, from the Birth of Christ; and the Turks, from their Hegira, or flight of Mahomet. Qu. What is a Lustre, and an O∣lympiad? Ans. A Lustre among the Ro∣mans and Olympiad among the Gre∣cians, signified the space of five years: because the Games so called were celebrated every fifth year. Qu. How do Sacred Chronilogers begin to reckon? Ans. First, from the Creation to Noah's Flood, 1657 years. 2dly. From the Flood to the cal∣ling of Abraham, 367 years. 3dly. From the calling of Abra∣ham, to the departure of the Isra∣elites out of Aegypt, 430 years. 4ly. From the Aegyptians Exodus, to Solomon's building of the first Temple, 480 years. 5ly. From the building of the first
Temple, to the erection of the se∣cond by Zorobabel, 497 years. 6ly. From the building the second by Zorobabel, to the Birth of our Saviour Christ, 529 years. 7ly. and lastly, From the Birth of our Saviour, to these present times, 1683 years. Qu. How do Prophane Chronolo∣gers begin to reckon? Ans. First, From Nimrod to Cyrus the Great, 1646 years. 2dly. From Cyrus to Alexander the Great, 228 years. 3dly. From Alexander to Julius Caesar, 300 years. 4ly. From Caesar to Constantine the Great, 355 years. 5ly. From Constantine to Charles the Great, 455 years. 6ly. From Charles the Great to Radulphus of Auspurgh, 472 years. 7ly. and lastly, From Radulphus to these present times, 400 years. Qu. Which are the best Authors for Chronology?
Ans. Helvicus, Calvisius, Buchol∣cer, Funccius, Petavius, Ʋsher and Alstedius. LIB. III. OF HISTORY. Of the Assyrian MONARCHY. Qu. WHat is History? Ans. A Record of past actions, either Sacred or Civil. Qu. Which are the four chief and most ancient Monarchies of the World? Ans. The Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian and the Roman. Qu. Ʋnder what Kings did the Assyrian Monarchy begin, flourish and expire? Ans. It began under Nimrod, and
flourish'd till Sardanapalus, by whose Lust it was divided, and al∣most destroy'd. Qu. At what time was the Assyrian Monarchy founded, and how long did it last? Ans. It was founded about seven∣teen hundred years after the Crea∣tion, and lasted sixteen hundred forty six years longer. Qu. Tell me the Names of the Assy∣rian Kings in order. Ans. Nimrod, Belus, Ninus, or Ashur, Semiramis, Ninias, Arius, and others unknown, till we come to Sardanapalus, by whose Luxury Monarchy became divided between two Rebels, Arbaces and Belesus, and so continued to them and their Heirs till Cyrus's time, who began the second Monarchy, called the Persian. Qu. How came Cyrus to begin the second Monarchy?
Ans. One part of the Empire fal∣ling to him by succession from his Grandfather Astygas, (one of Arba∣ces's Successors) he soon conquered Belshazzer, (who was Belesus's Suc∣cessor) and so joyning both parts of the Empire together, began a new Monarchy in Persia, his Native-Countrey. Qu. Wat Authors treat of this As∣syrian Monarchy? Ans. The holy Scriptures, Jose∣phus, Diodorus, Siculus, Justin, Eu∣sebius, Matthaeus, Ʋsher, Raleigh, Ho∣el and Viginier; besides the ancient Ctesias, Berosus and Megastenes, whereof only some few fragments remain.
Of the Second, OR PERSIAN MONARCHY. Qu. WHy was this second Mo∣narchy called the Mo∣narchy of the Medes and Persians? Ans. Because the Empire did chiefly consist of those two King∣doms. Qu. Ʋnder what Kings did this Persian Monarchy begin, flourish and expire? Ans. It began under Cyrus, whose Race ended in his Son Cambyses; after whom, Darius Hystaspes, ha∣ving defeated the Magi, and won the Empire from his Competitors by the neighing of his Horse, it still flourished till Darius Codomanus, in whom it ended.
Qu. How long did this second, or Persian Monarchy last? Ans. It lasted 228 years, and was enjoyed only by two Families, that of Cyrus, and that of Darius Hystaspes. Qu. Tell me the Names of the Per∣sian Kings in order. Answ. Cyrus the Great, Cambyses, Darius Hystaspes, Xerxes, Artaxerxes Lon∣gimanus, Darius Nothus, Artaxerxes Mne∣mon, Artaxerxes Ochus Arsames; and lastly, Dar. Codomanus, Qu. What Authors write chiefly of this second Monarchy? Ans. Herodotus, Thucydides, Xe∣nophon, Plutarch, Diodorus, Justin and Orosius.
Of the Third, OR GRECIAN MONARCHY. Qu. WHy was this Third Mo∣narchy call'd the Greci∣an or Macedonian Monarchy? Ans. It was so called from its first Founder, Alexander, the Son of King Philip of Macedon, a Grecian born. Qu. When was it that Alexander began to reign? Ans. 329 years before the Birth of Christ, and in 12 years space con∣quer'd most part of the Universe; and is therefore called, the Great. Qu. How long did the Grecian Monarchy flourish? Ans. It flourish'd no longer than Alexander's Life; for he dying without Sons, bequeath'd the Em∣pire to the Worthiest; which cau∣sed
great division amongst the No∣bility, till at length they divided it into four parts: And so it lasted till they were all conquer'd by the Romans, who began the Fourth and last Monarchy, under the Conduct of Julius Caesar. Qu. Which were the Four parts of this Grecian Monarchy, after its di∣vision? Ans. The Kingdoms of Macedon, Asia minor, Syria and Aegypt; all which were in the space of 300 years reduced to the Roman Yoak. Qu. What Kings succeeded in Ma∣cedon after Alexander? Ans. The first was Alexander's Brother Arideus; after whom suc∣ceeded fifteen Kings more, whereof the last was Perseus, who was over∣come by Paulus Aemylius, the Ro∣man Consul. Qu. What Kings succeeded in Asia minor after Alexander? Ans. But Two; whereof the
first was Antigonus, King Philip of Macedon's Bastard, and the second was Demetrius Poliorcetes, who be∣ing put to flight by his Son-in-law Seleucus Nicanor; after that, Asia minor was joyn'd to the Kingdom of Syria. Qu. What Kings succeeded in Sy∣ria after Alexander? Ans. The first was Seleucus Nica∣nor, after whom succeeded 19 King, whereof the last was Tigranes, who being subdued by Pompey, Syria became a Province to the Romans. Qu. Now lastly, What Kings suc∣ceeded Alexander in Aegypt? Ans. The first was Ptolomaeus Lagus, (another of King Philip's Bastards) after whom succeeded 12 Princes more, till by the death of the famous Cleopatra, Aegypt was reduced into a Roman Province; And thus Rome, having swallowed up the four divisions of the Grecian Monarchy, began another, which
was called the Fourth, or Roman. Qu. Which are the best ancient Authors that treat of this Grecian Monarchy? Ans. First, Arrianus and Quintus Curtius, that write of Alexander himself; and secondly, Plutarch, Justin, Polybius and Diodorus, that treat concerning his Successors. Of the Fourth, OR, ROMAN MONARCHY. Qu. WHen was Rome first founded, and by whom? Ans. Rome was first built 753 years before Christ, by the two Brothers, Romulus and Rhemus. Qu. How hath Rome been ancient∣ly govern'd? Ans. Rome was first govern'd suc∣cessively by Kings; then by annual
Consuls, limited with Senators and Tribunes; and in time of War or distress, by Dictators, who beco∣ming perpetual, were at last called Emperours. Qu. How many were the first Kings of Rome? name them in order. Ans. Seven; to wit, Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Tullius Hostilius, Ancus Martius, Tarquinius Priscius, Servius Tullius, and Tarquinius Su∣perbus, who by reason of his Tyran∣ny was the last King of the Romans; after whom they govern'd by Con∣suls till the Emperours times. Qu. Who was the first Roman Emperour? Ans. Julius Caesar, who making himself perpetual Dictator, and ha∣ving defeated Pompey, took upon him the sole government of the Em∣pire, and so began the fourth Mo∣narchy, called the Roman, which was afterwards established by Au∣gustus.
Qu. How many years was it from the building of the City of Rome, to the death of Julius Caesar? Ans. 710 years; which was a∣bout 42 years before the Birth of Christ, who was 14 years old when Augustus dy'd. Qu. The first period of this Roman Empire, reaching from Julius Caesar to Constantine the Great, tell me in order the Names of the several Em∣perours. Ans. Julius Caesar, Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Flavius Vespasian, Titus Vespasian, Domitian, Nerva, Trajanus, Adrianus, Antonius Pius, Anton. Phylosoph. Commodus, Pertinax, Didius Julianus, Septimius Severus, Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus,
Alexander Severus Maximinus Thrax Balbinus & Pup∣pienus, Gordianus, Philippus Arabs, Decius, Tribonianus Gallus Valerian, Galienus, Claudius secund' Aurelianus, Tacitus, Probus, Carus, Dioclesian, and Constantius Chlo∣ras, Father of Constantine the Great. Qu. How many years was it from Julius Caesar to Constantine the Great? Ans. About 355 years. Qu. Why is the first period of the Roman Empire reckon'd but to Con∣stantine the Great, when he had so many considerable Emperours that succeeded him, as Constantius, Julian the Apostate, and others? Ans. First, because Constantine the Great was the first Christian Emperour; and secondly, because he removed the Imperial Seat from Rome in Italy, to Byzantium in
Greece: where building a great City he call'd it after his own Name, Constantinople, which soon after produced a division of the Empire into East and West, betwixt Arca∣dius and Honorius; and so it conti∣nued for several years under two several Emperours. Qu. What became of the Empire of the East, after its division? Ans. The Empire of the East, to∣gether with its chief City, Constan∣tinople, was taken by the Turks (who now possess it) about 230 years a∣go, from the last Greek Emperour, Constantius Palaeologus; whereupon 'tis observ'd, that as the City of Con∣stantinople was built by a Constan∣tine the first, whose Mothers Name was St. Helena, so likewise was it lost under a Constantine the eleventh, whose Mothers Name also was He∣lena. Qu. What became of the Empire of the West, which was held at Rome, after Honorius?
Ans. About 100 years after Ho∣norius, the Empire of the West was destroy'd, together with its Empe∣rour Augustulus, by Odoacer King of the Herulii; which Empire hath been since succeeded by two Suc∣cessions of Western Franks: the first beginning with Charles the Great, and the second with Radulphus Au∣spurgensis of the House of Austria, who possesses the German Empire at this present time. But here it is observable, how that as the Roman Empire was founded by an Augustus, so was it lost by an Augustulus. Qu. How was the Roman Empire destroy'd? Ans. By the Invasion of Barbari∣ans, such as were the Hunns, Goths and Vandals. Qu. Which are the best Writers of this Fourth, or Roman Monarchy? Ans. Caesar's Commentaries, Dio∣nysius Halicarnasseus, Valerius Maxi∣mus, Livy, Plutarch, Suetonius, Ta∣citus,
both the Plinies, Velleius Pa∣terculus, Ammianus Marcellinus, Appian, Lucius Florus, Herodian, Polybius, Dion Cassius, Salust, Zozi∣mus, Procopius, Jornandes, Cassio∣dorus, Agathias, Historiae Augustae Scriptores, and all the Byzantine Writers, besides many learned mo∣dern Authors of the same Subject. LIB. IV. OF THE GREEK and ROMAN HISTORIANS. Qu WHich are the most eminent of the Greek Historians? Ans. Herodotus, Thucydides, Xe∣nophon, Polybius, Diodorus Siculus. Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Josephus,
Plutarch, Philostratus, Arrianus, Laertius, Appian, Dion Cassius, He∣rodian, Eunapius, Zozimus, Eusebi∣us, and the Byzantine Historians, as Procopius, Agathias, &c. Qu. What account have you of Herodotus? Ans. Herodotus, born at Halicar∣nassus, a City in Greece, is the most ancient of Historians we have ex∣tant next to Moses, and therefore called by Cicero, the Father of History. He lived about 450 years before Christ; when, being a man of Qua∣lity and Power in his Countrey, and opposing Lydamus, his Cities Tyrant, he was forced to fly to Thu∣rium, where he wrote those Nine Books of History, which Posterity called by the names of the Nine Mu∣ses, and which contained the most remarkable Transactions of the World during 240 years, beginning from the time of Cyrus the first King of Persia, and so on to Xerxes's
time, wherein Herodotus himself li∣ved. As for the Life of Homer, (though very ancient, and ascribed to him) it is thought to have been wrote by some other hand. Hero∣dotus his Stile (like Homer's) is sweet and easie; his Dialect Ionick: Some (as Plutarch and Chrysostom) esteem him fabulous: but Camera∣rius, Stephens, especially our late Voyages and Discoveries, have sufficiently vindicated him. He dy∣ed, and was buried at Thurium. Qu. What account have you of Thucydides? Ans. Thucydides was twelve years younger than Herodotus, and lived 438 years before Christ. Being but a Boy, he wept at the hearing of He∣rodotus repeat his History, whereby Herodotus presaged his future parts. He was the Son of Orolus, of a Royal Extraction, and married a rich Wife, the King of Thrace his Daughter, by which means he ex∣pended
much money both to the Athenians and Lacedemonians, for good intelligence of their procee∣dings; whereof being well infor∣med, he wrote his History, and call'd it, A possession for everlasting, which gives an account of the Peleponesian Wars with the Athenians for one and twenty years together, in 8 Books, whereof the last seems uncorrect and unfinished to the former seven, which makes some think it wrote by his Daughter, others by Theo∣pompus, but Vossius by Thucydides himself whilst he was sick. His me∣thod is preferr'd above all others; His Stile pithy, and full of matter; His Dialect most pure Attick. How∣ever, Dyonisius accuses him of using obsolete words. His Orations filled with good Argument, but tedious. Lastly, he was an enemy to Fables, and his Relations most faithful; writing only of such things as were acted in his own time and know∣ledg,
which advantage Herodotus wanted. Qu. What account have you of Xenophon? Ans. Xenophon, by Birth an Athe∣nian, and Son of one Grillus, lived 400 years before Christ. He was a second Tresmegistus, being a great Captain, Phylosopher and Historio∣grapher. His Attick Dialect was so pure, that he was called Apes Atti∣ca, and was therefore envy'd and hated of Plato. He was so generous, that he exposed the Writings of Thucydides, which he might have delivered for his own. Xenophon's History treats of 46 years Transa∣ctions of the Greeks, and begins where Thucydides ended; shewing Alcibiades's return to his Countrey, whom Thucydides left meditating on that retreat. Also Xenophon gives us the Enterprize of Cyrus the younger (under whom he was a General) against his Brother Ar∣taxerxes,
with the Grecians retreat out of Persia, which was afterwards an occasion of his Banishment. His Institution of the Elder Cyrus is a moral Romance, and shews rather what a Prince should do, than what Cyrus really did: there being little true History in it, save the taking of Babylon, and captivating of Crae∣sus, as appears by the Relation gi∣ven of Cyrus in Justin and other Historians. As for the Book de Ae∣quivocis, attributed to Xenophon, it is an Imposture of Annius. His works (saith Chrysostom) may teach Poli∣ticks to all Princes, States-men and Generals; which made Scipio and Lucullus, who never went without them, succeed accordingly, as Cice∣ro observes. A late foolish Italian Author, without any ground for it, accuses Xenophon of an immodest Love for Agesilaus, only because he writes so much in his praise; but he had learnt too much Morality
from his Tutor Socrates, to commit such an Act. Qu. What account have you of Po∣lybius? Ans. Polybius, born at Megalopo∣lis a City of Arcadia, was the Son of Lycortas General of the Achaians, by whom both Father and Son were sent Embassadors to Ptolomaeus Epi∣phaneus; and afterwards Polybius associated with the Roman Consul, as joynt-Commissioner, in the War against Perseus King of Thessaly. He wrote his History in 40 Books, whereof only the five first remain entire, with an Epitome of the 12 next following, to the beginning of the 18th. Book, which were thought to be epitomized by Marcus Brutus. This History begins with the second Punick War, and contains not only the Events that passed betwixt the Romans and Macedonian Kings, to the end of that Monarchy, but all other the most considerable actions
of the World for 53 years; for which reason he gives it the Name of Ʋniversal. And for the more compleating hereof, he travell'd himself over most part of Europe, Asia and Africa, being furnished with Ships by Scipio Aemilianus, who, together with Lelius, were his two Bosom-friends; whereupon Cicero saith that he wrote a distinct Treatise of the War of Numantia, waged by his Friend Scipio, (to whom he was a Councellor, though not a School-master, as some would have it. He dy'd in the 82d. year of his age, which was 230 years before Christ. He believ'd nothing of Gods, Heaven or Hell, as appears by his sixth Book. Dyonisius accuses his unpolite Stile: Patricius, without reason, blames his method; and Li∣vy (notwithstanding he transcribes whole Books of Polybius verbatim in his Decades) dis-ingeniously terms him only a Writer not to be de∣spised.
However, (besides the mo∣dern Casaubon) Cicero and Plutarch of old did much esteem him; and Brutus, who disliked Cicero, did much admire Polybius. Finally, as Vossius observes, though inferiour to one or other of the Greeks for Elo∣quence, yet to none for Civil Pru∣dence and Military Science. Qu. What account have you of Dio∣dorus Siculus? Ans. Diodorus Siculus, born at Agyrium a Town in Sicily, lived to a great age under Julius and Au∣gustus Caesar, about the middle of whose Reign he dyed. He spent 30 years in writing his Historical Li∣brary, which in 40 Books (whereof we have but 15 extant) comprized the most remarkable passages of the World for the space of 1138 years, (not reckoning what was compre∣hended in his first six Books, of those fabulous Times before the War of Troy;) which is certainly the best
account of the ancient Heathen My∣thology, we have any where extant. For the perfecting hereof, he tra∣vell'd most part of Europe and Asia, as well as into Aegypt. Henry Ste∣phens was informed that the Re∣mainders of this Authors Works were all found in Sicily, but how true, I know not. His stile is con∣demn'd (as being a Sicilian, and li∣ving in the declining of the Greek Tongue) by Bodin; His Chronolo∣gy censured by Pighius and Sigoni∣us; and Ludovicus Vives inveighs against his whole Book, for descri∣bing the Antiquity of the World according to the ancient Caldaean and Aegyptian Records. Neverthe∣less, Authors of no less Credit, as Photius, (who praises his Stile) toge∣ther with Pliny, Eusebius, Justin Martyr, and Stephens, do at least e∣qualize, if not prefer him to the best of the Greek Historians.
Qu. What account have you of Dio∣nysius Halicarnasseus? Ans. Dionysius of Halicarnassus in Greece, lived under Augustus at Rome, whither he came soon after the end of the Civil-Wars; where, after 22 years abode, (having well inform'd himself both from the most judicious Books and Men) he wrote his History of the Roman Antiqui∣ties, in 20 Books, (whereof 11 only are extant.) The whole Work be∣gan from the Siege of Troy, and reached to the first Punick War, and ended there where Polybius began. But the 11 now extant con∣clude with the Government of the Decemviri, when the Consuls re∣sumed their Authority, which was 312 Foundation of Rome. He was a severe Critick, and censures Pla∣to, Demosthenes, and most of the Ancients; also a most accurate O∣rator, as appears by his Composition of Rhetorick now in being, but too
exact and rigorous in his Laws of Eloquence; He too much affected digressions in his History; also he was too credulous and superstitious in his Ethnick Religion, as when he makes a Statue speak, &c. Never∣theless, Photius praises his Stile as most Elegant, and some prefer him before Livy; but Scaliger esteems him before any of the Latines for his account of Roman Antiquities, both in respect of his Chronology and Matter, wherein he is very par∣ticular. Qu. What account have you of Jo∣sephus? Ans. Josephus the Jew was born under Caligula, (which was 39 years after Christs Incarnation) of Royal Extraction, being descended from the High-Priests of Jerusalem by the Father, and from the Royal Blood of the Machabees by the Mo∣ther: He lived also under nine Em∣perours. In the 26th. year of his age
he went to Rome, and by the assist∣ance of Poppaea (Augustus's Wife) procured the release of those Priests whom Faelix had imprison'd. After∣wards, being chosen Captain of the Galilaeans, he headed them in their revolt against the Romans under their General Vespasian: and being worsted, obscured himself in a Well, where he endured great misery, till being taken, and brought to Vespa∣sian, he there prophesied of Vespasi∣an's coming to the Empire; which soon happening accordingly, as also interpreting the Prophecy of a Mes∣sias to signifie Vespasian and his Son Titus, he was released, and made as a Friend to accompany Titus at the taking of Jerusalem. After which, he composed seven Books of that Judaick War, which he presented to Titus, who valued them above all others in his Library. To this he adds his own Life, written by him∣self; And when he was returned to
Rome with Vespasian, he wrote his twenty Books of the Jewish Anti∣quities, beginning from the Creati∣on, and so on to the 12th. year of Neroe's Reign. As for his two Books against Apion, they were to vindi∣cate the Antiquity and Honour of the Jews, from a Work which Apion had publish'd to the disadvantage of Philo and his Countrey-men. Jose∣phus (tho' Hebrew was his Mother-Tongue) wrote his Books in Greek, (wherein he was most perfect) to have them more generally under∣stood by the Greeks and Romans. The credit of his History is blamed by many; as, Maldonat, Melchior, Canus, Pererius, Baronius, and o∣thers, as Gregory, who says, (in his Posthuma) that Josephus destroys se∣veral Miracles in Holy-Writ, only to make them seem credible. Neverthe∣less, Justin Martyr, Eusebius, St. Je∣rom, Suidas, Calvisius, and Scaliger, prefer him to the best of Writers next
those of the Holy-Writ, as doth the Letters of King Agrippa approve him for the truest of Authors. As for his Testimony of Christ in the 22d. Book of his Antiquities, it is by the most judicious Criticks thought to have been inserted by another hand, though very ancient. Josephus publish'd his Writings also as well in Hebrew, as Greek. Finally, Jose∣phus has not only writ many things contrary to Moses, but also omitted many Evangelical Truths; as, the coming of the Wise-men to Judaea, also Herod's Massacre of the Infants; and therefore ought to be read with caution. Some (as Munster) con∣found with this Author, that Coun∣terfeit Josippus Gorionides his Wars of the Jews. Qu. What account have you of Plutarch? Ans. Plutarch (who lived under Domitian and Nerva, but flourished chiefly under Trajan, about 100
years after Christ) was born at Cheronaea in Baeotia; He was a Priest of Apollo, and both a great Historian and Phylosopher. First, as for History, he wrote the Lives of 24 Famous Grecians, educated at Sparta and Athens; and of 25 Ro∣mans, bred up under the several Go∣vernments at Rome: His Greek Lives begin with Theseus King of Athens, in the year of the World 2750. and end with Philopaemenes, General of the Achaians, in the year of the World 3821. which was 121 years before Christ. His Roman Lives begin with Romulus the Foun∣der of Rome, and end with Galba and Otho, about 70 years after Christ, and 820 from the building the City of Rome. Now secondly, for his Phylosophy, contain'd in the Book of his Morals, he learnt it part∣ly from his Father Lampras his O∣ratory, partly from his Grandfather Nicarchus his Phylosophy, and
partly by the Converse of his Bro∣ther Timon, but mostly from his Ae∣gyptian Tutor Ammonius, and Tra∣vels into Aegypt. He is esteem'd by all as a most wise grave Author, both in Phylosophy and History. Qu. What account have you of Phi∣lostratus? Ans. Philostratus flourish'd from Severus to Phillippus: and at the request of Julia Augusta, Severuses Wife, (whose Secretary he was) wrote the Life of Apollonius Tya∣naeus, a Pythagorian Magician, in eight Books: wherein he followed the Relations of Damis the Assy∣rian, and Apollonius his Associate in his Travels; as also the Records of Maximus the Aegaean, and two others, besides Apollonius his own Testament of himself, and written with his own hand. From hence Hierocles (who is for that cause An∣swered by Eusebius) attempts to prefer Apollonius before Christ;
which has rais'd an unjust out∣cry of the PRIESTS against our Author Philostratus:☜ whose Style is Elegant Greek, as well as his Geographical Descriptions, especially of India, useful, and such as are not to be found in others. But to say the worst of him, Philostra∣tus is (as Merric Causabon observes) (though fabulous, where he would make a God of a Magician) yet for some strange Relations once sup∣pos'd false, and now approv'd true, well deserving to be Read. Qu. What account have you of Arrianus? Ans. Arrianus, of Nicomedia a City in Bithynia, was a Priest of Ceres and Proserpine; and flourish'd under the Emperours Adrians, Antonius, Pius, and Marcus Au∣relius Antonius. He was as well a Phylosopher as Historian, being Educated under Epictetus the Stoick: whose Phylosophy he collected from
his Discourses, and afterwards pub∣lished in Writing as an Enchiridion. Besides which, he published of his own Composure, seven Books of the Expeditions of Alexander the Great, and an eighth Book of so much of the East-Indies as was known in his time. He wrote also ten Books of Alexander's Successors, whereof at this day there remains only Photius's Abridgement. He wrote likewise four other Tracts, none of which are at this time extant: one of Timoleon of Corinths Acts in Sicily: Another of the Art which Dion of Syracuse used to free those Countries from the Tyranny of Dionysius the Second: A third of the Parthians descent from Sy∣thia and Wars with the Romans un∣der Trajan: And the fourth, called the Alanick History; which makes some believe him to be the same Arrian that Dion says was Gover∣nour of Cappadocia under Adrian,
that made War upon the Alanians. His Greek is so Attick and Sweet, that it gave him the name of the new or young Xenophon, whom attempted to imitate. Not only Lucian and Photius of old, but also Scaliger, Vossius and Bodin of the modern Criticks prefer him to the best of the Greek Historians, provided you will pardon his Arro∣gance in the middle of his first Book, where he boasts himself to exceed all other Authors, as much as Alexander excell'd all other Con∣querors. Finally of his eight Books, the only that are extant of him, he professes in the first seven concer∣ning Alexander to follow the Re∣lations given him by Aristobulus and Ptolomaeus, Lagus, their Wri∣tings, who were Captains under Alexander; and in his other eighth and last Book of the East-Indies, to follow the Geography of Marinus Tyrius, who in this point far ex∣ceeds Ptolomy:
Qu. What account have you of Diogenes Laertius? Ans. Diogenes Laertius, so called from Laerte a Town in Cilicia where he was born, liv'd under Antonius Pius, or soon after. He wrote the Lives and Apothegms of the Phylosophers in ten Books, be∣ginning with Thales, and ending with Epicurus; whom (being him∣self an Epicurean) he favours even to a fault, making him place his chief Happiness in the pleasures of the mind, and not of the body, which is contrary to the Character given both by Cicero and other An∣cient Authors of Epicurus. Never∣theless from hence Gassendus (too much enclin'd to this Epicurian Sect) takes occasion to write so favour∣ably of its Founder. However, as Lactantius treats only of the Moral Phylosophers, so we owe our best ac∣count of Natural Phylosophers to Laertius; notwithstanding Kecker∣man
(who is more studious of Mo∣dern, than Ancient Writers,) con∣demns him. Finally, Ludovicus Vives tells us, that this Piece was written by Laertius, to a woman. Qu. What account have you of Appian? Ans. Appian of Alexandria, re∣mov'd thence to Rome, where he liv'd (under Trajan, Adrian, and Antoninus Pius,) at first the qua∣lity of Advocate, but afterwards for his parts preferr'd to be one of the Emperors Proctors. He wrote in 24 Books an History Royal, beginning with the taking of Troy, and success of Aeneas, and exten∣ding to the reign of Augustus; nay with some reflections even to the times of Trajan. But of all these, we have none at this time extant, save his Punick, Syriack, Parthian, Mithridattick, Spanish, Hannibalick, Illyrian, and Civil VVars of the Romans: For as for his Celtick, or
VVar with the Gauls, we have none but a fragment thereof left us. His Stile is plain and easie; and his Orations moving; his Descriptions of his Battails Natural, and full of Military knowledge; for all which, he is much extoll'd by Photius. And lastly, for his method, he en∣deavour'd to imitate Thucydides and Salust; but fell far short: In so much that 'tis rather Rapsody of things most important, than a con∣tinued History, as Livyes: He flatters the Romans right or wrong: and as Bodin observes in many Re∣lations appears too Credulous: Al∣so Sigonius accuses him of great Le∣vity, and many Omissions: But what is worst of all, he inserts as his own, whole Paragraphs out of Po∣lybius, Plutarch and other Antique Authors, without ever acknow∣ledging his Theft; which was (I conceive) one great reason that ex∣asperated Scaliger so far, as (in his
Notes upon Eusebius) to call Ap∣pian a meer Child in History. Qu. What account have you of Dion Cassius? Ans. Dion Cassius, whose Sir∣name was Coccius, or Cocceianus, was born at Nicea a City of Bithy∣nia, whither he like wise retir'd in his old Age to avoid the Praetorian Militia, being advised thereto by his Familiar Spirit, or Daemon, which directed him in all things, as Socra∣tes's did him; and diverted him from his former Phylosophical Lear∣ning, and Interpretation of Divine Dreams, (whereof he compos'd a Book) to the writing of History. He liv'd under the Tyrannies of Commodus, Caracalla, Macrinus and Heliogabulus; in whose Reigns by the prudent conduct of himself, he escap'd the loss either of Life, Goods or Reputation; and arrived safely to the peaceable happy Reign of Alexander Severus, under whom
he publish'd his Roman History, being directed thereto by his Ge∣nius, as well as commanded by Septimius Severus. His Father Apro∣nianus was a Consular man, as well as Governour of Dalmatia, and Pro∣consul of Cilicia. Also he himself having Consular Dignity twice be∣stowed upon him, and comman∣ding Pergamus, Smyrna, Africk, Austria, and Hungary, was after∣wards made Joynt-Consul with the Emperour Alexander. His History comprehends 981. years, viz. from the Building of Rome, to the Reign of Alexander Severus in 80 Books, divided into eight Decades, whereof the first 34 Books are lost: Also, of the twenty, we have only the Epitomy of Xiphiline a Constantiniopolitan Monk; for all that we have entire of Dion Cassius (besides this Com∣pendium,) are only the Events of 300 years, beginning with Lucullus
about 71 years before Christ, and ending with the Death of the Em∣perour Claudius. But all this Au∣thors VVritings that are lost, what are most to be lamented, are the 40 last years, whereof he was an Eye∣witness. He employ'd ten years in providing Materials for his History, and twelve more Composing it. He imitates Thucydides in his Narratives and Orations, but not in his Obscurity; his Language (saith Photius) is Elevated, Copious, and Artificial, but without Labour; he hath discover'd the Arcana Imperii, Election of their Magistrates, Ro∣man Rites and Ceremones, the Apothesis and Consecration of their departed Emperours, together with the Ceremony of August's Funeral, Livia's Mourning, and the letting flye the Eagle from the Funeral Pile, better than any other Historian, either before, or since.
Nevertheless he is condemn'd for his tedious superfluity of Orations; for too much adhering to Caesar against Pompey in complyance with the Times; for impartially siding with Antonius, and bespattering Cicero; for too much Superstition and Credulity given to Vespasian's Cure, and Appollonius Tyanaeus his Prediction; as well as for his Ca∣lumnies against Seneca, unless his ab∣breviator Tigellinus misquotes him. But I shall not accuse him (as Barro∣nius does,) for attributing the Victories of Marcus Aurelius rather to the Magick of the Egyptian Sor∣cerer Arnaphis, than the Prayers of the Christians, because he him∣self was an Heathen. Lastly, be∣sides his History, Suidas and Vola∣terranus (how true I know not) make him the Author of Arrianus the Phylosophers Life, the Actions of Trajan, certain Itineraries, three Books de Principe, and some small Tracts of Morality.
Qu. What account have you of Herodian? Ans. Herodian, the Son of Apol∣lonius Difficilis, was originally a Grammarian of Alexandria, and liv'd in the third Century under Com∣modus the Emperour. He wrote Eight Books of History of his own time, beginning with the Death of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Philosopher, and ending with the Murder of the two Emperors, Bal∣binus and Puppienus. His History comprehends the space of 70 years, and is prais'd, not only by Photius for his Elegant Stile, but also by Julius Capitolinus, Tribonius Pollio, Ammianus Marcellinus, and Ste∣phanus, for the Fidelity of his Ro∣man Accounts, wherein (according to his Latin Interpreter Angelus Po∣litianus) he only swerves in his Re∣lation of Alexander and Maximus. He imitates Dion Cassius in his Relation of the Ceremonies used
at the Apotheosis of the Roman Em∣perors, particularly of Severus his Funeral Rites, in the beginning of his fourth Book. As for the Cen∣surers upon Herodian, he is thought by some to be too full of Orations; as also, to be too severe upon the Empress Mammea, out of ill will to her Son Alexander Severus, to whom he was a declar'd Enemy. Suidas saith that Herodian wrote many other Pieces, the which (if he did) are now lost. Qu. What account have you of Eunapius? Ans. Eunapius Sardianus liv'd in the times of Valentinian, Valens and Gratian: He is called Sardianus from Sardis a City in Lydia, the place of his Birth, from whence he travelled to Athens, and there be∣came eminent, as well for Sophistry and Physick, as History; being the Disciple of the Great Proaetesius, and nearly related to the Noble
Sophist Chrysanthius, who married Eunapius his Sisters Daughter. At the perswasion of this Chrysanthius, he wrote an elegant piece of the Lives of the Sophists, and afterwards that other Historical Tract of the Roman Emperours, beginning where Hero∣dian left off, and so continuing it to his own times. Photius praises his Stile, but con∣demns his History, for traducing Constantine the Great, and extol∣ling Julian, as also (in his Lives of the Sophists) for being too severe upon the Christians. Lastly, besides these two pieces here mention'd, we have likewise a fragment of another Treatise of Eunapius, Entituled, de Legationibus, which was first pub∣lish'd by Andrea Shottus, and is now annexed to the Byzantine Histo∣rians. Qu. What account have you of Zosimus?
Ans. Zosimus liv'd in the time of Theodosius the younger, and wrote six Books of History; whereof the first doth briefly describe all the Emperours from Augustus to Pro∣bus, and so on to Dioclesian: But the other five Books (which extends to the Siege of Rome by Alaricus) are more copious and large, especi∣ally when he treats of the grounds of the Division betwixt Arcadius and Honorius, whereof he himself was an Eye-witness. This History of Zosimus is said to be a meer Abridgement of Euna∣pius; except in those passages where he praises Stilico, whom Ennapius condemns. Evagrius, Photius and others say, that he barks like a Dog at the Christians, and unworthily traduces Constantine the Great: As also, that he not only irreligiously bespatters Christianity, but Super∣stitiously adhers to Paganism, be∣ing over-credulous in sundry of the
Heathen Miracles. However, Le∣unclavius, who first Translated Zo∣simus into Latin, makes great Apo∣logies, as well for his inveighing against the Christians, since Zosi∣mus himself was an Heathen, as for his Traducing Constantine, since he discovers as well his Vices. Lastly, Photius applauds the Purity of his Stile, the Brevity of his Sentences, and Conciseness of his Phrase, be∣ing exempt from Figures or long Orations. Qu. What account have you of Eusebius? Ans. Eusebius Pamphili (so cal∣led from the Intimacy betwixt him and the Martyr Pamphilius,) was Bishop of Caesarea, the chief Metro∣politan of all the Churches in Pa∣lestine, and most Ancient of all the Ecclesiastical Writers in the fourth Century. For (as St. Jerome in his Life tells us) Eusebius flourish'd un∣der Constantine the Great, and his
Son Constantius: So that (perhaps) fear might oblige him to render a more favourable account of Con∣stantine, than Zosimus did. As for his Writings, they are various, both Prophane and Sacred: The Pro∣phane, is his Chronicle from the be∣ginning of the World to Constan∣tines twentieth year, which was, 326 years after Christ; Joseph Sca∣liger esteems this Piece to be only a Transcript out of Julius Africanus. As for the Sacred Writings of Euse∣bius, they were these: Of Evan∣gelical Preparation, fifteen Books; Of Evangelical Demonstration, twen∣ty Books, whereof but ten are now extant; Of Divine Apparitions, five Books; Of Ecclesiastical History, ten Books; Of the Disagreement of the Evangelists; upon the Prophet Esay, ten Books; Against Porphyrie, thirty Books, whereof twenty were only known to St. Jerome; Of Topicks, one Book; A Defence
of Origen, in six Books; The Life of Pamphilius, in three Books, and several other Books of Martyrs; Learned Commentaries on the whole Book of Psalms; The Life of Con∣stantine, in, four Books, Against Hierooles, Eight Books; Against Fatal Destiny, one Book; and three Books against Marcellus, mention'd by Socrates, lib. 2. Ecclest. Hist. All which several Pieces have been Translated by several hands. In his Evangelical Demonstration, he seems to favour Arrianism, notwithstan∣ding his Subscription to the Nicene-Council, and therefore is to be read with Caution. Qu. What account have you of Procopius? Ans. Procopius was born at Cae∣saria in Palestine, from whence he went to Constantinople in the time of the Emperour Anastatius, by whom he was highly esteem'd, as also by Justin the first; and after∣wards
by Justinian, so as to be preferr'd to the Senate with the Quality of Illustrious, and created Praefect of New Rome: Besides which, he was chief Secretary to the General Belisarius in all the Wars of Persia, Africk and Italy; which makes him every where give so Honourable a Character of him. Procopius was both an Orator, So∣phister, Rhetorician and Historian. His History consists of eight Books, whereof, the first two comprehend the Persian War, Abbreviated by Photius: The two next the Vandal Wars: and the four last, the War with the Goths: Of all which, there is a Compendium in the Preface of Agathias, who began his History where Procopius ended. His ninth Book called Anecdota, or the Secret History of Justinian, which is a Scur∣rilous Invective against that Empe∣rour and his Wife Theodora, though mention'd in Suidas, was thought
by Vossius to have been lost, but has since been made publick by Heschae∣lius and others. Now besides the fore-mention'd Pieces, there is ano∣ther Treatise de Aedificiis in six Books, which Procopius wrote for the Honour of Justinians Buildings in which Discourse there are some passes that make many esteem our Author a Christian, but if his whole works are examin'd, he will be found no better than a Superstitious Eth∣nick Writer. Procopius is extream∣ly condemn'd, not only for his too severe reproach of the French; but likewise, for his Anecdota or Libel∣lous Invective against the Emperour and Empress, Justinian and Theo∣dora: Which not only varies from it in Stile, but also in Matter contra∣dicts all his other Works, wherein he ever mentions the Emperour and Empress with great Honour and Applause; Insomuch that for this very reason many have doubted
whether that Piece is not Spurious, and written by some other hand. Lastly, by his Oblique Orations he attempts to imitate the Ancients, but comes far short of them. His Translator Porsona, did rather per∣vert, than convert him Qu. What account have you of Agathias? Ans. Agathias (the Son of Mem∣nonius) was born at Murina a City of Asia, in the Reign of Justinian; he professed the Law, and pleaded as an Advocate at Smyrna, for which reason he was Sir-named Scholasticus. His first study was Poetry, which made him publish many small Poems in Heroick Verse under the Title of Daphnicks, toge∣ther with divers Epigrams; where∣by being prepar'd with a Stile most agreeable florid, he (by the advice of Eutychianus prime Secretary of State) undertook to write an Histo∣ry concerning the Empire and Deeds of
Justinian in five Books, beginning where Procopius left off; which Piece he finish'd in the Reign of Justin the second, as he himself de∣clares in his Preface. Now albeit Agathias highly extols Procopius, yet he differs from him in many things, particularly in his commen∣ding the French, whom Procopius decryes. He likewise (though an Heathen, as appears by his Discourse of Stephen the Proto-martyr,) seems to speak more favourably of the Christians in the beginning of his History, where he praises the French for being so. Finally, his account of the Oriental Monarchys, in the end of his second Book, as well as his Succession of the Persian Kings after Artaxerxes, in his fourth Book, are rendred very considerable by the assistance of his Interpreter Sergius, who was furnish'd herein, by the Notaries and Library-keep∣ers of all the Kings and publick Ar∣chives in Persia,
LIB. V. OF THE ANCIENT LATINE HISTORIANS. Qu. WHich are the most emi∣nent of the Ancient La∣tin Historians? Ans. Julius Caesar, Salust, Livy, Paterculus, Valerius Maximus, Quin∣tus Curtius, Tacitus, Florus, Suetoni∣us, Justin, and Marcelinus. Qu. What account have you of Ju∣lius Caesar? Ans. Cajus Julius Caesar (de∣scended from the Noble Julian Fa∣mily) was the first Founder of the Roman Empire; yet no less emi∣nent
for his Commentaries, than his Conquests: Using his Pen with the same Vigour, as he us'd his Sword; in so much, that, as Quintilian ob∣serves, he was the only Roman, who for Eloquence might have been op∣posed to Cicero: And who, as Gy∣raldus saith) did alone overcome all others both in Writing and Fight∣ing. In his tender years he addicted himself to Poetry, and Compos'd the Tragedy of Oedipus, the Praise of Hercules, and several other Poems under the Title of Julii, which Au∣gustus afterwards prohibited to be publish'd. Neither was he less fa∣mous for his Skill in Oratory, wit∣ness his Funeral Orations on his Wife Cornelia, and Aunt Julia, his Accusation of Dolabella, his Invectives against Cato, and his Orations for the Bythinian Law Plautia, for Decius the Samnite, for Sextilius and others, Likewise his two Books of Analogy gave him
great repute among the Gramma∣rians. Besides which, he wrote se∣veral other Tracts of Augurie, and witty Apothegms; as well as of the motion of the Stares, which he had Learnt in Egypt, and wherein he Prognosticated his own Death, on the Ides of March, as the Elder Pliny relates; nor is he less eminent for his Reformation of the Kalen∣der. But what surpassed all his other Writings, were his seven Books of Commentaries, describing nothing but his own Actions, and things that he himself had seen. Asinius Pollio, (that carping Critick) accuses him (as Suetonius saith) for suer∣ving from the Truth in many Re∣lations about himself, and that he differs extreamly from the account which Dion, Plutarch and other Authors give of the same Actions; as also, that he reports many things unjustly to the Defamation of the Ancient Gauls: But these Cen∣sures
are only conjectural. As for the excellency of his Stile, 'tis so Easie, Natural and Eloquent, that his Latin has ever been compar'd to Xenophon's Greek, as well as his other Characters. The eight Book of his Commentaries was written by Hirtius. Caesars Writings, though adorn'd with some Orations, are destitute of many Rhetorical Orna∣ments, wherewith he could have beautified them; in so much, that Ci∣cero esteems his Commentaries to be nothing but short Notes prepared by Caesar in order to a more com∣pleat History, had not his untimely Murder prevented him. Qu. What account have you of Sa∣lust? Ans. Crispus Salustius, or, as o∣thers call him, Sallustius, was born at Amiternum in the Sabines Terri∣tory, the third year of the 173d. Olympiad, which was the same year that Sylla's Souldiers took and
Sack'd Athens; for he was Elder than Caesar, though he out-liv'd him seven years, Salust was first Educated in Rome, spending his youth in Ingenious Studies, so as to be preferr'd to many considerable Offices in the Government: as, Se∣nator, Tribune, Treasurer, and Prae∣tour in Africk by the favour of Ju∣lius Caesar, in which last Office, by his Extortions, he grew so vastly Rich, as to purchase the Village Ti∣burte, and his Country-house at Ti∣voli, as well as the chief Houses on Mount Quirinal in Rome, together with those spacious Gardens, called (at this day) The Gardens of Salust. He was descended from the Noble Salustian Family; and Educated un∣der his Tutor Attejus Praetextatus Philologus. Of his Works, Catalin's Conspiracy, and the Jugurthine War, are the two chief, that are extant; Besides which, he wrote the History of Rome from its foundation, with
a particular Narration of Marius and Sylla, as also the Atchievments of Pompey in the Mithridatick War, of all which, we have only some few Fragments remain; but for the true delivery of his Punick History, he was so Zealous, that he Travail'd into Africa on purpose, to be the better inform'd. His Stile, in imita∣tion of Thucydides, whom Quintili∣an compares him to,) is Concise, Short, and Pithy. Of the Ancients, as well as Tacitus, and Seneca, as St. Austin did highly esteem Salust; and of the modern Criticks, Lip∣sius, Turnebus and Scaliger prefer him to Caesar or Livy. Nevertheless, Asinius Pollio, Livy and others ac∣cuse him for inventing new words, as well as for the using obsolete ones; and for too much obscure brevity in his expressions, wherein Tacitus imitates him. He is likewise censur'd for stealing out of Thucy∣cides and Cato many Select Senten∣ces,
and for the too often repetition of the same words; as well as for inserting many inessential things in∣to his History, more especially his two Prefaces before Catalin's Con∣spiracy, and the Jugurthine War, which relate not at all to the fol∣lowing subjects: But the first a ge∣neral Harangue against Idleness; and the second an Invective against those whom Debauchery diverted from their Employs. Yet that, for the which he was the most condem∣ned, is his own extravagant Life, so much contrary to his Writings: When, not being satisfied with his own Wife Terentia, whom he mar∣ried after her Divorce from Cicero, he was taken in Adultery with Fausta, Lucius Sylla's Daughter; for the which he was not only ex∣pell'd the Senate, but condemn'd also to be Whipt by Milo, and fain to buy off that punishment with Money. Finally, his Orations dis∣cover
both his amity to Caesar, and enmity to Cicero. Notwithstanding some question, whether these two address'd to Caesar, were Salusts or no. But most certain it is, that that one Oration which Cicero a∣scribes to Salust is counterfeit, and none of his, it being in no wise Historical. The most considerable of his Friends were, Julius Caesar, Cornelius Nepos, Messala, and Ni∣gidius Figulus. Qu. What account have you of Livy? Ans. Titus Livius Patavinus, was born at Padua, and flourish'd chiefly under Augustus and Tiberius. He be∣gan to write after Augustus's Tri∣umph for the War at Actium, and finished his History in the beginning of Tiberius's reign. He wrote (as Seneca tells us, many Philosophical Dialogues before he came to Rome, the which he dedicated to Augustus Caesar, whereby he procured his
Favour. And Quintinian informs us, that in a Letter to his Son, he deliver'd many excellent Precepts of Rhetorick; but his chief Piece is his History, which contain'd 142 Books, or (as some say) but 140. beginning with the Foundation of Rome by Romulus, and extending for the space of 746 years, to the German War, mannag'd by Drusus. who lost his Life in that Expedition. This History was not divided into Decades (as now we find it,) by Livy himself, but by others since his time. And of the 140, or 142 Books which he wrote, there re∣main at present not above 35. nei∣ther are those altogether entire: For that the whole second Decade is wanting; also we have but the first, third and fourth, with half of the fifth, which was found at Wormes, by one Symon Gryneus. Likewise the beginning of the fourty third Book has been lately recover'd by a
Manuscript in the Chapter of Bam∣berg. But for the remaining four∣teen Decades, we must rest con∣tented with the Epitomy of Florus, who, as some vainly fancy, was the occasion of the loss of the whole. His Stile, notwithstanding Asinius Pollio blames it for its Patavinity, or Paduan Dialect, (where he writes sibe for sibi, and quase for quasi, as we now pronounce it;) is yet extoll'd by Quintilian, as most Eloquent, and his History equall'd to Herodotus. Also, however the Emperour Caligula accuses him of Verbosity, yet the same Prince was no less an enemy to Homer, Virgil, Seneca, and all Ingenious men. It is true, that Augustus blamed Livy for too much favouring Pompey's party against Caesar, but yet he with∣drew not his favor from him, as per∣ceiving it his Countries cause, who were all of the Pompejan Faction. Again, Trogus Pompejus (as Justin
informs us) accuses Livy's Orations, as too direct and long, which cen∣sure might happily, arise out of Jealousy betwixt two Historians of the same Age and Subject. And for what Mascardi blames him, of be∣ginning his History with part of an Hexameter Verse, 'tis frivolous, since there is no Prose without something of the like nature occuring. Se∣neca more justly accuses him of en∣vy to Salust, in preferring Thucydi∣des so much above him; but yet Seneca terms him the most Eloquent. Finally, the Aspersion which can with most difficulty be wip'd off from Livy, is that, for the which Gregory the Great prohibited him to be kept in any Christian Library, and which Causabon mentions in his Preface to Polybius, viz. his noto∣rious Credulity in the Pagan Su∣perstition, where he fills his Histo∣ry with Prodigies; as, of an Oxes Speaking; a Mules Engendring,
the Metamorphosis of Men, Wo∣men and other Creatures; showres of Flint-stones, Milk, Blood, Flesh and Chalk; the Statues of Gods Weeping, Speaking, and shedding Tears of Blood, Armies engaging in the Air, and Ghosts appearing; together with Lakes and Rivers of Blood: All which nevertheless he represents only as the fond opini∣ons of others, and not to be cre∣dited. Last of all, Gruterus entitles him the Prince of Latine History, Bar∣thius, the Patavinian Syren, and Lipsius, the most Plentiful of Hi∣storians, wherein (as he observes) we meet with things too good for us. He died in the fourth year of Tiberius. He was chosen by the Senate to be Tutor to the Empe∣rour Claudius in his youth. And (as Pliny the younger tells us) One travelled to Rome from the remotest parts of Spain, only to have a sight of Livy.
Qu. What account have you of Vellejus Paterculus? Ans. Vellejus Paterculus (descen∣ded from the Ancient War-like Princes of Campaigne) was at first a Military Tribune in France, then Praefect of Horses in Germany, after∣wards Quaestor, and last of all Tibe∣rius's Legate in the Pannonian War; as he himself informs us. About the 16th. year of Tiberius he composed his Epitomy of Roman History in two Books, whereof the beginning of the first is lost. He pretends to begin only with the Foundation of Rome, nevertheless, as appears by the remains of his first Book, He treats of things far more Anci∣ent, and so comes down to his own time, the 16th. year of Tiberius, which was the 32d. year after the Birth of Christ. Vossius, Lipsius and others extol the Elegancy of his Stile, and allow him to have given us a Judicious account of
some things which are not else∣where to be met with. Neverthe∣less, he is condemned for too much flattering the House of Augustus, as well as for parasitically applau∣ding even the Extravagancies of Tiberius and his Evil Councellor Sejanus, whom he magnifies for the most Vertuous of men. But, to conclude, his greatest Excellency is his Eloquence, which appears chiefly in his Invectives and Enco∣miums, as where he traduces Mark Anthony, and extols Cicero. Some attribute this Author another Frag∣ment of the defeat of the Roman Legion by the Grisons, the which Vossius, Velserus, and other Lear∣ned Criticks have demonstrated to be a counterfeit. Qu. What account have you of Valerius Maximus? Ans. Valerius Maximus, a Ro∣man Citizen of a Noble Patrician Family, derived his Pedegree from
the Valerian Family by his Fathers side, and from the Fabians by his Mother. In his youth he was ini∣tiated in Learning, but coming to be of Age, he served for some time in the Wars, and Sailed with Sex∣tus Pompejus into Asia: From whence, being returned to Rome, he published in nine Books his va∣rious History, or rather Miscellani∣ous collection of memorable Deeds and Sayings that had occurred a∣mong the Romans; the which he wrote at the latter end of Tiberius his reign, and after the disgrace of Sejanus, which makes him so boldly traduce that Favourite, whom Pa∣terculus was obliged to flatter, as writing in the time of his Prospe∣rity. Finally, he is condemn'd for the obscurity and unpoliteness of Stile. Qu. What account have you of Quintus Curtius?
Ans. Quintus Curtius Rufus, though born (as most think) in the Reign of Tiberius, yet, living to a great Age, flourished chiefly under Vespasian: And was the same Cur∣tius whom Suetonius makes in his younger days to teach Rhetorick un∣der Tiberius; as also the same, to whom (as the younger Pliny re∣ports,) a Phantasme appear'd in Africa. He wrote the Life and Ex∣pliots of Alexander the Great in ten Books; whereof, the two first, and end of the fifth are lost, as also the beginning of the sixth; and in some parts of his tenth or last Book, there appears a defect: Neverthe∣less, Christopher Bruno has supplyed the two first Books out of Arrianus, Justin and Diodorus. As for the Censures that pass upon him, Gla∣rian, Mascardi and others condemn him for an ill Geographer, in ma∣king the River Ganges run from the South, and confounding Mount
Taurus with Caucasus, as also mista∣king the Jaxartes of Pliny for the River Tanais: Likewise for too much abounding in Sentences, and making persons speak improper to the Characters they bear, as in the Oration of the Scythians to Alex∣ander, in his seventh Book. But all these accusations are frivolous and groundless, in comparison of that which is urged against him, for vindicating the Brutish and Unna∣tural Lust of Alexander to the Eunuch Bagoas, which Curtius justi∣fies as Lawful. Nevertheless, he is as much esteem'd of among the Cri∣ticks, as any of the Latine Histori∣ans, both for sincerity and Judge∣ment, and Eloquence. Lipsius pre∣fers him before all others for the perusal of Princes. Vossius saith, He is more Elegant, than Perspicuous; yet allows his Words to be Choice, his Sentences Accute, his Orations Eloquent, and his Phrase worthy of
Augustus's Age. As for his Orati∣ons, whether direct or oblique, they are all Excellent. Neither is he impertinent in Digressions, un∣less you will accuse his Description of India for one, which was really essential to his Design. Lastly, Al∣phonsus King of Arragon was reco∣vered from a dangerous fit of Sick∣ness by the diversion he took in the reading of this Author, which made him cry out, That he owed his Recovery neither to Hippocrates nor Avicenne, but only to Quintus Cur∣tius. Qu. What account have you of Ta∣citus. Ans. Cornelius Tacitus, Praefect of the Belgick Gauls under the Em∣perour Adrian, besides his Annals, (which reach from the Scene of Augustus, to the end of Nero's Reign, excepting his last twelve years,) wrote also an History, that extends from the Death of Nero,
to the Government of Nerva and Trajan; of which History, there are now extant but Five Books: And Lipsius, with reason, con∣jectures, that there are at least Ten more lost, in as much as they were all said to reach from Galba to Tra∣jan, which was the space of one and twenty years; whereof the five we have now left us, treat but of one whole year. His History is quoted in the eleventh of his An∣nals, whence we may conclude That to have been first written. Now, besides his Annals and Hi∣story, he wrote also a Treatise of Germany and its Inhabitants, with another Book of the Life of his Father in Law Agricola: Both which pieces are now extant. But for the other Tract of the corrup∣tion of Roman Eloquence, which some attribute to Tacitus, and others to Quintilian, 'tis thought by Lip∣sius and other Learned men to have
been written by neither. Now a∣mong these many Judicious per∣sons who extol this Author, Vossius (though he prefers the Eloquence of his History before that of his Annals,) yet allows him to be every where Grave and Elegant: Also Lipsius calls him, a sharp and pru∣dent Writer, and Imitator of Salust: Sidonius would have him never mention'd without Praise: But the Emperour Tacitus had so great a veneration for his Ancestor and Name-sake, that he made his Books be transcrib'd no less then ten times in one year, and caused his Statue to be erected in all publick Libra∣ries. Notwithstanding, he hath not been totally exempt from Censure: For Alciatus, rather out of Affecti∣on, than Reason, preferr'd his Friend Paulus Jovius before him; and Ferret, as well out of Igno∣rance, as Vanity, accuses Tacitus of writing ill Latine; However
Pliny the younger, magnifies his Eloquence therein. Also Vopiscus (only to justify his Assertion, that all Narrations are mixt with un∣truths,) accuses Tacitus of delive∣ring falsities, but gives no instance where. Likewise, Chrysostom and Tertullian bribed rather with Re∣ligion, than Judgment, accuse Ta∣citus as an Imposture, for that he derides the Christians, abuses the Miracles of Moses, and upbraids the Jews for their adoring the Effigies of an Ass, in the fifth Book of his History: Which, as coming from an Heathen, is not altogether so criminal; but rather to be con∣demn'd for a digression, than for an Impiety. Finally, he equals as well Thucydides, as Salust, in the number of his choice Sentences; out of which, the wisest Politicians have selected their most prudent Maxims of State.
Qu. What account have you of Lucius Florus? Ans. Lucius Annaeus Florus (de∣scended from the Noble Annaean Family, and thereby allayed to the Senececaes) lived under the Empe∣rour Adrian; and composed an Epitomy of Roman History in four Books. Some question whether he was the same Author that annex'd the Arguments to Livy's History; but 'tis a great errour to imagine, that he ever design'd the Epitomy of all Livy's works, much less, that he should occasion the loss of any part of them. His stile is Poetical, using (like Virgil) Hemesticks in his Periods, and writes more like a Declamer than a Historian, which makes Sigonius brand him for im∣pertinent. His account of the Suns being seen to fall into the Ocean, and there heard with Horrour to extinguish its Beams in the Waves; (as mention'd in his Description of
Brutus his Sea Voyage,) also his Report of two Spirits in the shape of young men appearing in Rome near the Temple of Castor and Pol∣lux; (when he speaks of the de∣feat of Cimbri by Marius;) are things altogether incredible, and not fit to be inserted in History; as Scaliger, in his Comment on Euse∣bius, well observes. Yet notwith∣standing, Vossius allows him to be a Writer, that is both Elegant and Eloquent, and (except in some few places) truly Florid. Qu. What account have you of Suetonius? Ans. Caius Suetonius Tranquillus (whose Fathers name was Suetonius Lenis, as he himself testifies in the Life of Otho,) was Secretary of State to the Emperour Adrian, till being suspected of too great Fami∣liarity with the Empress Sabina, he was removed from that Employ. After which, he apply'd himself to
writing, and compos'd these seve∣ral Pices: To wit, The Lives of the Twelve first Roman Emperours, be∣ginning with Julius Caesar, and en∣ding with the death of Domitian, in the 98th. year of Christ, which piece is now extant: Together with other Tracts of the Illustrious Grammarians, Rhetoricians, and Poets, whereof at this day, only some Fragments remain; Besides, a Discourse of the Roman Games, a piece call'd, the Republick of Ci∣cero, and of the most Illustrious Fa∣milies of Rome, all which are pe∣rish'd in the ruines of time. Au∣sonius likewise tells us of another Book of Kings divided into three parts, Which (he saith) was written by Suetonius, and afterwards con∣tracted into a Poem by Pontius Pau∣linus. But for that Treatise of the Life of the Elder Pliny, which goes under the Name of Suetonius, it was certainly none of his; for the
great Intimacy betwixt our Author and the younger Pliny, would have produced a more Honourable Cha∣racter of his Friends Uncle, the Elder Pliny, than is there to be found, had Suetonius been the Writer of it. Some are of opini∣on that the beginning of his first Book of the twelve Caesars is wan∣ting, because there is no mention of the Birth and first years of Julius Caesar, as there is of the Original and Education of all the other Em∣perours, in the rest of their Lives As for the Censures that are passed upon Suetonius, they are chiefly two; the first, For his exclaiming against the turbulent Superstition of the Christians; And the second, for his Description of Vice in the Lives of Tiberius, Nero, and Caligula; whereof, if you will pardon him the first as an Heathen, I see not how he could avoid the other, as a Faithful and True Historian.
Nevertheless, Pliny calls him, A most Learned and Honest Author: Suidas, the famous Roman Gram∣marian: Vopiscus, a fair, Candid and Compendious writer: But Ludo∣vicus Vives saith, That of all the Greek and Latine Historians, He is the most pure and diligent, speaking Truth boldly. Nay, many prefer him before Livy, Salust or Tacitus: which Character, though Vossius will not assent to, yet doth he ap∣prove of those other Encomiums given him by Vopiscus and Vives. This Author was at first rendred into English by that Voluminous Translator Dr. Philemon Holland, which gave occasion for one mer∣rily dispos'd to break this quibling Jest upon him: Philemon with Translations doth so fill us, He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus. Qu. What account have you of Justin?
Ans. Justin flourish'd under An∣tonius Pius, and abbreviated those forty four Books of the Ʋniversal History of two thousand years from Ninus to Augustus, which Trogus Pompejus had before composed un∣der the reign of Tiberius, and where∣of nothing but this Epitomy re∣mains; which, nevertheless, we find not to occasion the loss of the Original, as some imagine. Mar∣tin the Polander, as well as Munster, confound this Author with Justin the Martyr, making them one of the same, because they were Con∣temporaries; but without any colour of Reason, as appears by the Scurrilous Invective made by this Historian against the Jews, in his 36th. Book, which the Martyr would never have been guilty of. Now of this Author, as well his Method (wherein he follows his Original, even in the very number of Books) as his Stile, are both
highly commended. The seven first Books comprehend the Infancy of the World, or first Inhabitants thereof, beginning with the de∣scription of Kings, Places and Countries of the first Assyrian or Babylonish Monarchies; and from the seventh to the one and fortyeth Book, is a continued Series of the Empire of Macedon, beginning with Philip, the Father of Alex∣ander the Great. He used no di∣rect Orations, for that had rendred him guilty of the same errour, which Trogus himself condemned in Livy and Salust. Yet nevertheless, Ju∣stin is accused of some Digressions, as in the beginning of his second Book, where the Scythians and Egyptians have a long tedious de∣bate in preference of each others Antiquity: And likewise in the twentieth Book, concerning the Birth, Travels, Virtue and Death of Pythagoras. Again, Pererius
in his Comment upon Daniel, hath convinc'd Justin of many errours concerning the Jews: And Vopiscus accuses him of Falsity. But that wherein he seems most of all inex∣cusable, is his false Chronology, which is wholly attributed to the Abbre∣viator. Qu. What account have you of Ammianus Marcellinus? Ans. Ammianus Marcellinus, a Graecian and Citizen of Antioch, flourished chiefly under the Em∣perours Gratian and Valentinian, holding in his youth divers consi∣derable Offices of the Militia, par∣ticularly, one of the Guard du Corps, besides many other eminent Employs, in all which, he acquitted himself with much Honour. He wrote an History which extends from the beginning of Nerva, to the death of Valens, in one and thirty Books: whereof, the first thirteen being lost, the other eigh∣teen
only remain; and those (too) full of Imperfection. As well his Military Profession, as Greek Birth, do both contribute to the Rough∣ness of his Stile; and for the same Reasons ought to be pardon'd. No other Historian so well informs us of the Antiquities and Originals of the Gauls, Germans and Burgun∣dians, as he doth; neither hath any Heathen Author written less reflectingly on the Christians, not∣withstanding the excessive Praises he attributes to Julian, which were but his due in respect of Moral Vir∣tues: For which reason, as well as for his sincerity, and presenting us with things no where else to be met with, he is duly esteem'd of by all Learned men. Yet, nevertheless, some just exceptions may be taken against him; when, instead of an Historian, he plays the Philosopher, and runs away from his Subject: As in the seventh Book, where he
quits Julian at Paris, to Speculate the nature of Earth-quakes: Also, in the beginning of his twentieth Book, where leaving Constantius to prepare against the Persians, he falls enquiring into the nature of Eclipse; and presents his Reader with a Lecture of Astronomy in∣stead of History: And again, in his thirtieth Book, where he leaves Valentinian at Tryers, whilst he pre∣sents you with an Invective against Lawyers. Also Marcellinus is by Causine accused of his too many Poetical Descriptions throughout the whole Body of his Writings. But notwithstanding all these Cen∣sures, he is allow'd of by Vossius, To be a Grave and Serious Writer, worthy to be beloved by all men.
LIB. VI. OF GOVERNMENT AND SUCCESSION. Qu. WHich are the three prin∣cipal forms of Govern∣ment? Ans. First, Monarchy, which is the Government of one single man alone, as is used in England, France and Spain: Or secondly, an Ari∣stocracy, where the people are go∣verned by a select number of Noble∣men or Grandees, as heretofore the States of Venice and Genoa: Or thirdly, Democracy, which is a Re∣publick
or Commonwealth, where∣in the People are govern'd only by such Magistrates, as they choose a∣mong themselves, as 'tis at this time in Holland. Qu. What are the Extreams or Abuses of these three sorts of Govern∣ment? Ans. When a Monarchy runs in∣to Tyranny, Aristocracy into Oli∣garchy, or Democracy into Anar∣chy and Confusion. Qu. How many sorts of Monarchy are there? Ans. Two, the one Hereditary, as in England or France, and the other Elective, as in Poland. Qu. How hath England been An∣ciently govern'd? Ans. England was first under the Britains: secondly, Tributary to the Romans: thirdly, under the Saxons; fourthly, under the Danes: and fifthly under the Normans; whose Conquest of this Island by
William Duke Normandy, is the chief Period of time from whence our Chronologers reckon. Qu. Name me the Succession of our English Monarchs from the Con∣quest, together with their several Races? Ans. First, of the Norman Race, were William the Conquerour, William Rufus, Henry the first, and King Stephen. Secondly, of the Race of Plan∣tagenets, were Henry the second, Richard the first, King John, Henry the third, Edward the first, Edward the second, Edward the third, and Richard the second.
Thirdly, Plantagenets of the House of Lancaster, were Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth. Fourthly, Plantagenets of the House of York, were Edward the fourth, Edward the fifth, and Richard the third. Fifthly, of the Race of Tudors, were Henry the seventh, Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. Sixthly and lastly, of the Race of Stuarts, were King James, King Charles the Martyr, and Charles the Second, our pre∣sent King, whom God pre∣serve.
Qu. How many years is it since William Duke of Normandy Con∣quer'd England; or when began he to Reign? Ans. William the Conquerour having defeated Harold in that fa∣mous Battle at Hastings in Sussex, began his Reign Anno Domini one thousand sixty six. which is about six hundred and seventeen years ago. Qu. When did the Division be∣twixt the two Houses of York and Lancaster first begin? Ans. It began upon the death of Richard the second: In which Kings reign was that Insurrection of Watt Taylor and Jack Straw, whom the Mayor of London so Loyally defeated. Qu. How ended the Quarrel be∣twixt these two Houses? Ans. By the Marriage of Henry the seventh, to Elizabeth the Eldest Daughter of Edward the Fourth;
which Match united the Kings Red-Rose of Lancaster, with the Queens White-Rose of York, and so estab∣lished the Peace of both Houses. Qu. From whence sprang the Title of King James, and the Stuarts, to the Crown of England? Ans. By the Marriage of the Lady Margaret, King Henry the seventh's Eldest Daughter, to James the Fourth King of Scot∣land, whose Son, James the fifth, had Issue one only Daughter, which was Mary Queen of Scots, the Mother of our English Monarch King James, the sixth of that Name in Scotland, and the first in Eng∣land. For Henry the sevenths Issue Male being expired by the Death of Queen Elizabeth, (the only Re∣lict of Henry the eighth) the next Succession fell upon his Issue Fe∣male, the aforesaid Lady Margaret. Qu. Which are the chief Writers of our English Chronicles?
Ans. Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, Jeffry of Monmouth, Martin, Polydor Virgil, Holinshead, Speed, Stow, and Baker; besides the Writers of particular Lives: such as, Daniel, Heywood, Bacon's Henry the seventh, Herbert's Henry the eighth, and Cambden's Queen Elizabeth, the best in their kind. Qu. What Races have succeeded to the Crown of France? Ans. There have been three Races of Kings in France: The first of Pharamond, A. Ch. 419. the second of Pepin, A. C. 751. And the third of Hugh Capet, A. C. 988. Qu. What Races of Kings have succeeded to the Crown of Spain? Ans. Since the Expulsion of the Romans, the Spaniards have had four Races of Kings: the first from the Goths, the second, after the In∣vasion of the Moors, from Don Pelago; the third from Don Sancho Mayor, King of Navarre; and the
fourth from the House of Austria, by the Marriage of the Daughter and Heir of Ferdinand the Catholick; which Race now governs in Spain. Qu. What Races of Kings have succeeded to the Crown of Scotland? Ans. The Ancient Kingdom of the Scots reckon by two Periods; the first from Fergusius, who was King of Scotland in the time of Alexander the Great; and the se∣cond from Robert Stuart, the Son of Walter Stuart, who married Margery, King Bruces Daughter, in the year of our Lord 1350. or thereabouts. Qu. How came Ireland into the hands of the English? Ans. By the Conquest of Henry the second, in the year of Christ 1172. Qu. Of what Family is the Empe∣rour of Germany? Ans. Descended from Radulphus Auspergensis, who A. D. 1273. made Austria the Imperial Seat, constituting his Son Albert first Duke thereof.
Qu. Of what Family is the Em∣perour of Turkey? Ans. Of the Ottoman Family, so called from the War-like Empe∣rour Othoman (Son of Orthogules) who A. D. 1300. did much enlarge the Mahometan Empire by his Arms. Qu. Of what Family are the Kings of Portugal? Ans. Portugal, which did for∣merly belong to Spain, is now a distinct Kingdom of it self, and en∣joys the blessing of Kings of its own, out of that Honourable Fa∣mily of the Duke of Braganza, de∣scended from Henry of Lorrain, to whom Alphonsus King of Castile gave his Daughter Teresia in Mar∣riage, for the good Services he had perform'd against the Sarazens in Portugal, A.C. 1110. Qu. How is Holland and the Low-Countrys Governed? Ans. Holland did formerly be∣long to the King of Spain, 'till by
the Severity of the Spanish Inqui∣sition, and Cruel Government of the Duke of Alva under Philip the second, they Revolted, and by the Assistance of Queen Elizabeth threw off the Spanish yoak, and set up a Commonwealth among them∣selves; under which kind of Go∣vernment they now continue at this very day. Qu. What Interest hath the Prince of Orange in the Government af Holland? Ans. He is allowed a double Vote in their Senate, with many other Priviledges above the rest, as a Reward for the good Services done them by the Old Prince of Orange, in their Revolt against the Duke of Alva and the Spaniards. Qu. How is the present Govern∣ment of Italy? Ans. It is divided into little Commonwealths, Principalities or Dukedoms; which in Spiritual
matters are mostly subject to the Pope; who, as the Ghost of the Deceased Roman Empire, sits Crown'd upon the Grave thereof, as the Malmsbury Phylosopher well observes. LIB. VII. OF PHYLOSOPHY. Qu. WHich are the chief Suc∣cessions of Ancient Phy∣losophy? Ans. These three; the Ionick, Ita∣lick, and Eleatick, as Clemens Alex∣andrinus reckons them; But Dio∣genes Laertius mentions only two the Ionick and Italick, which last
he makes to fall in with the Eleatick. Qu. Who was the first of the Ionick Sect? Ans. Thales. Qu. Who was the first of the Ita∣lick Sect? Ans. Pythagoras; whose Masters Name was Pherecydes? Qu. What Phylosophers succeed∣ed Thales in his Sect of Ionick Phylosophy? Ans. Anaximander, Anaxime∣nes, Anaxagoras, Archelaus, and Socrates, who being the first Foun∣der of Moral Phylosophy, after his time several new Sects arose. Qu. Who were the chief Phyloso∣phers of the Italick Sect after Pytha∣goras? Ans. Telauges and Xenophanes, (whom Clemens makes the first of the Eleaticks,) also Parmenedes, Zeno Eleates, Leucippus, Empedo∣cles, Democritus, Protagoras, Me∣trodorus, Diomenes, Pyrrho, Hera∣clitus,
Anaxarchus, Nausiphanes, Naucydes, and Epicurus, whose Phylosophy is given us by the Latine Poet Lucretius. Qu. What are the chief Sects, which you say arose after Socrates, a∣mongst his Followers? Ans. They were the Cynicks, Stoicks, Academicks, Peripateticks, Scepticks, Epicureans, and Eclecticks. Qu. Who were the chief Cynicks? Ans. Antisthenes, Diogenes, and Crates, from whom sprang the Stoicks. Qu. Who were the chief Stoicks? Ans. Crates, Zeno, Citiensis, Cle∣anthes, Chrysippus, Cato, Varro, Tullie, Seneca, Antonius, and Possidonius. Qu. Who were the chief Aca∣demicks? Ans. Plato, Pseusippus, Xenocra∣tes, and Polemon, of the old Aca∣demy: Crantor and Arcesilaus, of the middle Academy: and Lacy∣des, Hegesilans, Carneades, and Cli∣tomachus,
of the new Academy. Qu. Who were the chief Peripa∣teticks? Ans. Aristotle, Theophrastus, Stra∣ton, Lycon, Critolaus, and Diodorus. Qu. Who were the chief Scepticks? Ans. Pyrrho, Timon, Aenesidemus, Neumenius and Sextus Empericus. Qu. Who were the chief Epicu∣reans? Ans. Epicurus, his servant Mus, Hermannus, Lucian, Celsus, Lucre∣tius, Cassius who murther'd Caesar, Maro, and Patronius Arbiter. Qu. Who were the chief Electticks? Ans. Potamon of Alexandria, Sotion, Ammonius, and Plotinus. Qu. Why were the Cynicks so called? Ans. In derision of their Morose Dogged Manners and ill Nature; Fawning on Vertue, and Barking at Vice; as Ammonius well ex∣presses it. Qu. Why were the Stoicks so called?
Ans. From the place they dispu∣ted in, call'd a Stoa, or Porch. Qu. Why were the Academicks so called? Ans. From the place where they studied in, called an Academy. Qu. Why were the Peripateticks so called? Ans. From their manner of Dis∣puting as they walked in a place called the Lycaeum. Qu. Why were the Scepticks so called? Ans. Because they deny'd any cer∣tainty of knowledge in any thing; which others affirming, were called Dogmaticks. Qu. Why were the Epicureans so called? Ans. From their Master Epicurus; who nevertheless received all his Principles of Atomical Phylosophy from Democritus, who held the same long before. Qu. Why were the Electicks so called?
Ans. Because they pretended to search all other Phylosophies, and choose the best out of each. Qu. Why were all these men called Phylosophers? Ans. From their Study of Wis∣dom and Knowledge. Qu. To what kind of knowledge did the Academicks pretend? Ans. To know nothing certainly, but to dispute all things; yet not absolutely denying that there may be some probability of conclusion, only that it was difficult to attain unto. Qu. In what did the Stoicks differ from the Peripateticks, and the Epicureans from both? Ans. Somewhat they differ'd in their Physicks, but most in their Opinions of the chief good and Happiness of man. Qu. Wherein did the Stoicks place Happiness? Ans. In the rigid exercise of Ver∣tue,
and contempt of those things, which others esteem Pain or Plea∣sure. Qu. In what did the Peripateticks place Happiness? Ans. In the exercise of Vertue, together with the enjoyment of the gifts of Nature and Fortune; the want of which, they acknow∣ledged to be Unhappiness. Qu. In what did the Epicureans place their Happiness? Ans. In the enjoyment of Plea∣sure, and living without the fear of Powers Invisible. Qu. What are the chief parts or contents of Phylosophy? Ans. Physicks, or Natural Phy∣losophy; Ethicks, or Moral Phylo∣sophy; and Dialecticks, or Logick. Qu. What doth Physicks, or Na∣tural Phylosophy, comprehend? Ans To know the Nature of the Heavens, and all things in the World.
Qu. What doth Ethicks, or Moral Phylosophy, comprehend? Ans. The instruction of Good Manners, Vertue and Vice, toge∣ther with the chief good of men, and how to attain it. Qu. What doth Dialecticks, or Lo∣gick, teach? Ans. The Art of Discourse, or true Reasoning, which serves as the Instrument of both the other. Qu. Which are the best Authors to instruct us in the Lives and Doctrines of the Phylosophers? Ans. Diogenes Laertius, Stobaeus Plutarch, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Steuchius Eugebinus; but above all, Cicero's Works, wherein we shall find what the Lord Bacon says to be Infallibly true: That as a little Phylosophy enclineth men to Atheism, so depth in Phylosophy bringeth back to Religion.
LIB. VIII. Of LEARNING AND SCIENCES In General. Qu. WHich are the seven Libe∣ral Sciences? Ans. Philology, History, Mathematicks, Phylosophy, Physick, Law, and Divinity. Qu. What doth Philology com∣prehend?
Ans. Philology comprehends the study of Grammar, (or the Art of Writing and Speaking Correctly;) Rhetorick, (or the Art of Speaking Eloquently;) Poetry, (or the Art of Writing in Measure or Verse;) Logick, (or the Art of Reasoning;) Anagnostick, (or the method of Reading Authors Profitably;) Criticks, (or Censures upon Au∣thors;) and Diadacticks, (or the method of Teaching others.) Qu. How may History be divided? Ans. Into seven parts: As for Example, Ecclesiastical, (or the History of the Fathers and Councils;) Political, (or the Government of States and Kingdoms;) Natural, (as Pliny of the Heavens, Fowls, Beasts and Plants;) Successions, as of Countries and Fa∣milies;)
Professions, (as the Lives of Famous men in any Faculty;) Various, (as Aelian, Plutarchs Mo∣rals, and Valerius Maximus;) and Fabulous, (such as are called Ro¦mances;) Qu. What do the Mathematicks comprehend? Ans. Arithmetick, (or the Art of Numbers;) Geometry, (or the Art of Measuring;) Perspectives, (or the Art of Sight;) Astronomy, (or the knowledge of the Stars and their Motions;) Geography, (or the Description of the Earth;) Architecture, (or the Art of Buil∣ding;) and Musick, (or the Art of Harmony.) Qu. What doth Phylosophy com∣hend? Ans. Metaphysicks (that treat of Supernatural things, as Spirits, &c) Physicks, (or Natural Phylosophy;) Ethicks, (or Moral Phylosophy;)
Oeconomiques, (of Order and Dis∣cipline; Politicks, (of Government;) Thanmaturgicks, (or the working Strange Conclusions;) and Pneumatology, (or the Doctrine of Spirits.) Qu. What is comprehended in the Study of Physick? Ans. To be well read in all Na∣tural and Physical Writings, of the Latines, Greeks, Arabians, Paracelsians, Galeno-Chymists, Prophylacticks, and Empericks. Qu. What is comprehended in the Study of Law? Ans. To read such as have written concerning Law-givers, and Laws in general, Of the Law of Nature, Of the Law of Nations,
Of the Laws of the Hebrews, Of the Civil-Law, Of the Canon-Law, and Of our Municipal Laws. Qu. What is comprehended in the Study of Divinity? Ans. To read such as have writ∣ten Divinity Natural, Catechetical, Exegetical, on Commentators, Polemical, in Controversies, Synidetical, for Cases of Con∣science. Prophetical, of Preaching, and Gubernetical, of Church-Govern∣ment. Instrue praeceptis Animum; nec discere Cesses: Nam sine Doctrina, vita est qansi Mortis Imago. FINIS.
