B3770 11052029 46166
Latham Spaw IN LANCASHIRE, With some remarkable CASES and CURES Effected by IT; Together with A farther Account of It; As may conduce to the PUBLICK ADVANTAGE With Ease and little Expence. LONDON, Printed for ROBERT CLAVEL, in Cross Keys Court in Little Britain. 1672.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE CHARLS Earl of DERBY, LORD LIEUTENANT Of the County Palatines of Cheshire and Lancashire, Chamberlain of CHESTER, AND LORD of MAN, and the ISLES, &c. My Lord, SPrings tend not more naturally to the Ocean, than this
Treatise to your Lord∣ship, The rise and Ori∣ginal of it. What I have collected, the faults excepted, hath been much out of your own Observations, writ in a Stile, your Lord∣ship must pardon, that it may live. When I first visited your Spaw, I approacht its Avenues with some prejudice, being not con∣vinc't of the Efficacy of
Waters (though I have observed some, and read of more) in comparison of a well order'd Method in Physick, which I still favour: Though in pertinacious obstructions, and diseases, that must be long hewing down, na∣tive to those Parts through which the wa∣ters may pass, incline much to their use, especi∣ally if Patients (nause∣ating variety of Medi∣cines)
can comply with These, as more natural and obvious to their Con∣stitutions. And here by the way, I cannot approve of such fictitious waters, as some by a pretended skill, in opposition to natural Spaws, say they can apt to this or that distemper. No, I am not convinct that Art (though in some great Masters of it, it may arise to a wonderful
Excellency) can yet ever so deliciously compose me∣dicines as to equal the re∣fin'd Spirits, which God and Nature hath with so much Curiosity mixt in the Bowels of the Earth. A truth Fallopius seems to deny, hac ratione du∣ctus, quod ob eorum so∣liditatem (speaking of concrete Minerals) nihil ab iis abradi possit; which
Julius Caesar Claudinus in his ingressu ad infir∣mos (p. 373.) clearly confutes, aswell from their first as their second quali∣ties; with whom our Learned Jorden in his discourse of Baths, and mineral waters (p. 63.) agrees, that before Mi∣nerals have their full Consistence, whilst they are in solutis principiis, as earth, juice, or vapours (afterwards indeed they
will need some Medium, or Corrosive to unite them with the water) they may be communicated with water, non qua Talia sunt (to inforce Claudi∣us his words) secundum suam substantiam, sed per soluta sua Principia, terras (scil.) succos & vapores. And hence I account the waters of Israel bet∣ter than Abanah and
Pharpar Rivers of Da∣mascus; God having on Those bestowed a Bles∣sing, He denied these, his hand having more im∣mediately in those divine∣ly temper'd, what Art in these can but grosly imi∣tate. And▪ yet I do not deny that from the Family of Minerals, many powerful and Noble medicines may, and are daily by
Art fram'd to eradicate distempers; in which par∣ticular none certainly was ever happier than our Learned Willis, the Atlas and strength of Physical improvements, which being mixt with common water, as a Ve∣hicle to carry them off, may effect good Cures, so Alcoholiz'd; But not with like facility, and so little Disgust as your Lordships and o∣ther
Spaws proe: The Abuse of which have many times pro∣phan'd their use: So that they, who would effectually drink of Spaws, must also con∣sult judicially about the manner, there being (as the Lord Verulam ex∣cellently observes) many Medicines which by themselves would do no Cures, but being or∣derly applyed produce
great ones, Nat. Hist. p. 16. And here I would not be mistook, as if by a ju∣dicial consulting of the manner of drinking these Spaws I insinuate such a necessity of advising alwaies with Physicians, as no Dose could effe∣ctually be took without them: No, that were to supply the defect of practice by the Commen∣dation
of the Spaw, to foment Distempers, and then allay them: An Artifice too mean, and dis-ingenuous, however so specious and practica∣ble. I know the Poor (for whose Relief these Spaws seem providenti∣ally to be found) may re∣sort hither beneficially on small preparations, ha∣ving robust bodies, na∣tures
which with a little help, can work out po∣tent Diseases; And the Rich (coming advised by their Physicians) may likewise receive infinite good, according to the qualifications prefac't) unless extraordinary sym∣ptoms arise, which in some measure too, they may be prepar'd for; That water being weak, and poorly impregnate, if not infici∣ously, which ever and a∣non
requires medicines to actuate its vertues, or to remove bad effects. I know, Medicinal Springs were never more pretended to than of late; Nor shall I deny such their content, Qui ip∣sos inflatis buccis orbi commendant. That which I have more to add, as to your Lordships Spaw, is only,
that I believe Time, the Mother of Experience will commend it to Poste∣rity, especially whilst your Charity Accommodates the Poor, as your Exam∣ple animates others. I mention not Time, as if the experience of 20 years in the general, as well as four years particular ob∣servation, were not suffici∣ent to evidence the Vir∣tues of your Lordships
Spaw; But that a great∣er Concourse to it may (without the nicety of a∣ny) set a larger Seal on its power and energy. More might be insisted on, but I fear I have tres∣past too long on your Lordships Patience, a virtue I would not further wound. Long may you Live, the Glory of your Fa∣mily!
Your Countrys Preservation! and your Soveraigns Repose, and Confidence! That at length, though late, you may be Crown'd with Martyrs, and the im∣marcible Reward of Loyalty, and a good Conscience! I am, My LORD, Your Lordships most obliged and humble Servant E. Borlase.
LATHAM SPAW; How it is situated, what Conveniences may be there had for Strangers, whence it proceeds, its ver∣tues, and some ac∣count of the Cures wrought by it. IN the Mannour of Latham in Lancashire, within a quarter of a mile of Latham-House (the an∣tient and Magnificent Seat of
the Earls of Derby, which too sharply bears the Character of her Lords Loyalty, and the Miseries of more than a Civil War) is a notable Medicinal Well, commonly called Maud∣len Well, in the Tenancy of Tho∣mas Hulmes of Slade, named the West-head, erecting its Spring much higher than the Road adjacent to Ormeskirke, the Noble burying place of the Stanlies, Earls of Derby. The happy effects of which Well I having observed the last Summer, attending the Commands of the Right Ho∣nourable the Earl of Derby and his Lady there, who have e∣qually (with many in their nu∣merous
Family) received much benefit thence; I cannot, with∣out injurie to the publique, but obey his Lordship in this brief but just account, though it be more sutable to my Incli∣nations to indulge my Retired∣ness than to expose it. This Spaw (by the Care and Nobleness of the Earl of Derby and his Lady mutually assistant to the health of their Neighbours) is wall'd in with a good free stone, and defen∣ded from the violence of wea∣ther with a well order∣ed and decent▪ covering, set on a necessary, though no curi∣ous Fabrick of wood, ordered more to secure it from rain,
than the Raies and power of the Sun, which have still a suf∣ficient influence upon it; whence this Spaw being intire, it preserves (without the af∣fronts of accidents) its own pureness and efficacy, issuing forth its stream (through a well pav'd Channel) into the Road where the neighbour∣hood and common people (who are alike free, coming at seasonable hours) drink of it there, and convert much of the water (running into the Road) to their necessary uses of washing, brewing, and the like with no little advantage; it being observed that the peo∣ple thereabouts are of healthi∣er
Constitutions, and not so subject to the Epidemical di∣stemper of this year, which hath so miserably infected most places; though I will not say (as Abheers of the German Spaw) that vix anno∣siores homines sub nostro Coelo, quàm Spadanos inveneris, it is sufficient they have not like Distempers at present as else∣where. The Water (in its descent beating on the pavement) dies it with a rusty iron colour, one Argument of what it is im∣pregnant with. Not far from the Spaw there are many able Tenants sufficient to receive the best
Persons with all Accommo∣dations and respective conve∣niencies. The Spaw is set about with Trees which yield a pleasant shade, and there are two com∣petent Seats about it for the Patients repose, and Atten∣dants. Adjoyning to it, there is a large field (of late repurcha∣sed by the Earl of Derby for the freer access of all comers thither) by nature cast into such order, as men and wo∣men may have a full conve∣niency for their walks and e∣vacuations, without trespassing on eithers modesty, and that with diversity of Entertain∣ment
too, there being shrubs, plants, and young trees of sun∣dry sorts and uses. A fathom scarce sounds the bottom, where there is laid a large Mill-stone, through the hole of which the Spring for∣ces its passage, casting up (within a foot of the surface) a cleer silver sand, mixt with such variety of little thin Cockle-shells, and some Pe∣riwinkles curiously filed by the penetrable quality of the vitriol, as the finest glass is not more perspicuous, more smooth, that were a Micro∣scope set to inlarge their mi∣nute bodies, what figures, what improvement, what
objects might thence capti∣vate the eye? more and no less I am perswaded than Mr. Hooke in his Book hath im∣proved to admiration, evin∣cing (as Dr. Power in his Pre∣face to his Experimental Phi∣losophy hath it) the dull world how curiously the mi∣nutest things are wrought, and with what signatures of Di∣vine Providence they are in∣rich't, which (as it is excel∣lently observed in the Beauty of Providence) doth not dai∣ly fall under our sense and ob∣servation: And yet none of these, or any of the sand ever mixes with the stream, though it issues (through a large hole
in the side of the Cistern) with a current flux bubling in seve∣ral places at once, and is of that strength, that if one try the deepness of it with a stick, it immediately buoys it up. Some (from the Cockle∣shells and Periwinkles found in this water) conjecture, that this Spaw may be fed by subterraneous veins from the Sea, whose shore is common∣ly stored with such shells; nor is the opinion wholy to be ex∣ploded, though the earth (in its matrice) may also have such a plastick vertue, as (from its prolifick ferment actuated by the Sun) it may produce such shells, which, as the
case stands, is hard to deter∣mine. Mr. Childrey in his Britan∣nia Baconica (a good piece) page 75. mentions Cockle shells, and Periwinkles found at Al∣derley neer Severn in Glocester∣shire; but so as he rather al∣lows them attempts of Nature failing in her workmanship for want of fit matter, than such in reality, which those we speak of are in figure and other similitudes exceeding like, though very minute, and without the least substance found in them; though in a Close hard by, there are like shells which have full fishes in them; Ours (as Mr. Childrey's)
are not found neer the surface of the Earth, but in the body of the sand cast up by the force of the Spring. This Spaw (by its Effects and the separation of its parts) seems impregnate with Vitriol and some Allum out of Iron, and not in the least saturated with any ill quality. That Allum is an Ingredi∣ent, not the main Principle, nothing discommends the Spaw; As by Forestus and o∣thers we shall hereafter more fully evidence and cleer. And here before I proceed, I must (from all whom I have discoursed with) insert, that if this Spaw proves slow, in
getting off with some, it is but with a few, and that through their want of advice first, whose distempers have such a nicety of complicati∣ons as may (in prudence) re∣quire advice, (which I think ought regularly to be taken by such. Ne fortè aqua noxios hu∣mores incurrens, eos secum ra∣piat, inventamque obstructionem augeat, as Abheers observes) or if it comes off slow, it is through the irregularities of others in taking the water too late in the day, and dining too early and plentifully after, in∣dulging besides a more than ordinary freedom; Yet none ever complained that it pre∣judiced
them in the least. I have heard that Dr. Sprat∣ling (a Person worthily respect∣ed in Lancashire, for his En∣dowments, though somewhat morose and cloudy) commen∣ded this Spaw to Mrs. Fleet∣wood of Penwerden, and others, as singularly good. And this Testimony I have from a Reverend Prelate, one of the most ingenuous and in∣timate Sons of the inmost Re∣cesses of Nature, that He hath a very good Opinion of this Spaw, though he drank but one morning of it: In which opinion is Dr. Pope, one of the Councel of the Royal Society; And Dr. Howorth of Manchester
(my honoured friend) a Per∣son whose desert intitles him to no mean Credit, writes to me, That he lately viewed and drank of the Latham Spaw, and perceived it to be as deep∣ly impregnate with the tin∣cture of the Iron and Vitriol Minerals as any water in Lan∣cashire, or the Yorkshire Spaw: adding further, That the grea∣test Test now must be from Those, that by experience make further discovery of its usefulness and benefit it affords, which he believes may answer the hopes and expectation he hath of it. And old Spaw drinkers, of which I met some at this Spaw,
told me cheerfully, that a less quantity effected their business than at Tunbridg, Epsom, Bar∣net, and other Spaws, of which (in an ingenious Persons Case here following) you will have a notable proof, which can∣not but be an excellent Quali∣ty, considering thereby that the Hypochonders are less stretch∣ed, Obstructions are more powerfully opened, the filth of the stomach impacted in its folds and wrinckles is sooner fetcht off, especially if an easie vomit of Sa vitrioli albi, which as well astringendi vi, streng∣thens as evacuates the stomach in robust and obstinate bodies, precedes, and the membranous
Parts (by the speedier com∣ming off of the water) are easier reliev'd, especially if this Spaw be a little acuated (as I have advised some) with Salt of Vitriol, or Steel, or Cakes of Cream of Tartar, the German way prepared, freely bestowed by the Countess of Derby, who obliges (by her great indulgence) her Neighbours thereby. There is an Ingenuous Per∣son, one of a quick and through apprehension, who coming (more out of a complacency than complaint) to this Spaw, drank of it with others some daies successively, but seldom
more than three pints at a time, yet made within an hour and an half two Chamber-pots full of Urine; which clearly demonstrates its celerity and vertue. And that he might not be without a blessing (though the healthfulness of his Constitution knew not what he might desire) he yet found much gravel, to which his Parents are addicted, eva∣cuated by it, and himself freed of an Ebullition of blood, which Critically (about Midsummer) had expressed its virulency in small pimples, for some late years, with much offence. This Spaw I have throughly
tried as to the turning its colour with the powder of galls, oak leaves, the boyling it with milk, the bearing of soap, which (as the Lord Bacon observes, Nat. Hist. p. 87.) hungry water will not admit of, such kills the uncti∣ous nature of the soap. As likewise I have tried other experiments (frequent in the like Case) and I find few Spaws, if any sooner answer all their Tests than this. Less than a grain of the shavings of Gall will immediately tincture a considerable glass full of the water, first purple, then inky. Nay, I have experienced that after some of this Spaw had
been kept seven weeks in a bottle, it yielded to the Gall a full colour, though indeed, it putrifies soon, being out of its body, which argues highly the fineness of its Spirits, they being thin and aerial, and is an evincing token of its vertue, in the Judgment of the Lord Verulam, Paulus Aegineta, Oriba∣sius and others. And that I might be yet fuller informed (desiring to lay no Fucus on a wither'd face) I caused three pints of this water (after it had been carried seven miles) to be distilled in a Lamp Still, excel∣lently performed by my Lords
Apothecary in the House: The first four or five spoonfuls of which so distil'd, I turn'd (as I had done the rest from the Well) with a little Gall, though what was afterwards distil'd never altered in the least, notwithstanding how much Gall soever I put in, but remain'd insipid and clear. I put also into a glass of Spaw water, at the Spring a few drops of the volatile Spi∣rit of Harts-horn, which made a white separation, with a strong scent, not of the faetor of the Harts-horn, but the Spaw, as if it had drawn all its Spi∣rits
into a narrower compass, which a few drops of the oyl of Tartar reduced to its clear∣ness and scent. The scent of this Spaw is not loathsom, somewhat it is like ink, more (in my apprehen∣sion) like the Sea-shore when the Tide's gone out, brackish and subtile. Further, I exactly weighed a glass of fresh Spring-water with as much to a drop, as we could measure it, of Spaw water, which in three ounces (so much the glass contain'd of Spring-water) the Spaw water came short of the Spring-wa∣ter
a full half ounce, which de∣monstrates the levity of its parts, and the subtilty of its Spirits, which in the opinion of the Lord Verulam (Nat. Hist. pag. 86.) makes much for the better: Though I must confess too with Heurni∣us, that Learned and intire Physician on Hippocrates his Aphorisms 26. l. 5. Non lance semper aestimanda est aqua, sed si non gravis sit Hypochondrio, verùm si ea subito pervadat, nec ibi cunctando putrescat, is the best quality, which I have al∣ready manifested are extant in our Spaw. This Spaw hath a blewish
Cream, or skin which swims upon the water after it hath stood a very little while, Instar iridis, vel caudae pavonis in aquae superficie, to use Hadrianus a Mynsichts expression in his Anima Vitrioli, a medicine of admirable use, as this Spaw, (for this reason) may be in many of the like Cases, especi∣ally when obstructions are the original of such distem∣pers. I know coal waters, and others which are not without some ill quality (as standing Lakes and the like) have the same coloured scum, but not from the like Principle, the
one being from putrification, This the innate vertue of the Minerals. Abheers (who in concerns of this nature leaves nothing unsearcht) believes this vari∣ous colour'd fat, or skin in the superficies of the Spaw to be liquid Amber, though others think it Sulphur: But whe∣ther from the one or the other, certainly much vertue is specified by it, both being in∣gredients active and effectual. This Spaw works several waies, most by Urine, often by Urine and stools, some∣times by Vomits, but least free
that way, unless the stomach be before foul and nauseous. The Spaw at first drinking, is exceeding cold; to avoid the inconveniences of which falling suddenly on the sto∣mach, a sensible part and the bowels, I advise, as is usual in the like case, Fennel seeds, Coriander seeds, Lem∣mon or Orange pills, Ange∣lica roots, or roots of Enula Campana candied, to be taken with it, which brings off the water gratefully: And if some few drops of that Noble and generous Medicine Elixar pro∣prietatis be taken in a draught of the water now and then,
I am perswaded it may further its excellency, as the Earl of Derby fully experienced when he took the water in reference to an indisposition on his stomach, which this Spaw hath happily removed, be∣getting besides an excellent appetite. Some (Claud. p. 382. not without Authority) admit of a spoonful of Salt in their first Cup, ut facultatem intestinorum irritent, ac alvum subducant, which in robust bodies replete with gross humours, I shall not forbid according to Avicen and Mesue cited by Dr. Jer∣den, p. 130. though it is too
severe, and harsh for finer contextures, having such te∣nuity of parts as may fret the guts and bowels. In the weaker and finest bodies Manna may be suffici∣ent, Rhubarb with Cream of Tartar, or Tartarum vitriola∣tum, or my Deobstructive powder, which I have obser∣ved hath done singularly well. Some have been for drink∣ing this Spaw warm (as they were they say the first Exam∣ples of that course at other Spaws) the stomach being apt to suffer by the contracti∣on the water may make on
the nerves through its active quality, the nerves enduring no cold, in pursuance of the Lord Verulams advice for warm drinks, (Hist. Life and death p 214) which may be in some constitutions more proper at meals than in a course of Phy∣sick, and I believe his Lord∣ship means so, for so drunk in a course of Physick it makes it more nauseous, diminishes its spirits, renders it less pene∣trable, and gives it another quality, though in weak bo∣dies the water with good ef∣fect may be taken warm, yet if such who desire to take it so would either drink it in their bed, or go to bed soon
after they have drunk their dose (as with some is usual at other Spaws) all inconve∣niencies of its chilness would be easily prevented, especially if the former rules of taking some gentle Correctives with the water were faithfully ob∣served, or a little white wine drunk with it, Ut si vestigi∣um aliquod frigiditatis ventriculo ab illis communicatum fuerit, ab his deleatur. Claud. p. 390. For though this water (as Abheers observes of his Spaw, p. 102.) Actu est humida, potentia poten∣tèr exsiccat & calefacit, sicque ventriculi, & Cerebri vitia e∣mendat. And that it affects the stomach by its coldness with
no ill effects, is evident from the appetite it raises in all that take it, signally remarkable even to the repairing of some appetites prostrate before, con∣stringendo enim ventriculi orifi∣cium excitat suctionem, as Hol∣lerius in his praxis, p. 456. ob∣serves from our supream Ma∣ster, when he calls cold water  Vorax. The Right Honourable the Countess of Derby when she first began to drink of this Spaw (three or four years since) was forc't to take Cardamum seeds with it, now a few Fen∣nel seeds, sometimes without any thing, the Spaw passes off
with much ease and benefit. Exercise (whilest the Spaw is in drinking) is most ne∣cessary: light walking is good, but in that the body is apter thence to sweat, than distri∣bute the water, the matter of which is much spent by sweat, especially if the motion be vio∣lent, whereby the strength being drawn into a narrow room, the Spirits become more sharp, and predatory, I commend riding, shooting, bowling, or what may make the water more easily descend, and inlarge its distribution; and if some easie exercise to warm the bowels be had before one
drink the water, I conceive it may make way for the water to proceed with less prejudice. What diet (in this case) is most necessary, is very ob∣vious, viz. meats of easie di∣gestion, all fruits of the season must be avoided; early rising, going to dinner when the wa∣ters are come off, and soon supping is most requisite; yea Lipsius his advice to Lessius from the Spaw in his Epistles is excellent, vix quandocunque venietis coenulam vobis paratam apud me scitote ex legibus spada∣nis, tenuem frugalem cum fame dimissuram: so is a cheerful spi∣rit, moderate exercise, and all
temperance, and the body by Art, if the water effects it not, is constantly to be kept open. In what Cures this Spaw hath been most happy I shall in brief run over some; Time, which matures all, and my leisure, (at present somewhat disturbed) being to enlarge further as there is occasion. In facilitating the passage of the stone and gravel, and abstersing its sordes and mine∣ra, I find it very successful. One Cropper in the Man∣nour of Latham hath (for these twenty years) found, (as to
the stone and gravel) much benefit by this Spaw in great violence and extremity. Major Henry Nowell Depu∣ty Governour of the Isle of Man, drinking of this Spaw, found (as I am informed) infinite relief by it, voiding thereupon much Gravel and many stones. John Lingley a poor man, miserably afflicted with a con∣tinued pain about his reins, and his bladder, especially when he would make water, drank freely (after he had been gently purged) of this Spaw, by which he immediately
found such ease, that the mem∣brum virile (swelling pri∣apismi instar, constantly before when he endeavour'd to make water) grew orderly, and he voyded the next morning a stone with two discoverable branches. A Gentleman of a fair Estate, and an Ancient Fami∣ly nigh to, and in Leverpool (one of the most encreasing and flourishing Sea-Towns now in England) having, but ineffectu∣ally, long experienced the ablest advice in London for an Ulcer in his right Kidney, at length repaired to this Spaw, of which for some daies (indeed too
few to make a through Cure) he drank freely, and with that effect, as ever since he is restored to such a competency of health and strength, as he travels in his new Chariot with ease, and walks without the least disturbance, who for some years before could not stir without stooping and much pain. Strange success it hath had on most sturdy obstructions, and Annual pains. Richard Dinton (at present Coachman to the Earl of Derby) was long held with an excessive pain about his
stomach, flushing heats in his head, and a streightness at times about his heart. Several months successively (for two daies together in a month, and no more) he had an inter∣mitting Tertian, with a regu∣lar Type, and a sharp stitch in his right side; for which he tryed much means, but in vain; At length he drank freely of this Spaw, taking some daies a little Rhubarb and salt with it (the Medicine is of the Lord Bacons approba∣tion, Hist. of Life and Death, p. 218.) and is now in good health. A Gentlewoman of good
note washing her knees and hams morning and evening with this Water (she drank of it too) eased her self thereby of infinite pains and aches in those parts. Here I must insert a Case of great importance, Elizabeth Holden Wife to one of the Keepers of Latham Park, a woman of good years, and grave, having for a long time suffered under intolerable pains about her stomach, back, and belly, principally towards the Matrix, and in her groins: And fearing by the bigness of her belly, that she might fall into a Dropsie, drank order∣ly
of this Spaw, being tired out with variety of Churlish Medicines before. After a day or two, the Spaw wrought so effectually with her, as first it mitigated her pains, then les∣sened her belly, and at length, Oh numen Aquarum! It brought away such Bladders, as many of them equall'd a pigeons egge, which being broke, with some noyse, yeilded a spoonful of limpid liquor somewhat jel∣lying: Before the voiding of which, pains, not unlike Throws, pressed her in her belly, groins, and lower parts. I had (by the favour of the Earl of Derby) one of those Bladders, the last I think, she
ever voided, sent to me, whose outward Tunicle was not un∣like a Swines bladder, but without Fibres or veins; with∣in it was smooth, and had adhering to its sides a slimy blewish jelly substance. Upon discourse with her, of which afterwards she assured me, that she had not voided less (since she took notice of them) then two hundred, each with pain and trouble, though the last with least. What to think of these I am somewhat uncertain; That there are Monsters in Physick, as in Nature, is no late Exclamation. Ludovicus Nonnius, a learned Physician of Antwerp, in an Epistle to the
most ingenious Beverovicius of Dordrecht, inserted in his Trea∣tise De Calculo, writes that as in the Yard Caruncles may be generated, which inclose U∣rine, so the like substance may be bred in the body of the bladder: And Zacutus Lusi∣tanus, that admirable observer of especial Cases, p. 184. gives an excellent evidence, that multa monstrosa in vesica innasci, & membranae nerveae Globi cry∣stalli formes, incredibilis quanti∣tas pituitae, & alia mira quae intus corercita deinde excernuntur cum urina. Nor is Sennertus, that Learned and excellent man less observing in his Chapter, de vermibus & aliis praeter na∣turam
in vesica natis. And none of our books, treating of preternatural accidents, but are plentifully stored with strange productions from the womb; Concessions much strengthening our present Case though they clear not the rea∣son of it: Nor do I believe the reason is easily found out. Multa tegit sacro involucro Natura. Though till I am better con∣vinc't, I must suppose these Bladders voided by our Patient to be bred in her bladder, if there, or in her womb, as Aposthumes, of which there are great varieties arising from choice of matter, as Sennertus
well observes, disseminated through the whole body, some of them inclosed in a proper tunicle, receiving form and matter from the place they are generated in. I have been late∣ly assured by a Person worthy to be credited, that having had some years since, discourse with an Eminent Physician in these parts, whose infirmities generally tyed him to his Chamber, he was then told by him that he once had a Pa∣tient, a Gentlewoman of good quality, who on her Urine had a fat scum with various colours in it, under which swam many Bladders, the big∣ness of a large pins head, very
clear, which being broke af∣forded a slimy water, which he conceived were the effects of some Apostumated mat∣ter in the Reins, and not im∣probable, so various is Na∣ture in the discharge of her burden. But that which sways most, next to what may be imputed to the irregularities of the womb, is the opinion of a Learned Physician, whose deserts challenge more than is paid to his years and merits. He conceives these Bladders come from the Mesentery, and are the involucra and Cystes of Scrophulous Tumors generated there, there being, as Vigo maintains, the focus and se∣minary
of the Scrophula ex∣pelled thence, as Schenckins observes of other evacuations, per ductus occultos; and hence Forestus in his Treatise of Chi∣rurgical observations (lib. 3 p. 259. in 8o) from Arnoldus ob∣serves, that Aquae minerales alu∣minosae non solùm infernos hos strumosos, ac pituitosos abscessus, sed externos quoque & summa corporis occupantes imminuunt, ac discutiunt; from whence this Patient received so much be∣nefit: But to our intent. The Collick seldom here misses of a Cure; Holmes who had lately the ground in Lease, gives an excellent Testimony
of this, as others whilest I was on the place. Since, Mr. William Black∣bourn of Billings, a young Gentleman, having some sharp heats breaking forth in his body, went the last Autumn to Holywell, in hopes the coldness of that Well (certainly a clear and fresh one) would have re∣lieved him; But washing there, returned notwithstanding with the same heats increast, and some days after had the Collick so extreamly, as it tormented him much; Whereupon com∣ing to this Spaw, he drank plentifully of it, and was that day cured of his Collick, and
mended immediately of his itch. This Spaw hath wrought good effects on long obstructi∣ons, of which something hath been took notice of in Dintons Case. The Countess of Derby be∣ing sensible of a more than ordinary indisposition on her right Hypochonder, applyed her self, two years since, to the drinking of this Spaw; The Spaws in Germany, (those of Ardenne, as that of Wilong in the Territories of the Lantgrave of Hesse, famous for the Dutchess of Longaveile, Sister to the
Duke of Conde, proving after∣wards with Child) having been no strangers to her Palat and observations, which in∣couraged that Excellent and discerning Person to hope well of her own Spaw at Latham, in tast and trial not unlike. Upon drinking of which she found so notable an improve∣ment of her health, languid and impair'd before, that her appetite return'd, the rawness and crudity of her stomach before mentioned, wore off, her flushings and heats grew less, and her Liver (till then stretcht immoveably to her ribs) grew loose and plyable, and all upon drinking this
water, this admirable vehicle imbib'd with such active qua∣lities as wasting the pertinaci∣ous humours, adhering to the Parenchyma, and vessels, before rebellious to ordinary solutives, and medicines, re∣stored her Ladiship to the ex∣cellent health she now en∣joys. The Lady Colchesters Gentle∣woman complaining, through a long indisposition, of much pain inher head, and stomach, with a strange averseness to meat, & a vomiting afterwards, drank orderly (after some small preparations) of this Spaw, and in few days grew well,
and so continues. In old Aches, and inward and outward Sores, this Spaw is of good effect. Thomas Holmes of Slade, about 50 years old, having been troubled several years last past with a pain about his Midriff, which though not altogether, yet in great mea∣sure hindred his daily Labour, contracted by a strain, lifting a great weight neer 20 years since, the last May began to drink of this Spaw (not con∣stantly and regularly, but as he thought fit, and business permitted him) in quantity
about two quarts at a time, and is now not only freed of his pains, but can daily do more work than he could possibly reach to for some years before. His Servant also, about Christmass was twelve-month got a strain in his back, lifting more than he could well ma∣ster, which disinabled him much; In June last he drank of this Spaw, for the most part, twice a day for some weeks, whereby he is now lusty and follows his labour close, without the least sense of his former Complaints.
Henry Maudesley (within the Mannour of Latham) be∣ing in very great pain at his heart, in his thighs, legs, feet, and head (you must accept of his own expressions) for which he had tryed what help Boul∣ton and the Country afforded (Eminent men in some pla∣ces) but in vain, came, or rather, with much ado, crawl∣ed to Latham Spaw, with a strong confidence, where in the morning, he drank thereof freely, and getting a bottle, carried it full home of the same water, and drank of it when he went to bed; Next morning he found himself
(amaz'd at the Deliverance) in a very good Condition, and both his thighs broken out with pimples, out of which issued much water, whereup∣on he immediately grew per∣fectly well, and so conti∣nues. Alexander Parr, one of the Keepers of Latham Park, on a bruise, vomited much blood, and thereupon grew weak, and short-winded, but drink∣ing of this Spaw recovered strength, grew hearty, and spat no more blood. Thomas Aiscough, one of an athletick constitution, upwards
of 50. every winter (for some years last past) being troubled with a severe Cough, toge∣ther with a shortness of breath, complaining withall of such exquisite pains in his shoulders and over his brests, as the an∣guish of them would some∣times cloud his Reason. Quibus etsi non tollitur lumen illud, ut sic dicam, mentis: tamen interdum offuscatur, & velut nubeculâ sere∣nitatem ejus subducunt; to make use of dear Lipsius his words to Prunius, then his pains would descend to his stomach, where they would be more tolerable, and afterwards settle, with much virulency, in his thighs, having in their walk pain'd his
hips, so as to turn them black, and in the end determine in his great toes, with blisters pouring forth (for some weeks) freely thick and putrid matter, as Herc. Sax. p. 288. observes in the like Case, Humours descended, ad pedes, in quibus fiunt tubercula & sic solent solvere abscessus: for the Cure of which he had much advice, but finding it ineffectual, re∣sorted to this Spaw, which af∣ter due preparations by bleed∣ing, vomits, purges, and an orderly diet, which of himself he was not much inclin'd to, wrought so powerfully on him, every way, as he found excee∣ding Relief thereby, and is
now returned to the Isle of Man, (where he usually lives) with much Comfort, and sa∣tisfaction: Though such a habit of Distempers will ne∣cessarily need, Spring and Fall, some evacuation more than natural. Monsieur Pelate, Gentleman of the Horse to the Countess of Derby, one well verst in Chymistry, and a sober per∣son, who in his own Country had often visited the Waters of Bourbon, and the most re∣puted Spaws, acknowledges This, in its kind, to be no∣thing inferiour to any of them; It having effected a most sig∣nal
Cure on him, who, be∣ing much indisposed, and stiff in his Limbs, inclinable, as he suspected to a Palsie (a Scorbutick one I conjecture) drank orderly of this Spaw, and within a short time re∣covered his Limbs, with a con∣stant good habit of body, be∣fore much indisposed, and ob∣structed through a sedentary life in his more retired years. The last Summer he went to Holywel, and with others ba∣thed himself there. Upon which ensued a great indisposition on his Limbs, and his whole bo∣dy; The Spring being too cold and piercing (though it must be own'd, for its Rise and
Purity, one of the excellentest of that nature) as it discom∣pos'd him much, so much as he hath exprest his resentment ingeniously, fecit indignatio ver∣sus: since he hath recovered his health by drinking again This Spaw. John Thorp of Chester, 16 years old, having been for se∣veral years, if not since his birth, exceeding scrophulous in his face, arms, body and legs, so violent there, as to have eight bones at once took thence, underwent all usual means for his recovery, but finding little good thence the year 1669. the humour broke
forth very violently in his arm, thighs and back, in his back so violently as it ran extreamly distempering his whole body, sufficient indeed, and more than sufficient to make him an object of great Charity; which the Earl of Derby con∣sidering, ordered (about the midst of July last,) that he should be brought with much Care to This Spaw from Chester, of which he drank freely, it agreeing (after two or three daies) excellently with him, working by stools, and urine, very kindly, so kindly as after six weeks stay there, observing an orderly Course, both as to Physick and diet,
his Ulcers mended to admi∣ration without any other ap∣plication whatsoever, than the Spaw water; His pains, before intolerable, vanisht, his strength (neer exoluted) increast, and his mind (dejected through the loathsomeness of his di∣stemper) grew serene, so that at this day he stands a Miracle of Restoration, being able to walk cheerfully, that lately could not move without an∣guish, and complaints, though I suspect (unless the next Spaw season perfect his recovery) his distemper, through its violence hath so impoverisht Nature, that he will at length fall un∣der his Complaints, through
the decay of some Parts, (with∣out the recovery of which) Nature cannot well subsist, though at present, exceedingly relieved. John Stephen of Newgate in Holland near Latham, 20 years old, having (near the verte∣brae of the loins, within some∣what more than an inch of the back bone, upon the first of the spurious ribs) a great Tumour which for six months was gathering to suppuration, but could not be brought to it, notwithstanding the most usual effectual pultises, cata∣plasms, and plaisters, till by the advice of a Country wo∣man,
a Colts Secundine, which was stretcht (according to their Custom) on a board, and by pieces applyed to the Tumour so ripen'd, and easily brake it, as at the first running it yielded some quarts of lau∣dable Quittor, The next dres∣sing almost as much, and every day after, for four weeks, the Aposteme wetted three or four napkins each dressing, not unlike to what Herculius Saxonius observes, p. 288. of one he opened, qui excerneba∣tur pus album eo die ad libras octo, & sequentibus diebus ultra decem libras; which comes the nearest I read of to our Patient, who being thereby brought
very low, and finding no be∣nefit by what he had been ad∣vis'd to for his recovery, He with much difficulty repair'd to Latham Spaw, where (after he had took a dose of the A∣pozeme prescribed for the for∣mer Scrophulous Patient, he drank orderly of that Spaw; As Her. Sax. in the former Chapt. advises in curatione ul∣ceris post abstersionem: utilitèr enim, says he, administrantur omnes Aquae Thermales, & intem∣perie calidâ conveniunt frigidae, in minus calida aluminosae, nam ex∣siccant & mutant intemperiem partes, as Forestus in his Chy∣rurgical Observations p. 329. also advises, by which the Pa∣tient
in few daies gathered strength, with such a stomach, as his sores (he had two) ran kindly, grew sweet, and by the Fistula injection, which the Countess of Derby (excel∣lent in those things) ordered, out of her Charity and know∣ledge, is now in such a Condi∣tion, as he can without pain ride, nay go many miles, who before could scarce hold up his back one step, and might easily have the wound heal∣ed, if there were not more danger Lupum auribus tenere; Some Recidiva's remaining, which (for fear the vertebrae of the back should be foul, or the Cartilage, and the Ten∣dons
of the joynts be thereby impair'd, the Aposteme being long in gathering) I cannot yet but indulge Doctor Reads Cau∣tion, not to heal the Orifice too soon. Before he came to the Spaw, oftentimes the Orifice in his side would be shut up, upon which he would breath extream short, and spit up exceeding bitter matter in great quantity, ready to suffocate him (the mat∣ter being translated to his Lungs) which, after drinking a day or two of the Spaw, turned it's Course to the Wound, never reversing it's order since: So happy hath this Spaw been to this poor neighbour. Some in Dropsies have repai∣red
happily to this Spaw. The Lord Strange's Nurse, a Woman of a full body, cheer∣ful, and of a wholesom Com∣plexion, being exceedingly swo∣len in her belly, thighs and legs, nay almost all over, af∣flicted too with violent pains in her head, and a troublesome Asthma, seriously betook her self to drink of this Spaw, and without any considerable pre∣paration; which, in few months cur'd her Dropsie, remedied her head-ach, and freed her, as it hath done some others lately, of her Asthma, that at this time she enjoys much health. I know a Divine about 40 years old, a graceful Preacher,
and Reverend, much afflicted with the Scurvy, and many of its languishing symptoms, be∣sides miserable swoln legs, who drinking of this Spaw but a few daies, returned home infinitely eas'd of his Complaints, and cured of his swoln legs. In the Worms, nothing proves more effectual. The House-keepers Wife of Cross-Hall (a sweet Retirement of the Earl of Derbys) maintains it, that one of her Children being very ill, and as she thought at the point of Death, and she her self too, at that time, indisposed and ill, drank both of this Spaw brought to them in a bottle, by James Holmes the Husband, and
immediately they both grew well. The Mother thereupon voiding two, and the Daughter three worms Indeed the Neigh∣bourhood, as I am informed, drinks it often upon that score, and with much benefit. Mistris Elizabeth Nowel, being troubled with the Palpitation of the Heart from the womb, and Spleen, drank some days of this Spaw, and found not relief only, but (for ought I yet hear) a Cure. In Womens Diseases, viz ob∣structions of the womb, Criti∣cal evacuations, hysterical fits, &c. the whites with all the symptoms arising thence, the Spaw produces excellent effects,
too apparent here to insist on, that through the whole, glance only at some Cures; As also in loosenesses, bloudy fluxes, fluxes of the Liver, This Spaw effects considerable Cures, and that not so much as some suppose, by a restringent, and thickning quality condensing the prodiga∣lity of Humours preying on Nature, thereby disabled to act in her own vigour, as by an o∣pening, and discussing vertue, precipitating the Morbifick Cause of these and the like flux∣es, whereby Nature (being rid of her superfluities) she reco∣vers her pristine strength, as Abheers p. 24. excellently well observes to this effect.
The same may be affirmed of the Gonorrhea, and all the diseases incident thereto: Of which you may take two Ex∣amples, One of a young man a∣bout 29 years, who having run through a Course of Physick, not less terrible than the Di∣sease, drinking of this water, was speedily cur'd of a notable Flux of Bloud in the frenum with its consequents. The other was of a man a∣bout 30. who having a Con∣sumption in his back, drank freely of this Spaw, and in few daies gathered strength, such as (if a Quartan, which hath seiz'd on him this winter, do not again impair his strength
exceedingly) may restore him to a healthful Condition. I may here likewise mention one (related to him that looks to the Well) who having spent much in the Cure of a dysente∣ry, was by his friends advised to come from Manchester, where he lived, and lack't not advice of Learned and eminent men, to drink of this Spaw, which he did, and in a short time return∣ed cur'd. Nor is it any wonder that this Spaw impregnate with suffici∣ent virtue, should have such an effect on the Diseases last men∣tioned, since (as Sennertus ob∣serves of the taking of the Aquae Thermales, in the Dysentery, the
reason of which Cure is also pregnant for the rest) That cùm una opera pluribus scopis satisfaci∣ant, acres (scil.) humores diluant, & deturbent, sordes ulcerum detergant & ulcera ipsa egregiè consolident, so my Author in his Ch. De dy∣senteria, p. 329. 4o which, as a Conclusion to this hasty Dis∣course, is not impertinent to in∣sert: And though I might now add more, each day during its season, raising up some passage worthy an Observation; Yet with the shutting up of the Spaw in Winter, we will also leave the rest to flourish with this Spring, If what we have writ, we judge not more than sufficient. FINIS.
Memoriae Sacrum ILLUSTRISSIMI Paris Conjugum, Viri quidem Nobilissimi D. D. CAROLI Comitis DERBIAE, Et Junctae Illi Lectissimae Foeminae D. Dorotheae Helenae, Operam Conferentium ut Aquae Acidulae Lathamenses, Omnium visui obviae & usui expositae essent. Anno à FONTE saliente plus minus XLXX. Aera Christi MDCLXXII.
A further Account of LATHAM∣SPAW, as IT may conduce to the publick Advantage, with ease and little Expence, under the favour of the ILLUSTRIOUS PER∣SONS, the Proprietors of IT, whose Charity exposes IT to All, as their Countenance gives Life and encouragement to IT. MAny having been encoura∣ged by the success, which They and their Friends have found on their Repair to La∣tham-Spaw, to enquire further af∣ter its Effects, and the Times and Customs to be observed there; (too cursorily glanc'd at in the first Treatise of this Subject) I can∣not, but in order to the approach∣ing Season, so far yield to the Im∣portunity of Truth, and the pub∣lick benefit; as briefly to affirm what the most knowing and ingeni∣ous testifie, that the Excellency of
that Water far excell'd the attempt of its Praise and Vertue: though it being remote from the Business of the Nation, the Access to it may not be so universal, as is observ'd in other Places weaker impregnated with the Minerals, Iron, Vitriol, and Sulphur. Nor were the Effects more visible on the Plebean, than the Patrician, as hereafter may be more particularly expressed; though some circumstances in their Cases, are more remarkable, than a short time may well comprehend; to which at present (intending few Notes only, not a Tract) I am nar∣rowly confin'd. Hence for their clearer Information, who shall re∣pair thither, for the opening of Ob∣structions, either of the Liver, Spleen, or Mesentery, the Inn of slow Fevers, and other contumacious Effects; freeing the Uriters of Gra∣vel, Stone, or Phlegm, restoring the Appetite, clearing the Vessels of the Gall and curing the Diseases inci∣dent thereunto, also the suppression
of Urine, painfulness, &c. the rectify∣ing the Womb, furthering Concep∣tion, menstrual Evacuations, and re∣ctifying other Infirmities of Women; dissipating Hypocondrick Vapours, or Melancholy, removing old Pains, Scorbutick affections, with its prodi∣gal and virulent Progeny, Dropsies, Asthmas, Morphew, distempers of the Reins, Worms, Reliques and pro∣per Fuels of intermitting Fevers; hea∣ling old Sores, sore Mouths, inflam'd Eyes, inveterate Dysenteries, Laskes, and Fluxes, with many Diseases lodg∣ing in the Channels, through which the water passes. I shall add some Di∣rections, observing (to the Prophana∣tion of this great Blessing) how irre∣ligiously, how brutishly most flock thither, (as to other Spaws) without discrimination, or rules to be bound∣ed by in their Drinking; as if the Water were a Spell, not a Medicine: whereas the influence even of the Plei∣ades, and Orion, have not their natural Effects, but as the Bodies (they work on) are capacitated to imbibe their Energie.
In pursuance of which, so grateful to the most illustrious Indulgers of this Spaw, whose Interest is never so well advanced as in the Community of Good, I shall set down some Can∣ons which (observed) may make the Waters (influenced from above) true∣ly healing and beneficial; not here only, but where ever the like are drunk, so as these Rules may prove a general Benefit summ'd up in a narrow Room: In publishing of which, I comply rather with their Charity, (diffusive as their vertues) then seek my Ease or Repose. First, as to the Time, though some are of opinion, Waters may be drunk in winter as being stronger then: Yet the Air being then cold, the Pores are more condensed, whence the passages are not so relax; and commonly one is driest in the Summer months, so more inclin'd to drink freely, a good Expe∣dient to carry them off readily; in which respects, I conceive the fittest Time to repair hither, is, from the end of May to August, inclusively.
Some (so the constitution of the Sea∣son disswades not) commend August most, though generally then the first Rains begin, and that (according to the Proverb) discovers the Poverty of Nobility: The Trees thence forward casting their Livery, whence People cloathing themselves warmer imply Waters (afterwards) are ill Visitors of the inward parts: But this Cir∣cumstance may be ore-rul'd accord∣ing to the seasonableness of the year, no maxim being truer than that, Change of Seasons principally begets Diseases. Certainly the hottest Season, and clearest Air, are fittest Times to drink Waters in: the Air (a vehicle by which Diseases are conveyed to us) being much indisposed by the con∣trary, consequently Waters, and we by them, in case Wind, Rain, or Air prove unwholsom; Yet I have known Those, whom the strongest Medicines could not move, the Waters (though in Winter) have wrought on effectual∣ly; but such Patients are not suffici∣ent to make the Rule general.
Secondly, let such (as would drink these Waters) advise with their Phy∣sician, whether the Cause (for which they would apply themselves hither) be probable to be relieved here: Si∣loe was not for all; since Luxury, complicate Diseases have flown in upon us. Nothing is so soveraign which (in some respect) may not be attended with an inconvenience, though I havebeen so strict, in my ob∣servation of this Water, that I cannot charge the least Ill upon it; Who were fit to drink it; Who have took it or∣derly, that have not been spent with Age, or whose Heat or Vital parts have not been asleep. Thirdly, having rightly discovered the Disease (for one may emulate aother, and yet is not to be cured by the same means) let them carefully pursue Rules, drink orderly, and keep within the compass of a sober Dyet. Rules consist first in Purging, either by Vomit, or Stools, of which more in the larger Treatise on this Subject, it being impossible to apt Medicines
to every ones Necessities, though (in general) the Nauseous may help their Stomachs by Hiera Picra, in Pills, from half a Drachm to a Drachm, or take it in its Species, with Syrup of Wormwood, and strengthen their Stomach afterward with Zedoary, Galinga, China-Ginger, sweet Cala∣mus Roots candied, and the like. The costive may do well to take Diacassia cum Manna an ounce, Cremor Tartar a scruple, made into a Bolus the night before, or some of the lenitive Ele∣ctuaries with a little Hiera Picra, which by morning may relax the bel∣ly. 2. Let the Patient drink the Water early, on an empty Stomach, and walk, jump, ride, swing the Arms, shoot at Butts, or exercise gently after, also a little before; the better to relax the Passages, and excite na∣tural Heat: weak Persons may drink them in their bed, some what warm, but never too much at once, least dri∣ving obstructive Matter into the Uri∣ters, the Waters find not a current flux; or (the Stomach being over∣charg'd)
the Patient be forced to vo∣mit: not that a Vomit the first or se∣cond day may be inconvenient, though the Custom of it may effeminate the Stomach, and divert the Course more natural and intended. Hence I dis∣allow drinking in the afternoon, unless a Cup or two, four or five hours after Dinner, that the Chylus diluted may be the better distributed; but then I am against such as would sleep upon it, for that (as some well observe) the Water lying longer in the Sto∣mach, than at other times, and gather∣ing Heat, it sends up Vapours apt to oppress the Brain. 3. After the Wa∣ter begins to come off kindly, the Pa∣tient may drink thin Veal or Mutton Broth altered with Asparagus, Fenel, Parsley roots and the like, with Tops of young Wheat, Succory, Chervil, and seasonable Herbs, the better to warm the Stomach and open the pas∣sages. 4. Dine not till the Water be come off: A little White or Rhenish Wine (in a glass or two of the Wa∣ter) furthers that; sometimes a Pipe
of Tobacco, also Elecampane or An∣gelica Roots candied, Orange Pills, Tablets of Aromaticum Rosaum, and the like, mentioned under the first head (strengthening the Stomach) help concoction, then which nothing can bring off the waters sooner. 5. As one ascends by degrees to his Dose, (which is impossible to assign positive∣ly to any, for that the Water works not alike with All) so let him descend gradually; and if he will not admit of other Physick, let him, at least, take a Glister in conclusion, that (what the waters have thrown into the Bowels) it may cleanse and relieve; Else af∣ter evacuations, (sometimes Tor∣ments) may ensue very prejudicial: indeed Glisters (and those of the Spaw Water) may (in case of Co∣stiveness, or obstinate obstructions) be of excellent use through the whole course. 6. Feed on meats easie of Disgestion, such as may rather satis∣fie than whet the Appetite; The Bel∣ly's cheaply fed: especially avoid the crude Fruits of the Season, viz. Cher∣ries,
Cucumbers, Millons, Pease, Pea∣ches, or what may raise the least sati∣ety; the fertile Parent of divers com∣plicate inexplicable Diseases. 7. Spend the vacant time in gentle exercise, as before is specified, also in Mirth, and good Company, that together with the Body, the mind may be relieved. 8. Get convenient sleep in the nights, rarely in the day, unless the Patient be very weak, and that sleep may be taken with Advice; and in case you sweat kindly in the night, check not favourable Dews; although such I am against, in the Act of Drinking; for that it spends much of that mat∣ter which is more natural to come away by Urine, so, infeebling the Spi∣rits, it much indisposeth the Patient. 9. Less then fourteen or twenty days (a respect being ever had to the habit of the Patient, and his strength) can∣not well serve to run the Course in: In the strict observance whereof, some times Headach, Maziness, and the like (by reason of vapours) affect the Patient. In others the pains of
the Hemorrhoids prove offensive: And the Waters get off difficultly with others. All which may thus probably be remedied. First, the Patient (having been seasonably purg'd) may take a Tab∣let of Sugar of Roses, preserv'd Quin∣ces, or the like, mentioned in the first Head under the Rules to be observ'd, which, gratifying the Brain, repells the grosness of the vapours. Secondly, the Hemorrhoids may be prevented by a Glister (in a little quantity the better to retain it) of common Oyl, or Oyl of Violets and Butter, injected a convenient space be∣fore the Patient drinks the Water; or make an Oyntment of Oyl of Vio∣lets, Mucillage of Psylly seeds; and a little Wax, wherewith (as also with Oyl of Eggs, well beaten with the yolk of an Egg) the Part may be well anoynted. Thirdly, as to the difficult coming off of the Water, sharp Glysters may be excellent, yet in respect there is some doubt of those as not sufficient∣ly
reaching the Parts most burthened, Caesar Claudinus his Bolus Sylvius, his Electuarium Hydragogum, a neat com∣pounded Medicine, or the deobstru∣ctive Powder mentioned in the first Treatise, pag. 27. may do well in a draught of white Wine early in the morning. Nay the same Powder ta∣ken (sometimes from a Drachm to a Drachm and a half with the water) may be a ready means to bring it off, or to prepare the Body at first, as hath been long experienced: Though if the Body still proves obstinate, its better to desist, then force Nature to what she will not readily yield to. And yet I have found, nor are others without the same Notion, that where these, or the like waters come not off readily, they often spend them∣selves (even some months after) in beneficial sweats, or large salivations, nay (not seldom) in great quantities of Urine; that it hath amazed some, where the treasures of these Waters should be so long deposited without further prejudice, which (as obser∣vations
very important) I could not but insert, that where the Waters are slow, hopes may not be cold. Some complain of sharpness of Urine, after drinking the Waters, though Others are certainly cur'd (even of this complaint) by their orderly govern∣ment herein; to remedy which, E∣mulsions of the greater cold Seeds, white Poppy Seed, and Almonds sweeten'd with Sugar of Pearl, Sy∣rup or Sugar of Althea, may con∣tribute much: though I have long experienc'd, that a draught of Flo∣rid Wine well defecated hath not had less happy effects on this com∣plaint, than it hath found in the Dysury, or Strangurie, proceeding from cold Indistempers fomented by refrigerating accidents; Of which, and the other Heads I might say more, the Field being spatious, but so these Rules (with the rational de∣ductions that may favourably be gathered thence) may be well ob∣served, I see not why brevity to
the Reader as well as to my self may not be an advantage. Fare∣well. CAstalios Latices decantavere Poetae, At Lathamensis tutior haustus Aquae. Mens vatum Lymphata furit, corpus{que} tabescit▪ Ast hinc mens sano Corpore sana viget. Printed in the Year 1672.
