B4884G 99828941 33374
A BRIEF DISCOVERY of the chief CAUSES, SIGNS, and EFFECTS, Of that most Reigning Disease, the SCURVY: Together with the CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, & EFFECTS, Of several other dangerous Diseases most usually afflicting Mankind. Whereunto is added, A short Account of that incomparable, and most highly approved MEDICINE CALLED Bromfield's Pill. Being the only Remedy this Age hath produced against the SCURVY, and most other Curable Distempers. Formerly prepared and set forth for the Publick Benefit, By M. BROMFIELD; And now wholly assigned by him to Mr. JOSEPH STENT. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1694.
The chief Causes, Symptoms, and Effects of the Scurvy. THIS Disease doth chiefly proceed from Melancholy bred by distem∣pers of the Stomach or Spleen; which being crude, stays in the pas∣sages of the Arteries and Veins, and thereby doth excite grievous Fermentation or Workings, from whence are sent Vapors which afflict the heart and brain, &c. from all which is caused malignant and contagious putrefaction of Melancholy; and thence proceed these Symp∣toms, viz. Giddiness in the head, sudden flushings, heat and redness in the face and body, putrefaction and stinking of the mouth and gums, Tooth-ach, stinking breath, blackness and looseness of the teeth, want of digestion, much wind, and unsavoury belchings: and by thick vapon arising from the Hypocondria to the midriff, are occasioned obstructions of respiration, or shortness of Breath, and straitness of the Breast, &c. The body is dull and heavy, and in the legs are spots, sometimes red, purple, black, or blue: There are also violent pains in the head, shoulders, arms, fingers, belly, thighs, knees, legs, ancles, feet and toes: Whence some who have had the Pox, (though cured) do fear the return of their old malady. There are many thousands have this Distemper, that are per∣swaded they have the Gout; because sometimes it hath the very signs of the Gout: which also is the cause why the Scurvy (which by mistake is judged the Gout) is so seldom cured. For those Medicaments pertinent in the Gout are not the very same in the Scurvy, and consequently cannot cure it. Other signs of the Scurvy are bad sleep, and frightful dreams, a feverish heat and sweats towards the morning. Some have risings on their body, as if stung with Bees or Wasps, &c. others have dolors in their sides, imi∣tating those of the Spleen. And in short, it doth appear to a judicious eye, with and in the shape of most Diseases; as hath been sufficiently ap∣parent, not onely to my self, but also to several other experienced Physiti∣ans, who have traced this Disease, and made exact inspection into its variable dresses, for many years together. And it is also observed, that it is propagated and spread abroad in these parts of the world, more than any other Distemper whatsoever; and by its sundry shapes hath seduced many in their judgment of the Disease. For in some it passeth for a Con∣sumption, in others for a Dropsie, &c. and Medicines are given accordingly, but alas to little purpose, and all for want of a true knowledge of the original of the Disease it self. And here observe a great truth, viz. that there are very few afflicted with any Distemper of long continuance, who have not joyned with it a Scorbutick taint; which unless it be considered, and some powerful Antisoorbutick Medicaments given, the Patient is very rarely, if ever cured. Now the conclusion of all (if the Scurvy be not timely remedied, and
that it grow predominant) is sometimes Swoonings, Apoplexies, Dropsies, great decay of the Body, Consumptions, and very often Death it self. Note, That in some, the Scurvy is hereditary; and that there are some few causes thereof, besides those here set down: but these being usually the chief, the other are omitted. The Causes, Signs, and Effects of the VIRGIN or MAIDEN Disease, called the GREEN-SICKNESS. THE main cause of this Disease is from obstructions or stoppage; and the cause of such obstructions, &c. are evil, thick and clammy humours which choak and stop the passage in the Vessels, and spoil the making and passage of the Blood, &c. and these proceed from bad Diet; as eating of raw Wheat, Oatmeal, much Salt, Ashes, Clay, Chalk, &c. drinking of much Vingar, or much cold Water; from too much or too little Sleep, eat∣ing much raw Fruit, sitting too long at Sewing work, Melancholy, violent Exercise, great Heats or Colds, &c. The signs of this Disease, are a pale and greenish colour in the Face, the Face and Eye-lids swelled, especially after Sleep; the Heart beats and fainteth, the Stomach swell'd or pained; they loath Meat, have a tickling cough, and their Breath short; they sometimes Vomit; they have thirst, Head-ach, and are often Melancholy; they are swell'd about their Ancles and Feet, and care not much to stir, especially up Stairs or an Hill. The continuance of this Disease brings long Fevers, Barrenness, great watery Swellings, and the Dropsie: Some have a Schirrus or Tumour, and wasting in their Liver; others by oppression of the Heart die suddenly, and many fall into Consumptions, which end in the Grave. Note, That great caution ought to be used in Bleeding any Maid in the Arm, before she have had her monthly Visits; but if an urgent occasion call for Blood-letting, then rather breathe a Vein in the Ancle. By fol∣lowing this advice, you shall most certainly prevent the Death of some, and many Diseases in others; but more especially that most dreadful Disease of Barrenness. And against this very Disease, viz. the Green-sickness; and also to procure the monthly Visits in such Women in whom they are wanting, there are but few Medicines comparable to these PILLS, as has been often proved, when no other means or Medicines could prevail. I shall here give some account concerning WORMS. OF these Creatures are several sorts; but the most usual are shaped round and long: these are bred in the Guts, yet sometimes get in∣to the Stomach. The second are short, and very small, like threds; and commonly lie in the right Gut, and in the end of the Fundament, where∣in is almost continual itching; which Worms also provoke the Patient very
often to stool. The third sort are long and broad, of an incredible length, but very rarely seen. Worms are chiefly caused from raw, gross, flegmatick matter; and there∣fore Youth and such as eat much Fruit, are seldom free from them: Also all great Eaters are very subject to them; especially those who eat Meats that easily putrifie in the Stomach, and more at once than Nature can well digest; whence follow Crudities, and thence Worms; the signs of which are ma∣ny. Some have unsavory belchings and a stinking Breath, wasting of the Gums, heaviness, fainting, great thirst, vomiting, cold sweats, and often a Fever; a short Cough, unquiet Sleep, intolerable gnawing pains in the Stomach and Belly, loss of Appetite, weakness and consumption of the whole Body. Many times the Patient hath an insatiable Appetite, caused by flat Worms, which devour the Food that is eaten. There are a few signs more of Worms, but these being the most common, I shall say no more of the rest at present; only thus much shall add, that if Worms be voided a∣live, without other excrement, in the beginning of a Disease, 'tis dangerous, and signifies great Crudities; and if voided dead, signifies much putre∣faction that has killed them, which probably, shortly after kills the Patient. In short, 'tis the opinion of our Age, grounded upon experimental proofs, that Worms and their effects, have conducted more People to their Graves, than any one Distemper whatsoever. And therefore you that suspect them in your selves, make much of these PILLS, as a choice remedy to pre∣vent a Worm-eaten Carcase: and take them ere too late; by which doing you may prolong your days in case and health, and be obliged to thank your Adviser. The Causes, Symptoms, and Effects of DROPSIES. THE Dropsie Ascites, is from abundance of Water heaped up between the Peritonaeum, or inner-coat of the Belly, and Bowels; which in∣fecting the Mouth of the Stomach, doth bring great thirst, and often a Fe∣ver. Sometimes it begins in the Feet, and swells upward to the Legs, Thighs and Cods: but at the same time the upper parts of the Body usually consume. The cause of this Dropsie may be from a cold Distemper of the Liver, which cannot make perfect Blood, but Flegm, Wind, and Water. Sometimes a Dropsie may proceed from a Fever, hot Meats, and too plenti∣ful drinking of Wine; whence the Liver, Spleen, and kidneys, may lose part of their native heat, and consequently their ability to attrack the Water, and eject it by the Ʋreters. The same may be caused from the natural Flux in Women flowing too plentifully, or from retention of the same: And drinking much cold Water may diminish and disperse the native heat, and by that means make way for a Dropsie. The Dropsie Tympanites, is from wind shut up in the cavity of the Ab∣domen
or Belly, and sometimes in the Guts. This wind is bred from crude thick flegmatick, or Melancholy humors, which by heat having motion, and made thin, become gross windy Vapors. This Dropsie is never of wind alone, but always mixt with Water. But the greatest part of this Distemp∣per proceeding from wind, it is then called a Tympany. The Dropsie Anasarca is, without controversie, bred from a cold Distem∣per of the Liver, which hinders its concoction; from whence, instead of good Blood, it disperseth flegmatick humors, and causeth the whole Body to swell. A Dropsie may be also caused from all tumors or obstructions of the Liver, much bleeding, great evacuation by Stool, Sweat, &c. Note, All Dropsies are dangerous, and hardly cured. Yet the Dropsie Anasarca, which is occasioned by flegm spread over the whole Body, is easiest cured of the three; but Ascites and Tympanites, with much more dif∣ficulty. Notwithstanding, I here promise that my Pills do very rarely fail to give help in the most dangerous Dropsie; provided the Disease be within the Power of Physick to remedy. Note, That all the Symptoms afore-mentioned, are seldom in every one that have these Diseases at one and the same time (except those in Dropsies) but most are; and some have more, and some fewer of them. There remains now something more to be said of those excellent Pills afore-named; of which briefly thus. Two of the larger Boxes of them, price but six Shillings, are usually enough for perfect Cure of either of the aforesaid Diseases, except the Dis∣ease be of very long continuance; and then the Person doth sometimes take a small quantity more, to perfect the Cure. These Pills are also of admirable use for such as have the POX, Gonor∣rhaea, or Running of the Reins; and for such as formerly have had either of those Diseases, and suspect an ill Cure, or dread a relapse: and for such they are of good use, taken in the Spring, or Autumn, to carry off any re∣liques of the Malady that may be suspected to remain. They are likewise one of the most sure and speedy Medicines in the World against the Green-sickness, and for such young Women as want their month∣ly Visits. And (as I hinted before) have recovered many, who have been brought even to the Grave with these Distempers. They are also of good use against Fits of the Mother, as likewise against foulness, and other Distempers of the Womb, taking away the causes of Barrenness. They free the Body from lumpish Melancholy humours, and revive droop¦ing Spirits even to a wonder, cure the Jaundies, and are a good Medicine against heat and sharpness of Urine
I shall add, That these Pills taken sometimes to prevent Diseases, or more closely followed to cure, as need shall require, are a choice remedy for all Families, especially those who inhabit near the Seas, such (much more than others) being liable to Obstructions, Agues, the Scurvy, and many other Distempers. They are also a precious Medicine for Mariners, and such as use the seas, to whom the Scurvy, and many other Diseases, are very incident; partly from bad Airs, Sea Fogs, sudden Heats and Colds, much Salt Diet; and sometimes from excessive drinking of Foreign and unfrequented Liquors, &c. and they are the more commodious for such to take to Sea with them, because in the time of taking them, none is confined to keep in, but every one may walk abroad at pleasure (except the weather be ex∣tream sharp, or the body very tender) for indeed they are so gentle, that they are safely taken by all Persons, from three Years Old, to the greatest Age; and at all times of the Year, even in the coldest or hottest Seasons; being so congruous to all Constitutions, as gently to wait Nature in her di∣ctates; as is daily manifested by their sundry and facile Operations: for in some they gently move sweat, in others much Urine, and in others they operate effectually by Stool: and in some again, they work by sweat, Urine, and Stool. So that which way soever Nature is inclined to acquit her self, that very way they are ready to assist her. Many more are the Vertues might truly be ascribed to this Medicine; but I shall only add, that it being taken some few times at Spring and Au∣tumn, doth fortifie the Body against the assaults of most Diseases; and it is also found, by daily Experience, to free the Body from malignant humours, and to resist these Disease. viz. the SCƲRVY, the violent Head∣ach, Palsie, Falling-sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy, or sleepy Disease, vertigo, Dizziness, Frenzy, Madness, Catarrbs, or Defluctions, Asthma, or Shortness of breath, obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Mesentery, Agues, Quotidian, Iertian, or Quartan, Foulness and Distempers of the Womb, Pain, and foul∣ness of the Stomach, putrefaction of Humors, Kings-Evil, Leprosie, Mange, Scurf, Running Pain, Stitches, Convulsions, Gout, Sciatica, Cholicks, Stone, Loosness, Fluxes, Excoriation of the Intestines, or Griping in the Guts, Sur∣feits, loss of Appetite, Vomiting, &c. purges gross Tartarous humours from the Body, thereby preventing the Gout, also sweetning and purifying the whole Mass of Blood, &c. And know that it doth not only prevent these Diseases, but doth also cure the most of them: And, in a word, is a significant and most Noble Medicine against most curable Distempers. I shall also add, that these Pills do wonderfully remedy a Stinking∣breath, if the cause be not in the Teeth. They are likewise a singular good remedy against those Painful, Watery Flegmatick, or Cholerick Vomi∣tings
incident to the Good-fellow, after drinking much, and sitting up late at night. Also the Pills being taken, to the number of Three, Four, or Five, as the body is able, the next morning after hard drinking (and the person to lie in bed two or three hours after taking them, or until they work) do prevent Surfeits, Fevers, Gouts, Palsies, Dropsies, &c. which are often the effects of too much Wine, or strong Liquors. I shall now insert the Names and dwellings of some few (of the great number that I might) who have been restored by my Pills, out of many dangerous Distempers, after all other Medicines haue failed. Mr. Harding of Linnington near Warwick, being near Eighty years of age, had been a long time troubled with a dangerous Scurvy and Dropsie, being swelled as much as his skin could hold, in his feet, legs, thighs, belly, privities, breast, arms, hands and head, so that he was not able to stir out of his bed, was with six shillings worth of my Pills per∣fectly cured. Mr. Richard Hinton, Living near the Cock, towards the upper end of Leather-Lane, being brought into such a low and dangerous condition with Griping in the Guts, as there was very little hopes of life, was, however, by a Friend of his advised to my Pills, as the only Medicine to be hoped in for his Recovery; whereupon he freely took them, and was thereby in a very few days perfectly recovered. Mr. Joseph Seidon, Woodmonger on Mill-bank, Westminster, being ex∣ceedingly afflicted with a dangerous Dropsie, insomuch that the print of a singer would have continued a long time in his flesh; and in this condi∣tion (by a sad accident) was thrust into the body with a Sword, and bled much inwardly: his wounds alone were judged so dangerous, that most gave him over for a dead man; and yet some perswaded him after all to try what my Pills would do for him, which he willingly assented to: And their effects were indeed most wonderful, for they brought from him all the Coagulated, or hardned blood, which was judged before would very much hasten his death; they caused his wounds quickly to heal, and perfectly cured this Dropsie. Mary the Wife of Dennis Barnard of Butleigh in the County of Somer∣set, having been above three years troubled with a violent tormenting pain in the left side of her Stomach, but more especially after eating or drinking (when, it was her constant use to tumble her self on the ground, in hopes of ease thereby) had the advice of many Physitians, and took many Medicines they prescribed her; but found no ease at all: And be∣ing brought exceeding low, even to the gates of death, almost despair∣ing of life, was informed of the wonderful effects of my Pills; where upon a Box of them was bought for her, at Yeovil in the said County: she took of them as many and as oft as her body was able to bear, and
they brought from her by Stool many hundreds of living Worms, of strange shapes; some about an inch in length, some longer, and headed like Eels. At last they brought from her somewhat like a bag; which was judged to be that wherein the Worms had lain. The woman upon this recovered perfect health, look't fresh and well, and became as able to fol∣low her business as in all her life; she being at that time Fifty years of Age. Mrs. Griset, of Rockshal near Warwick having been a long time sore∣ly afflicted with an Ague, was thereby brought into a very weak condi∣tion; and withal being much troubled with the Scurvy, had spots of seve∣ral colours on her legs, and such violent pains in her joynts, that she was hardly able to go: This Gentlewoman was perfectly cured with Fifteen shillings worth of my Pills, and in a short time became one of the hear∣tiest women in that Town. Matthew Griset of Rockshal above named, being very far gone with the Scurvy, and full of blew spots, and knotted in his joynts, had many great breakings out on his body; all which with nine shillings worth of my Pills, were perfectly cured. Mr. Samuel Hookey, of Thrupe near Christ-Church in Hampshire, being for a long time exceeding sick and weak, and judged by all to be far gone in a Consumption, and being given over by most Physitians for a dead man, was, to the great wonder of all that knew him, perfectly cured with my Pills. Mr. John Hall of Stowmarket in Suffolk, being extreamly afflicted with the Scurvy and Gout, was cured with my Pills. Edward Goodall of Stowmarket, was also cured by my Pills, of the Gout, Scurvy, and several other Indispositions. Mr. Robert Taylor of Hadleigh in Suffolk, being much troubled with the Scurvy, and having great pains in his bones, was perfectly cured with my Pills. The Wife of John Roper of Southover, in the Parish of Tolpidele in Dorsetshire, was exceedingly troubled for the space of eight years with the Scurvy and Dropsie, her legs being full of purple, red and yellow spots, and so swelled, that they were ready to burst; and she was often so full of pain in them, that she could not go, but upon her hands and knees; she was lifted into, and out of her bed: and after the trial of all likely means that could be heard of for her Cure proved successess, she had perfect help by the use of my Pill, which made her so well, that she could travel on Foot nine or ten miles in one day, being then Fifty years of age. Mr. John Edmonds of Arundel in Sussex, being extreamly afflicted with the Scurvy, insomuch that himself and others concluded it would in a short time end his days, was to the great admiration of all his acquaintance, perfectly cured by my Pills, as in his Letter to me he doth fully and thank∣fully acknowledge. Mr. Pearson of the Bank, within two miles of Sheffield in York-shire, was exceedingly swelled with the Dropsie, and his breath so short, that he judg∣ed
he had not long to live: And being in this sad condition sent for a Box of my Pills, with which he cured not only himself, but also two of his neighbours, who at that time were so desperately ill, that their Physi∣tians gave them both over for dead men: And in the same Parish one of my Pills perfectly cured a Child of Convulsion-fits. Mr. John Johnson, servant to Mr. Thomas Forth, Brewer in St. Giles's in the Fields, London, being so far gone in a most dangerous Dropsie, that he appear∣ed to all that beheld him absolutely past Cure, and not likely to live three days; was, to the great admiration of all that knew him, perfectly cured with my Pills. And of this great Cure any may be satisfied at the house of the said Mr. Forth, as also by most of the Inhabitants thereabout. Mr. Henry Towgood, an Officer of the Excise, resident at the Bell in Shep∣ton-mallet in Somersetshire, being exceedingly afflicted with the Scurvy, and so much swelled with the Dropsie, that he could not lift his hands to his head, his teeth were loose, his breath short, stomach lost, his body exceeding weak, and he almost despairing of help, was in a short time perfectly cured with my Pills; and his Cure in those parts is judged most wonderful. Thomasin Spurwel, Servant to Jonathan Spark Esq; at the Friery in Ply∣mouth, having for divers years been afflicted with violent tormenting pains in her Stomach, and several other Indispositions proceeding from some Maiden obstructions, whereby she was brought very weak; was, after all other means had failed, perfectly cured with my Pills. In March 1684. Mr. William Forman, living in Gardners Ally near Clarken∣wel-green, was in that dangerous condition, that he lay Bed-rid 20 Weeks, or upward, and could not turn in his Bed, without two Persons to help him: He was so far gone with a desperate Scurvy, and Dropsie, that he had quite lost the use of his Limbs; which were restored, and he perfectly cured by my Pills. He will also give further satisfaction to any that desire it. Mr. Doules of Milton, four miles from Marlborow in Wiltshire, being even at the gates of Death, not able to move about his Chamber, with a most dangerous Scurvy and Dropsie, was, to the admiration of the whole Country, perfectly cured with my Pills. John Lawrence, being grievously afflicted with the Dropsie and Scurvy for several Months, my Legs swelled to admiration, having above fifty holes in them; and being given over by several Physicians as past cure, was advised by an acquaintance of mine, who had been in the like condition, to take Bromfield's Pills, saying they were the safest & only Remedy for my Distemper that could be, and that by the use of those Pills he himself had obtained a perfect Cure: Whereupon I being willing to try any thing, which might contribute to my recovery, I presently applyed my self to the taking of them, which wrought so effectually with me, that with less than four half Boxes, in six weeks time, I received a perfect Cure, and was able to perform as good a days work as ever I did in all my life, and at this time am, blessed be God, in good health and
state of Body, really believing, that if it had not been for those Pills, I should undoubtedly have lost my life. All this I do hereby affirm to be true, which I am ready to satisfie any person in, that shall enquire of me. To which I freely set my hand, this 23d day of December 1686. John Lawrence. Mr. Rowland the Minister of Bishopston, near Marlborow in Wilt-shire, being brought even to the grave with a most dangerous Scurvy and Dropsie, received a most wonderful Care with my Pills. John White, Servant to Mr. Marshall of St. Albans, was exceedingly af∣flicted with the Yellow and Black Jaundies, also had the Scurvy in a very high degree, and an exceeding dangerous Dropsie, so that all gave him over for a dead man, yet was perfectly cured with my Pills. Mr. Nicholas Gouge, of Tisbury near Hendon in Wilt-shire, being 65 years of age, was exceedingly afflicted with a swelling and watery humor in his Legs, which run much, he lay song under the Chyrurgions hands, but finding no good from them, applied himself to my Pills, which perfectly cured him, so that he was as able to follow business, as he had been in 20 years before, as was acknowledged under his own hand on the 11th. of Novemb. 1677. James Swanton Esq; living in Kelberry, in the County of Kildare in the Kingdom of Ireland, being extreamly afflicted with the Scurvy and Dropsie, received a most wonderful Cure with my Pills. Mr. William Leeds, living at the Wheat-sheaves and Pidgeons in Portsmouth, being exceedingly afflicted with a dangerous Scurvy and Dropsie, insomuch that he was given over by Physitians for a dead man, all hopes of his Reco∣very being past, and not being able to turn him in his bed without help, was by the blessing of God perfectly cured with less than Six shillings worth of my Pills; and this I had notice of by request of the said Mr. Leeds, in a Letter dated the 10. of July, 1677. Katharine Green, Widow of Waterford, within two miles of Hartford; was extreamly troubled with very sick vomiting Fits, for the space of three years, and sometimes with violent pains in her side ready to swoon away; she sought for help to several eminent Physitians, far and near, but could find none, insomuch that she was pined away even to a Sceleton, and indeed did despair of Life; but being advised to try my Pills as the likeliest Medicine for her cure, she accordingly did take them, and with such success, through the mercy of God to her, that with less than a three Shilling Box of them, She was perfectly Cured, to the great admiration of all that knew her. And this Relation is printed upon her own request, which she is ready to testify. Goodman Stratom, living at Shream near Highworth, in the County of Wilts; being exceeding sick and lame, and having spent much time and Money in seeking after help, but to no purpose, and his Cure being almost dispaired of, he was however, advised to take my Pills as the only reme∣dy proper against his Maladies, if any Cure might be hoped for which
he accordingly did, and by his use of little above three shillings worth of them, he received a perfect Cure, and in their operation or working with him at several times, he voided incredible quantities of strangely shaped Worms exceeding large and long, to the great admiration of the beholders; and this Cure is accounted so wonderful, that the like hath not been heard of in those parts. An Abstract of a Letter from Thomas Baker, of Darking in Surry. SIR, It hath pleased God, by the use of your Pills, two marvelous great Cures have been wrought in our Town: The one was upon Thomas La∣ker, aged seventy four years, who was extreamly afflicted for the space of thir∣ty years, with great numbers of Worms in his Fundament, so that it is almost incredible to say what vast numbers came from him, and he having been with many Physicians for help, could get none, but was given over as incurable; however, some that had experienced your Pills, advised him to try them, which accordingly he did, and was perfectly cured with an eighteen penny Box of them. The other Cure was on Henry Dibble, also of Darking, aged above sixty years, who was so far overrun with a violent Scuroy, that his Physicians gave him over as past all hopes of Recovery, who, notwithstanding, was perfectly cured with taking one eighteen penny Box of your Pills. These Cures were performed, the first in the Year 1680. and the latter in the Year 1681. but I thought not fit to give you any account of them, until they had continued some considerable time free from these Distempers, that we might be assured their Cures were per∣fect and confirmed, which now we sufficiently are, without the least sign of a Re∣lapse. These are real truths, as can be testified by many in our Town, as also by Darking 22d of January 1683/4. Your Loving Friend Thomas Baker. A Letter from Mr. Bradshall, Minister of Lime in Cheshire. Mr. Bromfield, THESE parts of Cheshire are bound to praise God and pray for you, for those excellent Pills sent by you amongst them, whereof eighteen perfectly cured one Peter Hunt a Shoe-maker of Lime, in the County of Chester, in two or three days time, to the great admiration of his Neighbours. Both his hands were very much swelled with great pain, and his Body in an high Feaver; and much infected with the Yellow Jaundies. The first Dose eased his hands and whole body; the second took down the swelling, and the third put him into a good state of Body, and so dried the superated matter in his hands, that it pilled off in a very short time: And he hath lived since in good health for two or three Years, without taking any other Physick. I might inform you of many o∣ther ther wonderful Cures performed by your Pills with God's blessing, on multi∣tudes of Gentlemen, Gentlewomen, and persons of inferiour rank, who have been speedily cured by them of a putrid Feaver, which hath much infected these parts since so rare a Medicine for it was by you sen us. So many also have been cured
by them of Colds, and Wormes, and several other Distempers, too many to be par∣ticularly mentioned, that I conceive your Pills cannot be sufficiently commended by SIR, Your thankful Friend and Servant, T. Bradshal. An abstract of a Letter from Mr. Thomas Pitt, Chirurgeon in Lime, in the County of Dorset. SIR, I hold my self obliged to give you an account of the great benefit, I, in my private practice, as well as the Countrey round, have received by the worth and excellency of your Pills, I have found them effectual against inveterate Scurvies, Calenture, Griping in the Guts, and Serophulous Tumors, one Dose hath cured Surfeits to admiration, they have cured pains in the head, old aches in the Limbs, and many other distempers. More particularly three persons, in and near this Town, one of a Dropsie and Scur∣vy, who had been diseased eight years, another was worn away (as was judged by a consumption) to a Sceleton, who by taking two half Boxes was perfectly cured, the third by taking one Box was perfectly cured of the Yellow Jaundies. I could also give you an account of a great many more Cures wrought by your Pills, but shall add no more at this time but that I am, Lime, June 22. 1675. SIR, Your humble Servant at Command, Thomas Pitt. An abstract of a Letter from Richard Carter Distiller at Chichester. Doctor, THese are to acquaint thee with a remarkable Cure that hath been lately per∣formed with thy Pills, upon the Daughter of Edmund Stevens of the Parish of Appledrum, near this City; she hath been extreamly afflicted with tormenting pains in her Stomach and Bowels, and many times in all her Limbs, with great weakness in all parts of her Body, seeming to be in a Consumptive condition, very much loathing her meat, not being in a capacity to eat with her Father and Mother at their Table in several years; much hath been spent upon Physicians and in Physick for her Cure, but all in vain; and she continuing in this sad condition from seven years old, to the age of seventeen years, caused her Relations to despair of ever getting help for her, yet notwithstanding all seem∣ing unlikeliness of her recovery, she is perfectly cured with taking thy Pills, and hath continued in good health ever since last Spring: and this will be Testified to any that shall enquire, by her Father and Mother, (who are Credible Persons) and who also desired me to give thee this account: I might also enform thee of se∣veral others, but having no order for it by those Cured, shall say no more at present but rest. Chichester, the 19th of the 11th Month, 1677. Thy Friend Rich. Carter.
Directions for taking of my PILLS, are as followeth. I. PErsons of a middle strength are to begin with taking three or four Pills at Bed time, about three hours after a very light Supper (but no Supper is better.) If three or four work not sufficiently, add one every night, until you take the Dose that best agrees with your Body: take them two or three nights one after another (or as strength will allow) then forbear them a night, (or two nights if the Patient be not strong) then take them again as before, &c. II. Those whose Bodies are weak, or that a little Physick will work with, may begin with two Pills, taken after their first sleep, or very early in the morning fasting, and lie in bed an hour, (or two, or three hours) after them if conveniently they can. III. Note, If the Pills taken at bed-time usually work much in the night, it will in such case be best to take them very early in the morning, and to lie in bed 2 or 3 hours after taking them; or 2 or 3 Pills more or less, may be taken at night, and as many in the morning, as strength will allow. IV. Women with Child, and those that give such, should begin with taking but one or two Pills at most; and afterwards may take more, as they find convenient. V. To children about three or four years old, give half or three quarters of a Pill, to elder children give a Pill, 2 or 3, according to their age and strength: And by the way  there is no better Remedy in the world against Worms. VI. If the Patientbe thirsty; in time of the Pills working, he may drink a draught or two of Pet drink, thin Broth, or such Liquors as he best likes, except in Dropsies, in which, 'tis best to drink the Liquor made as follow∣eth (if coveniently to be had.) Take of the tops of Green-broom six handfuls, of Fumitary as much, Garden Scurvy-grass, Common Wormwood, of each three handfuls, all can, Bark of Elder ten Ounces, Juniper-berries bruised, twelve Ounces, Anniseeds bruised, six ounces, Horse-raddish Roots three ounces; Liquorish four ounces: slice the Roots, put them into a thin Linnen or Hair Bag, and put them into five gallons of strong Ale: when it hath almost done working, then within a day or two after, the Patient should begin to drink thereof three draughts in a day: but if he drink no other Liquor it will be the better, and let him sometimes eat a little candied or Green-ginger, and still remember, besides the drink to take my Pills as before appointed. These Directions observed, the Pills sel∣dom fail to remedy any curable. Dropsie, as hath been often proved. And note, this Drink, with my Pills, is also of excellent use for such as find them∣selves very far gone with the Scurvy. VII. Such as care not to swallow Pills alone, may take them in a little of the pap of an Apple, stew'd Prunes, five or six spoonfuls of Beer, Ale, or Wine; or they may be bruised or cut small (which indeed is the best way
if they be very hard by long keeping and taken with Honey, Sugar the pap of an Apple, Beer, Ale, or Wine, &c. VIII. Against the Pox, Gonorrhaea, or Running of the Reins, let the Pills be taken in the largest Dose, yet not so, as much to weaken the Patient. IX. Note, My Pills sometimes give an easie Vomit or two; that is when the Dose is large, the Stomach foul, or Nature much inclined that way; which proves very well for the Patient: For they carry forth such Choletick, Flegmatick, and other noxious Excrements, as Nature could not well avacuate any other way, and by that means often compleat the Cure. And if in their working the Patient chance to be much stomach-sick (which seldom happens) then let him drink a glass of Sack or Whitewine; or if Wine be too costly, a draught of strong Ale warm'd; either of which usually gives speedy ease. And because I would have no mistake, pray observe, That those whose Distempers are of long continuance, cannot in reason expect perfect Cure with three or four times taking my Pills, such should therefore take them in a Dose as large. as they can conveniently bear, and continue them ten or fifteen days, or longer if need require; omitting them a day or two sometimes, as before directed, or as the Pati∣ent shall see cause. And that my Pills may fully answer every ones expectation, I do advise all per∣sons that shall swallow them (whole) and not find them opperate by Stool or o∣ther ways by Sweat, Ʋrine, &c. as may be expected from the number of Pills taken, that they would afterwards cut or bruise them pretty small, and so take them in the Pap of an Apple, Honey, or stew'd Prune, or drink them in half a dozen Spoonfuls of Ale, Beer, or what best like the Patient; which is a sure way to make them opperate to content; they being really not at all the worse (but only harder) though seven years old. And indeed it is also a piece of good Husbandry, (besides it's great advan∣tage in forwarding the Cure) to cut or bruise them; for four or five Pills so taken will be to all intents and purposes as significant as six or seven taken whole: also to drink a good draught or two in the forenoon of Posset-drink, thin broth, or Ale, will very much forward and quicken their operation. But withal you should note, That when not only my Pills, but any other pur∣ging Medicine hath been taken three or four days immediately one after another, there cannot be matter the third and fourth times to work on, as there was as there was at the first and second takings. And so is it also most true, that half so many Stools, when they have been taken three or four days as above mentioned, are as signifi∣cant to the cure of a Distemper, as so many more were at first taking. Now these things being but throwly considered, and my Directions rightly followed, I am very confident that every rational mans expectations (in the use of my Pills) will be fully answered: But for such as will not follow. Directions in taking them, it will be much better both for them and me, that they let my Pills quite alone. and so I heartily desire them to do.
My PILLS are disposed of in Tin-boxes sealed up with my Seal at Arms, being a Lion passant Guardant, the larger Box containing about Forty Pills (or within one or two more or less) is Three shillings; and the lesser Box of Nineteen or Twenty Pills is Eighteen pence. But because of Dangers, and extraordinary charge of Fraight by Sea, and great cost of Returns from many parts out of England: the larger Box of Pills in Scotland and Ireland is sold for three shillings six Pence; and the lesser Box for one shilling nine Pence, and not under: And are to be sold by Mr. Brabazon Aylener, Bookseller at the Three sidgeons against the Royal Ex∣change in Cornhil, and at the Royal cof∣fee-House in Exchange Alley. Mr. Charles Brome, Bookseller at the Gun near the west end of St. Pauls Church. Mr. Martin, at the Coffee-house in king∣street near Guildhall. Mr. John Rowse, Trunk-maker in Ratcliff Highway at the end of Old Gravel-lane. Mr. Burgess, Cheesmonger at the George at Shadwell Dock. Mr. Jeffery Woolston, at the Holly-Bush at Queen-Hithe. Mr. Horrod, Cheesmonger within Smith∣field Barrs. Mr. John Weld, Bookseller at the sign of the Crown betwixt the Temple Gates, in Fleetstreet. Mrs. Stanly, Semstress at her Shop without Moorgate. Mr. Avertey, at the Cake shop without Aldersgate. Mr. Francis Rakestraw, Tallow-chandler near the Gate in Tuttle street Westminster. Mr. Robert Collet, Tallow-chandler at the end of Newport-street, near Leicester fields Mr. Natha. Chandler, Cheesmonger against Drury-Lane end in St Giles's. Mr. Thomas Ʋmfrevile, Tin man against Cree-Church in Leadenhall Street. Mr. Butcher, Distiller at the Plow and Still against the George-Inn in Southwark. Mr. John Seckle, Tinman, at the Bird-Cage at Cock-Lane end against the Conduit on Snow hill. Mr. Bentley, Bookseller at the Post-house in Russel-street, Covent-Garden. Mr. Paget, Cheesmonger in S. James's Market. Mr. Lloyd's Coffee-House against the Star-Inn in the Strand near Charing Cross. Mr. Joseph Adams, Cheesmonger at the Fry∣ing-pan over against the Market-house in Clare Market. Mr. John Rogers, Haberdasher of Hats, at the Hat and Harrow against the Bull-Inn within Bishopsgate. Mr. Thomas Stent, Cheesmonger without the Barrs against Hoglane in Bishopsgate-street. Mr. King, Razor-maker at the Flying∣horse against St. Clements Church in the Strand. Mr. Israel Harrisen, Stationer under Lincolns∣Inn-Gate in Chancery-lane. Mr. Thomas Ingleton, Hosier over against Cripplegate-Church, Mr. Francis Parr, Oil man in middle-Row in Holborn. Mrs. Green, Semstress near Fauntain Stairs on Redrif Wall. Mr. Chapman, Bookseller at the Angel in the Pall Mall. Mr. John Taylor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard. Mrs. Mary Tonson, Stationer at Gray's-Inngate next Gray's Inn Lane. Mr. Robert Diment, at his Shop at Billingsgate, and at his Shop upon St. Mary∣hill. Mr. John Wilson, Sail-maker upon CopesKey at the Hermitage-Stairs. Mr. Robert Fage, Grocer at the Golden SugarLoaf in Piccadilly over against BurlingtonHouse. Mr. William Willis, Stationer at the Bible in Kings-street, Westminster. Mrs. Banbury, at her Shop in WestminsterHall, near the Common-Pleas.
Mr. Thomas Barras, Pastry-Cook next the Bull near the Barrs in White-Chappel. Mr. Samuel Bampton, Cheesemonger in Hun∣gerford-Market. Mr. Marshal, Bookseller at the Sign of the Bible in Newgate-street. Mr. Leicester, Tallow-chandler in Edmonton. Mr. Crosdeal, Chandler near Battle-Bridg in Tooly-street. Mr. Adam Levingston, Fruiterer at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. Mr. John Own, Cheesmonger at the Head in Drury-lane against the Play- william Vine, at his House over against the Rope-Yard in Woolwich. Mr. Robert Todd, Salesman at the Star in chiswell-street. Mr. Edmund Collet, at the Angel and three Crowns, a Cake Shop in Smook-Alley near Spittle-Fields. Mrs. Harding, Chandler over-against the Mount in White-Chappel. And are also to be sold (as heretofore) at my former Dwelling at the Blue Balls in Plow-yard in Fetter-lane, London, by Mr. Joseph Stent. ADVERTISEMENTS. FOR above 25 years past, that my Pills have been made publick, they have through the as∣sistance of God been attended with admirable success in caring most dangerous Diseases in∣cident to mankind, and thence hauing deservingly gained an high esteem and reputation, some wicked persons out of a design filthy lucre, have falsely pretended they have gotten a Receipt of them; who wandring through the Countries, have offered at under rates a sort of dangerous Counterseit Pills to sale: these are therefore to request all my correspondents (for sale of my Pills) that if they can discouer any such person or persons as about-mentioned, they will give me speedy notice thereof, that I may proceed against them according to Law, all such pretenders being ab∣solute Imposters or Cheats designing only to Couzen the Countrey. WHereas it hath of late been falsely given out by some Persons, that M. Bromfield the In∣ventor and Publisher of the abovementioned Pills  died and that one Mr. Joseph Stent sets forth Pills in his Name, without euer having had any order for  so doing. these are therefore to satisfie all Persons, that I the said M. Bromfield (blessed be God)  in good health at my House now in Tottenham-High-Cross in the County of Middlesex; and I do hereby further signifie to all Persons, that I the said M. Bromfield for divers good Reasons and Causes thereun∣to to me moving, have some Years since, set ouer and assigned my whole and sole Right and Inte∣rest of preparing, making; uending and selling my said Pills, to the said Mr. Joseph Stent, and to no other Person whatsoever: He the said Joseph Stent being the only person to whom I ever did or shall discover the Secret of preparing the said Pills, and who hath constantly assisted at the preparation of them at my former Dwelling-house in Plow-yard in Petter-lane afore∣said for the space of about fourteen Years together. Dated at my House in Barnet, my former Dwelling. March the 13th 1685/6 M. BROMFIELD. FINIS.
