B5969 12630204 64729
A Briefe RELATION Discovering Plainely the true Causes why the great Levell of FENNS In the severall Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntington, North∣hampton, and Lincolne Shires; BEING Three hundred and seven thousand Acres of Low-Lands, have been drowned, and made un∣fruitfull for many yeares past. AND As briefly how they may be drained, and pre∣served from Inundation in the times to come. Humbly presented to the Honourable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. By Andrewes Burrell, Gent. LONDON, Printed for Francis Constable. 1642.
TO THE HONOVRABLE House of COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT. GReat and Honourable workes ought to bee directed by great and Honourable Councells; And therefore to the intent this noble Enterprise may not be under∣valued (as it is by some) I humbly in∣forme this Honourable Court, that besides sundry at∣tempts made by divers Noble men, who desired to im∣prove the great levell of Fenns; the undertaking was so well esteemed by King JAMES, that Hee really intended to take it into His owne care; the diver∣sion
of His Royall intention is unknowne. After him the Late Earle of Bedford and his friends adventu∣red great summes of money to recover them; But be∣fore their workes were finished, they were circumvented and outed of all their intendments. The last underta∣king was attempted by the Kings Majesty that now is; but the greatest part of His money being mis-spent, and all his intended workes misled by Sir Cornelius Vermuden's mysticall designe, His now Majesty hath declined His undertaking also, so that it is like to returne to the now Earle of BEDFORD and his friends. This Noble Enterprise being thus misguided, lyeth now before your grave Wisdomes, expecting direction from this Honourable Assembly, and wanting a better friend to petition for them, (there being an Order made by the Honourable Committee for the Fens, the twenty five of February last, that all men whom it may concern may offer any other designe; In regard a perfect designe concerneth the preservation of many mens estates, which also may be ruined, impaired, or cast into eminent dan∣ger.) I am humbly bold to informe you, that unlesse this Honourable Court command the now intended works to be published to the severall Counties (as was once intended by the Honourable Committee) so that the Countries approbation, or exceptions may bee va∣lued (or at the least heard.) And that before the works beginne, equall compositions may bee made with all those whose Lands shall bee impaired, endangered, or
taken from them: many men may bee ruined in their just Estates. There are two Reasons that make me ear∣nest in this cause: The one is the former ill designing, and ill mannaging of the workes, wherein Wilfulnesse and Ignorance (in the Kings Name) over-ruled the Countries. The other concernes my selfe, first, in ta∣king a great part of my owne Land (and some of that which I Farme) from me, without satisfaction, com∣position, or leave to cut it; and which is much worse, by bringing all the rest of my Inheritance, and leas't Lands (which together are not lesse than three thousand Acres) into eminent danger of drowning, by cutting my old firme Banck, and exposing my Lands to bee defended from the common waters by a hollow coun∣terfeit Banck, made of so light a composition, that it will both burne and swim. And here I beseech you give mee leave to tell you, that for want of Iustice in ENGLAND, and Peace in IRELAND, my aged Mother; my selfe and foure Brethren, have within a few yeares lost nine hundred and sixty pounds per annum: which when time will give me leave, I hope to prove before this Honourable Parliament; which makes me the more earnestly implore your aide in this my great necessity. To conclude, if this Noble Enterprise by your Honourable paines, be well designed, and so prose∣cuted; The Improvement will not only returne a
sufficient satisfaction to the adventurers, but the Com∣mon-wealth will sweetly rellish the great Improvement which will follow. But because it is not safe to be over large in great promises, I will say no more; but GOD grant the Fenns may in due time be made VVinter grounds, not impairing any private mans estate. So Prayeth Your Honours humble Supplyant, Andrewes Burrell.
A BRIEFE RELATION Of the true Causes why the FENNS In Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Hunting∣ton, Northampton, and Lincolne Shires, have beene drowned. AND As briefly how they may be drained, and preserved from Inundation. BEfore I declare the Reasons why those Low Lands are subject to drowning; I conceive it is fit to discover to them that doe not know those Countries, in what condition the Fens were be∣fore they were drowned: How they are seated, and how they are drowned. Mr. Cambden in his Brittania, folio 449. referres his Readers to William of Malmesbury, who reporteth the Lordship of Thorney in his time to be so fruitfull and fragrant, that for delight it resembled Heaven it selfe.
That Lordship is indeed a large and rich piece of Land, consisting of eighteen thousand Acres, or there∣abouts, and pertaineth to the Earles of Bedford. But having lost the beauty lately mentioned (nay to be plaine) being quite lost, and perpetually drowned, save onely one Hillocke where the Abbey standeth, was the cause that induced the late Earle to undertake the drayning of the great Levell. In which service, by reason of my imployment under his Lordship in the yeare 1635. In deepning Wisbeach River, I discovered a stony bottome, upon which there was found lying at severall distances seven boates, which for many yeares had laine buried eight foot under the bottome of the River, as it was before the late Earles underta∣king. And it is very likely, that when Thorney flouri∣shed, Neene did run as deepe as that bottome. After this discovery, it was intended by the late Earle that the River Neene should have been enlarged and deepned from Wisbeach to Stanground (by the tract of Mourton Leame) as now it is from Wisbeach to Guyherne. And I am very confident that if Neene were made a hundred foot broad, and so deepe as it is in Wisbeach Towne, from Wisbeach to Stanground, Thor∣ney Fens in a few yeares would be as fruitfull and rich as ever they were in Malmesburies time, whose story is, That they represented a very Paradise, for that in pleasure and delight, it resembled Heaven it selfe, in the very Mari∣shes bearing trees, that for their straight tallnesse, and the same without knots, strive to touch the Stars: A Plaine is there as even as the sea, which with green grasse allureth the eye; so smooth and levell, that if any walk along the fields they shall finde nothing to stumble at; there is not the least parcell
of ground that lieth waste and void there. Here shall you finde the Earth rising some where for Apple trees: there shall you have a field set with Vines, which either creep upon the ground, or mount on high upon poles to support them: A mutuall strife there is betweene Nature and Husbandry, that what the one forgetteth, the other might supply and produce: What will be said of the faire and beautifull buil∣dings, &c. This great Levell of Low-Lands, whereof Thorney is a part, is almost compassed about with high Lands, and lyeth betwixt the high Lands and the Sea. The superficies thereof being generally as high as the su∣perficies of the Sea in ordinary Tides, commonly cal∣led Neape Tides; But foure or five foot lower than the superficies of the Sea, when the Sea is at the high∣est, which is in the Spring Tides, whereof some doe very much exceed others, being ruled by the windes: Such Tides doe happen twenty or thirty dayes in the course of a yeare; some yeares more than the most, and some yeares lesse than the least, as the stormy windes doe force the Spring Tides into the Bay, which is betwixt Burnham in Norfolk, and Winthorp in Lin∣colnshire; whereby it is apparant that the Rivers which are in the Fens cannot empty themselves into the Sea, but at such times as the Sea floods are returned out of the Rivers to the place from whence they came; By reason whereof the Fens are often drowned, two, three, or foure foot deepe, according as the floods are greater or lesse. Betwixt the Fens and the Sea there is much good Land that is improved and defended by substantiall Bankes made of Clay and Silt, which doe preserve
them from being drowned by the Sea on the one side, and the high land waters on the other: The common Fens being at the least five foot higher than some of those lands; so that the Sea commeth not neare the Fens by six miles, or thereabouts. The fresh water Rivers which doe passe through this Levell, are principally Owse and Neene: the rest are but branches that doe fall into Owse at their severall distances. The neerest way that any part of the River Owse doth run from the high land to the Sea, is thirty six miles, but the greatest part of it runneth fifty six miles, or thereabouts. The River Neene runneth through this Levell be∣fore it falleth into the Sea, twenty miles, or there∣abouts. So much for the scituation and condition of the Fens. The reasons why the Fens are drowned, are principally six. FIrst, because the superficies of the Fens lyeth low∣er than the superficies of the Sea, when the Spring Tides are at the highest. Secondly, because the high land floods must of ne∣cessity passe through that great Levell of low Lands, having very little descent to enforce a streame from the high Lands to the Sea, but at such times as the Sea floods by retiring themselves doe leave the Rivers empty, which many times is not above eight houres in twenty foure. A third reason is, the Rivers through which the high Land waters should passe, are not large enough to
convey them to the Sea, nor are they armed with suf∣ficient banks to keepe the Sea and Land floods from dilating themselves over the face of the whole Levell; and it is a hard question, whether the Sea or the Land floods are the most potent enemies to the Fenns; but this is most certaine, that when the Sea floods and the Land floods meet, as they often times doe, halfe way betwixt the high Lands and the Sea, in that very place like two powerfull enimies joyning in one, they doe over-run the Levell, and drowne it from one end unto the other. A fourth reason why the Fenns are drowned, is oc∣casioned by the Sea floods, the violence whereof ma∣keth so loud a noise at the first comming into the River Owse, that it is oft times heard by those that are two miles from it; and after the eager is past, for the space of foure houres there followeth a mighty flood streame that runneth into the Country neere forty miles; which waters returning more slowly, must of necessity have more time to empty themselves then was spent in receiving them; for those waters which the Sea forces into the Rivers, must all returne before the high Country waters can possibly be admitted to passe. The disadvantage is very plaine, the high Land waters comming from betwixt the hills are continu∣ally running into the Fens, and the Sea floods are con∣tinually interrupting and repelling them where they should passe out of the Fens into the Sea, and will not suffer them to run above foure houres in twelve: which is one chiefe cause why the Fens neare Ely are so often drowned. A fifth reason is the ill disposition of the Sea in those parts, which being troubled by stormy windes,
doe carry such abundance of Silt or Sand into the Rivers in the Sommer season, that for want of a fresh water streame to wash them back into the Sea, the Rivers are choked and lost; which Silt or Sands soon after the Spring Tides are past doe lie dry, and pre∣sently gaine a firmenesse, so that men and horses tra∣vell upon them; and in the beginning of Winter they doe much hinder the streame of the high land waters as they passe to the Sea, untill by many land floods they are removed and washed into the Sea from whence they came; but it is so long before that can be effected, in regard the high Land floods compared with the Sea floods, are very weake, that when it is done it is too late for the Country, being seldome wrought before the end of Winter: The dryer the Sommer is, the more the Rivers are filled and choked with Silt and Sand against Winter; and it is com∣monly seen, that after much drought there falleth much Raine, which oftentimes occasioneth the grea∣test Inundations. The sixt and last reason why the Fens are often drowned, is because there is no Land Eayes to re∣ceive the surplussage of the waters which proceed from Raine and Snow falling upon the high Lands adjacent to the Fens, and to carry them into those Rivers or Draines which are next unto them. Now I have briefly showne the true causes why and how the great Levell of Fens are drowned; I will particularly declare what works must be made to draine and preserve those low Lands from Inundation, so that the greatest part of them may be made Culturable grounds. TO remove the first and second causes of Inunda∣tion, there must be a descent gained from the high
Lands to the Sea, which is a work of a double conse∣quence, and indeed it is one of the greatest works which is to be effected. The waters in the Fens may be fitly compared to the beame of a paire of Skales when it hangeth Levell, which being raised at one end doth at the same instant settle as much at the other; Such a contrivement must be made of the fal that is to be gained betwixt the high Lands and the Sea; the one halfe must be gained by raising the waters next the high Lands by Banks of a convenient heigth, and by setling of the waters in that part of the Rivers that is next unto the Sea, which latter work must be wrougt by mending and enlarging of the old Rivers and Draines where they are crooked, and where they are too narrow, or too shallow, and by placing of Sluces to repell the Sea floods. To remove the third impediment, it is necessary that every River and Rivolet should be enlarged to such a breadth and depth as may convey the greatest Win∣ter floods the nearest way from the high Land to the Sea, and on either side of them to have a continued Bank able to keepe the high Land waters from sprea∣ding over the superficies of the Fens; the Rivers being so perfected, there must bee many Draines opened which are now lost, and some new made for the lead∣ing of the waters to the next adjacent River. There must be also many division Dikes which will lead the Raine waters into the neighbouring Draines. The particulars will in this place take up too much time, I will therefore leave them to the Designe it selfe. There must be a large Sluce placed upon the out∣fall of Owse that may be able to repell the Sea-floods, and keep up the high Land waters in dry Sommers;
of which kinde there is already one upon the River Neene, built by the late Earle of Bedford: at which time had Neene beene enlarged to a sufficient bredth and depth, from the Sluce to Peterborough, and the Banks continued and maintained on both sides at the same heigth that the Southside Banks were once made, having a Sasse placed at Stanground, as was in∣tended, to keep all Neene to Wisbeach, the petty draines and division-dikes being also made, That side of the Fenns will be perfectly drained; but as it is, there is but a part of that work perfected. The ma∣king of Sluces is very chargeable, and so difficult, that every Bank-maker doth not understand how to place them nor make them; but the advantage which they bring, being well built, cureth the fourth and fifth inconvenience, and indeed is very materiall to the perfect draining of the Fenns. The last work is a great work, and will cost much money: It is the making of so many Land Eayes as may receive the surplussage of the waters which doe fall upon the high Lands that are next the Fenns, and convey them to the next River, rivolet, or draine, so that they may not offend the neighbouring Fenns. Having acquainted you with the scituation and condi∣tion of the great Levell, and briefely declared how they may be preserved from Inundation, I am humbly bold to present my designe unto this Honourable Court, therein expressing every particular work, together with the totall charge and time when the works may be per∣fected. TO enlarge Wisbeach River from the Sluce to Gui∣hern, so that it may be twenty foot broader than
now it is from the top to the bottome, and to take up the two ten foot Banks which do lie hid under water, on each side of the River one; and to leave a foreland of thirty foot broad on the south side from the brink upwards, being in all six measured miles, whereof there is one mile halfe wrought by Sir Cornelius, at the rate of forty shillings the Rod, is, three thousand five hun∣dred and twenty pounds. To purchase divers Lands and Tenements which doe stand upon the brink of Wisbeach River, and must be removed before the River can be enlarged, with the extraordinary charge of carting the earth out of the Town, may cost twelve hundred pounds. To make a wharfe of Brick fourteen foot high, foure foot thick in the bottome, and two foot thick on the top, from Elme sluce to the Town bridge, being an hun∣dred and twenty rods; the stuffe, workmanship and earth work at the rate of seven pounds the rod, will cost eight hundred and forty pounds. To make a Cart bridge in Wisbeach Town in the same place where the old bridge did stand, may cost two hundred and fifty pounds. To remove the Bank which is now on the south side of Mourton Leame, so farre back, that there may bee thirty foot foreland betwixt the new Bank and the brink of the Leame, being ten miles in length, at three shillings foure pence the rod, it will cost six hundred and forty pounds. To make Mourton Leame an hundred foot broad from Guihern to Stanground, it must be enlarged fifty six foot on the north side to the same depth which the south side now hath, which was six foot when it was wrought, being twelve miles in length at twenty
foure shillings the rod, will cost foure thousand six hundred and eight pounds. To make the old and new works as deep as the bot∣tome of Wisbeach River, being three foot and a halfe, and with that manure to heighten the Banks on either side of the Leame leaving thirty foot foreland to each Bank at forty shillings the rod, it will cost seven thou∣sand six hundred and eighty pounds. To Pile the dike Ends, Swamps and low Lands which break off the Banks in many places, and convey by Boat so much earth thither as will make the Banks as high there as they will be elsewhere, which may bee Eight foot, may cost three hundred pounds. To make an Indike on the southside of the south bank twenty five foot broad at Guihern, and fifteene foot broad at Witelsey high Lands, six foot deep at Gui∣herne, and five foot deep at Witelsey, at twelve shillings the rod, will cost one thousand nine hundred and twen∣ty pounds. To make an Indike on the north side of the north Bank twenty foot broad at Guihern, and fifteene foot broad at Stanground, six foot deep at Guihern and five foot deep at Stanground, at ten shillings the rod, it will cost one thousand nine hundred and twenty pounds. To make the twenty five foot draine which is on the north side of the Leame, two foot deeper than now it is, will cost three shillings the rod, which is five hun∣dred seventy six pounds. To make two Cart Bridges over Mourton Leame neere Witelsey Town, each of them to have two peeres and no more, may cost three hundred and sixty pounds. To make new doores for the Sasse at Stanground, with Spring doores in them that may open on a sud∣den;
and that for the safety of the Country in times of danger, some part of the extreame floods may be turned into Witelsey Meare, and the other adjacent Meares, which being empty, will receive a great wa∣ter without prejudice to any, may cost fourscore pounds. To place a Brick Sasse on South Eay Draine neare Guyherne Crosse twenty foot broad, the bottome to lie even with the bottome of Wisbeach River, with spring doores, that may open on a sudden to receive some part of a great flood in times of danger, the draines being empty; this Sasse may cost one thou∣sand foure hundred pounds. The like Sasse to be placed on Bevill Leame, that in times of danger some part of the great floods may be turned into March River: it may cost one thou∣sand foure hundred pounds. To make South Eay twenty five foot broad, and three foot deeper than now it is, being twelve miles in length, at eight shillings the rod, it will cost one thousand five hundred thirty six pounds. To make Cats Water twenty foot broad, and six foot deep, being nine miles in length, at eight shil∣lings the rod, it will cost one thousand one hundred fifty two pounds. To open the Shire Draine, and to continue it from Hills Sluce to the South East corner of Sutton Marsh, being a mile and a quarter, at twenty shillings the rod, is six hundred pounds To make a Brick Sluce twenty foot broad, with two paire of doores to keepe out the Sea, and one paire to keepe up the fresh Waters, to be placed at
the South East corner of Satton Marsh, in regard it must stand very deep on a Sandy foundation: It may cost two thousand foure hundred pounds. To bring the many crooked Channels which are in the Washes into one straight Channell, is a work that must be first wrought with the Spade, and after that is accomplished, there must bee many Jetties made with Piles, Stones, and Brushwood, to keepe the Channell straight from the lower end of Wis∣beach River to the Sea Deepe, being a work of great consequence, it may cost foure thousand pound. Bedford River. TO make Bedford River five foot broader on ei∣ther side, and three foot deeper than now it is, and to cast all the manure which now lyeth upon the forelands, with that which will be taken out of the bottome of the River upon the Banks, being twenty one miles and a halfe in length, at thirty five shillings the rod, it will cost twelve thousand and forty pounds. To pile the Dike ends and Swamps, which else will not be able to support the Banks when more waight shall be laid upon them, and to convey by Boat so much earth thither as will make the defe∣ctive places as high as the Banks are generally else where, may cost foure hundred pound. To make the two Indikes ten foot broader on the Fen side, and foure foot deeper then now they are, and to cast all the manure that commeth out of them upon the Bank, at ten shillings the rod, for each
Indike, it will cost six thousand eight hundred and fourescore pound. To make two Brick Sluces at the outfall of the two Indikes, that each of them may have sixteene foot waterway, with a paire of doores to keepe out the Sea floods, and a paire of doores to keep up the fresh waters, may cost two thousand foure hundred pounds. To make two Bridges of foure foot broad over Bedford River, one at Welney, and the other at Maney, and to make a Cart Bridge at Mepell, may cost two hundred and forty pounds. To make the West water twenty five foot broad and six foot deep from Erith to Plantwater, being nineteene miles in length, at twelve shillings the rod, it will cost three thousand six hundred forty eight pounds. To make a Sasse in the Northbank of Bedford River twenty foot broad, to be placed in the roome of a little Sluce at the entrance of the West water, being within halfe a mile of Erith: It must have two paire of doores against the water in Bedford River, that Boats may passe at all times, and may cost one thousand foure hundred pounds. To make Elme Leame forty foot broad and six foot deeper than now it is from Wisbeach River to March Streame, will mend the outfall of VVisbeach River, and maintain the Navigation from VVisbeach to Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, and Huntington Shires. The work is six miles in length, and will bee very chargeable for the space of a mile, and may there∣fore cost five and forty shillings the rod, one with
another, which is foure thousand three hundred and twenty pounds. To make a Brick Sasse twenty foot broad, where Elme Leame falls into Wisbeach River, with two paire of doores to keep out Neene, and one paire of doors to keep up the back water, may cost one thousand eight hundred pounds. To make two Cart bridges and one foot bridge over Elme Leame, being made of Oken timber with Brick Pieres, may cost three hundred and forty pounds. To make Witelsey Meare Draine two foot deeper than now it is from Guyherne to the Meare, being thirteen miles in length at foure shillings the rod, it will cost eight hundred thirty two pounds. To make two Cart Bridges over Witelsey Meare Draine right against Witelsey high Lands, may cost eighty pounds. These generall works, together with a Land Eaye from Peterborough to the Crosse neere Crowland and the division-dikes, will be sufficient for that part of the Levell which lieth on the north side of Bedford River, being much about one halfe of the Levell; Provided alwayes that the River Welland be kept to its proper outfall, which may be effected by mending the new Bank that the late Earle of Bedford caused to be made from Waldram Hall to Crowland, and by maintaining the Queenes Bank at a sufficient heigth from Crowland to Spalding, which at this time is much setled and in great decay.
The River of Owse. TO make a Bank of six foot high on either side of the River Owse, from Erith to Southery Ferry, on the South and East side, and to Salters Load on the North and West side, leaving twenty foot fore∣land between the Banks and the River. These Banks are to be made of the manure which riseth out of the Indikes, being twenty foot broad, and six foot deep: either of these Banks will be twenty eight miles in length, and being for the most part Silt, will cost ten shillings the rod, which is eight thousand nine hundred and sixty pounds. To make a Bank on either side of the River Grant from Harimer to Clay Hive, six foot high, leaving twenty foot foreland between the Banks and the River. These Banks are to be made of the manure which riseth out of the twenty foot Indike, six foot deep, being ten miles in length, at ten shillings the rod, will cost three thousand two hundred pounds. To take up the Hards or Shoulds which are in the River Grant, betwixt Harimer and Cambridge, be∣ing Gravell, Sand, or Chalk, and nine in number, whereof some are long and some are short, is a work that must be performed by a water Engine, which may cost two thousand foure hundred pounds. To maintaine the Navigation from Lyn to Cam∣bridge, there must be a Brick Sasse made at Harimer two and twenty foot broad, with four paire of doores, so that the Boats may passe at all times, which may cost sixteen hundred pounds.
To make another Brick Sasse at Harimer on the West side of the great Sasse, sixteen foot broad for the waters of the two Indikes of Owse and Grant, with two paire of doores to keepe out Owse, and one paire of doores to keepe up the water in Sommer, may cost twelve hundred pounds. To make a Brick Sasse neere Breame, sixteen foot broad, with two paire of doores to keepe out Owse, and one other paire to keepe up the water in the Sommer, to be placed at the outfall of the Indike, which will be betweene Erith and Breame, on the North side of Owse, may cost twelve hundred pound. To make Grunty Fen Draine twenty foot broad at the outfall, and ten foot broad at the head, and six foot deepe, being two miles in length, and a great part of that very deepe worke, it may cost ten shillings the rod, which is three hundred and twen∣ty pounds. To make the new Draine which is between Little-port Chaire and Turbesey, ten foot broader on either side, and foure foot deeper than now it is, leaving twenty foot foreland between the River and the Banks; and to cast the manure which commeth out of the River upon the Banks on either side, being three miles and a halfe in length, at forty five shil∣lings the rod, will cost two thousand five hundred and twenty pounds. To make a Sasse twenty foure foot broad, at Little-port Chaire, at the lower end of the last work, for the preservation of the Navigation from Lyn to Cam∣bridge, may cost two thousand and two hundred pounds.
To make two Indikes of fifteen foot broad and six foot deepe, the manure to be cast upon the maine Banks, may cost six shillings the rod, is six hundred seventy two pounds. To make two Brick Sluces of ten foot broad at the ends of the two last Indikes, may cost six hun∣dred pounds. To make a Bank on either side of Milnall River from Prickwillow to Milnall, six foot high, leaving twenty foot foreland betweene the River and the Banks, being eleven miles in length, at ten shillings the rod, will cost three thousand five hundred and twenty pounds. To make a Brick Sasse twenty foot broad, with foure paire of doores, so that Boats may passe at all times, and to place it at the Lower end of Milnall River, may cost eighteen hundred pounds. To make a Brick Sasse for the North West In∣dike of Milnall River, and the South Indike of Grant, sixteen foot broad, with two paire of doores to keepe out Owse, and two other paire of doores to keepe up the water in the Sommer, may cost twelve hundred pounds. To make a Dam crosse the River of Owse at Tur∣besey to be piled and wrought to the same heigth that the Banks are else where, may cost three hundred pounds. To make a Bank on either side of Brandon River, from Priests Houses to Brandon, six foot high, leaving twenty foot foreland betweene the Bank and the Ri∣ver, being twenty miles in length, at ten shillings the rod, may cost six thousand foure hundred pounds.
To make a Brick Sasse at the outfall of Brandon River, twenty foure foot broad, with foure paire of doores, so that the Boats may passe at all times, may cost two thousand two hundred pounds. To make a Brick Sasse for the West Indike of Brandon River, and the South Indike of Owse, from Milnall Sasse to Brandon Sasse, sixteen foot broad, having two paire of doores to keepe out Owse, and two other paire to keep up the water in the Sommer time, may cost fifteen hundred pounds. To make a Brick Sasse at Southery Ferry for the Indike which will be on the East side of Brandon Ri∣ver, and also for the Indike which will be on the East side of Owse, from Brandon Sasse to Southery Ferry, sixteene foot broad, with two paire of doores to keep out Owse, and two other paire of doores to keepe up the water in the Sommer time, it may cost fifteen hundred pounds. To remove the Banks of Feltwell Cut, so that there may be twenty foot foreland on either side, and to make the Draine two foot deeper than now it is, being five miles in length, at eight shillings the rod, it will cost six hundred and forty pound. To make an Indike of ten foot broad, and five foot deep on either side of Feltwell Cut, and to cast all the manure to the two Banks, at three shillings the rod, it will cost foure hundred and fourscore pounds. To make two Brick Sluces at the outfall of the two Indikes, six foot broad, with one paire of doores to keepe out Owse, and one other paire to keepe up the water in the Sommer time, may cost foure hun∣dred pounds.
To make a Bank of six foot high on either side of Stoke River, from the River Owse to Stoke Bridge, leaving twenty foot foreland between the River and the Banks, being ten miles in length, at ten shillings the rod, it will cost three thousand two hundred pounds. To make a Brick Sasse at the outfall of Stoke Ri∣ver, twenty foot broad, having foure paire of doores, so that the Boats may passe at all times, may cost eighteen hundred pounds. To make a Brick Sluce and a Brick Sasse upon the River Owse neere Mandlin Falls, that may have one hundred sixty foot water-way, with double doors in every Arch to keepe out the Sea floods, and Land doores to keepe up the fresh waters; and those Land doores must have Spring doores in them to discharge the fresh waters on a sudden, for the better maintaining and preserving of the Channell from the Sluce to the Sea. The Sluce, the Sluce-pit, and the casting of water, together with the cutting of a new River to and from the Sluce, and making of a Dam in the old River, may cost one and twenty thou∣sand pounds. To make so many Land Eayes as may convey the downfall of all the high Land waters into their pro∣per streames, so that they may not drown those Fens which are next them, may be a work of one hundred and five miles in length, considering one place with another, they may cost ten shillings the rod, which is sixteen thousand and eight hundred pounds. The purchasing of Several, through which many of the Draines are to be made, may cost six thousand pounds.
To make Horse-mills, Tun-mills, Wheele-bar∣rowes, Store-houses, and work houses, and to buy Spars, Deals, Nailes, Ginropes, and such like mate∣rials which will be used in this work, may cost foure thousand five hundred pounds. The making of division Draines may cost five thousand pounds. The Sallary of Officers imployed in this work may in foure years amount to foure thousand pounds. It is knowne to Builders that after great care and examination of their intended charge, there will be some Nailes omitted. For which reason, if you please, you may cast the odde money into this esti∣mate, and reckon the totall charge to be one hun∣dred and fourescore thousand pounds: and that with this caution, that the Springs of the yeares must not be lost for want of money. The works above mentioned cannot be perfor∣med in lesse time than foure compleat Sommers. The placing of a great Sluce upon the River Owse neare Lyn, together with those other works which are here designed under the title of that River, will draine all the Fenns that are on the Southside of Bedford River, so that the greatest part of them will be culturable grounds; and peradventure it will spare the charge of those Banks which are intended to bee made on either side of the River Owse, from Salters Load to Little-port. But the making of that Sluce is a work of so great a consequence, that of my selfe I dare not absolutely resolve it. It is true that the Fens are drowned by the high Land waters onely; yet an I have said before, the Sea floods are as Potent an
Enemy to the Fenns as the Land floods are. In con∣fideration wherof, my conclusion is, That the making of a Sluce upon the River Owse, neare Lyn, to keepe out the Sea floods, will undoubtedly prevent and re∣move one halfe of that cause which occasioneth the drowning of that great and rich Levell. The objections that will be made against the ma∣king of that Sluce will be three: And under favour of this Honourable Court, I conceive they will bee weak in comparison of the great benefit which that work will produce by keeping out the Sea floods. The first objection is, the greatnesse of the charge. The second is, the hazzard in placing of it. The third is, the op∣positions that Cam∣bridge and Lyn will make against it, in re∣gard of their Naviga∣tion, which consi∣steth principally of three parts. The first and greatest is, whe∣ther the repulsing of the Sea floods will impaire Lyn Ha∣ven or not. The second is, that for want of a flood Stream, the Keeles must of necessity make lesse speed in their passage from Lyn to Cambridge. The third and last objection will be, Some losse of time by staying the Keeles at the Sluce, in regard they must take their turnes in passing through it; which I hum∣bly leave to the grave consi∣deration of this Honourable Court.
Being serious for the Fens, these objections were once strooke out; for it is not a question whether this be the best way to Drain the Fens or not. These doubts therefore were only inserted in regard of Lyn Haven, and the Navigation from Lyn to Cambridge (as is said before.) But being awfull of what I pre∣sent to this Great Councell, I durst not omit them: And now having with all care and diligence fi∣nished my Designe, I earnestly implore your Noble acceptance, humbly entrea∣ting you to heare all, chuse the best, and God grant the Kingdom may flourish in your Honou∣rable Resolves. FINIS.
