B952 R35742 15554795 103705
PROPOSALS For the First Volume of the WORKS of the eminently Learned Dr. ISAAC BARROW, late Master of Tri∣nity College in Cambridge: and since his Death Publish'd by the Reverend Dr. TILLOTSON, Dean of Canterbury: Now Printing in Folio. 1682. THE Undertaker, Brabazon Aylmer, having had encouragement by Printing the said Learned Authour's WORKS in several small Volumes; Doth now, for the accommodation of all Persons, and ma∣king more publick the said WORKS, Propose as followeth. 1. That this First Volume contains all the Works in English of the said Authour's which have already been Published: viz. 1. Twelve Sermons upon several Occasions. 2. Ten Sermons against Evil-speaking, or Vices of the Tongue. 3. Eight Sermons of the Love of God and our Neighbour. 4. The Duty and Reward of Bounty to the Poor. 5. A Sermon on the Passion of our Blessed Saviour. 6. An Exposition of the Lord's Prayer and the Decalogue; also the Doctrine of the Sacraments. 7. A Learned Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy: To which is added, A Discourse concerning the Ʋnity of the Church. 2. That to this Volume will be prefixed the Life of the said incomparable Authour: and an exact alphabetical Table of the most material Things in the whole Volume: as also his Effigies exactly engraved. 3. That this Volume will contain about 235 Sheets, or 940 Pages, of excellent Paper and Print. 4. That the Subscribers pay to the Undertaker 18 shillings for each Book nbound, viz 10 shillings present money; and the remaining 8 shillings upon the Delivery of the said Book to the Subscriber or his Assigns: which cannot be thought dear, being not a peny a sheet: and so well printed as aforesaid: the Undertaker also paying conside∣rable Copy-money. 5. For the Encouragement of all Persons who shall subscribe, or procure Subscriptions for six Books, at the rate aforesaid, shall be presented with a seventh gratis. 6. That no Persons expect the Benefit of these Proposals who pay not the First Payment before the first of February: After which time, the Undertaker resolves not to sell it under 20 shillings unbound; and possibly not so cheap. 7. That the said Book is now in the Press, and will be finish'd by the twenty fifth of March next at farthest. Vide the Proposals for a Second Volume on the other side.
PROPOSALS For the Second Volume of the WORKS of ISAAC BARROW, D. D. and late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge: and since his Death Publish'd by the Reverend Dr. TILLOTSON, Dean of Canterbury: Now Prin∣ting in Folio: (Never Printed before) 1682. AMongst all the WORKS that this Learned Authour hath left, none has been more earnestly desired than this incomparable Piece upon the CREED; wherein he hath not onely explain'd and confirm'd the great Doctrine of our Religion; but likewise shewn what influence every Article of our Faith ought to have upon our Practice. The Undertaker, for the accommodation of all Persons, and making more publick the said Book, doth propose as followeth; viz. 1. That this Second Volume doth contain many large Sermons upon the several Articles of the Apostles CREED: with an exact alphabetical Table of the most material Things treated of. 2. That the said Book will contain about 140 Sheets, or 560 Pages: of an excellent Pa∣per and Print: also the Authour's Effigies exactly engraved. 3. That the Subscribers pay to the Undertaker 12 shillings for each Book unbound, as fol∣loweth: 6 shillings present money; and the remaining 6 shillings upon the Delive∣ry of the said Book to the Subscriber or his Assigns. 4. That for the Encouragement of all Persons who shall subscribe, or procure Subscripti∣ons for six Books, at the rate aforesaid, shall be presented with a seventh gratis. 5. That this Book is also in the Press, and will be finished by the twenty fifth of March next at farthest. 6. That no Persons expect the Benefit of these Proposals who pay not the First Payment before the first of February: After which time the Undertaker resolves not to sell it under 13 s. 6 d. unbound; and possibly not so cheap. 7. That they which have the First Volume in parts already may have this Volume alone. The Ʋndertaker, Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhill, over against the Royal-Exchange in London. For the ease of Subscribers that live in the Country, the Undertaker hath appointed the Booksellers here mentioned to receive their Subscriptions and money; who give these Proposals gratis. Henry Dickenson in Cam∣bridge. Sam. Simpson in Cam∣bridge. Richard Davis in Oxford. George West in Oxford. George Rose in Norwich. Edward Giles in Norwich. Tho. Wall in Bristol. Ch. Allen in Bristol. George. Tongue in Warwick. Richard Lambert in York. John Goodrik in Hull. Sam. Evans in Worcester. John Jones in Worcester. Sam. Richards in Nottingham. Robert Eveleigh in Exeter. Mich. Hide in Exeter. John Conneber in Barnstable. Will. Churchill in Dorchester. Robert Foster in Shrewsbury. Richard Hunt in Hereford. Samuel Palmer in Gloucester. John Tuthil in Yarmouth. William Bailey in Lichfeild. Edward Pawlet in Grantham.
