S2166A C1219 C1220 R19031 12284907 58821
THE CHRISTIAN PILGRIME IN HIS Spirituall CONFLICT, And CONQVEST. AT PARIS M.DC.LII.
APPROBATIO. UTI finis Praecepti, it a & Consilii, Cha∣ritas de corde puro, & Conscientia bona, et Fide non ficta. Ad quam cum facilitate assequendam, & securius retinendam, com∣pendiosam & Regiam viam sternunt Docu∣menta, quae in hoc libro, cujus Titulus est, The Christian Pilgrim, in his spirituall Conflict and Conquest, continentur: quia in illo nil Fidei Catholicae repugnans, aut bonis moribus contradicens, invenitur; sed Doctrina pia, sana, & solida; ad quam legendam & sequendam, omnes, qui reple∣ri consolatione, superabundare gaudio, fer∣vere spiritu, crebro suspicere in Caelum, puras manus in oratione levare, suas solici∣te observare conscientias, & Sanctorum se∣qui Vestigia cupiunt, sunt invitandi. Datum Duaci Januarii 17. anno 1652. Stilo Novo. Fra: RUDESINDUS BARLO, Sacrae Theologiae Doctor & Profes∣sor in Collegio Vedastino Duaceno▪
The same Approbation Englished. THE End of the Counsell, as well as of the Commandement, is Charitie out of a pure Heart, & of a good Conscience, & of Faith unfeig∣ned. Which to obtain with facility, and retain with security, the Documents contained in this book, intituled, The Christian Pilgrim in his Spiritual Conflict and Conquest, Shew a plain and compendious way; For therein nothing is found dissonant to our Catholique Faith, or re∣pugnant to Piety; but a holy, sound, and solid Doctrine: To the perusall and practise where∣of, all they are invited, who desire to be re∣plenished with comfort, to overflow with joy, to be fervent in Spirit, to aspire frequently to∣wards Heaven, to lift up pure hands in prayer, to preserve their Conscences unspotted, and to follow the steps of the holy Saints. Given at Doway January the seventeenth 1652. Stilo novo. Br: RUDESIND BARLO, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the Vedastin College Doway.
devil capturing a soul 1 Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the Devill, as a roaring Li∣on walkes about, seekng whom he may devour: whom resist, stedfast in Faith
THE SPIRITVAL CONFLICT: OR The ARRAIGNMENT of the Spirit of Selfe-love and Sensuality, at the Barre of Truth and Reason. First published in Spanish, by the Reverend Father John Castaiza, a Benedictin Monk of ON A: Afterwards, put into the Latine, Italian, German, French, and now lastly into the English Tongue, according to the Originall Copy. With many profitable Additions and Explications. The Second Edition Job 7. 1. Mans Life is a Warfare upon Earth. AT PARIS, M.DC.LII.
Ephesians 6. 10, 11. MY brethren, be strong. in our Lord, and in the power of his might, Put on the Armour of God, that you may be able to stand against the Wiles of the De∣vill. James 4. 7. Be subject to God; resist the Devill, and he will flee from you. Matth. 26. 41. Mark 13. 38. Watch and pray, that you enter not into temptation. 1. Cor. 16. 13. Stand fast in Faith, quit you like men; be strong, &c.
Hee shall not be crowned who fights not valiantly. 2. Tim. 2. 5. A Lively pourtraict of the Spirituall Conflict.
To the right Re∣verend Fathers, Religi∣ous Dames, and devout Brothers and Sisters of the holy Order of Saint BENNET. THIS little book is presented un∣to You; not be∣cause the Translator fol∣lows the epidemick cu∣stome which enforceth the complement of a De∣dication; or expects any return of temporal pro∣fit from you; or stoops you to so low a Patro∣nage,
as to become Gos∣sipps to this adopted child; which are the vul∣gar ends of almost all presents of this nature, wherby the Receivers are rather engaged than gra∣tified:) But meerly as an humble oblation of Filial duty and respect. For he pretends not to cast in his mite, or bring a gift to your spirituall treasury, but only to pay a little parcell of his larger debt, and to give you an ac∣count of some houres of his time, which he ac∣knowledgeth
should be all employed in your ser∣vice. Besides, he but re∣stores unto you, what was your own before, by an∣other and a nearer title of Confraternity; and only new cloath's a Spanish Monk of St. Bennet's holy Order, with your English habit, (a thing both usu∣all, and hitherto very suc∣cesfull unto you, hoping thereby to make him the better welcome; and not doubting but he will speedily, easily, and ef∣ficaciously insinuate him∣self
into your affections, whose dayly practices have so great sympathy with his divine doctrine. For what are (or surely should be,) the continu∣all endeavours of a true Benedictin Monk, (and in∣deed of all devout Chri∣stians) but to quell and conquer the world, the flesh, and the Devill, accord∣ing to the Principles of Truth; to subdue sense to reason; to make his very passions, (by taming them,) usefull, and his affections, (by fixing them upon the
right object,) instru∣mentall to the attaining of perfection; and to study self-knowledg, pra∣ctice self-hatred, and persevere in self▪deniall? that God may be the sole possessor of his heart, the only mover of his affections, and the all ruler in his whole man, having now no self-will left to hinder his holy operation. And this is the only drift of this devout Trea∣tise; which may there∣fore fully serve you
(and all pious Pilgrims travelling to their hea∣venly home) for a clear glass, wherein you may see your own souls with∣out flattery, discover your spirituall blemishes without partiality, learn the rare secret of rooting out vices, implanting vertues, improving all accidents to your best profit, and trimming up your interiours to your highest advantage for the sweet entertainment of your beloved Spouse, without overmuch pains or prolixity.
You are (I say▪ to look upon this small book, as upon a Compendious sum∣mary of Christian per∣fection; or as a little store-house, well fraught with the Originall seeds and simples of all spirituality, from whence other de∣vout druggists, cunning in compositions, have since furnish'd their lar∣ger shops, and extracted many ample and indeed some excellent volumes. But because Art is long, Life short; and this life is lent us to learn the Art
of living well; what pity is it, that our lives should be more spent in reading, than profiting; that men should take more delight in writing, than instruct∣ing; and that we must be forc'd to seek a few precepts in many sheets, which may be plainly set down in a few pages? Yet such is the strange itch of writers now a days, that the number of books wch are extant upon all sub∣jects, seems to exceed that of the readers, whose arms may be as well tired in
turning over the vast multitude of volumes, as their brains confounded in studying them: So that it were to be heartily wished, that that grave S. Tho∣mas of A∣quin. who being ask∣ed, which was the speediest and best way to be∣come learned▪ Answered, To read only one Book. Doctors advice were now revived and followed by spirituall persons; which is, That they would on∣ly (or at least chiefly) betake themselves to the serious perusall of some one good Authour, for their Guide, Governor, and Conductor in the way of the Spirit; if they mean speedily, and securely
to arrive at their desired port of perfection. All o∣ther Books, should serve as certain solaces of their appetites, some changes of diet, or holy divertise∣ments in devotion; but this (which they have advisedly made choyce of) should be their Souls Dayly bread, and the or∣dinary, familiar, and na∣turall food and suste∣nance which it should strive to chew and digest. This (I say) should be their School of Defence, where they are to learn
the right use of their spi∣rituall weapons; how to Train, Muster, and Or∣der the Army of their un∣ruly passions and affecti∣ons; how to stand up∣on their guard when an Alarm is given, or an assault made by their e∣nemies; how to apply fit salvs to their sores, when they are worsted and wounded in the skir∣mish; and finally how to behave themselvs in all emergent occasions of troubles and temptati∣ons, or other accidents whatsoever.
And though I presume not to propose unto you this Brother of yours, as a more absolute master in this Art, than your fa∣mous and renowned Ab∣bots, Gersen, Cisnerius, Blosius, and many other excellent and experienc'd Champions of your Or∣der, with whom he will not enter into the least competition: Yet I may In the 40. chap. of this Book. with him safely promise, that whosoever shall faithfully and perseve∣rantly practise what he here prescribes, shall find
this Book, though very little in bulk, yet large e∣nough in vertue and sub∣stance to conduct him to the happy end he ayms at, to his soul's unspeaka∣ble comfort and content. Neither is he to be dis∣esteemed for the plain∣ness of his expressions; for his intent being to touch the heart, rather than to tickle the Ears, he delivers solid sense in undisguised words: And the Interpreter, being to present a true draught of his Originall,
and not to take upon him the privilege of a Paraphrast; could not shape the quaint lan∣guage of these profane times to the divine noti∣ons of his Authour, with∣out evident danger of sa∣crilege: and therefore pur∣posely avoids all curiosity of speech, wch oftentimes in these high matters, ra∣ther puzzles, than edi∣fies; and more amuzes the devout Readers under∣standing with niceties, than moves his affectiō to true piety, or makes him
resolute in the perfor∣mance of his duty; which ought to be the only end and aym of all spirituall writers; and he is most happily and sufficiently eloquent, who hits this mark, and workes this holy effect; as no doubt but this Religious Au∣thor will do in their zea∣lous souls, who make the right use of his doctrin, in order to their spiritu∣all advancement, and u∣niō with God; whom ho∣ly S. Denys styles, the Fa∣ther of unions, and who by thesweet bands of love,
draws his intelligent creatures to himself, the essentiall and eternall U∣nity. To the which lead and conduct us, ô God, one in Trinity, and Trine in Unity; Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Amen.
An advertisement, To the devout Reader. YOu may justly seem to mervail, why this gol∣den Tract is now said to be taught the English tongue, which was ove fifty years since transplanted into this Printed at Lovain, in the year 1598. Island, out of the gardens of certain Italian manuscripts. But if you will take the pains to confront both the Copies, and compare them with their Ori∣ginall Spanish, or else with the Printed at Doway in the year 1612. and reprinted at Witez∣burg, 1641. Latin pattern, you will easily perceive this, though not the better, yet to be the far truer Translation. For besides very
many and materiall differences, the 33. Chapter is in that edi∣tion altogether forreign to this Authors work; and the whole six last Chapters, (which are most excellent and usefull branches of this little tree) are absolutely lopp'd off, and (as it seems) purposely skipp'd over; the Conclusion being in each of them one and the same. The reason of which omissi∣on, as it is obvious to every un∣derstanding (which considers that to be directed to Religious women; and some of these left-out Chapters, Dedicated to the Nuns of S. An¦drew's in Venice, by Hierome Count of Portia. to concern chief∣ly the Priestly function;) so it seemes to carry with it suffi∣cient grounds where upon to build an excuse for the so do∣ing; because women are unca∣pable to make use of that kind of devotion: But if a Transla∣tors
duty be well look'd into, (whose chiefest praise consists in faithfulness and sincerity,) we shall no where find that any such privilege of defalkation from his Author's Text, or of addition to the same, doth at all belong to him: Neither do I hereby glance at the least thought of accusation against that first pious Interpreter of this Treatise in our Mother-tongue, who without all doubt deliver'd it to us, as it was given him; But only render an account of my own fidelity in Copying out my Author's Ori∣ginall; and withall desire such pious women, who shall peruse these excellent Devotions, that The 37. Chapter. How to offer up devoutly the Sacri∣fice of the Mass. they will rather patiently ad∣mit one Chapter, (which con∣cerns them not,) to be inserted into their books; than uncha∣ritably
to desire the razing out of the least tittle, which may be profitable to any one. And you are to be further∣more advertised, that this Spi∣rituall Conflict hath been ve∣ry often printed in the French language; Into which it was also translated by the Religious men called Fulians; and this These Fu∣lians are reformed Monks, following S. Bernard as their Patron, & St. Bennet as their Patriark & law-giver; men of great e∣steem for their san∣ctiy of life, emi∣nency of learning, and exer∣cises of charity. Edition of theirs, was (as it truly deserved) receiv'd with the highest applause and liking of all those worthy and illumi∣nated divines of that age; and namely of that famous and blessed Bishop of Geneva, Francis de Sales, the mirrour of his time, and most skilfull conductor of souls in the way of the Spirit; who usually recom∣mended the reading and pra∣ctice thereof to his dearest Dis∣ciples tending to Perfection.
One of which, a man of no mean rank and quality, under∣took another Translation of the same Treatise, out of an I∣talian Copy, (which he dedi∣cates to the same holy Bishop of Geneva,) augmented (as he saith) with 27 Chapters, (though they are indeed, either bare subdivisions of some one Chapter of our Author into divers, (as for example, Our third chapter is there divided into three severall ones;) Or else they are more ample ex∣plications of that Doctrin, which is concisely delivered in the Text; and so may with more propriety be termed These Theatins, are so cal∣led from heir Institutor, John Peter Garaff, who was first Bi∣shop of Theate, in the King∣dome of Naples, & afterwards Pope Paul the fourth men also renowned for their sanctity. Commentaries than added Chapters,) and written by the Reverend Fathers, com∣monly call'd Theatins. And be∣cause the endeavours of these
pious men serve much to the elucidation of this Subject, and savour of a sincere spirit of Devotion; I have also made use of their pains for your profit; and transferred hither (by way of Explications) whatsoever in that Edition seemed pertinent, and conducing to the illustrati∣on of our Authour: Yet still punctually observing the Text, and division of his own origi∣nall Spanish, and the Latin traduction of some learned Divines in the University of Doway, where it was appro∣ved and reprinted in the year 1612. If you make your best advantage of these my labours, your own souls will receive the true comfort, and I the full re∣ward I look for.
TO THE Devout Champions, fighting in this Spirituall Warfare; The Translator wisheth hap∣py Victory, & the reward of eternal Felicity. TO you, dear Souls, is this little work most fitly addressed; who in this deplorable age, (when the deluge of all vices, & an universall inundation of wickedness covers the face of the Earth, and to which that may be applied, almost as properly as in the time of the generall flood, All flesh hath corrupted his way;) having happily left the broad and beaten path of perdition, and estranged your selves from the pernicious Contagion of the times; imploy all your diligence and indeavours to
preserve your souls pure and clean from all worldly filth and infection, and whatsoever may displease the eyes of your Heavenly Spouse; and take all possible paines that Gods sacred Image, stamped upon you in Baptisme, but defaced, or at least much darkened through human frailty and infirmity, may be again restored and imbellish'd within you: An enterprise so high and he∣roique, that no tongue of man can worthily praise or express it. Take courage valiant Champi∣ons of Heaven, and faint not in this holy pursute, having Angels and Saints for your helpers and favou∣rers, and the Almighty himself, stretching out his powerfull hand to conduct you with safety and secu∣rity through all the throngs of dif∣ficulties and dangers; and leading you, as it were, over the bel∣lies of the Amorrheans, Cananeans, and all other uncircumcised and profane people, into the true Land of promise, the happy Land of Pa∣radice, replenish'd with Milk and
Hony, the blessed Land of heaven, full-fraught with eternall and un∣explicable solaces and sweetnesses. You are also suited with such ex∣cellent armour of proof, both offen∣sive and defensive, taken out of the rich store-house of sacred Scripture, and the wholesom doctrin of the Catholique Church, as will not on∣ly render you invincible against all opposition, but make you glorious conquerors, and triumphers over al your hellish adversaries. It only remains, that you seri∣ously apply your selves to learn the use of these weapons, to get the art and dexterity of fighting to your best advantage, and to study well the manner of these spirituall skir∣mishes, that so you may give home-blows both with point and edge, and handsomly ward off those which are made at you by your ene∣mies: And then you may be confi∣dent of an assured victory. And though this holy Science of Fencing is largely taught, and plain∣ly set forth by many spirituall and
skilfull Masters, both ancient and modern: yet the whole doctrin ther∣of is so briefly and familiarly com∣prised in this little Book, that I know not of any other instruction which can be presented you in this kind, more to your purpose and profit; (especially if you want leasure or conveniency to turn over many or greater volumes;) since you may here find the collected substance, and as it were, the marrow and cream of all the choycest precepts, concerning the aforesaid necessary trade of training up your selves in the true and practicall knowledge of your spirituall weapons. This ministred me the occasion to translate it, that it might be accom∣modated to your benefit; and to this I was urged and led on by the ar∣dent desire of advancing your good, to the utmost extent of that small power which the Divine goodness hath imparted unto me. Receive it therefore gratefully, and imbrace it willingly, O most Dear Souls, as an expert Tutor of
arms, and excellent School-master of the Spirituall Conflict: by whose directions and documents you may fight undantedly, and infallibly foil not only the Flesh and the World together, which wage such cruell and continuall warre with you; but also all the powers of darkness, and malice of the Devil, from whom neither peace nor truce can ever be expected: waiting with patience & perseverance for that happie hour, in which it will please your loving Lord to give you a full deliverance, to banish all war unto the utmost bounds of the earth, to bruse the Bow, break the Weapons, burn the Buckler, and withdraw your de∣sirous souls from this place of tu∣mults and alarms, to the quiet re∣sidence of eternall peace and felici∣ty. To which his Divine goodnes grant we may all at last joyfull arrive.
THE SUBJECT OF THE SPIRITUALL CONFLICT. THis Book, (correspondent to it's title), is of warrs, fights, and combats, not against the lawfull
powers of this world, but against the Eph. 6. 12. Against the rulers of the darkness of this world, &c. 2 Thes. 2. 4 Shewing himself as if he were God, &c. Psal. 11. 1. Truth is diminish'd amongst the chil∣dren of men. 2 Tim. 2. 5. No one shalbe crowned, who fights not. 1 Thes. 3. 3 We re appointed hereunto, &c. Job 7. 1. Man's life is a war∣fare. 2 Tim. 2. 12. If we suffer, we shall also reign, usurped authority of the Prince of darkness; who sits inthron'd, as sole Monark of this inverted Universe, in opposition to God and all good∣ness; tyrannizing and trampling down all vertu, piety and religion; clipping Faith's sacred wings, and blinding her with sin and sensuali∣ty; destroying and driving out all justice and sincerity from amongst the sons of men, and endeavouring to substitute double-harted fraud, with all sort of prophaness, impiety, and infidelity, in their stead. The necessity of fighting against these monsters, is a sufficient com∣mendation of this our holy enter∣prise; For we are put here expresly for this purpose; All men are in∣cluded in this Spiritual Warfare, nor is there any exemption from combating, where there is the least expectation of conquering, or hope of being crowned. How highly then doth it concern each Christian, to learn so to combat that he may con∣quer,
if he attends ever to be crown∣ed? The Sum of this desired Con∣quest, Ephes. 4. 25. Depose all lying, &c. Coloss. 3. 8 Depose all these, wrath, ma∣lice, blas∣phemy, &c 1 Pet. 2. 1. Rom. 6. 12 13, 14. Let not sin reign in your mor∣tal body, &c. consists in deposing the devil, and setting up God in our souls; in subduing Sense to Reason's em∣pire; in bringing the Animal man under the feet of the Intellectual; in raising up the Intellectual man to his proper Sphaer which is his Crea∣tor; and in uniting the Spirit to it's true object and Centre, which is the Divinity. The way to arrive at this high and happy Union, is by continual and indefatigable tendencies of the soul to God, in the track of sincere and solid Devotion. This solid Devotion depends upon Religion, as the branch on it's tree; and since there can he but one right Religion, as there is one only Faith, one law, one Lord, one Jesus Christ; Ephes. 4. 5 One Lord, one Faith, one Bap∣tisme, &c. so there can be but one real Devoti∣on, and all others must needs be con∣cluded unsecure, superstitions, hypo∣criticall, hypocondriacal.
Now lest we should miss this right way, or mistake this real De∣votion, we may here fitly, at our first entrance into these holy list, take a general view of this Animal, Sensu∣al, and Carnal man, which is to be destroyed; of this Counterfeit Hy∣pocritical, and Hypocondriacal man, which is to be undeceived; and of this Spiritual, Supersensual, and Perfect man, which is to be brought into us, and built up within us; that so framing a right I dea of the end we aym at, we may follow those means, which appear most propor∣tionable for the attaining therof.
THE ANIMAL, CARNAL, AND SENSUAL MAN Is he who gives up the raynes of his Reason to the intire conduct of Sensuality, and puts his soul into the devils power, (by submitting to all
sinfull suggestions), to be driven and dragg'd on uncontrollably to all Ephes. 2. 2 You wal∣ked accor∣ding to the cours of this world, ac∣cording to the Prince of the ayr, &c. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The animal man per∣ceives not the things of God's Spirit, &c. Philip. 3. 19. Whose God is their belly. James. 3. 15. This Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly▪ sensu∣al, devilish, &c. Jude v. 19 Sensual, having not the Spirit. Ps. 31. 9. wickedness. He walks after the world's perverse course and custom, living in all things according to his own lust and liking; acknowledging no other Superior than his own all-swaying affections, no law but that of his own will, no God but his bel∣ly. He easily yields to all his un∣tam'd passions and appetites; glut∣ting his senses unrestrainedly with all alluring objects; and making pleasure his only end, heaven, and happiness. Briefly, he is all earth, all sin, all sensuality; in whom is no∣thing of the Spirit, of grace, of God: his Understanding is a dungeon of darkness; his Memory a Magazin of bestial imaginations; his Will a confusion of base and brutish affecti∣ons; and his whole man totally de∣praved and degenerate; resembling the filthy swine, the unclean goat, and the unbridled horse and mule, which have no understanding.
THE HYPOCONDRIACAL, HY∣POCRITICAL AND COUN∣TERFEIT MAN. Tinnit: inane est. Tinnit; Inane est. Is he who makes a great shew of sanctity and devotion, but hath Ps. 143. 5. Touch the mountains and they will smoak nothing of substance, sincerity, and solidity. Touch him, and he turns into smoak; sound him, and you shall
soon find him to be but a windy cask, Nahum, 20. 2. She is empty, void, and waste. 1. Cor. 13. 1. As sound∣ing brass, or a tink∣ling cym∣bal. Mat. 6. 2. to the 16. Luke. 18. I am not as other men are. tunnd up with ayr, an empty eccho, a hollow noyse, a flatuous an foolish nothing. He wilfully mistakes the means for the end, and places per∣fection in pompous forms, Pharisai∣cal fashions, and external practices: If he prays, 'tis in publick; if he gives alms, he sounds the trumpet; if he fasts, he disfigures his counte∣nance; if he seemingly punish his body, 'tis to deceive more surely under the guise of sanctity; finally, all his actions rather savour of self-satisfaction and hypocrisy, than have any sense of true piety. Yet he ever pretends to high lights of the Spirit, finds out new and unheard-of ways of walking with God, sleights all that is common, though never so commendable, and catches at all that is curious, though never so dange∣rous. Thus he loseth himself in his own Chymerical conceptions, and pretending to refine ancient piety, becomes puff'd up with secret pride and presumption, and grasps no∣thing but froth and vanity
THE SPIRITUAL, SUPERSEN∣SUAL, AND PERFECT MAN, Is he who walks not in the wayes of this wicked world, nor follows the tenents of flesh, and blood, but of
Reason, Religion, and Understand∣ng. Rom. 8. per totum If you live after the flesh, you shall dy. 1 Cor. 3. 16. You are the temple of God, & Gods Spi∣rit dwels in you, &c Rom. 8. 36 Ps. 44. 22. For thy sake we are morti∣fied all the day long, &c. Coloss. 3. 5 His only end and aym is the Per∣fection of God's love in his soul; his unwearied endeavours are bent against Satan, Sin, Sensuality, and all Selfishness; his main study, is to make his body obedient to the Spirit, his Spirit to Reason, his Reason to Faith, and All to God; and his daily practice is self-mastery and Mortification. And having, 1. Trampled down the Man of sin, 2. Layd a sure and solid ground∣work of Devotion, 3. He faithfully applies himself to fight under Christ's banner, and learns exactly the right use of his spirituall weapons, 4. He carefully eschews his enemies Ambushes, 5. He keeps himself to the continual practice of prayer, introversion, recol∣lection, abstraction, annihilation, contemplation, 6. He couragiously climbs up to the mountain top of Perfection, 7. And lastly he sweetly reposes in divine love and Union; as is more amply held forth in these following Treatises.
Galathians 6. 8, 9, &c. What things a man shal sow, those also shall he reap For he that soweth in his flesh▪ of the flesh also shall reap cor∣ruption: But he that sowet in the Spirit, of the Spiri shall reap life everlasting. Psalme 125. 6. They that sow in Teares, shall reap in Joyfullness. Going they went, and wept, casting their seeds. But coming they shall come with Exultations carrying their Sheaves.
he INDEX of all the CHAPTERS of this Spirituall Conflict: OR, Arraignment of the spirit of Self-love and Sensuality: . I. WHerein Christian perfection consists: and of four things necessary to obtain it. pag. 1 ap. II. Of Diffidence or distruct of our selves. p. 10 ap. III. Of Confidence in God. p. 14 hap. IV. Of Continuall exercise: and first, that the Vnderstanding is to be care∣fully kept from Ignorance, and from Curi∣osity. p. 20 hap▪ V. Of the will: and the end to which we are to direct all our actions. p. 29 hap. VI. Of a two-fold Will in man: and the continuall combat between them. p. 38 hap. VII. Of the fight with Sensuality: and of the inward way of the Will to ac∣quire Vertues. p. 43 Chap. VIII. What he must doe, who feels his superior Will or Rcason, overcome by his Sensuality. p. 52 Chap. IX. That we must not avoid the oc∣casions of the combat. p. 57 Chap. X. Of th fight against suddain tempations. p. 60. Chap. XI. Of the fight against our flesh, and fleshly Concupiscence. p. 64.
Chap. XII. How to fight against slack and negligence. p. 7 Chap. XIII. How to govern our S¦suality. p. 7 Chap. XIV. Of the order to be observed  fighting against our enemies. p. 10 Chap. XV. What course he must take w is conquered, and grievously wounded  his enemies. p. 10 Chap. XVI. That wee should keep o hearts ever quiet and joyfull in our Lord▪ p. 10 Chap. XVII. That pious purposes  sometimes the deceits of the Devill  hinder our progress in vertues. p. 111▪ Chap. XVIII. How the Devill endeavou to draw us from the way of vertue. p. 11 Chap. XIX. How our Enemy endeavours to make our vertues instrumentall to our ruine. p. 144. Chap. XX. That we must never flatter our selves, as having subdued our enemies, but must often return to our wonted ex∣ercises, as if we were yet Novices in this Spirituall Conflict. p. 199▪ Chap. XXI. Of Holy Prayer. p. 200. Chap. XXII. What inward (or Men∣tall) Prayer is, and what Contemplation; and the use thereof. p. 208. Chap. XXIII. How we may joyn Contem∣plation to this inward Prayer. p. 211. Chap. XXIV. Of another manner of Pray∣er, by way of Meditation. p. 214. Chap. XXV. Of a way of Praying by the intercession of the Blessed Virgin. p. 215.
Chap. XXVI. How to pray and metate by meanes of the boly Angels and hea∣venly Citizens. p. 219 Chap. XXVII. How to meditate upon the holy Crosse, and Christ our Saviour banging thereon, to excite and move our affections. p. 222 Chap. XXVIII. Of sensible devotion: as also of spirituall drynesse and desolation. p. 236 Chap. XXIX. That the worthy frequenting of the most B. Sacrament, is an esficacious means to conquer our passions. p. 245 Chap. XXX. How to excite in us affecti∣ons of love, by the sacred Communion. p. 249 Chap. XXXI. Of spirituall Communion. p. 259 Chap. XXXII. Of Thanks giving. p. 262 Chap. XXXII. Of the perfect oblation of our selves to our Lord God. p. 263 Chap. XXXIV. How to petition for Di∣vine grace. p. 270 Chap. XXXV. Some short Observations concerning Meditation. p. 273 Chap. XXXVI. An exercise before the sacred Communion. p. 278 Chap. XXXVII. How we may devoutly offer up the sacrifice of the Mass. p. 281 Chap. XXXVIII. An exercise after the ho∣ly Communion. p. 286 Chap. XXXIX. A daily examination. p. 289 Chap. XL. Being a Conclusion of the whole work. p. 294.
Lord, we have fix'd our hopes on thee. Then let us nere confounded be. I Kings. 15: 18. Thou shalt fight against them vntill their vtter destruction: (With the four weapons of the Spirituall Combatant; Diffidence of thy selfe▪ Confidence in God, Continuall Exercise, and Devout Prayer.
THE Spirituall Conflict: OR, Of the Perfection of a Christian life. CHAP. I. Werein Christian Perfection consists: And of four things necessary to ob∣tain it. IF thou heartily and seri∣ously The im∣portance of this knowledg. desirest, (ô dearly beloved in Christ,) to reach the sublimity of Christian perfection, and to be truly united to thy Lord God, by becomming  spirit with him, (which is the most profitable employment, and the most excellent and divine enter∣prize imaginable;) It highly imports thee to understand in the first place
wherein this perfection of spirituall life consists. 2. For some there are, who for Some place per∣fection in austerity. want of this necessary consideration, imagine that this high perfection is placed in leading an austere life, in the maceration of the flesh, in the use of hair-cloth, in much fasting, watching, and the like rigorous ex∣ercises, and bodily afflictions. 3. Others, especially women, judg Others in reciting many prayers. of their progresse in spirituality, by their daily recitall of many prayers, their assisting at many Masses, their frequent Confessions, and Commu∣nions. 4. And there are very many, (ye Others in their ex∣act obser∣vance. even some of them, Religious and cloyster'd persons) who perswade themselves that perfection consists in frequenting the Quire, in the ex∣act observance of silence, and soli∣tude, and in well-ordered disci∣pline. 5. Thus some by these pious pra∣ctices, All which are good means, but not direct∣ly tending to perfe∣ction. some by other externall exer∣cises, tend to this desired perfection; but are all wide of the direct way leading unto it: For though thes outward and devout employmen
conduce very much towards the at∣taining it, yet in them alone, and their exactest observance, it consists not: Ti's true, that the discreet use of them, is doubtlesly a forcible means to obtain the Grace of the holy Ghost; to fortify us against our fleshes frailty; to shield & arm us a∣gainst the deceits and assaults of our common and cruell enemy: and fi∣nally to perform our practices of piety (especially whilst we are new-champions and Novices in this spi∣rituall conflict) with more sweet∣nesse and alacrity: Yea they pro∣duce plenty of fruits to them also who are well-experienced and skil∣full combatants in this holy warfare; who therefore afflict their body, because it hath been instrumentall  the offence of their Creatour; herefore love silence and live in so∣tude, to shun all ocasion of sinne, nd to attend their heavenly me∣itations with more quiet and tran∣uillity, being untangled from the orlds impediments; they are de∣out and diligent performers of the ivine office; they are fervent and requent in works of charity, in
prayer, and holy Communion; and all this for no other reason than God's honour and Glory, and to unite themselves to him, by the sa∣cred bonds of sincere affection. 6. Yet they who rest here, and And they that rest in these lower exercises are in great dan∣ger; place their end in these outward ex∣ercises, do oft times endanger their own Salvation; and this not by reason of the exercises themselves, (which are truly and naturally holy, and war∣ranted by the practice and example of many great and glorious Saints,) but for that they are so totally atten∣tive to these lower exercises, as they leave their inward man in its natu∣rall affections, and unrescud from the snares of the devill. For the de∣ceitfull fiend, finding them gone a∣stray in following their affections to those devotions, gives them not on∣ly peace but also pleasure in the pur∣suance of them; they seeme to tast they very sweets of Paradise, yea to walk and talk with God, and heare his divine whispers in their Souls; such is their vain perswasion! And are somtimes so absorpt in their cu∣rious and deep fancies of meditati∣on, that they conceit themselves
even separated from the world, sever'd from all creatures, and rapt into the third heaven. 7. But how dangerously all such As may appeare by the rest of their acti∣ons, Souls are deceived, and how wide they are strayed from the right way of perfection, will easily appeare by the rest of their actions: For they are commonly very singular, curious, censurers of their neighbours lives and conversations, and prone to murmur at their proceedings: And when themselves are advertised of their own errours, or never so litle hindred from their accustomed ex∣ercises, (which they frequent chiefly for fashion's sake,) or barr'd from the ordinary use of the Sacraments; you shall presently perceive them fall into passion, unquietnesse, and despair. 8. And if it pleaseth God, (to the And espe∣ccially by their want of resigna∣tion in time of af∣fliction. end they may truly understand their own state,) to send them some in∣firmity, or permit some tribulation to befall them, (for such trialls are his touchstones, whereby he proves his servants sincerity,) O how soon shall you discover the false foundati∣on whereon they built the edifice
of their feigned devotion? how rotten is their inward man, and how full of secret pride? For they re∣fuse to resigne their wills, and to humble their hearts under God's powerfull hand, in all the change∣able courses of prosperity and ad∣versity: They will not, according to the divine example of God's hum∣ble suffering Son, subject themselves to all creatures, nor take their seem∣ing enemies, (that which truly they are) to be their true freinds, as be∣ing instruments of God's goodnesse, pomotours of their perfection, and helpers in the reformation of their unmortified passions: which is an evident signe of their dangerous state. For the eyes of their souls are dazzled and corrupted by ga∣zing upon these outward actions, (though good,) arrogating to them∣selves, I know not what degrees of perfection; and from thence fal∣ling into self-conceit, they judge rashly, and contemn others. Nor can they be recalled or cured, unlesse God himselfe strikes strongly at the doore of their hearts, and dissipates the darknesse of their interiour with
the divine rays of his gracious light; making them see their own danger, and seeke the remedie: For a great and manifest sinner is more easily reclamed, than a seeming Saint; whose secret iniquity, is shrouded under the appearance of vertue and piety. 9. Thus then it is manifest unto True per∣fection therefore, consists in the know∣ledg of God and our selves. thee, (ô my beloved,) that spirituall perfection consists not at all in the aforesaid practices and perswasions. Know therefore that it is placed in no other thing, than In the true know∣ledge of Gods goodnesse and greatnesse; and of our own basenesse, miserie, and nothing, and of the pronenesse of our naturall affections to all malice: Also, in the hatred of our selves, and the love In the love of God, and hatred of our selves; In resig∣nation to Gods will, and deny∣ing of our own. of God: And lastly, in the absolute denying of our own will, and entire re∣signation of it to the divine will and pleasure: That is, that we totally submit our selves, not onely to the Almighty God, but even to every one of his creatures for his sake; and this for no other end, than onely to please his divine Majesty, who de∣serves to be purely served, highly ho∣noured, perfectly praised and glorifi∣ed by all.
10. This is the Abnegation which All which Christ hath taught us by word and ex∣ample. Christ our saviour so often inculca∣ted; This is the Obedience, to which God's sonne invites and directs his faithful followers, both by his words and by his example; This is the de∣sirable Crosse, which his diligent ser∣vants are to lay on their shoulders, and so follow the steps of their Sa∣viour; This is that love, which our Lord so seriously, frequently and carefully recommended to the whole world, and especially to his Disciples, as his particular friends and children, after his last supper. 11. If then (my dearly beloved) thou intendest to attaine to this high And we must also do it, if we mean to purchase victory. perfection; thou must use violence to thy selfe, and vanquish thine own affections both great and small; thou must affect this fight, and in∣struct thy mind to wage this holy war. For the crown of victory is conferred only upon the stout and lawfull combatants. Nor is there any thing more glorious to our selves, or more gratefull to God. 12. For as this battell (we now treat of) is the greatest, and of most difficulty; so is the ensuing victory most glorious to our selves, and most gratefull to God: in so much
as if thou overcommest, subduest, mortifiest, and rootest out thine own disordinate and unruly affecti∣ons; thou offerest up to God a more agreeable sacrifice, than if (neglecting this) thou shouldst whip thy body till it were embrued in it's own bloud, or fast beyond the au∣sterity of the strictest Anchorites, or convert thousands of Infidels and sinners to Christ's faith and perfect pennance: For though the conver∣sion of souls bee in it self more dear to our Lord God, than the renoun∣cing of our own wills in small mat∣ters, yet it is thy part to will and do that chiefly and most carefully which Hee most strictly requires of thee: And this is undoubtedly the serious mortification of thy unta∣med passions, wherein thou shalt better please him, than in any other highest and holiest employment. 13. Being thus instructed, (ô dear∣ly But to ob∣tain it, we must pro∣vide four necessary weapons. beloved,) wherein Christian per∣fection consisteth; and that to ob∣taine it, thou must adventure up∣on a cruel and continuall warre, if thou intendest to be a conque∣rour: It befits thee like a stout
Christian champion, to arme thy-self with Four necessary weapons, which are, 1. Diffidence of thy self. 2. Confidence in God. 3. Continual exercise. 4. Devout prayer. Of all which weapons, I shall (by Gods assistance) now briefly treat, according to their several or∣ders. CHAP. II. Of the diffidence, or distrust of our selves. THis diffidence of thy selfe, may be obtained by three manner Distrust of our selves, which is gotten; First by a deep sense of our own no∣thing. of wayes: First, by a deepe sense of thine own basenesse and misery, tru∣ly acknowledging that of thy selfe thou canst not doe the least good thing: For man can no more effect any good or meritorious work by his own power, than a stone (if I may say it) is able of it-selfe to ascend upwards: and he hath al∣most the like inclination to evill, as a heavie stone hath to the Earth's centre.
2. The second way to get this self-distrust, 2. By Prayer. is to demand it of him, whose gracious gift it is, with humble and earnest prayers: And to prevail in thy petition, thou must first yield that thou truly wantest it, and that of thy self thou canst never attain to it: and thus totally naked, present thy prayer with a constant faith, and a couragious hope to be heard, and to obtain this desired diffidence of thy self. But let thy prayer encrease in dayly fervour, and expect with perseverance the divine pleasure in the grant of thy petition: and then be confident, it will sooner or later be granted unto thee. 3. The Third is, That as oft as thou 3. By often reflecting upon our own weak∣nesse. failest and fallest into sin, thou presently turn thy soules eye toward thine own basenesse, misery, and inabilily to act any thing that is good; for untill this be truly known, and humbly acknowledged by thee, never hope to be secure from falling. 4. Whosoever therfore aspies to And this self-know∣ledge, is leston mus needs be learn'd. a blessed union with the increated verity, must first study this necessary lesson of selfe-knowledg: For God permits the proud & presumptuous
to fall sometimes into some grievous sin, that so they may be forced to confesse their own frailty, and impo∣tency: and according as their pride is greater or lesse, so is their fall more or lesse grievous: in so much, as if there were no pride in man, (as there was none in the sacred Virgin Mary) there should likewise be no fall into any sin. 5. Wherefore presently upon thy And we must bee carefull to rise speedi∣ly after our fall. fall, hasten thy thoughts to an hum∣ble reflexion upon thine own no∣thing; beg instantly and ardently of thy Lord God, his true and inward light, to see thy own frailty and in∣firmity, and to keep thee from more dangerous fallings for the future. EXPLICATION. THis distrust of thy selfe (my The great necessity of this di∣strust in our own strength, dearly beloved) is so necessary for thee in this combat, that without it, thou canst not onely never hope to obtain thy so-much-desired con∣quest over thy enemies, but not so much as to surmount the least of thy passions or imperfections. Thou art therefore seriously and frequent∣ly
to reflect upon the corruption of is infor∣ced by the corruption of our na∣ture; thy naturall inclination, which makes thee apt to conceive a good opini∣on of thy selfe and thine own acti∣ons, and to perswade thy selfe that thou art something, when as indeed thou art nothing at all. Weigh further And the weaknesse thereof; the vanity and presumption of such self-conceits, and the weaknesse of thine own forces; and consider how And by consider∣ing how this ac∣knowledg∣ment pleaseth God, and how much presumpti∣on displea∣seth him. displeasing the one is to the divine Majesty, and how pleasing the other; for our Lord loves a free confession of our own frailty, and a reall ac∣knowlegment of our totall depen∣dancy upon his power and provi∣dence, from whose bounty and be∣nignity all grace and goodnesse is derived into our souls; since being left to our selves, we can neither think nor act any one thing which hath the least degree of worth or merit. Wherefore study well this first Thou art therefore to study this fun∣damentall lesson. and fundamentall lesson, as being a matter of highest importance, and yet the work of God's holy hand, which he teacheth his deare freinds, sometimes by his heavenly inspira∣tions, other times by permitting
them to fall grievously, and to bee tempted violently, and by other wayes unknown to thy selfe: and be sure to make serious use of the three proposed ways in the precedent chapter; by the due performance and practice whereof, and thy con∣currence with God's never-wanting grace, thou mayst confidently hope to attain it. CHAP. III. Of Confidence in God. THou seest then how usefull and  needfull this Self-distrust is: but yet if thou enterest the field to fight with that onely weapon, thou must look to be either speedily vanquish'd, or basely put to flight. Wherefore ha∣ving fitted thy selfe with this first ar∣mour, Distrust of thy selfe; let thy 2 Confi∣dence in God, which is obtained next diligence be imployed to get a pious Confidence in God, begging, ho∣ping, and expecting from him all good, and help whatsoever. In ob∣taining whereof, make use also of these three advices. 2. For first thou art to crave it in∣stantly, 1 By prayer. and ently and humbly of the divine Majesty.
3. Then, thou art to consider his 2 By consi∣dering the divine power, wisdome and good∣nesse, by which he can, knowes how, and is willing to help. wonderfull power, and contem∣plate his infinite wisdome, from whence thou wilt conclude, that nothing is either impossible to him, or difficult. Then weigh his bound∣lesse goodnesse, which is ever ready to poure plentifully upon the all necessaries for thy spirituall profi∣ciency, and all things usefull for thy gaining an intire victory over thy enemies. For how can it be possible that this holy and heavenly Shep∣heard, who for full thirty-three yeares space hath so carefully run after this stray'd sheep, so lovingly recall'd her home to himselfe; so painfully sought her, and so dearly bought her with the price of his bloud, and losse of his life; should avert his eyes of compassion from her when shee cryes, calls, and converts her self unto him? Oh, how can he forget his own promise, and not lay her upon his sacred shoulders, and celebrate a Feast of joy and jubilation with his heavenly Citizens for her happy reduction? Or who can imagine, that our loving Lord God, who so much
desires to dwell in our hearts, and feast in our souls; and to this end, is ever knocking at those doores for admittance, that so he may replenish us with the Heavenly Treasures of his graces; should then shut his eares, when we open to him our hearts, or should refuse to give us admittance, when wee humbly and earnestly in∣vite him to our banquet? 4. And thirdly, For the obtain∣ing 3. By medi∣tating up∣on holy writt. this holy confidence and trust in God; make use of the infallible truth of sacred Scriptures: which frequently and manifestly tell thee, that who so place their Confidence in their Lord God, are never confoun∣ded. 5. There is also another way to get this Distrust of our selves and An other means is by think∣ing on our own frail∣y, and Gods om∣nipotency at the beginning of each action. Confidence in God; Which is, never to set upon any work, before thou first makest reflection upon thine own frailty, and thy Lords omnipo∣tency. For if thou observest not this order in the beginning of thy en∣terprises, thou shalt find thy self of∣tentimes deceived, even when thou thinkest to have undertaken them in the best manner: because pride and
presumption are so inherent in our nature, that our whole live's dili∣gence, is scarcely sufficient to drive them out; and therefore thou must so order thine actions, that still the thought of thine own nothing, and God's all sufficiency, and readinesse to assist thee, goe before them. And here, look diligently to thy selfe, that thou be not deceived: For of∣tentimes when thou imaginest to have truly attained to this Diffidence in thy selfe, and Confidence in God, thou art farre short of it; as thou mayest easily perceive, by the remai∣ning motions of thy mind, and fre∣quent fallings into imperfections: Whereby we shall not be foo∣lishly de∣jected at our fre∣quent fal∣lings. For if these relapses make thee sad, unquiet, and in a manner desperate of thy spirituall progresse; it is an evident signe that thy confidence is in thy selfe onely, and not in thy Creatours goodnesse: And if thy sadnesse and despaire be great, great also is thy confidence in thy self, and litle is thy trust in God; as on the contrary, if thou hast a true distrust of thy own selfe, and a perfect con∣fidence in God onely, thou wilt not much marvell at thy own frailty, nor
be vainly dejected at thy frequent fallings, which proceed from thy own weaknesse, and therefore hin∣der not thy confidence in God's goodnesse. So that thou wilt con∣ceive a holy anger against thy self for thy sinnes, and with an humble sor∣row for thy offence, wilt trust here∣after lesse to thy self, and more in God; and with a new-enkindled zeale, and greater courage than before, wilt follow thy begun enter∣prize to get the victory in this spi∣rituall warfare, and pursue thy ene∣mies even to death. 6. And would to God these A necessa∣ry caveat for all spi∣ritual peo∣ple. truthes were diligently div'd into by some, who seeme to bee spirituall; and yet they no sooner fall into de∣fects, but they presently become impatient, and cannot be quieted, till they have recourse to their gho∣stly Father, rather for their own solace, than for any true devotion: when as the prime motive of their comming to him should be to purge their soules from sin by absolution, and to obtaine new strength against their enemies by the sacred Commu∣nion.
EXPLICATION. AS we can promise to our selves By God's assistance we can do all things. nothing but faylings & fallings, because we are of our selves nothing; so also we may certainly promise to our selves from our God an in∣tire victory over all our enemies, if we arm our hearts with a lively con∣fidence in his divine Majesty. But Wherein many are deceived, many deceive themselves in suppo∣sing that the pusillanimity and dis∣quiet following their fall, is an effect of virtue, because it is accompanied with a displeasure for their offence; when as indeed it springs from pride and presumption, and is founded in selfe-confidence, and conceit of their own strength, to which they too By reason of their pride and presumpti∣on in their owne strength. much trusting, find by the wofull experience of their fall, that they are truly weak, and really nothing, and thereupon they become troubled & astonished, as at a new thing; and so lose their courage, seeing that prop which sustained their vain con∣fidence, fallen down to the ground. But this befalls not them who are truly humble; For they confiding in God alone, nothing presuming
of themselves, when they chance to fall into any fault, feele indeed a true grief in their souls; but are nei∣ther disquieted nor astonished, see∣ing clearly (by the light of truth) that this proceeds from their own misery, frailty, and presumption. CHAP. IV. Of continuall exercise: and first, that the Ʋnderstanding is carefully to be kept from Ignorance, and from Curiosity. IT hath been hitherto declared, The third spirituall weapon, is continuall exercise; how much this Distrust of our selves, and trust in Gods goodnesse, help us on, in our spirituall conflict: But they alone are yet insufficient to gain the victory, and keep us from relapses; and therefore besides these two, a third weapon is necessary, which we above tearmed Continuall Exercise; and this chiefly consists in the rectified use of our Understan∣ding Which consists, in the right use of the under∣standing. and Will. 2. First therefore the Understan∣ding is to be carefully kept from two great evils, Ignorance, and Curi∣osity:
From Ignorance, that it may bee pure and cleare, and so we may The un∣derstand∣ing is to be kept from Ig∣norance, see what is necessary for the taming of our passions, and overcomming of our affections. 3. And this light may be obtained two manner of wayes: First and chiefly by earnest Prayer, invoking First, by prayer, and imploring God's holy Spirit to infuse this light into thy soule. Se∣condly, Secondly, by a dili∣gent search into our owne acti∣ons. by daily practice of a pro∣found and accurate search into all thine own actions and affairs; not only as they appeare outwardly, but rather as they are truly in them∣selves. Doe but make tryall of this exercise for a time, and thou wilt come easily to understand what things and actions are good, and what are evill; as also what are truly good, and what are onely in shew, promising much by their out∣ward splendour, but performing indeed nothing, nor any way con∣ducing to the quiet of thy consci∣ence.
EXPLICATION. THis point, [which is, to estimate This search into all things according to their true worth, will open our eyes to see the meanesse of all worldly vanities. all things according to their true and reall worth and goodnesse] being well practised, will open our eyes to see the poornesse of all such toys which worldlings most desire and delight in; It will shew us, that earthly honours and pleasures, are meer vanities and afflictions of spi∣rit; That injuries, infamies and af∣fronts, patiently suffered, are the harbingers of true happinesse and glory; That afflictions are indeed freindships, and that seeming cros∣ses are followed with certain con∣tentments; That to despise the world, is better than to be master of it; and that to be willingly obedi∣ent for the love of God, to the meanest creature, is a more magna∣nimous action, and the signe of a more generous spirit, than to com∣mand the greatest Kings; That the humble ackowledgment of our own nothing, is more acceptable to the divine Majesty, than to dive into the height and depth of all sciences; That to quel and conquer our owne
appetites and imperfections, though they be never so small, merits more praise, than to force the strongest holds, than to triumph over the greatest armies, than to worke the greatest miracles, or raise the dead out of their graves. All which things, and others of like nature, are not sincerely discerned by us, because before we enter into our selves to weigh them well as we ought, and as they truly are, we permit our fancy to be prevented, prepossessed, and surprized, with some sensuall affection towards them; which so darkens and dimms our understan∣dings, that they are rendred uncapa∣ble to judge of those objects right∣ly and impartially, as they should, and they truly deserve. 4. Wherefore give an attentive Text. A necessa∣ry caveat; to keep the will from fixing it's love care (ô dearly beloved) to what I shall now tell thee, for it will much further thee to fight successefully: The means to know the true nature and properties of all things, which occurre in thy daily transactions, is by taking speciall care to keep thy Will pure and free from all motion
of love and affection, which looke not directly upon God himself, or upon the means leading unto him. For to the end thy Ʋnderstanding may rightly distinguish good from evill, it must first consider it, before thy Will hath made it's election or Untill the Under∣standing have first pondered the object. reprobation of it; because when the Will hath fastned once it's affe∣ction upon the object, the Ʋnder∣standing is hindred from comming to a true knowledg thereof; by reason that the consent of the Will intervening, leaves it so involved and obscured, that it appeares farre fairer to the Ʋnderstanding, than it is in it self: And hence it happens, that the object being thus falsly re∣presented to the Will, becomes too too passionately beloved and em∣braced, without the due enquiry of its reall goodnesse: And by how much the desire or love of the Will is more vehement; by so much the Ʋnderstanding is more grosly clow∣ded in its judgement; and being so deceived invites the Will to a en∣crease of affection towards it. So that these too cheif powers of man's soul, miserably deceived and misled,
walk continually as in a circle, from this darknesse into others, and fall from one great errour, into others more grievous. 5. Take heed therefore of fast∣ning thy affection upon any thing And the same ca∣veat is ne∣cessary also in holy things. whatsoever, before it be wel weighed and examined by the Ʋnderstanding, and recommended to God in pray∣er; that so thou maist truly discerne, whether it be good or evill. And to this I exhort thee, not only in all in∣different things, but even in them al∣so which are good and holy; for though they are evidently good in themselves, yet they may prove otherwise to thee by reason of some circumstance of time, place, measure, or obedience: Whence it often happens, that many have endangered themselves in their most laudable and holiest exercises. 6. Thou must also warily retain The Un∣derstan∣ding is to be also weaned from Cu∣riosity, thy Ʋnderstanding from Curiosity; lest it draw that into the soul, which may retard it in the intended pur∣chase of victory. For a curious en∣quiry after earthly things, which are impertinent to thy spiritual purpose, though it may bee sometimes per∣mitted,
yet, tis generally the poyson of the spirit: Restrain therefore thy Ʋnderstanding to thy utmost, and strive to make it simple and foolish. And made simple and foolish to worldly things. As for the changes and chances in the world, whether they be great or small, if they concern thee not, consider them not. And when thou needs must heare or behold them, let thy Will alwayes contradict them. Yea even in the knowledge of hea∣venly things, be sober and humble, and content thy self in the onely de∣sire to know thy crucified Saviour, and his blessed life and death. A∣bandon all other things; for so thou shalt yield to thy Lord a most grate∣full service, who puts them into the list of his best freinds, that desire no more knowledge than what is suffi∣cient to inflame their hearts in the love of his goodnesse, and hatred of their own wickednesse, for in the search of all other knowledg, nothing but self-love and a certain pernicious pride, lyes secretly lurking. 7. If thou thus weanest thy Ʋn∣derstanding How highly this conduceth to perfe∣ction, from these curiosities, thou shalt happily escape many am∣bushes of thy enemies: For the
wicked spirit, marking the unchange∣able will and resolution of those tra∣vellers tending to spirituall perfe∣ction, not to yield their consent to sin; layes his crafty plots first against their Ʋnderstanding, that so he may by little and little get the mastery And how cunningly the devill plots a∣gainst i, over it, and the Will together. To this end, hee suggests to the learned and sharpwitted, sublime and subtile conceits; that they may think themselves already united to the divinity, & so forget themselves, and give over the correction of their own consciences, the resignation of their wills, and study of their own nothing: And thus they are insna∣red By sugge∣sting pride to our un∣derstan∣ding; with pride, and make to them∣selves a certain Idoll of their own wisdome in their Ʋnderstandings; and are so highly puffed up and per∣plexed in these vain thoughts, that they now perswade themselves, not to stand in any need of others coun∣sell or direction. 8. O the danger that these souls Which is far more dange∣rous, and more diffi∣culty cu∣red, than that of the Will. are in! and how hardly are they cured? by reason that the pride of the Ʋnderstanding is far more pe∣rillous than that of the Will: For hee
that is proud onely in Will, omits not all obedience, but submits his judgement sometimes to others, which he preferres before his own, and beleeves it to be better: But he that is puffed up with the pride of his Ʋnderstanding, and assuredly be∣lieves his own opinion to be better than that of others; ah! what hope is there of his cure? How shall he be brought to submit to anothers judge∣ment, when as he thinkes himself the wiser man? For when the Ʋnder∣standing (which is the souls eye, and should both see and correct its se∣cret pride,) is it self blind, and blowne up with presumption; when light it self is become darknesse, and the very Rule crooked, thou easily conceivest what followes, and what the end of those things is like to bee, which depend upon such principles. Wherefore take timely care to prevent this pride, before it pierce thee to the marrow; yeeld not up the reins to thy understanding, but subject it to counsell, and submit thine owne sense to others judge∣ments; become a foole in thy own conceit for the love of thy Lord,
and by this means thou shalt bee wiser than Salomon. CHAP. V. Of the Will: and the end, to which we are to direct all our actions. IF thou desirest (ô dearly beloved) 1. A will to do well, sufficeth not: to become one spirit with thy Lord God, 'tis not enough to have a pious and prompt will to doe good works; but even that good thou doest, must (by his divine help and motion) be totally referred to Gods honour, and to please him onely. In But our a∣ctions must be performed only to please God. this thou must look to have a strong conflict with thine own nature, which in all her actions and omissi∣ons seeks her own commodity and complacence, especially in things spirituall: Hence it is, that when any good thing is proposed to be per∣formed as from Gods will and plea∣sure, shee readily undertakes to per∣form it; but yet not as a thing plea∣sing to God, or proposed by him, but rather because she considers the commodities and content which man reaps by doing the will of God.
2. Wherfore, to the end thou Which that thou maist at∣tain to, maist wrest thy selfe out of this dan∣gerous snare of the Devil, and per∣nicious stumbling block cast in the way of perfection; and by degrees get a custome to doe or not to doe, because God will have it so, and with an intention to please him only (who should be the entrance and end of all our actions;) listen dili∣gently to these following advices. 3. When a thing is presented un∣to Apply thy understan∣ding to Gods will, thee to bee performed, which is agreeable to the divine Will: first lift up thy Ʋnderstanding unto God before thou appliest thy Will to exe∣cute it; thus thou shalt clearly dis∣cern, that it is his divine pleasure thou shouldest perform it; and that thou shouldst doe it solely for his Honour and good liking: And that thy will is drawn and moved by the divine will to effect this work for this onely end and intention, be∣cause God will have it so, for the ho∣nour and glory of his own most sa∣cred Majesty. 4. So likewise, when thou wouldst omit or refuse the things not wil∣led And take heed of be∣ing decei∣ved; by God; resolve not rashly up∣on
this omission, untill thou hast di∣rected the eye of thy Ʋnderstanding to the divine will (as is even now de∣clared.) And take particular care over thy self, lest thou bee deceived; because it may many times seem to thee that thou actest or omittest this or that, for Gods will and pleasure, when indeed it is otherwise; for because nature is subject to seek her∣self. nature doth so secretly seek her selfe in our enterprizes; that those very things, which thou thinkest please or displease thee onely for the love of God, are principally willed or re∣fused for thy self-interest. 5. Wherefore in the very entrance into any action whatsoever, dispoile thy selfe to the utmost of thy power, of all intentions which hath the least mixture of this proper in∣terest: nor doe thou adventure to act or omit any thing, till thou fee∣lest and findest thy selfe inward∣ly moved, to begin and go on with it, for Gods onely will and plea∣sure. 6. But if thou wantest time and This in∣tention of doing all for God, is to be al∣waies made in the ente∣rance to any work. leisure to make this intention, and to ponder the causes moving thee to doe or omit every work; take
care to do it when occasion gives thee permission; and then from thy in∣tention, to seek onely Gods good pleasure and honour in each one of thy actions and omissions: Now in o∣ther affaires, which admit of more deliberation, let this formall and ex∣presse intention be made at the begin∣ning of thy putting hand unto them: as also in things of longer durance, this intention is to be often renew∣ed; And to be renewed in the pro∣gresse of it, lest after right beginning, some crooked intention may chance to creepe into thy mind: And thus thou maist shun the secret deceits of thine own Nature, which is too prone to seek her-self, and to invert thy well-made intentions, and in stead of Gods honour, strike in for her own interest. 7. So that a champion who is not Lest self-love creep in, and so change & corrupt it. very vigilant in this doubtfull fight, may (as you see) often begin good works, and intend to perform them punctually according to the divine will & liking; and yet afterwards, al∣most unawares, the same works may begin to please himself so much for his own sake, that he may wholly forget Gods glory and honour. And
thus by little and little he may be∣come so changed, bewitched, and abstracted, with the pleasure, profit, and honour, redounding to himself from these works; that if these private conveniencies chance to be abstructed, by means of sicknesse or other accidents whatsoever, hee presently remains much troubled, contristated, and disquieted; nor can he without great difficulty be drawn to his first pure Intention, of doing what God would have him for his only divine honour and glo∣ry. EXPLICATION. WHence it manifestly ap∣peares, He that doth all things purely to please God, re∣mains in perfect in∣differency; that he acted not as moved by God, nor was his intention purely for God: For whosoever followes Gods motion, and desires to satisfie him alone, fixeth not his affection upon one thing more than another, but is ready to have this, doe that, or leave the other thing, in what manner, time, and circum∣stance it pleaseth God: So that he remains in such an indifferency, that
whether he hath it, or hath it not, he is equally pleased and pacified, al∣wayes quiet and content; because however it falls out, he hath what he desires, and enjoyes the end he aimed at, which was no other, than And hath alwayes what he desires. to be conformable to his Lord God. 8. In all thy actions therefore, and omissions, carefully cherish this Text. Therefore this right intention is of high impor∣tance, right Intention; for it is not to be expressed, what strength, efficacy and comfort it will afford thee; in so much as the very least and mea∣nest thing thus performed, (to please God, and for the honour of his name,) are of more merit and higher va∣lue in his sight, than the most hero∣icque works which are done without it. EXPLICATION. BUt if sometimes the disposition 9. This puri∣ty of in∣tention may be kept even in things aiming at our own good. of thy soul seems to call upon thee to act any good thing which points more directly at thy own good than Gods onely glory; [as, To avoid eternall punishment, or to obtain the blisse of Paradice:] Yet
even in this also thou mayst propose to thy self this perfect end of the divine will; who is well pleased that thou shouldst not descend into hell, but enjoy his heavenly Kingdom: And thus thou wilt keepe alive in thy And it puts such a worth up∣on our a∣ctions, heart this holy motive upon all oc∣casions whatsoever, of the impor∣tance whereof, I need not enlarge this discourse; It being most certain, that as the most holy and heroique That the best acti∣on with∣out it is lost, and may be sinfull; And the smallest a∣ction with it is most acceptable to God. work becomes not only defective and utterly lost, if it be not done for a good end, but may become even sinfull if it's end be sinister: So on the contrary, the smallest and least action, hath an inestimable price and value when done with an intention looking simply upon God, and his good will and pleasure; in so much, that a single penny bestowed on the poor, is more acceptable to the di∣vine Majesty, because it is given pure∣ly to please him; than if the same person should liberally profuse all his temporalities for any other end whatsoever, as, to gain thereby the joyes of heaven; though this end is not only good, but very much to be desired.
10. This exercise, (of accommoda∣ting all our actions purely and onely to please God, to sigh alwaies after God, to seek God in every thing we doe or omit, and to aspire perpetually to God with lively and lovely affecti∣ons, as to our most amiable and on∣ly good, which deserves in himselfe that all rationall creatures should honour, serve, and love him above all other things,) may seem at first very difficult, but use will render it If this ex∣cercise seem hard at first, yet use will render it easie, facile; and the frequent considera∣tion of Gods infinite worth, will so inflame the Wil in the production of the aforesaid acts of fervour and affection, that we shall with much ease and speed get a habit of doing And soon beget a ha∣bit in our souls; all things for his onely sake and re∣spect, who only deserves it. To which also the ensuing reflexions upon our own obligations to do it, will not a little conduce. 11. For who can choose but be Especially if we con∣sider, perswaded to search and will Gods pure honour, with an intire resigna∣tion to the ordinances of his divine How dear∣ly our Lord hath loved us. providence in all things, if he often call to his remembrance, how much he hath first honoured and loved
him? As in our Creation, hee made Which ap∣pears in our Crea∣tion, Re∣demption, us of nothing to be like himself, and produced all other creatures in order to our service: IN our Redemption, he sent no Angel, but his onely Son to pay our ransome, not by the cor∣ruptible value of gold and silver, but by the infinite price of his own precious bloud, and by his dolorous and disgracefull death. IN our Preserva∣tion, Preservation, each houre and mo∣ment, fighting our battails for us against our enemies, preventing and accompanying us with his heavenly grace, and leaving with us his deare Sonne, alwaies ready for our sup∣port and sustenance in the Holy Sa∣crament of the Altar, THESE ve∣rily And ma∣ny other benefits, and many more, are evident tokens of the high price he puts up∣on our meanesse and misery, and of the love which our great Creatour bears to us his poore and caitif crea∣tures; and are in themselves such inestimable benefits, that none but Which are so great, that none but God himselfe can com∣prehend them. his own divine understanding is ca∣pable to comprehend the least there∣of: And how much then are we bound in exchange, to doe for so excellent a Majesty, who hath done
such things for us? For if worldly Potentats, receiving honour from private persons of lowest rank, think themselves bound to return them reciprocall honour, what ought our vilenesse endeavour towards the su∣preme Monarch of the Universe, who so highly courts and cherisheth us. CHAP. VI. Of a two-fold Will in man; and the continual fight between them. THou must take notice (my dear∣ly 2. Wills. Rationall, and Sen∣suall. beloved,) of two Wills in man: The one of Reason, which is therefore called Rationall and superiour; The other of Sense, and so is named Sen∣sual, inferiour; and sometimes, sen∣suality, appetite, concupiscence, flesh, passion, and the like. And though each one of these is in man; yet be∣cause the use of Reason truly makes us and denominates us men, wee should never own any thing, which our meere sensuality dictates, till our superiour and rationall Will gives her joint consent.
2. From this diversity springs all The Ratio∣nall is sea∣ted be∣tween Gods grace, and our sense. our spirituall conflict: For our su∣periour Will and Reason being mid∣dled between Gods Will, which is above it, and our Sensuality, which is under it, still tempting and enticing it to naughtinesse: therefore both of them, that is, Gods Will and our own Sensuality, strive to get this our rationall Will, to side with them, and sometimes that, othertimes this, renders her subject and obedient to them. 3. But this battail is of no great And the truly ver∣tuous per∣sons yield promptly to Gods will, difficulty to them who are either truly vertuous, or downright vitious. For they who are vertuous, come no sooner to the knowledg of Gods holy will, but they presently yield their consent, and bridle their bru∣tish sensuality: And the wicked do And the vitious to their sen∣suality. contrarily according to their appe∣tite, checking the divine will which contradicts it. They therefore chieflly feele the brunt of this battail, (espe∣cially at first,) who have been great sinners, and are now resolved upon amendment, and to this end sever themselves from worldly and flesh∣ly delights, the better to love and
serve their Lord Jesus Christ for the future. For the inward feeling and strokes of Gods will, which their But they who of sinners are become converts have the greatest conflict; Reason receives from above; and the cruel contradictions and adverse motion of their Sensuality, which it must necessarily suffer from below; are so powerfull on each side, that the poor Reason is between them both brought into extreme straits and perplexities. 4, Wherefore let none think to Who must therefore resolve to beare pati∣ently the losse of their plea∣sures. gain the victory, who is not instru∣cted, prepared, and resolved to sup∣port patiently all such pains, as he shall endure in leaving his past plea∣sures: For this surely seems one of the chief causes why so few attain to true perfection; because, feeling grief and trouble in the beginning of their conversion, and in the quitting of their depraved affections and desires, they stand not fast to their resoluti∣ons, but yield to their enemies, who treacherously invade them, not making manlike resistance with the sword of Reason; but rather like cowardly souldiers, they skulke away, throw downe their armes, yield themselves to
the mercy of their enemies, and become againe their bondslaves who will now more than formerly tyran∣nize over them. EXPLICATION. ANd amongst these, one may Divers sorts of unmortifi∣ed souls. pick out some, who indeed neither take away, nor detaine their neighbours goods wrongfully; but yet have their affections fixt exces∣sively upon them which they possesse justly: so likewise they will not purchase honours unlawfully, but they love and desire them passio∣nately; They will keep the com∣manded fastings punctually, but care not to mortifie their gluttony; They will live continently, but are loath to leave pleasing company, which hinders their union with God, and greatly retards them in their ten∣dance to perfection: From all which, and the like petty-affections, Whose af∣fections are accom∣panied with much imperfe∣ction. it follows, that their good works are performed with a certain irk∣somnesse of mind, and are accom∣panyed with divers self-interests, and secret imperfections, yea with
self-conceit and good liking of their own actions, and with a longing desire to be liked and loved by o∣thers: But all these, not only make no progresse in the way of spiritu∣ality, but even return backwards, and And who make no progresse in spiritu∣ality, are in eminent hazard to fall into their former follies; because they are neither inamoured with true vertue, nor gratefull to their loving Creatour, who hath freed them from the tyranny of the Devil: They are moreover strucken with Ignorance and blindnesse, since they But are full of ig∣norance and blind∣nesse. neither understand nor see their ow danger, but falsly and foolishly fancy themselves to be in a state of security. 5. And here thou mayst perceive a Text. A danger in the choice of spirituall exercises discove∣red. very perilous and pernicious deceit, wch very few take true notice of: For many beginners in a spirituall course, out of self-love make choice of such exercises as are most pleasing to themselves, rather than most pro∣fitable unto their souls: when as in∣deed, they ought to begin with the knowledg of their own natural affections, and the naughty desires of their sensuality; and to make their
first and fiercest encounter with these enemies: and so long falling on and following this fight, till they be en∣tirely subdued to Reasons Empire, as farre forth as in this life is pos∣sible. CHAP. VII. Of the fight against Sensuality: and of the inward way of the Will, to ac∣quire Vertues. AS often as thou feelest thy self assaulted by the motions of 1▪ When Sensuality rebels▪ thy Sensuality, convert thy minde quickly to thy Lord God, and resist manfully: And that thou maist be∣come a conquerour in this combat, furnish thy self with these severall wayes and wards against thy foes. 1. Look presenly to thy rea∣son that it cosent not. 2. Recall that moti∣on again and again, and as of∣ten con∣quer it. 2. First, let the temptation be no sooner felt in the senses, but that thou forthwith put a precept of obedience upon the Superiour Will or Reason, that it yield no consent unto it. In the next place, when thou hast happily vanquished and discomfited any such temptation;
excite the same againe in thy self, and again repell it with the like fervour: Yea, do it yet again and again, that so often thou maist have occasion more zelously to hate it, to reject it, to contemn it: And this way is to be used against all temptations, and unruly affections of thy Sensuality; except onely what concerns carna∣lity: whereof hereafter in its due place. 3. Lastly, let it be thy exercise to 3. Pro∣duce acts of those vertues which are contrary to these vices. produce frequent and fervent acts of those vertues which are contrary to the temptations of these vices: For example: Art thou tempted to impatience? Recall thy mind home into its inner roome, and thou shalt there perceive, that this temptation to impatience, doth incessantly strive and sight with thy Superiour Will or Reason, to terrify and drive it out of the field, or incline it to consent: Therefore thou must contradict and resist the said temptation with re∣doubled fervor of thy Reason; and never leave off this resistance, till thou seest thine enemy conquered at thy feet, and become thy Cap∣tive.
4. Yet here thou art to be adver∣ized, But be∣ware of thy cun∣ning ene∣my, who sometimes suppres∣seth these motions. that our enemy perceiving us o constantly and continually to op∣ose our selves against his suggesti∣ns, passions and affections, ceaseth ometimes (out of his treacherous unning) from stirring them up: And which is more, when they are aised, he sometimes suppresseth hem; lest by the frequent fight of our Reason against them, we should get the habit of those vertues which are opposite to those passi∣ons. 5. It imports thee therefore to For then it is thy part to excite them. be weary, that thou lettest not slip this occasion of acquiring these ver∣tues: And if thou hast made a truce with thy foe, and art at peace with thy passions; yet reduce into memory thy past and overcome temptations; and excite the ill sug∣gestions which have formerly mo∣lested thee, yea and carry thy selfe so towards them, as if thou seemedst to consent, and yield them the victory: And with all marke the motives, ar∣guments, & reasons suggested by thy enemie; examin what he aimes at, what he would have of thee, and
to what thou art inclined; and when thou seest thy Sensitive part stirred up, and evill thoughts ascending, encreasing, and almost domi∣neering over thy Reason, which is even readie to give her consent; Then draw back thy foot, and vio∣lently excite good thoughts in thy soul in opposition to those evill sug∣gestions, boldly denying them further entrance or longer continuance. And fight the battail over and over, so And to fight a∣fresh with them, often and so long, till thou feelest in thy self, that thou art now a con∣querour of thy selfe. 6. But we must yet furthermore Till thou gettest a perfect ha∣tred a∣gainst them. take notice, that though we have gallantly fought, and happily foyled our enemies; we are in no security, till we hate them perfectly. And to excite, encrease, and perfect this our due hatred against them, we must so often (as aforesaid) stir them up, and provoke them to the com∣bat, thereby to take occasion of contemning, despising, and abhorring them, (that is our evil affections,) with the greater indignation; till we at length come to have a true and constant hatred against them.
7. Now, for the adorning of thy And the way to plant ver∣tues, is to practice acts con∣trary to these de∣fects. soul with vertures, the former fights and exercises against unruly passions, and evil affections, suffice not; but thou must frequently and fervently undertake the practice of those affections, and acts of those vertues, which are contrary to those now-extirpated passions, and over∣come vices. As thus: One gives thee occasion of impatienc: It is not e∣nough for thee to conquer and quell this motion according to the now-delivered doctrine; but thou shouldst moreover desire, that the same per∣son may, in the same manner, more & more move and molest thee; yea, thou shouldst force thy self to feele content in that trouble; and make resolutions to suffer more of the like nature, or greater of any other: And which is yet above all this, thou must constrain thy self to converse lovingly, speake sweetly, serve cor∣dially that very person, whose occa∣sion thus moves thee to impati∣ence.
EXPLICATION. THe reason why such contrary The rea∣son why such con∣trary acts are so ne∣cessary, acts are necessary to perfect our vertue; is, for that the root from which the vice buds forth, can by no other acts so fully be extirpa∣ted. Therefore, (to continnue in the same example,) although when we are sleighted and contemned, we yield not to the motions of impati∣ence, but beat it down with the three forementioned weapons; yet if we habituate not our selves to make this contempt pleasing unto us, and to rejoice therein, we shall never be freed and exempt from the vice of impatience; which (by reason of our naturall pronenesse to seek the encrease of our particular reputa∣tion,) is founded in the abhorring Is, for that whilst the root of vice re∣mains a∣live in us, it will still bud forth, and choak up our plants of vertue. of all contempt: And so long as this vitious root remains alive, it will be still putting forth, and make our vertue languish and droop, yea and sometimes choak it up: besides, that it puts us to perpetuall danger of relapses upon all occasions which are represented unto us: whence it is clear, that without the practice of
such contrary acts, we can never ob∣tain the true habits of vertues. And you are further to be instructed, that these acts must be so fervent, fre∣quent, Therefore we must make ma∣ny acts, contrary to the vici∣ous habit, and numerous, that they may be capable to destroy totally the vicious habit; which having got the possession of our heart by many vicious acts, must be thence extracted by many acts of contrary nature, that the desired vertuous habit may be let in and implanted. Yea, I That we may im∣plant the habit of vertue: moreover advertise you, that more good acts are required to obtain a ha∣bit of vertue, than vicious acts to get the habit of vice, because those are not assisted, (as these are,) by nature corrupted with sin. I add to all this, that if the vertue which you pra∣ctise, requires it, you are to make outward acts conformable to the in∣ward: And these acts must be exter∣nall as wel as inter∣nall. Text. Which is indeed full of paine, but very full of pro∣fit. as, (in the aforesaid subject,) you must use words of love and sweetnesse; and strive to find out, and lay hold on some occasion, of serving him, whom you take for your opposite and enemy. 8. And although these practises are full of pain, and seeme to be so
coldly performed by thee, that thou perceivest them to goe against the haire; yet omit them not in any case: For if they are painfull, they are also profitable; making thee valiant and bold to fight these holy battails, & preparing thy way to the victory. 9. Thou art moreover to be ad∣vertized, And this diligence must be used al so against the least evill moti∣ons; that not only these great and grievous temptations, and ma∣nifest wickednesses, are to be stoutly resisted; but even the least and lightest passions and disordered mo∣tions: For these are but forerunners of the greater, opening the doore for them to steale in upon us and oppresse us at unawares, and so to precipitate us into all vices: And it oftentimes falls out with them, who sleight these petty temptations, and care not to use diligence in resisting them: that when they afterwards least suspect it, much more grievous suggestions, do suddainly, violently, and dangerously invade them. Yea, and against lawfull af∣fections, when they are not ab∣solutely ne∣cessary. 10. Lastly, thou must also resolve to skirmish with thy lawful affections, and deny thy selfe even in thy honest desires, when they appear not to be necessary: For this will render thee
an experienced soldier in this spiritu∣all warfare, and a most gratefull servant to thy Lord and Saviour. 11. And now I tell thee plainly, For this is the way to become truly spiri∣tuall. (my dearly beloved,) If thou wilt try and train up thy self (in thy ghostly quarrell,) according to this prescri∣bed method; thou shalt soone feel, (Gods grace assisting thee,) a happy and totall change into spiritu∣ality. But if thou wilt needs follow other exercises, though seeming most excellent, and performed with such present gust and sweetnesse, as if thou hadst the full and familiar con∣ference and company of thy Cru∣cified Jesus: never perswade thy selfe, that such delicious wayes, are the direct path to perfection. 12. For as our vices spring fom Because all vice springs from the yielding to sense, this fountain, that our superiour Will or Reason submits her selfe to the in∣feriour feelings of Sensuality: So on the contrary, Vertues are ingenera∣ted in our souls, by due submission of this Will to the divine Will; and And all vertue by subduing and sub∣mitting our Will to Gods. as our will can never be truly good and gratefull to God, (though it receive from him never so holy and heavenly inspirations, and be driven
by the impulse of his Will to all its works and omissions) unlesse it con∣sent to the divine operations within it self; so it cannot be tearmed bad, and separated from God, though never so much tempted and troubled by the Sensuality, but only by consen∣ting unto it. CHAP. VIII. What he must do who feels his Superi∣our Will or Reason, overcome by his inferiour Will or Sensuality. IF thou sometimes findest (ô dearly  beloved) that thou prevailest no∣thing at all in the fight of thy Reason against sense; because thou feelest not an efficacious ardour to root out ill affections; Be not troubled, but stand As long as thy Rea∣son con∣sents not to Sensu∣ality, fear not. fast, and still pursue thy fight with courage and constancy: For as long as thy Reason keeps her selfe from consenting to these motions of Sen∣suality, so long thou hast the better in this battaile, and art master of the field. 2. Nor is it necessary that all thy affections and motions of Sensuali∣ty
do entirely submit to thy Reasons For victo∣ry consists not in fee∣ling no motions, but in not yielding. empire; neither doth our victory consist, in feeling no perverse passi∣ons in our Sensuality: But it sufficeth, that our Will and Reason (though Sensuality storm never so much) can alwaies act or omit, doe or not doe, will or desire, when, how, where, and as shee pleaseth: In so much as the Devill himselfe, and the whole world together, can never alter this our resolution. 3. And if it sometimes happen, But if thy enemies surprise thy reason, that thy enemies suddainly and vi∣olently rush in upon thee; and so surprize thy Reason, as to give it no respite to have recourse to such won∣ted wayes of devotion, whereby it might suppresse these motions: Then briefly make use of thy tongue, and say: No, no, I beleeve thee not, I will none of thee, I will never consent un∣to thee. And so behave thy selfe in this exigent against thy inward foes, as one would do being oppressed un∣awares with outward enemies: For his sword prooving uselesse in his defence, he strives to step backwards, that so he may get ground and time both to draw his sword, and also to
drive his enemy away therewith: And do thou in like sort, O spirituall champion; first give back, thereby Then give back to gaine time and strength. to gain time to think upon thy no∣thing, and that of thy self thou canst never conquer thy cruell enemies: And then buckling up thy self with hope and confidence in thy God, who can do all things, make a gallant assault upon thine enemy; saying, Lord help me, O my God give succour to thy servant; O Jesu, O Mary, the most worthy Mother of my Redeemer, deliver me from this danger. 4. But if thou hast time to breath And if thou hast time, help thy selfe with consi∣deration, upon it, then thou mayst support thy Will from consenting and yeil∣ding, by the succour of thy Under∣standing: fetching strength from the Consideration of those means, which may help her against her ene∣mies: As for example; If a great and grievous Impatience hath laid hold on thee, (by reason of some accident or affliction,) in so much that it seems more than thou wilt or canst doe to beare or dissemble it any longer: help thy selfe presently with these following thoughts. 5. First, whether or no thou hast First, whe∣ther thou hast de∣served this affliction.
any way deserved, or given just occa∣sion, that this adversity should befall thee: If so, rest contented, be no longer troubled; for it is most just and equitable, that thou patiently beare the blow given to thy selfe, by If so, rest contented. thine owne hands: But if not, Then turne thine eyes to thy other sins, If not, think on thy former sinnes not yet fully punished. for which neither thy loving Lord hath yet chastised thee as thou de∣servest, nor thou afflicted thy selfe as thou oughtest: And thence con∣clude, Secondly, That thy meke and mercifull mker, hath exchanged either the eternall paine, which thou shoudst have endured in Hell-fire, or else the temporall punishment, due to thee in Purgatory, into this easie and fatherly correction: And what then is more reasonable, than that thou embrace it, not only with a willing mind, but also with a grate∣full acknowledgment for so bounti∣full a benefit. Yea, though they were; yet selfe-denial and sufferance is the way to heaven. 6. Thirdly, But if thou thinkest, (which God forbid thou shouldest) that thou hast done sufficient pe∣nance for thy petty-offences: then reflct with thy selfe, that none can
enter the heavenly Kingdome, but they must passe through the narrow gate of selfe-deniall, and of patience in tribulation; for thus Gods holy Sonne himselfe, and all his blessed Saints ascended to their glory. 7. Fourthly; Nay, put case thou And if there were ano∣ther way, yet thy du∣ty to God binds thee to chuse this, couldst find out some other way to get to heaven; yet thou art obliged by the law of love, and duty, not to doe nor desire it: For the Sonne of God chose the way of thorns and crosses by which he would enter into his glory; and this for thy love, and that thou shouldst imitate him, who left thee this exact pattern of perfect patience. 8. Lastly, know for certain, that As being most gratefull and plea∣sing to his Majesty. amongst all the pious motives and meditations, which thou makest use of in these or the like events and ne∣cessities, for the comfort and confir∣mation of thy Will; this seems to be one of the most efficacious: To think what a joy and content it is to thy Lord God, how he likes and loves thee, when he beholds thee fight so stoutly for his sake. For nothing sure∣ly can be more gratefull to thy Crea∣tour, than that thou kill, and cut up
by the root, all depraved desires; and plant true vertues in their places, and this meerely for that thou well knowest it to be his holy Will and pleasure. CHAP. IX. That we must not shun the occasions of these combats. ANd now (my dearly beloved.) 1. The way to get true vertue, is not to a∣void, but to seek the occasions of combat. I adde to all these meanes hi∣therto mentioned for the acquisition of vertues, this as a short and certain memoriall: That thou neither feare nor fly, the offered occasions of fighting against thy passions. For if thou art desirous to have the habit of any vertue, (as of Patience, for example,) thy way is not to shut thy selfe up from conversing with men, or to shun those things, (whether words, actions, or cogitations) which move thee to Impatience. No, thou As for ex∣ample, to get Pati∣ence shun not the company, must not shun them, I say, but seeke them out, desire them, and love their company and conversation who are the causes of this thy disquiet. And as often as thou shalt have occasion of
intercourse with them, prepare thy selfe, and make ready thy Will to receive joyfully and endure patiently all tribulations and troubles, which they can any way bring upon thee. And this is thy onely way to ac∣custome thy selfe to Patience. 2. In like manner, If thou art Or the imploy∣ment which is tedious to thee. weary of any work, which growes tedious and troublesome unto thee; (either for that the person who com∣mands it displeaseth thee, or because it is of it selfe offensive, or that thou art thereby hindred from some o∣ther employment, which thou wouldst more willingly embrace) yet omit it not upon any termes, but rather set sooner upon that work than any other, be it never so pain∣full or displeasing: And although the leaving it undone seems to settle and quiet thy mind, yet still see thou desist not from doing it: For thus thou shalt become more and more instructed in the way to get perfect Patience: Nor is that supposed quiet, at all solid, because it springs not from a heart sincerely purified from all disorderly passion. 3. And I teach the same lesson, And the same rule is to be ap∣plied to trouble∣some thoughts.
concerning such thoughts; as some∣times trouble and contristate thy mind: To wit, that thy aime be not utterly to expell them, but kindly to entertaine them, and treat them as gratefull guests; because the trouble of their company, inures thee to the patient suffering of all contrarieties. And whosoever shall otherwise in∣struct thee, (ô my bloved,) com∣mands thee to fly that very thing in affliction, which thou seekest to ob∣taine by fighting; that is, the vertue which thou desirest to gaine, by con∣quering thine enemies. 4. But yet a young, and unexperi∣enced Yet a young Scholar, must be wary in waging this war; Soldier in this spirituall con∣flict, must warily enter the list to wage this warre with wicked thoughts: and therefore I counsell him sometimes to oppose them, o∣thertimes to exchange them for others, according as he perceives this or that way best profits him in the acquisition of vertues; but never so But never desert the field. to fly from them and totally leave them▪ as to seeke to be quit of all trouble and irksomenesse which thence ariseth; For though by this flight, he cuts off the occasion of im∣patience,
yet he gets no strength or constancy of heart, against the next rising motions thereof. 5. Whence it followes, that if the same Sergeants of Impatience doe at or then he will stil be un∣provided. another time, seize on him; he is soone terrified, and quickly conque∣red; because he was unprovided of armes convenient for the combate; that is, he had not fortified his mind, with customes, counsells, thoughts, and resolutions to keepe perfect patience in all events of Adversi∣ty. This way is usefull against all imperfe∣ctions, carnality onely ex∣cepted. And this way of warring, is very profitable, not onely against Impati∣ence, but all other Imperfections; (the carnall still excepted,) whereof shall be hereafter treated. CHAP. X. Of the Fight against suddaine tempta∣tions and passions. HE that is not yet accustomed  to receive suddaine adversities and troubles with a calme counte∣nance and quiet mind, may thus en∣ure himselfe thereto: Let him first
diligently consider them with his Ʋnderstanding, then earnestly desire them with his Will, and finally always expect them with a ready, resolute and prepared Minde. 2. The manner to ponder such First, thou art to pon∣der them in thy un∣derstand∣ing, And fore∣see what is like to be∣fall thee. adversities by the Understanding is this: Mark thine owne state, calling and condition, as also the place and persons where and with whom thou art like daily to converse: thus thou maist easily foresee what may pro∣bably befall thee, and how thou must carry thy selfe, and fortifie thy mind, against any suddain surprisall of thy passions. And if some accident not foreseen chance to happen, then be∣sides this former strength already gained by that first resolution to bear all crosse events with an evennesse of mind, thou maist thus farther help thy selfe. 3. When thou perceivest that thou But if some other crosse hap∣pens not foreseene; fly to the thoughts of Gods love and provi∣dence, art sleighted, scorned or any way in∣jured; presently enforce thy mind towards thy Lord and maker, and weigh his immense bounty and infi∣nite love to thee: from which thought it will forthwith occurre to thy understanding, that he is the
chief cause of this thy trouble and tribulation; and that he expresly permits it to befall thee, that thou maist learne to beare it patiently for his love, and so maist draw nearer, and be more perfectly united unto him. 4. And after thou hast thus con∣cluded with thy selfe, that it is his divine will and pleasure thou shouldest suffer it patiently; then reflect thy thoughts back upon thy selfe, and begin to chide thy soule, and tell it: Ah, why strivest thou to cast off this crosse, which neither this nor Who sends it, or per∣mits it, that enemy, but thy most loving Lord, and heavenly Father hath laid upon thy shoulders? Then turne to the Crosse or calamity which presseth thee, salute it, praise it, embrace it, and receive it with all possible joy and alacrity. 5. And although the rising passi∣ons And be constant though al∣most con∣quered. be so unruly and violent, that they suffer not thy mind to elevate it selfe to God, but leave thee woun∣ded, and almost vanquished; yet per∣severe in thy well made resolution, and proceed on as if thou wert not worsted in the skirmish.
6. But amongst all the remedies But the best reme∣dy against suddaine motions, is to cut off their cau∣ses. against these sudden and unexpected motions, this seems most effectuall; To take away timely the cause from whence they proceed: As, If thou feelest thy mind much troubled, when thou canst not obtain such a thing, which thou affectest: presently, away with that love to it, exclude that thing from thy mind. But if thy trou∣ble and vexation ariseth not from the thing, but from the person who hinders, helps, or procures it; and this party is so highly displeasing to thy humour, that the least thing as comming from him is troublesome to thee; then the speediest and best remedy is to conquer thine owne in∣clination, and compell thy will to yeeld him true love and affection. EXPLICATION. FOr besides that he is a Creature, framed as thou art, by the All-powerfull hand of God, and redee∣med by the same precious ransome of thy dear Saviours blood; he fur∣thermore presents thee with a happy occasion, (if thou canst love it, and
lay hold thereon,) to make thy selfe even like God, who is good and gra∣cious to all. CHAP. XI. Of the fight against our flesh, and fleshly concupiscence. IN this warre with thy flesh, (ô my 1. In this war, thou must change thy weapon; And therefore, Before the temptation assailes thee, call it not; But avoid all occasi∣ons of pro∣curing it, Which are five, 1. Conver∣sation. dearly beloved) thou must change thy weapon, and fight in a new po∣sture, contrary to the former. And therefore thou art to take particular notice of three times: to wit, the time going before the temptation, accompanying it, and following it. 2. Before thou feelest the temp∣tations of this kinde, fight not with them, but diligently fly the occasi∣ons; and cut off all causes which procure them: As First, all conversati∣on, though never so little dange∣rous. EXPLICATION. BEcause this enemy is not to be affronted, but avoided by all possible meanes, and we are to dread
the incounter of any person whatso∣ever, whose presence may put us in the least danger; nor are we to trust our not feeling presently the stings of the temptation, for this This ene∣my assailes us some∣times by stealth. accursed vice makes its approaches most commonly by stealth and under hand, and hurts us by so much the more grievously by how much it pretends truce and amity, whereby we neither distrust its treachery, nor stand upon our guards to defend our selves vigorously: So that there is oftentimes more cause of fear, when the haunt & familiarity is continued under the pretext of lawfulnesse, as of And un∣der the pretext of lawful∣nesse, &c. kindred, of obligation, of comply∣ance, or even of vertue in the party beloved; for then the poysonous pleasure of our sensuality, intermix∣eth it selfe with this affection, (which But sensu∣ality may mix it self with thy affection, and ruine thy soule. is in its owne nature good and holy) and insensibly distilling into the heart and penetrating by little and little into the very marrow of the soule, at last darkens and obscures the Reason; till it be brought to sleight all dan∣gers, and so by degrees fall either into open ruine, or at least into such trou∣blesome temptations, which are after∣wards
very hard to be conquered. Secondly, All pleasant aspects Text. 2, Aspects. upon any such persons or things, all shew of familiarity, all loving Saluta∣on, all pressing of their hands with thine, or the like levities: But if thou hast some affaire which must necessa∣rily be transacted with such a one, dispatch it with all speed and gra∣vity. Thirdly, Take heed of idlenesse, 3. Idle∣nesse. and take a particular and perpetuall care, never to act or think any thing unbeseeming thy state and vocation. Fourthly, Be punctuall in obeying 4 Disobe∣dience. thy Superiour, never contradict him in any thing, but be ever ready to execute his command. Fifthly, Judge 5. Vain-Compla∣cency. not rashly of thy neighbour concer∣ning this vice: yea, though his sinne be manifest, and cannot admit of any excusation; doe thou condole with him, but neither disdaine nor despise him. And turning his imperfection to thy owne profit, humble and con∣temne thy selfe; debase thy selfe even to the dust, and trembling with awfull feare, beg heartily the divine assistance, that thou be not likewise tempted, lest thou likewise fall. For,
if thou art ready to judge and sleight others, God will punish thee to thy cost, and permit thee to fall into the same vice, that so thou maist learne truly to know and humble thy selfe, and suppresse thy owne pride and presumption: For if thou art proud and fallest not, thy Salvation is much to be doubted of. Lastly, mark se∣riously, and beware of vaine-compla∣cence in thy selfe, upon the feeling of any sensible grace, or spirituall comfort: or inward delight in de∣votion, perswade not thy selfe that thou art therefore more perfect, or that thou shalt henceforth have no enemies to fight withall; but remaine still carefull, and ever fearefull. 3. In the time accompanying thy In the time of temptati∣on, mark the cause of it; whe∣ther exter∣nall, and fly from it, temptations; weigh whether they proceed from an externall or inter∣nall cause: by externall causes are commonly understood, conversation, speeches, reading, or whatsoever may provoke to this vice: against which the onely, present, and perfect reme∣dy, is to omit all such exercises and fly from these occasions: For there is no fighting with these temptati∣ons, as is aforesaid, but the best secu∣rity
is to fly far from them, lest they infect thy soule with their contagi∣on: By inward causes are meant, Or inter∣nall. either the body which is over full of sap and strength: Or the mind, which is infested with filthy thoughts, com∣ming either from our owne evill customes, and neglect of our senses; or else from the enemies suggestion. 4. The first of these inward causes, And pre∣vent it by fit cha∣stisements of the bo∣dy, which is from the body's fulnesse, must be prevented with fastings, hairecloths, watchings, and the like chastisements and austerities, as Rea∣son dictates, or Obedience directs. The other inward causes comming And by hearty prayer, from filthy fancies, are best remedied by holy prayer, pious meditation, diligent labour, and continuall em∣ployment, in affaires convenient for thy state. EXPLICATION. THy Prayer may be made in this or the like manner; When thou first apprehendest the approach of the enemy comming to assault thee with such fancies, recurre sodainly to the sacred Crucifix, saying, O my
Jesu, my sweet Jesu, succour me with speed, that I be not subdued, and em∣bracing the Crosse with thy Saviour upon it, kisse and cherish againe and againe his holy feet, and speak with heart and affection: O blessed wounds, ô chast and comfortable wounds, ô sa∣cred and sugred wounds! wound this wretched and unworthy heart of mine with thy pure and perfect love, and free it from these present and pressing motions of impurity, &c. But I would not advise thee to Text. Yet not according as some books pre∣scribe. choose such points of meditation, which many spirituall bookes pre∣scribe for remedy of these temptati∣ons: which are, to consider, First, the fowlnesse of carnall vices, & their insatiablenesse: Then the great shame and danger which must of ne∣cessity accompany them; and lastly, the losse of fame, and consumption of goods; temporall discontents, and eternall damnation: For though these are good mediations, yet they are not conducing to the conquering of these temptations: For since that Flight, in the judgement of all, is the Soveraigne remedy against this dis∣ease;
therefore every such thing is Which may give new occa∣sions to impurity. to be avoided, which gives any occa∣sion to impure cogitations: But in these forementioned meditations, howsoever the understanding tires i selfe in detesting these sins of carnali∣ty; yet at the same time, it fastens such fancies in the memory, that there are just grounds to feare the falling into delight thereof. 5. Wherefore, let the matter of But by medita∣ting on Christs death and passion. thy meditations for this purpose, be rather taken from the passion and death of our Saviour Jesus. And if evill temptations of that nature, doe also in these pious meditations in∣trude themselves (against thy Will) to trouble thee; and notwithstand∣ing thy vigilancy, yet still drive on their plots, and invent new devices against thee; (which may perhaps befall thee as well as others) yet be not out of heart, nor leave off thy well-begun meditations; nor stay to dispute with these flying thoughts; but proceed constantly in what thou art about, leaving and laughing at the other fancies, as if they nothing concerned thee. And this is the onely and best way to conquer im∣ure
cogitations, though never so mportunate and troublesome. EXPLICATION. ANd thou maist conclude thy meditation, with this or some such colloquie: O my soveraigne Crea∣tor and sweet Redeemer! disingage me from mine enemies for thy bitter pas∣sions sake, &c. And be sure not to per∣mit thy fancy to returne or reflect on the vice, since the onely memory thereof is accompanied with very much danger. 6. And take heed of holding any Text. Dispute not with carnall temptati∣ons, argument with them, whether thou hast yeelded thy consent or not; for this is a covert deceit of the Devill, who under this maske of good, lyes waiting to insnare thee, and bring thee into inconvenience. Which at another time, when thou enjoyest thy quiet, and art free from these troublesome temptations, will be easily perceived by thee, and taught But disco∣ver them to thy Ghostly Father. thee by thy ghostly Father: To whom thou art faithfully to discover all and every such thoughts, and not to
be asham'd: For humility is here mainly necessary, if we mean to com∣pleat the victory. 7. As concerning holy Prayer, And make no actuall and parti∣cular re∣flexions upon these temptati∣ons. (another remedy against this carnal malady, and all other spiritual dis∣eases) know, that it must be made with often lifting up thy mind to God, virtually intending to pray for victory over these thine enemyes without any actuall reflexion upon the temptations; Beware therefore of descending to particulars in thy prayers, or to shew as it were their malice, and thy misery, by reflecting upon speciall circumstances: for this may endanger thee to fall into new delectation. And this will suffice thee for thy defence in time of tempta∣tion. 8. And after the carnall tempta∣tion After the temptation is past, stand up∣on thy guard. is past, think not that thou art presently safe and secure from the like assault: but stand upon thy guard, and doe not so much as ever remem∣ber those objects which occasioned thy temptations, though never so much disguised with the appearance of vertue or piety; For all this is a secret perswasion of our corrupted
nature, and a craft of the Devill to insnare us, and allure us to delight. CHAP. XII. How to fight against slacknesse, and negligence. THat thou mayst secure thy selfe,  (ô dearly beloved,) from this pernicious vice; employ thy whole diligence and indeavours, to corre∣spond readily with all holy inspirati∣ons, Follow holy inspi∣rations speedily. and to decline all earthly com∣forts, curiosities, and superfluous affaires, not directly belonging to thy state and calling. EXPLICATION. COncerning which prompt and speedy correspondency with Gods holy inspirations, take this Rule: Be sure not to deferre the To begin a good work spee∣dily, and in it's due time, enterprise and beginning of that thing, (which thou art certainly satisfied thou oughtest to do), in it's due and fit time: For I assure thee, this delay in the beginning of thy work, will prove an unrecoverable
losse in the progresse thereof: because this first short lingring, calls on a se∣cond, which invites a third, and that is attended by another, and so thou wilt passe on to admit of more, to Is of great conse∣quence to overcome sloath. which thy sense will consent more easily than to the first, as having now tasted the bait, and swallowed down the seeming pleasure of this protra∣ction: whence it follows, that thou either entrest upon thy exercise when 'tis too late, or wholly omittest it, because thou art totally disgusted therwith. Thus by litle and litle, and almost insensibly, creeps in this evill habit of Negligence, and in the end we content our selves with this con∣ceit, that we will doe it another time more carefully and diligently. Take heed therefore of this most subtile enemy, Negligence, which not onely infects the Will, by making it abhor action; but also blinds the Ʋnder∣standing that it apprehends not the vanity of these ill-grounded max∣imes, to fancy the doing of our duty another time more devoutly and di∣ligently, which we may now per∣forme; and yet voluntarily leave it, or negligently delay it.
Wherefore having couragiously And ha∣ving cou∣ragiously set upon it, careful∣ly prose∣cute the same. begun thy good work, continue it carefully, prosecute it diligently, and end it devoutly; yet not so hastily as to hurt or prejudice the perfecti∣on thereof, or to imitate the errour and idlenesse of them, who out of sloathfulnesse think upon nothing but to make a speedy end of what they have enterprised; litle caring to doe it well, but onely striving to dispatch it quickly, that they may the sooner enjoy their over much-desired quiet and repose. 2. And because there is no better Text. remedy to recall one fallen into this sluggish vice, than thus to settle him to some good work; (though the sloathfull man, loaths all such em∣ployments; having more thought upon the labour, which he must un∣dergoe, The fruit of good works must be discover∣ed, than the fruit which follows it:) Therefore this good must be discovered, and made apparent unto him; and he must be given to under∣stand, that one hearty elevation of the mind to God, or one onely bending of the knee humbly to the earth for his honour, is more worth
than all worldly wealth and trea∣sures. EXPLICATION. ANd that as often as we make a diligent hast to speed a good work, by using a certaine force and violence to our selves, so often the holy Angels bring crowns of glori∣ous victory from heaven to adorne our soules: and that God by litle and litle takes away from the tepid and negligent, those graces which he had formerly given them, encreasing them to his faithfull friends and fol∣lowers. And as for the paine which is to Text. be taken in the prosecution of ver∣tuous practices; it must be so dexte∣rously And the pains dis∣guised. hid and disguised from him, that it may seeme lesse and lighter than it is. As; If thou shouldest perchance employ thy selfe in the exercise of pious meditation for the space of one whole houre, and that seemes too long to thy lazy disposi∣tion; use a pious fraude, and per∣swade thy sensulity, that after half a
quarters time well spent in prayer, thou wilt presently leave of: And againe when this short space is past, get thy body to have patience a litle longer, before thou ceasest thy devo∣tions; and thus continung from space to space, the whole howre will soone be overpassed, and thy sloath easily shaken of. 4. But if indeed thou findest a re∣all Unlesse there be a reall disa∣bility. disability of body, to beare such labours; thou maist lawfully leave it off for a time; till by degrees, it becomes accustomed to performe these practices of piety, with more fervour and alacrity. EXPLICATION. THis I tell thee, as condescending  to thy sloath and weaknesse: But if thou wouldest habituate thy selfe to make all labour light, and all paines pleasant; the best, though the But the best way to get a custome of induring, is to ex∣pect cros∣ses conti∣nually, most difficult way, is to get before it, expect it, & cheerefully embrace it at the first incounter; whence thou wilt find, that all tediousness in the perfor∣mance thereof wil be turned into per∣fect quiet & content, since what thou
dost, thou dost voluntarily and wil∣lingly: whereas if on the contrary thou seekest to shun labour, it will And not to seek how to shun them. not onely seeme irksome when it comes to be performed, but formi∣dable before-hand to thy apprehen∣sion; so that thy very quit will be subject to trouble, and the feare of this surprisall will continually alarme thy fancy; thou wilt abhor all pains-taking, as a thing loathsome, and still dread the occurrence of such occasions, persons or objects, as are like to impose it upon thee. 6. Marvaile not that I so much presse this point, and inveigh against Negli∣gence, is highly prejudici∣all to per∣fection, this vice of Negligence; I doe it, for that it is seldome perceived, and yet highly prejudiciall, because it per∣secutes and pursues us most secretly, and subtilly, it falls upon us not by force but flattery, it gnaws the very root of all spirituality, and insensibly gangrens the marrow of our piety and devotion: And our enemy hath no better or more alluring bait to And the most allu∣ring bait of our e∣nemy. entice any one into his treacherous ambushes, especially them who aime at spirituality: Be thou therefore vigilant, (ô my dearly beloved,) pray
heartily, performe good works di∣ligently, and delay not the spinning of the wooll for thy nuptiall robe, untill the marriage day be come, when thou shouldest be ready and arrayed to goe before thy deare Spouse. Reflect, that thy God, who Therefore take time∣ly care to prevent it. gave thee the morning, doth not promise thee an evening; therefore improve each moment to thy profit, and remember the strict account which will be exacted thereof. I And ac∣count that day lo, in which thou hast done no goodacti∣on. conclude, and counsell thee to give that day for lost, (though thou hast dispatcht never so many affaires,) wherein thou hast gotten no victory over thy enemies, nor thanked God for his benefits. CHAP. XIII. How to governe our Sensuality. THy Sensuality (ô dearly beloved)  is the ordinary gate whereby the Devill enters into thee; Let it be therefore thy chief care so to keep and curb it, that it may rather be a doore alwayes open to let in thy Lord God to thy Soule. Therefore
in all thy commerce with earthly creatures, be sure to have thy heart Keep thy heart dis∣ingaged from earthly creatures, free and disingaged from them; and often elevating the eye of thy affe∣ction to thy God, looke upon him, hidden in that creature as in his own work: and then reflct, that thy same Lord and love, is within thee also; and thou maist begin to con∣fer with him in this sort. O my mer∣cifull maker, and eternall Lord God; thou art ever present with mee; Thou art more within me than I am in my selfe: and I ungratefull and forgetfull wretch, remember thee not, love thee not, honour thee not. 2. At other times, elevate thy And con∣template thy crea∣tours greatnesse; thoughts to the contemplation of Gods incomprehensible perfections; and rejoyce in those his goods, greatnesses, and glories, more than if they were all thine owne. And be more glad, that he is incomprehen∣sible in his Majesty, than if he were within the reach of thy understand∣ing and capacity. 3. And when thou remarkest any And re∣duce all reated erfecti∣on to him, the foun∣taine, main perfection, either of Grace or Nture, in any man or wo∣man, (as wisdome, understanding,
piety, justice, and the like,) lift up thy selfe to him who is the bountifull bestower; and consider them not as they are in that creature, but redu∣cing them to thy Lord God, say: Behold these, ô my God, are rivulets flowing out of thee, the true, living, e∣ternall and increate fountaine; these are the rewards of thy servants, issuing out of the immense Ocean of thy ineffable bounty. 4. But when the beauty of any And all earthly beauty to heavenly glory. creature allures thee to any delight and complacency; passe presently from earthly beauty, to the thought of supernall glory, and therein one∣ly taking pleasure, say: O my God, when will the happy day come, that I shall take in thee onely my whole de∣light? 5. Another remedy against such∣like Mark well the craft of the Devill. surprises of pleasure, may be; To ponder presently with thy un∣derstanding, how cunningly the De∣vill, (who onely seeks to kill, or at least to wound thy soule mortally,) lies lurking under this bait. Which when thou perceivest, tell him bold∣ly: Ah, thou cursed serpent, how craftily and covertly, dost thou lie in
wait, to infect me with thy poison? And then lift up thy mind to God-ward, saying: O the goodnesse of my God, bee thou eternally blessed and praised, which hast discovered my hidden enemy, lying in wait to destroy my soul! 6. But in other accidents, which But when things which are unpleasant befal thee, thinke up∣on God's eternall decree. go against the hair, and rather procure pain than pleasure, thou maist thus exercise thy self: when somthing happens which is of hard digestion to thy Sensuality, (as heat, hunger, sicknesse, blows, or the like,) elevate thy mind to that eternall will, who would have it so, and even from all eternity decreed that thou shouldest suffer this or that calamity, at this very time, thus grie∣vously, and with these circumstan∣ces, as thou now endurest the same: Therefore ful of hearty joy say with∣in thy selfe: Now is thy divine will, (ô my eternall Lord and love) accom∣plished in mee; whereby thou wouldest from all eternity, that I now in this manner, measure, and number, should receive and carry this crosse: and I acknowledge all this to be for thine ho∣nour and glory, and my owne soules welfare and salvation.
7. And make use also of such like So likewise in any sudden or dismall chance, thoughts, upon all dismall occasions of wind, weather, and the like; which are out of mans power and provi∣dence to hinder or prevent. So, when thou readest any thing which tickles thy fancy, turne presently all thy de∣light to thy Lord God; and con∣clude, that he infallibly is hid under those words, and now by them sweetly discovers himselfe unto thee. And in like manner, when good thoughts occure with complacency And in all felfe com∣placency. and delight, as proceeding from the reflexion upon some good and ver∣tuous action; turne thy mind so∣dainly to thy Lord God, and ado∣ring him with all possible humility and reverence, acknowledge that good to have sprung from his grace, and therefore thou gratefully re∣turnest it his glory.
EXPLICATION. A larger Declaration of the foregoing Chapter, concer∣ning the government of our outward senses. THat thou maist rightly study  this usefull science, and learne how to governe & regulate thy out∣ward senses; it imports thee to use all exactnesse of custody, all curiosity, care, and diligence, and a perpetuall and never-intermitted practise; be∣cause the appetite which sits as Cap∣taine The appe∣tite is vio∣lently bent to seeke it's pleasure, and chief commander of our corrupted nature, is violently and inconsiderately bent to search after worldly solaces, earthly pleasures, and outward contentments; but be∣ing of it selfe unable to acquire them, makes use of the senses, as his Soldi∣ers And makes use of the sen∣ses to ob∣taine it. and naturall instruments, to ap∣prehend their objects; from whence drawing their images, it imprints them in the soule, and proceeds on to pleasure, which (by reason of the sympathy between it and the flesh) dilates it selfe through all those sen∣ses
which are capable of such pleasure: and from hence is derived the com∣mon contagion which infects & cor∣rupts both body and soule. Secondly, Now if thou art truly sensible of the danger of this poison, apply speedily The Anti∣dot against this poy∣son, this antidote which I have here prepa∣red against it. Beware of giving up the reines to thy senses, or letting them run at randome after the unruly fan∣cy of their leading appetite; and ne∣ver make use of them in things tend∣ing to meere pleasure, without any further good end, profit or necessity; but if unawares, they have gotten And how to curb the senses roa∣ming a∣broad, vent, and are roam'd too far abroad, either recall them back, or else so re∣gulate and curb them, that whereas they had at first basely yielded up themselves, and were become wretched prisoners to vaine plea∣sure, they may now bring home some noble spoile or other from each ob∣ject, and place it as a trophe in thy soule, where she recollected within her selfe displayes the banners of her affections towards heaven in the contemplation of her Creatour: Which thou maist thus practise: So soone as any object is presented to
one of thy outward senses, separate in thy thought, the spirit which is in that creature, from the creature it By sepa∣rating the spirit of each ob∣ject, from the thing it self ma∣teriall; selfe, and conclude that it hath no∣thing of it's owne nature which can charm thy sense, but that all is the work of God, whose Spirit bestowes invisibly this being upon it, gives it this goodnesse, and indues it with this beauty, & with all other its pre∣rogatives and perfections: Then re∣joyce heartily that thy God is the onely cause and source of so many and so great excellencies, which he eminently contains in his divine es∣sence, and whereof these are the least and lowest images. 3. So when thou findest thy sense fastened upon some creature which Whether it be a crea∣ture which hath onely a Being. hath onely a Being, reduce it in thy thought to it's first nothing, looking with the interiour eye of thy soule upon thy Soveraigne Creatour there present, who beautified it with this Beeing, and taking pleasure in him alone, thou may'st say: O Divine and desirable essence! how doth my heart leap with joy that thou alone art the infinit beginning of all created Beeing.
4. In like manner, when thou Or hath a Vegetati∣on, and increase; takest notice of Trees, Plants, Herbs, Flowers, and such other things; thy understanding will soone distinguish, how they have no life of themselves, but from that quickning Spirit, which falls not under the sense of thy fight; to whom thou mayst thus breath forth: Behold the true life, from which, in which, and by which, all creatures live and encrease: O the lively and lovely contentment of my heart! 5. Also, beholding brute-beasts, Or hath sense and feeling. let thy spirit soare up to thy God, the free bestower of all their sense and motion, saying: O prime mover of all things, yet remaining in thy selfe immovable; how great is my joy in thy firm stability! 6. Moreover, when thy sense is Or is in∣dued with rare beau∣ty; touch't and tickled with some rare Beauty; separate with all speed that which appeares to the eye, from the inward spirit which appeares not at all; and considering, that all the outward fairenesse, springs onely from the invisible Fountaine; say with a gladsome heart: Oh! the ju∣bilation of my Soule, when it thinkes
on that eternall and immense beauty, which is the originall source and essen∣tiall cause of all created comeli∣nesse! 7. Furthermore, upon the consi∣deration of any perfection in Crea∣tures, Or excel∣lent per∣fection; first making the aforesaid se∣paration, then break forth into these-like expressions: O rich treasury of all vertues! What contentment doe I feele, that all good is derived from thee, and by thee onely? and that all good∣nesse, compared to thy Divine perfecti∣on, is a meer nothing. 8. Stretching forth thy hand to Also, when thou un∣dertakest any action, any action, imagine thy Lord God to be the first cause thereof, and thou onely the living instrument of his Divine Majesty, to whom thy Soule may thus powre forth it selfe: O Soveraigne Lord of this Ʋniverse! how truly doe I rejoyce that I can doe no one thing without thee, and that thou art the prime and principall agent in all good actions. 9. Taking any refection of Meat Or re∣freshest thy body with meat and drink, or Drinke; reflect who gives that gust and savour to that Creature, and taking no other content than in him onely, say: Be joyfull, O my Soule,
that there is no true satisfaction out of thy God, and that in him onely thou hast a full abundance of all plea∣sure. 10. If some delicious smell be Or smel∣lest delici∣ous odours welcome to thy sense; stay not there, but ascend to him who is the source of all sweetnesse, and with a heart softned with comfort, say: Alas! O my Lord, as I am truly glad that all sweetnesse proceeds from thee, so grant I beseech thee, that my Soule being truly despoiled and uncloathed of all earthly pleasure, may purely soare up to thy delicious Paradise, and render a perpetually pleasing odour to thy Divine Nostrils. 11. When thou art taken with the Or art de∣lighted with musi∣call har∣mony, Musicall harmony of some excellent voyce or instrument, turne thy soule to thy Saviour, and speake to him: O my Lord and my God, how doe I joy in thy infinite perfections? O what an admirable harmony doe they make not onely in thy self, but also in the heavenly Citizens, and in all other thy Crea∣tures? 12. Thus mayst thou (my dearly Or any other sen∣sible ob∣ject. Beloved) raise up thy spirit from all sensible objects to the contemplati∣on
of the divinity, as hath beene hitherto declared. It remains, that thou be now in like manner instruct∣ed how to passe from the same sensible objects to the meditation of the Word incarnate, by frequet reflexions upon thy Savious Life How to raise thy Soule by the same objects, to contem∣plate the Word In∣carnate. and Passion. And to this effect, all things of the whole Universe will conduce; by considering in them (as before) that Soveraigne and Supreme good which is the efficient cause of their whole being and beauty; and thence passing on to the admi∣ration of his immense goodnesse and greatnesse, who being the absolute Lord of all these things, would vouchsafe to descend so low as to become man, and to dy for man, permitting his owne Creatures to arme themselves against him their Creator. Many things will also par∣ticularly represent to the eyes of thy Soule, these sacred mysteries; and put thee in mind of the severall in∣struments of his severe sufferings: As for example, by the sight of poore cottages. Of Raine. Poore cottages will remember thee of thy Saviours stable and cribb: If it raineth, thou wilt reflect upon that Divine moysture, distilling from
his Body in his bloody agony: The tones which thou beholdest, will Of Stones. put thee in minde of the Rocks rend∣ing in sunder at his Death; the Earth Of the Earth. will seeme to tell thee how it then trembled; and the bright-shining Sun, how it's light was then obscu∣red. Of the Sun. Of the Water, &c. If thou considerest the water, thou wilt fall into contemplation of that which issued out of his open∣ed Side; and the like of all other objects: So, when thou tastest Wine, thou mayst thinke of Christ's In tasting Wine. Vinegar and Gall; when sweete odours delight thee, how ill savour'd In sweete Smells. were the carkasses upon Mount Calvary where thy Saviour suffered? Cloathing thy selfe, reflect how the In cloath∣ing thy self. eternall Word put on our humanity, to adorne thee with his Divinity; In un∣cloathing thy self. In hearing Noyses. Uncloathing thy selfe, how he naked, was naild to the Crosse. Hearing a noyse or acclamations of People, remember those abominable out∣cries; Away with him, Crucifie him. When the Clock strikes the houre, In hearing the Clock. thinke how thy Saviour's Heart pan∣ted in the Garden at the apprehen∣sion of his approaching passion; or seeme to heare and count the cruell
stroakes of the scourges, or blowes of the Hammer fastning the Nailes through his Body to the Crosse. If In time of Sadnesse. sadnesse and sorrow seize thee, whe∣ther by reason of thine own suffer∣ings and sicknesse, or out of com∣passion to others, conceive, alas, how litle is all this, compared to the incomprehensible Anguishes, Distres∣ses, and Dolours, which pierced the Body and Soule of thy deare Sa∣viour. 13. Having thus shewed thee the Other wayes to meditate upon sen∣sible Ob∣jects. way how to elevate thy understand∣ing by meanes of all sensible things to the Divinity, and to the my∣steries of the Word incarnate; I will now adde other means and method of meditation, drawn from the same sensible objects; that as the Soul's gusts are various, so the spirituall diet may bee diversly dress'd and serv'd up for their sustenance: though this variety may be also very usefull, not onely to the simple, but even to elevated Soules well advanced in the way of the Spirit, which are not alwayes equally disposed to sublime contemplations. Neither need'st thou feare, that this variety will any
way confound thee, if thou art overned by the rule of discretion, nd the direction of thy ghostly Father, which thou art carefully and umbly to follow, not onely in his, but in all other thy under∣akings. 14. When therefore objects most By consi∣dering how mean the best of them are in them∣selves. pleasing to the eye, delicious to he sense, and desirable to flesh and blood, shall be represented unto thee; mark well, how meane these things are in themselves, though never so highly courted and cherish∣ed, extolled and esteemed by world∣lings: how the best of them is no better than dirt and dung in respect of Heavenly happinesse, for which thou art designed, which thou desi∣rest, and to which thou aspirest. 15. When thou gazest on the As the Suns brightness. Suns glorious splendour; know for certaine, that thine owne Soule is far more bright and beautifull than it, if shee be in her Creatours grace and favour: otherwise, that shee is more obscure and abhominable, than darkesome and dismall Hell it selfe. 16. When thou castest up thy
corporall eyes to the Heavens; eleva The Hea∣vens great∣nesse. those of thy Soule to those higher & holyer mansions of the blessed Sain and Angelicall spirits, and there fix and feast thy thoughts, as in the happy mansion prepared for thy eternall abode. 17. When thou hearken'st to the The Birds melody. Birds warbling notes; or other mu∣sicall charmes, soare up in spirit to the sweete harmony of Heaven, where Alleluja's do forever resound, and beg of thy deare Lord, that thou may'st become worthy to chant forth his perpetuall prayses amongst those heavenly quiristers. 18. When thou walkest on the way, Walking abroad. ponder how each one of thy paces, is a step towards thy death. 19. When thou markest the Fowls Marking the swift flight of the Fowls. of the Aire, how swiftly they glide through that yielding Element, and the running Waters hastning to their originall Ocean; thinke how thy life slips away, and thy Soule runs on to eternity with greater speed and celerity. 20. When impetuous Winds are In time of Winds, Thunder, Stormes. rais'd, or Thunder and Lightning rage in the Skyes, remember the
earefull day of Judgement, and rostrating thy selfe at the foot f the Crucifix, adore thy Saviour, nd implore his gracious assistance, hat thou mayst now make such good use of the time hee lends thee, hat thou mayst be then prepared o appear couragiously before his dread Majesty. 21. As concerning divers Acci∣dents, Also upon all other Accidents and Occa∣sions. As of grief & sorrow. which are personall and pecu∣liar to thy selfe; thou mayst thus be∣have thee. When Griefe or Sadnesse hath seized thy Heart, when melancholy oppresseth thy minde, or when any inconveniency troubles thy body; raise up and resigne thy spirit to the supreme and eternall Will of God, who is pleased this molestation should even now, and thus, touch and torment thee for thy good, and his owne glory; and bee glad of this occasion to serve him according to his owne Decree and Dispo∣sition. 22. When thou castest thine eyes When thou lookest up∣on Christ crucified. upon Christs sacred Crosse, consider it as the banner of thy warfare; from under which thou, maist not step
aside, without eminent danger of being surprised by thy sworne ene∣mies; but following it closely and valiantly, thou hast certaine hope to conquer them, and climb up to hea∣ven, loaden with their glorious spoils and trophees. 23. When thou seest the image, Or the image of the Blessed Virgin. representing the holy Virgin mother; turne thy heart towards her, now reigning in Paradise; and give her thanks for having been ever ready to performe the divine will; for bearing and bringing up the Redee∣mer of the world; and for never denying her favour and succour to thee and all spirituall combatants humbly imploring it. 24. So let the pictures of Saints, seeme as so many representatives of And the pictures of Saints. stout champions and Soldiers, who by their courages and conquests, have made thee a free and safe passage to follow them, imitate them, over∣come with them, and be crowned with them in eternall glory. 25. Let the Churches, which thou Or entrest into Churches frequentest, put thee in mind that thy soule is Gods temple, and should be therefore kept most purely,
and prepared most perfectly for his comming. 26. Finally, let each creature, all Finally, make all objects & accidents instrumēts to thy per∣fection. objects, and every accident, be so spiritualized and distilled by thy un∣derstanding from their earthly and materiall drosse, that they may serve thee as true instruments to the perfection of thy soule, and become powerfull helps to thee, (contrary to thine enemies intention) in thy ten∣dance to divine union, which is the onely end thou aimest at. How to regulate the Tongue. 1. And because the tongue hath a neere assinity with our senses, (for we willingly discourse of those things wherein we take delight) I will here (before I descend to the following doctrine) briefly shew thee how thou art to regulate, bridle and master this unruly member. 2. Much pratling proceeds ordi∣narily Much talk proceeds from pre∣sumption. from a certain presumption, which perswades us that we are very knowing in the things we talk of; and so pleasing our selves in our own conceptions, we endeavour to im∣print them in the hearers hearts with
soperfluous repetitions and replicati∣ons of the same subject, to appeare thereby more masters of Reason than others, and as if they stood in need of our instruction. Few words cannot expresse the evill which en∣sues upon over-much talking; for it is the parent of idlenesse, an argu∣ment of ignorance, the dore of de∣traction, the instrument of falsehood, and the blaster of all true devotion and spirituall fervour. 3. Wherefore I advise thee, in the Therefore avoid long discourses, first place, not to enlarge thy selfe in long discourses, before unwilling hea∣rers, which is to break the lawes of civility; nor yet before them who are willing to hearken to thee, lest thou exceed the bounds of mode∣sty. 4. Avoid also, all patheticall and And passi∣onate ex∣pressions; passionate expressions, and an over∣high elevation of voyce; for both these are generally odious to the hearers, and alwayes arguments of thine owne vanity and presump∣tion. 5. Speak not at all of thy selfe, of And all talking of thy owne affaires, thine owne affairs, of thy patentage or kindred, unlesse in case of evident
necessity, and then also with all pos∣sible brevity, simplicity, sincerity, and modesty: and if another seeme superfluous in such speeches concer∣ning himself, be thou edified thereat, but imitate him not, though his words tended to his self-abjection and accusation. 6. Discourse not of thy neighbour, Or of thy neigh∣bours. nor any thing concerning him; unlesse a just occasion urge thee to defend him, or speak well of him. 7. Shew a willingnesse to talke But speak willingly of God. alwayes of God, and particularly of his love and liberality, yet still with profound reverence for fear of fai∣ling; and therefore take more con∣tent to hear others discourse, than to talk thy self; and conserve what good words are delivered in the cabin of thy heart. 8. As for all other discourses, let the only sound strick thy eares, but keep thy mind fixed upon thy God; And if thou needs must lend an eare because thy answer is expected, yet let thy souls eye glance up to heaven And pon∣der in thy heart, what thy tongue is to utter. where thy Lord and love is, and first examin briefly in thy heart what thou intendest thy tongue
should utter, wherby thou wilt quickly resolve whether speech or silence be now more to the pur∣pose. 9. Lastly, thou wilt find by expe∣rience, (my dearly beloved,) that The praise and profit of Silence. Silence is an excellent and usefull weapon for thy spirituall combat, giving courage to fight, constancy to continue, and confidence to over∣come. It is his sure friend, who distrusts himself, and trusts in his God; it conserves us in devotion, and comforts us in the exercises of our duty: And surely the bare con∣sideration of the disasters caused by inconsiderate talking, is a sufficient motive to make us in love with si∣lence, to which that thou maiest ha∣bituate thy selfe, make frequent use of solitude and retirement from fruitlesse company, and frivolous conversation; whereby instead of men, thou shalt have Angels, Saints, and God himselfe for thy compani∣ons and comforters. Finally, reflect upon the conflict which thou hast undertaken, and considering how much thou hast to doe, thou wilt find litle leasure to spend in idle talk.
CHAP. XIV. Of the order to be observed in fighting against our enemies. IN thy spirituall combat against  thy disordered affections, and passions, follow this method: First, enter into the cabinet of thy Mark which are thy great∣est ene∣mies, heart, and let thy inquisitive thoughts search and examine with exact dili∣gence, which be the affections that there beare the greatest sway, and with what thoughts and motions thou art most frequently tempted, and troubled. Secondly, And having found thy And sin∣gle out the fiercest to fight with: foes, turne thy weapons against that single enemy which then actually molests thee, most nearly endangers thee, and is now ready to graple with thee, oppresse thee, and ruine thee. Thirdly, But in time of peace with But when they ap∣peare not, seek them. thy passions, when no enemy appears in field, to provoke thee to battalle; begin thou with them; and make thy strongest onset upon those which have chiefly indomaged thee, most frequently foiled thee, and wrought
thy greatest confusion before thy Lord God. CHAP. XV. What course he must take, who is con∣quered, and grievously wounded by his enemies. IF thou chance to fall into some  vice, either through frailty and weaknesse, or through wickednesse, and wilfull malice; Turne thee with When thou art faln, rise with all speed. all speed to God; and first reflect upon thine own basenesse, & heartily hate thy self. Then recollecting thy spirits, and converting thy self againe to thy Creatour, confesse to him thy ingratitude, and say with an inflamed heart: O my Lord, he hold I have done Pray with fervour. like my selfe: For what better could be expected from me, than basenesse, fallings, and sinfulnesse; I am sorry, O my God, with my whole heart: and I confesse, I should have done farre worse, and fallen more grievously, had not the hand of thy goodnesse, kept me, stayed me, and upheld me; for which I render thee most humble thanks. And now (O my loving Lord,) doe thou like
thy selfe, according to the treasures of thy mercies; and let me not live out of thy grace, nor ever offend againe thy most sacred Majesty. 2. Having thus sincerely poured Be not over-soli∣citous or fearefull. forth thy heart in the presence of God, be not solicitous and thought∣full whether he hath forgiven this thy sin, or no: for such a curiosity savours of pride, endangers thee to fall into the snare of Satan, renders thee unquiet, and consumes time to little purpose: Therefore, cast thy selfe purely into the paternall bo∣some of thy mercifull Lord, resume thy wonted exercises, and take up thy weapons again, as though thou hadst not fallen. Yea, shouldest thou chance to fall many times a day, and receive many grievous wounds from thy enemies; yet never despaire, never grow faint-hearted, or over-fearfull of thy selfe; but still stand upon thy accustomed guards against all new assaults; and doe the same things with no lesse confidence, the second, third, fourth time, and as often as thy need shall require, as thou didst at the first. 3. This kind of exercitation, by so
much the more displeaseth the De∣vill, by how much he well knowes it is highly pleasing to God: and for this reason he moves all his engines, to make us tepid and slack in fre∣quenting it. Doe thou therefore use But be di∣ligent, and use vio∣lence to thine own Inclinati∣on, violence to thy selfe; and the more difficulty thou findest, by so much more redouble thy diligence in do∣ing it; and esteeme it not a thing over-irksome, to renew it divers times in one and the same fall; And if after the first, next, and third re∣lapse, thou feelest a grievous trouble, confusion, and diffidence in thy self; yet still endeavour, by all meanes, to recover the inward quiet of thy soul, Recove∣ring the quiet of thy soule, and recon∣ciliation to thy Sove∣raigne. and then reconcile thy selfe to thy loving Lord: For that disquiet∣nesse of conscience remaining after the sinne committed, is not any signe of thy sorrow for having of∣fended thy Saviour; but rather of fear, for thy owne private damma∣ges, which thou hast thereby de∣served. 4. Now the way to recover this The way to get this quiet, is to forget thy fault. quiet of mind, may be this: Having truly turned thy selfe to thy God, and humbly craved pardon for thy
sinne; thinke no more of it, but for∣get it totally for the future; and fix thy thoughts onely upon thy Lords infinite love, by which he earnestly desines to unite thee to himselfe, and make thee partaker of his eternall beatitude. And when by this or the like considerations, thou hast setled thy mind, and stated thy heart in tranquillity; turne thy thoughts a∣gaine to contemplate thy fall, and doe as thou wert directed in the beginning of this Chapter: And when thou goest to confession, (as thou shouldst frequently do,) re∣call all thy fallings and defects into thy memory, discovering them faithfully, and confessing them sim∣ply, to thy Ghostly Father.
CHAP. XVI. That we should keepe our Hearts ever quiet, and joyfull in our Lord. EXPLICATION. AS when wee have lost the quiet of our Heart, we are to use all possible endeavours to recover it, (as is aforesaid:) So thou must know No acci∣dent, can justly de∣prive us of quiet. that no accident whatsoever can with any just reason deprive us of the same. For 'tis most true, (and thou hast beene often told it,) that wee must be angry with our selves for our sinnes, yet our griefe must bee govern'd with discretion, and accom∣pained with tranquillity, and our sorrow must produce acts and reso∣lutions of amendment of our lives, not of disquiet and anxiety in our selves. As for other painfull and unpleasing accidents, as the sick∣nesse, death, yea and eternall dam∣nation of our deare friends; or the scourges of Plague, Famine, Warre, Saccagings, Burnings, and other evils, falling upon our selves; though
as they are things contrary to our For thoug wee must needs ab∣hor things contrary to nature, Yet wee may love them as coming from Gods permissiō, And so conforme our selves to his holy will. nature, we must needs reject them; yet we may by the efficacious work∣ing of Gods Grace, not onely desire them, but even be delighted with them, as being the just punishments of the wicked, and exercises of vertue to the good, for which ends out loving Lord permits them to befall us. Thus conforming our selves to Gods holy Will, wee may quietly and peaceably passe through the midst of all this lives bitternesses and contrarieties. And take this for a truth, that all Disquiet of mind, is displeasing to our deare Lord; be∣cause it is never without some im∣perfection, and evermore proceeds from some perverse root of self-love- 1. To obtaine therefore this quiet of Text. Thou art to appoint a sentinell. Heart in thy Spirituall Conflict; thou must (O dearely beloved) appoint over thy selfe a faithfull Scout-watch; which, as soone as it discovers any thing tending to thy trouble and disquiet, may suddainly shoot off the warning peece, that thou maist timely betake thee to
thy Weapons for thy defence. 2. And if it falls out, (as too often it doth,) that through some sodain assault, thou art grievously perplexed; presently setting all other If thou art surprised with per∣plexity, return with all dili∣gence to quiet thy Heart. things aside, pacify thy interiour, and endeavour to regaine a quiet and joyfull Heart: for this being done, thou wilt be better enabled to prosecute other affaires, which will take small effect, so long as thy minde is troubled and unquiet: Besides, the enemy drawes from thence an occasion to tempt thee more violently; For hee feares this sacred quiet and peace of the Soule, (as Gods Tabernacle wherein hee workes his wonders,) and there∣fore hee shadows his wiles with the shew of good, that he may the more deceive us; exciting in us sundry pious affections, and holy desires: The cunning whereof is discovered by their fruits and effects; which is the bereaving our Hearts of all their joy and content. 3. So soone therefore as thou hast And ther∣fore admit of no new affections, understood by thy scout-watches signe, of some new affection which demands admittance into thy heart;
beware of opening unto it, before thou hast blunted the edge of thy Will from any desire thereof; and made an humble offer of it to God, with an acknowledgement of thine Before thou hast offer'd them to God; owne ignorance and blindnesse, whereby thou art uncapable (with∣out the light of his heavenly Grace, which now thou implorest) to judge of this good motion, and to de∣termine whether it comes from his glorious Majesty, or from some earthly cause and consideration. 4. And be ever mindfull of mor∣tifying And mor∣tified thy will and desire; the pronenesse of thy nature, before thou adventure upon any good desire, though sent from God himselfe: for such workes which ensue upon selfe-mortification, are more gratefull unto him, than those which are done following the desires of thy greedy Nature. And this mor∣tification of thy will, doth generally better please him, than the worke it selfe. 5. Thus, driving out vaine and vi∣tious affections; and not rashly ad∣mitting of the good, till first thy owne nature with all her passions and desires be stilled and mortified;
Thou maist be sure to remaine in Which is the surest way to re∣main in peace. peace, and to keepe the bulwarke of thy Heart in perpetuall security from all thy foes without, and from reprehensions, and selfe-afflictions within: which grudgings of consci∣ence, though they seeme very good, and to come from God, because they blame thee of some defect; yet they are sometimes suggested by the Devill: but the onely way to know their off spring, is to examine their effects; For if such selfe-repre∣hensions keepe thee humble and quiet, and spur on thy diligence to doe good Workes, without les∣ning thy pious confidence in God; then receive them as inspired by him, who thus knocks at the inner dore of thy Heart to teach thee selfe-knowledge. But if they make thee unquiet, pusillanimous, unapt to good Workes, and diffident of God, (especially at the time when thou feelest these interiour reprehensions and afflictions in thy selfe;) con∣clude as a certaine truth, that they come not from thy Creatour, but are suggested by the deceiver: and there∣fore hearken not to them, but persist
merrily in thy devout and accustom∣ed exercises, as if thou didst not at all feel any such suggestions. CHAP. XVII. That pious purposes, are sometimes the deceits of the Devil, to hinder our progresse in vertues. BEsides these hitherto disco∣vered  deceits of the Devill, this yet remains, to wit, A holy purpose and earnest desire to fight afresh against our former sinnes: which hee therefore suggests unto us, The Devil suggests desires, to fight against former faults, that thou maist neglect the present, that our minds being taken up with this employment, may forget their daily and more dangerous enemies, and wage no war against them. But he that will take due care of his own spirituall safety, must in the first place, fall to worke with his next neighbouring vices, and set them farther of: For through the neglect of this, we fall into many miseries; as they must needs doe, who are still wounded afresh, and yet thinke not of seeking for any salves to cure them.
2. Because these purposes being And fall into self-compla∣cency, esteemed as if they were reall per∣formances; we fall into selfe-compla∣cency and secret pride; in so much as wee cannot disgest a hard word, much lesse any blowes; and yet wee attend our high contemplations, and there wee can make resolutions to endure patiently, and purely for Gods Love, all the pains of Purga∣tory. And for that our inferiour will or sensuality, feels nothing in it selfe that troubles or grieves it, but looks onely upon such calamities as are to come hereafter; wee very soolishly and rashly conceit our selves, to bee some of them who are perfectly patient, and that wee actually suffer many great matters for Gods Sake. 3. Wherefore, O my beloved, that thou mayst avoid this deceit, resolve, Therefore thou art to fight actu∣ally with thy nearest foes, not onely in thy mind, but buckle thy selfe actually to fight with thy nearest foes, which thou findest most troublesome, and most strongly to oppose thee: And thus thou shalt plainly perceive whether thy purpo∣ses be true or false, strong or weak: But I may not advise thee, to wage
war against those enemies which now trouble not thy quiet, unlesse thou plainly foreseest, that they are ready to assault thee: For then thou mayst lawfully and profitably fight them, before they fall on thee; that so And not to irritate them which are quiet, thou mayest have the more strength and courage at the time of the Battail. 4. Yet perswade not thy selfe, that by this foregoing skirmish with thy enemies, thou hast already van∣quish'd them, unlesse thou hast been for a long time exercised and vers'd Unlesse thou art well vers'd in the acts of that vertue. in the acts of that vertue: in which case, thou maist resolve to fight against past grievous sinnes, though thou canst not yet conquer some lesse defects; the Divine Providence so permitting, to preserve thee in the humble acknowledgement of thy own weaknesse. 5. But whosoever is carelesse in Bee not carelesse of smal de∣fects. overcomming small defects, and yet thinkes hee can easily vanquish the greatest, is notoriously vaine, and presumptuous, and even already fal∣ling into the snare of the Devil.
EXPLICATION. I Advise thee here, (my dearely beloved,) to take speciall notice Three things make our designs fruitlesse. of three principall occasions which render our designs fruitlesse, and de∣fraud our pious purposes of their desired and expected effect: And this Doctrine will teach thee how to make good purposes as thou oughtest. 6. The first occasion, (which was also touched briefly in the foregoing Text,) is, that we ordinarily pur∣pose 1. The re∣lying up∣on our strength. to do a good action, or to avoid the doing of evil, more trusting to our strength, than to Gods assist∣ance: And this pride, (whence this deceit proceeds,) so hudwinkes the eyes of our Soule, that wee see it not at all, and are therefore justly permitted to fall and faile of our expectation, that wee may thereby truly come to the knowledge of our own nothing, and learn to ground all our good designs upon the Divine Goodnesse, Grace, and Power, and not at all in our owne strength or indeavours.
7. Another occasion is, that when 2. The want of force to go through with them. our will enters upon a designe, it wants force and efficacy to goe through with it: (although it seemes otherwise to us, because our designe eyes the beauty of that vertue which wee aym at, rather than the difficul∣ty which intervenes in the getting it,) So that it is no great mervail, that such ill-grounded designes fall downe to the ground, and melt away into nothing upon the first sight of the vertue. 8. The third occasion is; That we 3. The no levelling at the right end. addresse not our designes to their true and proper end, to wit, the pure Service and Honour of God; For wee make them oftentimes, in our afflictions, or in time of distresse and desolution, rather to find there∣by some solace in such contrarieties, than onely to please our Lord God; who therefore lets us fall after∣wards, that wee may discerne this deceit, and learn, to our cost, to aym at nothing else in all our actions than his holy Will and Pleasure.
CHAP. XVIII. How the Devil strives to withdraw us from the way of vertue. MOreover, the Devil makes 1. Another deceit of the Devil, use of an other subtilty, to draw us from the path of vertues, into the precipice of vices. As thus: A certaine person fals into a sick∣nesse, which hee desires to support Exemplifi∣ed in a sick person. with patience; The Devil, (seeing that if hee thus persevere, hee must needs get the habit of patience) suggests unto him divers motions and desires, to do this or that good Worke, if hee could once have health restored: and that hee could serve God better; advance his owne perfection more effectually; and assist others more charitably, if hee were sound, than hee can doe being sick: And these conceits en-kindle more and more in the breast of the sick person, till they make him weary and impatient of his sufferings; as being thereby hindred from doing such heroique actions: And by this deceit, the Devil casts down a Soule
from the practice of Patience, (in Falling into im∣patience upon pious pretences, which it first exercised it selfe) into open Impatience against this infirmity; yet not as a thing which is in it selfe displeasing, but as it is a hindrance, retarding her from the Execution of those good Works, which shee unquietly desires to performe. 2. Nor doth the enemy rest here; but having brought the sick person to this, proceeds on in his plot, and And over-earnestly desirous of health. takes away from him the aforesaid suggestions (of such good Workes as hee could bring about if hee en∣joyed his health) when the sick person perceives it not; leaving in him onely an ardent desire to re∣cover his health: and if this follows not as hee would, hee falls into grievous sadnesse and great impa∣tience. 3. The best remedy of this, is, that The re∣medy, is to admit of no purpo∣ses which thou canst not pre∣sently practice. when sicknesse or other adversity hath seized on thee, thou take care to admit no motion or desire into thy minde, which thou canst not forthwith put in execution: other∣wise it will make thee solicitous, and leave thee in unquietnesse.
EXPLICATION. ANd thou rt in this case, to Because perchance they would not have their effect; perswade thy selfe with all pa∣tience, humility and resignation, that perchance thy now-made inentions, would not have the effect thou ima∣ginest; because thou art far weaker than thou thinkest: Or, that God Or that God would not receive them. by his secret judgements unknown to thee, by reason of thy demerits, will not receive this good from thee; but rather that thou humble thy self under the sweet and powerfull hand of his holy will. So likewise, shouldst thou be hindred by thy ghostly Father, or any other occasi∣on whatsoever, from following thine Therefore, trouble not thy selfe, when thou canst not per∣forme thy desires; own fancy in thy accustomed de∣votions, and particularly in receiving the sacred Communion, trouble not thy self with over-earnest desires, but truly devested of all self-will, cloath and content thy self with Gods good pleasure; Saying sweetly; If the all-seeing eye of divine providence, found not in me so great ingratitude, and so many defects, I should not be now de∣prived of so great a blessing as is the receiving of my sweet Saviour in the
blessed Sacrament; but humbly ac∣knowledging that my loving Lord, doth thus discover unto me mine owne un∣worthinesse, his holy name be ever blessed and praised. O my God, I place my whole confidence in thy divine good∣nesse, and hoping thou wilt accept of my will, which I force and conforme to thy disposition; I here open to thee my heart, ready to obey thy holy command, disposed to doe what thou inspirest; enter into it, I beseech thee, and endow it with Spirituall comfort, and courage against its enemies, and then doe with it, O my Creatour and Redeemer, that which is most agreeable to thy di∣vine Majesty, and let thy sacred will be now and alwayes my onely food and nourishment, since I desire nothing more, ô sweet spouse of my soule, but that purged and freed from all things whatsoever displeasing to thee, I may be ready, adorned, and prepared for thy comming, and willing to follow thy blessed disposition in all things whatso∣ever. But rest secure, that thy good will is ac∣ceptable to God. If thou punctually performest these precepts, rest secure, (my dearly beloved,) that all thy good desires to doe well, which neverthelesse thou
canst not compasse; (either by rea∣son of thine own nature, or the craft of thy enemy, or God himselfe not permitting it, to prove thy resignati∣on to his holy will,) will always minister some occasion of satisfying thy duty to thy Lord God in what manner hee best pleaseth. And this is the truest service thou canst performe, and the most acceptable sacrifice thou canst offer to his divine Majesty. But I think it very convenient to Another dangerous snare. give thee here another caveat, of a most dangerous and subtile snare, into which many, blinded with selfe-love, fall unawares: and this it is; They so palliate and excuse their defects that themselves doe scarcely per∣ceive them. 4. And mark this diligently; that Text. oftentimes when a man falls into impatience, he imputes it not to the pain which he endures, but for that he is impeded from the practice of good wotks: So that the cause of Divers pretences for our impati∣ence. his impatience relates not to the sicknesse or adversity it selfe; but partly to himselfe as deserving it,
partly to others, whom he must be forced to trouble against his will; and partly to the omission of his spi∣rituall exercises. 5. Thus he who failes in his ambi∣tious But all un∣warranta∣ble, seeking of honours and offices, will tell you, he complains not for his owne sake, but for the necessity of his family and friends, whom he might thus have helped. Now that such men deceive themselves, is made apparent by this; that they are not much troubled, when the very same effects come to passe by some other meanes or persons, which seemed to afflict them, and under which they covered their owne imperfecti∣on. 6. For example, Thou tellest me, As is ex∣plained by an exam∣ple. that thy sicknesse makes thee not impatient, because it is in it selfe grievous to thee, but for that they who are about thee are thereby o∣verburdened: But should they, whom thou so much compassio∣natest, be as much overburdened in serving other sick persons, it would not much trouble thee: From whence it is evident, that not the sense of their trouble, but thine owne desire,
and selfe-love, was the true root of thy Impatience. And in this manner, thou maist discover the hidden de∣ceits in the rest of thy affaires. EXPLICATION. TO remedy this, I advise thee, The re∣medy is, to separate the pain, from the pretended circum∣stances. (my beloved,) that as soone as thou doubtest of such a deceit, thou presently separate (by the help of thy conception) the pain which presseth thee, from those circum∣stances which are pretended excuses for thy impatience; and then reflect∣ing upon that alone, force thy selfe to produce true and efficacious acts of patience, and resignation to suffer it willingly. Thus thou wilt either become a true practiser of vertue, or at least thine eyes will be opened to discover thy owne defects, whereof thou wert formally ignorant. 7. Wherefore I exhort thee, that Text. Therefore desire not to be freed from thy Crosse, if thou art able to carry thy Crosse with patience; thou never desire to be freed from it: for this desire brings with it two great evills: The one is, that if it destroyes not thy pa∣tience,
yet it disposeth thee by little and little to impatience: The other is, That it deprives thee of merit be∣fore God, who esteemes that only a work of perfect Patience, (though short in reference to time,) which is done with the resignation of our wils to his divine pleasure. 8. In this therefore, and in all But con∣forme thy will to God's. thy other works and proceedings follow this Rule: Withdraw and purge thy heart from all other de∣sires and demands, than that onely, purely, and simply, which is con∣forme to God's will. And this is the way to be no more disquieted with adversity; since no such thing can befall thee, without his will and liking. 9. But when some lawfull meanes Yet thou maist use lawfull meanes, so thou takest heed of self-love. must necessarily be used for the ex∣pelling of some overburdening ad∣versity; take heed left selfe-love creep into thy heart with them; and see thou apply them, (not to bee thereby freed from thy pressure) but onely because it is Gods pleasure▪ that thou shouldst make use of those instruments: and then thou canst not be discontented, in case they
should not conduce to thy delive∣rance from adversity. EXPLICATION. How to oppose the Devill, stri∣ving to deceive us with indiscretion. VVHen the Devill perceives 1. How to oppose the Devill, striving to deceive us with indis∣creion, that thou walkest on warily in the right track of vertue, so that his common cunning is become use∣lesse to his designe of making thee goe astray: he then transformes himself into an Angel of light, and so∣licites thee with delightfull thoughts, flatters thee with passages of sacred writ, and suggests examples of the Saints; that so conceiting thy selfe climb'd up to the top of perfection, thou maist fall more dangerously in∣to the precipice which he hath dig'd for thee. To this end, he presseth And pres∣sing us to afflict our bodies; thee to the punishment of the body, with disciplines, abstinence, hair-cloath, and other extraordinary au∣sterities; that either thou may'st be puffed up with pride, as thinking thou dost very much; or mayst de∣stroy
thy health, and so become un∣capable to doe good works; or last∣ly, that having endured much in this kind, thou maist grow weary of do∣ing penance, and abhor thy spiri∣tuall exercises; and so become a prey to thine enemies, and a slave to flesh∣ly and worldly pleasures; which hath hapned to very many, whose pre∣sumption having led them on, and left them to the conduct and vio∣lence of an indiscreet zeale, after they had gone beyond the limits of their owne vertue by immoderate rigours, perish'd at last in their owne inven∣tions, and so became laughing stocks to their enemies; all which disasters will never befall him who diligently observes this doctrine. Whih though it is some∣times good, Yet it must be tempered by discre∣tion: For all cannot imitate the Saints in austeity of life; 2. For although these voluntary pernances are sometimes praise∣worthy, and may be meritorious, when strength of body and humility of spirit doe correspond and accom∣pany them; yet they must be tem∣per'd and moderated by discretion according to each one's nature and quality: Thus, hee that is unable of body to imitate the Saints in severity of life, may right well be able to
imitate their vertues; by being fer∣vent in devotion, frequent in pray∣er, continually aspiring to his Lord and love, setting naught by the world and himselfe, and loving si∣lence and solitude; HEE may be humble and affable to all, patient in suffering affronts, glad of the oc∣casions to doe good to his greatest enemies, and finally resolved to per∣forme his Lords will, and promote his honour to the utmost of his power; and never to offend his di∣vine Majesty in the least matter whatsoever. 3. All which inward acts and But each one may imitate their ver∣tues. mortifications are far more pleasing to God thn the outward macera∣tions of the flsh; and therefore I counsell thee to be very punctuall in those things which concerne thy du∣ty and obligation, but as for extra∣ordinary rigours, be rather backward and fearfull, than indiscreetly for∣ward o embrace them. 4. Yet I speak not here to those Yet take heed of too much ad∣dicting thy self to delica∣cies, &c. delicate ones, who (though in other things they are sufficiently spirituall) are over-much inclined to indul∣gence towards themselves, and to an
exct doting and diligence in the preservation of their health, under Under pretence of health, or the bet∣ter perfor∣mance of thy duty. pretence of being thereby better able to serve God and perform their duty; for they strive to couple two capitall enemies together, the Spirit and the flesh; but unprofitably, and with manifest danger to both, since this solicitude causeth oftentimes the losse of health to the one, and of de∣votion to the other. Discretion there∣fore Discretion therefore is the best directour in this matter of mortifica∣tion, must be the chief directour in this matter, which must distinguish the diversity of complexions and conditions, and since every one is not of like temper, all cannot be re∣gulated by the same precept. To this I adde, that this discretion and mode∣ration is necessary not onely in exte∣riour things, but also in the acquisi∣tion of interiour vertues, as I shall now declare. 5. For though the true Soldier of Christ, aspiring to perfection, must put no limits to his spirituall profit, yet there are some heart of spirit, which need to be quenched with And also in the ac∣quisition of vertues, the dew of discretion, especially such as in beginners are kindled with over-much fervour. Thou art there∣fore
to know that vertues are to be gotten by little and little, and by de∣grees, Which must be done by degrees, that so they may take the deeper roote, and become more durable in our souls. For example: If Thou art in the pursute of pati∣ence; Thou art first to study how to bear injuries and afflictions, before thou fall to practise those higher degrees of delighting in them, and de∣siring them. 6. Moreover I advise thee not to And one by one, ra∣ther than all or ma∣ny toge∣ther; apply thy selfe to obtain all vertues or many together, but first and prin∣cipally to practise one, and then af∣terwards another, for by this means a vertuous habit is more easily plan∣ted, and mo irmly fixed in thy soul; For by this continuall exer∣cise of one only vertue, the memory is ready upon all occasions, the un∣derstanding is studying new means and reasons to acquire it, and the will is more affectionately inclin'd to embrace it, than if many were the objects of their imployments. And such is the conformity and affinity of one vertue to another, that the implanting of any one, is the pre∣paring of the ground for all the
others; and whosoever is a profici∣ent For, the obtaining of any one vertue is a prepara∣tion to all the rest. in the practice of one vertue, hath thereby learned the manner how to purchase another; in so much that as one is augmented, all the rest doe by the same meanes increase in our soules, by reason of their insepa∣rable nearenesse, connexion, and concatenation together; they be∣ing all beames proceeding from the same Sun, which is the divine light. Further advises for the getting of Vertues. 1. Besides those meanes formerly prescribed (in the 11. Chapter) for the obtaining of vertues, I will here give thee some brief and materiall advices concerning this important matter. First, it behooves thee to have a ge∣nerous First, thou must re∣solve to suffer. heart, a great courage, and a strong and resolute will, as being cer∣tain thou hast to doe with cunning enemies, and art to wrestle with ma∣ny contrarieties, and suffer many 2. Thou must beare a great love to vertue. Crosses. 2. In the next place thou art to bring with thee a particular inclina∣tion
and affection to vertue, which thou canst not want, if thou truly weighest how pleasing it is to God, how excellent in it selfe, how pro∣fitable and how absolutely necessary to the attaining of all perfecti∣on. 3. Every morning make strong and efficacious resolutions and pro∣testations, 3. Thou must pra∣ctise it up∣on all oc∣casions. to exercise thy selfe ac∣cording to the probable occasions which may that day be offered unto thee; and sometimes in the day re∣flect upon thy selfe, and examine thy performance of this promise, and fervently renew thy desires and in∣tentions. 4. Apply all thy actions, spirituall exercises, reading, prayer, and 4. Apply all thy ex∣ercises to this end. meditations, for the obtaining of that vertue which thou now pra∣ctisest. 5. Endeavour so to accustome thy selfe to forme acts of vertue, 5. Form acts there∣of. both internall, and externall; that they by use may become as easie and naturall unto thee, as were formerly their contraries, which were conformable to thy vicious desires.
6. The sweet passages and sen∣tences 6. Think upon such passags of Scripture, as con∣cerne, and commend it. of holy scripture, are of great force to this purpose; and therefore it will be convenient to commit di∣vers of them to thy memory touch∣ing that vertue thou now aymest at; and to pronounce them often by mouth, or expresse them in thy heart, especially upon the occasion of feel∣ing the passions and motios contra∣ry to that vertue: For example, If patience be the vertue thou praisest, reflect upon that saying of Baruch: Baruch 4. Child, suffer patiently the wrath which is faln upon thee. And that of the Psalmist: The patience of the poor shall Psal. 9. not perish in the end: Or that of Salo∣mon: The man that is patient, is bet∣ter Prov. 16. then he that is strong, and he that overcomes his owne mind is better than he that conquers towns: And; in your Luke 21. patience you shall possesse your soules: And; let us by patience run on to the Heb. 12▪ battaile which is proposed unto us. 7. To the same purpose thou maist 7. Make frequent use of Ja∣culatory prayers, also make use of these Jaculatory pray∣ers: When, ô my God, shall my heart be arm'd with the shield of patience? When shall I for thy love support cheerefully all contrarieties? O sweet
and dear sufferings! which make me like my meek Saviour, afflicted for my sake! O onely life, and love of my soul; shall I never compasse to content my self for thy glory, amongst thousands of crosses and calamities? Oh, how happy were I, if amidst the flames of tribula∣tions, I could burne with an inflamed desire to suffer yet far more! 8. These and the like ejaculations, and darts of affection, have great power to excite us to vertue, and penetrate even to Gods heart in heaven, especially being ayded and Which be∣ing ayded with two wings, wlil so are up to heaven. accompanied with two wings: A true knowledge of the content our Lord takes in our practice of vertue; and a lively and longing desire to obtaine it, for no other end than because it is pleasing to his divine Majesty. 9. Thou art yet farther to be in∣structed, Above all things thou art to make a continuall progresse: (my dearly beloved,) concer∣ning this weighty and necessary matter of obtaining vertue; that one maine point is, to make a continuall progresse in the practice thereof: or if thou leavest off this pursute, it will necessarily follow, that through the violent inclination of thy sensuall appetite, and the alluring impulse of
outward objects; unruly passions will presse in upon thee, which will either destroy, or at least much dimi∣nish the acquired habits of vertue, and will moreover deprive thee of those manifold graces and gifts of God, which by thy continuance and progresse thou hadst infallibly obtained. 10. For surely the way of the spi∣rit, walking to perfection, is farre different from that of earthly travai∣lers; who lose nothing by their con∣venient stay, because they redresse their wearinesse, which is caused and increased by the continuance of their corporall motion; whereas in this way of the spirit, by how much more thou marchest onwards, by so much thy strength more increaseth; for, For by go∣ing fore∣ward, thy strength increaseth, the inferiour part, (which by it's resistance, renders the path harsh and painfull,) is by this vertuous pro∣gresse still more and more weakned; and the Superiour part, (which is the habitation where vertue resides,) is thereby fomented and fortified: So that by the continuance of well∣doing, thou still lessen'st the contra∣diction which thou feelest in thy
journey, and receivest a certain secret content in thy happy conquest. 11. Thus continuing thy designed course, and marching ever onward in thy journey, thou wilt arrive with lesse paine and more pleasure, ascen∣ding by the severall degrees and steps of vertue, to the top of the moun∣taine; where thy perfected soule Till thou art gotten up to the mountain of perfe∣ction. will performe her pious exercises, not onely without contradiction, but with much gust and content, having now tam'd and triumph'd over her unruly passions, and compleated her conquest over her selfe, and all things created, and being sweetly setled in the bosome of the divinity. 12. Neither is it sufficient, (my dearely beloved,) that thou strivest not Thou art also to seek out all oc∣casions of practising vertue, to avoid the offered occasions in this practice of vertues, (as was declared in the ninth precedent Chapter,) But I would have thee seeke them out, and joyfully lay hold of them, though they appeare never so little, and at a Especially such as are contrary to thy sen∣suality. distance; especially such as are con∣trary to thy sensuality. 13. To this hard combat, then mayst incourage thy selfe by these following considerations: Whereof
one is, that all such occasions, are the proportionate and probable, (yea necessary) meanes, for the ac∣quisition of vertue; in so much that when thou demandest vertue of God, thou also askest these occasi∣ons, This being the most propor∣tionate means to attaine to it, else thy prayers would be pre∣sented in vaine, and thy heart would contradict thy lips, yea thou might∣est seeme to tempt thy Saviour, who ordinarily gives not patience with∣out suffering, nor humility without contempt: and this is also true in all other vertues, which are all acquired by contrary accidents, whereby wee best perceive our owne wants, and therefore are most moved to desire their redresses: And by how much these feelings are more sensible, by so much the more strong and gene∣rous are the acts by which wee en∣devour to the vertues, wee stand in need of. Thou art therefore to make high esteeme, and improve thy self, by the least offered occasion; as by a crosse-looke or contradicting word, which will inure thee to the patient sufferance of more import∣ant diffulties. 14. The other consideration, is that
which hath beene formerly touched; To conceive of all things which be∣fall thee, as comming from Gods And com∣ming from Gods Pro∣vidence for thy parti∣cular pro∣fit, Providence for thy particular profit: And though some of them, (as thine owne, or others faults,) cannot be imputed to God, (who abhors all sinne,) yet they may be referr'd to him, in as much as hee permits them, and though hee can, yet doth not hinder them: But all pains and punishments whatsoever, which hap∣pen to us, by and through our own defects, or others malice, are from God, and his Divine Providence, to which hee concurres, and wills that wee indure them; and which hee would not permit, (since they containe a certaine deformity, a And that thou maist draw good from them thing ever odious to his purity) but for the good wee may draw from them, and for other just reasons best knowne to his All-knowing Majesty. 15. Being therefore ascertained of Gods Will in all thy sufferings, and that he will have thee to support voluntarily all afflictions which be∣fall thee either by others faults or thine owne; it follows, that they
are much mistaken, who (to excuse The mis∣take of some rectified. their impatience) pretend, that God will not this or that thing, be∣cause hee hates all evill: for what is this, but to seeke a cloake to cover their owne imperfections, and to refuse the carriage of that Crosse, which Christ hath lay'd upon their shoulders? 16. And I yet further assure thee, To suffer voluntari∣ly by them whō thou hast ob∣liged, that thy Lord God more values thy voluntary disgestion of such difficul∣ties which come from those persons whom thou hast obliged, than them which come from other accidents; because the pride of thy perverse nature is more suppress'd by these, than by them; and suffering these willingly, thou much contentest and exaltest thy God, by co-operating with him in that, wherein his inef∣fable bounty, and power do so Is to draw vertue frō sinne and malice. greatly appeare: and this in effect, is to draw from the pestilent poyson of sinne and malice, a most pre∣tious balsome of vertue and good∣nesse. 17. For beleeve it, (my beloved,) thy Lord God no sooner discovers in thy heart a lively and ardent love
of well-doing, and a disinteressed desire of getting this glorious con∣quest, but hee forthwith prepares and presents this chalice of cruell temptations, and harsh occasions, which thou art to take and disgest, according as hee best knoweth and pleaseth: and therefore confident Receive therefore the bitter cup, mixed by the heavenly Physitian; and swal∣low it cherfully. of his love, and carefull of thine owne profit, shut thine eyes, and receive it from his holy Hands, swallowing it down cherfully, readi∣ly, and securely, even to the last and least drop, as a medicine made by a Physitian uncapable of errour, and whereof the ingredients, are by so much more profitable to thy soule, by how much they have lesse sweetnesse and savour to thy sen∣suality. How to make use of all occasions in the exercise of one vertue. 1. Thou hast beene already in∣formed, (my dearly beloved,) that the single practice of one only vertue at once is more profitable, than the laying out for them all together; and that all occasions and occurren∣ces,
though different in themselves, are to be directed to that end; Now take this method for thy more easy proceeding therein. 2. It may fall out, that often∣times in the same day or houre, thou mayst chance to be unjustly repre∣hended for something which in it selfe deserves praise; that thou maist cause anger by doing a good action, or be murmured against for some small subject; that thy fitting de∣mand In all oc∣curring ac∣cidents of suffering, may bee harshly refused and rejected; that thou art suspected, contradicted, and calumniated with∣out cause; that thy body is afflicted with paine, or thy mind with me∣lancholy; that thou art imployed in some peevish affair; that thy diet is ill dressed; and finally, that thou sufferest either in these-like inconsi∣derable occasions, or perchance in matters of more difficulty to bee supported, wherewith this miserable life is replenished. 3. In all which accidents, though it be good to produce divers acts of Make acts of that vertue thou then practisest. vertue, conformable to the variety of the subjects; yet following the Rule already prescribed, thou art to
exercise thy selfe in such acts, as directly aym at that vertue thou then practisest: As for example: If at the time when these occasions are Examples; in the vertue of Patience. offered, thou art upon the acquisi∣tion of Patience; thy way is to form acts, of induring those particular contrarieties, with all willingnesse, joyfulnesse, and chearfulnesse. If thy vertue bee Humility; acknow∣ledge Of Hu∣mility. thy selfe most justly deserving these and far greater indignities: If it be Obedience; yield readily, and submit to Gods powerfull Hand, Of Obe∣dience. offering to obey (if so he pleaseth) not onely all reasonable creatures, but even to sinke below the brute beasts, and debase thy selfe under all things which any way disgust or displease thee: If it bee Poverty; Of Pover∣ty. content thy selfe in the want of all worldly comforts and convenien∣ces, whatsoever: If it be Charity; Of Chari∣ty. produce acts of love, both towards thy neighbour, as being instrumen∣tall to thy purchasing of vertue; and also towards God, as being the principall and loving cause, whence these crosses proceed, (or at least are permitted) to come upon thee,
for thy spirituall practice and profit. And by this Doctrine here delivered concerning the divers accidents which may dayly befall thee, thou mayst easily learne how to be∣have thy selfe, and make acts of the vertue thou practisest, in any one occasion of sicknesse, persecution, or other pressures which are of longer durance. 4. As for the space of time, which Concer∣ning the time thou art to stay in the practise of each vertue, Thy di∣rectour must be judge; is to be imployed in the practice of each vertue; it is not for mee to determine; but it must be regulated by the condition, diligence, and necessity, of each particular comba∣tant; and according to their much or litle progresse in the way of the spirit; whereof none can be a competent judge, but hee who is the Guider and Directour of their soules. 5. But whosoever shall heartily settle himselfe to worke, with the devotion and diligence aforesaid, Yet thou mayst have some signs of thy pro∣gresse; may without doubt make great pro∣fit in few weekes practice. And take this for one sure signe of thy proficiency; if amidst all drynesse, darknesse and distresses of thy Soule,
and feeling thy self bereft of all spiri∣tuall Whereof one is, if thou lo∣sest not courage in time of de∣solation. gust & comfort, thou ceasest not to continue with courage in thy ver∣tuous enterprises. Moreover, the contradiction of thy sensuality in the forming of acts of vertue, will afford thee a mani∣fest testimony; for the more that is weakned, the more this is strength∣ened; Another, if the rebel∣lion of thy sensuality be weak∣ned. so that to feele no rebellion in the inferiour part, especially in unforeseene assaults, is a true token of thy having obtained the vertue. And as far forth as thy actions are accompanied with a promptitude and alacrity of spirit, so farre thou hast just reason to thinke thou hast profited in this exercise. 6. Yet take heed of perswading thy selfe, that thou art in sure posses∣sion of perfect vertue, or absolute Yet never thinke thy selfe a con∣querour, master of any one passion; though happily thou hast not a long time, and after many hot skirmishes, felt these rebellious motions; for the deceit of the Devil, and the corrup∣tion Because vice may be cloath∣ed in ver∣tues dresse, of thy nature, may herein be too hard for thee, since that thing may bee really a vice, which secret pride cloath's in the habit of vertue.
f furthermore, thou steadfastly be∣oldest And thou hast yet much more to do. the perfection to which God hath called thee, thou wilt ea∣ily grant, that hadst thou made a far greater progresse in the path of perfection, yet thou art scarcely well entred into the first confines thereof. 7. And I must here put thee in Therefore looke for∣wards up∣on what thou yet wantest, mind, (my dearly beloved,) that thou art still to looke forwards, and ad∣vance thy selfe towards those many vertues thou wantest, and not to reflect backwards upon thine owne small profit and progresse: For this is to be left to thy Lord God, the true searcher and onely knower of hearts, who layes open this secret to some, and conceales it from others, according to his Divine knowledge of the pride or humility which will ensue thereupon, and so as a loving Father, takes away from these all danger, and gives those an occasion to increase their vertue. 8. Wherefore let the pious practi∣tioner And pur∣sue thy exercises with pati∣ence and constancy. pursue his exercises with pa∣tience and constancy, though his per∣ceives not it's owne progresse; assuring himselfe that he shall in due
time see and feele it, when the Di∣vine Providence shall be so pleased for his greater profit. CHAP. XIX. How our enemy endeavours to make our vertues instrumentall to our Ruine. 1. OUr deceitfull and dangerous enemy the Devil, tempts us also by those very vertues which wee have acquired, and casts them, as it were stumbling blocks, in our way, to occasion our ruine. To this end Our ene∣mies strive to make us take plea∣sure in our vertues. hee strives to make us please and delight our selves in them; that so being puffed up in our selfe-conceits, wee may fall afterwards into the dangerous precipice of pride. 2. But to secure thy Soule from this fearfull fall, stand alwayes in the open and plaine field, and per∣severe securely in the true and pro∣found But do thou con∣sider thine own no∣thing. consideration of thy owne nothing; confessing that of thy self, thou art nothing, thou knowest no∣thing, thou canst do nothing, and
thou hast nothing else in thee of thy self, but eternall damnation. 3. And take a serious care, to drive far from thee all such of thine owne cogitations, which seeme to whisper against this selfe-know∣ledge: For they surely are suggested by thy sworne enemies, and there∣fore if thou excludest them not from thy heart, they will either kill, or cruelly wound it. 4. Which truth that thou may'st apprehend, I prescribe this Rule un∣to thee: When thou goest about to contemplate thine own basenesse, thinke not of the Benefits, Blessings, And mark well what is within thee of thine own goods, and what of Gods Gifts. Gifts and Graces which thou findest in thy selfe; for these are none of thy goods, but Gods Gifts: turne thee therefore to take a view of what is thine own, and so thou shalt rightly judge how great, or rather how truly nothing thou art: which thou mayst thus do: Imagine the time before thou hadst a being, and What wert thou from eternity? thou wilt soone finde that for an eternity thou wert an absolute no∣thing, that thou didst nothing, nor couldst contribute in the least man∣ner to thy owne life, or any thing
which thou now possessest. If in What art thou in time? the next place, thou dost ponder the time wherein thou begann'st to be something, thou wilt likewise under∣stand, that thou receivedst it from the pure bounty and benignity of thy God alone; for hee created thee, and gave thee this life, which he still continues and conserves unto thee, and hee doth all other things thou now hast, knowest, and pos∣sessest. In so much as thou canst not meete with the least occasion in thy selfe, whereon to ground a thought of thy being any thing, or of de∣serving any esteeme above others, for any thing. 5. Now as concerning thy state What good canst thou do of thy selfe? of grace, and abilities given thee to do good: tell mee, Can thy nature do the least good thing by it selfe, de∣prived of thy Creatours Divine Assistance? If further thou turne thy thoughts upon thine owne evill and sinfull workes, and others yet What evill hast thou, or mightest thou have done? worse which thou hadst undoubted∣ly done and continued in, if God of his great Mercy had not kept, stayed, and withdrawne thee with the right hand of his holy Grace;
thou wilt be easily brought to ac∣knowledge, that thine owne wicked∣nesse, (both by reason of the length of time, in which thou lay'st drownd therein, and also of the multitude of thy evill actions and perverse af∣fections,) is so great, that it can neither be expressed, nor numbred; in so much that thou art, or surely mightst have beene, like another infernall Lucifer: therefore unlesse thou wilt be a sacrilegious felon, and steale away the goods of thy Lord God, and attribute them to thy self, thou mayst justly esteeme thy selfe every day worse than other. EXPLICATION. YEa, thou hast good grounds to So that thou maist justly thinke thy selfe, the worst of all men. think thy selfe the most ungrate∣full and ungratious wretch in the World, and to be nothing but dirt and dung of the Earth, or that which is more stinking and abhominable, because the loathsomnesse and stench of thy sinnes is farre grea∣ter. Text Yet be just in thy self-accusation, 6. Yet here take this necessary
caveat, That Justice be joyned with this confession of thine owne base∣nesse; lest it bring thee more pre∣judice, than profit: For if in this knowledge and humble confession of thy selfe thou excellest some other, (who by reason of his owne blindnesse thinkes himselfe some∣thing, and for such desires to bee esteemed by others;) and art desi∣rous that upon this score, others should thinke well of thee, and esteem thee that which thou acknow∣ledgest thy selfe not to be; thou art far worse than he is. 7. Wherefore that the acknow∣ledgement of thy own basenesse and vildnesse, may be true and reall, and render thee pleasing to God; thou art not onely to acknowledge thy selfe base and wicked; but bhave And not only ac∣knowledge thine own basenesse, but so use thy selfe. thy selfe as such a one, treat thy selfe as such a one, and desire to be so held, and so handled by all o∣thers. EXPLICATION. Abhorring all honours, rejoycing in affronts, and condescend∣ing
upon all occasions to performe the basest imployments, and to be sleighted and contemned by every one; yet still for the onely end and intention to humble and exercise thy selfe, and not out of a certaine pride, and secret presumption of spirit. 8. And if it sometimes happen Text. that for some good worke, wherein thy Lord God vouchsafed to make thee instrumentall, thou comest to gaine a good esteeme, or beginnest to And stick to this amidst all praise or applause of others. be beloved, or praised by others: Take heed, and be not drawne a tittle from the aforesaid truth of thine owne basenesse: but turn thy heart to thy Lord God, and there say to him: O my Lord, let it never enter into my thought, to steale from thee thine own Divine goodnesse. EXPLICATION. TO thee, O my God, all praise and honour is onely due; to thee onely be given all the glory, and to mee that which I truly deserve, which is onely confusion.
And afterwards thou maist reflect Text. upon him who praysed thee, saying within thy selfe: Why doth this man thinke I am good? When indeed there is none good, but thou onely my good God. If thou thus proceedest and practisest, thou rendrest truly to God that which is his, and puttest thy soule in a disposition to receive greater grace. EXPLICATION. 9. BUt if the memory of thy good deeds, endanger thy soul to fall into vanity; looking upon them And let not the memory of thy good deeds, puff thee up with vani∣y; presently as none of thine owne goods, but as Gods Gifts, reason thus with them: How can you appear and pretend to have a being in my heart, since I neither gave you a be∣ginning, progresse, nor perfection; but my good God, by his onely Grace and Goodnesse created you? I therefore acknowledge him for your principall Father, and to him I returne all hearty Thanks, Praise, Honour and Glory.
10. Then penetrate the best of thy For thou wilt finde the best of them very imperfect. good workes, and thou wilt find, thou hast not onely fayled in perfectly corresponding to the grace which God gave thee to perform them; but also that they are far from that perfection, purity of intention, and due fervour and diligence, which should have accompanied them: in so much that the whole matter being impartially pondered, thou mayst rather be confounded and asham'd, than puffed up with pride and com∣placency. For nothing is more certain, than that the pure and perfect graces and gifts of God, are destroyed and lessened by our imperfections, when we put them in practice. 11. And if thou wilt elevate thy spirit to thy Lords supreme Great∣nesse and Goodnesse, and truly resent what service is due to so Divine a Majesty; thou wilt soone conclude And that thou hast no colour to glory in them, that there is no cause or colour for thee to glory in thine owne merits, though thy actions had beene farre more excellent and renowned than they are; but accusing thy selfe of Bu to ac∣cuse thy want of duty. want of duty, and trembling at thine own deficiency, wilt put on the
person of a poore penitent desiring pardon, and saying; O my God, be favourable unto mee, a wretched Sinner. Thou mayst furthermore, enter into comparison of thy workes, with them of the Saints and Servants of God; and thou wilt by that parallel, plainly perceive the basenesse of thy best actions. 12. Learne therefore (O my Learn therefore humility, beloved) this necessary lesson of humility, and acknowledge thy selfe with thy whole bundle of good works put together, to be a meere nothing; for this is the firme foundation, whereon thou art to raise the perfect structure of all other vertues; and Which is the foun∣dation of all vertues, the deeper thou layest this ground∣work, the higher will be thy spirituall building; yet never thinke thou canst digge it deepe enough, but rather imagine, that if an infinity could befall a creature, thy unworthinesse would be infinite. This point, (to wit, selfe-acknowledgement,) being well practised, gives thee the posses∣sion And with∣out which thou art lesse than nothing. of all that is good, and without it thou art lesse than nothing, though thy actions are more perfect than
those of the greatest Saints, and thy heart be in continuall recollection with thy Creatour. O blessed know∣ledge! which makes us happy on Earth, and glorious in Heaven! O true light, shining out of our dark∣nesse! O great nothing, which ren∣drest us masters and monarchs of all things! No, (my dearly beloved,) I will never give over the pressing of this Point, which thou art ever to practise. 13. If therefore thou desirest to praise God, accuse thy selfe; if thou wilt exalt his Divine Majesty, dive into thine own misery; If thou wilt find him, climb not up to Heaven, for hee will fly from thee, but rather descend into the abysse of thine own nothing, and hee will thither come to And it is the onely way to praise, find, and please God. thee, and there embrace thee. Yes, hee will court and cherish thee by so much the more dearly, deliciously and tenderly; by how much thou seemest abject and vild in thine own eyes, and art well pleased to have all others slight, and scorn thy com∣pany, as a meere out cast, an object of derision, and a thing abomi∣nable.
14. Know furthermore and con∣sider Therefore thou art bound to him, for permitting thee to be scorned; thy selfe most unworthy of so high a favour from thy Lord God, as to bee neglected and scorned by all; and faile not to render him most hearty and humble thanks. Finally, thou art to be gratefull, and sensible of thy great obligation to them who have administred the occasion of this thy spirituall im∣provement, and to acknowledge And to them who do it. thy selfe most bound to them who have most master'd and mortified thee. 15. But if notwithstanding all these true and weighty considerati∣ons, the subtilty of the Devil, thy own ignorance, or an evill inclina∣tion, should have yet the power over thee, so as to disquiet and And be ever wary of the devil, and thine own inclinati∣on. trouble thy minde with fancies of selfe-praise, and make some impres∣sions in thy heart, of thine owne merits and deserts: 'Tis then thou art chiefly and couragiously to beat downe and humble thy selfe; since thou findest by experience, how poorly thou hast profited in the way of the Spirit, and knowledge of thy selfe, and what deepe roots thy pride
and vanity have taken in thy entralls: And this is the way to suck hony out of poyson, and to draw health from wounds. Of Rash Judgement. 1. From this vice of selfe-esteem, springeth up another no lesse dan∣gerous, which is Rash-Judgement Rash-judgemen springs from Self esteeme, concerning our neighbouts, and this is commonly followed with con∣tempt of their persons, and detracti∣on from their good name: This vice as it hath its beginning from a pevish and proud inclination, so like∣wise And from Pride. it is nourished and fomented by no other food; for Pride and Rash Judgement increase together, comply with each other, and doe both joyntly covertly and insensibly concurre to deceive us. For wee presume to exalt our selves, by iudg∣ing meanly of others, and we thinke our selves free from those imperfecti∣ons, which we are fully perswaded are in our Brothers. 2. Now, our wylie enemy, the Devill, no sooner discovers this perverse disposition in us, but hee is
busy in keeping our senses open, to he Devil trives to eepe open our senses, upon our Neigh∣bours actions; see, heare, examine, controll, and heighten the faults of our Neigh∣bours: hee is diligent to imprint this imperfection, or that indiscretion, of such or such a person in our spirits: If therefore (my dearly beloved) thy foe is so forward and watchfull to intrap thee, be thou equally care∣full and vigilant to avoid his plots, But wee must be as vigilant, to shun, as he is to lay his plotts. and rescue thy soule out of his dan∣gerous snares; and in the first place when anothers defects are presented before thee, presently withdraw thy thoughts; but if thou art solicited to give sentence, let it bee a flat First, by denying to give any sentence; deniall, and short answer, that thou hast no such power given thee: and if thou hadst any such privilege, thou couldst hardly forme a right and sound judgement, being inviron∣ed and prevented with such a num∣ber of passions, inclining to thinke more amisse than there is just cause. 3. Then make use of this second and singular remedy: Let the consi∣deration Secondly by looking home∣wards, up∣on our own selves, of thine owne wants, and interiour necessities, so take up thy whole time, and thoughts, that seeing how convenient it is to looke home∣ward,
and how much thou art con∣cerned to take order in thy owne bleeding affaires; thou mayst recall thy mind from roming abroad, and have no leasure left to lend away to others superfluously, who hast scarcely time enough to looke after thy selfe in things of absolute neces∣sity. And this serious search into thine owne wants, will cleare the inward eye of thy soule, from those ill humours which ingender this pestiferous imperfection of Rash judgement. For know, that when thou conceivest amisse of thy Neigh∣bour, Where we shall finde some root of the same fault wee blame in them. there is some root of the same evill in thine own heart, which is apt to take the impression of that object which is like it selfe. When there∣fore thou feelest this itching desire to censure anothers fault; fall into passion at thy selfe, as if thou wert equally culpable, and enter into these terms with thine owne Soule: Is it possible, that I, who am so mi∣serable, not onely because I wallow in the same mire, but am also full of greater faults and inperfections, shall notwithstanding be so proud and pre∣sumptuous as to take upon me to judge
another? Thus the weapons which first pointed at thy neighbour, but have thus pricked thine owne heart, will prove a perfect cure of thy wounds, and a true comfort to thy soule. 4. But when the fault which is If the faut be manifest, put a cha∣ritable constru∣ction up∣on it; committed, is become manifest, then excuse it with a charitable constructi∣on; and piously conclude that thy brother hath many hidden vertues and perfections, for the custody whereof he is thus permitted to fall: or that it is to humble him for a time, to make him see his owne no∣thing; and so from this contempt of others, raise him afterwards to higher perfection in the sight of the divine Majesty, whereby his gaine may prove greater than his losse. But if the sinne be not onely mani∣fest, but even monstrous, and pro∣ceeds If mon∣strous, have re∣course to Gods se∣cret judge∣ments, from a perverse and obstinate heart; turne thy thoughts to Gods se∣cret & severe judgements; where thou wilt find some, whose works seemd to speak them highly wicked, to have afterwards shew'd evident signes of holinesse, and died with opinion of sanctity: and thou wilt also find o∣thers,
who were thought to have touch'd the top of perfection, tum∣bled downe into the miserable pre∣cipice of eternall damnation: It is And tremble at the pro∣ceedings of his Provi∣dence. therefore thy part to tremble at these unperceiveable proceedings of divine providence, and to remaine alwayes carefull and fearefull of thine owne condition, not intermed∣ling with that of others, which is concealed from thy knowledge. 5. Finally, beleeve it for a certain∣ty, And know that all Charity proceeds from God's good spirit, that all the good and charitable constructions thou puttest upon thy neighbours actions, are the assured effects of the holy Ghost, and that all contempt, rash censures, and bit∣ternesse of mind against them, are derived from thy owne malice, and and all bitternesse from the Devill, thine enemies suggestion: wherefore raze out of thy soule with all speed and diligence, such impressions as glance at thy brothers imperfecti∣ons, and shut not thine eyes to sleep, before thou hast excluded all such thoughts out of thy heart.
Of the meanes to shield us against the attempts of our Enemies at the time of death. 1. Though the whole course of our life is a continual warre, yet the The way to be con∣querours at our death, most signall and important day of battaile, is the day of our death; and whosoever is conquered in that last and inevitable skirmish, remaines hopelesse of the victory for all eter∣nity: wherefore that thou mayst be then ready to beare this fatall brunt with constancie, fight now and fall upon thine enemies before hand Is to fall now upon our ene∣mies be∣fore-hand. couragiously; for he that is a stout combatant duting his life, is most like to be conquerour at the poynt of death, as having by long practice gotten the true use of his weapon. 2. Thou art also to make death familiar to thy thoughts, by frequent and attentive conference and con∣sideration; for so thou wilt lesse feare it when it comes; and be free∣er to resist what will then so fiercely assault thee. Worldlings heare not willingly this doctrine, because it in∣terrups them in the cariere of their pleasure, which they follow with
over-much passion and affection, and consequently leave it not with∣out great griefe and affliction. But doe thou (my dearly beloved) make timely preparation for a matter of Therefore make timely preparati∣on, so high importance; and to this end, imagine thy selfe to be sometimes all alone, helplesse, and comfortlesse, struggling hand to hand with death; and there represent to thy soule, these things following; which as I conceive will then most afflict thee: and consult with thy own heart how to remedy all things before it be to late, that so thou maist readily make use thereof in thy latest and greatest And now study thy answers, to the four challenges, which thy enemies will then send thee. necessity: For that which can once onely be acted, ought in all reason to be very exactly studied before∣hand, lest a fault be committed, which can never be redressed. Of four assaults which our enemies make against us at the time of Death; And first, Of their assault against Faith, and of the meanes to defend our selves. 3. Our subtill enemies, make or∣dinary The First is against Faith. their strongest opposition
when we are in the weakest conditi∣on; and therefore they raise four maine batteries against us, from whence they let fly their empoyson∣ed darts at us into our death-beds: assaulting us, with temptations a∣gainst Faith, with Despaire, with Vain-glory, and with Illusions. 4. As for the First: When the Devill sets upon thee with false argu∣ments, The re∣medy is, to retreat from thy Under∣standing to thy Will, to batter downe thy Faith; make a speedy Retreat from thy Understanding to thy Will, saying: Avoid Satan, thou Father of all fals∣hood, I will give thee no audience; for it sufficcth and satisfies me to beleeve that which the Catholique Church pro∣poseth unto me. Take heed therefore of admitting any fancies concerning thy Faith, though they appeare never so friendly; but take them all, as indeed they are, for deceits of the Devill, to ingage thee in a dispute with him: But if thou art so sodain∣ly intrapped, that thou wantest time to retreat, stand strongly upon thy firme ground: and never yield either to the reasons he allegeth, or to the authorities of Scripture he citeth, as∣suring thy self, that they are either
ull of fallacies, or corruptly quoted, or ill applied, or falsly interpreted, hough they appeare never so clear and evident. 5. And should the subtill Serpent fall upon interrogations to intrap And to give no answer to thy ene∣mies que∣stions; thee in thy answers: As, What doth the Church beleeve? vouchsafe him no reply, but frame an inward act of lively and firme Faith; or undaunt∣edly tell him, that the Church beleevs the Truth. If he againe proposeth, And, What is this Truth? Say, it is even that thing which this Church beleeveth. 6. But above all things, keep thy heart and mind fix't and attentive But to fix thy thoughts, upon Christ crucified. upon the contemplation of Christ crucified: where sweetly discours∣ing with thy Lord and love, say: O my God, ô my Saviour, ô my Creatour, succour me speedily, abandon me not in my necessity, let me not swerve one tit∣tle from the truth of thy Church; and grant me, I beseech thee, this grace, that as I now live in it, so I may con∣stantly dy in it, to thy glory, and my owne eternall comfort.
Of their Second assault of Despair, and the Remedy against it. 7. The Devills next Engine, where∣with he strives to ruine and destroy The se∣cond as∣sault, is of Despaire, us, Is the fright he puts into us, up∣on the thought of our normous offences, whence he would cast us down headlong into the guph of despair. In which cruel danger, stand Where, thou art to observe this cer∣tain Rule. fast to this certain Rule: That all reflexions upon thy sins, proceed from Gods grace, and tend to thy good, if they be followed with ef∣fects of humility, with true sorrow for having offended so good a God, and with a firme confidence in his goodnesse: But when this reflexion disquiets thy mind, makes thee doubtfull and distrustfull, peevish and pusillanimous, then (although thy sinnes appeare indeed sufficient, to make thee think thy selfe justly and eternally damned, and that there can be no reason for thee to hope after Salvation,) assure thy selfe they are clearly the effects proceeding from Satans suggestions: And there∣fore And to have a perfect humble thy selfe so much the
more, and be more hopefull and hope, and humble confidence in God, confident in thy God; whereby thou wilt confound and conquer thy enemy with his owne weapons, which he prepared for thy destructi∣on. 8. When therefore thy sins are And never to distrust his mercy, suggested to thy memory, conceive a perfect hatred of them, as of things detestable to the divine goodnesse; yet be sure to have an hopefull con∣fidence in thy Saviours passion: And I tell thee yet more; shouldest thou seem to heare God saying unto thee, Away, thou art none of the number of my sheep; yet thou art not to lose thy confidence in his mercy, but humbly to reply, Thou hast just rea∣son, ô my Soveraigne Lord God, to shake me off for my sins sake; But I have greatest reason to be confident of thy goodnesse and mercy, and to beleeve that thou wilt pardon me; therefore I humbly beg salvation for this thy wretched creature; damn'd indeed by it's owne malice, but redeem'd by the And the merits of his passi∣on. dear ransome of thy Sonnes most pre∣tious blood and passion. Thou wilt save me, ô my Redeemer, for thine owne glo∣ries sake; and I resigne my selfe freely
into thy hands, upon the assurance of thy infinite mercy. Doe with me, and di∣spose of me, as thou best pleasest, for thou art my onely Lord; and if thou killest me, yet I will place my whole hope in thy heavenly goodnesse. Of the assault of Vain glory. 9. The third assault, is that of The third assault is, of vain∣glory, Vain-glory and presumption: Here thou art to be quall, wary of the other extreme, and never to admit of the least conceit or complacency in thy selfe or thy actions, but to re∣ferre all goodnesse that seemes to be in thee, purely to Gods great mercy, and the merits of Christs pssion; Imbase thy selfe in thy heart, whilst there is the least remainder of breath in thy body, and acknowledge thy Which is conquerd by distrust of thy self, and trust in God. God as the true fountain of all thy goodnesse. Look not at all upon thine owne merits, but rely totally upon his mercy. Distrust thy selfe, and trust in thy Saviour; and think what poore provisions thou hast laid up in store for this passage of death, and thy journey to eternity; and how vain and uselesse all thine owne
indeavours will prove, unlesse God will be pleased to put his helping hand, and gather thee under the sa∣cred wings of his divine protecti∣on. Of illusions, and false aprearances, which are usually presented at the hour of death 10. If thy obstinate enmy, who is The fourth assault, is, by false illusions, ever studying to supplant thee, should at this time set upon thee with false appearances, and transfigu∣rations of himselfe into an Angel of light, thy best way is, to recurre to the certain knowledge of thine own nothing, and boldly to answer him: Depart, ô thou accursed devill, into Against which, have re∣course to the confes∣sion of thy owne no∣thing; And ad∣mit them not though they seem to come from hea¦ven. thy own darknesse; I neither deserve nor desire any visions: I need no o∣ther thing than the mercy of my Jesus, the prayers of the Virgin Mary, and the assistauce of the Saints. Yea, though thou hast reason to guesse by some evident signes, that these things are from heaven, yet still deny them all accesse unto thee, and drive them far from thee; nor needest thou fear lest any such resistance (groun∣ded
upon thine own indignity) should displease God; for if the visions come from him, he knowes well how to make them manifest, notwithstanding thy opposition: and art secure to be thereby no loser; since he who gives his grace to the humble, cannot be angry with him who practiseth such high acts of that vertue. 11. These are the common and After these gene∣rall temp∣tations, follow o∣thers in particular. ordinary engines, which our ene∣my makes use of in this last pas∣sage: After which follow his other trained bands of temptations, accor∣ding to each ones particular inclina∣tion and disposition. Stand there∣fore timely to thy arms (my beloved) before this great day of battail steal upon thee; and fight now valiantly and generously against thy violent passions and imperfections, that thou mayst be prepared at that time, which takes from thee all other time and power to perform it.
CHAP. XX. That we must never flatttr our selves, as having subdued our enemies; but must often return, to our wonted exercises, as if we were yet Novi∣ces in this Spirituall Conflict. I have yet one thing (O beloved) Never perswade thy selfe, thou hast gotten a full victo∣ry, to tell thee of; which is, that thou never perswade thy selfe to have gotten a full victory over any one of thy passions, though perchance thou hast for a long time together felt no motions thereof: But that thou often renew thy accustomed But often renew thy exercises. spirituall exercises, as if thou wert yet a young beginner, and a fresh∣water souldier now entring the list. 2. For if we behold, and desire to follow the perfection whereunto God hath called us: wee shall find it to be so high and so copious, that For per∣fection is very high and hard to be ob∣tained. after our best spent endeavours, wee shall scarcely presume to say, that we have learnt the first principles there∣of: And besides this; That which seemes to us a vertue, may indeed sometimes be a vice; our judge∣ment
being deceived by some secret pride. CHAP. XXI. Of Holy Prayer. WE have hitherto (ô beloved) The fourth weapon is Holy prayer. through the divine assistance heard and learned what concerns Diffidence in our selves, Confidence in our God, and continuall Exercise; which are the three necessary meanes, to get the victory of our passions, and to conquer the disordered motions of our Sensuality. Now follows the fourth, which is Holy Prayer; and this is the best and most efficacious means to obtain all good things from Gods gracious and bountifull hand. EXPLICATION. FOr Prayer, is the food, the com∣fort, A furthet descripti∣on of prayer. and the support of the soule during its pilgrimage upon earth: It is a secure bridge for it to passe over the severall seas of adversities and prosperities: It is a wall of
defence against vices and temptati∣ons; a key opening into the cabinet of celestiall treasures; the dore of holy thoughts; and finally, an invin∣cible Citadel, and sure retreating place from the violent assaults of all our enemies. By prayer, (if thou knowest how to apply it to its true use,) thou put∣test a sword into thy Lords power∣full hands, wherewith he will fight thy battails for thee, and vanquish all enemies which oppose thee in thy way of perfection. 2. But to make thy prayer grateful, Text. Which must have these pro∣perties, usefull, and acceptable; it must be accompanied with these conditions, and properties. First, That an ardent desire to 1. A desire to serve God. serve thy Lord God, in such a man∣ner as may best pleasure his divine Majesty, doe continually inflame thy heart. EXPLICATION. TO obtain this inflamed desire; How to obtain this inflamed desire. consider that thy Lord God, by reason of his admirable excellencies,
of goodnesse, majesty, wisedome, beauty, and other infinite perfecti∣ons; is more than worthy to be served, and honoured, by thee and all creatures. That to serve and suc∣cour thee, this greatnesse hath con∣descended to compassionate thy weaknesse; and to suffer for thee in his sacred humanity for thirty three yeares space, during which time he cur'd and salv'd thy stinking sores, (which were gangren'd by the soule contagion of sinne,) not with medi∣cinall oyle, ordinary wine, and com∣mon plaisters; but with the most precious balsom of his owne sacred bloud, and with unguents confected of his purest flesh, torn from his body by scourges, thorns and nails. Weigh also the importance of this his service, since thou art thereby ina∣bled to master thy selfe, to conquer thine enemies, and to become the child of God. Secondly, That thou be possest Text. Secondly, perfect Faith, with a true and constant Faith, whereby thou beleevest, that thy lo∣ving Lord will give thee all things necessary for his service, and thy sal∣vatio.
EXPLICATION. THis holy Confidence, is the ves∣sell, which the divine goodnesse fills with the treasures of his graces; and the greater it is, the richer, and more laden, will thy prayer return into thine owne bosome: For how can our unchangeable Lord faile to make us partakers of his good gifts and graces, when as himself hath commanded us to ask them, and promised his holy Spirit to them who petition him for it, with Faith and perseverance? Thirdly, that thou hast no other Text. Thirdly, Confor∣mity to God's will end in frequenting holy prayer, than the accomplishing of Gods will and not thine owne; and this as well in asking, as in obtaining. That is, Let nothing move thee to pray, but only that God will have thee pry; nei∣ther doe thou desire to be heard, for any other reason, than that thou ho∣pest it is his pleasure: briefly; Let thy intention, and the whole purpose of thy prayer be this, That thy will may be conformable to Gods will:
and strive not at all to bend his will or draw it unto thine. EXPLICATION. ANd this thou art to do so much Because thy owne will is sub∣ject to er∣ror, the rather, because thy will be∣ing infected with selfe-love, is subject to errour, and forgetfulnesse of it selfe, and so knows not what it asks: but the divine will is ever accompa∣nied with unspeakable goodnesse, and so can never faile, but is the rule but the di∣vine will is infallibly right. and queen-regent of all other wills, deserving to be followed and obey'd by them all. Thou art therefore al∣wayes to petition for those things which are conforme to Gods hoy will; and when thou suspectest whe∣ther some desire of thine be truly such, to make thy demand conditi∣onall; and not to wish it, but onely so far forth as thy Lord God is well pleased thou shalt obtain it. In things also, which are known to be certain∣ly agreeable to his divine Majesty, such as are vertues, and graces; thou art to pray for them, rather that thou maist by their meanes better please, satisfy and serve him, than
for any other end or consideration whatsoever, though never so spiri∣tuall. Fourthly, That thy prayer, and Text. Fourthly, A connex∣ion with the former exercises. the other before-described spirituall exercises, be so joyned together, as that thou undertake not the one, without the practise of the other: For pray thou never so long, and never so much, to obtaine any vertue, unlesse thou also labour, and exercise thy self in the way to get it; thou onely temptest God, but ob∣tainest not thy desire. EXPLICATION. FIftly, remember that before thou Fifthly, Thanks∣giving for received favours. demandest new favours, thou art to render humble thanks for them thou hast formerly received, by these or the like expressions: O my good and gracious Lord God, who hast made me, redeemed me, and rescued me from mine enemies, oftner than I my selfe know or can conceive; succour me now also, and deny not to grant this my present petition, though I have beene hitherto rebellious to thy
will, and ungratefull to thy good∣nesse. And if thy demand be for some particular vertue, whereof thou now standest in great need, by reason of some temptation, trouble or contra∣diction, which urgeth thee; forget not to thank him for that occasion of thy triall and exercise; which through his gracious assistance, may redound so much to thy spirituall good. Sixthly, since Prayer hath it's Sixthly, a reflexion upon Gods goodnesse, and pro∣mise; and Christs passion. whole force, power and hope of ob∣taining, from Gods goodnesse and mercy, from Christs merits and pas∣sion, and from the divine promise; therefore thou maist fitly usher in thy demands, by some of these fol∣lowing sayings: O my God▪ graunt unto thy servant, I beseech thee, this grace for thy supreme goodnesse sake, that thy most dear Sonnes merits may impetrate for me the graunt of my petition. Remember ô my Lord, thine owne loving promise; and incline thine eares to hear my prayer. At other times, thou maist ask by the merits of the most glorious Virgin, and suf∣frages of the Saints; which are
powerfull to prevaile, in thy pious demands. Seventhly, Thou art to pray with Seventhly, Perseve∣rance. perseverance; For if the continued importunity of the Evangelicall widdow, inflected the hard-hearted Judge to give her what she asked; how shall perseverant petitions be rejected, by him who is mercy and goodnesse it selfe? Therefore after thy prayer, Text. Prayer must also be strength∣ned with Hope. strengthen thy soule with a live by Hope in God, that (through his infi∣nite love) he will bestow on thee the now demanded grace or gift, or something that is better for thee, or both together: And although he so long delayes his answer, that thou maist doubt he denyes what thou askest; yet remaine constantly in this hope, and never slacken there∣fore, either thy prayer, or thy pra∣ctise, or thy confidence. And though God see∣meth to re∣ject thy prayer, yet persevere knocking. 3. Yea though it may seeme to thee that God rejecteth thee and thy prayer: Yet doe thou still humble thy selfe more and more before him, encreasing thy Faith, and comfort∣ing thy self with hope in thy Saviour.
For the more fervently and fre∣quently thou interposest this constant hope in God, even in such violent repulses, and (as it were) manifest reprobations of thy prayer, the more thou becommest pleasing and grate∣full unto him. 4. And therefore thou art alwaies And al∣wayes thanking him, as wel when he grants, as when he denies. to return him gratefull thanks, whom thou acknowledgest no lesse good, wise and loving in thy behalfe, when he seemes to cast out thy petition, than when he grants it. Keep then an ever-constant, couragious, and joyfull mind, in all events whether good or bad: and humbly submit thy selfe to the infallible wisdome, and all-ordering providence of thy Lord God. CHAP. XXII. What inward (or mental) prayer is, and what Contemplation: and the use thereof. INward (or mentall) prayer, Is an 1. Mentall prayer in∣cludes as∣wayes, elevation of the mind to God: and it alwayes includes, either to an actuall, or virtuall petition of some∣thing▪
2. Virtuall petition is, when the minde is lifted up to God to obtaine Either a virtuall Petition  some thing, some grace from him; shewing him our necessities simply and briefly without any discourse or considera∣tion of any other things: As, when I elevate my mind to God, and con∣fesse before him my weaknesse both to do well, and to defend my selfe from doing evill: This sort of prayer, is properly tearmed Virtuall; be∣cause when I thus briefly lay my minde open to God, hee well knowes what is there wanting, and how much I stand in neede of his helpe. EXPLICATION. ANd this virtually implies, an humble supplication to his Di∣vine Majesty that hee will vouchsafe to supply my necessities. And by how much the more this confession of thine own want and weaknesse is reall and manifest, and thy desire efficacious, and thy confidence lively; by so much also thy demand shall be of more force and value. 3. There is also another kinde of
inward virtuall Prayer, which con∣sists in a simple beholding or con∣templation of God in our minds, And this Prayer is, When we silently desire, and (as it were) put our Lord in remembrance of that grace, wee formerly demanded. 4. Learne, (O my beloved,) this way of Prayer, and make it fa∣miliar unto thee by the frequent use of it: For experience will give thee to understand that it is the best armour of proof against all enemies, adversities and dangers. Have it therefore always in readinesse, that where and whensoever need requires thou mayst make use thereof. 5. Actuall petition, or actuall in∣ward Prayer is when grace is asked Or an actuall asking by words ex∣pressed in the mind. by words expressed in the mind; In this or the like manner: Give me, O my Lord God, this grace, this benefit, for the honour of thy most sacred name: Or thus, I steadfastly beleeve, O my God, that it is thy holy will I should begg of thee this grace which I stand in need of: Do thou therefore, O my God, accomplish thine own pleasure in me. 6. Thus also thou maist present
before Gods Divine Majesty, thine enemy which annoyes thee, or thy sinnes which afflict thee, joyning therewith thine owne weaknesse to resist them: and say; O Lord, looke upon thine owne creature, made by thy holy hands, and redeemed by thy pre∣tious blood: behold also thine enemy and mine, outragiously reaching at mee, and striving to take mee from thee, and teare mee in peeces. O my God, to thee I onely fly, In thee onely I trust. Consider my weaknesse, and mine enemies strength; who will in∣fallibly subject mee to his tyranny, if I am left destitute of thy powerfull protection. CHAP. XXIII. How wee may joyne Contemplation to this inward Prayer. 1. IF sometimes thou art willing to settle thy selfe to mentall Prayer for a certaine space of time, as an houre, or more; thou mayst joyn Take some points of Christs Death or Passion. to this way of Prayer, certaine Meditations upon the Life and Death of our Saviour Christ, applying
alwayes his Actions to that vertue thou then demandest, and so meditat∣ing upon them both together. 2. For example: Patience is the vertue thou art now in quest of; choose therefore for the subject of And apply his actions to the vertue thou de∣mandest; thy Meditation, some mystery of Christs Crucifixion; As, how cruelly hee was despoiled of his garments, which were barbarously rent from his Body, carrying away part of his sacred Flesh which cleaved fast unto them: With what ourcries, and As for ex∣ample to Patience. curses, they crowne and uncrowne him with Thornes, iterating againe and againe that terrible torment: How this most innocent Lamb was fastened with Nayles to the wood of the Crosse, and lifted up into the Ayre, with unspeakable griefe of his Wounds, and new anguish of his whole Body: And so of other the like points. 3. And in these considerations, first apply thy senses to feele, see, &c. the paine which thy deare Saviour endured in these passages in all the Members of his sacred Humanity: Then elevating thy heart to his holy Soule, penetrate into his Ptience
and Meeknesse, and see how plea∣santly hee passeth over these so great and grievous afflictions: and how ready hee is, for his Fathers satis∣faction and our salvation, to suffer much more and farre greater tor∣ments: After this, behold him hang∣ing Mark how meekly hee suffered, and learne thereby to suffer pati∣ently thy smaller adversities. on his Crosse, and compleating his sufferings by his Death: stand thou close to him and contemplate him, and thinke with what an ardent desire hee did all this for thee, that thou by his example might'st learne to endure with patience, thy smaller adversities for his honour. And as hee turned himselfe to his Heavenly Father, and prayed for thee; so thou shouldst implore his Grace to beare and overcome this Crosse thou now groanest under, and all other thy Of Reso∣lution. grievances, with quiet of minde, and constancy of resolution. 4. And Lastly, compell thy will to consent to these sufferings; And And com∣pell thy will, to take up thy Crosse quietly. speake to it, to take up this Crosse quietly, and cary it on constantly: Then turne thee to God thy Hea∣venly Father, and humbly beg of him the vertue of Patience; and that he will be pleased to hear the perfect
Prayer of his own dear Son, powred out on the Crosse for thee. CHAP. XXIV. Of another certaine manner of Prayer, by way of Meditation. 1. THere is yet another manner of Praying and Meditating together; As thus: Having attentive∣ly and seriously considered upon thy To pray and medi∣tate toge∣ther, Saviours bitter Passion, sustained for thy sake, and to save thy soule; apply thine own senses (as aforesaid) and endeavour to feel (as it were) the like dolours in thy selfe: and let thy thoughts pierce into the promp∣titude of mind wherewith Christ thy Saviour suffered all this. 2. And having weighed his ex∣ceeding pains and his exact patience; proceed to these two following con∣siderations: By con∣sidering Christ Merits, & the con∣tent his Heavenly Father took in his obedience. First, of the treasure of Christs Merits: and Secondly, of the high content and good liking, which his heavenly Father took in his deare Sons perfect obedience. Then, 3. Having fill'd thy minde with these pious points of Meditation;
produce them, and present them to And pre∣senting them both to God. thy Lord God; and beg by vertue of these that grace which thou standest in greatest need of. And thus thou mayst put up thy Petitions, not only in meditating upon any mystery of Christs passion; but also upon any internall or externall action of his. CHAP. XXV. Of a way of praying by the Intercession of the Blessed Virgin. 1. THere is yet, (besides these foregoing methods of Prayer and Meditation,) another way, by the means of the most glorious and ever∣blessed Virgin, and Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wich thou mayst thus easily practise: First, fix thy mind and meditation upon God the Eternall Father; then upon Jesus Christ his deare Son and our sweet Saviour; and lastly upon Mary, the First; fix thy minde and medi∣tation up∣th 'eternall Father. ever-blessed Virgin-Mother. 2. In thy meditation of the E∣ternall Father, take these two points for thy subject, and offer them up
to his Divine Majesty: First, the great liking and content hee had in himselfe from all eternity, concer∣ning this perfect creature the Virgin, before she had a being: Secondly, the wonders hee wrought in her, and the content he took in her, when she was borne into the World. 3. And as for the first of these considerations; Soare aloft, and Consider∣ing the content he had in himselfe (concern∣ing her) from all eternity; exalt thy thoughts beyond all time, and above each thing created, pe∣netrating the very eternity of the Deity; and then consider what ce∣lebrity of joy and delight the Divine Majesty had within himselfe, con∣cerning this sacred Virgin and her high perfections: And there finding thy Lord amidst these joyes and delights▪ lay hold of the opportunity, and addresse thy Petition unto him with full hope and confidence, that for this his great joys sake, hee will impart bountifully some Grace, Strength and Courage unto thee, whereby thou mayst be enabled to encounter and conquer thine ene∣mies, especially this vice which now chiefly tempts and troubles thee. 4. Hence proceede to the consi∣deration
of those admirable vertues, great gifts, and singular graces, con∣ferr'd upon this most glorious Virgin; And the wonders he wrought in her, when shee had a be∣ing. and sometimes present the whole bulke of them to the view of the eternall Father; other-times choose out some particular perfection to lay open before him: imploring and intreating for his owne boundlesse goodnesse sake, and in respect of these vertues and merits of this his dearly beloved Spouse, that hee will graciously heare, and mercifully grant what thou so greatly needest. 5. Then turne thy thoughts to∣wards the Sonne of God, our Lord Secondly, upon God the Son. Jesus; and represent before him the sacred wombe of his Virgin-Mother, which enclosed and carried him for nine moneths space: as also the sin∣gular reverence wherewith shee re∣ceived him from her wombe into her bosome, when he first appeared in the World; assisting him and acknowledging him true man, and adoring him as eternall God; as her own poore child, and as her power∣full Creatour: Put him further in minde, of her eyes of compassion towards his poverty; of her sacred
Armes which so often embraced him; her Kisses, wherewith shee cherish'd him; her Milk wherewith shee nourish'd him; her labours suf∣fered for him all his life time, and her dolours at his Death: by which and the like relations from the deare Mother, thou shalt use (as it were) a certaine violence to her beloved Son, to grant thy Petition. 6. Lastly, come to the sacred Vir∣gin Lastly come to the sacred Virgin. her selfe; lay open before her, her owne privileges, prerogatives and perfections; how shee onely, amongst all Virgins and Women, was especially elected by the eternall, Power, Prudence, and Goodnesse of God, to be a Mother of Gace and of pitty; to be an assistant and advocate of all mankinde; and that (next to her dearly beloved Sons humanity) wee can apply our selves to none but her, for better supplies of our necessities, or truer solace in our sorrowes, or greater hopes of happinesse. Tell her also of that true and tryed saying; that no one did ever faithfully call upon her, who received not a mercifull answer, and present assistance by her holy Prayer
and Patronage. Lastly, put before her eyes all her Sons sorrowes and sufferings upon Earth; and beg of her for his sweet sake, for his onely honour, and for his glory, that thou mayst impetrate by her pious inter∣cession the effect of this thy Petition, which that thou mightst obtaine, he patiently underwent his so bitter Death and Passion. CHAP. XXVI. How to pray and meditate by means of the holy Angels, and Heavenly Citizens. 1. ANother powerfull meanes to obtaine thy Petition, is by the Angels and blessed Saints in Heaven: which is also practised two manner of ways. First▪ apply thy thoughts First, ad∣dresse thy selfe to the eternall Father. to the Eternall Father; and present before him the Love, Honour and Praise, wherewith his Heavenly Court worshps and exalts him: and withall lay open all the miseries, labours and molestations, which his Saints suffered, and by his grace sur∣mounted, here upon Earth.
2. The other way is, by applying thy selfe to these glorious spirits, as Next unto the glori∣ous Angels and Saints them∣selves, to them who not onely remember us amidst their joys, but earnestly desire our perfection: beg therefore their faithfull assistance in thy fight against vices; and sometimes implore their ayd and assistance at the houre of thy Death, against thy dreadfull enemies. 3. Other times, reflect upon those excellent gifts and graces, wherewith their Lord God indued them; ex∣citing in thy soule a lively feeling of love and joy, that they possesse these high perfections, as much, yea more, than if they were thine owne, since such was the good will and pleasure of the Divine Majesty. 4. And that thou mayst more Dividing them into Quires, ac∣cording to the days of the weeke. easily and orderly performe and practise this pious exercise; divide the Quires of this blessed company, according to the week-days, in some such manner, as followeth. Upon Sunday, meditate upon the nine Quires of Angels. Upon Monday, of the holy A∣postles. Upon Tuesday, of the glorious Martyrs.
Upon Wednesday, of the blessed Bishops. Upon Thursday, of the holy Doctors. Upon Friday, of the holy Con∣fessours. Upon Saturday, of the sacred Virgins. 5. But let no day passe, without But every day pray∣ing to the B. Virgin, To thy particular Patron, some speciall devotion to the most glorious Virgin Mary; to thy Proper-Angel; and to that particular Saint and Patron, to whom thou owest singular duty and Veneration. EXPLICATION. AMongst which I perswade thee to place S. Joseph, the deare Spouse of the sacred Virgin; who (as experience, and contemplative persons testify,) will assist thee by And to S. Joseph. his holy Prayers, in all thy temporall and spirituall necessities; and par∣ticularly advance and direct thy Soul in its spirituall Exercises of Prayer and Contemplation: And surely if our loving Lord, so highly esteemes his other Saints, because they yielded him his due honour and obedience
upon earth; how much more doth hee value this most humble and hap∣py Saint; and how prevalent are his prayers like to be, with that Di∣vine Sonne, who honoured, served, and obey'd him upon Earth, as his Father? CHAP. XXVII. How to meditate upon the holy Crosse, and Christ our Saviour hanging thereon, to excite and move our affections. 1. I Have before shewed thee, (O my dearly beloved) the manner of meditating and praying upon our Saviours Passion: now I will instruct thee how thou mayst thereby stirre up good motions and enkindle holy affections in thy soule. When there∣fore thou hast taken some Article of Meditation, upon Christs Crosse and Passion; (as for example, Of his How to enkindle holy af∣fections in meditat∣ing on the Passion. Crowne of Thornes,) thinke thus with thy selfe: How thy most inno∣cent and amiable Lord Jesus, was (with greatest derision and scorne) cloathed in a purple coat, crowned
with sharp Thorns, cudgelled with a hard Cane, besmeared with filthy spittle. How this King of eternall glory, whom millions of Angels adore in Heaven, was by the worst and wickedest sort of men, mocked upon Earth, as a counterfeit King with scoffing Adoration and Re∣verence. 2. Now when by these, and such other points of Meditation, thou desirest to raise in thy soule the true feelings and affections of Love; By reflecti∣on upon Christs Love and goodnesse. elevate thy heart often-times whilst thou art meditating, to acknow∣ledge the boundlesse goodnesse of thy Lord God, and his love towards thee: which thou mayst easily ga∣ther, from the multitude and the bitternesse of his sufferings for thee. By this acknowledgement of his Goodnesse, thy love will be more and more inflamed; and a true con∣trition for thy sinnes will bee more easily obtained: especially if thou considerest, that thou hast againe and againe offended, this thy most bountifull and loving Lord God, who was thus cruelly sline for∣merly for the Ransome of thine iniquity.
3. To raise also a constant hope in How to get a con∣stant hope, thy soule; looke upon thy Lord Jesus, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, reduced into the extremity of misery, to free thee from the slavery of Sinne and snares of Satan, to reconcile thee to his Heavenly Father, and to give thee confidence to come to him cheerfully in all thy necessities. 4. And if furthermore, thou wouldst by these Meditations on thy Saviours passion, move thy selfe to spirituall joy; warn thy thoughts from And a spi∣rituall joy, remaining any longer upon his pains, and passe to the profits, fruits, and effects of his sufferings: There thou wilt finde thy selfe and the whole World absolved from thy sinnes by them, the Divine wrath appeased, the Devill defeated, Death conque∣red, the lost sheep reduced, the Angels seats supplied. Joyne to all this, the Joy of the sacred Trinity, and of the whole Church both triumphant and militant, who all rejoyce in the profit issuing from Christs cruell Death and As aso affections of sorrow and com∣passion, Passion. 5. But to raise affections of sor∣row and compassion towards thy
suffering Saviour; thou maist weigh, not onely the many wounds of his sacred body; but the multitude of an∣guishes, griefs, & sadnesses of his most holy foul. For he well knowing the eminent and infinite dignity of his heavenly Father, (whom he so high∣ly loved,) must needs be grieved a∣bove measure, to see this benigne and bountiful Creatour of all things, after so many and so great benefits, to be so rashly, so maliciously, and so frequently offended, and deluded, by his owne creatures. 6. And this sadnesse of thy Saviours soule, was much augmented by the foresight he had of that vast multi∣tude of men, who by their owne sinne and sloath, were to be damned eternally. The same grief was further aggra∣vated, by seeing the immense dolours of his deare and worthily beloved mother; and the same sword spared not his, which pierced her heart with sorrow. Moreover, Christs sacred foule, which was all-knowing (by reason of the divine union) suffered in all the Martyrs and tender Virgins torments, sustained for his faith and affection.
7. In these and the like meditati∣ons And acts of contriti∣on for thy sinnes. upon thy Lord and Saviours passion, thou must often reflect, that thou by thy grievous sins and defects, wert the cause and occasion of these his afflictions: and from hence, conceive acts of true sorrow for thy shamefull ingratitude, and humble thy selfe at the feet of his Majesty. And know that to be the best pleasing and most acceptable compassion, when thou persecutest thine owne disordered affections, and strivest to ruine those enemies, and root them out of thy heart, which were the cause of thy Lords so cruel pains and passion. 8. And to move thee to a perfect With a perfect ha∣tred of them. hatred of thy sinne; think seriously in running over all these points of thy dear Saviours passion, as if all these his sufferings were for no other cause, than to stir thee up to detest all sinne, and destroy thy unruly pas∣sions and affections: them especially, which most endommage, defile, and distract thy selfe, and most displease thy Saviour. 9. Lastly, That by these meditati∣ons upon Christs death and passion,
thou maist be moved to the admi∣ration And to admire Gods goodnesse: by consi∣dering 6, circum∣stances. 1. Who suffereth? 2. For whom? of his goodnesse: Consider attentively, First, Who he is that suffereth these things? Surely, the onely Sonne of the Almighty God; who to save thee, came from heaven and became man. Secondly, For whom he suffered? Surely, for us poor worms, the works of his owne hands, and who always are prone to offend him. Thirdly, By whom he suffered? Surely, By the vild and 3. By whom? vulgar crew, and the very refuse of all nations. Fourthly, What he suf∣fered? 4. What? Surely, disgraces, contumelies, contempts, wounds and torments, more than can be named or imagi∣ed. Fifthly, How he suffered all 5. How? this? Surely, with a most patient, meek, and willing mind; neither shewing any signe of distast, nor speaking any word of reproch, a∣gainst his most ungratefull and ma∣licious persecutors; but like an innocent lamb led on to the slaugh∣ter, he complained not of their vio∣lence, and his owne sufferings; but laid down his life, his heart remai∣ning full of sweetnesse. Sixthly, 6. When & where? When and where he suffered? Surely,
at the time of their Paschall solemni∣ty, and in their prime and sacred City, and in the presence of his dear∣est mother, and finally in the view, as it were, of the whole world. EXPLICATION. A further Declaration of the pro∣fit which may be drawn from the meditation upon Christs Passion, and particularly of the imitation of his vertues. AMongst the infinity of profits The first profit, is a confusion at the sight of our im∣perfecti∣ons. which may be drawn from this holy exercise, One is; that thou must needs conceive, not onely a sorrow for thy sins past, but feel also a shame and confusion in thy soule, to see that those unruly passions, which put Christ Jesus to death upon the Crosse, doe yet lurk and live within thy heart. The other main profit which flowes The se∣cond, a de∣sire and demand of pardon, from the former, is; that being truly sensible of thy sinnes, and ashamed of thine Ingratitude, thou wilt hear∣tily
desire, and humbly demand pardon for what is past, and grace to amend for the future: And for an acknowledgment of thy extraor∣dinary obligation, for thy Saviours sufferings undergone for thy sake, with a re∣solution of amend∣ment. thou wilt resolve to serve him, love him, and suffer for him hereafter. The third profit, is; that thou wilt fall out with thy perverse inclinati∣ons The third, a persecu∣tion of our passi∣ons. The fourth, an imitati∣on of Christs vertues. and passions, and persecute them to death, be they never so little. The fourth, is; that thou wilt force thy selfe to the utmost of thy power, to imitate the virtues of thy deare Saviour; who endured all this, not onely to save thee, and satisfy for thy Sinnes; but also to give thee an example to follow his sacred steps. Another way to meditate on the Passion. And now (my beloved,) I will here declare unto thee another method of meditating upon Christs passion, which thou maist make use of, as thy devotion and occasion shall suggest unto thee. If thou desirest (for ex∣ample)
to obtain patience, in imita∣tion of thy Redeemer; consider these points following: First, What the afflicted soule of thy Saviour doth towards his hea∣venly Father. By consi∣dering, Secondly, What the Father doth towards this soule of his Sonne. Thirdly, What this soule doth to∣wards it selfe, and its sacred body. Fourthly, What doth thy Saviour towards thee. Fifthly, What shouldst thou doe towards thy Saviour. First therefore, Consider how the soule of Jesus Christ being totally First, how Christs soule car∣ries it selfe towards his heaven∣ly Father. intentive upon God; Is amazed to behold this infinite and incompre∣hensible Majesty, in respect whereof all things created are as a pure no∣thing; submitted, (though immuta∣ble in his glory,) to the sufferance of such unworthy usages upon earth, for man; from whom he never received any thing but disloyalty and injuries: And how it afterwards adores, thanks, and offers up it self intirely to the disposition of the divinity. Secondly, how the Father to∣wards him. Secondly, Consider how God wil∣leth and exciteth the soule of thy Sa∣viour,
to suffer for thy sake all those blowes, buffets, scourges, spittles, blasphemies, thorns, and death upon the Crosse; giving him to know, how well it pleaseth him, to see him thus replenished with all sorts of af∣fronts and afflictions. Thirdly, passing on to the soule of thy Saviour Christ, Consider, how with his understanding (which is all Thirdly, how the soule to∣wards it selfe, and its sacred body. light) knowing how highly his passi∣on pleased God; and with his will (which is al fire) loving the divine Ma∣jesty beyond measure, which thus in∣vited him to suffer for thee; he dispo∣seth himself, readily, joyfully, & con∣tentedly to obey his sacred will and pleasure: And who can dive into the depths of those desires which this pure and loving soule of thy Sa∣viour had to suffer for thy sake? It found it selfe, as it were, in a Laby∣rinth of troubles; casting about to encounter new wayes of sufferings: and therefore freely gave up it selfe, and it's innocent body, as a prey to the pleasure, and cruelty, of the most lewd and worst sort of villains. Fourthly, Consider in the next Fourthly, how thy Saviour carryes himselfe towards thee. place thy sweet Saviour, amidst his
bitter torments, fixing his eyes full of teares and tendernesse upon thee; and conceive thou hearest him thus expostulating with thee: Behold, my Child, whither thy immo∣derate desires, and unmortified affecti∣ons have brought me; because thou wouldest not use a little violence to thy selfe: See, and consider, how much, and how willingly I suffer for thy love, and to give thee a pattern of perfect patience: I beg of thee, (ô my deare child;) and I conjure thee by all these my sufferings and sorrows, that thou wilt willingly embrace, and cheerfully carry this Crosse, and any other which I shall think fit to lay upon thy shoul∣ders; and that thou abandon thy selfe intirely into such hands as I shall per∣mit to persecute thee in body or fame, how vile, contemptible, and cruel soe∣ver they be. O, didst thou but con∣ceive the greatnesse of the comfort I should receive in this thy patience and courage! But thou mayst read it in these my wounds, wherein my love to thee is written in bloudy characters, and which I willingly receive, as so many precious pearles to enrich thy poore soule with all sorts of vertues and
perfections, because I love it above all things created: And if I thy Lord and Creatour am reduc'd to this ex∣tremity for thy love; why, (ô my deare Spouse) wilt thou not consent to endure a little to satisfie my hearts de∣sire; to supple my wounds, and to miti∣gate these my pains, caused by thy impatience, which more afflicts my soule, than these grievous torments doe my body? Fiftly, Consider well who he is Fiftly, how thou shouldst carry thy selfe to∣wards thy Saviour. that speakes thus unto thee, and thou wilt find that he is the King of glory, Iesus Christ, true God and true Man: Mark also the greatnesse of his grief, the variety of his torments, and the manner and indignity of his disgraces, too bad for the worst of men, or most infamous malefactor in the world: Yet thou seest thy Saviour amidst all these affronts and afflictions, not onely unmoveable, mild, and patient; but even joyfull and content, as if hee now kept his marriage-banquet: And as a little water, rather strengthens than ex∣tinguishes a full kindled fire; so by the increase of his torments, (which were small in respect of his exces∣sive
love,) his content and desire of suffering farre greater, was more and more enkindled and augmented: Consider further, that he endured all this by no externall violence, nor for any self-interest; but (as he told thee) for thy love, and that thou mightst imitate him, and exercise thy selfe in the vertue of patience: And then penetrating into that which he desires thou shouldest doe, and into the content thou shouldest afford him by this thy practice of patience; produce acts of a passionate will, to beare not onely this Crosse patient∣ly and joyfully, but any greater; that so thou maist imitate him more perfectly, and content him more a∣bundantly. And imprinting in thy mind a lively image of these his sufferings, and of his constancy therein; be a∣shamed to thinke thy patience so much as a shadow of his, or that thy affections are really any at all, being compared with his; and tremble that the least thought of not endu∣ring for the love of thy Lord, should remaine in thy heart. Thy Crucified Jesus, (my beloved,)
is the best book thou canst read in; Christ crucified is the best book to read in, and the liveliest image thou canst look upon, to draw the perfect pourtrait of all vertue: For it being the book of life, it not onely informs thy un∣derstanding by words, but also in∣flames thy will by example: The world is full of books, yet all of them together cannot so spee∣dily and perfectly teach the true means of obtaining all vertues, as doth the right contemplation of Christ upon his Crosse: But they And to learne all vertues, who imploy much time in deploring their Saviours passion, and admiring his patience, and apply it not at all to their particular practice when oc∣casions If thou makest fit applicati∣ons to thy particular practise. are offered; doe like unto those Souldiers, who before the skirmish, talk of great matters, and speak high words in their tents; but at the first sight of the appearing e∣nemy, they take a fright, quit their colours, cast down their armes, and utterly forsake the field. And in∣deed, what thing can be more silly, cowardly, and unworthy, than to contemplate, as in a most cleare glasse, the vertues of our Lord and Saviour, loving them, and admiring
them; and presently to forget them, and disesteeme them, as soone as any occasion is presented wherein to exercise our selves in their imita∣tion. CHAP. XXVIII. Of sensible devotion; as also of spiritu∣all drinesse, and dereliction. SEnsible devotion, proceeds some∣times  from a naturall inclination; sometimes from the Devil; and sometimes from Gods grace: And by Devotion is best known by the effects it produ∣ceth. the fruits of it, thou maist best judge from which of these springs it issu∣eth: For if thence thou art no whit moved to amendment of life; thou maist justly feare it comes either from thy enemy, or from thy owne nature; and the more sweetnesse thou feelest, the more shouldst thou be suspicious whence it flow∣eth. 2. When therefore thy soule is re∣plenished How to make pro∣fit of all spirituall sweetnesse in devoti∣on. with spirituall sweetnesse, question not whence it commeth, nor adhere much unto it; but still stick stedfastly to the acknowledge∣ment
of thine owne basenesse, ab∣stracting thy heart from all other delights or desires, than onely that which it takes in God, and his good pleasure. Thus, will these short sweetnesses, whether they spring from thy owne nature, or thine ene∣mies suggestion, be truly turned to thy comfort and profit. 3. Drynesse in like manner, or de∣solation Three causes of spirituall drynesse. of the soule, may proceed either out of our owne naturall de∣fect, or from the Devil, or from God. From the Devil; who thereby The De∣vill. strives to render the soule tepid, and tedious in her spirituall exercises; and so to draw her by degrees to leave them, and looke after earthly solaces. From our selves; Either because Our selves. we stand in feare of our selves by reason of our sinnes, or because we are negligent in the practice of our devotions. From God; who therefore per∣mits God. this drynesse, to excite us to more diligence, and abstract us from all other cares and curiosities, but them onely which concern our Crea∣tour,
or have some relation unto his honour, or our own perfection: Or finally, to teach us, not to trust or rest in spirituall joyes, but to depend wholly on his holy will and pleasure: As that resigned soule did, which said: Our Lord gave, our Lord hath Job 1. 21. taken away, as it hath pleased him so it is done. 4. When therefore thou feelest this drynesse of devotion, enter into thy selfe and search out the cause there∣of; Search out the true cause thereof, and having found it, fight against it; not to recover that sensible sweetnesse of grace, but to expell farre from thee whatsoever is dis∣pleasing to the divine Majesty. 5. And let it be thy continuall And keep on thy ac∣customed practices of piety. care, to keepe on thy accustomed practices of piety, notwithstanding this drynesse in thy soule; yea, though thou seemest to labour in vaine, yet prosecute them with grea∣ter diligence, and drinke of that bitter potion of desolation with a prompt and peaceable resolution; and if it be so mingled with the thick dreggs of a troubled minde, that thou knowest not how to swallow it, nor which way to turne thee;
yet persevere with alacrity, and sit And seek no out∣ward com∣forts. solitarily thus deferted, under the shadow of the holy Crosse, seeking no outward solace, though the whole world should offer it, or any creature afford it thee. 6. For thou arr to conceale this Nor pray to have it mitigated. Crosse of thine from all persons, ex∣cept thy ghostly Father, to whom thou art faithfully to discover it; not to have comfort from him, but counsell, how to carry thy selfe during this drynesse, conformable to the divine pleasure and good liking. 7. Nor art thou to make use of the holy Communion, Prayer, or any o∣ther spirituall exercise with intention to have the least mitigation of thy adversities; but only that thy good God will give thee strength of spirit, to support thy Crosse with patience. And if through trouble and distra∣ction, thou canst hardly make use of thine understanding in thy medita∣tions; keepe onely a willing minde to doe it, and supply it with jacula∣tory prayers, and frequent elevations of thy mind to thy Lord God.
EXPLICATION. IN this case, thou maist make use of these or the like sacred senten∣ces: My heart is troubled within me, my strength hath forsaken me, and Ps. 37. 11. the light of my eyes is not with me. Lord I suffer violence, answer for Esay. 38. 24. me. Return, return, ô my beloved, let me Cant. 6. heare thy voice. How long shall I consider in my self, Psal. 13. 3. and have griefe in my heart all the day? Why, ô Lord, art thou gone farre Psal. 10. 1. off, and despisest in opportunities, in tri∣bulation? Pardon me, that I may have some Psal. 38. 14 refreshing, before I goe hence, and shall be no more. O my God, my God, why hast thou Psal. 22. 9. left me? Or thou maist say: O my Lord, ô my love! where, where dost thou leave thy poore servant thus all alone, who hath no comfort in himselfe, and desires none from any creature? O what shall he doe, if he findes it not in thee? Whi∣ther wilt thou goe, poore stray'd sheep,
if thou hearest not the voice of thy di∣vine shepheard? O living fountaine! ô source of all sweetnesse! shall I never more become worthy to tast one onely dropp of thy delights? To whom shall I have recourse, if thou, my God, and onely refuge, keepest aloof from me? O unlimited bounty! when shall I have a lively feeling of thy effects? How is it possible for my dry soule to subsist in this desert earth, being deprived, ô my God, of thy heavenly dewes? When thou findest thy selfe thus In thy de∣solation, remembr how thy Saviour was left comfort∣lesse on the Crosse. abandoned; remember how thy deare Saviour was also left comfort∣lesse by the same heavenly Father, in the Garden, upon the Crosse and in his greatest afflictions; Therefore pronounce with him oftentimes those hard words; Fiat voluutas tua, Thy holy will be done: which procee∣ding from the depth of thy heart, will sweetly wound the heart of thy Lord God, and move him to compas∣sionate thy misery, either by sending thee comfort, or giving thee cou∣rage, constancy, and resignation, to endure it. 8. For know assuredly, that to doe Text.
or suffer for Gods honour, is to him For, to suffer for God, is the best pray∣er, and makes thee truly de∣vout. the most acceptable prayer; And therefore to endure this drynesse with perfect patience, and humble resignation; makes thee truly de∣vout; because true devotion con∣sists in no other thing, than to have a ready will to follow Christ thy Lord, with thy crosse on thy shoul∣der, whither, and which way hee pleaseth; having and desiring God, only for God; and sometimes lea∣ving God for God. 9. If therefore spirituall persons, especially Religious men and women, would seeriously examine and mea∣sure their progresse in the way of perfection and piety, by this Rule; and not by the feeling of sensible devotion, (which many doe chiefly And not sensible devotion. regard;) they surely would make better use of sensible comforts in their exercises of devotion; which their loving Lord affords, to make them more zealous in submitting to his sacred will; which disposeth all things, in order to our salvation and benefit. Wherein many are deceived. 10. And in this also many are much deceived, that when they are
troubled with impure and perverse thoughts, they presently become fearfull and faint-hearted, and as if God had utterly forsaken them, thinke it impossible that his holy Spirit should inhabit a heart so trou∣bled and tormented. And they so intricate themselves in these fancies, till by degrees they fall into a grie∣vous dislike of themselves, and lastly into a certain dangerous despaire. Which they no sooner apprehend in themselves, but they presently run to their wonted wayes, to recover their quiet. But hereby they shew themselves little gratefull to God; who therfore permits them to be thus troubled and tempted, to bring them to the cleare knowledge of their owne nothing; that so, as wretched, frail, and desolate crea∣tures, they may more seriously seeke him, and more diligently draw near him. 11. Wherefore, (ô my beloved,) What thou art to do in this di∣stresse. that which thou must doe in such a distresse, is this: Enter straight into a profound reflection upon thine own basenesse, and there humble thy selfe, and confesse thy peevish affe∣ctions
and passions, and acknowledg thy pronesse to fall, (if left to thy selfe,) into all manner of wicked∣nesse; and that without thy loving Lords care and custody, helpe and defence, thou wouldst be cast downe headlong incontinently. 12. This done, raise thy heart with a good hope, and confidence in thy Creatour; seeing it is hee only who permitted thee to fall into this ad∣versity, that thou might'st take hold of the occasion to draw neerer unto him by humble prayer; and therefore thou art obliged to render gratefull thanks to his divine Majesty, for these-like troubles and temptations. And take this as a certainty: That all such perverse thoughts are sooner ex∣pelled with meeke sufferance and pa∣tience, than with much solicitude and study.
CHAP. XXIX. That the worthy frequenting of the most Blessed Sacrament, is an effica∣cious meanes to conquer our passi∣ons. THe sacred Communion, or most  holy Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist, is received by devout Christians for divers ends. But if thou desirest to take it, for the particular strength∣ning of thy soule against the as∣saults of evill inclinations; attend to what I shall now teach thee. 2. The day before thou intendest Meditate the day before thy Commu∣nion, of thy Savi∣ours de∣sire, &c. to come to thee; to communicate; meditate, if thy leasure give thee leave, of the great desire thy dear Saviour hath to unite himselfe to thee by the meanes of this Sacrament, and thereby to root out thy vitious affections. For this his desire is so immense, that no cre∣ated understanding can comprehend it. 3. But that thou maist have a small glimps thereof, consider these two things: First, What pleasure our Lord takes to dwell in us; since the holy
Scripture calls this his delights; and in My delights are to be with the children of men. Child, give me thy heart. And how much he hateth sin. requitall of this love, he only requires our hearts. Secondy, how much he hateth our sinnes, which der his nearer union with us, and are direct∣ly opposite to his incompable per∣fections. For he being the ely and chief good, the purest light▪ d most perfect beauty, cannot but detest that which is meer darknesse, frailty, and the corruption and Canker of our wretched soules. 4. And that this loving desire of thy dear Lord, may take yet deeper impression in thy mind; meditate often of his mervailous works re∣lated in the Old and New Testa∣ment; especially of his most bitter Passion and cruell death; which he did expresly suffer to deliver thy soul from sinne; and to cleanse it from such affections, as are contrary to his divine Majesty. Concerning which point, all the illuminated Doctours of Gods Church, doe una∣nimously conclude and teach; That Christ our Saviour would againe, if it were needfull expos himselfe to a thousand deaths, to free us from the least evill passion or affection.
5. By such considerations, thou And move thy soul to a recipro∣call desire and affe∣ction to∣wards him. wilt easily gather the great desire thy deare Saviour hath to dwell with thee: and from thence conclude, how fitting it is that thou shouldst reciprocally stirre up in thy selfe an ardent affection to receive and en∣tertain him: Which thou mayst do by these and the like jaculatory prayers: Come, ô my Lord, and my love; helpe thy caitif creature to con∣quer her enemies. When, ô when (my deare spouse,) will that happy hour come, that I may receive thee, the bread of life; and being comforted and encouraged by thee, may fully conquer my selfe, and totally subdue my owne evill passions, and disordered affecti∣ons? 6. And when thou art hightned And then provoke thy passi∣ons to battail. with the hope of thy sweet Saviours comming into thy soule, then pro∣voke thy passions to battaile; call up thy affections, and curb them againe and againe with perfect hatred and disdaine; and this done, produce acts and desires of the vertues which are opposite to these vices: And let this be thy evenings entertainment, and mornings mploymt.
7. But when the hour of sacred Being near the time of Commu∣nion thou art to fear, communion draws neare; think se∣riously of thine owne faults, failings, and unfaithfulnesse to thy Lord God, since the time of thy last ap∣proach to the sacred table; for which ingratitude and unworthinesse, thou tremblest with fear and confusion be∣fore his dread Majesty: But then a∣gaine, encourage and comfort thy But also to have cou∣rage and cōfidence. selfe with the consideration of his goodnesse, his readinesse to pardon, and his inclination to mercy; and with a pious confidence, that he will have thee receive him, notwithstan∣ding thine own indignity; go on with alacrity of spirit to the holy banquet, and joyfully embrace thy Lord God in thy soul. 8. The Sacred Communion thus After Commu∣nion dis∣cover thy wants. performed, presently shut up thy self within the closet of thine own heart, and discover to thy Saviour thy wants, and thy weaknesse; saying in thy mind: Thou seest, ô my sweet Sa∣viour, how I am possessed with this passi∣on, and pestred with this perverse af∣fection. Thou also well knowest, ô my Lord, my weaknesse to resist it, and that  is not possible for me by my owne di∣ligence
to be delivered: Therefore this battail is thine; I resigne this my quar∣rell against these enemies into thy pow∣erfull hands; and from thee alone I look for the victory. 9. After thou hast thus silently And con∣stantly hope for the divine helpe. prayed; turn thy selfe to the eternall Father, and piously present his deare Sonne Jesus unto him, for the same effect for which thou now receivedst him into thy soul: And expect with constant hope his divine helpe, which although thou presently perceivest not, yet thou shalt infallibly and plentifully receive, when it shall be most expedient for thee. CHAP. XXX. How to excite in us the affections of love, by the sacred Communion. IF thou desirest to stirre up in thy  soule, by meanes of this most holy Sacrament, that fervent love of thy Lord God which destroyes and con∣sumes all self-will, and selfe▪love within thee: Settle thy selfe, in the evening which precedes thy com∣munion, to meditate upon thy Lords
immense love and liberality, to∣wards Consider Gods love and liber∣ality. thee unworthy wretch, the worke of his owne hands; how not content to have formed thee of no∣thing to his image and likenesse; and to have sent his onely Sonne from heaven to inhabit our earth, and to serve thee for the space of three and thirty yeares in continuall labours and travails, and lastly to undergoe his most bitter passion, and ignomi∣nious death for thy redemption: He would further bequeathe this his Son unto thee in the most holy Sacra∣ment of the Eucharist, for the per∣petuall food and refreshing of thy soul. 2. And that by the due consideration Especially shewed in the sacred Commu∣nion. of this speciall benefit (of sacred Com∣munion) thou maist become all fire and love; thou shalt thus order thy devout exercise: Consider, in the first place, Who it Weighing first, who it is that comes thus unto thee. is that conferres on thee this so large and liberall gift: Surely, it is thy Lord God himselfe; the divine and increated wisedom and goodnesse; whose worth and perfection infi∣nitly exceeds the reach of all created capacity.
3. Then, looke upon the gift it self 2. What he gives thee. which is the true and onely Sonne of God, of equall height, nature and substance with the heavenly Father and holy Ghost. Now if a small gift proceeding from a King, hath its high value in respect of the giver; how highly is this gift to be valued by us, which is God, and given by God himselfe, as a token of his true love, and a perpetuall memoriall of his tender affection towards us? 4. Again, reflect upon the eternity 3. The eternity of his love. of this love, by which it was decreed by his most divine, most hidden, and most holy wisdome, that he would thus give thee himselfe for thy food and refection: and hence begin with joy and jubily of heart to sing and say within thy selfe: O infinite good∣nesse of my God! and is it even so, that thou lovedst me in thy endlesse eternity! didst thou, ô my Lord and my God, so much value me, thy poor and unworthy creature, that thou remembredst mee in thy blessed eternity, and hadst an ardent affection and desire to give me thy self for the food of my soul? 5. And finally, looke into the pu∣rity 4. The purity of his love. of this love, which so great a
Lord shewes unto so mean a worm: How different is it from all earthly affection? how free from the least mixture of profit, and selfe-interest? How farre is it above thy merits, and how purely is it a worke of his onely mercy and bounty? 6. Having thus seriously and sweetly, with affection and admira∣tion, meditated of the divine good∣nesse; Thy heart may breake forth Hence break forth into admi∣ration. into these raptures: Whence is it, O my Lord, that thou so lovest me an ab∣ject creature? Why, O King of glory, wilt thou so nearly joyne me to thy selfe, who am but a litle dust and ashes? I well conceive thy designe, O my deare Lord, this thy excessive love towards me: It is to win me reciprocally to thy love; O the purity of divine love! Thou lovest me, ô my God, and givest thy whole selfe unto me, for no other end but that I may in gratitude give thee my love, life, and all, entirely: and this for no need thou hast of me, but meerly for thy mercies sake, and for my advancement and profit; that by this sweete tye and happy union of love, my earthly heart may be raised up to become one with thy divine heart, ô my Lord and my God.
EXPLICATION. HEre all ravisht with joy to see And ra∣vishment to see thy self so highly prized. thy selfe so highly prized, and beloved of thy Lord God; withdraw into the secretest part of thine owne heart, and there acknowledging that all this powerfull love, is to intice thy poore and inconsiderate selfe unto his divine Majesty: make so And make an intire oblation of thy self to him. absolute an oblation of thy selfe unto him; that thy memory may scarcely thinke of any thing but thy God; thy affection may abhor all content which comes any way without him; and thy Ʋnderstanding may admit of no other object for its continuall entertainment, than him, who is the onely satiety and satisfaction of all thy inward faculties and outward senses. And since there is no action, a∣mongst And this being the chief act of Religi∣on, all them which concern our Religion and loyalty to God, which can compare with this, (of recei∣ving him worthily in the most holy Sacrament,) either in appeasing Strive to perform it most per∣fectly. his anger, or uniting us to his love: Force thy selfe to the utmost of thy
power to prepare, purifie, and open thy heart unto him, and to shut it against all things created. 7. Then offer and dedicate thy self humbly and wholly, with heart and Text. affection, to the divine pleasure; Dedica∣ting thy self wholly o him. and retaine an ever ready and infla∣med desire to please God, and fol∣low his blessed will. And when this holy desire and affection shall be throughly enkindled in thy soul; thou wilt see me to move thy Lord God also to be so much enamoured with thee, that he desires thou shoul∣dest freely open thy heart to him, that he may the next morning enter And free∣ly open thy heart to him. in unto thee, feast with thee, and take his full delight in thee: Then doe thou also declare thy mutuall desire to receive him, with these kind of Jaculatory prayers. O heavenly and divine manna, when will that wished houre come, that I shall to thine owne content, receive thee into my soul? Ah; when shall I be surely united un∣to thee, by sincere affection? When shall I, (O onely life of my soul!) relinquish all self-will, and vanquish all my passi∣ons and imperfections?
8. In these and the like devotions thou maist spend the evening and morning, to excite, cherish, and en∣crease thy desire to receive thy deare Saviour, that so thou maist perfectly please him, and be most happily uni∣ted unto him. And in thy pious practices of these things, take this Caveat: Be sure to keep each power and faculty of thy soule, pure and But take heed of va∣nity and curiosity. free from all curiosity of worldly things, and from all idle and vaine thoughts: Take also the like care of thy outward senses, lest thy heart steale out by them, and so thou lose all thy devotion. EXPLICATION. THe time of the sacred Commu∣nion At the time near the Com∣munion. drawing nigh; think thou art to receive the Lord who created this great Universe, and thee to his owne likenesse; the Sonne of God, who died for thee nked on the 1. Think what thou art going to doe. Crosse; that increased goodnesse, which hath so often freed thee from danger, death, and damnation; which thy sinnes deserved. Thanke him with most profound Thank,
humility; and adore him, (uniting Adore, Implore. all thy spirits and forces of body and soule togeather,) as true God, and true man. Beg also his pardon for thy faults, and that the same love which moves him to grant thee this great gift, may also induce him to purge thy soule from the staines of all sinne and uncleannesse, thereby disposing it to a more pure and per∣fect union with his divine Majesty. When the Priest pronounceth those sacred words: Domine non When Do∣mine non sum dignus, is sayd. sum dignus; O Lord, I am not worthy; accompany him with these follow∣ing, and speak to thy Lord and love from the bottome of thy heart. I am not worthy to receive thee, ô my great Lord, before whose Majesty the Angels of heaven, tremblingly confesse their owne nothing. I am not worthy ô my Lord, that thou shouldest enter into my heart, who am one of the meanest, weak∣est, and ungratefullest creatures upon earth. I am not worthy, ô my Lord, that thou shouldest lodge with me, because I love thee not, and I remember thee not, though these are prime reasons of thy instituting and remaining in this most blessed Sacrament.
Thus humble, confound, and abisme Humble and Con∣found thy selfe. thy selfe, at the serious consideration of thy sinnes, malice, and misery: but then raising up thy heart with hope by the following words; [Sed But still raising up thy heart with hope. tantum dic verbo, & sanabitur anima mea.] Doe thou onely speak the word, ô my Lord, and my soule will be sa∣ved: Enter, ô my love, into this un∣worthy harbour, and make use of thine infinite power and goodnesse in pardo∣ning my sinnes, supplying my defects, and protecting me from my enemies. 9. And after thou hast received Text. Having communi∣cated en∣tertaine thy guest with amo∣rous ex∣pressions. this divine Sacrament, betake thee presently to the innermost closet of thy heart, and there enter into com∣munication with thy holy guest, using these or the like loving and respectfull expressions: What hath moved thee, O great King of Kings, to enter in to me, who am nothing but a miserable, despicable, vild, blind, and naked creature? And he will answer thee: Love; for thou art my dove, my friend, my sister, my spouse and my dearely beloved. Then thou maist re∣ply; O increated love, ô sweetest dilection, ô friendly and faithfull
charity, what wouldest thou have me doe? what demandest thou? what desirest thou? I ask nothing (saith he) but love: I would have nothing burne in the harth of thy heart, but the fire of my love, that it may devour all forraine love within thee, and destroy all self-wil and seeking. This, this is my desire; be∣cause I would be truly thine, and would have thee likewise be totally mine: Which can never be compassed, untill thou freely deliverest up thy selfe to my will and pleasure: For without this entire resignation, thy fancy will be al∣waies fastned to the loving and liking of thy selfe, and thine owne actions, be they never so meane: I desire therefore that thou shouldest hate thy selfe, that thou maist have the love of me: I demand thy heart for my habitation, that I may joyne and unite it unto mine, for to this end was my heart opened to thee upon the altar of my Crosse. My will is, I say, (ô my dearly beloved spouse) that thou desire no∣thing, think nothing, understand no∣thing, see nothing, feel nothing, but my selfe onely: that so I onely may be in the, and thou totally turned into me, and that thou maist possesse in me per∣fect
quiet, and I in thee pleasant con∣text. 10. Lastly, thou shalt offer the ho∣ly And Last∣ly, offer up the divine Sonne to his hea∣venly Fa∣ther. Sonne to his heavenly Father, for thy selfe, for the whole world, and for the soules departed; in memory and union of that divine oblation which he offered upon the holy Crosse: presenting in like manner all the unbloody sacrifices to the divine Majesty, which are that day offered up in his universall Church. CHAP. XXXI. Of Spirituall Communion. ALthough (my beloved) thou canst receive thy sweeet Savi∣our 1. Thou maist thus often Commu∣nicate. sacramentally onely once a day; yet thou maist receive him spiritu∣ally, every houre and moment: For nothing can hinder thee from this, but onely thine owne fault and neg∣ligence. And this spirituall Com∣munion may sometimes prove more profitable to thy soule, and pleasing to thy Saviour, than the sacramen∣tall, especially if there be a defect
in thy due and diligent preparati∣on. 2. For as often as thou desirest By fre∣quent de∣sires. to receive thy loving Lord God thus spiritually into thy soule, thou shalt find him ever ready to feast thee with his owne sacred hands; and thou mayest thus easily dispose thy selfe unto it: Turning thy selfe to thy Saviour to this end, reflect upon thine owne frailty and frequent fai∣lings, and conceive an inward sorrow and detestation of thy defects; then make thy supplication with a loving affection, that he will not disdaine to enter thy poor cottage, and feast thee with his owne true body and blood. 3. So also, when thou art moved And it is an excel∣lent exer∣cise against passions. with a pious zeal against any perverse Passion, and desirest efficaciously to mortify it, or to plant some vertue in thy soule; make use of this spirituall communion, by converting thy thoughts towards thy Lord God, and invoking his aid with ardent prayers, beseech him to enter and possesse the secret part of thy soule: Or, calling to mind thy last sacra∣mentall communion, speak to him
with an inflamed desire: When (ô my good God) shall I againe welcome thee into the closet of my heart? Come now, (O my Saviour) and comfort me spi∣ritually, with the like strength and vertue. EXPLICATION. IF thou wilt practice this pious How to make great use of this exercise for thy spi∣rituall pro∣fit. exercise of spirituall Communion, with more reverence and profit; frame thy intention over-night to apply all the mortifications of thy vicious passions, all the acts of ver∣tue, and whatsoever good thou shalt any way performe, for the obtaining of this happy effect, and that thou maist worthily open the gate of thy heart, to give due entertainement to so divine a guest. And in the morning settle thy thoughts upon the serious consideration of the great happinesse of that sweet soule which worthily receives this most holy Sacrament, whereby sins breaches are repaired, lost vertues are restored, languishing forces are recruted, and each good returnes to its first beauty, by the communication of the fruits of
Christs merits and passion. Then force and excite thy heart to an ar∣dent desire of these comforts by thy Lords comming; and turning towards him, say: O my Lord, and my love, I am not worthy to receive thee sacramentally; but doe thou, ô incre∣ated goodnesse and unlimited power, pardon all my imperfections, and make me worthy to receive thee spiritually, to the honour of thy holy name, and the true comfort of my poor soule. CHAP. XXXII. Of Thanks-giving. ALL our good actions are of All good∣nesse is from God. God, and from God; and there∣fore a thankfull gratitude is due to him for all our well performed ex∣ercises, for each victory obtained a∣gainst our enemies, and for all and singular his blessings and benefits. 2. And that thou maist not be de∣fective To whom therefore all grati∣tude must be shewed. in this point of duty: Re∣member, that the chiefe motive why our omnipotent creatour conferres his mercies upon his creatures, is that they should correspond to him in
pious, perpetuall and worthy thanks∣giving. And because our Lord God in bestowing his benefits, intends principally his owne honour; and secondly our profit: doe thou like∣wise First, therefore acknow∣ledge his goodnesse. in receiving them acknowledge in the first place, his power, wisdome, and goodnesse, which most glori∣ously shine in each one of them. 3. And in the next place, reflect upon And then thine own unworthy∣nesse. thine own unworthinesse of so great favours, who art nothing else but ingratitude, misery, and basenesse. And Lastly, submit thy selfe to obey his divine will and pleasure, and study to performe what thy Lord, in lieu of these benefits, expects from thee; which is, to love him chiefly, to serve him carefully, and to offer and de∣dicate thy selfe to him freely and totally; as I shall now teach thee. CHAP. XXXIII. Of the perfect oblation of thy selfe, to thy Lord God. AFter thanks-giving for received favours, the soule presently
breaks forth into that delicious affe∣ction of the Royall Prophet: What shall I render to my Lord, for all the good things he hath given me? That therefore thou maist doe something, seeming like satisfaction; by offe∣ring up to his Majesty, all that thou art, hast, and canst; and that entire∣ly, absolutely, voluntarily, and by an efficacious act of thy inward man. 2. Consider first with a serious at∣tention First, con∣sider Gods greatnesse and glory. the greatnesse and glory of thy Lord God; (for upon this depends the perfect oblation of thy selfe,) and thou wilt find that there is a reverence and feare due to this his greatnesse and glory: that there is a love due to his goodnesse; that there is a hope & confidence due to his mercy; and so of his other attributes and perfections: And thou shalt congratulate and rejoice with thy Lord God, that he is what he is; to wit, the best, greatest, most wise, most holy most happy, most power∣full, most infinite, and that he hath all the perfections which he posses∣seth: Thus multiplying many such amorous acts of complacence in thy heart.
3. Then, bow down the knees of soul and body with most profound 2. Adore and ac∣knowledg him, &c. reverence, before thy Lord and ma∣ker, adoting his divine Majesty, and acknowledging him to be the supream governour of all his creatures: And particularly, that whatsoever good thou hast by nature and by grace, is his proper gift: since he alone con∣fer'd it upon thee, and he alone con∣serves it in thee: for thus thou must needs confesse thy self to be his debtor, though thy offering be never so great; because thou canst present him with nothing, which is not alrea∣dy his owne, and first proceeding from his liberality and bounty; neither doth he lose his dominion thereof by conferring it upon thee. 4. In the next place, passe on to the 3. Offer up all thy interest in any thing. oblation it selfe; and deliver up all thine owne interest in whatsoever thou hast or canst, into the holy hands of thy heavenly creatour, with all possible cheerfulnesse and integri∣ty: that is, offer up unto him all that he hath given thee, and so re∣store thy whole selfe to thy God in perpetuall bondage, to dispose of thee both in time & in eternity, as he
best pleaseth: Neither shall it suffice thee to make this oblation generally, by presenting unto him the root and beginning of all thy thoughts, words, and works; but thou shalt doe it peculiarly, by presenting even those also, which by reason of thy state thou art obliged to exercise, to the honour & glory of his sacred name. 5. Lastly, thou shalt unite this en∣tire oblation of thy selfe and all that And unite all to the merits of Christ. belongs to thee, unto the merits of Jesus Christ, the sweet spouse of thy soul; that from thence it may have that value and esteeme, which from it selfe thou canst not hope or ex∣pect: And thus thou shalt end thy exercise, by presenting the eternall Father, with thy whole selfe and the Preing both toge∣ther to the eternall Father. holy merits of his onely Son joyned together, with all his actions and suf∣ferings, from the crib unto the Crosse; for all these are thy trea∣sures, which he at his death, bequea∣thed by his last will and testament unto thee, whom he left entitled to all his merits: But remember that thou makest not this oblation for thy selfe alone, but also for the uni∣versall Church, and her members:
for thus it will be far more accepta∣ble to God being sweetned with the incense of perfect charity. 6. In like manner, when thou wilt offer up thy fastings, prayers, or other So Like∣wise in of∣fering thy works of piety. pious works to thy Lord God: con∣sider, that his holy Sonne thy sweet Saviour hath already presented them together with his owne, to his eter∣nall Father; and so hath conjoyned and united them both together, doe thou therefore offer up the same in the same manner; by which thou shalt know that thy oblations pro∣ceed from a sincere heart. And if thou practisest this in time of adver∣sity, thou wilt easily master all mise∣ry, anguish, pain, and perils whatsoe∣ver, & duly fulfil Gods holy pleasure. 7. If furthermore thou desirest to make an oblation of Christs actions for thine own offences, he have thy How to offer up Christ's actions for our offen∣ces. selfe in this sort: First cast an eye upon thy sinnes, and perceiving that thou canst not hope to pacify Gods wrath, nor satisfie his divine Iustice by thine owne endeavours: addresse thy selfe to thy Saviours life, passion and death, and fix upon some one or other action or suffering of his; as
upon his fasting, or his praying, or the effusion of his precious bloud: then reflect, that he offered that his action or passion to his eternall Father for thy sins, and to reconcile him to thee; as if he said: I do now, O my heavenly Father fully satisfie thy divine justice for the sins of this thy servant N. Oh; let it please thee to spare him, and to receive him into the number of thy elect. 8. Doe thou also make the same oblation of thy deare Saviour to the eternall Father; and humbly beg for thy selfe and others, that in vertue of this offering and for his owne glories sake, he will in his mercy par∣don both thine and their offences. And thou maist piously and pro∣fitably make use of this manner of spirituall exercise, in any action or passage of our Lord and Saviours life or passion. EXPLICATION. Another maner, of perfect oblation. TO the end thy oblation of thy Christ here on earth, offe∣red not only him∣self, selfe may be acceptable to the divine Majesty; Consider, that whilst our Saviour so journed here upon
earth, he perpetually offered up to his eternall father, not onely himself and all his merits, but also all us mortalls together with himself: But also al us, to his Father. Make therefore thy Oblation in ver∣tue and union of his, yea make the self-same oblation of Jesus Christ, in which he also comprehended thee: Make thou the same oblation. and let this thy oblation be without the least touch of propriety or selfe-wil, neither regarding earthly goods, nor heavenly graces, but purely and precisely looking upon the divine pleasure and providence, to which thou art entirely to submit and sa∣crifice thy selfe, as a perpetuall holo∣caust; and forgetting all things crea∣ted, say unto thy Lord God: Behold, ô my good God, ô my great Creatour, a small lump of mire and earth mixed together, in the hands of thy eternall providence; do with me what best pleaseth thee, in my life, at my death, and after my death; in time, and in eternity. And thou mayst give a How to know the sincerity of thy ob∣lation. probable guesse concerning thy own oblation, that it proceeds from a sincere and disinteressed heart, if thou canst perfectly practise it in time of adversity; bearing it with
true patience, and being then ready to execute Gods holy will in all thy desolations and distresses. This is the right way, (o my dearly beloved.) to make a beneficiall truck and traffick of thy self for thy Saviour, who will give thee himselfe in exchange, if thou bequeathest and sacrificest thy selfe thus totally to his divine Ma∣jesty. CHAP. XXXIV. How to petition for divine grace. HAving made this perfect oblati∣on Text. First en∣courage thy selfe with con∣fidence in his good∣nesse. of this most precious trea∣sure, (which is no lesse than Christ himselfe, with all his glorious me∣rits,) to the Eternall Father: thou mayst appeare with Confidence be∣fore the throne of his mercy, to pe∣tition for the supply of thy necessi∣ties; And that thou mayst doe it with the more decency: First, encourage thy selfe with confidence, remembring his benefits, bounty, and liberality towards thee: for nothing can more strengthen thy hope of obtaining new supplies, than
than the reflection upon Gods for∣mer favours in time of necessity: And know that this confidence gives the whole efficacy to thy petition; so that without it, never expect to obtain from God any thing which thou demandest. 2. Secondly, Take speciall care that Secondly, join humi∣lity with it. this Confidence be coupled with hu∣mility; distrusting totally thine owne merits, and relying boldly upon Christs mercies: Not that I advise thee to become fearfull and pusilani∣mous, upon pretence of humillity; so as not to beg large benefits from Gods bounty: For though it be∣hooves to know thine own basenesse, and to consider how litle thou de∣servest; yet thou must beware of distrusting the divine bounty, or un∣dervaluing his liberality: No, be not dejected; for as thou deservest nothing, so thou hast greater occasi∣on to demand much; since Gods gifts are not grounded upon thy deserts, but upon Christs merits, which are Thirdly, presse thy petition with fer∣vent de∣sires. of infinite worth and dignity. 3. Thirdly, Endeavour to presse thy petition with frequent and fervent desires: that is, that thou adently
wish to obtain what thou askest: for since thou petitionest a most pious father for a supply of thy necessities, who not onely bids thee ask great things, but is also angry if thou askest not; and hath past his promise to perform thy petition; why shouldst thou not have inflamed desires o obtain what thou demandest? 4. And indeed we most commonly The want whereof, hinders the effect of our de∣mands. faile in the effects of our demands, because we want this fervour in our desires, and make our petitions te∣pidly, rather because faith and rea∣son dictate unto us that such things are needfull for us, than that we zelously covet to receive them: The true cause of which tepidity is, for that our affections being fastned to earthly things, we prize them in our wills, though we sleight them in our understandings; and conse∣quently though we know in our judgement, that our minds are to be raised up to higher objects, yet we doe not seriously seek to be separa∣ted from them: whereas if we verily and vigorously, humbly and heartily desired it, our prayers would soon return us a happy effect.
5. Lastly, provide that thy petition Fourthly, Let not thy petiti∣on want Charity, want not; First, Affection of charity to thy neighbours; for it should not suffice thee to pray fervently for thy self, but to extend thy piety in petiti∣oning the divine grace for all others. Secondly, Perseverance; For our Perseve∣rance, loving Lord, useth sometimes to prolong and to put off the fulfilling of our petition, for our greater pro∣fit, and the better encrease and en∣kindling of our holy desires, as may be exemplified in the Cananean wo∣man, and Evangelicall widdow. Thirdly, Resignation of thy will; Refignati∣on. For thou art to represent thy desires to thy deare Lord, as if thou rather expectedst the fulfilling of his divine pleasure, than of thy petition: So Christ prayed in the garden, not to have his owne will, but his heavenly Fathers accomplished. CHAP. XXXV. Some short observations concerning me∣ditation. FIst, Before thou betakest thy self 1. 1. Read overnight the matter of thy me∣ditation. to thy nights rest; read atten∣tively
and considerately that mystery of thy Saviours life, or that argu∣ment which thou meanest to medi∣tate upon the morning following; and contracting it into two or three points or heads, commit it to thy memory. 2. When thou awakest from sleep, 2. Re∣flect of the same in the mor∣ning. shut out all other thoughts from thy heart, and let thy employment be to reflect upon, and repeat the points, prepared over-night for this mor∣nings exercise: and think that thou art presently to talk with thy Lord God. 3. Wherefore making (as it were) 3. Weigh his maje∣sty with whom thou conferre. a stand, for a short space, before thou art in the place of prayer; imagin that thy great Creatour, whom the Angels adore, is present in the Ora∣tory, expecting thee to enter dis∣course with him, and beholding thy behaviour in thy prayer. Let this truth make a deep impression in thy mind; and thereupon yield him most profound reverence with body and heart, as craving permission to confer with his majesty. 4. Then with bended knees, begin 4. Begin with obla∣tion, and petition. thy prayer; first, offering up to thy Lord
God all the cogitations, words, and actions of thy whole life; particu∣larly presenting unto him this present exercise now intended, to his honour and glory; and humbly implore his gracious assistance, that thou mayst perform this thy practice with such attention, devotion, and reverence, as befits one that speakes with his Lord and Saviour. 5. Incontinently after this, imagin Then ap∣ply thy senses to the myste∣ry. thy selfe present to the mystery thou intendest to meditate on, and in the very place where it befell; for this will fix thy fancy from wandring: As, If thy theame be of Christs In∣carnation; think thou seest the glori∣ous Arch-angel entring the secret chamber of the sacred Virgin, and there listen to their; mutuall discour∣ses. So, If thy subject be of thy Saviours flagellation; suppose a pillar before thee with thy deare Lord fastned thereunto, and eye those in∣humane executioners, how cruelly they whip and beat him: And thus thou art to vary thy fancy, and conform it to the manner of the mystery. 6. And when the mysterie is thus
present to thy mind, make thy peti∣tion, And beg what thou intendest to obtain. and beg that which thou pro∣posedst to obtain by this exercise: As, If thy meditation be concerning Christs Incarnation, let thy prayer be for spirituall light, that thou mayst clearly penetrate and perceive that ineffable love which moved him to be made man for thy sake: If it be of his Passion, ask the grace of com∣passion and condoling with thy dear Saviour's sufferings; and so let thy petition be for such pious affections, as are usher'd in by the argument of thy prayer. 7. this done, begin with thy first After this beg in with the first point. point; and if that alone furnish thee with fewell sufficient to inflame thy affection, persevere therein for the whole space assigned to thy prayer; but if otherwise, then passe on to the second. And briefly, take this for a maxim in all meditations; that whensoever thou feelest thy affection enkindled; stay there, and disgest well that consideration, till thou hast therein fully satisfied thy de∣votion. 8. And suffer not thy understanding And be∣ware of fancying high my∣steries, to roam after high and delicate my∣steries;
but make use of it's discourse so farre onely, as many helpe to heat thy will with pious affections, and solid resolutions. Wherefore from each consideration extract some af∣fection, and from every affection draw some determinate and parti∣cular resolution, to do this very day, this or that thing for thy Lords ho∣nour; to reform this or that fault or imperfection, and to mortify thy sensuality in this or that occasion. And this is the true fruit and profit of prayer. 9. Bee resolute also in staying out Or lea∣ving off before the time allot∣ted for prayer, be expired: the full time allotted for thy prayer; and stirre not from it through any drynesse in devotion, or any trouble of distractions; for such a prayer is for the most part more profitable to a soul using diligent resistance, and patient expectance of Gods grace, than when it sensibly partakes of the sweets and abundance of de∣votion. 10. Thy exercise being ended, In the end reflect how thou hast beha∣ved thy self, insist a while in the examination of thy self; and reflect how thou hast be∣haved thy self in thy prayer: If thou findest all well; give thy good God
all the thanks; if thou hast been negligent, resolve upon amendment; and take notice of the cause of this ill successe, that thou fail not for the future. 11. Let the matter or mysteries And order well the matter of thy medi∣tion. thou meanest to meditate upon, be well ordered; as, if thou proposest to thy self, thy Saviours life and passion, make thy entrance at his Incarnation, and duly proceed in the rest of the ensuing mysteries; and leap not in∣constantly from one to another. CHAP. XXXVI. An Exercise before the Sacred Com∣munion. 1. THe conformation of the place, for 1. The place. the setling of thy mind; may be to imagin thy Saviour Christ, en∣compassed with his Angels and Saints, who all adore his divine Ma∣jesty with all possible reverenc. 2. Make thou also thy humble 2. Beg of thy Savi∣our to fit up thy poor house. addresse unto him, and since hee vouchsafeth to divert into the har∣bour of thy poor heart, entreat him to send before him such ornaments,
as are necessary for his worthy enter∣tainment; because thy poverty is uncapable to provide, what is suitable to so great a majesty. 3. Then reflect who it is that in∣tends 3. Think what guest is to lodge in it. to lodge with thee; It is surely hee, whom the Angel named Jesus, the Saviour of man▪kind; Hee, who onely can cure thy wounds: Hee, who so dearly loves thee, and takes such care of thy salvation, that he came purposely and personally to procure it; interposing his authority, hazarding his honour, and losing his life for thee upon an ignominious Crosse: And be sure to insist upon this pious consideration, as being very proper to prepare thy soul for the receiving of this most holy Sacra∣ment; according to our Saviours precept, As often as you shall doe these things you shall do them in remem∣brance of me. 4. Consider to what end thy dear 4. Why he comes to thee, Lord comes unto thee; Surely, to conclude a union betweene himselfe and thy soule, whence results a cer∣taine divine life, which thou hence∣forth enjoyest by this sweet union with thy Saviour. For the food we
take, begets humours of the same quality which it selfe is of: and consequently no mervaile if this hea∣venly food, and divine nourishment do in some sort deify the soul. He that eats me, shal live for me, saith our Lord. 5. Let thy next consideration be, to whom he comes; To a litle worm 5. To whom he comes. of the earth, to a vessell full of filth and rottennesse: and perhaps, (which is farre worse) even to his enemy, to the contemner of his commands, to the wilfull transgressour of his lawes, to a base run-away, who hath forsa∣ken the colours of his Lord God, and taken part with the Devill. 6. Make therefore thy humble 6. Make thy petiti∣on. supplication to thy sweet Saviour, that since he vouchsafeth freely to come unto thee for his owne mer∣cies sake, and for no merits of thine; he will also be pleased to prevent thee with his grace, and adorne thee with the gifts of his holy Spirit, that thou maist become a worthy recep∣tacle for his sacred body: as he for∣merly by the like prevention, pre∣pared for himselfe a happy and holy habitation in the virginall entralls of his most blessed Mother.
CHAP. XXXVII. How we may devoutly offer up the sa∣crifice of the Masse. WHen thou feelest thy heart 1. 1. Free thy fancy from all outward objects. inflamed by this foregoing or the like exercise; free thy fancy of all sensible objects, and shutting the windows of thy senses, so are up to thy Lord God, and fix there the eye of thy soule upon him onely, purely, freely, and quietly, excluding all tumults of outward thoughts; and implore the assistance of the holy Ghost, by reciting the hymn of the holy Church, Veni creator spi∣ritus, &c. 2. Then comming to put on the 2. In vest∣ing thy selfe, mark the myste∣ries. sacred vestments, mark with attenti∣on those mysteries which they mean and signify: and from that very instant of time, take upon thee Christs person, whom thou represent∣est in this holy action; that so thou maist be moved, to conforme each outward and inward deed, to him whom thou now personatest. 3. Let thy outward depot∣men be decent. 3. And as for the outward compo∣sure of the body; see that thy going
forth of the vestry, be with all de∣cency and gravity; let thy counte∣nance be cherfull, thine eyes humbly cast downe, and not curious to prie after any passages done in the Church: Let thy voice be low and sober, reading those sacred words neither precipitantly, nor over-pau∣singly, but beseemingly between both those extremes: Let the holy cere∣monies be piously and punctually observed: and let all be attentively performed; taking more care in the Canon, and most of all when thou commest to the words of conse∣cration. 4. Let thy inward composition also correspond with thy outward carri∣age; 4. And thy inward compositi∣on corre∣spondent. and therefore comming to the foot of the Atar, looke upon Christ thy Lord and thy love, sitting in his throne of glorious majesty, attended by his Angels and blessed Saints: and think he is presently comming down from his throne to the altar, to en∣rich thy poore soule with the trea∣sures of his divinity: And considering so high a Majesty, confesse thine own misery, meannesse, and nothing: and so truly humbling thy selfe both
inwardly and outwardly, begin the action of the sacrifice: And keep this presence of thy Saviour sitting in his throne and beholding thy de∣votion, untill thou commest to the consecration; which done, thou hast him then before thee upon the altar, thou touchest him with thy hands, and embracest him in thy heart there present in the Sacrament. 5. In thy first memento: Contem∣plate 5. In thy first me∣mento. thy Lord Jesus crucified, repo∣sing in thy heart, and depose all thy necessities and wants in his sacred and sugred wounds. And first offer up thy whole Masse to his holy head, To Christs holy head. intending it to the eternall honour of the most blessed Trinity, and for the increase of the accidentall glory of his deare Mother, thy Angel guar∣dian, and thy particular protectours and patrons in heaven; all which thou shalt joyne together in the wounds of thy Lords venerable head; and beseech them, that as thou in this vale of misery, strivest to aug∣ment their glory; so they in their happy and heavenly mansions, will be pleased to remember thee, and joyne with thee in the oblation of
this divine sacrifice to thine and their Creatour. 6. Comming then to the wound To his right hand. of his right hand, pray for the state ecclesiasticall; that is, for the Pope, Cardinalls, Bishops, and pastours of the Church; for all Religious per∣sons and their Prelats: and for them all, offer up this present sacri∣fice. 7. At the wound of his left hand, To his left hand. pray for the Laity; for Kings, Princes, Magistrates, and the rest of their people; and in particular for thy parents, friends, familiars, and all who desired to be made parta∣kers in thy devotions. 8. At his most sweet heart, offer To his sa∣cred heart. up thy whole selfe onely, humbly re∣presenting unto him thy life past, and begging his pardon: thy present being, and desiring his direction: thy spirituall necessities and corpo∣rall needs; thy health, thy temptati∣ons, thy desires, thy designes; Con∣secrate all the future thoughts, words and works of thy whole life to his eternall honour: Finally, re∣signe thy whole selfe reverently and confidently to his divine providence;
and so rest secure in his care, since thou hast delivered all thy affaires into his custody, who will better im∣prove all things for thy profit, than thou canst either ask or expect. 9. At the wound of his right foot, To his right foot. offer up the sacrifice for all them who are in Gods grace, and continue in his charity, that he will be pleased to preserve them still in his favour and friendship. 10. At the wound of his left foot, To his left foot. offer it up for all sinners, that God will vouchsafe to convert and en∣lighten them: for all poore, weak, and any-way afflicted wights, that he will please to comfort and deli∣ver them; and lastly for all thou either oughtest, or art bound to pray. And so conclude thy whole oblation with Saint Augustines words: I re∣commend Commendo eos, quos tu vis & scis, & velle me nosti. unto thy Majesty, whomsoe∣ver thou (ô my Lord) wilt, and knowest; and wouldest have me remember: And finally, offer up thy Saviour Jesus, thus loaded (as I may say) with all thy petitions and necessities, to his eternall Father in this present sacri∣fice; saving those words of the Psalmist: Behold, ô God our protectour, Ps. 83. 10.
and look upon the face of thy Christ; And so proceed on in the sacred Action. 11. In thy second memento; Thou 6. In thy second memento. hast Christ present in the holy Sacra∣ment, now glorious and risen from death; unite therefore thy affection unto him, and strive to creep into his open side, and there hide thy self safely and securely from all assaults of thine enemies: There also deter∣mine resolutely to doe his holy will for the future in all occurrences whatsoever; and put on that pious affection of the Royall Prophet: What is to me in heaven? and besides Psal. 72. 25. thee, ô my Lord and love, what would I upon the earth? Lastly, offer up the Sacrifice for the soules of the faith∣full departed; and compleat what remains of the sacred Masse. CHAP. XXXVIII. An Exercise aefter the holy Com∣munion. REpresent to thy selfe (as for∣merly) 1. Repre∣sentation of the place. thy Blessed Saviour, encompassed with the glorious
troops of Angels and heavenly spi∣rits, adoring and praising his divine Majesty. 2. Then implore his grace; that since 2. Implo∣ration of his grace. he beyond all desert of thine, hath vouchsafed to enter thy poor cottage, he will be likewise pleased to furnish it with all such ornaments of holy vertues as may best like him∣selfe; and to illustrate thy soul with the beams of his celestiall light, as he did that of holy Simeon; that with him, receiving thy Lord into thy loving embraces, thou mayst sweetly intone thy Nunc dimittis, &c. 3. In the next place, consider that 3. Consi∣der whom thou hast within thee. he whom thou hast now within thee, is thy sme Lord God, of whom be∣fore Communion thou conceivedst such high things: And render him humble thanks, for this immense be∣nefit, of communicating and uniting himselfe unto thee; intreating him that it may not be a sleight (and as it were) a passing visit, but a perma∣nent abode with thee. 4. After this, look upon thine 4. Mark thine own unworthy∣nesse. own unworthinesse to receive such a guest; how homely is thy habitati∣on? how beggarly, yea how beastly
is thy heart? how full of the noyse of passions and perplexities? and draw from hence acts of sorrow for thy sins, of shame for thy negligence, and of confusion for the uncleanesse of thy soul. 5. And lastly, ask with a most fer∣vent desire, that he who is the King 5. Make thy Petiti∣on. of glory and goodnesse, and the source of all sanctity and purity, will garnish thy soul with his vertues, and wash away all thy filthyness with the water of his celestiall grace; and so inseparably unite and joyn thee to himselfe, that nothing created may evermore make a breach between thee and him; but that he will strongly lock up the closet-doore of thy heart, and mark it for his own habitation with the signet of his sacred love; that so he alone may there peaceably and perpetually take up his rest, without the least distur∣bance of any forrain guest.
CHAP. XXXIX. A dayly Examination. 1. FOr the keeping clean of thy Conscience, it will be necessary for thee to go down daily into it, and sweep each darkest corner thereof with the besom of diligent examinati∣on, that all uncleanesse may be spee∣dily cast forth of dores. 2. Wherefore, thou art to do three Every Morning thou art to do three things. things every Morning: First, Give God thanks for all his benefits be∣stowed upon thee in the night past, and particularly for thy delivery from sodaine death, and from the deceits of the Devil. 2. Then, make a cordiall oblation of all things thou shalt thinke, speake, or do in the day following: and intreat the Blessed Virgin, that shee will bee pleased to present with her purest Hands this Oblation of thy self and thy actions, together with thee, to her onely Son. 3. And lastly conceiving a confidence of the Divine assistance; make a firm purpose by his grace not to offend him that Day in the least veniall sinne.
3. And at night, a litle before thou At night thou art to examine thy selfe. betakest thy selfe to thy rest, examine thy selfe how stoutly thou hast stood to this good purpose. But before thou descendest to particulars, thinke of thy Lords Presence, to whom thou art now ready to give in a reckoning of that days transactions: and indea∣vour to feele a certaine shame and confusion in thy self, like an ill servant before his most indulgent master; or like a perfidious Souldier before his pious Soveraign, who rays'd him from the dunghill to the highest degree of honour: for how much more reason hast thou to be ashmed in the sight of thy God, whom thou hast served so negligently, and offended so impu∣dently? 4. Begin therefore with a generall Begin with a generall acknow∣ledgement of Gods favours. acknowledgement of thy Lords love and favours, conferred upon thee from the first instant of thy being, to that present houre: rendring him particular thanks for the benefits that day received from his Bounty: And invite all the Angels and Saints, and chiefly the sacred Virgin, to help thee make a worthy thanks-giving, for thy Creation, Conservation, Re∣demption,
Vocation, Remission of thy enormous crimes, and expecta∣tion of thee so long to penance, &c. 5. Secondly, demand light and grace Then beg light and grace. to see thy defects and negligences, which thou hast that day committed, and to feele a true sorrow and con∣trition for the same: For they are so secret, that without this light thou canst not discerne them, and so enor∣mous, that without this ayd thou canst not truly judge of them. 6. Thirdly, run over each houre of Next, de∣scend to particu∣las, the day, and discusse with diligence what were thy Thoughts, Words, Actions or Omissions, in every of them, that thou mayst punctually perceive wherein thou hast particu∣larly transgressed. 7. Fourthly, indeavour to excite a true sorrow for thy sinnes, (which is And in∣deavour to excite a true sorrow for thy sins. the main drift of this examen,) and let this grief touch thy heart, because thou hast offended so good a God, rather than for any other inconve∣nience, which thereby thou incurrest: Let it proceed (I say) not from any feare of punishment which thou hast deserved; but from a true reverence, and high esteeme, which is due from
thee to the Divine Majesty of thy Lord God, whom thou desirest to love and respect, above all things, and resolvest to practise it for the time to come. 8. Fiftly therefore, and lastly, beg And lastly implore his pardon for the past, and protection for he future. his pardon for thy past negligence▪ and his assistance for thy future amend∣ment: promising particularly, and resolving effectually, to shun, fo his love, this or that occasion of sinne; and to lay hold of this or that opportunity, for the correction and bettering of thy selfe. 9. And if thou happily findest by this serious discussion of thy selfe, that thy transgrssions are not so grievous as to excite thee to this sor∣row and shame; refer all this to the Divine mercy, and not to thy own diligence or vertue: And reflct upon thy former faults, and the grie∣vous failings of other worldlings; and conclude that thou hadst surely fall'n more foulely, had not his Hea∣venly Grace upheld and prevented thee.
EXPLICATION. Another method of Examination. QUestion thy selfe concerning, three things. First, Wherein thou hast that day fallen and offended. Secondly, What occasion'd it. Thirdly How diligent thou hast been in the practice of vertue. Concerning thy fallings, read and follow the 15 foregoing Chapter. Concerning the occasions, resolve to cut them off for the future. And for thy practice of vertue; strengthen thy will with these three Cordials; distrust in thy selfe, trust in God, & Prayer. Suspect thy past victo∣ries, and rely not upon thy former good works; but rather forget them, lest thou fall into selfe-complacency; looke alwayes forwards upon what thou yet wantest, & how much rests to bee done: And acknowledging Gods Grace to be the source of all good∣nesse, thank him for all his benefits and blessings; for the inspirations he hath sent thee; and the good desires of vertue he hath given thee; for his
deliverance from dangers, and de∣fence against thine enemies. CHAP. XL. Being a Conclusion of the whole Worke. 1. MUch more might be said of This short booke wel practised is suffici∣ent. these important matters; but let this which is here delivered, according to my poore Talent, suf∣fice for the present: which surely if thou endeavourest to keepe in thy memory, and accomplish in thy acti∣ons, thou hast sufficiently learned and laboured. 2. But in respect of thy weake capacity, and my proposed brevity; it will be necessary that thou use a studious diligence in often revolving and meditating upon these foregoing Precepts: For by frequent conside∣ration, and continuall exercise, thou wilt certainly increase thy inward strength, whereby to conquer all thine enemies.
EXPLICATION. ABove all things beg incessantly of the Divine Goodnesse, the gift of perseverance, in thy unwearied endeavours against thy passions and imperfections; it being the chiefe weapon in this spirituall warfare, against thy never-dying enemies; which like ill weeds are ever budding and breaking forth, so long as the Earth hath any life in it to nourish them. 3. Resolve therefore to betake thy Tex. If thou re∣solvest to fight man∣fully. selfe to these proposed Armes of defence; and to fight stoutly, man∣fully and constantly; because no man can avoid this combat, without endangering the losse of the conquest. Nor can there be any hope of Peace with such enemies; which endom∣mage them most, who most dsire to enter league and friendshp with them. 4. Neither be thou terrified at And not to be terri∣fied at thy enemies power. their seeming power and cruelty; since all their force and fury, is in the more powerfull hands of that Supreme
Captaine, for whose honour thou art ingaged in the battail; wherein none can be vanquished, but they that will themselves. And if thy Lord for whom thou wagest this war, doth seem sometimes to with∣draw his Assistance, and delay thy conquest over thine enemies for a time, yet be not thou faint-hearted, but fight on couragiously; being most certain and secure, that his Good∣nesse, Power, and Providence, directs all events, (and more especially all adversities) to the best profit of his souldiers. 5. These thoughts will beget in Though the victo∣ry seems to come slowly on. thee a generous spirit, and a constant heart to resist and fight with courage; and therefore though the victory comes slowly on, beleeve firmly that this deferring is either to free thy soule from secret pride, and conserve thee in true humility: Or else to perfect thee in vertue, and to teach thee to become a tryed Souldier, by these long continued conflicts; Or surely, for some other good of thine, which thy Lord then conceales from thee, for thy greater merit and im∣provement.
6. Go on therefore, (O my dearly beloved) and enter these lists with a cheerfull and heroick minde, lest thou seem ungratefull to thy loving Lord God, who so much tendred thy good that he suffered death for thy sake: And attend carefully to every Counsell and Command of thy Captaine Christ Jesus, that thou mayst totally rout and ruine all thine enemies: For if thou permittest but one only to live and lurk in thy Soul, it will be as a moat in thy eye, and as a Launce in thy bowels, and prove a perpetuall impediment in the pro∣gresse of so glorious a Victory. APOC. 2. 7. To him that overcommeth, I will give the hidden Manna. 1. KINGS, 15. 18. Thou shalt fighe against them, untill their utter destruction.
The generall Table, containing the severall Chapters of this Treatise, as they stand divi∣ded into numbers: And being a brief compendi∣um of the whole worke. The Spirituall Conflict. Or, The Arraignment of the Spirit of Self-love, and Sensuality, at the bar of Truth and Reason. Chap. I. WHerein Christian perfection consists. The importance of this knowledge is very great. Numb. 1. Some place perfection in austerity. 2. Others in reciting many prayers. 3. O∣thers in exact observance. 4. All
which are good meanes, but not directly tending to perfection. 5. And they that rest in these lower exercises, are in great dan∣ger. 6. As may appeare by the rest of their actions. 7. And especially by their want of resig∣nation in time of affliction. 8. True perfection therefore con∣sists in the knowledge of God, and our selves, In the love of God, and hatred of our selves, In re∣signation to God's will, and deny∣ing our owne. 9. All which Christ hath taught us by word and ex∣ample. 10. And we must also do it, if we meane to purchase victo∣ry. 11. Nor is there any thing more glorious to our selves, or more gratefull to God. 12. But to obtaine it, we wust provide foure necessary weapons. 13. Chap. II. First, Distrust of our selves, which is gotten, by a deep sense of our owne nothing. 1. By Pray∣er.
2. And by often reflecting upon our owne weaknesse. 3. And this self-knowledge is a lesson must be well learn'd. 4. And we must be carefull to rise speedily after our fall. 5. The great, ne∣cessity of this distrust in our owne strength, is inforced by the cor∣ruption of our nature, and the frailty thereof; and by conside∣ring how much this acknowledg∣ment pleaseth God, and presump∣tion displeaseth him. 6. Chap. III. Secondly, Confidence in God, which is obtained. 1. By prayer. 2. By considering the divine po∣wer, wisdome, and goodnesse, by which he can, knowes how, and is willing to help us. 3. By medita∣ting upon holy writ. 4. Another means, is; by thinking on our owne frailty, and Gods omnipoten∣cy, at the beginning of each acti∣on; Whereby we shall not be foo∣lishly dejected at our frequent
failings. 5. A necessary Caveat, for all spirituall people. 6. By Gods assistance we can doe all things, But many are deceived in presuming upon their owne strength. 7. Chap. IV. Thirdly, Continuall Exercise, 1. Which consists, in the right use of the Understanding. 2. Which is to be kept from Ignorance, by prayer, and by a diligent discus∣sion of our own actions; judging things according to their true worth; And this will open our eyes to see the meannesse of all worldly vanities. 3. A necessary caution, to keep the will from six∣ing its love, untill the Under∣standing have first pondered the object. 4. And the same caution is necessary also in holy things. 5. The understanding is to be furthermore weaned from curio∣sity. 6. How highly this condu∣ceth to perfection, and how cun∣ningly
the Devill plots against it, by suggesting pride to our Un∣derstanding. 7. Which is farre more dangerous, and more diffi∣cultly cured than Pride of the Will. 8. Chap. V. Of the Will: and the end, to which we are to direct all our actions. A will to doe well suf∣ficeth not, But our actions must also be performed onely to please God. 1. Which to attaine to, Ap∣ply thy Understanding to know Gods will. 3. And take heed of being deceived, because nature is subject to seek her selfe. 4. This intention, of doing all for God, is to be always made in the entrance upon any work, And to be renewed in the prosecution of it. 6. Lest self love creep in, and so change and corrupt it. 7. He that doth all things to please God, remains in perfect indifferency, and hath alwaies what he desires, whch
shews the high importance of this pure intention. 8. And it may be kept even in things ayming at our owne good; Finally it puts such a worth upon our actions, that the best of them without it is lost, and may be sinfull, and the smallest with it is most accepta∣ble to God. 9. If this exercise seem hard at first, yet use will render it easie, and soone beget a habit in our soules. 10. Especi∣ally, if we consider how dearly our Lord hath loved us; as appears in our Creation, Redemption, Preservation, and his other bene∣fits, which are so great that none but God himselfe can comprehend them. 11. Chap. VI. There are in man two wills: The Rationall, seated between Gods grace & our sense. 1. And the sen∣suall. 2. The truly vertuous per∣sons yield promptly to Gods will, & vitious to their sensuality; But
they who of sinners are become converts, have the greatest con∣flict. 3. Who must therefore re∣solve to bear patiently the losse of their pleasures. There are divers sorts of unmortifi'd souls; seem∣ing good, but full of imperfection, ignorance and blindnesse. 4. A danger in the choyce of spirituall Exercises, discovered. 5. Chap. VII. Of the fight against Sensuality; and of the inward way of the Will to acquire Vertues. When sensu∣ality rebels. 1. Look strictly to thy reason, that it consent not: and recall that motion againe and againe, and as often conquer it. 2. Also produce acts of those ver∣tues, which are contrary to these vices. 3. But beware of thy cun∣ning enemy, who sometimes sup∣presseth these motions. 4. For then it is thy part to excite them, and fight afresh with them. 5. Till thou hast gotten a perfect hatred
of them. 6. And the way to plant vertues, is to practice acts contra∣ry to those defects; The reason whereof is, because as long as the root of vice remains alive in us, it will still bud forth, and choak up our plants of vertue. And therefore we must make many Acts (contrary to the vicious ha∣bit,) to implant the habit of ver∣tue. 7. And though this be full of paine, yet it is also full of pro∣fit. 8. The like diligence must be also used against the least evill motion. 9. Yea and against law∣full affections, when they are not absolutely necessary. 10. And this is the way to become truly spi∣rituall. 11. Because all vice springs from the yielding to sense, and all vertue by subduing and submitting our will to Gods. 12. Chap. VIII. What he must doe, who feels his Reason conquered by Sense. So long as thou consentest not to
Sensuality, fear not. 1. For vi∣ctory consists not, in feeling no motions, but in not yielding. 2. But if thy enemy surpriseth thy Rea∣son; then give back, to gaine time and strength. 3. And if thou hast time, help thy selfe with con∣sideration. 4. Whether thou hast deserved this affliction: If so, rest contented; If not, think up∣on thy former sinnes, not yet fully punished. 5. Yea, though they were, yet self-deniall and suffe∣rance is the way to heaven. 6. And if there were another way, yet thy duty to God, binds thee to cbuse this, 7. As being most gratefull and pleasing to his Ma∣jesty. 8. Chap. IX. That we must not shun the occa∣sions of these Combats. The way to get true vertue, is not to avoid, but to seek the occasions of combat; As for example, To get Patience, shun not the company. 1.
Or the imployment which is te∣dious to thee. 2. And the same rule is to be applied to troublesome thoughts. 3. Yet a yong Scholler must be wary in waging this war, but never desert the Field; for then he will still be unprovided. This is good in all cases, except that of carnality. 4. Chap. X. Of the fight against sudden Temptations and Passions. First, ponder them in thy understand∣ing: 1. And forsee, what is like to befall thee. 2. But if some other crosse happens, not foreseen; fly to the thoughts of Gods Love and Providence. 3. Who sends or per∣mits it, 4. and be constant, though almost conquered. 5. But the best remedy against sudden motions, is to cut off their causes. 6. XI. Of the fight against fleshly Con∣cupiscence. In this warr, thou art to change thy weapons. 1. And
therefore before the temptation assails thee, call it not, but avoid all occasions procuring it. This enemy assails us sometimes by stealth, and upon pretext of law∣fulnesse, &c. but Sensuality may mix it selfe with thy affection, and ruine thy Soule. 2. The occa∣sions are commonly five: Con∣versation, Aspects, Idlenesse, Disobedience, Vain complacency. 2. In the time of the temptation, marke the cause of it, whether externall, and fly from it. 3. Or internall, and prevent it by fit chastisements of the body, and by hearty Prayer. 4. Yet not as some Bookes prescribe, for feare of giving new occasions to impurity. 4. But by meditating on Christs Death and Passion. 5. Dispute not with carnall temptations, but discover them to thy Ghostly Fa∣ther. 6. And make no actuall and particular reflexions upon these temptations. 7. After the tempta∣tion
is past, stand still upon thy guard. 8. Chap. XII. How to fight against slacknesse and Negligence. Follow holy inspirations speedily. For this is of great consequence to conquer Sloath, and having couragiously set upon thy worke, carefully prosecute the same. 1. The fruit whereof must be discovered, 2. And the pains disguised, 3. Unlesse there be a reall disability. 4. But the best way to get a custome of induring, is to expect Crosses continually, and not to seeke how to avoid them. 5. How prejudici∣all Negligence is to perfection, and the most alluring hait of our enemy: therefore take timely care to prevent it, and account that day lost, in which thou hast done no good action. 6. Chap. XIII. How to govern our Sensuality. Keep thy heart disingaged from
earthly creatures. 1. And con∣template thy Creators greatnesse, reducing all created perfection to him, the fountaine. 3. And all worldly beauty to heavenly glo∣ry. 4. Marking wel the craft of the Devill. 5. But in things dis∣pleasing to sense, think upon Gods eternall decree. 6. So likewise in any sudden or dismall chance, and in all self complacency. 7. A larger Declaration of this Doctrine. The appetite is violently bent to seeke its pleasure, and makes use of the Senses to obtain it. 1. The antidot against this poyson; and how to curb the senses roaming abroad, by separating the spirit of each object, from the materiall thing it selfe. 2. Whether it be a creature which hath only a be∣ing, 3. Or hath a vegetation and increase. 4. Or hath sense and feeling. 5. Or is indued with
rare beauty. 6. Or excellent per∣fection. 7. Also when thou un∣dertakest any action. 8. Or re∣fectest thy body with Meat and Drinke. 9. Or smellest delicious odors. 10. Or art delighted with musical harmony. 11. Or any other sensible object. How to raise thy Soule by sen∣sible objects to contemplate the word Incarnate: Examples; By the sight of poore Cottages, Stones, the Earth, Sun, Water, &c. In tasting Wine, in smelling, In cloathing, and uncloathing thy selfe, in hearing noyses, or the Clocks striking, In time of sadnesse. 12. Other wayes to meditate upon sensible objects. 13. By consider∣ing how meane the best of them are in themselves. 14. As the Suns brightnesse. 15. The Heavens greatnesse. 16. The Birds melody. 17. Walking abroad. 18. Mark∣ing the flight of the Fowls. 19.
In time of Winds, Thunder, Storms. 20. Also upon all other occasions, as of grief. 21. Looking upon Christ crucified. 22. Or the image of the blessed Virgin. 23. And the pictures of Saints. 24. Or entrest into Churches. 25. Finally, make all objects and accidents, instruments to thy per∣fection. 26. How to regulate the Tongue. Much talke proceeds from Pre∣sumption. 2. Therefore avoid long discourses. 3. And passionate expressions. 4. And all talking of thy own affairs. 5. Or of thy neigh∣bours. 6. But speake willingly of God. 7. And ponder in thy hear, what thy Tongue is to utter. 8. The praise and profit of Si∣lence. 9. Chap. XIV. Of the order to be observd in fighting against our enemies. Mark which are thy greatest. 1. And single out the fiercest to
fight with. 2. But when they ap∣per not, seek them. 3. Chap. XV. What course he must take, who is conquered, & grievously woun∣ded by his enemies. When thou art fall'n, rise with speed, And pray with fervour. 1. Be not over solicitous or fearfull. 2. But be diligent, and use violence to thine own inclination; recovering the quiet of thy Soule, and Reconcilia∣tion to thy Soveraign. 3. By for∣getting thy fault. 4. Chap. XVI. That we should keep our hearts ever quiet and joyfull in our Lord. No accident can justly de∣prive us of quiet; for though we must needs abhor things contrary to nature, yet we may love them as comming from Gods Permissi∣on, and so conforme our selves to his holy Will. To obtain this quiet, thou art to appoint a sentinell. 1. And when thou art surprised with
perplexity, returne with all dili∣gence to quiet thy heart. 2. And therefore admit of no new affecti∣ons, before thou hast offered them up to God, 3. and mortified thy wil and desire, 4. which is the surest way to remain in peace. 5. Chap. XVII. That pious purposes, are some∣times deceits of the Devill, to hinder our progresse in vertues. For he suggests unto us desires to fight against former faults, that we may neglect the present. 1. And fall into selfe-complacen∣cy. 2. Therefore thou art to fight actually with thy nearest foes, and not to irritate them which are quiet, 3. unlesse thou art well vers'd in the acts of that vertue. 4. Be not carelesse of small defects. 5. Three things make our designs fruitlesse. First, the relying upon our own strength. 6. Secondly, the want of force to go through with them. 7. Thirdly, the not le∣velling
at the right end. 8. Chap. XVIII. How the Devill strives to with∣draw us from the way of vertue. This deceit of the enemy is exem∣plified in a sick person, falling into impatience, upon pious pre∣tences, 1. and over-earnestly desirous of health. 2. The remedy whereof is, to admit of no purpo∣ses; which thou canst not present∣ly put in execution, And to per∣swade thy selfe, that either they would not have their effect; or, that God would not receive them from thy unworthy hands. 3. There are divers pretences for impati∣ence, but all unwarrantable. 5. (As is explained by an example.) The remedy of all which is to se∣parate the paine from the preten∣ded circumstances. 6. And not to desire a freedom from thy Crosse. 7. But to conform thy will to Gods. 8. Yet thou mayst make use of lawfull means, so thou take heed of self-love.
How to oppose the Devill, stri∣ving to deceive us with indis∣cretion, and pressing us to afflict our bodies. 1. Which though it is sometimes good, yet it must be prudently tempered. 2. For all cannot imitate the Saints in au∣sterity of life, but each one may imitate their vertues. 3. Yet be∣ware of the other extreme, which is, to addict thy selfe overmuch to delicacies, &c. under pretext of health or the better perform∣ance of thy duty; Discretion therefore is the best directour in this matter of mortification. 4. And also in the acquisition of vertues; which must be done by degrees. 5. And one by one, ra∣ther than all, or many together, because the obtaining of any one vertue, is a preparation to all the rest. 6. Further advices, for the ob∣taining of vertues. First, thou must resolve to suffer. 2. Thou
must bear a great love to vertue 3. Thou art to practise it upon all occasions. 4. Apply all thy ex∣ercises to this end. 5. Form fre∣quent acts thereof. 6. Think up∣on such passages of Scripture, as concern, and commend it. 7. Make use of Jaculatory prayers, 8. Which being ayded with two wings, will soare up to heaven. 9. Above all things, thou art to make a continuall progresse, 10. (For by going forward, thy strength increaseth.) 11. Till thou art gotten up the mountaine of perfection. 12. Thou art also to seek out all occasions of practi∣sing vertue, especially such as are contrary to thy Sensuality. 13. This being the most propor∣tionate meanes to attaine to it. 14. And comming from Gods providence, for thy particular profit. 15. The mistake of some rectifyed. 16. To suffer volun∣tarily by them whom thou hast ob∣liged,
is to draw vertue from sin and malice. 17. Receive there∣fore the bitter cup mixed by thy heavenly Physician. How to make use of sundry oc∣casions in the exercise of one ver∣tue. 1. In all occurring accidents of suffering, 2. Make acts of that vertue thou then practisest: Examples, in the vertue of Pa∣tience, Humility, Obedience, Po∣verty, Charity. 3. As concerning the time, thou art to stay in the practice of each vertue, thy Di∣rector must be judge. 4. Yet thou maist know thy progresse by these signes: First, if thou losest not courage in time of desolation; Se∣condly, If the rebellion of thy Sen∣suality be weakn'd. 5. But take heed to think thy selfe a Conque∣ror, because Vice may be cloathed in Vertues dresse, and thou hast still much to doe. 6. And there∣fore art to look forward upon what thou yet wantest. 7. And to
pursue thy exercises with patience and constancy. Chap. XIX. How our enemy endeavours to make our vertues instru∣mentall to our ruine. By making us take plea∣sure in them. 1. But doe thou consider thine owne nothing, 2. And mark well what is in thee of thine owne goods, and what of Gods gifts: What thou wert from eternity, what in time. 4. What good thou canst doe of thy selfe, and what evill thou either hast or mightest have done; Whereby, thou mayst justly think thy selfe the worst of all men. 5. Yet be just in thy self-accusation. 6. And not only acknowledge thine owne basenesse, but use thy selfe ac∣cordingly. 7. And stick to this, amidst all praise or applause of others. 8. And let not the me∣mory
of thy good deeds, puff thee up with vanity. 9. For thou wilt find the best of them very im∣perfect, 10. And that thou hast no colour to glory in them, but to accuse thy want of duty. 11. Learn therefore Humility, which is the foundation of all vertues; and without which thou art lesse than nothing. 12. It being the onely way to find praise, and please God. 13. To whom thou art bound, for permitting thee to be scorned; as also to them that doe it. 14. Be ever wary of the Devill and of thine owne inclination. 15. Of Rash-Judgement; which springs from Self-esteem, and Pride. 1. The Devill strives to keep open our senses, upon our neighbours actions; but we must be as diligent to shun, as he is to lay his plots; First, by denying to give any sentence. 2. Second∣ly, by looking homewards upon
our selves; where we shall find some root of the same fault we blame in them. 3. If the fault be manifest, put a charitable con∣struction upon it; If monstrous, have recourse to Gods secret judgements; and tremble at the proceedings of his Providence. 4. And know, that all Charity pro∣ceeds from Gods good spirit, and all Bitternesse from the De∣vill. 5. Of the means to shield our selves against the attempts of our enemies at the time of Death. The way to be then con∣querours, is to fall upon our ene∣mies before hand. 1. And to make timely preparation, by stu∣dying now the answers of the foure challenges our enemies wil then sendus. 2. The first is against Faith; and the remedy is, to retreat from thine Understanding to thy Will. 4. And to give no answer
to thy enemies questions, 5. But to fix thy thoughts upon Christ crucified. 6. The second assault, is of De∣spaire; where thou art to observe this certaine rule, &c. And to have a perfect hope and humble confidence in God. 7. And ne∣ver to distrust his mercy, and the merits of his Pas∣sion. 8. The Third is, of Vain-glory, which is conquer'd by distrust of thy selfe, and trust in God. 9. The Fourth is, by Fl Illu∣sions, against which have re∣course to the confession of thine owne nothing: and admit of no apparences, though they seeme to come from heaven. 10. After these generall temptations, follow others in particular. 11.
Chap. XX. That we must never flatter our selves as having subdued our enemies. But ofte renew our exercises, for perfection is very high and hard to be obtained. 1. 2. Chap. XXI. Of Holy Prayer. The Fourth maine Weapon, in this spirituall warfare. 1. Which must have these properties: First, a Desire to serve God: Se∣condly, Perfect Faith: Thirdly, Conformity to Gods will; because thine own will is subject to error, but the divine will is infallibly right. Fourthly, A connexion with practice. Fifthly, Thanks∣giving for received favours. Sixthly, A reflexion upon Gods goodnesse and promise; and up∣on
Christs Passion. Seventhly, Perseverance. Prayer must also be strengthned with hope. And though God seems to reject thy prayer, yet persevere knocking; and alwayes gratefully thanking him, as well when he deny's as grants thy request. Chap. XXII. What Mentall Prayer is, and what Contemplation. Mentall Prayer includes al∣waies either a virtuall petition of something, 1. 2. 3. 4. Or an actuall asking of it, by words ex∣pressed in the mind. 5. 6. Chap. XXIII. How to joyne Contempla∣tion to this inward Prayer. By taking some points of Christs death or passion, 1. And applying his actions to the ver∣tue
thou demandest. As for ex∣ample to Patience. 2. Marking how meekly he suffered; and learning thereby to suffer pati∣ently thy smaller adversities. 3. And compelling thy will, to take up thy Crosse quietly. 4. Chap. XXIV. Of another certaine manner of Prayer, by way of praying and meditating together. 1. Considering Christs merits, and the content his heavenly Fa∣ther took in his obedience, 2. And presenting them both to God. 3. Chap. XXV. Of a way of praying by the In∣tercession of the B. Virgin. 1. First, fix thy mind upon th' eternall Father. 2. Conside∣ring the content he had in him
selfe (concerning her) from all eternity. 3. And the wonders he wrought in her, when she had a being. 4. Secondly, upon God the Sonne. 5. Lastly, upon the sacred Virgin. 6. Chap. XXVI. How to pray and meditate by meanes of the Holy An∣gels and heavenly Citizens. First, addresse thy selfe to the eternall Father. 1. Next unto the glorious Angels and Saints themselves. 2. Dividing them into quires, according to the dayes of the week. 4. But every day praying to the Blessed Vir∣gin, to thy particular Partron, and to S. Joseph.
Chap. XXVII. How to meditate upon Christs Passion, and to enkindle holy af∣fections. 1. By reflexion upon his love and goodnesse. 2. How to get constant hope, 3. And a spiri∣tuall joy. 4. As also affections of sorrow and compassion, 5. And contrition for thy Sinnes. 7. With a perfect hatred of them. 8. And to admire Gods bounty, by considering; First, Who suf∣ers? Secondly, For whom? Thirdly, By whom? Fourthly, What? Fifthly, How? Sixthly, When and where? 9. A further Declaration of the profit which may be drawne from the Meditation upon Christ's Passion, and particu∣larly of the imitation of His Vertues. The first profit is, a Confusion at the sight of our imperfections. The second, a desire and demand of pardon,
with a resolution of amend∣ment. The third, a persecu∣tion of our passions. The fourth, an imitation of Christs Vertues. Another way to Meditate on the Passion; By considering, First, how Christs Soule carries it selfe to∣wards the Heavenly Father. Secondly, how the Father to∣towards Christs Soule. Third∣ly, how the Soule towards it selfe and it's sacred body. Fourthly, how thy Saviour carries Him∣selfe towards thee. Fifthly, how thou shouldst cary thy selfe towards thy Saviour. Christ Crucified is the best Booke to reade in, and wherein to learne all vertues; if thou makest fit application to thy particular practice.
Chap. XXVIII. Of sensible Devotion, and Spirituall Drynesse. Devotion is best knowne by the effects it produceth. 1. How to make profit of all spirituall sweetnesse in Devotion. 2. Three causes of Spirituall Drynesse, The Devill, Our selves, and God. 3. Search out the true cause thereof. 4. And keepe on thy accustomed practices of piety, without seeking outward comforts. 5. Nor pray to have comfort in thy Crosse. 7. Because to suffer for God, is the best Prayer, and makes thee truly devout, 8. And not the feel∣ing of sensible Devotion, 9. Wherein many are deceived. 10. What thou art to do in time of distresse and derelicti∣on. 11.
Chap. XXIX. That the worthy frequent∣ing of the most Blessed Sacra∣ment, is an efficacious meanes to conquer our Passions. 1. Meditate the Day before thy Communion, of thy Savi∣ours desire, &c. to come to thee, 2. Who affirmes that his de∣lights are to be with us. 3. And moove thy Soule to a reciprocall desire and affection towards him. 5. Then provoke thy pas∣sions to battail. 6. Beeing neare the time of Communion, thou art to feare thy selfe, but to have confidence in thy Savi∣our. 7. After Communion lay open thy wants, 8. And con∣stantly hope for the Divine helpe. 9.
Chap. XXX. How to excite in us affections of love, by the Sacred Communi∣on. Consider Gods Liberality, 1. especially shewed in the holy Communion. 2. Weighing First, who it is that comes thus to thee; Secondly, what hee gives thee; Thirdly, the eternity of his Love, Fourthly, the Purity of his Love. Hence breake forth into admi∣ration, and ravishment to see thy selfe so highly prized, and make an entire oblation of thy selfe to him. And this beeing the chief act of Religion strive to performe it most perfectly. 6. Then dedicate thy selfe to his Service, and freely open to him thy heart. 7. But beware of vanity and curiosity. At the time of Communion, Thinke what thou art going to do.
Thanke, Adore, Implore. When Domine non sum dig∣nus, is sayd, &c. humble and confound thy selfe, yet still rai∣sing up thy heart with hope. 8. Having communicated, enter∣taine thy guest with amorous expressions. 9. And lastly, offer up the holy Son, to his heavenly Father. 10. Chap. XXXI. Of spirituall Communion. Thou mayst thus often com∣municate. 1. By frequent de∣sires. 2. And it is an excellent exercise against passions. 3. If thou makest this right use there∣of, here prescribed. Chap. XXXII. Of Thanks-giving. All goodnesse is from God. 1. To whom therefore all grati∣tude
is due. 2. First, there∣fore, acknowledge his goodnesse, and then thine owne unworthi∣nesse. 3. Chap. XXXIII. Of the perfect oblation of thy selfe to God. First, consider Gods great∣nesse and glory. Secondly, adore and acknowledge him, &c. Thirdly, Offer up all thy interest in any thing. Fourthly, unite all to the Merits of Christ, pre∣senting both together to the eternall Father. 5. So likewise in offering thy works of piety. 6. How to offer up Christs Actions for our offences. 7. Another manner of perfect Oblation. Christ here on Earth, offered not onely himselfe, but also all us, to his Father; make thou
the same Oblation. How to know the sincerity of thy Ob∣lation. Chap. XXXIV. How to Petition for Divine Grace. First, Encourage thy selfe with confidence in Gods Good∣nesse. Secondly, Joyne humility with this confidence. Thirdly, Presse thy Petition with fervent desires: the want whereof hin∣ders the effects of our demands. Fourthly, Let not thy Petition want Charity, Perseverance, or Resignation. Chap. XXXV. Some short observations con∣cerning Meditation. First, Read over-night the matter of thy Meditation. Se∣condly, reflect upon it in the mor∣ning. Thirdly, Weigh his Ma∣jesty
with whom thou art to conferre. Fourthly, Begin with Oblation, and Petition. Fifth∣ly, Apply thy senses to the my∣stery. Sixthly, Beg what thou intendest to obtaine. Seventhly, after this begin with thy first point, 8. and beware of fancy∣ing high mysteries, 9. Or lea∣ving off before the time alotted for Prayer be expired. 10. In the end reflect how thou hast behav'd thy selfe. 11. And be sure to order well the matter of thy Meditation. Chap. XXXVI. An exercise before the sacred Communion. 1. The conformation of the place. 2. Beg of thy Savinor to fit up thy poor house. 3. Think what guest is to lodge in it. 4. Why he comes, 5. and to whom: And lastly, present thy Peti∣tion.
Chap. XXXVII. How wee may devoutly offer up the Sacrifice of the Masse. 1. Free thy fancy from all out∣ward Objects. 2. In vesting thy selfe, marke each mystery. 3. Let thy outward deportment bee decent. 4. and thy in∣ward composition, correspon∣dent. 5. In thy first Memen∣to: To Christs holy Head; To his right hand; To his left-Hand; To his sacred Heart; To his right-Foot; To his left-Foot. 6. In thy second Memen∣to, Unite thy affection unto Jesus Christ now present in the Sacrament. Chap. XXXVIII. An exercise after holy Com∣munion. 1. Representation of the place. 2. Imploration of Gods
Grace. 3. Consideration, of him whom thou hast within thee, and of thine owne unworthinesse. 4. Petition. Chap. XXXIX. A Dayly Examen. 1. E∣very Morning thou art to make three acts; of Thanks∣giving, 2. Of Oblation, 3. Of Resolution. Secondly, at night thou art to examine thy selfe: beginning with a generall ac∣knowledgment of Gods Favo, Then begging his Light and Grace, next, descending to par∣ticulars. 6. And indeavour to get a true sorrow for thy sins. 7. And lastly implore pardon for the past, and protection for the future. 8.
Another Method of Exa∣mitation. By questioning thy self, First, wherein thou hast offended. Secondly, what occasion'd it. Thirdly, how thou hast practised vertue. XL. Being a Conclusion of the whole Book. This little Book, well practised with perseverance, is sufficient, Supposing thou fightest man∣fully, without being terrified at thy enemies power, though the victory seemes to come on never so slowly. FINIS.
depiction of death and time Hold thy hand, O Death, whilst Tymes Conflict begets an Eternall Conquest. Will▪ Marshall. sculpsit.
A Lively pourtraict of the Spirituall Conquest. Love Seraphicall Divine of stepps Sacred They have disposed Ascension in their hearts The Law-giver will give a blessing, and they shall ascend from vertue to vertue, (by steps and de∣grees, even to Heaven). Psalm: 83. v: 6. 7. 8.
THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST, IN Five TREATISES, Enabling all Chri∣stian Warriers, to con∣quer themselves, and come to a vicinity with GOD. Habacuc. 3. 19. God our Lord is my strength: he will make my feet as of the Harts: And upon my high places, he the conqueror, will lead me singing in psalms. AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.
The five Treatises Of the Spiritual Con∣quest. The First. Of the discovery of our enemies Ambuscado's. The Second. Of the use and practise of our Spiritual weapons. The Third. Of the steps, and degrees of Per∣fection. The Fourth. Of the steps and degrees of divine Seraphical Love. The Fifth, and last. Of the choycest Maxim's of Mystical Divinity.
TO THE truly vertuous and our most honoured PATRONS Two in one Right Worthy, and most Ho∣noured Patrons, AMongst the numberless vanities of this life,
our thoughts have more than once glaunced (not with∣out a certain indig∣nation), upon that exceeding folly of almost all Dedica∣tory Epistles; the writers whereof, (as if hir'd tomake Encomiums, and present the world with Panegericks) run over each common place of Rhetorick in the
recital of their Pa∣trons rare parts and qualities, leave no tittle of honour un∣touch'd, no action of their lives un∣admir'd, no prero∣gative of pedigree unextoll'd, no gift of nature or grace unsumm'd up; and having drain'd their whole stock of invention in this scrupulous inquest after all sorts of
praises; conclude finally, that al these (and more lines of perfection, than either their mode∣sty dares relate, or their capacity can reach), do directly concentrate in the unparalell'd brests of them, whom they thus resolve to celebrate, cano∣nize and Deify. A proceeding so far from pleasing all
generous, heroick, and discerning spi∣rits, that it rather puts them to the blush, to see them∣selves more abus'd than adorned, with such plain and pal∣pable flatteries. We therefore (most worthy Pa∣trons), who build upon other princi∣ples; and follow a Rule and professi∣on obliging us to
sincerity: though we most willingly acknowledg your temporal and spiri∣tual greatnesses, heartily congratu∣late your high per∣fections, and joy∣fully consider you mounting up a∣main the divine ladder of heavenly love & contempla∣tion: Yet we cannot but look upon your souls as immured
stil in walls of clay; we can only judge you to be faithfull pilgrims, not full possessors; to be va∣liant champions, not yet crowned con∣querors; and ther∣fore we conceive that we may much better complie wth our dutie to God, and our obligation to you, by endea∣voring to further you in your spiri∣tual
progress, than to follow you wth Euge's and accla∣mations, as if you were already arri∣v'd at the desired end of your jour∣ney. For this reason, we declare, that the primarie motive inducing us to pre∣sent you with this small spiritual do∣native, is the ardent zeal and desire we
have of your own happie advance∣ment in solid devo∣tion & divine cha∣ritie. And in pursu∣ance of this design, we First, discover brieflie unto you the most common & dangerous snares of your sworn ene∣mies, and shew you the safe way to shun them. Secondly, we de∣liver
spiritual arms into your hands, wherewith to de∣fend your selves, & defeat your foes, by reducing the precepts into pra∣ctice, & furnishing you with such af∣fective acts & ele∣vations, as may rea∣dily serve you for restauratives against fainting in these your indefatigable combats.
Thirdly, we raise you up a ladder of perfection; from the top whereof, (which is perfect indifferencie, resig∣nation, and obedi∣ence to Gods Di∣vine will and plea∣sure), you may comfortablie cast down an eie, and counteach step you have taken in your wearisom journey towards your hea∣venlie
Jerusalem. Fourthly, from this mountain top of perfection, we shew you the di∣vers degrees of sa∣cred and seraphi∣cal love, which wil lead your eleva∣ted souls to perfect union with their beloved Bride∣groom, and settle them in the sweet embraces and bo∣som of the divinity.
And lastly, we have made a colle∣ction of the chief∣est and choicest Maxim's of mysti∣cal Theologie, to which you may have continual re∣course, by which you may solve all your doubts, and in which you may se∣cure your consci∣ences, upon all e∣mergent occasions and difficulties, ari∣sing
in this your blessed enterprise & tendance to eter∣nal felicitie. These are the choice flowers which we have gathered in the several gar∣dens of sacred wri∣ters, and bound up in this posie for your present use, comfort, and incou∣ragement. The other end we aim at in this
our dedication, is to give you, & poste∣ritie, a publick and perpetual testimo∣nie of our grateful hearts for your ma∣ny signal favors and temporal benefits; wherewith you have more obliged us, and our neerest friends, than we can either tell how to repay in any o∣ther coin, or ex∣press in any parti∣cular
tearms: And therefore we de∣sire you to receive this our thankfull acknowledgement and real protestati∣tion, proceeding from both our uni∣ted mindes and mouthes, as an ab∣solute assurance of our truly devoted service to your selves, and all the worthy branches of your most ho∣noured family.
THE FIRST TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: Or, A plain discovery of the Ambuscado's, and wily Stratagems of our Ene∣mies, in this our daily War-fare. Enabling the Christian Warrier to foresee, and avoid them. Psal. 56. 7. They prepared a snare for my feet, (but) Psal. 123. 7. The snare is broken, and we are de∣livered. AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.
To the devout Champions, tending to perfection. YOu have beheld, In this precedent Treatise of our learn∣ed and de∣vout au∣thour, Fa. John Castaniza. (O Dear Champions of heaven) a famous Duel, fought be∣tween the Sense and the Soul, the Elesh and the Spirit, the Animal and the Spiritual man; you have been Specta∣tors of this Grand-plea, and present at this renowned trial; where, before the supream Tri∣bunal of Truth and Reason, the Animal man was convened
and arraigned at the Bar; had Perus Da∣mianus. Serm. 30. his own thoughts, words, and works, for his casting, convin∣cing, and condemning Jury; heaven and earth, irrefraga∣ble witnesses against him; his own guilty Conscience, a con∣stant accuser of him; the said Truth and Reason, the impar∣tiall Judges, pronouncing sen∣tence upon him; and his own soul, the happy executioner of their just verdict: Which lift∣ing up the sword of holy zeal and indignation, gave such home-blows (of Contrition for the past, and Resolution of a∣mendment for the future) to his heart; that blood of tears and joy, seem'd to stream from the wounds; and the whole man, first made a true Martyr of Pennance, is now become a faithful witness of Gods infinit mercies.
You have seen (I say) a no∣table siege, lay'd to this rebel∣lious City, mans sensuality, which for it's ditches of de∣fence, had depths of impiety; for walls and rampiers, obsti∣nacy and insolency; for towers and bulwarks, mountaines of pride and presumption; for arms and weapons, reluctancy to goodness, and resistance of Gods inspirations; for artille∣ry, tumults; for dwelling∣houses, dens of hypocrisie: for palaces, labyrinths of dissimu∣lation; for temple, proper-will; for Idol, self-love; for Cap∣tain, blindness; for Souldiers, exorbitant passions; for coun∣sel, folly; and for constancy, perverse opinions. Yet Babylon is fall'n, this treacherous town is taken, sen∣suality is subdued: So great is
the force of Grace, and so hap∣py the success of Truth and Rea∣son! And which is most wor∣thy of joyful admiration, per∣fect liberty is gained by this captivity, high advancement by this down-fall, holy great∣nesse by this annihilation, and by this death, a happy life. O blessed Conquest! But lest this now stifled fire of rebellion should again burst forth into new flames of sedition, and so your recidi∣vations prove more dangerous than your first diseases; (For Alas! such is mans inconstan∣cie, that he now seems in a Who so stands let him look that he falls not. 1. Cor. 10. 12. firm station, who soon falls and fades away into nothing: such is the nature of his quarrel, that it hath no other point of quiet in this life, than the last full period of his death: such are
his watchfull enemies, that they Mans life is a war∣fare upon earth. Job 7. 1. are ever waiting for advanta∣ges; and such is his known weaknesse, that it perpetually wooes, and eggs him on to wickednesse); how highly doth it import you (O pious Soul∣diers) to stand constantly and continually to your spirituall arms, & to keep an uninterrup∣ted guard upon all the gates of your inward and outward sen∣ses and appetites. To this end, we have here presented you, (out of our Au∣thour), Castanizae. with a brief draught of your enemies chiefest po∣stures; shew'd you from what grounds they take their usuall advantages against you, and discovered where they lay their Foreseen darts, do least hurt. Greg. hom. 35. in E∣vang. perilous ambushes to intrap you; that being thus duly fore∣warn'd of your eminent dan∣ger,
you may be fitly and fully arm'd for your necessary de∣fence, preparedly attend their approaches, undantedly receive their charges, couragiously re∣pell their violence; and final∣ly, return loaden with glorious Trophees of victory, into your own peacefull consciences; and keep there a delicious Call'd by Isay; Sab∣batum deli∣catum? Esa. 58. 13 Sabbath of repose in the hap∣py enjoyments of unspeakable delights.
The Seven chief Ambushes of our E∣nemies. 1. SElf-love. Which is the root of all sin, and cause of all in∣proficiency in the way of per∣fection. 2. Few are found free from it. 3. To avoid this snare we must seek Gods honour in all our a∣ctions. 4. To self-love belongs un∣mortified sensuality, which must be tamed by cutting off superfluities: 5. To the same pertain Pride, Self-conceit. &c. Which must be reme∣died by the Practice of humility. 6. Also the passions of our inferi∣our nature, Love, Hatred, &c. To which we must oppose Peace of heart. 7. Lastly, the adhering to our own wills and judgements▪ which must be cured by Obedience. 8. Note a triple Obedience.
2. Immoderate affection to creatures. 1. This distracts us from our Creator; against which we must provide Poverty of spirit. 2. Affections to persons corrupt our judgements. 3. We must remedy it, by loving all impartially, in and for God. 4. Spirituall comforts may be sometimes snares of the De∣vil, therefore we must not stay in them, but transcend them. 3. Extroversion, or an inordinate application of our selves to externall things, 1. Which choakes up Devo∣tion: therefore we must not thrust our selves upon imployments, 2. But curb our fancies; 3. Perform works of obedience, necessity, and charity, without ingaging our affections; 4. And strive to get into our inte∣riour, 5. By fixing our heart on Christ crucified. 4. Bitterness of heart, sadness, frowardnesse, &c. 2. All which proceed either from nature, indiscre∣tion, thoughtfulnesse, presumption, or immortification; 3. And must be sweetned with Charity. 4. To this belong a certain grudging at Gods pro∣vidence;
which must be avoided by a cordial Resignation. 5. Scrupulosity, inward affliction, fearfulness, &c. 1. Which aym at the destruction of our Faith and Confidence in God. 2. To avoid this, we must rely upon God and our guide, 3. And assure our selves that we cannot erre in Confidence, if we fall not into Negligence. 6. Excessive and unnecessary study, 1. Which busies the Under∣standing, but leaves the Will barren. 2. Puffs us up with Vanity, but leaves us empty of true Piety. 3. The remedy is to rectify our intentions in our studies. 7. Tepidity and coldness in Devotion, 1. Which is the bane of all spirituality. We must alwayes go forward towards perfection, with perseverance, and excite our slug∣gishness with frequent aspirations. 2. An excellent document of Saint Anthony.
Latet hostis, et otia ducis?
The first Ambush. Self-love. 1. THis (in S. Austin's opinion) is the root of Self-love is the root of all sin, and cause of all in∣proficien∣cy in the way of perfection. all sin, and we may fitly add, and avouch it to be the cause of all inproficiency in the way of per∣fection. For our subtil nature so constantly seeks her self in all her actions and omissions; that even the spirituall man, who treads in the pleasant paths of piety, is sub∣ject to be drawn into this dangerous ambush: He will find (upon due examination) some sinister, and self-intention, Read the second ch. of the Spir. Con. creeping in, and corrupting his sincerest endeavours; and per∣ceive, (unless highly illuminated), that there is more of private com∣modity than pure and perfect cha∣rity,
in his most transcendent and heroique exercises. 2. Who is not generally more diligent in the performance of his Few are found free from it. duty, for the fear of hell, and hope of heaven, than for the sole and substantiall love of his Creator? who hath not rather some small clause and secret condition of self-interest in his actions, than the only fulfilling of Gods holy will, and the following of his Divine inspirati∣ons? Whom shall we find, though never so great pretenders to perfecti∣on, so totally untangled from this net of Self-love, that they neither hover after humane respects and praises; nor look upon rewards or punishments; nor overvalue their own wayes and exercises; nor so∣lace themselves with the sweets of sensible devotion; nor please them∣selves with their high-towring con∣templations, and raptures into Gods immediate perfections; nor finally, dresse up devotion by the pattern of their own passions, and so fall in love with their own con∣ceptions,
and make to themselves in Bethel golden calves, in stead of 3. Reg. 13. 8. the Cherubins in Jerusalem? Whose will is so truly devested from all propriety, as to remain untouch'd, unmov'd, undisquieted, resolute and resigned, in all temporall chances and changes, and in all spirituall dryness, desolation, dereliction, and affliction whatsoever? 3. To avoid this pernicious snare, To avoid this snare, we must seek Gods honour in our acti∣ons. we must strive to level all our acti∣ons at Gods pure honour and plea∣sure, as the only end we aym at, the only object of our love, life, and labour; in whom only, and not in the best of his creatures, is found true quiet and content. 4. Unmortifi'd Sensuality, is the To self-love, be∣longs un∣mortified sensuality, dear darling of Self-love; This pro∣poses nothing but pleasure and pa∣stime to our seduced appetites, roa∣mings abroad to our affections, makes us sedulous to satisfie our fancies, covetous to content our cu∣riosities, to hearken after vanities, to Read the 7. ch. of the Ar∣raignment glut our gusts with dainties, and to evaporte our pretious time and ta∣lents in extravagant adhesions to
creatures. What hope, Alas! of in∣ternal repose and recollection, where such tumults and troubles prepossess the spirit? What place remains for the holy entertainments of heavenly love, when such affe∣ctions have fill'd up each corner of the heart? Wherefore a soul that seeks God, Which must be tamed by cutting off superflui∣ties. must scorn to rest in these seeming goods she mst banish all super∣fluities, and be content with the meer supplies of her necessities; she must admit of no excesse in meat, drink, sleep, attire, talk, or other so∣laces whatsoever▪ if she really in∣tends to make the body pliable to the spirit, and the spirit proper to tend to perfection. 5. Pride, presumption, vanity, self-esteem, self-complacency, self-content, To the same be∣long pride self-cn∣ceit, &c. self-praise, self-seeking, self-delight, with all the rest of like na∣ture, are but severll noozes of the same net, and sprouts, out of the same main root▪ self-love. And whosoever hopes for honour, praise, preferment, or profit from others, for any goods of nature, gfts of
grace, or prerogatives of vertue, is faln into this snare of the Devil, robs God of his proper due, is rot∣ten at the heart, and hath already received his full reward. The remedy of all this (O dear Which must be remedied by the pra∣ctice of humility. souls), is unfeigned humility. Cast one glance of your souls eye up∣wards upon your Creators might and mercy; all your perfections come out of his treasury, and are lent you to be improved for his service, not to be proud of for your own satisfaction: And look down with your other eye upon your bot∣tomless nothing; see there your own base indignity and brutish ingrati∣tude, your great impurity and gross impiety, and be ashamed to desire any temporal esteem, who so truly deserve eternal damnation. 6. Other knots of the same To self∣love, ap∣pertain al∣so all the passions of our inferi∣our nature love, ha∣tred, &c. snare, are all those passions, which have their residence in our inferiour nature; love, hatred, joy, grief, hope, and fear, with their severall atten∣dants: these raise up broiles to di∣sturb our inward tranquillity, to discompose our Reason, and inter∣pose
their earthy exhalations be∣tween our superiour will and the grace of God. Peace of heart is the secure re∣fuge To which we must oppose Peace of heart. against all these peevish Passi∣ons: do but cast your whole care upon your Creator, and call away your inordinate affection from crea∣tures, and what then can punish or perplex you? Remit, and refer all accidents, whether adverse or pro∣sperous, sweet or sowre, good or bad, to Gods high power and holy providence; comfort your selves in his mercy, content your selves in his all-sufficiency, and quiet your selves in his love. Ah! how poor, how vain, how vile, how unregardable Read the 4. ch. num. 3. of the conflict. are the best of worldly blessings? how is it possible that things in themselves so contemptible can have the least entrance or admit∣tance into a soul setled in Gods pure love and presence? O let the chil∣dren of this world, who place their final felicity, in such fading foole∣ries, who have their souls buried in this earth, and swallowed up in sen∣suality; be solicitous to seek them,
glut and burst themselves in the en∣joying of them▪ and be dejected to be deprived of them: but we, (O souls aspiring to perfection), whose master is God, whose aym is vertue, whose reward is heaven; what have we to do with these inferiour passions? Away with these Mam∣mons. My heart is signed with the signet of Gods love, my hatred is only bent against sin and my self, my joy is in God my Saviour, my grief is that I am not all his, my fear is to offend him, and my hope is to en∣joy him. 7. Lastly, all adhering to our proper will and judgment, apper∣tains to this ambush of our enemy. The adhe∣ring to our own wills, and preferring of our own judg∣ments, are also points of self-love, Read the 5. ch. of the Con∣flict. This draws us off by degrees from doing our duty; diverts us from following divine motions, and supe∣riours commands; daunts us from relying entirely on Gods provi∣dence, and fulfilling perfectly his holy pleasure: we dare not disobey this master, nor will we venture to destroy this Idol of our hearts; 'tis death to be cross'd in our conceits, or contradicted in our exercises,
which we have chosen according to our private fancy, accustomed with self-complacency, and keep with unpardonable propriety. Perfect obedience breaks through Which must be cured by obedience, submissi∣on, and re∣signation. this snare and a totall resignation to Gods good will & pleasure, is the se∣cure refuge against this deceit. How can a soul be disquieted to receive or refuse, act or omit, that which she truly conceives to proceed both in substance and circumstance from the divine providence and permis∣sion? How can that person go astray who is perfectly obedient to God and his superiour; gives up himself wholly to the guidance of Gods ho∣ly Spirit, and the government of a discreet directour; observes each beck of the divine call, (first exa∣mined▪ and approved by them who are incharged with their souls); and waits upon the divine will, as the shadow on the body? 8. Where you are to take notice Note a triple obe∣dienc. 1. Of vow. of a triple obedience: One is of vow another of conformity and a third of union. The first concerns all religious people, and imports an
external, exact, and necessary per∣formance of that which is com∣manded. The Second concerns all spiritual 2. of Con∣formity. souls, and consists in their inward promptitude and readiness to exe∣cute Gods will, (manifested by faith and their ghostly guide) purely for himself, and precisely for his own sake, without the least touch of proper interest, or self-seeking. The Third concerns all perfect 3. Of Vni∣on. persons, and consists in so entire a connexion of their wills, to the will of their Lord God, that they seem both one: hence it is that they embrace all that happens to themselves or others, good or bad, life or death, for time or eternity, as immediatly proceeding from his divine goodness, and as the very best that could happen. Here the soul elevated (above it self, and all things) into God, and stedfastly fixed in divine contemplation, patiently expects, and obediently attends to what he speaks, wills, and acts within her remaining ever ready, and really resigned to suffer out∣ward
pains, or inward pressures; to receive comforts, or endure crosses, as the supream providence best knows, permits and pleases: being fully content with all and faithfully constant in all. The Second Am∣bush. Immoderate affection to crea∣tures. 1. THis infects, distracts, disquiets, and diverts our minds, from their pure and perfect tendance to our Creator. Ah! what have we (whose inheritance is heaven) to do This affe∣ction to creatures, distracts us from our Crea∣tor, with the poor and perishable com∣modities of this world? yet our subtil enemy strives to make us se∣rious in searching after them, solici∣tous to keep them, and impatient to part with them.
Against this, we must provide true poverty of spirit, which consists Again which must pr¦vide Po¦verty or spirit. in a perfect denudation of our souls from all propriety of love to any corruptible creature whatsoever: we must use them only and not rest in them; we may enjoy them, but take no joy in them: if Superiours command them from us, we must cheerfully part with them; if any accident bereave us of them, we must willingly let go our hold, say∣ing, Our Lord gave them, our Lord Read the 13. ch. of the Con∣flict. hath retaken them, his name be e∣ver praised, his will always perfor∣med: Farewel uncertain and unsa∣tisfying profits: wellcome sweet and secure poverty! We must throw away couragiously all such cloggs as retard our soul's flight to per∣fection: Away with superfluities: Oh! that we could live with the only love of our naked and cruci∣fied Jesus! That we could support our feeble Nature, without the sup∣plies of any creatures! that so our souls disingaged from the depressing necessities of flesh and blood, might soar aloft, and sweetly repose
in the bosom of divine love! 2. Nor is the overmuch tender∣ness of affection to any person Affection to persons corrupts our judge∣ments. whomsoever, under what pertext soever, any other thing than a meer ambush of our enemy; for it cor∣rupts our purest actions, and vitiates our most pious intentions; it is the bane of Gods love, the poyson of our hearts, and the venome of our souls: For when humane favour and respect strive to oversway the love of God, and strike in for a part of that which is due to God only; we do, or leave undone say or unsay, what we neither should nor would, but for their sakes: Ou kindred corrupt or judgments, and courte∣sies blind our reasons; so that we neither discern their follies, nor cor∣rect their faults▪ but rather comply with their imperfections, and som∣times wink at their open wicked∣nesses, for the continuance of our own content. 3. O how far is this from that The re∣medy is to love all impartial∣ly in and for God. pure love, which obligeth us to affect all, (without exception of persons), only in and for God, as
bearing his image, as being truly vertuous, and as far forth as they are furtherers to our souls salvation and perfection! Fy upon all friend, ships and affections, which are atten∣ded with such dangers, accompanied with such distractions, and followed with such disquiets which busie our fancies, and bend our imagina∣tions, to things so unprofitable and impertinent, and so much impeding us, in our intended pogresse to the perfection of Gods love. 4. So also all disordered delight, Spiritual sweetnes∣ses may be somtimes snares of our ene∣my; pleasure and propriety in spiritual sweetnesses, and inward solaces of devotion, are meer traps of the enemy, laid to catch and insnare our unwary souls, and to make them rest with complacency in things, which are not God himself (the end of our desires,) but only his creatures, guifts, and graces. You must not stay here, (O devout We must no stay in them, but tran∣scend them. souls) but pass on your way, and transcend all for his sake whom you only seek, and not his solaces. These are helps and encouragements in your course, not the goal you must
touch; These are neither security Read the 28. ch. of the Con∣fflict. nor sanctity, but only baits of the divine piety, to strengthen you in climbing the steep mountain to his perfect charity. The Third Am∣bush. Extroversion, or an inordi∣nate application of the soul to external things. 1. THis choaks up the Spirit of Extrover∣sion choaks up devotion, Devotion, quenches the souls ardor in her holy exercises, hinders her hastning to perfection, and buries the whole heart and mind, the whole time and talents in mean and inferiour employments, which should be totally taken up in di∣vine contemplation. Take heed of being drawn into
this dangerous ambush (O dear Therefore we must not in∣trude our selves into employ∣ments; souls,) intrude not your selves into any business: and when Necessity, Obedience, or Charity, (the only pretexts, which can make extrover∣sion lawfull and laudable), urge you abroad keep your heart still at home▪ converse there with your Lord and love, and commune with him, concerning the more impor∣tant affairs of eternity; abstract your selves from all outward mul∣tiplicity, and there treat sweetly and secretly with him, of your souls union to that one thing, which is only and absolutly necessary. 2. Abridge therefore your fan∣cy But curb our fan∣cies. from fruitless roaming abroad upon all occurring objects, which proceeds from instability of heart, and argues a neglect of your inte∣riour: Curb and suppresse all ex∣travagations Read ch. 4 n. 6 of the Conflict. of your mind, not only from sinful, but from super∣fluous, and unprofitable concepti∣ons▪ which nothing advance your soul in it's tendance to perfection, but contaminate it with the dust of vanity, and contristate
the holy Spirit of God, within you. 3. Perform such works as con∣cern your calling▪ without solicitude of mind, or ingagement of affe∣ction: Perform work of obedience, necssity, and chari∣ty, without enggng your affe∣ctions; lest your senses become darkned▪ your soul distracted, your fervor diminished, your prayers neglected, and you sliding insensibly into negligence, and a total dis∣composition in your inward man, be hardly ever again reclaimed and recollected For how can a soul which is totally environed with worldly impertinencies▪ have any vacant time left for the entertain∣ments of piety? how can a mind, dull'd and astonish'd with the con∣tinual noyses of mundanity, hear∣ken attentively to Gods holy inspi∣rations? 4. Wherefore strive timely and And strive to get into your in∣teriour. diligently to get into your interiour: prevent your soul (which is ever a∣ctive, never idle,) with pious thoughts, lest evil habits press in first▪ and pre-possesse it: apply your selves speedily and seriously to intro∣version, spiritual silence, and inward attendance to God alone; adhere
to him only, and remain unremo∣veable from this maxim, To desire nothing, demand nothing, think of nothing, love nothing, labour for nothing, but him alone, that One and All, which is needfull for you: Do this as if nothing else concern'd you, and as if there were nothing but He and your self, and You and him∣self, considerable in the whole world. 5. The surest way to compass this happy and heavenly design, is to keep your eyes and heart fix'd By fixing our hearts upon Christ crucified. constantly and continually upon Christ crucified. This is the solid ground whence the highest contem∣platives take their first rise; hither (into this sacred Ark of our Savi∣ours humanity), they must again return after their lofty soarings into the divinity; and here they must settle, when elswhere they can find no footing: And surely a soul that seriously considers his sufferings, contemplates his mercys, and reflects upon his vertues; will find her whole time too short to visit each room of his seve∣ral
perfections, and none at all left, to be lost upon extravagant and worldly fancies. The Fourth Am∣bush. Bitterness of Heart. 1. WHich comprehends all kind Bitterness of heart compre∣hends all sadnes, froward∣nesse, &c. of Sadness, Melancholy, frowardness, restlesness, indigna∣tion, despitefulness, proness to impa∣tience, discontent, tediousness of mind, aversion, distast of all things, dislike of others, suspicions, sinister interpretations, unpleasantness, mur∣murations, detractions, rancor, ma∣lice, rash-judgments, and the like. 2. The source of these bitter All which proceed, either from na∣ture, indi∣scretion n austerities, thought∣fulness, persump∣tion, or immortifi∣cation; streams, is either perverse nature; or indiscreet austerities; or an over-serious application of the
mind to study and thoughtfulness or a secret presumption of self-per∣fection and sufficiency or an im∣mortification of passions; or a re∣flexion upon past injuries; or an envying at others vertue, praise, preferment and prosperity. And all these anguishes of mind, and harshnesses in conversation, are great impediments in our progress to spirituality, and must necessarily And must be sweet∣ned with charity. be sweetned and season'd with the Sugar of perfect Charity: For if we truly love our Lord God, how can we scorn his image, stamp'd in the souls of our Brethren? Do they cease to be Gods amiable creatures, because they displease, despise or Read c. 16▪ of the Conflict. neglect me? may they not be Gods friends, though they are my foes? are they not more likely to love God, because they dislike me, who am so truly unworthy to be loved by any one? Are not my seeming enemies, (upon due consideration), my surest friends, since by morti∣fying me, they encrease my stock of merit, occasion my more serious application to the practice of veru,
ad egg me onwards in the way of all perfection? 3. You must therefore buckle up your selves (O dear Souls) against all these bad and bitter dispositions; by loving all, in, and for God; by being amiable, to a, And by being a∣miable and affa∣ble to all. affable to all, meek to all, mercifull to all: Strive to be gentle in words, cheerfull in countenance, pleasing in your proceedings, patient in enduring, compassionate to others in their failings, charitable in assisting them, ready to pardon them pious to interpret their actions for their best advantage, far from troubling or thwarting them, free from contristating or confounding them. 4. There is also another privat To this ambush belongs a certain grudging at Gods prceed∣ings, Which must be warily a∣voidd, and perilous corner in this ambush of bitterness of heart, which is, a certain grudgng at the proceedings of Gods providence, and a repining at his permission of adversities to fall upon us. Take heed (dear souls)▪ of slipping into this sad and dismal gulf of discontent and murmura∣tion
against God, in the least thought, word, or gesture: be not dejected or disquieted at any thing, but say cordially, cheerfully, faith∣fully and resignedly: It is the By a cor∣dial Re∣signation. Lord, let him do what seems good in his own eyes. Alas! Can Self-love so blind my understanding, as to make me think I deserve not to suffer this and much more? I offer up my self to thy sweet plea∣sure, O my God; my heart is ready and prepared to perform what thou pleasest, and to en∣dure what thou permittest; and I am wholly resigned to thy holy will, in all things which shall befall me, for time and eternity.
The Fifth Am∣bush. Scrupulosity. WHich includes all inward af∣fliction, fearfulnes, perplexity, vexation and trouble of the soul, and is an evident effect of some secret pride and self-love, 1. This dangerous Ambush is designed by our enemie to cut off Scrupulc∣sity ayms at the de∣struction of our Faith and Confi∣dence. To avoid this, we must rely upon God and our guide. all succours of Faith and Confidence in Gods mercy and goodness from us, that so by degrees he may lead us on, and cast us headlong into the precipice of despair. 2. To avoid this deceit, which ayms at your utter ruine and destru∣ction, your only secure and short way (O dear souls), is to cast your selves really, resignedly, cheerfully
and confidently into the bosom of the divine bounty and to the gui∣dance of your ghostly Father: there is no other hope of shelter or safety from these storms of troubles and temptations: There you may make a happy exchange of your servile & slavish fear into sweet & filial love: there you will drown and destroy these dismal, dreadful and desperate Imaginations and fancies in the abysses of Gods infinite mercy: there you will admire, adore, and implore, his power, wisdom and goodness, whereby you will confess, yield, and confide, that he can, knows how, and is willing to help and heal your sick and sorrowfull souls in his own good time and liking: there you will truly see that you are nothing of your selves, but are all things, have all things, and can do all things in him, your all∣sufficient creator and comforter. We can∣not err in Confi∣dence, so long as we fal not in∣to Neg∣ligence. 3. And you may securely stand to this infallible verity; That you can never err in overmuch trust, hope, and confidence in God, and in his mercy and bounty; so long as
you slack not in the punctual performance of your duty; cease not in the serious mortification of your passions and sensuality; con∣tinue your practices of patience in adversity, of gratitude in prosperity, and of indifferency and resignation to the divine will in all occur∣rences. The Sixth Am∣bush. Excessive and unnecessary Study. 1. THis busies the understanding Which busies the Under∣standing, but leaves the Wil barren, S. Bernard. Jerm. 36. super Can∣tica. about curious notions and useless speculations, and leaves the will barren of all true devotion and affections: For there are some who study to know much, that they may become learned, and it is a foolish
curiosity: Some study that they may fell their skill, and it is a foolish avarice: Some strive to know that they themselves may be known, and it is a foolish vanity: Some study knowledge, that with it they may edifie others, and that is cha∣rity: And finally some desire knowledge, that they themselves may be edified and their own souls better'd▪ and this is wisdom. 2. Wherefore all such study as ayms at the bare knowledge of things, without any uher relation Puffs us up with vanity, but leaves us empty of true piety. to piety, and proficiency in the way of the Spirit, is a meer trap of our enemy, thereby to puff us up with pride and vanity, to take up our time, and fill up our souls with self∣conceits, and presumption: It makes a great noise, and furnisheth our tongues with fair expressions concerning the spiritual life, divine feelings, and the secret wayes of Gods proceedings with his faithfull friends and servants; but hath no true tast at all of that which it talks so much; 'tis an empty discourse, void of all inward experience, a
meer Hypocondriacall wind. 3. The remedy against this, The reme∣dy is to rectify our inten∣tions. is, to rectify our intentions; Read not dear souls, nor study, to be accounted learned, but to become perfect; desire rather to love Gods goodness▪ than to know Read the 1. 2. 3. cha. of the first Book of the Imita. of Christ, And the 43. ch. of the third Book. much of his greatness; to lead a holy life, than to speak high words concerning it. Confesse your own ignorance in all things, and content your selves with the sole-knowledge of your Saviour: This is the sum of all Science, and this alone will suffice for your Salvation.
The Seventh Am∣bush. Tepidity, and coldnesse in devotion. THis is the bane of all spirituali∣ty This is the bane of all spi∣rituality. Read the 12. ch. of the Spir. Conflict. nor hath the devil any more alluring bait, than this (seldom perceived and yet highly prejudici∣all) luke-warmness in devotion, want of vigour in our spiritual exercises, and defect of fervour in our tendance to perfection. 1. Think not therefore (dear souls), that it sufficeth you to per∣form your accustomed practices of piety, but that you are continually We must alwayes▪ go for∣ward to∣wards per∣fection. to aym at a further and dayly en∣crease of charity: Consider, that not to advance in the way of the Spirit, is to recoyle; and that it is
not the multitude of your good works which makes them conside∣rable, but the fervour wherewith they are performed: Be sure to keep your heart and soul alwayes (as much as humane weakness and the rule of discretion will permit) ele∣vated to your Lord and love: cry continually for his grace, knock And sigh after it perseve∣rantly, incessantly at the gate of his mercy, sigh after him perseverantly seek to perform his will diligently, and follow his pleasure purely and per∣fectly; give that day for lost wherein you have not made some progress in the way of perfection; and final∣ly, rouse up your selves, and prick forward your sluggish dulness in de∣votion, with some brief and burn∣ing aspirations, which you are to have alwayes ready in your heart and mouth: As Excting our slug∣gishness by fre∣quent a∣spirations. O my Lord, ô my God, the life of my soul, and the only love of my heart! when shall I love thee, as I desire and thou demandest? O my Jesu! when shall I die perfectly to the world, my self, and all things, that I may live purely
and intirely in thy only charity. O when shall I be nothing to any creature, and every creature nothing to me, but only in thee, and for thee alone? O that I could go out of my self, and get into thee! That I could thrust my caitif heart out of this breast, to establish thine, (ô my sweet Saviour) in it's place! O let thy true love transform me totally into thee! Let me not live any longer but in thee! Let me not love any creature, but by, in, and for thee, my Creatour! O incomprehensible bounty! Ei∣ther take my soul out of this world; or take the love of this world out of my soul! Either bereave me of my life, or bestow on me thy love, &c. In all which raptures and affecti∣ons, the holy Spirit is the best di∣rectour, whose inward impulse and dictamen, you are diligently to fol∣low, (still according to discretion and obedience), with a perpetuall longing and loving, sighing and seeking to advance your soul to di∣vine Union.
2. Finally, I conclude with this hearty and heavenly counsell of S. Anthony to his disciples, against this dangerous coldness in devotion: An excel∣len docu∣ment of S. Anthony. My brethren, Let this be my gene∣rall and particular precept unto you, the first and last lesson I teach you: Never to lose your first fervour and good purposes, nor to grow slack in your observances, but to go alwayes forward, and renew daily your de∣vout exercises, as if you daily were new beginners in the way of perfe∣ction: This he often repeated and inculcated and being on his death∣bed, that his last words might re∣main more lively imprinted in their mindes, he bequeathed unto them as his final and never to be forgotten testament, this piercing and pithy document, able to win, wound and melt a flint into fervour and com∣punction: O my loving children, I go the way of my forefathers, our Lord calls and invites me, and my soul thirsts after him and heaven: But you, (ô my bowels)! what will you do? I have often admonish'd you, and do at this last gasp▪ leave it
you for my will and testament: Take heed you grow not tepide, and go backward, and so on a sodain lose the pains and profit of so many years past: Think still you are to begin a∣new, as though what you had already suffer'd for Christ, were nothing: Let your good will and desires get every day new strength and vigour; forget what is past, and run to what is be∣fore you; live and labour with such fervour and purity, as if it were your first work that ever pleased God, or the last service you should ever render him in this mortal life. O devout souls! Our dayes pass away swiftly, death is alwayes at our heels, eternity approches, where∣in our God, whom we have serv'd and lov'd, will wipe the tears off our eyes, the sweat off our brows, & the blood off our wounds, & crown us with glory, peace, security & im∣mortality: Let us not lose heart in his service, nor hope in his goodness! He expects and invites us: Angels and Saints offer their helping hands: The question is of eternal life, eter∣nall light, eternal liberty, and eter∣nall love.
THE SECOND TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: or, The use and Pra∣ctice of those necessary weapons, which are prescri∣bed in the Treatise of the Spi∣ritual Conflict. Here Methodically managed, and drawn into seven Exercises, Af∣fective Acts, or Aspirations, accor∣ding to the dayes of the Week. Psal. 118. v. 34. Give me understanding, and I will search thy Law, and I will keep it with my whole heart. AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.
To the Devout Champions aspiring to Perfection. THat you may make the right use (O de∣vout souls) of these ensuing Exercises, you are first to be premoni∣shed, That Aspirations or jacula∣torie prayers are short and fer∣vent acts, elevations, desires, and requests of the Soul to God; And they are of divers sorts, and may be performed either in the heart only, or by the heart and mouth jointly.
First, they may be practised by way of petition, begging love, vertue, perfection, de∣votion, &c. As, O Lord, give me light to know thy Will, grace to embrace it, and force to follow it. Help me to overcome my self, and my sworn enemies: Assist me to disgest difficulties, and dis∣graces for thy love. Pitty a poor sinner; Pardon a proud beggar; Receive a prodigall Child; Redeem a perishing soul; confirm my frailty, con∣found my Pride, comfort my Dull, Dark, and desolate Spirit. And the like short, amorous, and pithy petiti∣ons. Secondly they may be ex∣pressed by way of wishing, and sighing after God, good∣ness, piety, perfection, &c.
As, O Lord, vvhen shall I knovv thee and my self? When shall I truly love thee, and perfectly hate my self? When shal I live in thee, and be dead to my self? Or thus, Oh, that I vvere truly vertuous, truly religi∣ous, truly mortified! Oh, that I vvere all thine! O my poor soul, take courage, hovv shall vve abound vvith delights, vvhen vve shall see our Ma∣ster and Maker in his heaven∣ly Kingdom! Thirdly, they may be per∣formed by way of expostula∣ting, and complaining; some∣times to God, other-times to our own souls; and then to all creatures: As, Hovv long Lord? vvilt thou forget me for ever? Why hidest thou thy face?
Why art thou sad my soul? O heavens, are you shut a∣gainst me? &c▪ Fourthly, by shorter expres∣sions: as by Expressing the whole affection in few words, thus: Good God! Svveet Jesu! Hovv long! O fire! burn! O one! O all! &c. These must differently be made use of according to the various disposition of the souls dryness or devotion. In all which you are not to binde your selves to any set form or sorts of words, but only use such as holy and fervent love shall suggest unto you. And this manner of prayer (by fervent Aspirations, fre∣quent acts of love, and enfla∣med elevations of the soul) is (according to the divine do∣ctrine of S. Denys) the easi∣est,
shortest, sweetest, and per∣fectest means of uniting the soul to her last end, which is God, and consequently of cor∣responding to our creation and calling. This (saith he) is that ad∣mirable, holy and hidden Unitive vvisdom, which with∣out any foregoing meditation, or precedent search into divine mysteries, draws up forthwith the lovers affection to his be∣loved Lord, which is more and more stretched, intended, and inlarged by these ardent eja∣culations of the soul, thus fa∣miliarly conferring, commu∣ning, treating and talking with her Creator, and raising up her self to him by acts of love, and desires of conjun∣ction. And we may fitly say that
the solid foundation of in∣vvard perfection is contained in such acts, motions and ten∣dances of our Souls towards God, their neighbours and themselves; as the outvvard consists in the practical per∣formance of our duties, in relation to the same three ob∣jects. Make use therefore (O dear souls), of these affective De∣votions, daily, diligently and perseverantly; and you shall soon perceive a happy and hea∣venly change in your souls; you shall feel your faith strengthned, your devotion actuated; your good desires prepared and put in real performances; your pious in∣tentions ripened for executi∣ons; and your well-made purposes and resolutions for∣warded
to leap into the pun∣ctual and particular obser∣vation of each part of your duty towards God, the world, and your selves.
The Seven Exer∣cises. The 1. Exercise, For Monday. Of the Knowledge of God, and Confidence in him. The 2. Exercise, For Tuesday. Of the Knowledge, and Diffidence in our selves. The 3. Exercise, For Wednesday. Of obtaining Remission of our sins. The 4. Exercise, For Thursday. Of subduing Sensuality to Rea∣son. The 5. Exercise, For Friday. Of Mortification, and perfect Abnegation. The 6. Exercise. For Saturday. Of Conformity to Christ Cru∣cifyed. The 7. Exercise, For Sunday. Of perfect Vnion with God.
FOR MONDAY. Of the Knowledge of God, and Confidence in him. The First Exercise. 1. TO know thee, O divine fountain of goodness, is to be tru∣ly happy; and yet none can know thee, (O boundless and bottomless Sea of all perfections), but through thine own manifestation and mercy: Vouchsafe therefore, I beseech thee, (ô most loving and liberal Lord), to enter this poor & empty heart of thy meanest servant; to inform my
ignorant soul, with a glimpse of this necessary science, and to inflame my cold affection, with a small spark of thy holy love. O omnipotent Creator of heaven and earth, both which thou fillest with thy greatness and glory: O God of infinite power, excellent wisdom, unmeasurable goodness, and incomprehensible love! my soul thirsts after thee, the essential source of all felicity; my heart seeks thee, the proper place of it's re∣pose; it sighs to thee, the natural centre of all it's hope and happi∣ness. IN thy blessed mind, ô my God, it first rested in it's eternall possibility and similitude, thither it must again return, and there it must either rest eternally or perish for evermore: O let it now find thee, that it may ever love thee. 2. O Lord, most good, glorious, and gracious: most blessed and bountiful, most high and holy; most excellent and ineffable; What words or thoughts can express thy purity and perfection? Let me know thee, O thou life of my soul!
Let me see thee, O true light of my eyes! Let me seek thee, O thou only solace of my spirit! Let me find thee, O thou desired of my heart! Let me embrace thee, O my heavenly Spouse! Let me pos∣sess thee, O thou soveraign sweetnes, and full satiety of all my inward and outward senses. O that my heart could alwayes think on thee, my will ever love thee, my mind still remember thee, my under∣standing continually conceive thee, my reason perpetually adhere to thee, and my whole man incessantly praise thee! O hide not thy face from me, my joy, my light, and my life! If I may not see thee and live; O let me dy that I may see thee: I desire to dy here, and be dissolved, that I may see thee, know thee, come to thee, live with thee, and love thee eternally. O ever blessed and glorious divi∣nity! O Father, who of thine own substance, bringest forth an ineffable goodness, coequal, consubstantial and coeternal with thy self, which is thy Some: O Father and Son,
who loving each other with infinite charity and content, are united to∣gether in one Holy Ghost, equally and unspeakably proceeding from you both! I admire thee, adore thee, and worship thee with all the powers of my body and soul. 3. O sacred Deity! O Tri-Unity, and Vni-Trinity! O Father, Sn, and Holy Ghost! Holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts, who wert, art, and shalt be for ever almighty; I thy poor creature, prostrate before the Throne of thy Divine Majesty, from the abyss of my own nothing, invoke, adore and acknowledge thee, the abyss of all perfection: I present thee with al thine own gifts, goods, and graces, which thou hast plentifully powred out upon all thy creatures: I offer up to thy praise the affections of Angels and men, the properties of the elements, the beauty and motion of the whole u∣niverse, and the essence of all being: O that my soul were capable to comprise unitedly all their severall affections and perfections! how joyfully would it employ them in
thy praise? how sweetly would it melt away in thy presence? Behold, O my God, I make an intire oblation of them all, I acknowledge and adore thee with them all, and de∣sire to do it as frequently as I breathe, and as often as there are minutes in time, stars in the firma∣ment, sands in the Ocean, and num∣bers in all nature. O my Lord, whose love is the life of my soul, increase my know∣ledge of thee, that I may enlarge my love to thee. Alas! I love thee not, ô amiable Lord God, because I know thee not; I know thee not, because darkness and sin hath co∣vered and incompassed my under∣standing: Wherefore, ô bright light, who illuminatest all things, expell this darkness from my soul, drive off these clouds from my understanding, & draw the curtain from off the face of the abyss of my mind, that I may see and know thee, and then I shall not choose but love thee. O my dear Jesu, shew me thy divine Father; dart a beam of thy
heavenly splendour into my dull heart, that I may have some degree of that holy science which may help me in thy love, make me obe∣dient to thy will, and resolute in thy service. To know all things of this world, ô Jesu, and not to know thee, is but ignorance and folly: let me therefore know thy eternal Fa∣ther; and thee whom he sent for my salvation, and it sufficeth me. O give me this knowledge, that I may give thee my love, and I ask no more. Let me be unknowing, ig∣norant and a fool in all other things, so I may wisely know thee only, ô my God, and my all. 4. O King of glory, I acknow∣ledge thy perfections to be above all knowledge, but that of thy own divine understanding: I confess that thy height is unreachable, thy goodness unchangable, thy greatness incomprehensible, thy light inac∣cessible; And all other thy divine attributes and perfections are so mighty and so many, so good and so glorious, so excellent and so ad∣mirable,
so worthy and so wonder∣full; that were all the power and prerogatives, all the vertue, wisdom, and qualities of all creatures united in one individual nature, it were not so much in respect of thy glory and greatness, as the least drop of water is, in comparison of the vast Ocean. Wherefore, I beg of thee, (O im∣mense and inaccessible Godhead), only so much to know, conceive, believe and understand of thy hid∣den majesty, as may efficaciously move my will to thee; and I content my self with so much light of thy divinity, as may force me to love thee ardently, effectually, perseve∣rantly. O my Lord and my love! Fill my heart with the sweet influence of thy heavenly grace, that I may in some measure discover how good and gracious thou art to me, and to all thy creatures! O let me still re∣member thy mercy, ever dread thy justice, and continually admire and adore thy power and providence. Ah! my noble Soul, stampt with thy Creators lovely image,
endowed with the excellencies of understanding to know him, of will to love him, of Memory to rest in him; why adherest thou not fast to him only in pure and perfect de∣light, forgetting and forgoing all sensible and worldly objects? 5. O that I were so ravished with thy love and liking (my only amiable Lord God) that through joy, jubily, and admiration, I might feel no self at all, no sense, no change, no inequality! That no prosperity might puff me up, no adversity deject me, no accident separate me from thee, ô my God of infinite love and liberality! O that I could be ever joyful in thee, ever gratefull to thee, and ever mindfull of thy inhabiting pre∣sence within me! Thou are alwayes nearer to my soul (ô my good God) than my soul is to my body, alwayes conserving, counselling, disposing, directing▪ inciting and inspiring it to thy love; and wilt thou not, (ô my sensless and sinful soul!) be alwayes cautious and circumspect how thou behavest thy self in thy
Lords presence, who is so tenderly carefull of thy safety? O let his love be no longer neglected, his sweet invitations no longer slighted: O that thou wouldst henceforth walk before him as befits his chast and holy Spouse, with all respect and reverence, fear and fidelity, courage and constancy! preparing thy self diligently for his divine embraces. 6. Grant I beseech thee, ô mighty and mercifull Creator, that my whole time and thoughts may be totally taken up in the contem∣plation of thy unmeasurable bene∣fits and bounty towards me. For I know, Lord, that I am truly nothing, and yet thou carest for me (ô my loving maker), as if thou hadst no other creature in heaven or earth; thou deliverest me from innumera∣ble dangers; adornest me with many gifts and graces; givest me leave at all times to have free access to thy throne of mercy, so that with one holy thought, one humble sigh, one devout desire, I may draw neer to thee, and enjoy thee, and in thee
all comfort and content: O divine privilege! To discover to thee my wants, lay open my wounds, and boldly declare my wishes, as to my neerest, dearest, and trustiest friend and familiar, and to be sure of supplies, salves, and succour in all my neces∣sities! O what goodness, what grace, what mercy is this? O my soul! How loving and libe∣rall a Lord have we? how loving in mercy▪ how liberal in bounty? Ah! our unthankfulness to requite, our unworthiness to deserve his fa∣vors! Up my heart, be no longer un∣gratefull and unfaithfull, to so great, good, and gracious a benefactour. Yes, ô blessed and bountiful giver, I now say cordially, and will ever stand to i coragiously; I will henceforth love thee▪ ô my Lord, my love, my life, my strength, my support my home my harbor▪ and my happiness. I will remember thy sweet words to all sinners; Why will you perish. O children, As I live I desire not the death of a sinner,
but that he would turn to me an live. I will behold thy sacred wounds suffered for me, able to move a rock to love and compassi∣on: And though I am ashamed to think what I have been, and how little I have done, how much thou hast endured for me, how long thou hast expected me how loving∣ly thou hast besought me, and how poorly I have corresponded to thee; Yet I know, ô my Lord, thou ceasest not to be God and good, though I am weak and wicked. Therefore I will take yet courage in thy service, and confidently hope, that thou who sought'st after me a lost sheep, wilt mercifully receive me now I seek after thee my loving shepheard with a right intention, real resolution, and inflamed affe∣ction. 7. Yes, (ô my Lord and my love), heaven and earth shall sooner perish than my confi∣dence in thy sweet mercies, and my Saviours merits: If thou repell me, I will run after thee;
If thou shut thy door against me, I will never leave knocking; and if thou kill'st me, yet I will trust in thee. I wholly cast my self upon thy holy will, provi∣dence and protection. I protest with heart and mouth that I now am, and henceforth will be entirely thine; that I have nothing, seek nothing, fear nothing, desire nothing, de∣mand nothing, want nothing, will nothing, but thee onely, My Lord, my Love, and my All. And I firmly purpose to serve and love thee (ô sacred and su∣pream Majesty), simply, sin∣cerely, purely and perseverantly, not for any fear of pains or pu∣nishment; not for any self∣interest of what this world can offer, or the next afford; not for the least hope of heaven or hap∣pinesse: but I will thee, seek thee, and love thee for thy self only, (ô my all-sufficient Lord God), who art the sole object,
sweet compleatment, and solid contentment of my soul. Pardon me, protect me, and provide for me; For thou art my only hope and happiness.
FOR TVESDAY. Of the Knowledge, and dif∣fidence in our selves. The Second Exercise. 1. WHat is man, (ô Omnipotent Creator) what is this man, that thou shouldst be mindfull of him? He is nothing ô Lord, and I am the least and worst of those no∣things▪ because I have least corre∣sponded to thy grace, and made worst use of thy gifts. O give me ligt; reach forth thy hand to this blind creature crying after thee, O thou true light of the world, and life of my soul! that now at length I may duly, diligently, cordially and
abyssally dive into my own basenes, weakness, misery, nothing: that knowing what I truly am, I may really loathe, hate, distrust, despise, and deny my self, and all my own proceedings; sincerely love thee, only trust and hope in thee, and rely wholly upon thy divine providence and protection. I am not only content (ô my Lord God) but even willing and desirous, that all thy creatures should take me and treat me, ac∣cording to my true condition and unworthynesse; And I am resol∣ved by thy grace to humble my self, not only under thy mighty hand, but also under all their feet, as their ser∣vant and slave, to be troden on, ab∣horred, avoided, and detested by them all, as a sink of sin and filthi∣ness. I will be desirous to be esteemed and used as dross among metalls, chaff among grain, a Wolf among Sheep, and as Satan amongst the children of God. I acknowledge my self unwor∣thy of all grace and comfort from
God or man, and worthy of all pain, punishment, crosses, contra∣diction, confusion, desolation death, damnation. I will be henceforth a∣shamed to complain of any aggrie∣vances, and be content to suffer whatsoever the world, the devil, and hell it self, can inflict upon me. 2. And to strengthen this my resolution, I will rationally consider before thee, ô my Lord, what I re∣ally am? what I was? and what will become of me? both touching my body, my soul, and my whole being? Ay me! I have a body all clay, a soul all sin, a life all frailty, and a substance all nothing. And this is all I have to vaunt of in thy pre∣sence, ô my Lord and my maker! My material part, is but slime of the earth, the very worst part of the unworthyest element. Ah poor man! and canst thou look so big who cam'st from so base an extra∣ction? be ashamed to lift up thy head, vile mud and dirt, since thy pedigree is so well known, and the
ingredients of thy being are so mean and contemptible. And when I consider what this my body was in the womb, how it was conceived in concupiscence, nourished with filthiness, and brought up in darkness; I am a∣shamed to own my own beginning, which is so horrid and lothesome: and who then can justly boast of state, strength, beauty, or nobility, since the ground-work of all is but a little dung and corruption? Ah poor worm! what a dismal prison wert thou detained in, for nine months space of thy time? what nasty and poysonous food was thy diet? how wretched was thy birth? how weak and wofull thy infancy? and what art thou in thy best and most flourishing con∣dition in the world, but a clog and cage to thy inthrall'd soul; a paint∣ed sack, or pargetted sepulcher, full of filth, froth, and ordure? O my Lord, give me grace to frame an im∣partial judgement of what I am, and then how soon shall I check all risings of pride and presumption?
3. I came into this world (ô my Lord), with groanes and tears, I live in it with griefs and cares, I shall go out of it with pangs and fears, and lastly I must become a horror to the eyes of my dearest friends, a prey of vemin, and a companion of rottenness. Ah! how canst thou be proud of thy perfecti∣ons, poor clay and ashs? why should∣est thou look to be so highly priz'd, & so daintily pampered, thou stink∣ing puddle? Dust thou art, & to dust thou must return. Hast thou not alwayes before thy eyes these ashes for thy glass, and death for thy mi∣stress, why then dost thou suffer so many sparkles of vanity to arise from this thy caitiff condition? And thou▪ my poor soul, the spiri∣tual part of my composition; O what shall I say of thee to thy great Lord and maker? What thou st hitherto been, I wel know; wretched, wicked, sinful. What thou now art I know not; being uncertain of Gods grace and love. What thou shalt be hereafter, I am altogether ignorant; because doubtfull of thy
correspondency with grace, and fearful of thy perseverance in good∣ness. Ah sad condition! I came (ô my Lord), into this world in origi∣nall sin, I am bred up in actual sin, and if death and deadly sin meet together, I shall feel the smart of them both eternally: O how much need have I then of thy grace (ô merciful Lord God) to avoid sin, since I cannot eschew death! O let me rather admit a deadly wound, than commit a deadly sin! 4. What art thou then, ô my whole man, consisting of body and soul? What wert thou, (ô N.) from all eternity, before thy con∣ception in the womb, and birth into the world? Nothing. Ah poor no∣thing! what is less than nothing? where dwels this nothing? who can describe a nothing? which more differs from the least atome in the Sun, than Gods infinit greatness from the least of his creatures. O proud nothing! What hast thou, that thou hast not received? No∣thing. Why then art thou puffed
up with it, as if thou hadst not re∣ceived it? I acknowledge my whole being, to be from thy only bounty, (O my great, good, and glo∣rious maker): and since I possess nothing, but what I have from thee, since I shall also necessarily fade a∣way into my first nothing, if thou withdraw from me thy conserving hand but a moment; I will no longer glory in that which is none of mine, but I will here lay the foundation of my spiritual edifice, upon this sure and solid ground of thy All, and my own Nothing. I will endeavour to frame a true conceit of my own misery, frailty, insuffici∣ency and nothing, that so I may ful∣ly, speedily, and solidly come to this desired self-knowledge and humi∣lity. I will run over my lesson, repeat my questions, learn my answers, and strive to grow skilful in this neces∣sary and sacred science. What have I received that I have not abused? Nothing: Body soul, will, judgement, memory, under∣standing, affection, senses, meat,
drink, company, habit, books, pray∣er, Sacraments, all creatures. Can I then be proud of Sin, Fil∣thiness, rottenness, labour, grief, in∣firmity, blindness, obstinacy corrup∣tion, death and damnation, which are worse than nothing? Shall I boast of thy gifts (O my God), which are not mine; or of my own abuses and ingratitudes? The one is to rob thee of thy honor, the other is to be honoured for thy dishonour. 5. What creature ever sinned so grievously as I have done, and yet sorrowed so little, and suffered less? Who ever forsook so great and good a God, for so little and vain a toy as I have done? What sinful soul is there now in hell, that would not have been a glorious Saint in heaven, if it had the helps, favours, feelings, and visits, which I have both had and abused? Who ever received so many mer∣cies, so sweet comforts, and so great graces from thee, O bountifull Lord
God, and made so little and bad use of them as I have done? If I deny all this, my conscience witnesseth against me: If I confess it, oh! why am I not more hum∣ble? Finally, If such great troubles, temptations and tribulations had hapened to me, as have done to o∣thers, I should by consenting have ere now burned in hell fire; but thou, (O meek and merciful Crea∣tor) hast spared me, because thou knowest my weakness, and sent me small crosses, because I cannot bear greater, &c. Wherefore, Not unto me, (O Lord), but to thee, be all honour for time and eternity! O that I could know thee, and know my self! O that I could truly see my own nothing, and totall de∣pendancy on thee! my misery and malice▪ and thy perfection and total goodness. Ay me! weak and wretched N! What are my forces that I should rely on them? I have nothing. O my Lord, but what is thine, my me∣rits
are thy mercies, my goods thy graces; yet I neither have been thankfull for receiving them, nor faithfull in using them. O! when did I trust in my own strength and was not foiled, and confounded? Grant therefore, (O my Lord, ô my only hope, and help; O my sole safety and security) that I may totally trust to thee, and distrust my self; truly acknowledge thee, and deny my self; entirely love thee, and hate my self. 6. I confess (ô my Lord) that I am the poorest, ungratefullest, un∣profitablest, and unworthyest worm of the earth; a thing altogether useless to the world, and only active to offend thee, and to do wickedly in thy sight: and is it possible that I can harbor any thought of self-love, or self-I king? O God of infinite glory, greatness, and majesty, before whom the powers of heaven do tremble! what are all creatures in thy sight? and what am I the meanest of them all? O what proportion is there (great God) between me and thee? between
thy All and my Nothing? And yet have I infring'd thy laws, disobey'd thy commands, contemned thy Counsels, resisted thy callings, and contradicted thy will to prefer my own! O monstrous impiety and ingratitude! And shall I not wil∣lingly submit to all pain, punish∣ment, contradiction, and contempt, which thou (ô my highly offended creatour▪) shalt suffer thy creatures to inflict upon me? Behold, O my Lord, I debase, humble and anni∣hilate my self under all things that have a being: I will henceforth ut∣terly hate, distrust, and detest my self and wholly love thee, and relie upon thy mercy. O holy self-knowledge. O sacred humility! thou art the key of all perfection▪ the door of all solid ver∣tue, piety and devotion. 7. I now cleerly see, by the light of thy divine goodness (O gra∣cious Lord God), what hath hi∣therto been the cause of my on∣proficiency in the way of the Spirit; and why the path of vertue seemed and
so unpleasant, thornie, tedious and troublesome to my deceived soul: It was because I had not learned to leave, loath, deny, and di∣strust myself; and to rely wholly on thee, O my only comfort and sup∣port! I will therefore henceforth faith∣fully practise what I perceive so ne∣cessary: I will profoundly humble my soul; both inwardly in thy pre∣sence (O my Lord), and outwardly to the whole world. I will joyfully and volunta∣rily embrace all injury▪ indig∣nity, contempt, correction and confusion which can befall me, with as much pleasure as I have formerly any cherishings and kind∣ness. I will utterly destroy, ru∣ine, and root out all self-love, self-liking, self-seeking, self-praise, and self-complacencie. I will cast my self under the feet of the vilest creatures▪ take plea∣sure in the meanest employ∣ments, and obey them most wil∣lingly,
whom my nature most di∣stasts and dislikes. I will walk before thee, (O my Creator,) as thy needy, na∣ked, desolate and destitute vas∣sal; acknowledging my self void of all vertue, and attributing to my self nothing but sin, ingra∣titude, defects, failings, imperfecti∣ons. I will fully perswade my self that no one can contemn, con∣found, persecute and punish me as I deserve. I will not regard whether I am honored or hated, but imagine my self, as a thing dead & forgotten: or as that which never had a being, and is now truly nothing. I will be contented to be ac∣counted an hypocrite in my since∣rest actions; and to be thought full of inward impatience secret grudg∣ings, and desires of revenge against them who shall any way mortify or misuse me▪ though my heart be never so free from it. Finally, I will have these and the
like thoughts and words alwayes in my heart and mouth: I am no∣thing, I have nothing, I do no good, I am an unprofitable servant, I ut∣terly hate and distrust my self, and totally rely upon thee, O my Lord, my love, and my All.
FOR WEDNESDAY. To obtain Remission of our Sins. The Third Exercise. 1. WHo will give water to my head, and fountains of tears to my eyes? And I will weep day and night for my sins, which cover me all over like an incurable ulcer, from the soal of the foot to the crown of the head. Where art thou, O my wretched and wicked soul? In what laby∣rinths dost thou walk? In what sinks of sin, and puddles of un∣cleaness dost thou wallow?
Awake, arise, lament, repent: how long wilt thou sleep? why wilt thou dy? when wilt thou shake off thy fetters? Ah, return silly sheep to thy good Pastour, return poor pro∣digal to thy pious Father, whose goodness so lovingly invites thee, whose mercy hath so long expected thee. O great and glorious God, the mighty Monarch of heaven and earth, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, behold a poor and penitent Publican (who is ashamed to lift up his eyes to heaven, and unwor∣thy to take thy sacred name into his sinfull mouth) humbly knocking at thy gate of mercy clipping thy holy feet, and craving thy accustomed pity and compassion. O merciful Lord, hide not thy self from me shut not the door a∣gainst me. Oh! one crum of com∣fort, one dram of devotion to my sad and sick soul, to my dry and de∣solate spirit. 2. I am conscious of my ingra∣titude against thee, (O supream ma∣jesty) and my sin is always before me,
and confounding me: But whither should I retire my self from thee? To whom should I have recourse but unto thee? Art not thou my Father, my Father of mercies, which have nei∣ther limits nor measure? Art not thou my Maker, my preserver, my governor, my deliverer, my King, my Pastor, my Physician, my Priest, and my Sacrifice? If thou art not all this and more to me; and if I am nothing to thee; refuse me, reject me, and relinquish me a prey to be swallowed up by thy enemies. But it is time, (O my Lord) that heaven and earth take notice of what thou art to me, and what I am to thee. It is time thou enter in∣to thy right: And I must now either give my self to thee, or thou must take me unto thee. Not that I aspire to those excel∣lent prerogatives of thy dearest ser∣vants: No, my Lord, it sufficeth me to be in the out-rank of thy mean∣est slaves; to be only stamp'd with thy mark, and link'd fast in thy
chains, that I may never more have the power to fly from thee. O grant me this favour (most merciful Fa∣ther) wch thy dear Son hath purcha∣sed for me, by the price of his death and passion. I am fall'n without thee by my own frailty, but can never hope to rise, but by thy mercy, O my Lord and only support! I am sick with∣out thee, but cannot be cured with∣out thee, my heavenly Physician: I am dead without thee, but can ne∣ver be revived but by thee, ô life of my soul! So true it is that to make me come to thee, thou (ô most graci∣ous Lord God), must first come to me. O the admirable goodness of my loving Lord! Even this little I am doing, is rather thine own work than mine: Thou O my Lord, put∣test repentance into my soul, desires into my heart, sighs into my brest, confession into my mouth, prayers into my lips, remorse into my me∣mory, resolutions of amendment into my will: Tis Thou (O gracious God), who chiefly actest all this good in me, by me, and for me.
O my All! do then all in me that thou desirest: And particularly overwhelm (I beseech thee) my whole interiour with perfect con∣trition; not coming from a slavish and servile fear, but from a faithful and filial love: Grant me a true and intire grief for having offended thee, not because of thy promises or threats; but because thou art in thy self, good, amiable, ado∣rable. 3. Or if mercenary interest do yet more move thee, (O my sensual and sinful soul! For how hainous∣ly dost thou take a small injury, how deeply dost thou resent a little disgrace, the loss of a dear friend, of health, of honour, or the like tem∣porall and perishable commodi∣ties)? O whence is it then, that thou so little apprehendest thy loss of grace, and thy eminent and im∣minent danger of eternall damna∣tion? Is it a small matter to be Gods enemy? To lose the good will of all heaven? To destroy Gods image? To cut up life, root and branch?
To side with the accursed devils, (thy Creators sworn enemies)? to hatch Treason, & enter Conspiracie with the damned? Yea and to kill (as much as in thee lyes) him, who by his own death gave thee life? O brutall and unnatural ingrati∣tude! Surely the annihilating of hea∣ven, The rea∣son is: Because the least degree of a higher order, sur∣passes the highest degree of the lower order. earth, Angels, men, and all Nature, cannot be compar'd with this malicious evil and willfull de∣struction of thy grace O Lord, in my soul. O eternal God! what a monster have I then been in grace, what a prodigie in nature, who have so little car'd to commit such enormous sins? But (O my Lord) I will even now change my life; I here detest all sin, I make firm purpose of a∣mendment, I have a ful confidence in thee my Creator, a good wil to do satisfaction, and a totall resignation to thy divine pleasure. 4. I am the woful criminal, (O just judge of my soul), and I will be also the accuser and witnes, the advocate and executioner in this tribunal.
I summon you therefore, O de∣testable pride, O abominable envy, O execrable avarice, O beastly lu∣bricity, and all you accursed crew of sins: how long will you reign on earth? how long will you dispeople Gods inheritance? who brought you in amongst Gods children? Tis the perverted Will of man (O dread Soveraign) which hath done all these mischiefs. Rectify (ô my Lord, I beseech thee) this my crooked Will, and murder these horrible monsters in me, and grant that I may henceforth rather ex∣pose my body to a thousand deaths, than my soul to one deadly sin. Thy Saints will rejoyce (ô God) at my amendment▪ and thy Angels will make a Feast, but thy own re∣sentment of joy will be infinite, be∣cause thy love is infinite▪ which goes hand in hand with thy essence and comprehends all love in supream eminency. I will therefore expect from thee, O heavenly Father, the exact re∣membrance; from thee, my Redeemer
the perfect knowledge; from thee, ô holy Spirit, a true repentance and from thee, ô Sacred Trinity, an intire absolution and plenary indulgence from all my iniquities. The grief I feel for my past offences; the hatred I have against each sin at this present; and the re∣solution I make to avoid all iniqui∣ty for the future, are not equivalent in me to their enormity and hai∣nousness: I therefore humbly crave (ô holy Lord God!) that thou wilt accept thine own hatred against sin, for that which I should and would have; and in stead of the sorrow I want, I offer that of thy Son, my sweet Redeemer, with the Sacrifice of his immaculate life and innocent death. And since I cannot be impeccable by nature (O my Lord), nor dare presume to ask to be so by grace; give me leave to prostrate my self before thy infinite bounty and cle∣mency, and beg (by the merits of Jesus Christ, thy dear Son, and by the desires of thy essential love, the blessed holy Ghost), that though I
may not be impeccable, yet I may never sin more; and if I must som∣times sin through my frailty, yet that I may never sin mortally. This thou desirest, O Lord, this thou demandest, this thou comman∣dest; O give me what thou com∣mandest, and command me what thou pleasest. 5. O my good Lord Jesu, who art Lord of my life, and shouldst be the love of my soul (had I not like an ungracious and ungratefull wretch given my heart, and sold my affe∣ction, to fond, frail, filthy and fading creatures and comforts, which are so far from bringing me eyther quiet of mind, peace of conscience, purity of soul, or per∣fection of spirit; that they leave me nothing but trouble, confusion and remorse, with a world of dis∣quiet and desperate thoughts, vio∣lent passions, and vitious inclinati∣ons), I find no other refuge, or reme∣dy but to return to thee my Centre; to convert my self to thee, O my good Lord and Master; to cast my self
in all humility at thy sacred feet; and heartily to beg thy mercy, pardon and reconciliation. O mercifull Father, I truly acknowledge my prodigality, and humbly confess my treachery; and am sorry from my heart, that ever I offended thee, who deservest so much love and service from me: Beseeching thee as a guilty prisoner, to be pitifull to thy poor creature, and mercifully to forgive me the manifold rebellions and grievous iniquities that I have com∣mitted against thy Divine Majesty and goodness; and for the love of thee, I freely forgive all them who have any way offended or contrista∣ted me, sincerely acknowledging that I deserve no comfort from any creature, but all contempt and confusion, and not only to be troubled by all on earth temporal∣ly, but even to be tormented by the Devils in hell eternally. 6. O how ungratefull a child have I been to offend so often and
so grievously, so loving and liberal a Father so meek and mercifull a Redeemer and so weet and sove∣raign a Majesty, who hath always shew'd himself so benigne and bountifull to me, tolerating me in my sins, and expecting me to his mercy! wooing me to his love▪ and calling me to his service by a thousand means, all which I have either rejected or neglected; and still nevertheless given me time and opportunity to do pe∣nance? O my poor soul! how blind and bewitched hast thou been, to leave the bread of Angels, and to feed on the husks of swine; for vanities, villanies; shadows, and nothings, to abandon God and all goodness on whom depends all thy hope and happiness, quiet and comfort for time and eternity? O blindness! O folly! O fren∣zie! Would God I had never sinned! Oh▪ that I might never sin more! O my God, what have I done? Would
I had suffered on the Cross, pains of body, and pangs of soul, when I thus N. sinned! Oh what can I say or do more? I abhor and detest whatsoever I have done, said, thought or de∣sired contrary to thy holy will (O my Lord and my love!) I renounce all company▪ and oc∣casions which may induce me to of∣fend thee. 7. I cast my self at thy sacred feet, to be thy slave for ever, with a firm resolution to bear thy Cross till death, and to do penance and satisfaction for my past pride and pleasure, desiring nothing but to live at thy feet, like the penitent Magdalen, in solitude, silence, sub∣mission. O good Jesu! Out of thy infinit mercy, merits, and meek∣ness; suffer not me, thy poor creature, to be damned and sepa∣rated from thee eternally! O ami∣able eternity! O eternall amitie of God! Shall I leave and lose thee, for filthy pleasures, frail
creatures, fond friendships, fading honours? No, dear Lord, No: L it please thee rather to take my soul out of my body, than thy love out of my soul: let me rather dy miserably, then sin mor∣tally. Let me pass on the rest of my pilgrimage in thy grace and fear, that I may end my dayes in thy friendship and favour; which I beseech thee to grant me (O most powerfull and mercifull Savior), by the love of thy sweet heart, by the merits of thy bitter death and passion, by the intercession of thy Blessed Mother, and by the suf∣frages of all holy▪ happy, and devout souls. Upon all which relying, as upon so many sure anchors of my hope, I commit and resigne my self to thy disposition and providence, for time and eternity, (O my Lord, my love, and my All,) fully trusting that thou wilt mercifully pardon my sins, care∣fully
assist me in my wants and weaknesses and in the end happily bring me to eternall bliss, by such means as thy divine wisdom knows most convenient for me.
FOR THVRSDAY. Of Subduing Sensuality to Reason. The Fourth Exercise. 1. MY Spirit is willing (O most glorious and gracious Lord God), to serve thee, love thee, ho∣nour thee, and follow thee; but my flesh is weak, frail and refractory. I do not what I desire (O my God), and what thou demandest; but I act that which I hate, and what thou forbiddest. I feel, O my Lord, a law of sensu∣ality, contradicting the law of my mind, captivating my reason, clouding my judgement, and conti∣nually
striving to cast me down headlong into sin and perdition. Unhappy man that I am! Who will free me from this body of death? Ah▪ my brutish body! ah! my bur∣densom flesh! Thou art my dange∣rous and deadly enemy. 'Tis thy weight that depresseth my soul; thy earth that clog and corrupts my ayr; thy contagion and perversity, which infects and debaseth my bet∣ter part and heavenly portion; thy sensuality▪ which draws on, endan∣gers, and almost destroys my rea∣son. 2. Ah Sensuality! the source of all my misery! how justly do I now hate thee? and how willingly would I leave thee? At my first acquaintance with thee, thou defiledst me with origi∣nal sin: In my infancy thou mad'st a beast of me; And now in my riper years, thou still pursuest me, pro∣claimest open war with me, blind∣est my Understanding with darknes ignorance and errours, mak'st my Will refractory to good, and ready to all evil, distractest my Memory
with vain and vile fancies, and perpetually tossest me to and fro between love and hatred, joy and grief hope and fear, and the rest of thy numerous and enormous iras∣cible and concupiscible powers and passions. Ay me! how sad is my state? how deplorable my condition? Oh! how long (Lord) must I dwel with these devils? how long must I en∣dure the violence of these passions? O my Lord, my strength, and my salvation▪ break these fetters for me! Command a calm? (O thou only Ruler of Sea and winds) and appease the surges of these my un∣mortified appetites: Oh! restore me to my self again, reduce reason to her lost dominion in my soul, and bring back me thy poor creature, to thee, my powerfull Creator. O let not this passenger perish amidst these boysterous billows, nor suffer utter shipwarck in these fearfull tempests. I suffer violence (O my Lord) answer for me: the companion which thou hast given me hath deceived
me: Sense hath corrupted and con∣quered my Judgment. Oh! how I am dragg'd up and down by my al-mastering appetites! command∣ed by my servants, and fettered by my slaves: O tyranny! O indig∣nity! Ah my soul! O noble spirit, fair as the angels formed to thy Crea∣tors lovely resemblance, stampt with his divine character, and heir apparent to his glorious kingdom! To be thus subject to the base and brutall desires of flesh and blood? O intollerable bondage! O unwor∣thy servitude. 3. O Father of mercies, and only Physician of my soul! Thou art al∣mighty, and al-mercy; and I am all weakness, and all misery: There is no part left sincere in my whole body and soul▪ from the contagious poyson of passion, from the infe∣ctious leprosy of sin and sensua∣lity. All is out of order, (O my Lord) I acknowledge it to my own shame and confusion; each sense is gone astray, each member of my body is
corrupted, each power of my soul is perverted. My Understanding is obscured with self-love, my Memory dista∣cted with sensual bects▪ my Will posses'd with peevish inclintions: My affections are vain my passions violent▪ my dispositions vitious: My body is burdensome, my imagina∣tion troublesome, my life irk∣some. These are my wounds (O my heavenly Surgeon). O put to thy helping hand I beseech thee; see, fear, and search them before the gangren enter, and the grief grow incurable! My soul is sick even to death; if thou wilt, O my Lord, thou canst both cleanse and cure me. To this end thou descendedst from Jerusalem to Jerico, (O pious Sama∣ritan), from heaven to earth (O compassionate Saviour), where thou findest me in this pitifull plight sore, beaten, wounded, half dead, and utterly despoiled of all natural and spiritual riches, by theeves and rob∣bers, which are the senses of my
body, and the faculties of my soul: O pass not by me (sweet Jesu) but mercifully bind up my bleeding wounds with the swathing bands of thy death and passion; powre upon them the wine of thy pretious blood; and supple them with the oyl of thy heavenly grace. 4. I intend, ô my Lord, (streng∣then me in this hour), I intend, O sweet Saviour, a total reformation of life and manners; an intire mor∣tification of my corporeal senses, and spiritual faculties; an absolute change in my whole man. O grant me (I beseech thee my loving Lord) the powerful assistance of thy special grace, for the per∣formance of this great and good purpose. Teach me now (ô my blessed Master), to live inwardly, piously, spiritually; as I lov'd formerly to live outwardly, vainly, sensually. O let me henceforth yield to thy divine motion, obey thy call, imi∣tate thy example, and follow thy will. O let me never more act or omit
any thing, (be it never so little), for my own liking, but purely and per∣fectly for thy love. 5. Grant (ô good Jesu) that at each word of my mouth, at each glance of my eye, at each morsell I eat, at each member I move, and at each inward and outward action I undertake, I may first ask thy leave and permission, and so do it or leave it accordingly, as thy holy inspirati∣on answers and allows me. O that I could perform each naturall and necessary work with an actual reflexion upon thy praise and pleasure, and with a pure inten∣tion to be united to thee, my Lord and my love. Thy outward senses, (ô my sweet Saviour) were exactly subject to thy reason, and perfectly obedient to thy sacred soul: O let mine be swallowed up, I beseech thee, (gra∣cious Jesu) and sanctified by the merits of thine. Let me live, love, move, and make use of my senses, purely and only, in thee, for thee, and by thee. Thy sacred hands (ô holy Jesu)
were harshly nailed to the tree of the Cross; preserve mine I beseech thee from all sinfull touching. Thy blessed feet were likewise pierced and fastned to the same rood: O fix my steps, that I run not to evil actions, direct them in thy paths, and make me speedy in all works concerning thy honour, and the assistance of my neighbour. Thy holy mouth was free from guile, full of wisdom: put thy words▪ (sweet Jesu) into mine, let it alwayes speak of thy love, and only sing thy prayses. Thy divine ears were filled with blasphemies and derisions: Let not mine be open to hear vanities and detractions. Thy sweet eyes, poured out floods of tears for me: O give unto mine, tears of compassion for thy suffer∣ings, and of compunction for my own sins. Thy taste was tormented with the novsome potion of gall and vi∣neger: O take from me, I beseech thee, all desire of delicacies; let me not eat or drink but for meer
sustenance and necessity. Thy whole humanity (ô gracious Jesu,) was martyred and murther∣ed: O grant that I may be truly and totally mortified; Let me not see, feel, hear, tast, smell, eat, drink, do any thing, or make use of any thing, as following my own gust, sensuality, and self-seeking; but in pure conformity to thy divine will and pleasure. 6. O mercifull Redeemer! how great and grievous were the inward sufferings of thy holy soul? O for those thy sorrows, and thy tender mercies sake, cleanse, cure, inlighten, inform, reform, and transform all my inward man. O permit not my Vnderstanding, where the knowledge of thy great∣ness and goodness should be only seated to be overspread with igno∣rance and errour. Let not my Memory, which should be totally taken up with thee, be stuffed with vain fancies or impertinent curiosities. Let not my Will, which thou gav'st me to desire and love thee,
(O my only Lord and love), above all thy creatures, be inslav'd to any inferiour affection. Repair, (ô gracious Redeemer) this lively image of the lovely Tri∣nity▪ which is almost defac'd by my brutish sensuality. Grant, (O dear Saviour), that my Understan∣ding, Will and Memory, may be incessantly busied in knowing, lo∣ving, and remembring thee, and that they may forget and forgo all other objects, but only in thee and for thee. 7. O that my heart were per∣fectly disingaged from the love of all creatures! Drain it (sweet Jesu) and deliver it from all forreign and domestick affection; and fill it up again with thine only, that it may never love, desire, nor will any thing but thee alone, O my Lord, my love, and my All. O that my Will were conformable to thine, without any reservation or retraction! Take it unto thee (Dear Lord) freely and fully, for time and eternity: I will have no will but thine; dispose of me as thou
pleasest, here and hereafter. O that my Memory were dis∣incombred from all imaginations, and purged from all impressions, but of thee only! Empty it (ô thou only amiable object of my soul▪) and then replenish it with such holy and heavenly notions as may best please thy divine Majesty. O that my Vnderstanding were imbued with some measure of the knowledge of thy divinity! O my Lord, infinite in goodness, dreadfull in Majesty, and unspeakable in all perfection! O my great, gracious and glorious God, Quicken it, sharpen it, elevate it, and illuminate it, that knowing thee, I may not choose but love thee; and that knowing and loving thee, I may be eternally happy. Behold (Lord), I make an absolute divorce with all self-love, sensuality, and affection to creatures; and give thee my self by an irrevo∣cable donation. Behold, (Lord) the keys, the lodg∣ing, the treasure, and the Master prostrate at thy sacred feet, Enter
freely, possesse all fully, dispose uni∣versally, and command absolutely. Put me where thou wilt, give me what thou wilt, treat me as thou wilt, Thine I am, (ô my Lord, my love, and my All), for time and
FOR FRIDAY. Of Mortification, and perfect Abnegation. The Fifth Exercise. 1. O Eternal, and ever Blessed Lord God! Thou hast fram∣ed me of soul and body, and fitted me with faculties proportionable to attain the end of my creation, which is to love thee intirely, and to live with thee eternally. But alas! how far am I from observing thy blessed and beautifull order? Thou (ô Lord) gav'st me a soul to bear all the sway in my bo∣dy; Reason to have the chief re∣gency in my soul; thy Law to be
the guide of my reason; and thy self to be the sole mover and gover∣nour of my whole man. But Oh! how have I willfully cross'd thy sacred design? contradi∣cted thy intention, and swerv'd from this perfection? My body, is all brutish, my soul all animall, and my reason all sensuall. I am all blindness, self-love, and immortifi∣cation. Yet I know well, and thou (O eternall verity) hast expresly told me; that unless I renounce all, deny my self, take up my Cross, and follow thee, I can never become thy true Disciple. Ah, harsh words to my carnall ears! If thou wilt be my disciple, deny thy self: If thou wilt be per∣fect, sell all; give away all, reform all, renounce all, relinquish all: If thou wilt possess life eternal, contemn this life temporal: If thou wilt be exalted in heaven, humble thy self in the world: If thou wilt wear a crown with me, bear thy Cross with me. But (O my soul), how wilt thou brook that more dismall sen∣tence,
Depart from me, thou accur∣sed, into eternall fire? Wherefore (O my Lord) my love, and my all: Since Thou hast taught me these things by thy sacred word, and shewed them by thy holy example: and thou art the way, the truth, and the life; Grant, (O in∣fallible truth) that I may couragi∣ously walk in this thy perfect way, that so I may happily come to thee, the only true and eternall life and love of my soul. 2. What dreadest thou (O my fearful and faithless heart?) Behold, Christ thy King and captain is march'd on before thee; Take up thy Cross, and travell after him: he leads thee to a Kingdom; heaven is worth thy pains: O take courage to mortifie thy self, deny thy self, and die to thy self; that thou mai'st live to Jesus, and with Jesus eter∣nally. Learn (O my soul) this short and securing lesson: Leave all things, and thou shalt find one thing which is all in all. Take courage, and fight valiantly against thy own
bad nature; pray, suffer, stoop, bear repugnances, swallow down con∣tradictions, disgest injuries: the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence: The end thou aymest at is perfecti∣on, the reward of thy conqucst, is eternall love, eternal life, eternall happiness. Behold, (ô my Lord, my strength, and my salvation), I am fully re∣solv'd to lay the ax to the root of this wicked tree. Help me, I beseech thee with thy grace from above, that I may hew my self out of my self, that▪ I may kill, crucifie, and mortifie my inveagling sensuality, cut off my evil inclinations, rectifie my disordered passions, and root out each thought or desire, which tends not directly to thy honour, will and love, O my Lord and my God! 3. I know (Lord) that it is bootless to study perfection without the practice of mortification; I con∣fess I can never love thee truly, but in as much as I hate my self really; such is the antipathy between self-love and thy holy affection: Ah! how can a spirit distracted with
contrary inclinations be freely and fully vacant to thy divine contem∣plation? Put therefore I beseech thee, a sluce to my unmortified pas∣sions, put a bound to my distraught heart, and powerfully keep back those innumerous concupiscences, and corrupt imaginations violently succeeding each other, that my united affections may intend thee only, the only object of all happi∣ness. Gather (ô my Lord) the disper∣sed forces of my soul from all mul∣tiplicity of worldly affections, to the union of thy only love. Keep, I beseech thee, my under∣standing, will, memory, imagination, and all my inward and outward sences from roaming abroad: that carefully attending and entertain∣ing thy divine presence in my soul, I may attain true introversion, sim∣plification, and union of my Spirit with thine. Reform (ô my Lord), all the naturall corruptions of my out∣ward man, and redress all the spiri∣tuall infirmities of my inward man;
destroy and disperse all internal and external enemies and opposers of thy holy love; possess me perfectly, and dispose of me entirely accord∣ing to thy divine will and pleasure. 4. To this end, (O bless my weak endeavours, al-mighty and al-merciful Lord God), I will sub∣tract all superfluities from my body, and accustom it to all sorts of sufferings; that so I may fit it up for thee, O holy Spirit, who dwellest not with them that are sensuall and subject to sin. Alas! I have not yet resisted to the effusion of my blood; and should I spill each drop of blood in my body, in this holy quarrel; how little ought I to regard it in respect of the great good I expect? I will therefore crucifie thee, (O my flesh) with all thy concupiscen∣ces. I will mortifie my outward senses, the windows by which death steals into my soul, the hinderers of my hearts tranquillity the destroyers of true devotion the dispersers of in∣ward recollection, and the utter ruiners of all the good desires which
I conceive and kindle in my pray∣ers; Ah how soon is this divine fire cooled, and quenched, not only by sin, but also by the distracting ima∣ges of outward objects? I will keep a speciall and strict watch over my tongue, on which depends my spirituall life or death; and cheerish thee (ô beloved silence) which art the key of piety, the keeper of innocency, and the preser∣ver of purity. I will trample down my inferior This is the chief exercise of Gods chil∣dren, not to be car∣ried away with affe∣ctions of flesh and blood, but to conduct themselves according to Gods Spirit; nature with all it's evil affections and motions, of love, hatred, joy, sadness, desire, fear, hope, Anger▪ &c. I will order, dispose, and direct it, according to the laws of reason, and thy divine inspirations, (ô my Lord and my God). Grant me courage, I beseech thee, to quell and curb this most dangerous and my greatest enemy, which is the source of all my miseries; the citadell from whence sin assails me, and Satan fetcheth his forces to fight against me; Grant, good Lord, that I may Therefore, every one must strive to know his own natural inclinati∣ons, and then im∣ploy all his forces, and apply all his prayers and spi∣ritual ex∣ercises to quel them. never yeild to this wicked Eve, per∣suading Adam (my Superior will) to
eat the forbidden fruit; (to consent to unlawfull pleasures.) O that I could tame these cruel beasts, my naturall passions! how soon should I be master of all mo∣rall vertues? O that I could so till this vine∣yard, so delve this garden, so purge it from all ill weeds of affections, and prune all superfluous surgeons and shoots of passions, that the seed of thy grace, (ô heavenly hus∣bandman) might only there take root; increase and fructifie? 5. I will also mortifie my Su∣periour and rationall part with all the curious and fruitless speculations of my Understanding, all conceits of self-wisdom, naturall prudence, proper judgement, and good liking of my own proceedings: All vain and foolish reflexions of my Me∣mory; And all petty desires and affections of my Will, which relate not to thee, the only object and Lord of my love. I am resolved, (ô my Lord) to nip off each budding passion as soon as it peeps up in my soul to trouble
it in its true repose, and to hinder its liberty and tendance to thy love. I will (by thy gracious assistance) proceed faithfully and sincerely in the hatred, denial, and mortification of my self, and in the prosecution of thy divine love. And in order to this only end and aym, I make in thy presence, and from the very bot∣tom of my heart and soul these par∣ticular acts following. I renounce, (ô my Lord,) for the pure love of thee, all affection to worldly things. Give them unto me (ô gracious God,) or take them from me, as best liketh thy divine Majesty. I resign up all my interest in any thing, though never so near and dear unto me. Behold, (ô my Lord and lover) I uncloath my soul from all affections whatsoever to creatures, and desire nothing but thy self-alone O happy nakedness, O rich poverty of Spirit, O pure o∣bedience to the divine will in all things! Be you my hearts delight, my whole pleasure and patrino∣ny.
6. I renounce all self-seeking. Ah! my corrupt nature I abhor thee! Adieu all private-interest, profit, praise and preferment! I will henceforth performe all my actions and exercises (O my Lord God) for thy only pure & perfect love: I will seek to please and praise thee with an inward, ardent and a∣morous affection, for thy self only, and not for thy gifts or graces. I renounce all sensuality; whe∣ther it be in meat, drink, sleep, ap∣parel, curiosity of my five senses, or any thing else whatsoever. (O my Lord) I will make no other use of any thy creatures than I am abso∣lutly compell'd to by necessity of nature. I look for no solace but from thee alone, My only comfort and content. I renounce all disordered love to any woldly person. No favour or friendship, (ô my only amiable Lord God), no greatness or good∣ness of any one, shall make me fwerve from my exact duty to thee∣wards. No carnall affection to kindred, No tenderness of amitie,
No private or publick respect; No connivency or correspondency shall make me partiall in the reproof of vice, or praise of vertue. O take up my whole heart with thy holy love, that thy perfect image and perpe∣tuall memory may blot out all species of forreign objects. I renounce all vain, vicious, idle and unprofitable thoughts, fancies and imaginations. O let my mind not only yield no consent, but no entrance unto them! O let me ne∣ver more contristate thy holy Spirit with these vanities; nor hinder my souls advancement and union with thee by these divertisments. I will henceforth compell my heart to some good employment: I will no longer permit it to wander and wast it self in any idle and superflu∣ous curiosities. No, my Lord and Saviour, thy bitter and blessed pas∣sion, thy blessings and benefits, shall be the continuall occupation of my interiour. O what have I to do with transitory things, who am made for eternity! I renounce all care and solicitude,
which necessity, obedience and charity▪ do not oblige me to. No naturall passions of joy, sorrow, hope, fear, love, hatred, anger or shamefastness shall make any im∣pression in this heart of mine, which is preingag'd in thy affection, sealed up and setled in thy contemplation. No pretext of lawfulness, nor shew of fittingness, nor conceit of com∣passion, nor excuse of necessity, shall procure the admittance of such pas∣sions into my soul, as may any way distract, darken or dull the point of my affection and devotion towards thee, my only Lord and love. I renounce all bitterness of heart against any one. Is he good? be thou eternally praised in him and by him, (O bountiful bestower of all blessings). Is he wicked? Cor∣rect him, (ô mercifull Creatour,) comfort, encourage and raise him to amendment. Hath he offended, affronted, injured, or sleighted me? I deserve, (ô great God) to be tro∣den on by all creatures, and there∣fore I freely forgive him for the past, and give him free leave to add
stripes to his injuries for the future. Am I denied the grant of my most lawfull and just demands? Thou best knowest (O eternall wisdom) what is best for my state and con∣dition; O deny not thy love to my soul, and let me be refused in all other my requests whatsoever. I renounce all vain-glory, all self-liking and pride which may arise from worldly praises, al delight springing from any gift of nature or grace which is in me. Not unto me (Lord) but to thy holy name be given all honour and glory. Alas! what am I? what have I? what can I? All is thine, (O my bounti∣full Lord God) Nothing is mine but sin; and therefore I deserve only shame and confusion. 7. I renounce all desire of de∣light in my devotions, all sensible gusts of grace, and all sweetnesses and solaces in the inferiour faculties of my soul. Ah, my heart! what is all this to thee? follow thou thy Saviour. Thou seekest thy crucified Jesus: This is not he, but his gifts. O my Lord, it is thy self I seek and
sigh after: If thou send'st me com∣forts for the incouragement of my weakness, be thou ever praised, for thou dost like a most benign and bountifull God: If thou withdraw∣est them, still blessed be thy provi∣dence, which hath secret and seve∣rall wayes of conducting souls to thy self; and if thou wilt make triall of my fidelity, by permitting me to be dull, dry, and desolate in my devotions, be thou equally and eternally blessed. I renounce all scrupulosity of Conscience, which reflects any way upon the least diffidence or distrust in thy mercy. I am a sinner (O Jesu) but thou art a Saviour. I have great reason to dread thy justice; but greater to hope in thy goodness. Heaven and earth shall sooner fail, than my confidence in thee my mercifull maker. If thou kill me, I will trust in thee; And if I had formerly hated thee, and be∣trayed thee as Judas did, I would now with penitent Magdalen run to thy blessed feet, weep and be∣moan
my misery, and hope to obtain thy mercy. And finally, (O my Lord), I ab∣solutely intirely, and irrevocably renounce my whole Will in all things, and totally resigne whatso∣ever any way concerns me, to thy holy will and pleasure. I offer up unto thee the full sacrifice, both principall and accessorie, of all that (by thy gift and grace) I am, have, and can; my self, goods▪ graces, body, soul, senses, heart, will, all. I leave no right or title to any self∣ness in any thing whatsoever: I am no more my self, but thy slave. O Lord, not my will but thine be done for time and eternity. O let me will what thou wilt, or not will at all. Let all my desires be involuntary if they swerve never so little from thy divine pleasure. Dy self-will: Live Jesus, my Lord, my Love, my All.
FOR SATVRDAY. Of Conformity to Christ Crucified. The Sixth Exercise. 1. CRucified Iesu! thou only Lord of my life, life of my love, and love of my soul! O that I could reform my life, Deiform my love, and conform my soul to thee▪ the absolute pattern of all per∣fection! O that I could imprint thy live∣ly and lovely image in my heart! fasten all my affections and imper∣fections to thy sacred Cross, drown all my desires and defects in thy
dear wounds, put off my self totally, and put thee on intirely, O sacred humanity! ô my suffering Savi∣our! O that I could perfectly imitate thee, the pure exemplar of all ver∣tues! that I could give up my whole self to thee▪ by an act of ir∣revocable donation, as thou deman∣dest and commandest! But alas! I am yet, (O my Jesu,) all self-love, sin and sensuality. I acknowledge▪ (O my Lord) what I have, and what I want; I know what I desire and what I deserve. I confess I am wounded, I am wic∣ked. I am wretched, and I trem∣blingly come to thee, my heavenly Physician, to be cured, converted, comforted. O sweet Saviour! for thy mercies sake, and for thy passions sake, Forget and forgive what I have been, pitty what I am, satisfie for what I deserve, and supply what I desire. 2. Behold (most mercifull Iesu) I first cast my self at thy sacred Feet, pierced and fast'ned to the cruel
Cross for my transgressions: Pierce my flesh (O my Lord) with thy fear, and fasten my soul to thy love. O let not pride and presumption nestle any longer in that heart, which thou (O meek Saviour) lovest so tender∣ly, and redeemest at so dear a rate. O my vain glory and arrogancie what have I to do with you, how much do I now detest you? Wash off these stains, (O Iesu) from my poor soul, in these sweet streams flowing from thy wounded Feet. O drown these my imperfections in these sacred Seas of piety. Give me (O Gracious Lord) such true humility of spirit, that I may perfectly perceive the abyss of my own nothing and naughtiness, and rightly conceive the immensity of thy greatness and goodness; whereby I may depress my self un∣feignedly, and exalt thee only in my soul. Let me be content to be con∣temned by all creatures, desire to be despised, be willing to be troden on as dirt and dust and the very out∣cast of the whole world: O let me really hate all honour, and humbly
pronounce with mouth and mind, I am nothing, have nothing, deserve nothing, desire nothing, but only to please thee perfectly, (my Jesu) praise thee perpetually, love thee purely, and live with thee eternally. 3. Grant me also, good Iesu, by the merits of these thy wounds, the vertue of perfect obedience. O let me never tire in trampling down self-will, in forsaking my own sense, in subduing self-judgement, in sub∣mitting my spirit inwardly to thy inspirations, and outwardly not on∣ly to my Superiours injunctions, but even to the commands of all thy creatures. O let me have no pro∣priety, affection, or affectation in my own proceedings, but wholly mind thy holy pleasure in all things. Let me lay down all my desires at thy sacred Feet (O my Iesu), saying, Lord, what wilt thou have me do? so transforming my will into thine, by an absolute forsaking, denying, and annihilating my whole self. Let me receive, (O my Saviour) as from thy secret providence and
permission, not only patiently but thankfully, all pain, all poverty, all shame, all sickness, and all sufferings whatsoever; acknowledging that I truly deserve worse, and desiring willingly to endure more, that so I may have a more perfect resem∣blance of thee, my crucified Lord. Let me learn, (O my Lord), by thy blessed example, the holy lesson of discreet silence, not only from ill and idle talk, but even from all needless, and unprofitable discour∣ses: Let me rather edifie by the pu∣rity of my life and conversation, than by multiplicity of words and conceptions. O give me (sweet Iesu) a free and frequent access to thy sacred Feet during the whole course of my life, and a sure comfort in them at the hour of my death. 4. From thy blessed Feet, (O my dear Lord) I raise my humble devotion to thy al-holy Hands: and beg leave to cast into the sweet fountain issuing from thy powerful right Paulm, my manifold sins of malice and injustice; with all my
faults of hypocrisie and ingratitude, falshood and infidelity, rancor, and revenge. Renew, (O Lord God) a right spirit within my bowels: Let exact justice be the square of all my a∣ctions; truth the touchstone of my words; and sincerity the subject of my thoughts. Let me be punctual in perform∣ing my duty to thee, zealous in pu∣nishing my self, and charitable in compassionating my neighbour. Let me ever yield, first unto thy sacred Majesty, all honour and glory, re∣verence and respect, laud and love, gratiude and obedience, with my whole heart, soul, and strength; next, to my Superiors, equals, and inferiours, and lastly to my own body, soul and senses, that which is my duty, and each one of their respective dues. O let me fully per∣form what I am bound to, carefully eschew what is forbidden me, and uprightly walk according to my calling. O let me never presume to slight, scorn, suspect, judge, or condemn
any person; but sincerely serve, succour, and seek the temporal and spiritual good of all men whatsoe∣ver, even of my profess'd and most peevish enemies. Lord Iesu, give me grace to imi∣tate thy vertues, to be gratefull for thy gifts, and to make use of thy goodness in order to my souls ad∣vancement in the way of thy dear love▪ and desired union with thy di∣vine Majesty. 5. And in the Sacred wound of thy left-hand, I humbly intomb all my offences of Neglgence, tepidity, sluggishness▪ cowardise, and pusilla∣nimity; all my covetous desires, all impurity, and all intemperance. Purge me, (O my powerfull Lord), purifie me (O my merciful Savior). Give strength, comfort and courage to my feeble and frail nature, that I may pass undauntedly through all difficulties and dangers, to come to thee, my Iesu, to lay hold on thee, and to repose in thee, the only Cen∣tre of my desires. Grant me (O my Lord) chastity of body, and cleaness of heart;
temperance in my appetites, and sobriety in my senses▪ gravity in my deportment, and moderation in all my proceedings; that nothing may dislike thee in my soul, nor dissolve the sacred knot wherwith thou hast fasten'd me unto thee. Give me also (O Iesu my Lord) perfect poverty of spirit. O permit not my soul, intended to enjoy thee, the only solid and satiating riches, to be intangled with the least affection to the poor and perishable trifles of this world. Behold, I cast my self, uncloathed from all creatures, into thy naked embraces, (O crucified Saviour) I desire to clip nothing in my folded arms, but a breast burn∣ing with desires to please thee (my Creatour), and a heart melting away in thy love. I make choice of thy bare Cross, (O Christ) for my best inheritance; I stretch out my opened folds, to meet thy holy and heavenly huggings. O let me never more be unclasped from thy blessed bosom: Be thou (O my great-little-naked-Iesu) my rest during the short time of my life,
and my refuge at the dreadful hour of my death. 6. And now, O mercifull Savi∣our, I humbly convert my eyes and contemplation, to thy sacred Head crowned with thorns, and thy di∣vine Face, all besmeared with gore and spittle▪ for my sake: Here, I implore strength, (O Jesu) for the weaknesses of my head, and pardon for the wickednesses of my five wits and senses. (O my Lord) I desire to bury in these thy innumerous wounds, the enormous number of my iniquities; and I beseech thee for these thy sufferings sake, to a∣dorn my weak capacity with so much solid wisdom as may fitly suit with my condition. O let me never think, speak, or act any thing, which is not seasoned with the salt of dis∣cretion! Let me seriously weigh each circumstance, and patiently wait thy leave and leasure, before I leap into any work. Inlighten me, to see clearly thy will and pleasure, and impower me exactly to fulfil and follow it: Open the eyes of my Understanding to
behold my own baseness and wic∣kedness, and give me thy gracious assistance to reform it: Help me to form a right judgement of the real vileness and vanity of all transitory things, and indue my heart with courage to contemn them. Inebriate my affection, (ô ami∣able Iesu) with the sweetness of thy love, and let all worldly solaces sa∣vour of bitterness to my soul. Let me be deaf, blind, and dumb, to all things which are not thy self, ô my crucified Saviour. Let me prudently discern, and piously perform, each parcel of my duty, in it's due circumstance of time, place, order, measure and man∣ner. Let that holy and innocent simplicity (which is the vertue of thy Saints) shine in all my actions. Let me not be curious to know much, but careful to practise much, and cordial to love thee much, (O my only Lord and love). Cleanse my Will from all self-seeking; Keep my Memory from all superfluities; Close up my Senses fom all vanities, that my hap∣py
soul, separated from all sensible images, may quietly tend to thee only, sweetly repose in thee, and con∣tinually enjoy thy blessed presence. O let thy pure and perfect love, (dear Lord Iesu) be the faithfull scout-watch over all my procee∣dings; that no forreign affection, no sinister intention, no self-liking or self-seeking may steal into my heart, and defraud or disturb it's happy enjoyment of thee, and holy unity with thy divine Spi∣rit. Grant, (O my Lord), that I may prudently turn all good events, and all bad accidents, to my spiri∣tuall profit; by reflecting wherefore they befall me, of what they warn me, and how far they concern me. Let me learn thereby, gratitude to thy goodness, fervour in prayer, contempt of my self, humility of spirit, care of my actions, resigna∣tion to thy will amendment of my life, or what else thy holy Spirit shall please to intimate by these fa∣therly visitations. O sacred Head of my crucified
Saviour, be thou my certain succor, during my lives conflict, and my sure place of retreat, in my last a∣gony with death. 7. And lastly I reverently ap∣proch to thy dear Heart, (ô amiable Lord Iesu), opened with a cruell launce in the sight of thy blessed Mother, and thy beloved Disciple, for the love of my soul. O my Iesu, I here implore thy pardon for all my perverse affections, and irregular appetites. Give me thy leave (ô my loving Lord) to creep into this sweet hole of the rock, this sacred cleft of the wall, this unlock'd closet of heaven∣ly treasures, this saving Ark of the new Testament, and shut thou (O Iesu) the door from without, that free from the deluges of all wicked∣ness, and dangers of the world, flesh, and devil, I may sit solitarily, si∣lently, and sweetly hearkning to thy divine whispers in my elevated soul. Purge all my impurities, (ô my dear Saviour) in the pretious blood streaming from thy patent side, and replenish my heart with thy perfect
love! Oh! drown me, wound me, burn me, and consume me in thy divine flames of affection; that I may love thee strongly, purely, per∣fectly, perseverantly. O grant me to leave all things with alacrity for thee (my beloved Iesu), though never so great; to lothe all things joyfully for thy love, though never so good; to do all things contentedly for thy ho∣nour, though never so hard; to suffer all things patiently for thy sake, though never to painfull; and to persever constantly in my pious pra∣ctices, for the sole satisfaction of thy holy will, and accomplishment of thy blessed pleasure. O let me be incessantly calling and knocking at this sacred gate of mercy▪ Let me be still sighing and seeking after thee, (my Iesus, my Saviour, my Lord, and my love): Let me be alwayes thinking, ever talking and perpetually tending to unite my heart to thine, to conform it unto thine, to transform it into thine, that I may be all thine, and thou all mine for time and eternity.
Grant also, (dear Iesu) that I may truly love all others in thee and for thee. O inflame my charity, quicken my faith, rectifie my intentions, strengthen my confidence in thee, destroy all complacence in my self, establish me in all these my good purposes, and let me be as often minded of my now-promised duty, and incouraged to proceed forwards in the path of perfection, as I shall eye the sacred image of thy crucifi∣ed humanity. Elevate my desirous soul unto thy self, (ô Iesu my Lord) above all chances, changes, and creatures. Oh! let it be so totally attentive to thy presence, so intirely taken up in thy contemplation, and so wholly ab∣sorpt in thy love; that no outward objects may touch or trouble it, no inferiour cares or cogitations may intangle it, nothing may impede the free intercourse of thy heavenly friendship, nothing may stop the sweet influence of thy divine graces, or any way interrupt it's happy quiet and holy tranquillity. O dear and opened Heart of my
dying Lord Jesus, be thou my sweet comfort during this lives pilgri∣mage, and my sure Sanctuary in it's last period.
FOR SVNDAY. Of perfect Union with God. The Seventh Exercise. 1. O Infinite, immense and un∣measurable abyss of all bounty! O ever-flowing fountain of mercy! O undraynable Sea of love! O my Lord, my Soveraign my Saviour, and my Sanctifier! Be∣hold I return into thee, the sweet source of my beginning; I run into thee the gracious preserver of my being; and I desire to rest in thee, the only hope of my souls happi∣ness. Be thou henceforth, (O my Cre∣atour)
the sole subject of my thoughts, and the only object of my love: Be thou, (ô God of my heart, heart of my life, life of my soul, and soul of my love) my part and my in∣heritance for ever: I choose thee only, I offer up my self wholly, I consecrate my self heartily, and de∣dicate my self eternally to thy love, honour, and service, Ah, good God! where dwellest thou? which is the pleasant plaee of thy abode, ô King of glory, and comforter of my soul? I seek nothing but thy lovely presence, I desire no∣thing but the presence of thy love. My soul sighs to see thee, my heart covets to have thee, my love longs to enjoy thee, and I can expect no perfect content, untill I am totally united unto thee. If I now beg a glimpse of thy divine face, (O my glorious Lord) then a drop of thy heavenly grace, and afterwards a dram of thy dear affection; Yet in all this, it is thy self, (O sweet God) which I demand: thy whole self is the only satiating object of my boundless desires
and unlimited affections. 2. I desire to love thee (ô only amiable Lord God), by all means, and beyond all measure, until I am totally transformed into thee by love: O do thou freely and fully possess my spirit, guide it, govern it, inlighten it, inflame it, elevate it, inform it, and transport it, how and when thou pleasest. Oh! Let all adulterate love be quite banished, all multiplicity va∣nish away, and all impurity and self-seeking swallowed up: Let thy love be my light, my liberty, my life! Lord, I desire but two things in this world: To love, see, tast, and en∣joy thee my best beloved; and to be humbled, despised, rejected, and e∣steemed a reprobate for thy love. O sweet life! O loving Jesu! what a heaven, what a happiness is it to love thee? O how lovely, how loving, and yet how little loved is my God? O source of all goodness, and cen∣tre of all good souls! What is the greatest love of mother, friend, life,
or any thing else? Art not thou (my God) all this to me, and all in all? Ah, my soul! what didst thou ever best love? And didst thou love thy Lord God as much? I blush, (O my dear Lord), I sigh, and am asha∣med to answer: I will henceforth do any thing, suffer any thing, and leave all things for thy love. I will not live but languish, not breathe but burn, by reason of extasie and excess of love. 3. O fire! O flames! Burn, con∣sume, annihilate. Alas! Beauty of Angels, how late and how little do I love thee? O come into my soul; behold a poor lodging, yet such as it is, it is all thine: I conceal nothing, I reserve nothing; heart, soul, spirit, all is thine own, compose all, dispose of all, depose all unruly passions, impose what penance thou pleasest, I accept it, (o my Lord) only repose peaceably in my soul, and let no foul or false affecti∣on interpose it self, or disturb this blessed union. O that I could please and praise thee purely, perfectly, perpetually!
Oh, that I could love thee faithful∣ly, freely, and fully, in all and a∣bove all things, ô my all and only love! I acknowledge my self bound, (ô Lord) in thy chains of charity, I am burned in thy fire, I am wounded, and won to thy love; But what shall I say, What can I give? All I have is not worthy of thee, and yet is thine already: Ask (my sweet Lord) and have, choose and take, make me such as thou desirest, and then take me to thy de∣sire. Give thy self, (ô great God) to my soul, and then take my soul with thy self in it: My life, liberty, love and all is thine own. My last will is already made, in which I bequeath all to thee, Thine own death and passion, all thy mercies and merits, all the praises and perfections of thy dear Mother and the blessed Saints and Angels, and all the goods, glories and splendors of all thy creatures. All that I am, have, and can, both spirituals and temporals; kin∣dred,
friends, riches, health, honors, estates, offices, devotion all is at thy disposition. I am resolute, (ô my Lord) I am resigned and indiffe∣rent, to have them increased or di∣minished, to use them to thy glory, or to lose them altogether. 4. I give thee back, (ô merciful Maker) my whole being, either to be what thou wilt, or to be no∣thing at all; to love thee, or not to live at all. I offer to thee, (ô pious Redee∣mer,) my sins to pardon, my works to perfect, my will to purifie. I of∣fer thee my wounds to cure, my soul to cleanse, and my spirit to comfort. I offer to thee (O holy Spirit) my intentions to rectifie, my incli∣nations to sanctifie, my affections to deifie. Finally, I offer all for one, I give all to one, and all I desire is to be all one with thee, my all and only Lord and love. Thou hast given me, (O my bountiful Creator), the whole world in free-hold, for one penny of
Rent, saying; Child, give me thy heart: O Lord! Let this penny ne∣ver want the superscription of thy grace, and let me never want thy grace to pay this rent. O my Lord, all that I have is but two small mites▪ I cast them into thy hands, and had I more, I would give more: Dispose of them both (dear Lord), of my body and soul, as best pleaseth thee, that thy will may be perfectly performed, and thy name purely sanctified in both. O sweet God of my heart! Let me embrace thee in the two arms of profound humility, and perfect charity. O let my heart faint and melt away in the fire of thy divine love, let me lose my self to find thee, be out of my self to live in thee, and be empty of my self to be full of thee. O fun of Justice, dissolve with a beam of thy brightness the frost of my heart, and resolve it into tears of affection. 5. O beautiful and best-beloved of my soul! I am weary of this
wretched world: and I breathe, thirst and sigh after thee the sweet fountain of life-giving and soul-sa∣ving waters: O thou true rest and refresher of my faint and feeble heart, out of whom there is neither comfort nor content, Let me shroud my self under the shadow of thy wings, untill iniquity and infirmity have an end. Come, (Lord Jesu) Speak thy sweet words of love to my langui∣shing soul, for thy servant hears thee. Give me courage, alacrity, fervour and fidelity in thy service, the few remaining moments of my wretched and wearisome pilgri∣mage. O rest, long expected, and much sighed after! where shal I seek thee? and when shall I find thee? where sleepest thou (O dear Spouse) at midday, in the heat of love? Where is thy secret cabinet of Contempla∣tion, which thou hidest from the wisdom of worldling, and revealest to little ones and humble of heart? O shew me the bed of divine Uni∣on, wherein thou reposest with the
simple, solitary, and mortified soul! O let my poor heart have the ho∣nour and happiness to rest in thee, to remain with thee, and to be uni∣ted to thee! O God of love! wound my soul with thy sweet wounds of love, which nothing can cure but death, wean it from the worlds vanity, and wed it to thy increated verity; that treading all creatures under me, I may be rapt into thee (my Creator) above my-self, and there like the happy Dove in the secure Ark, re∣pose my weary and faint lims in the bosom of thee, my Soveraign Lord and lover. 6. O divine wisdom! Lead me into the solitude, speak unto my heart, teach me thy holy will in all occurrences. My deep sighs, and se∣cret desires are not hid from thee; Thou knowest nothing can fully cure, comfort and content me but thy self, the one and only necessary thing: O take my self and all, and give me that one thing in whom are all things. O sweet waters of divine Love!
which flow from the blessed bosom of the divinity, and from the open side of my Saviours humanity! Run into my bowels, and like pure oyl, penetrate and possess every parcel of my spirit; Irrigate and inebriate it, overflow and absorp it, that it may be transformed and conformed to the divine Spirit▪ so that all my a∣ctions, cogitations, and affecti∣ons may be spiritual, divine, and Deiform. O let my ravish'd soul, full of life and fire, break forth into these flames of joy and jubilation, I have found him, whom my soul loves: I have him, and I will hold him. This is he, which by reading I sought▪ by meditation I found, by prayer I desired, and by contempla∣tion I enjoy. O how the earth stinks? how loathsom are all creatures to me? O tast, O sweetness, O true and so∣lid pleasure! O how great is the difference between this spiritual, and all fleshly delights? O the mul∣titude of thy sweetnesses, which thou hast laid up, O Lord, for them that
fear and love thee! O lights! O delights! O extasies of spirit! Wound me, (O sweet God) burn me, consume me, crucifie me; Let me cry out with that Lover, Retain, O Lord, the floods of thy grace, or inlarge my heart, for I can hold no longer. I thirst, Lord, give me this water. O when? how long? how much? 7. O my soul! how good is it for us to be here? O sweet and se∣cure home and harbour! Let us re∣main and rejoyce here for ever. I will keep thee, O my dearly beloved, and I will kiss thee; I will conjure thee to remain with me, I wil rather lose my self, than leave thy presence. My beloved is mine; his honour is mine, his heart is mine, his heaven is mine: And I am his; behold the key, the keeper, the soul, the body, the lord, the whole (ô my God) is thine; Behold, my liberty, my life, my love, all is thine, (ô my Jesu) and thine alone; Repose therefore, as a sweet posie, between my breasts; sleep, like a bridegroom, in my heart; and reign, like a King, in the
most intim closet of my soul. Come, Lord Jesu, come quickly; take full possession of thy own: Come, and please thy self, love thy self, and serve thy self in me, as thou desirest and deservest to be pleased, loved, served. Let thy love▪ (O King of love) be the life of my soul, and the lease of my life, that when I cease to love, I may cease to live. In thy love, (O Jesu) I end this act of love, though my desire actu∣ally to love thee be endless: Oh! let me live and dy in thy love, and for thy love, that by love I may for ever reign and remain with thee, in thy Kingdom of love. Amen.
THE THIRD TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: Or, The Ascent of the pious soul by Steps and Degrees of Vertues, to the happy Mountain of Per∣fection. Psal. 83. v. 8. They shall go from vertu into vertu. The God of Gods, shall be seen in Syon. AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.
To the Devout Champions tending to Perfection. THis Spirituall lad∣der (O dear Souls) will shew you how much you have pro∣fited in pure & solid devotion; how far you have proceeded in the way of the Spirit; how for∣ward you are in seeking God, & forsaking your selves; & what progress you have made in your journey towards heaven: Con∣template therefore your selves often, in this impartial mir∣rour; bewail your backward∣ness, shake off your sloathful∣ness, increase your fervour, and encourage your diligence to
climb this sacred Mountain of Perfection, and to pass on cheerfully from vertu to ver∣tu, Psal. 83. 8. till you happily come to the beatifying sight of your Lord God in Sion.
The Seven Degrees of Perfection. 1.VPon the first Step, stand they who are Faithfull Catholikes, Fearful of Gods judgements, and Careful to avoid mortall sin. These are Beginners, who have little in∣ward light, stand upon slippery ground, and though they may be sa∣ved, yet so as by fire. 2. On the second Step, stand Proficients, who strive to avoid ve∣nial sins, and conquer their sensua∣lity; but are slow in tending to Per∣fection, and subject to be self-con∣ceited. 3. On the third Step, stand they who casting off sloath, tame them∣selves with austerities; but their intentions are not pure, nor they well grounded in self-denial. 4. On the fourth Degree, stand they who have gotten into their in∣teriour; but yet seek for solaces, and
are discouraged with adversities. 5. On the fifth Step, stand they who are fully resigned, and perfectly obedient; but fail for want of expe∣rience and courage. 6. On the sixth Step, stand they who have gotten a perfect habit of resig∣nation and constancy; but desire comforts to enable their perseve∣rance; Here also stand they who are indifferent to comforts or de∣solations, but yet they rest in Gods favours with some propriety: Here furthermore stand they who are sa∣tisfied with God only; but are not absolutely as willing to leave divine favours, as to have them. 7. On the seventh and highest Degree of Perfection, stand the ele∣vated and contemplative souls, Gods faithfull friends and favourites, who are perfectly indifferent, re∣sign'd and obedient in all things, to his divine will and pleasure.
The first and lowest Degree of Per∣fection. THe first Step and groundwork of all ver∣tue and perfection, is, To be well setled in the Vpon the first step of this ladder, stand Be∣ginners, who are Faithful Catho∣likes, Fearful of Gods judgments Careful to avoid mortal sin; Catholick faith, Fear∣full of Gods severe judgements, and Careful to avoid all mortal sin. This is the Church porch, and en∣trance into Gods holy Temple; but they who stand here, remain cold in charity, carelesse and undiligent in their lesser duties, remiss in spiri∣tual exercises, negligent in thinking of their obligation, by which they stand ingaged to tend towards per∣fection; and finally they greedily gape after all conveniencies of their corrupted nature, and give up
themselves to glut and solace their depraved sensuality. These Beginners have very little But they have lit∣tle inward light, or no inward light, they know not what is the meaning of mortifica∣tion, what it is to get into their in∣teriour, or what Introversion signi∣fies; but they seemingly satisfie and secure themselves, in that they have a will to avoid the known and ca∣pitall sins, whereby they hope to escape hell, and avoid Gods heavy judgements. Surely such souls stand upon ve∣ry unsafe and slippery ground, and Stand up∣on slippe∣ry ground, their salvation is in a doubtfull and dangerous condition: for they are so blinded and bewitched with self-love and sensuality, that they can∣not well distinguish, perfectly dis∣cern, nor rightly judge, what sins are of mortall danger, and what not; so that conversing dayly amidst such multitudes of perils, and shaking hands with the world, the flesh and the devil, with so much freedom & so little care and precaution; what do they else, but dance (as it were) up∣on the very brink of hell, from
whence, if they once tread awry, they infallibly tumble head∣long into that bottomless dungeon of eternall perdition? Yet in case they should indeed And though they may be saved, foot it so warily all their life time, that death takes them not tripping, nor fall'n into mortall offence, (a thing most rare, and not to be pre∣sumed on by any one, who carries himself so carelesly), they shall surely be saved; but so, as by fire: They must expect a most sharp and severe Yet so, as by fire. 1 Cor. 3. 13. 15. punishment, a long and piercing purgatory, by reason of their un∣mortifi'd affections to venial sins, their giving scope to their unbridled senses, their neglect of Gods love, their coldness in charity, and their tepidity in tendance to perfection. And as for their good works, they are not likely to be there much a∣vailable; since their groundwork was servil fear, their end self-love, and their whole drift and intention altogether sinister, and deficient from that purity and perfection, wherewith they should have been performed.
The Second Degree of Per∣fection. THey stand on this second Step, who hearkning to Gods holy inspirations, following his internall On the 2. step, stand Pro∣ficients, Who are careful to shun veni∣al sins, and con∣quer sen∣suality; attractions, and obeying the sweet invitations of his Spirit, keep themselves disingaged from all vain affections to the world, yield not to the enticements of flesh and blood, resist the suggested tempta∣tions of the devil, and carefully avoid all occasions of offending their Lord and maker, so much as venially. To help on this pious design, they put themselves into good company, seek to converse with vertuous peo∣ple, are diligent in their devotions, zealous frequenters of the Sacra∣ments, and painfull practisers of the corporall and spirituall works of charity. But by reason they are yet slow in the pursute of solid vertue, and
slack in their tendance to Perfecti∣on, But are slow in tending to perfe∣ction, they are still subject to fall into their enemies snares and ambushes: For they are terrified at the difficul∣ty of getting an entire conquest o∣ver their passions and imperfections, and therefore seem to satisfie and solace their minds with what they have already done, and left, for the love of God, presuming overmuch upon his goodness, flattering them∣selves with a certain self-security, fancying that they are in a suffici∣ently good condition; whence they fall into a false opinion of their and b∣ject to be self-con∣ceited. own worth, and an erroneous con∣ceit that little or nothing is wan∣ting to them: All which maxims manifest their secret pride and pre∣sumption, and render them by de∣grees, careless of their further in∣crease and progress in the path of spirituality.
The Third Degree of Per∣fection. VNto which those proficients are ascended, who have more per∣fectly vanquish'd all affections to the On the 3. step, stand they, who casting ff sloath, tame themselves with auste∣rities; world, subdued their sensuality to the rule of Reason, and changed their sloathfull and sluggish indis∣position, into a noble and generous resolution of mortifying each un∣ruly passion, and wrestling with their evil inclinations: And to this end, they fall seriously and severely to work, applying corporall auste∣rities, fastings, watchings, wearing of hair-cloaths, long vocall pray∣ers, and faithfully practise such painfull means, as may probably help them forward in their desired conquest over themselves in the ac∣quisition of vertues, and in their tendance to perfection. But because their intentions, in But their intentions are not pu, the performance of these pious pra∣ctices, are not pure, sincere, divested
of all selfishness, and simply for Gods supream honour alone; but have some small mixture of servil fear, which looks upon hell and punishment; or of self-love, which eyes heaven and reward, rather than Gods only pleasure and liking; therefore they are yet seduced by the devils subtilty, and drawn in∣to a certain secret delighting in their own supposed good deeds, re∣lying over-much upon these out∣ward exercises, and neglecting Nor are they wel∣grounded in self-denial. their inward man, by not laying there the true groundwork of so∣lid vertue, which is perfect mor∣tification and self-deniall; but following the track of nature, in it's love to these seeming, sensible, and satisfying practices, not duly weighing how highly they hinder the operation of Gods holy Spirit in their souls.
The Fourth Degree of Per∣fection. VNto which they are clmb'd, who rightly considering the nobility of the inward exercise, get Vpon the 4. step, stand they, who have gotten in∣to their in∣teriour; into themselves, and there study diligently how they may unite their souls to their Creatour, with fer∣vent desires and filiall affecti∣ons. Yet these are oftentimes self-seekers, But yet look for solaces, lovers of their own will, and desirers of solaces and sweet∣nesses in their devotions, rather than the pure pleasure of God: they glory in their own way of the Spi∣rit, and prefer it before that of their brethren; which shewes them to have a touch of spirituall pride, and argues them of immor∣tification. And though in time of com∣fort they seem well resigned to endure all dereliction; yet they are troubled when any cross comes up∣on
them, and discouraged when and are discoura∣ged with adversi∣ties. the least adversity befalls them: If they are commanded to leave what they love, or act what they like not, they soon shew what they are, & what spirit leads them; they declare their disobedience, fall in∣to grudgings and murmurations, and make apparent the hypocri∣sie of their pretended resignation. Such persons therefore must strive seriously to restrain this willfull pro∣priety, and give up themselves truly and totally to Gods good pleasure, and the guidance of their spirituall conductor, with∣out any manner of restraint or reservation: which is the only se∣cure and short way for them to attain to the next higher Degree of Perfection.
The fifth Degree of Per∣fection. IN which are placed those pious souls, wch truly renounce their own wills in all their actions, exer∣cises, On the 5. step, stand they, who are fully resigned, and devotions, and are ful∣ly resigned to the divine pleasure and disposition: These promptly obey, not only Gods inward calls, and their Superiours commands, and per∣fectly o∣bedient; but even the becks of all men living, in all things which ap∣pear consonant to Gods honour, and conducing to their self-denial and mortification: Their chiefest care is to conserve cleanness of heart, their dayly prayer is to pur∣chase purity of conscience, and their unwearied endeavours drive onely at the perfect union of their souls to their sweet Savi∣our. But because they are not yet masters in this sacred art, but young and raw Scholars in this
track of true and totall resigna∣tion; But fail for want of experi∣ence, and courage. they somtimes fail for want of courage, constancy, Ste∣diness and solidity in it; all their affections are not absolutely rooted out and mortified by sufficient use and experience in spirituality, which makes them yet waver in their sta∣tion, stagger in their resolution, slip down now and then into some lower pit of self-love, and admit of some little point of propriety: yet they soon arise, return, and regain their standing, by the help of self∣denial and resignation. The Sixth Degree of Per∣fection. VPon which stand those holy On the 6. step, stand they, who have a ha∣bit of re∣signation; Contemplatives, who by much experience and long continued di∣ligence, have gotten a perfect habit of resignation, and a resolute per∣severance and constancy in their good purposes, free from all mixture of self-will, propriety, or the least
taint of contradiction from their Lords will and pleasure; faith∣fully acknowledging that all things whatsoever, even the greatest ad∣versities, and most grievous tempta∣tions, turn to the spiritual advance∣ment of such souls, as truly seek God, which is their only aym and employment. Yet even into these high enter∣tainments with God, there may creep in a certain secret inclination to themselves, and an over-eager But de∣sire com∣forts to enable them. appetite towards gusts and ghostly comforts, upon pretext to be there∣by enabled to endure all desolati∣ons and adversities: which intention being not precisely pure from all propriety, and absolutely perfect in divine charity, is a great impediment to the operation of the holy Ghost in their souls: For what gifts soever (of nature or grace, outward or Note well this excel∣lent max∣ime. inward, temporal or spiritual) are not directly used in order to our own humiliation, and our Creators ho∣nour, are abused by us to our gret prejudice in spirituality, and prove hinderances and stumbling-blocks
in our way to perfection. And upon this same Stair, stands Here also they stand, who are intirely, indifferent also another rank of holy persons, who have brought their inward man to an intire indifferency in all things, whom neither prosperity puffs up, nor adversity dejects, who have their Lords will for the sole law of their actions, and his only love for their All in all: They desire to be truly conformable to their crucified Saviour, and to keep an internall quiet, content, and con∣stancy in all desolation and dereli∣ction: They are well grounded and setled in a simple and sincere affe∣ction to their Lord God; which enables them not only to act great and heroique things, but also to suf∣fer all grievous and hard matters. These illuminated souls receive But yet rest in Gods fa∣vours with some pro∣priety. many sweet and secret graces from the hands of the heavenly bounty, as rewards of their sincere fidelity; their Understandings are replenish'd with clarity, their Memories are possest with objects of piety, their Wills are burnt and consumed with perfect charity; But yet these aboun∣dances
of divine favours may som∣times turn to their prejudice, when they rest in them with the least spirituall gust and propriety. Here furthermore are seated those Here further∣more they stand, who are satis∣fied with God only; almost perfect souls, which have really resigned up themselves and all, purely to Gods pleasure, are fully contented with him alone, and remain wholly satisfied with all that he either sends or suffers, look∣ing upon himself only, and not upon any of his gifts or goods. These are yet more frequently visited from above, with divine illustrations, and solaced with high and heavenly comforts: but because But are not as wil∣ling to leave di∣vine fa∣vours as to have them. they are not as really resigned to leave them, and to be bereft of them, as they are ready and willing to have and enjoy them, they seem to have yet a little point left of secret propriety within them; and must therefore take yet a higher flight, before they can pearch upon the upmost round of this spirituall ladder: which is,
The Seventh and highest De∣gree of Perfection. WHereunto those elevated, and perfect souls are soared up, which are throughly inflamed, ab∣sorpt, and extasied in divine contem∣plation▪ On the 7. step, stand the per∣fect, con∣templa∣tives, wholly dead to the world, abstracted from flesh and blood, and living (as it were) only by vi∣vacity of Gods love, and quickning of his holy Spirit within them. These are the dear darlings, blessed minions, holy favourites, and Gods faithfull friends and dear favorites, happy spouses of the most high, though they somtimes live here below in perpetual oblivion and obscurity: They are brim full of heavenly gifts and graces, lifted up above themselves to taste the un∣explicable sweetnesses, and behold the unspeakeable glimpses of the divinity: Yet they rest not in these sublime prerogatives with the least pleasure or propriety, but utterly renounce all self-seeking and inter∣rest;
being securely grounded in solid faith, cloathed only with na∣ked charity, and accompanied with abyssal humility, counting them∣selves worthy of all abjection, con∣ceiving themselves the very worst of all creatures, and contenting them∣selves to be by all so taken and trea∣ted. Their whole comfort is in the Cross of Christ: they neither look for such plentifull showers of hea∣venly feelings, visitations illumina∣tions, and influences of the Spirit, nor ungratefully neglect them; but remain in perfect indifferency, and Who are perfectly indffe∣rent, and absolutely resigned and obe∣dient. offer up themselves as obedient instruments to all that the holy Ghost shall vouchsafe to operate by or in them: They receive all things from their Creators hands into their open and disinteressed souls, as if they felt them not; ever praising the divine piety, admi∣ring his liberality, returning all to his honour, resigning all to his will, and being satisfied with his provi∣dence and disposition in all tem∣porall and spirituall events whatso∣ever.
Finally their outward man de∣sires no earthly consolation; their inward man breathes nothing but the pure love of God; and the whole compositum begs nothing but a per∣fect conformity to his crucified Lord and master, in all things, but especially in self-denial and abne∣gation, the only safe and secure guide of each Step in this his long pilgrimage towards perfection.
THE FOURTH TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: Or, The Triumph of the elevated Soul, in the amorous embraces of her divine Spouse. Canticles. 5. v. 8. Tell my beloved, that I languish with love. Cant. 2. v. 16. My beloved to me, and I to him. AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.
To the Loving Spouses, ayming at divine Vnion with their heavenly Bridegroom. HAving thus happily 1. 1. The Sprituall Conflict. Fought and foiled your ghostly ene∣mies, (O Victorious souls;) 2. Pru∣dently 2. The Se∣ven Am∣bushes. discovered and avoided their dangerous ambushes; 3. Gotten the right use of your 3. The Se∣ven Exer∣cises. Spirituall weapons, by the fre∣quent and faithfull practice of your pious exercises; 4. And 4. The Se∣ven de∣grees of perfe∣ction. couragiously climb'd up from
one degree of solid vertu to an∣other, from the lowest Step of Devotion to the highest degree of Perfection: It only remains, that you now take your 5. last 5. This ladder of divine love, con∣sisting of seven rounds. and sublimest flight, from this mountain-top to the throne of divine love and Union: to fa∣cilitate which heavenly enter∣prise, you may fitly make use of this holy ladder, rais'd up for your souls assistance in those her high-soarings; that so she may conveniently repose her∣self, upon each mysticall Step thereof, prune her wearied wings, fetch breath a while, and get new strength, and more light, to ascend higher and higher, till she arrives at the full height and head of it, which leans upon the very bo∣som of the Divinity it self, and leads into the bedchamber of her beloved Bridegroom; where
finding a sure footing, and a secure resting place, forgetting the whole world, her self, and all the multiplicity of things which she left below, and from which she hath happily unfet∣ter'd, disingaged, and loosned her-self, she sits silently, solita∣rily, quietly, and contentedly, attending to that One alone whom she only loves, in whom only she lives, and from whose sweet embraces she desires never more to be separated.
The Seven De∣grees of divine Love. 1. In the first degree, the soul is wounded with love, sick of love, and languishing with love. 2. In the second, she seeks her Physician. 3. In the third, she fears her own unworthiness, and the loss of her beloved. 4. In the fourth, she wil∣lingly suffers for love. 5. In the fifth, she is im∣patient in her desires of love; and must either obtain, or dy for it.
lightly, swiftly and nimbly af∣ter love; grows bold and con∣fident in love; and becomes united to her beloved. 7. In the seventh, she en∣joys her beloved perfectly, and perpetually.
The first round of this ladder of di∣vine Love. UPon this first Step, stands the pious soul, which In the first de∣gree, the soul is wounded with love, fick of love, and languish∣ing for love, (after a long experience in the way of the Spirit, and a serious applica∣tion of her self to the practice of solid vertue, having truly gotten into her own interiour, and happi∣ly ascended the steep mountain of Perfection), is become deeply wounded with love, sweetly sick of love, and heartily languishing after love: So that she crys out with that fainting Spouse in the Canticles; O tell my beloved, that I languish with love. This infirmity is not to death, but for Gods glory; for the Soul in this
state defyes all sin, deserts whatso∣ever is not God, and desires him only: she grows weary and sick of all creatures, and aspires after the embraces of her Creator: And as an infirm person, loseth appetite, and loathes all the wonted contents of nature; so here, the soul feels no gust, takes no pleasure, findes no comfort; in any earthly objects. Shee lyes sick, and seized on by this my∣stical feaver, caused by the violent heat of heavenly love: and here she is in the degree of contemplative purgation, when she findes no sup∣port, no stay, no tast, no quiet, no content, in any thing whatsoever; And therefore she oon soars up from this Step to the next. The Second Degree of Love. WHerein she rouseth and raises In the 2: she seeks her Phy∣sician. up her self, and casts about which way she may seek and find her loving Physician, who can only cure and comfort her; she gets up early, and eagerly enquires after him
without intermission or cessation, whom she failed to find in her bed at night, (in the first degree): She faithfully follows the prints of his steps, turns over natures book, dives into all creatures, questions all she meets: Oh! have you seen him; whom my soul loveth? Yet she stays no where, stoops not to the lure of any created object; she demands, and passes on, she leaves all for him whom she only loves and longs after: She holds no discourse with Angels themselves, but listens only to his heavenly voice, and de∣sires nothing, but to see a glimpse of his beatifying countenance: O shew me thy face, let thy sweet words sound in my ears! Here, love bears all the sway, and hath made so deep an impression in the pious soul that she is perpetu∣ally solicitous for love, ever sighing after love, and still carping, caring, and seeking for her well beloved in all things: All her throughts tend to him, all her discourses drive at him, all her affairs end in him: If shee sleeps, she dreams of him; if she
wakes, she talks of him: Finally she is always, in all things, in all places, transported into this object of her love, and swayed towards this Cen∣tre of her life: And recovering new strength, ascends upward to a further Degree. The Third Degree of Love. WHerein she works with more heat and vigour, and of which the King-Prophet speaks; In the 3. she fears her own unworthi∣ness and the loss of her belo∣ved. Psa. 111. Blessed is that person who fears the Lord; for he will exceedingly de∣sire to fulfill his holy laws. Whence may be inferr'd; that if Fear, which is Loves daughter, cause such effe∣ctual desires; how efficacious will those desires be, which proceed immediately from Love it self? The Soul in this Degree beleeves that her best works, done in the be∣half of her beloved, are very base & inconsiderable: she runs over her Registers of accounts, sums up her numerous exploits, measures her long suffances, and surveys her high
services; and they seem at best but poor and mean performances of a greater duty: she finds them nothing worth, by reason of the excess of affection which inflames and con∣sumes her. If Jacobs love to Rachel had so powerful an influence upon his spirit, that his twice seven years apprentiship seem'd to him but a Gene. 29. 20. few dayes, by reason of the ardour of his desire: What admirable effects will the Creators love produce in that Soul, which it hath absolutely seized upon, entirely possess'd, and throughly penetrated in this third Degree? She will be piously trou∣bled, and angry with her self, that she doth so little for so great a Majesty: and if she might lawfully, she would most willingly give up her self to be minc'd into a thou∣sand morcels for his love, honor and service, and receive therein full com∣fort, content, joy and satisfaction. It truly seems to her that shee troubles the earth she treads on, and the ayr she breathes in; and that she unprofitably takes up a place in the world, as a barren tree,
which brings forth neither flowers nor fruit: Hence springs a further admirable effect, that she verily thinks her self the worst of all things created, considering what she owes, and calculating what she pays; for Love teacheth her how much God deserves and Humility tells her how little she doth: and because shee finds that all her best endeavours are full of defects and imperfections; and that her highest way of corresponding to the love of her heavenly Lord, is so low and unbeseeming his Majesty, she is in∣wardly pained and confounded in her self. A soul in this state is far from any puff of pride, presumpti∣on, vain glory, or censuring of others; and is therefore duly dispo∣sed to mount up to the next Degree. The Fourth Degree of Love. WHich is of suffering for her In the 4. she wil∣lingly suffers for love. beloved, freely and cheerful∣ly, without the least repining, or re∣luctancy; because true love makes
the heaviest burdens seem light, and the greatest labours easie. In this estate was that Spouse when she spake to her beloved: Place me as Cant. 8. 6. a signet upon your heart, put me as a seal upon your arm, because love is strong as death, &c. The Spirit hath here such a vi∣gour, that it absolutely subjects and subdues the flesh, and as much slights all motions of sensuality, as a well rooted tree doth the wagging of one of his little leaves. Here the soul seeks not at all her own gust or comfort, either in God, or any of his gifts; nor demands any grace in order to her own solace or support, but all her care is, to cast about her which way she may render some acceptable service to the Divine Majesty, and how she may content and please him in any thing which she can do or suffer, (for that he de∣serves it for his love and goodness Many seek their own content in God; But Few seek to give God con∣tent. towards her,) though such her ser∣vices cost her never so dear. Ah! Good God, how many of your followers seek in you their own content and comfort, sigh after your
favours, expect your cherishings, and run after your gifts and graces; But alas! how few are they, who strive to give you content, and to present you with any worthy dona∣tive at their own cost and charges, without some touch of self▪love or proper interest? You are ever open-handed, (ô bountifull Creator), and ready to showre your heavenly benefits upon our heads; but we are always loath to employ that in your love which we receive from your liberality: though this is the only way to have them continued and increased. This degree of love is very high and heroick: For as the soul here seeks her Lord so seriously, and ad∣heres to him so sincerely; that she is ready willing and desirous, to suffer any thing for him: So his divine Majesty often & ordinarily rewards thi her fidelity with putting her in possession of joy, and giving her many secret, sugred, and delicious visits: For the immense love of the Word incarnate Christ Jesus, per∣mits him not to see his loving
Spouse suffer purely for his sake, without hastning to her comfort and succour. Hence she speedily gets up to, The Fifth Degree of Love. WHich moves the inflamed soul to a certain holy impatience In the 5. she is im∣patient in her de∣sires of love, in her desires of being joyned to her beloved: She is seiz'd with such a vehement ardour to overtake him, and to be united to him, that all stay and tarriance, seems to her, te∣dious and insupportable: She thinks often to have found him, caught him in her arms clasp'd him in her bosom but perceiving her self still frustrated of her desired object, faints through her eagerness of spi∣rit; as he did who cry'd out, My soul covets and decays after the Courts of Psa. 83. 1. my Lord. She cannot subsist long in this And must either ob∣tain it or dy for it, condition: She must either obtain her love, or cease to live; she is as eager in her desires, as Rachel was to see her self a mother, when she
said to Jacob, Give me children or Gen. 30. 1 else I dy. Here the soul feeds alto∣gether on love, as she only hungers and thirsts after love So that she quickly raises her self up to, The Sixth Degree. WHere she runs lightly, swftly, and nimbly, after her beloved, In the 6. she runs lightly, swiftly & sweetly af∣ter love, Isai. 40. 32 being fortified with Faith, lifted up with Hope, and quickned with Cha∣rity: Of which degree the Prophet speaks; They who hope in our Lord, shall exchange their strength, shall take Eagles wings, and fly without fainting: The reason of this light∣ness, is the overspreading, and dila∣tation of these three Theological vertues in the soul, whereby it be∣comes so elevated, that it wants but little of a totall purification. Wher∣upon that enlarged soul said; I have Ps. 118. 32 run over the way of your command∣ments, when you dilated my heart. Hence she grows hardy in love, grows bold and confi∣dent in love, and putting on a confident boldness, is piously, amorously, and strongly
transported beyond the ordinary limits of reason: So that she stays not according to judgement, re∣treates not according to counsel, nor governs and represses her impetuo∣sity, violence, and forwardness, by the rules of modesty and shame-fastness; because the peculiar favor, which her best beloved shews her, communicates to her a holy and heavenly audacity. In this state was that hardy spouse, which beg'd a Cant. 1. 1. kiss of her beloveds mouth: And Moses, when he peremptorily said Exo. 32. 32 to God, Either pardon this people, or blot my name out of the book of life, wherein thou hast registred it. And then burning sweetly in and be∣comes u∣nited to her belo∣ved. pure and perfect union with her be∣loved, she cryes out; I have found the long desired object of my affe∣ctions, I will not let go my hold, nor permit him to escape out of my em∣braces, &c. Here her holy thirst and hunger is satisfied, and she en∣joys such unexplicable treasures of delicious love, that were whole vo∣lumes fill'd up with the description thereof, the greater part would still
be left uncomprised. And from th estate the amorous Soul passeth  to the last Degree, which belong not to this mortall life. The Seventh and last Degree. WHich likens her totally to her well-beloved Creator, by In the 7. she enjoys her belo∣ved per∣fectly, &c. the clear vision of divine essence: This she enjoys, as soon as (being here in this world arrived at the Sixth degree of this divine ladder of love) she departs hence to her hap∣py eternity. These blessed Souls, (which are very few in number) are sufficient∣ly purged and purified by Love▪ which hath done that in them here; which Purgatory doth in others elswhere: so that to them belongs that Beatitude, Blessed are the clean∣hearted, Matt. 5. 8. for they shall see God. Now we say, this divine vision causeth a totall resemblance of the soul with God, following that sen∣tence of S. John, We know, that, when he shall appear, we shall be like 1 Joh. 3. 2.
him, because we shall see him as he : So that all that which the soul s and hath, shall be like God by articipation. Here nothing at al can e concealed from her, according o our Saviours words; In that day Joh. 16. 23 you shall ask me nothing. Because he eyes the clear glass of the God-head, wherein her self and all things are most plainly and perfectly con∣tained: But untill that day comes, though the soul be perched never so high, yet God is alwayes hid from her in some manner, as far forth as there wants in her som∣thing of this totall resemblance with the Diviny. Thus, (ô amourous souls), by climbing this mysticall ladder of divine love, upon which God him∣self leaneth, you get out of your selves, and all things, and fly up in∣to the divine being for love (like fire) tends alwayes upwards, with a perpetual desire to be plunged and ingulphed in the Centre of its pro∣per Sphere. Apply your selves ther∣fore seriously to this holy and in∣ward exercise, that you may attain
to these heavenly effects: Embrace with open heart and arms, your good, great, and gracious Lord and love; and resolve with that holy Spouse, I have laid hold on him, and I will never leave him. Draw near Cant. 3. 4. Psal. 33. 6. this divine Sun and be illuminated; he will clear your darkness, errours, and ignorances; dissipate all your dulness in devotion, dry up the dirt of your concupiscences; encourage you in the carrying of your Cross, give you a general alacrity in the performance of all your actions and undertakings, and replenish your souls with unspeakable sweet∣nesses, comforts, and contents. Come, I say, and only bring with you these three companions, Faith, Love, and Resignation, and leave all other things to the divine dispo∣sition. Represent to your thoughts, a wofull and bedridden creature, lying grievously tormented with a burning feaver; his Physician pre∣scribing abstinence from drink, as the only and assured way for his cure and recovery; his compassio∣nate friends visiting him, seeking to
divert his pains with their pleasant discourses, and to charm his disease with the delight of musick, &c. Ah! what unwellcome comforts are all these things to him, who can fix his mind on nothing but drink; who thinks on nothing, talks of nothing, demands nothing, desires nothing, delights in nothing, but only to re∣fresh his ardours, quench his thirst, and asswage his tormenting heat? This is your case, (O dear souls) This should be the beginning, mid∣dle, and end, of your whole life and business in this world: Nothing but God, God, God: Neither science nor ignorance, neither musick nor mi∣sery, neither delights nor desolati∣ons, should touch, trouble, or amuse, your faithfull, loving, and resigned hearts: God is your only aym and end, 1. To languish after God, 2. To seek God, 3. To fear the losing of God, 4. To suffer for God, 5. To be weary of delay, in your love to God, 6. To run lightly, confidently, & sweetly into God, 7. And Finally to enjoy God, and live in God, and with God eternally.
THE FIFTH TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: Containing The choicest Max∣ims of Mysticall Di∣vinity. With Brief Instructions and Dire∣ctions, necessary for those Devout Souls which desire, To walk in the way of Gods holy Spirit without error, To follow the Divine call with∣out illusion; and Arrive at holy U∣nion without danger or difficulty. Dilated With points of Practice, Affections, and Elevations. Galathians. 6:16. Whosoever shall follow this Rule, peace be upon them. AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.
To the Devout Contemplatives, walk∣ing in the way of heavenly Love, and aspiring to perfect Union with God. WE have hi∣therto con∣ducted you, (O Dear and devout Souls), out of the E∣gypt Exod. 13. of sin and sensuality, through the Red-Sea of your dangerous conflicts and skir∣mishes, into the quiet Desert of Divine Contemplation: We
have led you to the top of the Deu. 32. 49 mountain Nebo, (by the se∣veral laborious Steps of Perfe∣ction), from whence we shew'd you a small glimpse of the glo∣rious land of promise, flow∣ing with the sweet milk and hony of heavenly Love and holy Vnion. Now lastly, to settle you in your happy station, to assist you in your high undertakings, to maintain your heroick fervor, to keep alive this sacred fire burning on the Altars of your inflamed hearts, and to streng∣then yr thus elevated spirits with Perseverance (which only crowns the work, and in∣fallibly entitles you to childrens portions, in this divine inhe∣ritance), we have provided these ensuing Maxims of My∣stical Divinity, for your conti∣nual
support and comfort. We name them Maxims, be∣cause they contain the generall grounds and granted veritis of solid Devotion and subl Contemplation; summ'd , and set in some order, out  the larger elucubrations of the most illuminated Mystical writers: And we deliver them in a compendious and concise style, leaving many points ra∣ther insinuated than expressed; because our aym is only truth, substance, and solidity, which need no word-ornaments to make them amiable or intelli∣gible; and we conceive they will be more easily admitted into your souls, better retained in your memories, and more ef∣ficaciously applied to your pra∣ctices, being thus nakedly, simply and briefly proposed,
than if they were cloathed and disguised with any begg'd lustre from abroad. We look not that sensualists should either read or savour Delicata est divina con∣solatio, & non datur admittenti∣bus alie∣nm. Ber∣nardus. them; for their doctrine is too divine, their positions too pure, their practice too perfect, their contents too contrary to the to∣nents of flesh and blood: Va∣nity and verity have little commerce together; light and darkness are opposites; sense is at perpetuall odds with the spirit, and the greater part of worldlings (in this our cor∣rupted age), are readier to mock at the holy practisers of piety, than to reflect on their own express duty and obliga∣tion of tending to perfection. Nor can we promise them a heartier well-come amongst some pretenders to spirituali∣ty:
for self love hath obtain∣ed Nemo ad veram con∣templatio∣nem scan∣dere valet nisi per sca∣lam humi∣litatis. Read F. Cisneius. chap. 31. 32. 33. &c. so great an Empire over most mens minds, that they ge∣nerally judge of devotion accor∣ding to their own gusts and fancies; they embrace Hypo∣condriacall shews and shadows for truths and substances; and believe that only to be good, which is agreeable to their hu∣mour and affection. Some great Scholars also, whose understandings are wholly busied in drawing con∣sequences from naturall rea∣son, will strive to discredit that point of our doctrine here delivered, (which denyes and forbids the use of such acts of our reason in this heavenly School of highest Recollecti∣on), Not duly considering the 1. p. q. 85. a. . 1. p. q. 17. a. 4. universally received principle of the Saints, That these two
lights, naturall and superna∣turall, Greg. upon Ezchiel l. 1. ho. 17. can no more actuate the same understanding at one and the same time, than a body can have two different forms toge∣ther: And that God who hath given us the light of reason for the increase of our naturall goods, knowledge, and perfe∣ction; hath ordained the light of Faith, (which is above all reason, and implies a negation and cessation of all the acts thereof) for the attaining of supernaturall gifts and graces: And it is the often inculca∣ted Maxim of S. Denys, Denys. c. 7. de divin. nomin. F. Garcias Cisnerius. chap. 28. That to receive supernaturall benefits, we must relinquish all acts of reason, and quit all such resemblances and images of creatures, as it ordinarily makes use of, for the increase of it's naturall knowledge.
So that it is most certain, that the soul which ayms at the purest, perfectest, and sublimest Contemplation, must not only abandon all operations of her outward and inward senses, but transcend all actings and wor∣kings of her understanding, and (as it were), blindly ele∣vate her-self to an un-expli∣cable union with that object, which is above all naturall knowledge and conception: This is to be moved with Love alone, (supported by Faith), without glassing her self in any creature, or staying upon any thing, which is not the very Deity: This is to be ingulphed in divine darkness, and to be so lost and absorpt in God, that she neither sees, feels, nor finds her self any where, but in the divine being: O happy loss! O
heavenly darkness! O glorious annihilation! Wherefore, drown your selves, (O divine Contem∣platives) in this Ocean; lose your selves in this abyss of the divinity; leave all that is materiall, sensible, intelligi∣ble, and look immediately upon the supernaturall object of your Faith; stay not in the lower exercises, and feeble discourses of your imaginations, but per∣mit your spirit to take it's free flight, as a Royal eagle, & perch upon the increated verity: Take courage in these your sub∣lime exercises, follow them faithfully, humbly, obediently, and perseverantly, according to the rules and directions here prescribed; and let the world slight you, which understands
them not; let greatest School-men condemn you, which experience them not; let flesh and blood repine, which relish them not; let the De∣vil rage, who by this means findes you not, but where you are forth of his reach, and free from his ambushes; that is, in God, in whom only you live by continuall re∣collection, abnegation, ab∣straction, introversion, anni∣hilation. This is to begin your heaven upon earth, and to fortast that endless felicity in which your faith shall be turn'd into clear vision, your hope changed into full possession, and your charity knit to her be∣loved centre and perfecti∣on; where you shall praise
God incessantly, love him intirely, and enjoy him e∣ternally.
The Table of the Maxims. 1. That our end is Perfection, and divine Union, and that Prayer is the way to it. 2. That Beginners may profita∣bly make use of the following Exer∣cise of mentall Prayer and Intro∣version, until they obtain greater light, and more experience in the way of the Spirit. 3. That of all internal Prayer, the affective is most noble, necessary and profitable. 4. That Meditation is a seeking, Contemplation a seeing of God. 5. That continual Recollection, is the Exercise of Exercises, and the immediate way to bring us to perfe∣ction and divine Vnion. The practice of this Exercise is declared in ten canons. 1. That all places are proper for Recollection, but the more quiet the more proper. 2. That to pray on our knees, is a posture most pleasing to God.
3. That we must (especially at first), prefix to our selves certain and set times of Recollection. 4. That we must frame an act of pure Intention, at our entrance ito Recollection. 5. That we must briefly examine our Consciences, and produce acts of Contrition, self-confusion, humility, and resolutions of amendment. 6. That we must also make an Act of perfect Resignation, before we fall upon this Exercise. 7. That we must bring with us, some theam, subject or groundwork of our Prayer and Recollection. 8. That we must look on God by Faith, and leave off all discourses. 9. That we must carry God with us from our Prayer. 10. That we must put on Christ, and imitate his example in all our actions. 6. That for this pure, perfect, and Transcendent prayer, no certain Rules can be prescribed. 7. That the Contemplative must be very observant of the divine visits, lights, and calls.
8. That the only way to get true peace of mind, is to be totally resign∣ed to God. 9. That a Contemplative soul, must lay a solid groundwork to serve her in time of desolation. 10. That in this high Exercise of Recollection, the three Theologi∣cal vertues, Faith, Hope and Cha∣rity, must perfect and possess the three powers of our souls, Vnder∣standing, Memory, and Will. 11. That our Vnderstandings must be setled in pure Faith. 12. That our Memories must be setled in pure Hope. 13. That our Wills must be setled in pure Charity. 14. That this Exercise of Re∣collection and Annihilation, is the short & secure way to divine Vnion. 15. That all sorts of people may safely addict themselves to this holy exercise of Recollection. 16. That outward Observances are helps, in the practice of this Ex∣ercise. 17. That Prayer for others is best practised by a general intention.
18. That all vertues are best pra∣ctised by addicting our selves to Con∣templation, or this internal Exer∣cise of Recollection. Some examples, for the practice of this divine way of Prayer. Some further Advices, for the same practice of this pure prayer. 19. That corporal austerities, must be alwayes subject to obedience. 20. That Contemplatives must alwayes have the seven verities, (which concern the divine nature, whereupon all Contmplation is grounded), either habitually, or for∣mally in their memories. 21. That Jcultory Prayers, are the nearest dispositions to Contem∣plation. 22. That the Presence of God, is the great exrcis of Contempla∣tives, and the shortest way to divine Vnion. A more sublime way to practise the presnce of God. 23. That Humiliation is a relique of Gods love. 24. That Humility is the solid groundwork of all spirituality.
25. That Silence and Solitude, are our heaven upon earth. 26. That the perfect love of God, and hatred of our selves, must be our constant and continuall employment. 27. That Confidence in Gods goodness is the main support of our Spiritual Edifice. 28. That the measure of our pro∣gress in Perfection, is the Confor∣mity of our will to the divine will. 29. That Vnquietness of mind is the bane of Devotion, and curse of Contemplation. 30. That Crosses are to be suf∣fer'd, not sought; to be taken, not made; to be conceal'd, not com∣plain'd of. 31. That Temptations cannot hurt us, if we cast our whole care upon God. 32. That Desolations, derelictions, afflictions, distractions, are to be transcended by generous Resolutions. 33. That Perfection consists in putting off all propriety, and putting on pure and naked charity. 34. That Zeal and eagerness must be temper'd with Moderation and discretion.
35. That we must never rely up∣on our own naturall judgement, ex∣perience, and knowledge. 36. That we must seek no com∣fort in any creature. 37. That we must walk, and perse∣ver, in these our Spiritual Exer∣cises, with the two feet of Faith and Obedience. Vnder this Maxim are solved many materiall doubts arising in our dayly progress to Perfection. The first doubt. If we fear that God will forsake us, by reason of our Ingratitude and disloyalty? 2. If our sins trouble us, in respect of Confession and satisfaction? 3. If we can neither pray with fervour, nor suffer with patience; neither feel God present, nor be con∣tent in his absence? 4. If we are doubtfull that God is angry with us, that we want grace, that we only seek our selves, that we yield to all temptations? &c. 5. If our consciences are unquiet, and our souls fearfull by reason of our proness to sin? &c.
6. If we are full of fears and ap∣prehensions of our estate, by reason we feel in our souls, such slender ef∣fects of Gods grace and love, and have little devotion, no inward peace? &c. 7. If some extream cross, cala∣mity, or affliction hath seiz'd our hearts? &c. 8. If we desire to conquer the Devil, and overcome all temptati∣ons whatsoever? 9. If we want comfort in long and dangerous temptations, and troubles? 10. If we wonder that God will have us suffer temptation, sithence our frailty is subject to yield, and so offend his divine Majesty? 11. If we are solicited by our e∣nemy to unchastness? 12. If we are in extraordinary desolation and darkness? 13. If we are tempted to despair of Gods mercy, by reason of our fre∣quent falls and relapses into sin? 14. If we are perplexed with great sadness? &c. Other remedies against Sadness.
Another antidote, against me∣lancholy and pusillanimity. 15. If we suspect, that our Sad∣ness and temptations proceed from our own fault or negligence, or some secret sin, or our want of correspon∣dency with Gods grace? &c. 16. If we doubt that God is displeased with our Prayers, that our afflictions befall us through our own occasion; and cannot satisfie our selves to think we have done what God requires? 17. If nature hath shew'd her self a Stp-mother unto us, in giving us a hard and harsh disposition, whence proceeds a reluctancy to works of vertue, and mortification of vice: So that we distrust of ever overcoming our selves? 18. If on the contrary, Our na∣ture is so facil and flexible, that we scarcely find difficulty in any thing: We wonder to hear mention of rebel∣lions, contradictions, desolations, &c. From all which we are secure and quiet; And therefore we fear our actions proceed rather from a natu∣ral promptitude than solid vertue?
19. If we so addict our selves to Recollection, that we look upon works of Obedience, and the external practices of our duty, as impediments to Perfection? 20. If we find such a calm in our passions, imperfections, and tem∣ptations, that we hope the worst is past? 21. If scrupulosity overwhelms us? 1. We must obey our Spiritual Directour. 2. We must do our best endeavour. But here arise two difficulties. 1. If our Directours knowledge be small, his experience less? &c. 2. If we cannot satisfy our selves, that we have done our best? &c. 22. If we fear we detest not sin sufficiently, because we feel not so great sorrow for the offence of God, as we do somtimes for a temporall loss? 23. If we cannot ground our selves in a firm hope of mercy, for that we are so frail and inconstant;
we sin dayly, and amend not our lives; we repay unto God evil for good; we promise fidelity, and pra∣ctise nothing less? 24. If we go not on with alacrity, because we know not that our sins are forgiven, that our Confessions are good, and that we are in the state of grace? 25. Though we cannot (in this life) assure our selves infallibly to be in good state; yet if we could comfort our selves with most proba∣ble tokens of grace, whereby we might feel the pulses of our hearts, and somwhat ease our anguish? 26. If we are troubled because we know not well when we give con∣sent to sinfull thoughts? 27. If we cannot well distin∣guish between Venial and Mortal sin? 28. If these sayings of Divines terrifie us: They sin, who do a∣gainst their doubt: And, In doubtfull things the securer part is to be followed? 29. If finally, we are appre∣hensive
and fearfull lest we should grow weary in the way of vertu, and not persevere constantly in our Spiritual Exercises.
Maxims of Mystical Divinity. The first Maxim. That our end is perfection and Di∣vine Vnion; and That Prayer is the way to it. IT is not sufficient for us, (who are resolv'd upon a spiritual course), to lead an ordinary good life, which consists in the avoiding of sin and scandal, and in the punctual performance of our external duty to God and our neighbour: But our end and aym must be to attain the perfection of Gods holy love, and a happy Vnion
of our souls with their first begin∣ning, by living in abstraction, re∣collection, and perpetuall Contem∣plation, as far forth as Gods holy Spirit shall enable us, and our frail∣ty can correspond. The chief means to attain this our end, is Prayer, without which, all Religion is but a shadow with∣out a body, or a body without a soul; and all outward observances will prove but a superficial, not a real devotion. For it is the constant doctrine of Divines; that what God S. Augu∣stine. S. Basil. S. Chryso∣stom. S. Thomas. 2, 2. q. 83. a. 2. in his eternal disposition hath deter∣mined to bestow upon us, he gives us in time, by the intervention of Prayer: tying (as it were) to this instrument, the conversion of sinners, the advancement of souls, the per∣fection of Saints, &c. So that as his divine decree is, that we must till the earth, if we will reap the fruits thereof, and provide ma∣teals, if we will raise up buildings, and the like; so, his absolute order is, that we must pray if we will have spiritual benefits to be powred into our souls, and supernatural
gifts and graces to be granted unto us. Let us therefore in the first place, resolve to prosecute Prayer, coura∣giously, constantly, and perseverant∣ly, at set times, if we intend to make speedy progress in sincere vertue, and lay a sure groundwork of solid spirituality; and let nothing upon any pretext whatsoever, hinder or divert us from it as far as obedience and discretion will give us leave.
Lord, heal my wounds, sup∣ply my wants, satisfie my wishes.
The second Maxim. That Beginuers, may profitably make use of this following exercise of mental Prayer and Introversion, until they obtain greater light, and more experience in the way of the Spirit. THis divine Exercise consists of three parts in general, and Nine points in particular. 1. Prepa∣ration of 3. acts 1. An affective & lively ap∣prehensiō of Gods presence. 2. A cordial and profound act of humility. 3. A pure intention to please and praise God only. 2. Consi∣derati∣on of 1. My wounds, both inter∣nal and external. 2. My wants, which are many in every degree. 3. My wishes, and humble desires.
3. Conclu∣sion also of 3. acts. 1. Contrition for my sins. 2. Resignation in my wants. 3. Complacence in God, and Confidence in his goodness. A more ample and practical de∣scription of this Exercise. The first part is Preparation, of three Acts. 1. A lively apprehension of Gods Presence, not only in all places, and all creatures, by his power, and es∣sence, but in our souls, by his mercy, love, care and providence. O my Soul! Where are we? 1. Part. 1 Presece of God. who seeth us? What is he that is with us, and within us? by whose light we see, by whose fire we burn, and by whose love we live? Live, my most glorious and gracious Lord! in whose presence I kneel, in whose arms I rest, and after whose love I breathe: O that thou wert as dear to my soul as thou art near it! Alas, why doth she not care as much for her God, as he doth for
her good? Why do I not love thy presence, ô my amiable Lord, since thou art present by love? Thou art my Father, my Physici∣an, and my food, hear me, heal me, help me: I am wounded, I am wic∣ked, I am wretched: Out of thee, there is no rest; without thee, there is no hope; remain with me, reign within me; Let me be thine, all thine, ever thine. 2. Profound and cordial humi∣lity: acknowledging unfeignedly be∣fore God and his Angels, our wic∣kedness, weakness, and wretchedness; what we are, and what we deserve, and so resting quiet in our Centre of nothing. O my Soul! What have we 2 Pro∣found hu∣mility. been? What are we? What have we? what can we do? What do we deserve? What do we desire? What hath our loving Father and liberal Lord, that he hath not given us? What have we, proud and prodigal children, that we have not received meerly from his mercifull hand and heart? What have we received, that
we have not abused by self-love or self-delight? O sweet Jesu! Give tears to my eyes, words to my tongue, sighs to my heart, and love to my spirit; for I need them all to deplore my mi∣sery, and implore thy mercy; to ad∣mire thy beauty, and adore thy bounty; to sigh after thee, and suf∣fer for thee: What I have been, it grieves me to remember; What I am, after so many signall benefits on thy part, and serious promises on mine, I am ashamed to think; What I deserve I am afraid to call to mind; What I desire, I am ignorant how to ask. Lord, for thy mercies sake, for thy Mothers sake; by thy Bowels of mercy, and her Breasts of meekness; by all that thou hast suffer'd for me, and she for thee; by all that is dear to thee in heaven and earth; forget and forgive what I have been, my past folly and wic∣kedness; Pity and protect what I am, my present frailty and weak∣ness; Be satisfi'd for what I deserve, supply what I desire, and be mind∣full of me in life and death.
How much, ô my God, do I wish to leave all, and lose my self to find thee? to humble my self, to please thee? and to hate my self, to love thee? But these hard and high matters I dare scarcely promise, how then and when shall I practise them? Yet without thee, (ô sacred humility!) there is no solid centre to rest in, no true sweetness to take gust in: therefore, ô my God, I come to thy School to learn this necessary lesson, teach me, touch me, wound me, and win me unto thee. 3. Pure intention, to please and praise God only: to be all his, ever his, in what manner and measure he best liketh, both in this prayer, and all things whatsoever. Behold therefore, ô my Lord, how out of pure Obedience to thy Will, 3. Pure Intention. and confidence in thy mercy, I now approach to please and praise thee: Not to receive great matters from thee, for I am unworthy; nor to conceive great matters of thee, for I am uncapable; but to leave all for thee, to be humble of heart be∣yond
all, and to love thee more than all: this is both conform to my con∣dition and obligation. I come to prayer. (O my only Lord and love) not to have much, but to give up all, to be thine, all thine ever thine in life and death, for time and eter∣nity, as thou best pleasest: I come. O my centre and sweetness, to seek thee and sigh after thee, yet I am content neither to find thee nor feel thee, but only to see thee by faith, and to suffer for thee with fi∣delity. I am satisfied and content that thou art so good, great, glori∣ous, rich and happy in thy self: and I am confident that thou in thy good time wilt make me rich in thy mercy, and happy in thy love; for in this Pilgrimage I desire no other happiness than true humility, nor greater riches than naked charity.
The second part is Consideration: shewing these three things, first to our selves, and then to our God, as his poor beggers. 1. Our wounds, both internal and external: to wit, our sins, ingrati∣tudes, daily faylings, strong passi∣ons, &c. Ah! my sick and sinfull soul! how 2. Part. 1. Our wounds. weak and wounded are we in every degree, in all parts, in each member of body, and faculty of mind? 1. All is out of order, all is pride and self-love: how impenitent are we in sorrowing? how impatient in suf∣fering? how unconstant in persever∣ing? and yet how importune in sin∣ning? 2. My Vnderstanding is blind to good, clear-sighted to evil; My Will is perverse peevish, cold, sensu∣all; My memory is weak, full of idle images, subject to distractions. 3. My affections are vain, my passi∣ons violent, my inclinations vitious. 4. My Faith is little, my Hope less, my Charity least of all. 5. So for∣ward to extroversion and dissoluti∣on,
so backward to introversi and compunction, so full of imper∣fections, and immortifications 6. So little confidence in thy mer∣cy, so little patience in my misery and almost no performance of m good purposes. 7. So curious t censure others, so careless to keep m¦self and curb my own senses. F∣nally, all is self-love, self-will, self-conceit, self-seeking, pride, proprie∣ty, partiality, which are my dayly and dangerous diseases. O Father of mercies, and only Physician of my soul! Thou art al∣mighty, and all-bounty; these are my wounds and impurities, and if thou wilt, thou canst both cure and cleanse me; and if thou wilt not, I will remain content as I am: I am willing to continue weak, so I be not wicked; to be wearied and wounded, so I be not utterly tired, over-turned, defeated, and lose the victory: Cut, kill, crucifie, ô Lord, only spare me for eternity.
2. Our wants, for we are not only needy, but naked; not only poor, but beggers; who neither know how to deserve an alms, nor how to desire it. O my poor soul! What do we 2. Our wants. want? nay what do we not want? 1. True light, true liberty, true love, true life. 2. A setled attention, a simple intention, a serious introver∣sion, a sincere conversion. 3. Hu∣mility of heart, conformity of will, purity of soul, indifferency of spi∣rit. 4. Wisdom to know Gods will, strength to execute it patience to persever in it. 5. Resolution to suf∣fer for our Saviour devotion to sigh after him, diligence to find him, constancy to remain with him. 6. Courage to endure all, faith to forgo all, hope to expect all, charity to give all, and Confidence to gain all. Finally we want all we should have, Yet our loving Lord is ready to bestow on us all that he hath. O my God and all! Thou art all that I want; give me thy self, and all my wants and wishes will be at
an end. Thou art all my safety and my only security, all my refuge and my only centre; Vntil I can return unto thee, or wholly turn into thee, let thy Cross be my Purgatory and thy will be my Paradise, for other heaven upon earth I can never hope to find: Vntill then▪ I must be con∣tent to sweat and sigh under the burde of this mortal life, to sit like Job upon a dunghil, forlorn and forsaken by all full of soars and sorrows to remain a perpetuall and pitifull patient scarcely feeling pa∣tience in my self, and finding no compassion in others. 3. Our wishes and desires. What can a wounded wretch wish, but to be cared for and cured? What can a naked begger desire, but to be clo∣thed and comforted with some few raggs and crumms? What can a blind and cold person ask, but light and love? This, O my soveraign and sweet 3. Our wishes. Lord, is the sum and substance of all my wishes and requests. O that I could go out of my self, and get in∣to
thee! That I were dissolv'd from my loathed body, to the end I might dilate my heart in thy love, contem∣plate thy divine face in perfect li∣berty, and please and praise thy Ma∣jesty eternally! For in this prison of flesh, and vale of tears, I faint under the weight of my temptations, I fall under the burden of my trou∣bles, and I continually fail in the prosecution of my pious purposes. Oh! that thy will did so rule me, and reign over me, that it were a torment to decline never so little from it! O that thy love did so free∣ly and fully possess my heart, that there were no room at all remain∣ing for any bastard or base love of things created! Good Jesu! how truly happy and holy should I be, if I could clearly behold my own nothing in thy all; if I could embrace crosses as crowns, and swallow down all contemprs and confusions, as milk and hony! O when shall I be so elevated in spirit above my self, by extasie of love, as to be able and willing to humble my self under all crea∣tures
without repugnancy! Alas! shall I never be content to forsake all, and be forsaken by all? Yea having lost and left all fo One, to be left by that One, who i my All? and so remain quiet i my own nothing. How long shall I he wallowing in flesh and blood? how long shall I delay and dally in false loves? How long shall I sigh and not enjoy! seek and not find! live and not love? Come, my Lord, and love▪ Lord Jesu▪ come quickly: Let the fire of thy sweet love so consume in me al dross of self-love, and so transform my spirit into thee, that I may take all from thee indifferently▪ give all to thee liberally, and rest and re∣pose in thee ternally. Lord! let me be thine, or no∣thing! Love, or not live! The third Part, is the Conclusion, which consists also of three Acts. 1. Contrition, which is a hearty and humble sorrow for our sins, in∣gratitdes, disloyalties, tepiditie, &c.
O my God! how little did I love 3. Part. 1. Contri∣tion. thee when I so carelesly offended thy Majesty? Oh! that I had never sinned mortally, though it had cost me my life immediately! O that I were sure never more to swerve from thy sacred will and comman∣dements! Let me henceforth endure, dear Jesu, a thousand deaths of my body, rather than admit one deadly sin again into my soul! O pity and pardon my past follies and frailties, and prevent me with thy gracious blessings against future fallings. How great, ô Lord, is my obli∣gation to serve and please thee, were it but for thy favours conferr'd, thy benefits bestow'd, and thy love powr'd out upon me? and yet, un∣grateful wretch that I am, how poorly have I corresponded! Oh! that I had so deep a sense of my sins, that my heart might break with sorrow? Hide not▪ ô Lord, thy face from me▪ shut not up thy mer∣cy gates against me; for though I have most grievously gone astray, yet I am resolv'd upon an entire a∣mendment, correction, reformation
of my whole man: this strong re∣solution, (which is thy gracious gift), grounds my hope in thy good∣ness, emboldens my confidence in th mercy, and gives me courage and comfort in thy love. 2. Resignation in all our wan wishes, desolations, and distresses,  the divine will and pleasure. I am indifferent, O my dear Lord, 2. Resig∣nation. to sickness and health, to light and darkness, to delight and desolation: I am thine, (sweet Jesu)! put me where thou wilt, do with me as thou wilt, send me what thou wilt! I am content, not only to have no∣thing, but to be nothing, so thou,  my Lord, be all things unto me! I acknowledge my self unworthy to beg, and less worthy to obtain, and therefore I resign my self still to beg, and yet still to want, even that which I most wish; which is all light, all liberty, all love, all com∣fort, all content, yea even all vertu▪ peace, and perfection, so long as it shall please thee! O father, I am thine, ever thine, all thine body and
soul for time and eternity. Live Je∣sus only! 3. Complacence and confidence: the first, that our God is what he is; the next, that he will heal our wounds, supply our wants, satisfie our wishes, and turn all to our good. I am glad, ô my glorious Lord 3. Com∣placence, and Con∣fidence. God that thou art so worthy of all love, though I of all others am not worthy to love thee: I am as joyful for what thou art▪ o great God, as if all thou hast were all mine, and I will love thee in all I am and have, as being all thine. Thy Cross is my comfort, thy Will my well▪fare▪ and thy love my life; so that if I can but suffer for thee, do thy will, and follow thy love, I shall do all that is necessary. I am indeed dry, dark, and deso∣late, but since it is thy will I am sure it is my good, and therefore suffici∣ent for me, and satisfactory to thee. I hope thou wilt one day compleat thy own heavenly design in my soul, healing my wounds, supplying my wants, fulfilling my desires, and
filling my yet empty heart with thy sweet presence and perfect love: In the mean space I will say and sing; Live Jsus, Live my Lord, my love, my life, my all! whose name b blessed by all, whose will be accom∣plishd in all, whose honour be ad∣vanced above all. An advertisement, touching the precedent Exercise. 1. We must perform it dayly, diligently, discreetly, and with great confidence and courage: 2. Yet without propriety that it may nei∣ther hinder the operation of the Ho∣ly Ghost within, nor works of due obligation and obedience without. 3. If in the practise of this intro∣version, we find dryness, and feel little devotion we may somtimes, fitly resume (in lieu of the second part, or consideration), our won∣ted exercises, whereto our minds are more addicted; ending the same with the Conclusion here prescri∣bed, being ever duly disposed to follow the holy Spirits invitation to higher matters.
If we faithfully observe these things, we shall infallibly receive comfort, and speedily perceive our own unspeakable profit and pro∣gress by the practise of this pious exercise, as being indeed the end of all other externall devotions, and the short, sure, simple, and Rgia via, leading to a spirituall, devout, and divine life. The third Maxim. That of all internal Prayer, the affective is most noble, necessary, and profitable. FOr the end and drift of all dis∣coursive Prayer, is, to move, in∣flame, and enkindle our affections in the love of God and vertue; and therefore all discourses must be left by little and little, as our souls can more and more live in Faith, and simplifie themselves from materiall objects, images, and conceptions; and only tend to God by a sweet and secret motion of the will; & an a∣mourous correspondency to the Di∣vine
operations, and inward impul∣ses of his holy Spirit; treading down▪ and transcending all things under God, by discreetly forgetting and unknowing them. The fourth Maxim. That Meditation is a seeking, Contemplation a seeing of God. PRayer in generall, (according to As is more amply de∣clared in our Intro∣duction to the Spiri∣tual Pil∣grimage. the known division) is either Vo∣call or Mental. Mentall Prayer, is, An Elevation of our spirits into God: For as our Creatour is elevated above all crea∣tures, so our souls cannot see, talk, and treat with him, purely, and per∣fectly, but by leaving them all and lifting up themselves above them all. This Elevation is by means of Meditation, Contemplation, Thanksgiving, and Petition: Which 4. Essenti∣all parts of Prayer. S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 83. a. 7. are the wings by which our soul▪ fly to God, and the four essentiall parts of prayer: all others, (as Pre∣paration, lecture, examen, oblation,
points, conclusion, and the like), be∣ing only accidents, and properties thereof. The difference between Meditation and Contemplation, is this, We Meditate, when we seek after truths, and cast about for rea∣sons The dffe∣rence be∣tween Me∣dtation, and to affectionate our wills to the embracing of Gods love, Christian vertues, or works of piety and per∣fection: For our Vnderstandings are (as it were) the Steels, and our Wills the Flints, which no sooner touch each other, but the sparks of holy affections presently fly out, in∣flaming and actuating our disposed souls with heavenly love. We Contemplate when we stea∣dily Contem∣plation. and unmoveably behold God by Faith, believing that we have him truly with us, and within us; and so leaving all other subjects, ob∣jects, reasons and discourses, to look on him as present, love him in si∣lence, and feed on his only satiating sweetness. And this Contemplation is ei∣ther
Ordinary, or Perfect, or Tran∣scendent. Ordinary Contemplation, is when Contem∣platon is threefold. 1. Ordi∣nary. S. Tho. in. 3. dist. 32. our souls make use of their imagi∣nation, and such Species, as they have drawn from sensible objects, (first purifi'd▪ subtiliz'd, and imma∣terializ'd by the Vnderstanding)▪ to conduct them to their Creatour. Perfect Contemplation, looks di∣rectly 2. Perfect. upon the increated light, fixes her view upon the eternall verity, and perches immediate∣ly upon the divine being and perfe∣ctions, without any admixture of fancy, or assistance of creatures. This is call'd dark Contemplation, because our souls discharged from all inferiour objects, and receiving no enlightnings from below, are wholly daz'led, and (as it were) blinded with the bright splendour of Gods incomprehensible Majesty, framing no sensible Idea of him, but beholding him with the eys of faith by way of Negation, and simple adhesion to his divine Essence. Transcendent Contemplation, 3. Tran∣scendent.
mounts up yet higher above all in∣telligible species, and may fitly be term'd the Cousin german of bea∣tificall vision, and that last heaven whereunto S. Paul was rap't, where not only all use of Sense is extin∣guisht, and all acting of Vnderstan∣ding abolish't; but the spirit is to∣tally transported, absorpt and in∣flam'd with Seraphical love; and the whole inward man is drown'd, annihilated, extasi'd, and ineffably united to the Divinity: so that the thus elevated soul can nei∣ther say or consider, God is with me or, I am with God; for such adver∣tency or reflexion is sensible; where∣as this most eminent Contempla∣tion, imports an absolute silence and forgetfulness of our selves, and all things whatsoever, and an intire conjunction with our Creatour, as shall be hereafter further declared. The Practise of the four essential The 4. parts of Prayer, exem∣plifi'd, parts of prayer; is in this, or the like manner. Taking some mystery of our Sa∣viours life, (as for example, his
praying in the garden of Gethse∣mani) As is shew∣ed in the following Maxim. for our subject or ground∣work; we first examine our consci∣ences, ask pardon for our sins, and make resolutions of amendment. Secondly, we give up our will irre∣vocably to God, seeking purely his glory, and not our own gust, &c. Then we enter upon the first essen∣tiall part of Prayer, which is, Meditation; considering our 1. Medita∣tion. dear Redeemer in his bloody sweat, sighing, weeping, praying, and his disciples sleeping; Vpon this sad spectacle we make some discourses, concerning the person that suffers, the love wherewith he suffers, the subject for which he suffers. Then our affections being moved 2. Con∣templa∣ton. by these considerations, and infla∣med in Gods love, we slide sweetly and insensibly into active Contem∣plation, leaving all discourses▪ and looking (with our eyes of Faith) upon our suffering Lord. And having melted away in his 3. Thaks¦givng. loving presence, for so long time as our Devotion, or the holy Spirits invitation lasts; we heartily thank
him for having thus suffer'd for our salvation. And lastly, we implore his grace, 4. Petition that we may faithfully follow his steps; and above all, that he will grant us his love; which we must filially, affectionatly, humbly, and confidently beg at the conclusion of all our exercises. The fifth Maxim. That continual Recollection, is the Exercise of Exercises, and the immediate way to bring us to Perfe∣ction and divine Vnion. THat we may rightly conceive the verity of this Maxim; let us here in the first place take a view of the whole manner, meaning, method, and practice of this sublime exercise, in these ensuing Canons. 1. That all places are proper for Recollection, but the more quiet the more proper. Wheresoever we live, we may and should send up our Petitions, and
breathe forth our affections to our every where present Lord and lover, in publick and in private, in tempests and in calms, amidst all noises of employments, and in quiet corners of retreat: Job prayed well on a dunghill, and Jonas in the Whales belly▪ but Judas did not so in his Apostleship, and society of Jesus. Yet when solitude, silence▪ and repose may be obtained, they are the fitest 2, 2. q. 188. a. 8. instruments of Contemplation, and therefore most highly to be prized, and most diligently embraced: I Ose. 2. 14. will lead him into the desert, (says our Lord), and there I will speak to his heart. 2. That to pray on our knees, is a posture most pleasing to God. Let us not hunt for excuses, pre∣tend want of forces, nor cloak our laziness and languour, with that misinterpreted Maxim; That Prayer must have the quietest, easiest, and least constrained composition of body: but rather let us imitate our Lord & Saviour, (since all his actions are our instructions), whose humanity
lay often prostrate on the earth, Matt. 26. 39. Mark 14. 35. Ephes. 3. 14. praying, and adoring his divinity and let us follow the example of his Apostle, who frequently bended his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us, I say, submit willingly to this direction unless evident weaknes or infirmity hinder us, (for this adoration, and a far higher, is due to the divine Majesty), and therefore let us conceive the contrary to be a manifest tempta∣tion of our enemy. 3. That we must (especially at first), prefix to our selves certain and set times of Recollection. Let us not complain for want of conveniency, time, or opportunity to follow this exercise; for if our wills be ready, time cannot be wan∣ting: If our stomacks call on us for meat, or our bodies for warmth, we can find time to feed and clothe them: are our souls less considera∣ble? Let us rather steal time from our sleep and recreation, than want it for Recollection: And since all our time is given us by God, to be spent
in his love and service; let us re-give unto him at least the tithe thereof, and dedicate two hours, of four and twenty, (one in the morning, and the other in the evening) to his par∣ticular honour. 4. That we must frame an act of pure Intention, at our entrance into Recollection: as thus, I intend, ô my God, to employ each moment of the short time I shall remain in thy presence, in ado∣ring thy Majesty, admiring thy goodness, begging thy pardon for my offences, thy mercy for the souls in Purgatory▪ thy succour for the Churches necessities, thy assistance in such an extremity, thy strength against such an inclination, thy grace for the getting such a vertue: I am here on my knees, (ô Lord) to perform these homages, and pre∣sent these petitions. This Intention will virtually en∣dure the whole time of prayer, and make our seeming idleness, and stless, active and meritorious.
5. That we must briefly examine our Consciences, and produce acts of Contrition, self-confusion, humility, and resolutions of amendment; Saying from the very bottom of our hearts, in this or the like man∣ner: O my Lord, my God, my  thou deservest all praise, honour and service, because thou art good, gra∣cious and glorious: I will hence∣forth rather lose all, than leave thee (ô my God), without whom all is nothing: and since thou art so good in thy self, and so good to me, I will (by thy grace) never more offend thee: I will confess my sins, amend my life, perform my pe∣nance, walk carefully, humbly, o∣bediently, resignedly in thy presence: to all which I am principally mo∣ved by the infinite greatness, beauty, and bounty of thine own divine be∣ing, and perfection. In the particular examen of our consciences, (which must never be omitted in the beginning of our Re∣collection), we must mark to what vice we are most inclin'd, and wherin
we are most frail, and then trample Read the Spir. Confl. c. 7. n. 1. 4. that down, violently and resolutely: for this Captain-imperfection being conquered, the rest will soon yield and submit: And in the next exa∣men, we must impartially search and censure our selves, and see whether our falls in that kind, are still as frequent as they were formerly: and so set upon our enemy again with fresh fervour, vigour, courage: and constancy, till we have gotten the compleat victory. 6. That we must also make an Act of perfect Resignation, before we fall upon this Exercise, Leaving our selves intirely in Gods hands: He is our father, let him dispose of his children, and all that concerns them as he best plea∣seth, saying: O my Lord, my father▪ my lover! do with my life, my health, my temporals, my spirituals, my body, my soul, all, all, as thou wilt: I come not hither, to receive my own content, but to learn how to con∣form me to thy will in all things, and
to remain in that very state, (neither more, nor less, nor otherwise) which best pleaseth thy divine Majesty. 7. That we must bring with us, some theam, subject or groundwork of our Prayer and Recollection, As some mystery of our Saviours life, death, Passion; mans last ends; some vice to be conquered; some vertue to be attained: some divine perfection to be admired; or some jaculatory sentence to be so long stayed on, and chewed, till our souls feel themselves inclined to quit all discoursing and acting, and to re∣main quiet in an exercise of pure Faith and perfect Resignation, as followeth, 8. That we must look on God by Faith, and leave off all discourse, When lively conceiving by Faith, that our Lord is in us, and in all things, we humbly beg him to teach us the holy lesson of divine love: and so keeping our selves in his presence, bidding good night to all creatures, objects, and images whatsoever, (as
at this time nothing concerning us), we only and immediately eye the beloved object of our souls, and rest quietly, contentedly, silently, and sweetly absorpt into the Diviniy. 9. That we must carry God with us from our Prayer. Let us not leave our dear Lord in the Oratory, when we rise from Recollection; but bear him along with us continually in our hearts; talking still with him, and of him; eating and drinking in his com∣pany; sleeping with him in our arms; negotiating walking recrea∣ting doing all things with him, in him, for him, and ever praying and praysing him whom we have with us, and within us in the closet of our souls. 10. That we must put on Christ, and imitate his example in all our actions. Our Saviour Christ is our Ma∣ster, let his life therefore be our modell and his practises the pat∣terns which we always study to
express and imitate: Let us com∣port our selves in eating, drinking, sleeping speaking, praying, and do∣ing all things, as we conceive Christ did,▪ or would do upon the like oc∣casions, if he were now living upon earth in his humanity: Let us study to have this Rule of three alwayes at our fingers ends. 1. To think as Jesus did. 2. To speak as Jesus did. 3. To do as Jesus did: So striving to become (as it were) a Jesus Christ by imitation. Thus briefly we have the whole manner and method of this tran∣scendent Prayer, and divine exercise of Recollection: (to wit, (1.) To get into our retreat, (2.) and there placing our selves on our knees▪ (3.) Twice every day, (4.) to frame an act of pure Intention, (5.) To exa∣min our consciences, and produce acts of Contrition, (6.) and Resig∣nation, Then to (7.) think on the subject of our prayer, (8.) Leave off all discourses, and look on God by faith, (9▪) Carry God with us from prayer, and (10▪) lastly, put on Christ by imitation.)
Which is the short and secure way to divine union and Deiformity, being faithfully performed, discreet∣ly practised, and carefully accom∣panied with profound humility, perfect obedience, and an absolute submission to our spiritual dire∣ctor, as shall be more fully dedu∣ced in the subsequent Maxims. The sixth Maxim. That for this pure, perfect, and Transcendent prayer, no certain Rules can be prescribed. THe ground of all Prayer, even purest, is (as hath been said) some mystery, some devout sen∣tence, some vertu, or some jacula∣tory dart, &c. untill our affection be moved: Now if by continuall Introvrsion and peculiar grace, our Wils are drawn incontinently by the simple view of our beloved Lord, it is needless to use this ordinary means. When our affections are thus
enkindled, they break forth into flames of love and aspirations. Then the heat increasing, our Prayer grows more inward, our sighs deeper, our love greater, our hearts more ardent in their desires of U∣nion, which is active Contempla∣tion: Wherewith our souls being overcome and drowned in teir lovers presence, leave him to speak, move, act all things with us and within us, and so we sleep in pas∣sive Contemplation, freed from all objects of creatures, and sweetly united by pure love to our Crea∣tor. The degrees therefore of Prayer in generall are these. 1. Devout reading or mix'd Prayer. The de∣grees of Prayer, in generall, 2. Vocall Prayer. 3. Meditation or consideration. 4. When the affection is excited, Vocall aspirations. 5. The heat and light encrea∣sing, mix'd (partly Vocall, partly Mentall) affections.
6. Then more still, abstract, and simple Prayer; 7. After which, come's Active Contemplation. 8. And lastly Passive: In which estate, we may and must leave all Rules, and help our selves by experience, and the ght f Earth; but especially by following and humbly obeying the internall mo∣tion and attraction of the holy Spirit of God; upon whom chiefly depends the perfection of this great work. For further explication whereof, The seventh Maxim. That the Contemplative must be very observant of the divine visits, lights, and calls. WE must take heed of tying our selves to any set forms of words, points, or methods of Men∣tal prayer, after we have made We must ty our selves to no set me∣thods, some progress in this practice of Recollection; for this were directly to impede the free operation of
Gods holy Spirit within us: When therefore we shall perceive our souls drawn from discourses to this higher exercise, we must humbly and readily relinquish our former hold, and give scope and leave to the divine invitation; busying our selves no longer in our former fears and customs, but making use of such inward or outward expressions as fervent love will suggest and furnish us withall; conforming our selves perfectly to God's will, and cooperating with his grace: yet so, as not to run before it▪ which is the other extream equally hindring the divine Spirit's intention. Wherfore a quiet▪ indifferent, and industrious attention and correspondency (still willingly giving way to Obedience, for fear of delusion,) is the very best disposition to receive these heaven∣ly visitations. We must not then be troubled, But wil∣lingly quit our old cu∣stoms. if we break our old customs to embrace Gods will: he is the end of all our exercises, and the end being obtained, the means must cease. O how many are called by
God, who refuse and resist him, by tying their Spirits to this or that practice, and so bar him from ele∣vating their souls to himself as he pleaseth. They are loath to leave God in their usuall Devotions for God in Contemplation: If they begin not their prayers thus, and thus end them they think they have done nothing and remain wholly unsatisfied. Thus they be∣come proprietarians in their Wils, and slaves to their exercises▪ and because they cast not themselves absolutely into the two arms of Gods will and love, they make small pro∣gresse in the way of solid perfe∣ction. The eighth Maxim. That the only way to get true peace of mind, is to be totally Resign∣ed to God. REsignation, is a putting away of What Re∣signation i. our own Will, and a placing of Gods Will in its stead: it is (as it were) a certain transfusion of our
Wills into his; and an uncloathing our selves of all desires, but only that God's holy Will be fully ac∣complish'd in heaven and earth. Without this Resignation, we There is no true quiet without it. shall never find quiet in God nor our-selves; and the way to attain to it, is, to receive all that happens, as from Gods holy hands, and to be content to bear it as long, and in what manner, and measure he pleaseth: Let us not be troubled (under a false pretence of zeal) at this place, that company, &c. For it is not that, but our selves who stand in our own light. First then, let us seek God purely in all. 2. See him present in all. 3. Take from him all. 4. Return to him all. Let us be indifferent in all; praise God in all; bee quiet and content in all; in sickness and health; in light and darkness; in peace and trouble; in life and death: To be expell'd out of Paradise with Adam; to lye full of sores and sorrows with Job on a dunghil; to be forsaken by all with Christ on the crosse; to bee poor, needy,
naked, nothing; being ever ready to say cordially cheerfully, and with an humble and habituall in∣differency, Yes, O Father, yes, I will; It pleaseth thee, it shall pleae me; well, good, best of all: So be it, my good Lord, for time and eter∣nity, in this and in all things. A soul thus resigned, can never be troubled with any cross or calami∣ty, for she eys Gods Will and em∣braces his Providence in all occur∣rences; nothing toucheth her, but only tht his divine pleasure is not perfectly performed in her self and in all creatures. If in her prayers, she be seiz'd with How to be resigned in deso∣lations. drynesse, dulnesse, desolation, shee gratefully confesseth that state to be best for the perfecting of her spirit: She neither complains of, nor considers her inproficiency in her pious exercises; for she comes not to prayer for gusts or graces, but to doe Gods will, to receive what he pleaseth, to suffer what e permitteth. And because this Resignation is the Key of her true progress, she
makes frequent and fervent acts thereof in this or the like manner. Take my Will totally to thee, O Acts of Resigna∣tion. my God! govern it absolutely, and submit it perfectly to thine own: and because I cannot deliver it up, O my dear Lord, as thou desirest, take it from me by violence, cut off all impediments, break all my fet∣ters for me, bring me forcibly, and bend me absolutely to a blessed con∣formity with thy Will and pleasure. Let my whole employment in this life, be the practice of this point! Let me neither think of pain, nor look upon recompense; but resignedly behold thee, because thou art in thy self so good▪ so great, so glorious, so amiable, so admirable. I give up my Will, O divine Artist, to bee plung'd, purified, po∣lished, hammer'd, filed and fired in the fornace of thy love; O doe with it, and with me, as thou best knowest and pleasest: 'Tis for this I now come to prayer, and for this only; that I may be taught this happy lesson of denying mine own, and do∣ing thy Will. Or thus briefly;
Lord! I put my Will (and al that concerns me, inwardly out wardly, temporally, eternally,) int thy holy hands; dispose of all a thou pleasest, and direct me in a to doe thy divine Will. Having made this act and ob∣lation, let us reflect seriously upon what we have said and done; and that in giving away our Will, wee have put the best pawn wee have into Gods hands, and out of our own power: let us then beware of so infamous and ignoble an action, as to re-take the gift so solemnly delivered, or to doe again our own wil in any thing whatsoever. The ninth Maxim. That a Contemplative soul, must lay a solid groundwork to serve her in time of Desolation. FOr no soul can in this life be al∣waies elevated to the Divinity, and therefore will sometimes need a stay to rest upon, till she can take breath, and repair her forces
in order to her higher soarings in Contemplation. This resting place, This grond∣work, may be Christs humanity. may most fitly be the Humanity of Christ, which is the very way and dore to the Divinity; upon which (when she returns to her self after she hath been absorpt into the di∣vine light,) shee may confidently rely and repose: And without this prop, the higher shee ascends, the lower will be her fall back again. The tenth Maxim. That in this high Exercise of Recollection, the three Theologi∣cal vertues, Faith, Hope, and Cha∣rity, must perfect and possess the three powers of our souls, Vnder∣standing, Memory, and Will. IT is, in the first place to be ob∣serv'd, (as an undoubted truth) that a foul cannot (in this life) bee united to God immediatly by her understanding, memory, will, ima∣gination, or any other sense, power, or faculty whatsoever; but only by the means of Faith in her Under∣standing,
by Hope in her Memory and by Love in her Will. These three vertues must there∣fore Read F. Cisnerius. ch. 65. be introduced, (by our coope∣ration with the divine grace) into the said three powers of our souls, in the purest and perfectest manner that is possible, if we will arrive at the height of divine Union. 1. Faith, must so possess our Understanding, as to deprive it (for that present) of all other knowledge than that of God only. 2. Hope, must blot out of our memory all images▪ and thoughts of possessing any thing, but God only. 3. Charity, must uncloath our Wills of all affecti∣ons, joys, contents▪ satisfactions in any thing, that is not God only: For Faith, tels us of things which cannot be understood by naturall light and reason; Hope, looks up∣on such things as we have not, hold not, possesse not; and Charity, re∣tires our love from all creatures, to employ it all, on our Creator. The three powers therfore of our soul, must bee perfected by these three vertues; our Understandings,
must bee informed with this pure Faith; our Memories uncloath'd of all possession by this pure Hope; and our Wils fill'd with divine affecti∣ons by this pure Charity; Thus re∣fusing, denying, and emptying our whole souls, of all that is not this perfect Faith, hope, and charity. In this divine practice is found an absolute assurance against all the subtle snares of the devill and self-love; for a soul which is thus en∣tirely denuded and stripp'd of all active knowledge, possssion, and love of things created, must needs remain in God, in a certain tran∣quillity, passivenesse cessation, sleep, annihilation, absorption: so that there can nothing be found out of God, for Satan, sin, or sensuality to attempt against. But to facilitate the intelligence and practice of this high matter, (upon which foundation stands the whole edifice of this holy Recolle∣ction and divine Union) let us par∣ticularly deduce and exemplify, how the Understanding is to bee placed in pure faith, the Memory,
in pure hope, and the Will in pur charity. The eleventh Maxim. That our Vnderstandings mu be setled in pure Faith. THe practice of this point, is thu F. Cisneri∣us ch. 28. Having conceived some myster of our Saviours Passion, or the like for the subject of our prayer; we ruminate a while upon it, not  much to admire our Lord Jesus, a imitate him; and we desire to know his vertues, that wee may practie them in our own particular, by hi perfect example. Then we make an Act of Faith An act of Faith. saying; I firmly beleeve that this my suffering Saviour, is not only a man, but also my Soveraign Lord God: I beleeve that he being Al∣mighty, submitted himself to Pilat, being the creator became a crea∣ture, being immortal became mor∣tal; and that in as much as he i God, he is with me, within me, with∣out me, about me, above me, be∣neath
me, and so in all creatures which have a being. Afterwards, we speak further to our Saviour; O my dearest Lord and lover, Teach me now my lesson, that in requitall of what thou hast done for me, I may keep thee company in thy sufferings. And then we quit all discourses, thinking we have no understanding at all left, and looking on our sweet Saviour only by Faith, which hath this property (says S. Thomas) to S. Tho. of Aquin. elevate the soul to God, and free it from all creatures: For so long as there are discourses in our Un∣derstanding, images in our Memo∣ry, joys or tenderness in our Will, these powers have not pure God but sensible things for their object; because God being above all sen∣sibility, must bee found without all creatures; and consequently if we can be totally abstracted from all things created, we shall infal∣libly lay hold on our Creator. 'Tis therefore impossible (say's St. Denys. the divine S. Denys) to be truly united to God▪ unlesse we leave all
materiall operations, both in sense and in spirit; that is▪ unlesse wee lay aside all senses, all discourses, all imaginations, and all waies of humane wisdome: Till wee can doe this▪ let us not think to become perfect Contemplatives. The twelfth Maxim. That our Memories must bee setled in pure Hope. WHich is done by forgetting all things created▪ heaven, earth, our selves, all; & being wholly taken up with God, and absorpt in the Di∣vinity. So that by a simple remem∣brance that we are with God, (with∣out looking back to reiterate the same reflexion) we repose and slum∣ber sweetly in him; staying upon no image whatsoever even of our Savi∣our himself; for as he, (in as much as concerns his humanity), call'd Joh. 14. 6. himself the way; so he thereby in∣sinuated, that we were not to re∣main in the way, but to march on to our ways end, which is his Divi∣nity.
No mervail then, if we find in The do∣ctrine of mystcall Divines explica∣ted. the prescripts of mysticall Divines this doctrine; That to arrive at the height of Contemplation, we must leave off all sort of Meditation, though it be on the life and death of our Lord and Saviour; because in all Meditation, there is ever some∣thing that is sensible to which na∣ture applying it self, hinders our souls from soaring up to the fine∣ness and quintessence of Contem∣plation, which is (and can be) only a pure, spirituall, and insensible thing. 'Tis true, that the consideration of the life and death of our loving Saviour, is a most powerfull means to mount up to this contemplation of his Divinity; but let us not make that the end, which is but the means and way to it.
The thirteenth Maxim. That our Wills must be setled in pure Charity. THis is done, by withdrawing it from all sort of Joy proceeding from any natural, supernatural, or moral good. Joy, is a certain content which our wils take in somthing we prize; How all Joy is to be quitted and this Joy is either Active, when we may leave it; or Passive, when it is not in our power to quit it. Now, to take Joy and content in naturall goods, as, health, wealth, friends, &c. Or, wit, sagacity, dis∣cretion, &c. Is a plain vanity. To joy in moral goods, as in the exercise of vertue, &c. Is to imitate the Pagan Philosophers, who lov'd vertue for vertu's sake; and made that their end, which is only our way to it. Supernaturall goods, are either the gratuite gifts of God, as the working of miracles, &c. And we must uncloath our wills from any
Joy proceeding from these preroga∣tives, since they may be conferred upon reprobates: Or they are such goods as have relation to sanctify∣ing grace, as Faith, &c. Which if they are not accompanied with per∣fect Charity and final Perseverance, are nothing worth; and nothing, can be no true subject of joy. We may here take notice, how little reason some persons have to be troubled, because they have not these extraordinary gifts; when as they may be rather impediments, (if ill used, or over-much adher'd unto) than helps to divine Union: For (says S. Denys), all these things are S. Denys. not God, but only some effects of his favour, ordered by his provi∣dence to indear us in his love. Thus the three powers of our souls, Understanding, Mmory, and Will, are to follow their three ob∣jects, Faith, Hope, and Charity: Now our Lord is our loving Master, to whom we must have continual recourse, and who seeing our long∣ing desires and diligent indeavours, will infallibly instruct us in the par∣ticular
and unexplicable ways of this divine and perfect Contempla∣tion. The fourteenth Maxim. That this Exercise of Re∣collection and Annihilation, is the short and secure way to divine Vnion. FOr a soul which is truly humbled and annihilated, hinders not at all Gods holy operation within her, but leaves her self in his hands (not at all relying upon any discourse or imagination which is coined in her F. Cisnerius ch. 29. own mint), as a child in his mothers arms, who corrects it, cherishes it, washes it, and orders it, as she plea∣seth: And must not this needs be the shortest, nearest, surest and most proportionate way to divine Vnion? For before God created us, we were either nothing at all; or we were in Gods Ideal being; and so were God himself, because all that is in God is God; now his divine Majesty gave us our present being, and we losing
our selves, because we abused this our being, have no better way to regain our selves than by a no-being; that so we may come to be that which we are not, by denying that being which we are. O secure an∣nihilation! What can hurt that which is nothing? If we thus leave our selves will-less, self-less, being-less, we sodainly become plunged into the increated being of God, and living in him only by Faith, Hope, and Love, our enemy (as is already said) finds no∣thing to lay hold on, because our annihilated souls are no where but in God, where they are securely co∣vered and protected under his wings; and who is obliged, (if we may say it), to be our bulwark of defence, against all assaults of our enemies.
The fifteenteth Maxim. That all sorts of people may safely addict themselves to this holy exercise of Recollection. 'TIs true, that this way of Prayer is delicate and slippery, for Be∣ginners to tread in. Yet if they will faithfully observe those few neces∣sary precautions here prescribed, they will find (to their unspeakable comfort), that most true in them∣selves, which experience hath proved F. Cisnerius ch. 22. to be true in others: who though deeply ingaged in worldly vanities and affections, falling seriously, re∣solutely, couragiously and humbly, upon Divine Contemplation and Recollection, became, (after some time employed in purging their souls from sin, and setling them∣selves in vertue, according to coun∣sell and obedience), quickly truly, and totally changed; and were con∣ducted, (as it were by a nearer cut), without pains and tediousness, to higher perfection, than by the ordi∣nary
wayes of discoursive medita∣tion they could in long time have attained. For this is most certain, That If we use our ende∣vors, Go always gives us his grace. God denies not his grace to them, who do what ly's n their own power. Now any one of us (being assisted with Gods grace, and a good will), may do this which follows: 1. We may purge our souls from sin, by Confession, contrition, satisfaction; the means ordained by God and his Church. 2. Resigne and give up our selves, and all that we have, are, and can, to Gods Divine Majesty. 3. Adore him in spirit and truth, and present our selves before him, as his poor, needy, naked creatures. 4. Abstract our Vnderstandings, Memories, and Wills, from all ob∣jects and images of creatures, though never so good, high, and holy. 5. En∣ter into the obscurity of Faith, hope, and love, and leave our souls, as it were, sleeping and swallowed up in the abysses of the Divinity. Finally, all we have to do, is briefly this; We must leave our houses empty, that our Lord and lover may take
full possession: and then we may assure our selves, that at the very instant, in which our dear Lord shall find our hearts vacant, he will en∣ter presently into them, inhabit them, instruct them, and shew them how sweet he is to those souls, which Lam. 5. 25. truly seek him. Let us but persever constantly, and couragiously, in this pious practice, and we shall soon perceive our un∣speakable profit and progress: and though it seems to our selves, that we perform it with much impurity and imperfection; yet our continued endeavours, enabled with Gods concurring grace, will speedily raise us up to divine Vnion. The sixteenth Maxim. That outward Observances are helps in the practice of this Ex∣ercise. ALl externall practices, duties, and mortifications, as fastings, Read F. Cisnerus ch. 68. disciplines, retirements, vocal devo∣tions, &c. must be directed to fur∣ther
our internal conversation with God, and to help us in the acquisi∣tion of solid vertue and divine Vnion: for else they will but puff us up, and make us proud of no∣thing; profiting little, with much labour. Yet we must be wary of offend∣ing against the least ordinance of We must not offend against the least ordinance, &c. the Church, order of the House, or disposition of our Superiours; we must be conscientious, careful, and punctual in each ceremony and constitution; omitting nothing up∣on pretence that it is no great mat∣ter, not commanded under sin, or not much conducing to our spiritual advancement: For this is a token of an ignorant, unfaithful, or indis∣creet spirit. Gods will, is as well in little as in great things; and who so is careless in small matters, will soon fail in higher.
The seventeenth Maxim. That Prayer for others is best practised by a general intention. WE are not lightly to promise We must not light∣ly pro∣mise, the performance of particu∣lar Prayers for others, either living or dead. This sort of charity, hin∣ders, diverts, and dissipats our souls; breeding multiplicity, when as one thing is only necessary. We must therefore omit all such obligations, as may renew old affections; and Nor ob∣lige our selves to pray for others. labour to forget and forsake all, that we may more purely adhere to one, who is our all in all: wherefore let this generall, vertuall, and cordiall intention, suffice for all cases of this nature. First, that we desire to be par∣takers of all prayers, sacrifices, and merits of the whole Church mili∣tant and triumphant, as far as God shall please and we need. Next that we intend to pray for all, (and especially for them who have de∣sired it, or to whom we stand any
way ingaged), as we do for our selves. And this without any personall reflexion, is more profitable to our friends, and less prejudiciall to our selves: All which is to be under∣stood, when no peculiar promise, occasion, or circumstance, induceth a speciall obligation and perfor∣mance. The eighteenth Maxim. That all vertues are best pra∣ctised by addicting our selves to Con∣templation, or this internal Exer∣cise of Recollection. THe chief way to practise vertue, and prevent temptations, is not by a direct and formall reflexion upon them, which imprints images in the soul, and averts her from at∣tending purely to God in her inte∣riour: But by a vertuous and vigo∣rous The pra∣ctice of all vertues in contem∣plation. binding of her will to God: for being thus seriously and sweetly intent to him only, she can by a happy disdain forget and pass over,
or through, all occurring dfficulties; and so behave her self orderly and discreetly, as to content both God and man. Now that all vertues in particular are thus most excellently practised; it appears, first in Faith: Whereof Of Fath. we are taught to make a lively Act in the entrance to this exercise. And what way can this vertue be more heroically put in use, than to have our souls lifted above all sensible objects, all discourse, all humane wisdom? Hope is here practised: for we Hope. ly prostrate at Gods feet as poor beggers, hoping to obtain his grace in order to the performance of his Will; and expecting all good from his meer mercy. Here also our Love is exercised: Charity. because our Will covets nothing but to content our Creator, and rests separated from all that is not him∣self▪ for the sole love of him. Here is the practce of perfect Resigna∣tion. Resignation: for we wish neither quiet nor disquiet, glory nor infa∣my, pleasure nor pain, but only the
fulfilling of Gods Will, and a desire to be left in what state he best likes. Patience, must be here necessaily Patience, practised, in respect of the crosses and contradictions suggested by So called by Thau∣lerus. sensuality in this afflicting exer∣cise. All sin is here destroyed; For that is an aversion from our Creator, and a conversion to creatures: but Destructi∣on of sin. here (by means of perfect Faith) we remain (as it were) agglutina∣ted to God, and governed by his inward grace, which stills all out∣ward motions, stifles all concupi∣scences, and makes us unknowing and forgetfull of our selves, and all things created. As for Mortification it is here Mortifica∣tion. S. Greg. the great. practised in a high degree: For he that tasts the sweets of the Spirit, growes soon disgusted with all car∣nal delights; here the flesh is totally supplanted, and the senses quieted; for the eyes see no outward object, rhe ears attend to no noyse, rhe tongue remains silent, the understan∣ding contemns all curiosities, the
memory drawes a curtain over all images; the will is disingag'd from willing or nilling any thing; finally here is an entire destruction of all sensuality. Obedience is perfectly practised, Obedi∣ence. because the wings of discourse are clip'd, and the understanding capti∣vated by Faith. Humility can no where more Humility. appear, than when a soul is so annihilated, as to trust neither little nor much to her-self. O Rich no∣thing! What spirituall mines, what Masses of treasures doth a soul find, that hath thus happily lost her self in her loving Lord? Adoration, sacrifice, devotion, and Adoration and al acts of Reli∣gion. all acts of Religion, are here effectu∣ally practised; & in a word, if we wil be perfect, (sayes Thaulerus), we must learn this abstraction, that is, this suspension of discourse, and silencing all the workings of Fancie, understanding, memory, will; lea∣ving our souls to the absolute con∣duct of our Loving Lord, accord∣ing to the doctrine here delivered;
which is the short and secure way to make all our actions divine and celestiall. Some examples for the practice of this divine way of Prayer. 1. Receiving the Blessed Sacra∣ment, Exam∣ples. How to communi∣cate. I say to my heavenly guest; My God, make me partaker of these sacred mysteries, that my soul may enjoy the effects for which they were by you instituted: Then being secured by my act of Faith, that I have received his body, blood, soul, divinity, &c. I settle my self in this holy idlenesse and abstra∣ction before described, and remain silent and recollected, hearkning what my dear Lord will speak with∣in me. 2. So when I have taken some point of my Saviours Passion for How to pray. the subject of my prayer, I say; O my Lord, communicate to my soul what you endured in this mystery, to the end she may enjoy those effects, for which you suffer'd it, &c. 3. In like manner, when I goe to How to take our rest. take my rest, I say; Silence my
soul! for our God is here present, with us▪ and within us: and in this verity, Recollecting my self in him, I rest all night in prayer▪ (or at least, my Lord allows it me as if I did), because my soul covets to continue in the same happy abstraction re∣collection, and annihilation▪ during the whole time of sleep. 4. Thus a vertuous, introverted, And doe all things to God's glory. 1 Thessal. 5. 17. and recollected soul, doing what lys in her to rest alwaies in her Centre (which is God,) may fol∣low and fulfill the Apostles counsel, which is, to pray continually, and doe all things, (even her naturall and necessary actions, of eating, drin∣king, sleeping &c.) to Gods glory; and these pure desires and intenti∣ons, render them all meritorious. Some further advices for the pra∣ctice of this pure Prayer. 1. Before we thus recollect our selves in God, we may make what The first advce. acts we please; but after wee are entred into it we are to remain still, quiet▪ silent insensible, unmove∣able as a stock to be fashioned, or a stone to be carved, according to
the heavenly workmans design: we must leave our selves entirely to be moved and managed, as best likes our great Master, who both knows what bee our necessities, and how, and when, to supply them. 2. We must take speciall notice, The se∣cond ad∣vce. That as all Arts have their pro∣per tearms; So this sacred science of Mystical Divinity, hath its pe∣culiar phrases and expressions: Di∣vine matters may not bee handled according to the manner and me∣thod of School subtilties; but are to be represented only with sim∣plicity, piety, and a holy liberty of words, which Contemplatives make use of, without metaphysicall que∣stions and arguments. When therefore we find in St. How to under∣stand my∣sticall writers. Bonaventure, Eschius, Thaulerus, Rusbrochius, Blosius and others, That a soul divinely and intimately united to God, doth clearly see and experience what shee obscurely be∣leeved by faith; we are not to in∣fer, Read Cis∣nrius ch. 29. that shee therefore loseth her faith in this life; for this Mysticall experience takes not away our
faith, but fortifies, comforts, an clears it. So when it is usually said b these spirituall writers, That suc a degree of Contemplation, of ver∣tue, or of pure love, is the very t of perfection; It is not meant, tha a soul which is ascended thither can climb no higher in this he exile: for that highest degree o perfection hath a latitude of many degrees of grace; whereby a soul may still encrease in sanctity, and ascend each moment to a nearer vicinity with her Creator, When likewise we meet with this doctrine, A soul arrived at Union and Transformation, carries her self passively, she acts not but suffers, God doth all within her, &c. We are to understand, that such a soul doth very little or nothing in comparison of what she did in her former discoursive exercises; be∣cause she here in this state, finds all done in an instant; and therefore leaves those painfull employments, to repose sweetly in a kind of holy idlenesse of Contemplation and
Union with God; which pacifies all her senses, silences all discour∣ses, and lulls all her powers asleep with his charning love and ravi∣shing presence: All which notwith∣standing, she remains still here a∣ctually loving and looking on her Lord, and consequently is not to∣tally idle, but is in cooperation with his grace. In this sense, St. Denys said; The S. Denys. Ch. 7. de div. nom. Soul of Blessed Hierotheus was heightned to such a Union with God, that it sufferd more than it acted, because in this passive contempla∣tion, the soul follows not her ac∣customed operations: as wee see our Understanding works not so much, when it receives its aliment from a higher knowledge, as when it gets it by constrained and labo∣rious discourse; nor our Will in like sort, which commonly follows the motives proposed by the Under∣standing, to which it is united. The 3. advice, of the pra∣ctice of aith, Hope, and Charity. 3. That which is most impor∣tant in this exercise of Recolle∣ction, is the practice of Faith, Hop and Charity: For by the Act of
Faith, all our knowledge is anni∣hilated; by the act of Hope▪ all ou worth is evacuated, in denying ou own forces and relying meerly o Gods assistance; by the act of Cha∣rity, all our wills and affections (which are not God, in God, for God,) are abandoned: So that by these three Acts the whole ma is drowned, suppressed, stifled; and consequently our enemy the Devil finds nothing at all to lay hold on, nor any way open for his entrance into our annihilated hearts; but is constrained to return alwaies foiled and ashamed of his ineffectuall ef∣forts. 4. Beginners in this exercise, The fourth ad∣vice. For Be∣ginners. must vigorously apply themselves unto it for some time, till use and experience fashion them into a ha∣bit of recollection; they must there∣fore in the first place, carefully cleanse their interiour from all objects whatsoever and then lock up themselves wih God in this inward retreat: for as in vain wee shut our dores and windows▪ if the thief bee already hid in our
house; so the closing of our senses from exteriour objects, furthers little or nothing, if in our interi∣our there lurks any thing which is not God. 5. In all our vocall and men∣tall The fifth advice, of our atten∣tion to God. devotions, our chief aym must be Attention to God: There are three sorts of attentions. 1. To the words, which is good. 2. To the sense, which is better. 3. To God, (who is the only end of all our prayer), which is best of all. Let our S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 83. a. 13. thoughts therefore abstract from all created objects though never so good, and fix stedfastly upon the increated and essentiall goodness. This is the main thing wee must aspire to during the whole course of our life, not only in our prayers, but in all our practices, To bee more attentive to our Lord and love, than to the action we have in hand: This is the Philosophy of perfect lovers, to live more truly where they love, than where they breath. 6. It is not here intended (by The sixt advice. the precedent doctrine), that a soul
should not at all meditate upon the That from Meditati∣on we must rise to Contem∣plation. subject or theame of her prayer nor chew it first by attentively con∣sidering it: No, this is not disswaded but counselled: Only we add, th assoon as affections are sufficient kindled, and that our elevated sou can procure to put themselves upon the aforesaid abstraction, recollecti∣on, and contemplation, they pre∣sently embrace it, and leave off all discourses which are proper for Schools & Sermons, not for Prayer and Contemplation: It sufficeth us therefore to remember the mystery, apprehend it throughly, imprint it deeply in our hearts, and then to observe the prescribed order: For when one hath sufficiently heard and understood what can be said for his good, he needs neither hear nor speak more of it but presently fall to practise: In this case to hearken after new things, seems more tend∣ing to satisfy curiosity▪ than to the increase of inward vertue as he that eats before he hath disgested his former meals▪ nourisheth bad humours, but nothing betters his
own bodily strength. 7. When therefore any distinct The 7. advice. That we must stay upon no objects or images. notions, forms, or images, intrude themselves into our memories, let us not stay in them, but return a∣morously to our Lord present with∣in us, think no more of all those varieties, than is absolutely necessary for the knowledge and perfor∣mance of our duties. The best way therefore to increase our inward strength of spirit. is to work cou∣ragiously and suffer patiently in si∣lence and solitude, forgetting all creatures, unkowing all objects, transcending all humane events and accidents. What though the whole world perished? though the frame of heaven and earth were dis∣solved? What is that to tee? follow thou thy Lord and love. For indeed he that hath his mind diverted and The 8. advice. How God is to be proposed to our un∣derstand∣ing, in an eminent and Nega∣tve way. distracted with such fancies in pray∣er, is little attentive to Gods pre∣sence. 8. As concerning our Vnder∣standing and Will: We are to take notice, that when the Vnderstand∣ing proposeth God to the Will, as
just, wise, powerfull, or under an particular attribute; the Will is ele∣vated by that sight alone; and so that act of love is limited lock' up, and less perfect, than if God were proposed under a most emi∣nent way and as the supream be∣ing, surpassing infinitly all that can fall within the verge of humane conceptions in this life. Though therefore the Vnderstanding may and can propose some positive and particular conception of God to the Will; yet it is far better, and of higher perfection, to do it in common, confusedly and negative∣ly: for our truest knowledge of God, S. Greg. the great. l. 5. moral. c. 26. is to know that we can fully know nothing of him. This is to know by ignorance; and it is signified by Elias, covering his eyes with his cloak when God passed before him; because all our knowledge is dis∣proportionate to God, and therefore we must shut our eyes, totally▪ if we will contemplate him per∣fectly. O holy ignorance! What Pesant Read Cis∣nerius. c. 28 is so simple, what Soul, (indued
with ordinary capacity) is so sensless, as not to conceive, and comprehend the easie art of this excellent man∣ner of Prayer: for having been ad∣mitted to Faith, and adorned with the gifts of the holy Ghost, in bap∣tisme, she hath all that is required to make her capable of this Con∣templation. We deny not, but that she stands in need of Gods special assistance to elevate her to this height; for this Maxim is always presupposed; That God concurs to humane acts, as the first cause, and to supernaturall acts, as the authour of grace. As for passive or infus'd Contemplation as it is altogether supernaturall, so it is totally Gods work: and this we possess when we See S. Aug. l. 19. c. 2. de civit. Dei. The 9. advice. To take and make use of what is most to ou spiri∣tual pur∣pose. cannot at all meditate, and yet per¦sever in this holy amorous, and negotiative idleness. 9. If what is here set down for the practice of this Prayer, seemes intricate or tedious to any one; let such a soul make choice of that she conceives expedient for her comfort, and leave the rest: for it is not in∣tended that she should be tied to
this or that way but only that she should be convinc'd and confirm'd in this truth; That to behold God with a simle understanding (which is the same thing with active Con∣templation) is more pleasing to him, and profitable to her self, than to seek after him by the sublimest di∣courses. Retire therefore (ô contemplative souls!) from all sensible and intel∣ligible objects; and recollect, ab∣stract, annihilate, and lose your selves in God: for there (even in the most refined conceptions), your enemy may find ground to pitch his nets but here you are in sanctuary and safety where he can never reach or touch you: Here, and here only in this silence from all discourses; in An exhor∣tation to Contem∣plation. this solitude from all creatures; in this idleness from all action; in this retrait into the Divine Bosom; in this resignation and conformity to Gods will; you may taste his sweetness in it's proper source: here and here only are full and over∣flowing measures of delight. Crea∣ted pleasures scarcely reach the soul
before they are consumed in the senses; and therefore can never quench our inward thirst after God: 'Tis he alone is capable to content and quiet us, who is our first begin∣ning, and our final end: And who so dives into this truth, will make higher account of one crum of this contemplation, than of all earthly crowns and kingdoms. The nineteenth Maxim. That corporal austerities, must be alwayes subject to obedience. AUsterities, are somtimes neces∣sary, somtimes obligatory, and somtimes dangerous. 1. By necessary austerities, are Austeritie are either 1. Necessa∣ry, meant the restraint of our senses, tongues, conversation, self-will: and in this sort of mortification, there is no danger of excess. 2. Those austerities which are 2. Obli∣gatory, commanded, must be preferred be∣fore them which are voluntary. 3. Corporal austerities are most dan∣gerous 3. or dan∣gerous. & least profitable, when per∣formed
by order of our own Will, without entire submission to Supe∣riours direction, for these are more worthy of reprehension, than praise. But the chief austerity of life, consists in the continuall applica∣tion of our selves to interiour re∣collection, The chief austerity is continual Recolle∣ction. introversion, and contem∣plation: For here we perpetually chain up our thoughts, yoke all our senses, reform our appetites, correct the disorders of our passions▪ regu∣late our actions, shackle our Wills, and admit nothing into our souls▪ which may retard or trouble their totall tendance to their Lord and lover: So that in the opinion of all spirituall men, this is the most rigo∣rous mortification, and most meri∣torious way of doing penance. For what is this continual prayer, but an absolute bondage of the whole inward and outward man? since we may not tast, touch, will, do, any thing we have a mind too. And though this blessed slavery may bring us in time to a heavenly tran∣quillity of life; yet the due and day∣ly practice of this denial and death
of the Will, doth so extenuate our truly mortified bodies, that they ra∣ther need somtimes to be cherished, than to be any further punished. The twentieth Maxim. That Contemplatives must alwayes have the seven verities, (which concern the ivine nature, whereupon all Contemplation is grounded), either habitually, or for∣mally in their memories. 1. THat God is an eternal being: 1 God is an Eter∣nal, he hath ever been, and ever will be, and 'tis impossible for him to be otherwise. 2. That God is an interminable 2. Inter∣minable, being: he so fills and penetrates all things, and all places, that his being borns them, and not they him, who is an infinite fullness. 3. That God is a simple being: 3. Simple, he is all in all creatures all without them, and all in each part of them; because having in himself no parts by reason of hs infinit simplicity, he must necessarily be with all his
perfection, wheresoever he is. 4. That God is an unchange∣able 4. Vn∣change∣able, being: he can neither change in respect of place, because he i every where; nor in respect of time, for he is eternal; nor in what con∣cerns himself, by reason he is an infinite perfection; and therefore there is in him nothing superfluous to reject, nor defective to repair. 5. That God is an independe 5. Inde∣pendent, being: All things depend on him, live in him, are conserved by him; and all being is ordained to the glory of his bounty, whence they had their beginning. 6. That God is an all-sufficint 6. Al-suf∣ficient, being: he remedies all that is amiss, supplies all that is wanting, com∣municates all that is good, satisfies all desires, without the least dimi∣nution of his own infinite perfecti∣ons. 7. That God is an incompre∣hensible 7. Incom∣prehensi∣ble being. being: no created under∣standing can comprehend what God is; All our knowledge is too silly and short to reach his heights; yet our spirits are dilated by the
light of Faith; and though our Creator may not be comprehended by the creature, yet he may be known by whom he pleaseth, when he pleaseth, and as much as he pleaseth. These verities, and other infinite perfections of God, give light to our dark and weak understandings, in order to the knowledge of his Sovereign Essence. The 21. Maxim. That Jaculatory Prayers, are the nearest dispositions to Contem∣plation. IF a soul finds great difficulty to This is the do∣ctrine of S. Bonaven▪ circa fi∣nem myst. Theol. unwind her self from worldly imaginations, and to apply her self to God by recollection; let her con∣tent her-self in breathing forth heartily these or the like short words: [O my Lord, when shall I love you? When shall I embrace you?] Let her repeat them affectionatly and perseverantly, and she shall sooner be inflamed with divine love,
than by the subtle consideration of the greatest secrets of heaven: for 'tis the Will which unites us to God, not the Vnderstanding. These acts of the Will, are the spiri∣tual wings of the soul to lift her up & unite her to her beloved obiect, they are short, sharp, and swift darts and desires, shot by our burning hearts, and reaching heaven in an instant. Our forefathers the Saints frequent∣ly Read the 10. colla∣tion of John Cas∣sian. c 10. used them, and most highly pri∣sed them: for being short, they trou∣ble not the memory; being fervent, they rowse our dulness and dryness to affection and devotion; being frequent, they still renew our at∣tendance to Gods presence, and put us perpetually in mind of our duties. The practice of this exercise, is Read the Spiritual Confl. ch. 13. n. 12. to take occasion from all objects, actions, and accidents, to pray▪ and praise God Do we eat? let us give God thanks. Do we walk a∣broad? Let us praise him who pro∣duced all things which we behold, from the abyss of nothing. Do we look up to heavens beauty? Let us
admire the Creator in his crea∣tures? &c. Have we sinned, or are we tempted? Let us lift up our hearts to God, and say, O Lord, permit me not to fall and offend thee. To dy? alas, I am content when thou disposest: but to sin? O prserve me from this disaster! Other times let us burst forth into aspirations of love; as My beloved for me, and I for him. Of Resignation; as, Not my will, ô Lord, but thine be done. What do I desire in heaven or earth, but thee, ô my God. Of pure inten∣tion; as, 'Tis for you, ô my God, that I fast; 'tis for your sake that I obey my Superiour; 'tis to please you that I study, work, pray, &c. Your will, ô Lord, is mine; your content is mine: I have no other I or No, but as you will or will not; all my plea∣sure is only to please you, &c. This rule is to be observed, that An obser∣vation. though all jaculatory prayers are good yet those are best, most profi∣table and powerfull, which our hearts, (moved by God), con∣ceive of themselves, though they be expressed in words never so plain and simple.
Nor is there any need of much variety of aspirations; for one onl word, being often and amorousl repeated, may serve for many days when our souls find therein gu and profit, and speak unto him whom they look upon as presen with their eys of Faith. This exercise is most easy, and most efficacious: and they who shall piously persever in it, shal soon find their hearts inflamed with God's love, and changed from all worldly affections. The 22. Maxim. That the Presence of God, is the great exercise of Contempla∣tives, and the shortest way to divine Vnion. THis exercise is called great, be∣cause Why call'd the great ex∣ecse, God himself taught it in the worlds infancy to his faithfull servant Abraham: I am thy God, (saith hee), and thy prote∣ctour, walk in my presence, and thou shalt be perfect.
It is called the shortest way to And shor∣test way to union. divine Union; because it is a sum∣mary of all the exercises of prayer, and which alone will conduct our souls to the hidden treasure of per∣ction, and replenish them with those celestiall riches, which our loving Lord is wont to communi∣cate to his dearest friends in this life. God is present in severall man∣ners How God is present in divers manners. according to our understan∣ding: 1. He is every where present by his essence; which being infinit, cannot bee contained within the limits of any place. 2. He is every where present by his power: He moves the heavenly orbs, fixes the earth, governs all his creatures, &c. 3. He is particularly present in heaven, by the demonstrations of his glory. 4. He is specially present in ho∣ly places, by grace, benediction, and readiness to hear their Petitions, bless their persons, and accept their sacrifices of praise, who shall
there unanimously meet to present them. 5. He is especially present in the hearts of his holy people, by the in∣habitation of his holy Spirit. 6. He is especially present in the consciences of all men, where he sits as witnesse, and judge of all their actions, good and bad. For the practice of this exercise Seven si∣militudes for the practice of Gods presence. of Gods presence, we may help our thoughts with these seven simili∣tudes, stirring up in our souls an ardent desire to feel the like effects of his Al-present Majesty. 1. How the soul is in the body; all in the whole, and all in every part of it, moving, animating, in∣forming all; giving it life, beauty, &c. 2. How the meat we eat is dis∣gested and changed into our sub∣stance, &c. 3. How a little worm lying in the warm Sun-shine is environed about with the beams made bright, hot and as it were, burned and in∣flamed &c. 4. How a black coale amidst a
great fire, is ignified, all on fire, and well nigh all fire. 5. How a little piece of paper, is pearced through with oyl falling on it; which by degrees dilates it self all over, that the whole seems rather oyl than paper. 6. How a small quantity of wa∣ter in a vessell of wine, is swallow∣ed up, lost changed, annihilated, and turned into wine. 7. How a sponge in the midst of the Ocean, is all compassed within and without, absorpt, imbued, pos∣sessed, and as it were, inebriated with water, &c. O that we could alwaies have S. Augu∣stin. de verbis Do∣mini c. 3. this actuall faith and thought, that God stands a present witnesse and judge of all our doings; that if we goe forth he spies us; if we goe in he sees us; if we light the candle he observes us; when wee put it out, he also marks us; should wee not behave our selves as becoms so holy a presence? should we not be very impious and impudent to give up the reigns to sin, and sensuality? O that wee would alwaits ru∣minate
and remember this reall verity, That God is the great eye of the world, watching over our acti∣ons; an ever-open ear, to hear all our words; and an unwearied arm to crush sinnes into ruin how spee∣dily would sin cease amongst us? how soon should we obtain an ha∣bituall fear and reverence of God? What greater ingagement can wee have to walk unblameably, than to consider wee act before that judge, who is infallible in his sen∣tence, Boetius l. 5. de con∣sola. all-knowing in his informa∣tion severe in his wrath, and powerfull to inflict punishment? This perpetuall eying of God▪ is properly a building to him a Cha∣pell in our hearts, into which we may securely and sweetly retire in the midst of all worldly varieties. This is to walk with God▪ (as E∣noch did;) and to be in continuall conversation with the Divinity. A more sublime way to practise Gods presence: is To look alwaies upon him with∣out any discourse, by a simple act of
lively Faith: not to question how, or in what manner he is present; nor to A hgher way to practse Gods pre∣sence. fix our eys upon his inaccessible splendours; because it is yet nigh for us, we are but travellers, and we must expect untill the bright day of eternity shine upon us and shew him unto us as he is in himself; we must not think here to behold him, but be content to beleeve him pre∣sent with us and within us, and that we live, move, and have our being in, and by him. In this manner of practising God's presence, it is not needfull to form any conception, or repre∣sentation of God; as that he is here by us, or in any designed place, or in such a form or figure: for wee speak here of the presence of God as he is God, which excludes all these imaginations: And therefore it sufficeth to behold him only by Faith, simply beleeving that he is here and in all places, that he fils the whole universe, and each corner and creature therein contai∣ned S. Augus. and that he is more inward to us than we are to our selves.
The 23. Maxim. That Humiliation is a relique of Gods love. WHen any occasion is offered us, of humiliation, abjection, or mortification, let us not exa∣mine, how, whence, or from whom it comes but joyfully accept it, embrace it▪ and kiss it, as a rich re∣lique, and royall token of God's great love and favour towards us: Let us force our sensuality to swal∣low it down and disgest it; for though it be bitter, it will purge and perfect our spirits. The 24. Maxim. That Humility is the solid ground∣work of all Spirituality. WE are to grave this necessary lesson, not only upon our Oratory, and in all our books▪ but upon the very dores of our hearts, and in the depth of our souls: Learn
of me, who am meek and humble∣hearted, Christ's lesson, is humility. Mat. 11. 29. and you shall find rest for your souls. O sweet Saviour! O meek and mercifull lamb of God! teach me this lesson, which I stand in such need of. Oh, that I could per∣fectly practise it? How purely and peaceably should I both live and dye? Meek and humble spirits con∣verse together like mourning tur∣tles, like innocent lambs, and like corporall Angels, turning the bles∣sed family where they live, into an earthly Paradise, &c. In the externall practice of this vertue, wee are to observe chiefly these three degrees. First, to forbear, forgoe, deny, Three points for the externall pactise of humility. and submit our own judgements, heartily, humbly, and really, not only to our Superiours, but also to all others, casting our selves at their feet, yea and under their feet to be troden on as dust and dirt: And this, as near as may bee, for Gods sake. Secondly, not to care what o∣thers say or think of us; which point, which that other, Of not
medling with what concerns  not, will soon bring us unspeakabl peace and purity; thinking alwaies with our selves; What is that to thee? follow thou thy Saviour. Thirdly, to get a habit of pa∣tience, condescendence, yielding and being silent, in all occurrences and contradictions. In the internall practice of hu∣mility, we are also to observe these three degrees. First, to confess and acknow∣ledge Three points for the inter∣nall pra∣ctice. our selves more wretched and wicked, impure and imperfect un∣gratefull and unworthy of all grace and favour, than any soul crea∣ted. Secondly, to be glad that others treat us for such, as we really take our selves to be; and repute us for∣lorn and forsaken creatures, un∣worthy of all company and com∣fort. Thirdly, to dye utterly to our selves, and be totally mortified in our appetite and desires renoun∣cing absolutely all propriety, and self-seeking: These short words,
contain infinit perfection. And to move us powerfully to the prosecution of this vertue, we may thus question our selves: 1. Doe not all things humble Motives to humi∣lity. themselves to serve me, both in heaven and earth? The Saints to pity me, the Angels to protect me, the Mother of God to remember me, th Son of God to redeem me, and God himself to remain with me, reign within me, comfort me in my prayers, feed me in Communi∣on, releeve me in tribulation? 2. O strange Humility of my Saviour! Not only to descend un∣to, but into a wicked worm; not only to eat with a sinner, but to be eaten by a sinner! O strange pride in me, to see the Lord of heaven and earth, so humbled in his In∣carnation, Passion, Communion, and yet to see a begger so proud, a sinner so lofty minded▪ and dust and ashes have such difficulty to stoop! 3. Upon earth: Doe not all things serve me for body or soul? some to nourish me, some to cloath
me, others to cure me, others to correct me, others to comfort and instruct me? Even my betters, su∣periors; and confessors, must hum∣ble themselves to me, because my pride will not bend to them. All creatures must be subject to me, and I will not be subject to my Creator? Alas! what mean I? when shall I begin? O secure and sweet Humility, when shall I pra∣ctice thee? 4. Doth not all the world, all that I am and have; my body, my soul, my actions, my sufferings, my sins, furnish me with sufficient ar∣guments of Humility! What was I from eternity? What am I? what shall I be? What have I that I have not received? what have I received that I have not abu∣sed? &c. 5. Upon whom doth the Holy Esay 66. 2. Ghost promise to rest, but on hum∣ble and quiet souls? Stoop O dust and ashes! O amiable Humility how necessary art thou for me? how pleasing to God and men? With what comfort and quiet dost
thou enrich thy possessour? O hea∣ven upon earth! What doe I not get by Humility? what doe I lose by Pride and presumption? &c. The 25. Maxim. That Silence and Solitude, are our heaven upon earth. THese are the proper instruments S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 188. a. 8. Lam. 3. 28 of Contemplation; where our souls sit silently and solitarily lifted up above themselves; by trans∣cending all things created, and uniting themselves to their Crea∣tour. Wee must observe them dili∣gently, Read Cis∣nerius. ch. 39. discreetly, and devoutly; not out of a sullen or melancholy humour, or in a disdainfull and disgustfull manner, or out of pride and singularity, or to wave mat∣ter of mortification, or to avoid the company of such as we brook not and have a version from: but with an internall cheerfulness, to converse with God in spirituall joy and fervour. And the ordinary
practice of them may be reduced to these four points. First, To retire our selves, and 4. Points for pra∣ctice. keep exactly some certain times of silence every day, which (our cal∣ling considered), we have enjoyned our selves unto. Secondly, to decline impercep∣tibly divers unnecessary and imper∣tinent occasions, extroversions, af∣fairs, companies, curiosities, &c. Thirdly, to speak modestly and moderately in time of speaking. Fourthly, to yield easily to others, and not contest in words: For all consists in denying and hum∣bling our selves. Now in Contemplation, there are three sorts of Silence. 1. When all fancies, imagina∣tions, In Con∣templati∣on there is a three∣fold Si∣lence. and species cease in the soul; So that she is silent as to any crea∣ted object; desiring no worldly thing, but driving from her all that is not directly God, to whom only she is silently, joyfully, and quietly attentive. 2. When in this great calm, she fits with Mary at her Lord's feet,
in a certain spirituall idleness; as it were saying; I will hear what my Lord speaks within me: to whom he answers; Hearken my daughter, and behold, and forget thy people and thy fathers house. 3. When she transforms her self all into God, her Will tasting his sweetnesse, and she slumbring in his bosome, in absolute silence, de∣siring nothing more, because fully satisfied. So that here is a threefold silence. 1. When no creature talks to us; as having no objects of them in our Understandings and Memories. 2. When we talk not to our selves; as, totally forgetting our selves, and converting our inward man to God alone, with a receptive sub∣jection; climbing above our selves by the act of Faith, whereby our Understanding is united immediate∣ly to God. 3. When God talks not to us, but leaves us in the enjoy∣ment of this divine sweetness, and elevation of our selves above our selves. O heavenly silence! This hath been by some xperienced,
but can be by none sufficiently ex∣plicated. The 26. Maxim. That the perfct love of God, and hatred of our selves, must be our constant and continuall employment. WE cannot love God; except we hate our selves; and if How to know whether we love God, and hate our selves. we would truly know how far we are advanced in this love and ha∣tred: First, wee must weigh, how willingly we can, and doe submit our judgement, in things contrary to our naturall inclination; Se∣condly, how quietly we can, and doe suffer such things as are oppo∣site to our sensuality, as hard usage, pains, confusions, &c. We must not conceive we have any degree of pure and perfect love, untill our affections are so totally transformed into God, that he free∣ly and fully possesss our spirit, guides it, enlightens it, inflames it, elevates it, how and when he plea∣seth; His love being our only light
and life, and we desiring only two things in the world: First, to love, see, tast and enjoy God only; Se∣condly, to be humbled, despised, reviled, rejected, reputed repro∣bates for his love. O sweet life! O loving Lord Jesu! What heaven? what happiness is this? We may stir up our souls to an ardent love of God, by these and the like motives. First; What is the object of our Moives to love God. love, and who is the authour of all our good? Is it not God only? What have we, (nay what hath he), that  he hath not given us, meerly of love and for love? thereby to woo, to win, to wed our loves, our souls, our spirits to himself? 2. Who created, redeemed, con∣verted,  called, and conserveth us untill this present? What hath he not done and endured to purchase our love? 3. What is the greatest love in  the world of mother, wife, friend, life, soul? &c. Is not God more than all this to us, yea all in all? What did we ever best love? Did
we love God as much? O let us blush, sigh, and be ashamed at our gross ingratitude. Live henceforth O Jesu, my only Lord and love. 4. Whose image doe we bea?  whose bitter death was our ran∣some? whose body and blood is our daily bread and drink? who suffred so much for us and from us, expected us so patiently, invited us so sweetly, received us so merci∣fully? O Lord what shall we doe or say? We are bound in thy chains of charity. We love thee; We are all thine, &c. 5. Upon whom doe wee depend  each moment for our whole being both of nature and grace? Our bodies depend not so much on our souls, nor our life on air, as all things, body, life, soul, depend upon thee, O powerfull Lord God! O that I had whole worlds to offer thee, infinit bodies to suffer for thee, and innumerable souls to love thee! 6. Have we not an inclination  to love? For what were we crea∣ted? Can we better employ our
love than upon God? Doth any Creature better deserve it, or more desire it, than our amiable Crea∣tor! 7. Can any thing else fully quiet  us in this life, or totally content us in the next? O no: Sweet Saviour, thou art my only safety, security, sanctity. Oh what did I ever love in the world, wch did not in the end bring me remorse and repentance? Is not all mix'd with many occasi∣ons of sin and misery; all vain, inconstant, fading, foolish, deceit∣full? Our souls, ô Lord, are created S. Augustin to and for thee, and untill they turn and return unto thee, they will ne∣ver find perfect peace, quiet, nor content. What quiet had the Prodi∣gal child, till he return'd to his loving Father? Jerusalem, Jerusalem, return to thy Lord God; Why wilt thou seek after puddle water, when as thou mai'st freely quench thy thirst at the fountain head? I thirst, ô my Lord, give me this water. 8. To whom must we have  recourse, amidst all the distresses of this miserable life? Who will or
can comfort us in the pains and pangs of death? Who must be our Judge after death? Who must be our eternall bliss and beatitude? Thou only, O our Lord and love▪ art only all this and all things else to our souls. And shall we please a creature to displease thee our Crea∣tor? No Lord, we will dy to all creatures, that we may live to thee eternally. 9. O my soul! Upon what canst  thou employ thy whole stock of love more reasonably, than upon him, who for thy love freely forfeit∣ed his own life? 10. To whom canst thou give up  thy self more profitably, than to him who promiseth eternal life for thy love; and that he will be all thine, if thou wilt be all his? 11. To whom canst thou con∣vert  thy heart & wed thy affections more necessarily; than to him, who threatens eternal death, if thou love him not? O King of glory, why menacest thou us with hell, if we love not? Can there be a heaven without thy love, or a hell with it?
Or is there any heavier hell or death than not to love thee? Had we not better cease to live, than leave to love? Oh! what shall I answer, if I love not? 12. What can make a soul  more truly honourable and happy, than to love God as he command∣eth? What privilege, to be admit∣ted into privacy with God, to enjoy his company and conversation, enter into his secret cabinet? eat at his table, repose on his breast, be his minion, become all one with him? O honour most admirable! O holy∣ness most amiable! O happiness most Angelical! O life! O love! The 27. Maxim. That Confidence in Gods goodness is the main support of our Spiritual Edifice. WE must be confident that our Loving Lord, will, First, par∣don our sins; Secondly, strengthen us in all necessities; Thirdly, bring us finally to eternall happiness. And
to strengthen this Confidence, we must deeply ingrave these two Max∣ims 2. Maxims in our souls, and then we shall easily be content to leave our selves in the arms of his paternall provi∣dence, and lose our selves in the abyss of his piety: First, That what ever befalls us, comes immediately Rusbro∣chius. Read the Conflict. c. 10. n. 3. 4 either from his will, or his permis∣sion; Secondly, That he will turn all▪ (even our frailties and failings) to our spirituall good. We may fur∣ther weigh, what wonderfull cause Motives to put our Confi∣dence in God. First, in heaven we have, 1. Viscera misericor∣diae. 2. Vulnera misericor∣diae. of confidence and comfort we have; First, In heaven; where we have 1. Bowels of mercy, in God the Fa∣ther: we cry dayly to him as his Son taught us; Our Father which art in heaven, Will not a good fa∣ther forgive the fault, and forget the folly of his returning and e∣penting childe? 2. Wounds of mercy, in God the Son, the least of which was sufficient to redeem a thousand worlds: whereby we being reconcil'd and made his friends, will he deny us any thing that is neces∣sary? Is not each drop of his dear blood a motive of loving confi∣dence, and able to melt us into a
filiall dependency on him? 3. Pro∣mises 3. Promiss misericor∣diae. of mercy, in God the Holy Ghost, who hath assured us of his continued comforts till the worlds consummation. 4. Words of mercy, 4. Verba misericor∣diae. when he said; O why will you pe∣rish, you of the house of Israel? As I live I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he turn to me and live. What hard heart would not be touch'd with tenderness, and say reciprocally; As I live, ô my Lord God, I detest all sin and convert my self totally to thee, that I may live with thee, and love thee eternally. O holy Conversion! O happy con∣tract! 5. Brests of mercy, in the 5. Vbera misericor∣diae. Mother of Jesus: O Jesu, be to us a Jesus! O Mother of Jesus, be to us a Mother of mercies, Let the care of thy honour be ever in our hearts, and the care of our welfare always in thine. 6. Castles of mercy, in the Angels, who are before and behind 6. Castra misericor∣diae. us, to watch over and protect us. 7. Oracles of mercy; the prayers and suffrages of all the Saints pity∣ing 7. Oracula misericor∣diae. our misery, and purchasing par∣don for us. If we put all this to∣gether,
we shall find all heaven for us. What matter then if hell be against us? O thou of little faith, whereof canst thou be doubtfull or fearfull, &c. Secondly, On Earth in the Church Secondly, On Earth. militant, what is not for us? Sacra∣ments, Scriptures, Examples, Prayers. If we go not to heaven where is the fault? What could God do that he hath not done? and what could we have more than we have, for our consolation and salvation? Who can choose but take courage, com∣fort, and confidence? Thirdly, Look upon Christ Je∣sus. Thirdly, In Christ. 1. Why came he into this world? 2. How did he carry him∣self in it towards sinners, both in his life and death? 3. Why was he called Jesus, and tearmed a friend of Publicans and sinners? 4. Why did he y, That he came to call sin∣ners, and not the Just, and to do mercy and not justice? 5. What access and comfort gave he to all sinners? 6. What was his last will and testament, &c? 7. What his last words? Father, forgive, &c.
Fourthly, Ponder Gods Perfe∣ctious. Fourthly, Look on Gods per∣fections. 1. He is our maker, we the work of his hands: Doth not each Artist love his own handy-work? Hath not every one a naturall proneness, to protect, improve, profit, and perfect his own? Even so our loving Lord takes care of us; he hides and harbors us, as the Hen her Chickens under her wings; he defends us as the apple of his eye: If a mother can forget the fruit of her womb, yet will I never forget you (say's our Lord), because I have graven you in my hands and heart. 2. He is All-mighty, All-wisdom, All-goodness: Put these together; I have a Father and Maker, that loves me exceedingly; he knows my necessities, and what is best for me; he is rich enough to provide for me: Will he let me perish? will he reject me? Then reason thus further with your-self; In whom shall I confide if not in God? In my self or others? We are all inconstant; all ignorant of what is best; all impotent, and want means to help: O how much better is it▪ to trust in God than men?
Fiftly, Reflect upon your own Fiftly our own expe∣rience. Experience. 1. Whom did God ever deceive in his promises? 2. Who ever called heartily on him and was refused? 3. Hath he not hitherto merveilously protected and preser∣ved you, and disposed all for your good? Why then should you doubt or distrust his providence for the time to come? No Lord, Blessed is the man that trusteth in thee: Heaven and earth may perish; but no tittle of my hope in thee, my Dear and only Saviour. This shall be my Anchor and stay: If he kill me, I will trust in him. I will rest Secure in his Divine providence▪ and endea∣vour to get an habituall and stable trust in his paternall protection, (without any care or fear)▪ as doth a child in his fathers bsom: This is the ready way to become unmoveable and immutable, quiet and content. Is he God? Is he good? Is he my God? my Father? my Jesus? Jesus cru∣cified? Is his goodness infinit? Doth he want power, wisdom or Will, to pardon, protect, and perfect me?
I must surely have little faith, less hope, and no love: If I will not take thy words, (O Lord) thy works, thy wounds, thy life and thy love for secure pledges of thy care towards me, and sufficient motives to place my whole confidence in thee. The 28. Maxim. That the measure of our pro∣gress in Perfection, is the Confor∣mity of our Wi with the divine will. 1. FOr our perfection consists in love: and the greatest signe of love, is to have one and the same Will with the beloved: So that look how much we have of our own Will, so much less have we of Gods will and love, and consequently are so much the further from the Union of our spirit with him. 1. In this exercise of conformi∣ty, consists all perfe∣ction. O what holiness and happiness, what privilege and prerogative is it, to have one Will and spirit with
God? Is not this to be a Saint, an An∣gel, a little Christ or a little God? Did not Christ say; Those that do the  of my Father, are my Brethrn, si∣sters, mother, and kindred? Oh who would not change Wills with God? 2. All things come from God, and for our good. 2. What can befall me, (sin only excepted, wch is from my will) but from thee my most sweet Lord, & lo∣ving Father? Good and bad, comfort & confusion, life and death are from thee; And what can happen to me from thee, but for my good▪ If my Father be my Physician, shall I not drink the chalice he tempers for me? What better sacrifice can I offer up to thee than my will? In all other oblations, I give but a part of my self, or somthing belonging to my self: But in this I give the prin∣cipall, leaving no right to my self; nay I am no more my self, but thy servant and slave. 3. Why were we 3. This is the end of our life, and being. placed in this world (ô my soul) but to perform the will of God? Why entred we into the school of perfe∣ction, but to learn to practise it purely and perfectly? To what end are all our prayers, communions,
exercises, &c. but to know Gods holy will, and to follow it? What profit have we reaped by following hither to our own will? What will become of us, if we continue in it? What means is there to amend it for the future, but humble obedi∣ence, and absolute submission of our will in all, and to all, leaving all to God, doing all for God, and recei∣ving all from God▪ that he only may be all in all? What can endamage me but my will? what will? past, present, or to come. The past I de∣test; my present is, that Gods will be done; for time to come, I desire this my will may stand irrevocable for ever. How often have I done the will of others for my own ends, to please them or pleasure my self? and shall I not do now as much, to please my Lord God? Yes, Lord, I will what thou wilt, neither more nor less, without exception without reservation, withot delay. 4. What fruits shall I reap by this 4. The pro∣fits of this exercise. Conformity of my Will? 1 Having no will, I can neither sin, erre, nor be deluded. 2. There is neither
judgement nor hell for me. 3.  shall find peace and rest▪ and rema constant and content amidst a chances and changes; and so beg my Paradise of delights, in this  of tears. 4. I shall be freed from all troublesome fears, scruples, d∣quiets, indiscretions, and illusions, both in prayer, and in the practce of vertue: All which are deriv'd from the disorder of my Will, and for want of this true conformity and indifferency. 5. This gives every thing I doe▪ leave, or suffer, a dou∣ble grace, merit, and crown. O only sweet, short and sure way! who would not leave, yea loath his own Will, for so many profits and pleasures? 5. What doe heaven and earth, Angels and Saints but Gods Will? 5. All Creatures doe the will of God. What doe the souls in hell, but suf∣fer for having done their own Wil? What did Christ Jesus, and Bles∣sed Mary upon earth? The one said, I came not to doe my own Will but his that sent me: The other said, Behold, O Lord, thy handmaid, doe with me as thou wilt. I say also,
with heart and mouth; O my Lord, I am entirely thine, put me where thou wilt; give me what thou wilt, use me how thou wilt, so thou wilt goe with me, and give me leave to bear and embrace thee with the two arms of perfect conformity, and lively Confidence. 6. What made the Apostles, 6. Exam∣ples of this Con∣formity. Martyrs, Virgins, so constant and content, amidst their torments and trials? What made those Saints so couragiously to defy the devils (flocking about them like so ma∣ny Lions and Monsters); If God S. Antony, & others. have given you power and permis∣sion over us, take us, devoure us, hurry us headlong into hell, we will not contradict his Will; but if not, why doe you labour in vain? What made Job so patient on his dung∣hill? Abraham so resolute to sa∣crifise his son? And finally, what made Christ in his bloody sweat, to cry out; Not my will, O Fa∣ther, Lu. 22. 42. but thine bee done? All this was caus'd by the Will of God, which they desired to follow and fulfill, to the last gasp and drop of
their blood. O holy and happy souls! When shall I imitate you? O my sweet God, that thou wouldst say of me, as thou didst of that thy servant; I have found a man David. according to my heart, who will doe whatsoever I will: Or that I could say as heartily as he did; My heart is ready, O God▪ to accept and execute thy holy Will in all things whatsoever! O my Lord, let all slf-will and self-love, hereafter dye in me! and let thy only Will and love remain and reign in my spirit; For I am most sure, till I faithfully follow this rule, I shall never find reall peace or content. The 29. Maxim. That Vnquietness of mind is the bane of Devotion, and curse of Contemplation. FOr it is not a single and simple Disquiet is not a single e∣vill. temptation, but a source whence many spring, a monster with many heads, and the greatest evill, (sin
only excepted) which seizes on the soul: Let us therefore shun it with all possible speed and dilligence, and refuse to give it the least en∣trance into our hearts, upon what pretence soever. If we perceive our selves inclin'd How to prevent it. to be easily troubled; let us duly practise these two points: First, carefully fore-arm and fortifie our interiours, against all future con∣trarieties, crosses, and contingen∣cies, by devoutly performing our morning prayers and exercies of Recollection. Secondly, prudently put off company and occasions of extroversion, bridle our tongues till the tempest be blown over, hide our selves in a corner▪ turn our souls to our Saviour, read something of devotion, and (in matters of mo∣ment) impart our minds to some vertuous friend, &c. If we will alwaies keep internall A rule to keep in∣ward peace. peace, we must observe these three rules: First, We must doe nothing only to edify others, without a fur∣ther end of God's honour; nor any thing, which may justly displease,
distast, dis-edify, or contristate them. Secondly, wee must not be eager, eurious, or solicitous to please or satisfy our selves, yea or to perform our duty's to God-wards, by doing all things in print, perfectly and exactly. Thirdly, All our pleasure must be to please God; yet wee must not please our selves in the pleasure wee find in serving and pleasing him. For generally it suf∣fiseth, that wee are heartily wil∣ling, and quietly carefull to serve our Creator, please him in all things, and displease neither him nor any one in any thing and so goe on in our Introversion with perfect freedome and liberty, sim∣plicity and purity, without further fears or reflexions. Let us, I say, keep on soft and fair, according to order and obe∣dience, in our exercises of Humility, recollection, and inward conver∣sation with God; checking and We must curb im∣portunate desires. curbing all importune pretensions, desires and resolutions of doing strange matters; and resting con∣tent in what God sends, and our
poverty affords; neither running before his grace, nor beyond our own strength. Let us leave all intermedling Of little medling comes great peace. with others doings and affairs, looking only to our own care and charge, thinking all others more perfect than our selves; and being truly glad, that our dear Lord is purely loved and perfectly served by them: This is a sure way to a∣void many stumbling blocks of our enemies; to begin to tast the joys of heaven in this life; to live with∣out solicitude, and dye without fear or trouble. For the further practice of this Further practices of this point. important point, and to obtain this happy quiet and content of mind, First, We must carefully avoid and contemn all curiosity, to see, hear, know, or have a hand in what concerns us not. Secondly, we must labour to be, (as it were), blind, deaf, dumb, insensible; passing by all things, or letting them passe by us; For all is vanity, [Salomon.] One to one, [S. Giles.] My God and all, [S.
Francis.] Whatsoever hath an end; is nothing, [S. erese]. What is that to thee? follow thou me, [Jesus Christ.] Thirdly, What is it we will see, hear, or know? novelty, vanity, a transitory toy, a foolish fable, an impertinent object, a flying sha∣dow, a false deceit. Fourthly, to what end? Either it will defile our souls; or disquiet our minds; or distract our spirits; or divert our intentions; or im∣print idle images, or excite our passions; or renew our vitious af∣fections: All which, are great hinderances in a spirituall and con∣templative course. Ah! poor souls! what amiable and admirable light and love, doe we leave and lose for a vain curiosity? &c.
The 30. Maxim. That Crosses are to be suffered, not sought; to be taken, not made; to bee conceal'd, not complai∣ned of. IT is far beter to take crosses, when, where, and how we find them, than to make them our selves; for this is losse of time, and a nourishment of Self-love. Let us not therefore cast our selves indis∣creetly upon difficulties, or seek out occasions of humility and pa∣tience; but be ready to receive, and indifferent to accept such as befall us, and wee shall find enough to doe. Let us make as little outward shew as may be of our inward suf∣ferings; but keep that secret to our selves, till obedience and just rea∣son induce us to reveal it, and then let us doe it simply, sincerely, and resignedly. O what peace, what profit, what pleasure, shall we find in this reall proceeding? Complaints
are commonly accompanied with self-seeking, and small troubles are sooner cured by quiet suffering, than much shewing or speaking of them: Doth this cross come from See the Conflict. ch. 10. n. 2. men; and is it not rather permit∣ted and provided by our beloved Lord from all eternity, to purify us from pride, to purge us from the love of creatures, and to dispose us for heaven and happiness? The 31. Maxim. That Temptations cannot hurt us, if we cast our whole care upon God. WHen temptations, passions, 4. Rules of pra∣ctice. repugnancies, or repinings, rage in the inferiour portion of our souls; wee are presently to reflect 1. That wee have made choice of God's love for our end, and resolve to stand to it till death. 2. That we must willingly submit to the trouble, as long as it shall please God to permit it. 3. That we must continue in our practices of piety
and Recollection, as if we felt no afflictions, neither thinking on them, nor fearing them; but assu∣ring our selves that nothing can in∣jure us, so long as wee rely upon God and resent our own weakness. 4. That Prayer may be our chief refuge, and support against all their surprisals: and therefore we may say briefly and heartily; Perfect thy strength, (O powerfull Lord,) in my weakness; let thy mercy triumph on the throne of my misery: I detest from my heart whatsoever is contrary to thy holy will in this point N. and all things: I resign my self to suffer it, as long and in what manner thou pleasest, though never so cross to my crooked na∣ture. Sweet Saviour remain with me, and let thy love reign in me, and then I neither want other com∣pany, nor desire further comfort.
The 32. Maxim. That Desolations, derelictions, afflictions, distractions, are to be transcended by generous Resolu∣tions. IN time of desolation, &c. we are not to dispute with our selves nor examin the causes or circumstances of our sufferings, for we are then neither competent nor indifferent judges, but we must referr that un∣till the time of Prayer; talk not now with your passionate and par∣tiall heart, but speak to God about some other thing; transcending and dissembling your trouble in some such manner; Good God! when shall this Pilgrimage have an end? My life is a continuall warfare upon earth, wherein all is vanity, all is affliction of spirit, all is full of frailty, misery, instability. O Lord, what is man that thou shouldst mind him? a weak reed, wagg'd with eve∣ry wind, and contristated with every little cross and contrariety, burden∣some
to himself, and troublesome to others, &c. There is more profit, and less danger to suffer Desolation, than to abound with Consolation; to desire sensible love and contrition, than to feel it; to resist temptations, distra∣ctions, passions, with patience and resignation, than to have none at all. It's a signe of high and heroick vertue, 1. To be Resigned, when it seems we neither are nor can be resigned. 2. To be Patient, when we are fullest of motions to anger. 3. To be Humble, meek and quiet, in time of sickness, serious business, multiplicity of employments. 4. To be Constant and invariable in all the diversities, and varieties of our own changeable humors, dispositi∣ons, inclinations, internal invitati∣ons, external instigations. Let us not think we lose our time when we are involuntarily distra∣cted in Prayer, but rather comfort our selves in being deprived of all comfort, because we then remain in that state in which God would have us.
Let us conceive our selves as within the walls of a strong castle; without which are great noises, out∣cries, tumults, alarms, but we safe and secure within, sleighting their vain attempts: If our desires be to love God, and our intentions to be with him, and we hold no discourse with other divertisments, we have made a good and profitable Pray∣er, &c. The 33. Maxim. That Perfection consists in putting off all Propriety, and putting on pure and naked Charity. THis will make us love God a∣bove all things, and all things in and for him only; uniting our spirits to God, and in him to our neighbours. The practice of this spirituall un∣cloathing of our souls. Behold, ô my Lord and love! I generally and totally renounce all things but thee; casting my self into the arms of thy most holy disposi∣tion
and protection: O my soul! return sweetly to thy seat of rest; repose quietly and confidently in the bosom of Divine bounty; Re∣main here without diverting or di∣stracting thy self to other objects; Rely securely upon his mercy and providence, cutting off incontinent∣ly all superfluous cares and solici∣tudes, and protesting thou desirest nothing but the advancing of his honour, accomplishing of his will, his love, and himself. Take courage, my naked soul! for if thou art uncloathed som∣times, and deprived of thy Lovers embraces, feelings of his comforts, and pleasures of his presence, it is only, that himself alone may pure∣ly possess thee. O my Lord and lo∣ver! Look upon this soul, which I have endeavoured to strip entirely from all sensuall affection: there∣fore I have not only abandoned, but hated, Father, Mother, brethren, sisters, lands, living, liberty, yea and my own life, that I might become thy disciple: And were it yet to do a∣gain, I would cast off Mother, and
run over Father to come to thee my loving Jesus: Confirm, O Lord, my courage! Live O rich nakedness! Live my beloved to me and I to him! Let me see no one but only Jesus! Let alone his other gifts, though never so excellent and holy, I am indifferent to leave them or keep them, in the manner and mea∣sure he pleaseth▪ 'tis naked Jesus I only seek and sigh after. Uncloath me then, my Lord, 1. Of all sin, great and small. 2. Of all affection to it, even the least venial. 3. Of all curiosity. 4. Of all sensuality. 5. Of all in∣ordinate passion. 6. Of all vanity. 7. Of all self-love and self-will. Let me be reduc'd to nothing; Put off my self, and put on me thy self crucified; Deprive me of all that distasteth thee; that thou mayest say of me, This is my beloved son in Mat. 12. 18 whom I please my self: This is my disciple whom I Jesus love; This is my rest for ever; Here I will dwell, because I have made choice of it: In this heart, is my harbor, there you shall infallibly find me.
The 34. Maxim. That Zeal and eagerness must be temper'd with Moderation and discretion. WE must moderate our natural vivacity, activity, and agility of spirit, by shunning all precipita∣tion, and indiscreet forwardness and fervour: Soft and sure; Let us look before we leap: Let us take our eyes in our hands; For that which is well done is twice done, and a thing warily begun, is well nigh half brought about. Let us lend our hands, and not give our hearts to any work; Let us endeavor to per∣form all our actions with a free and disinteressed mind, without which all is drudgery and slavery. Let us not be over eager: Perfe∣ction consists not in multiplicity of action, but in simplicity of intenti∣on; not in variety of exercises and devotions, but in peace of mind, and purity of heart; not in say∣ing
or doing much, but in suffering and loving much, &c. Let us sometimes check our im∣portunate spirit, as Jesus did Mar∣tha: Martha, Martha, thou art Luc. 10. 41 troubled about many things, when as there is but one thing only neces∣sary, which is, A real, cordiall, and totall Abnegation of thy self in all things. Let not indiscreet zeal serve for a cloak to cover our passionate hearts, and inward hatred of others: True Zeal is ful of compassion free from indignation; and perfect cha∣rity either will not see what is a∣miss in others, or seek out the best interpretation of it; excusing the fault, and pittying the party. The 35. Maxim. That we must never rely up∣on our own naturall judgement, ex∣perience, and knowledge. THis hath deceived many, and cast them headlong into confu∣sion & despair: hence so many Apo∣stasies,
rebellions, dissensions, di∣visions and scandals in Religion: O how pleasant, beautifull, and edifying a thing is it, to see persons of great perfection, glorious en∣dowments, venerable for age, ho∣nourable for learning, renowned in dignity, &c. to be truly hum∣ble, supple, simple, soft like Wax, capable of any impression, and condescending to others reason and command. Blessed are the meek, humble, and obedient spirits; for God will not permit them to goe astray, or be deceived. The 36. Maxim. That we must seek no comfort in any creature. FOr the practice of this; We must The pra∣ctice. cheerfully forsake all, and be content to be forsaken by all: re∣sting only in God, by prayer, pa∣tience and confidence. Adieu friends, familiars, Confessours, counsellours, books, exercises, An∣gels: Welcome solitude, crosses,
eclipses, shames, wounds, want, darknesses, desolations, deaths: Yes, O Father because thou so pleasest. Is the creature in which I delight more loving, lovely or beautifull than God my Creator? Hath it been more bountifull or benefici∣all tome? Can it more justly re∣quire, or more liberally requite my love? Can it make me holy or happy, quiet or content? Shall I leave light for darkness, life for death, substance for shadows, All for nothing? Answer impartially, and resolve effectually. The higher practice of this The high∣er pra∣ctice. Maxim, in order to Con∣templation, is, To estimate things according to Read the Spir. Con. ch. 4. n. 3. their reall value: And then, Alas! what comfort can a devout soul, which hath tasted the sweets of her beloved in Contemplation, find in the best of creatures? How far are they from affoording her any solid and substantiall satisfaction in her spirituall sorrows, sadness or deso∣lation!
Therefore shew wisely and care∣fully keeps her self to holy Recol∣lection, resigns her self absolutely to the divine pleasure, continues sted∣fastly in the presence of her Crea∣tor; seeks to treat with him one to one; and leaves worldlings to fol∣low their appetites, as the horse and mule which are void of under stan∣ding. Oh! how much more hap∣piness is it to suffer in the sweet company of God, than to enjoy all such false and phantasticall plea∣sures, as all creatures can con∣fer, in the company of men: My soul refuseth this comfort, I re∣member my God, and in him I am only delighted. And indeed, they who faithfully The true Contem∣platives are never sad or so∣licitous. and fervently addict themselves to spirituall Recollection, are neither sad nor solicitous, but only in shew: For what can they want, who are with God? In him they find gardens to walk in, fountains to bath in, pallaces to dwell in, dainties to feed on, and all plea∣sures to delight in, with such infinit advantages, that they ravish'dly
cry out, My God and All: These contemplatives need not your com∣passion, O worldlings! They are not so drownd in melancholy, so plung'd in sorrow, so little enjoy∣ing themselves, as you esteem and censure? No, your own poor souls are seriously to be pitied, which are so wide of wisdom, and so wedded to sensuality, as to relinquish true life and liberty, sincere comfort and content, for the shadows & smokes of the world: For this is most certain, that whosoever leaves Re∣collection to look after earthly con∣solation, enjoys neither God nor the world; whereas a soul which retires her self from the world to possess God, enjoys truly both God and the world together.
The 37. and last Maxim. That we must walk, and perse∣ver, in these our Spiritual Exer∣cises, with the two feet of Faith and Obedience. To per∣form this we must 1. Leave all for one. All others for God Our selves for God God him∣self whē he withdraws himself, By recol∣lection. By abne∣gation. By resig∣nation. 2. Leave one for all. 3. Leave one and all. The practice of this Maxim con∣sists in these five points. 1. TO have an ardent desire, af∣fection, The pra∣ctice. and intention, to love, see, please, and enjoy God. 2. To curb our senses from all curiosity, vanity, apprehensions, &c. which may either defile our souls, or disturb our minds, or distract our spirits; Either seduce us from the right way, or affright us when wee are in it. 3. Then we must take Jesus by
the right hand, by faith and confi∣dence, abandoning our selves to∣tally to his mercy, and resting in his providence, with a filiall indif∣ferency. 4. We must take our spirituall guide by the left hand, by punctu∣all obedience. 5. In our way, wee must have these or the like thoughts, recol∣lections, and devotions. Well, I am going to heaven; to my Fa∣ther and Creator; to my eternall rest and Center; to see, love and praise my God for evermore: There only is true life, true love, true light, and true liberty: O Jesu! how long! O Jerusalem, when! Jesus is with me, and for me, him I will follow, after him I will sigh, and for him I will suffer, come what can. If I erre, let my guide look to it, for I am obedient; If I stumble, Jesus will not let me fall, for I am faithfull. If I cannot have the fruit of Pe∣nance, I will keep that of Obedience; What I cannot get by Recollection, I will procure by Resignation;
What I want by Indifferency, I will supply by Confidence; though my Deserts fail, my Desires shall prevail. What hath an end, is no∣thing. Live Eternity! Sometimes let us hearken to Je∣sus speaking. O my child, my ser∣vant, my spouse: What are all things to thee? follow thou me: Let all pass, I am here: All is one, and One is all; trouble not thy self with multiplicity. Be silent, and I will answer for thee; be content, I am thy sufficiency; Be indifferent, all is my will; be confident, all is wel: I forgive thee all thou demandest; I will give thee all thou desirest; I will never desert thee, nor with∣draw my eys, hand, heart, from thee; therefore goe on quietly, couragiously, confidently. Other times let us answer him meekly and faithfully: O good Jesu! save me, for I am thine; O sweet Saviour, support me, for I am weak; O loving guide, direct me, for I am blind, &c. Thus boldly let us keep on our way, 1. Letting passe all, by insen∣sibility.
2. Out-passing all, by fer∣vour. 3. Passing under all, by hu∣mility. 4. Passing over all, by ge∣nerosity and elevation of spirit. Under this Maxim, are solv'd ma∣ny materiall doubts arising in our daily progress to perfection. The first Doubt. If we fear that God will forsake us, by reason of our Ingratitude and disloyalty? 'TIs true, we have been, are still, and ever shall be ungratefull, tepid, and defective in our corres∣pondencies to the divine love and light; and God may in justice for∣sake us, and yet be a good God; but wee must be confident in his mercy that he will not do it, for Jesus sake, in fury and rigour; though hee may sometimes with∣draw the feelings of his presence to try our loyalty: His holy will be done: Let us never say, God will forsake us; but say, We will never forsake God: Let us first say, Doth
God love us? who can doubt it? And doe we love him? If we will, we doe. Let us never say, We shall never amend, all is lost; But let us often say, We are sinners, wic∣ked, wretched, weak, none more than we: but it truly grieves us to be so; we will endeavour to reme∣dy all; sure we are, our God is Al∣mighty, all-mercy, all-meekness, him we will serve, and in him we will trust in despite of nature, and maugre the devill; and for him all desolation, and death it self is most welcome unto us. The 2. Doubt. If our sins trouble us, in respect of Confession and Satisfaction? LEt us cast off servil fear; and be confident that what is past is pardoned, by Gods mercy and our humble confession; & what is to come may be prevented by Gods grace and our dilligence and endea∣vours.
The 3. Doubt. If wee can neither Pray with fervour, nor Suffer with patience; neither feel God present, nor be con∣tent in his absence? LEt us have recourse to these four things, which will supply our defects, and satisfy for our faults. 1. Obedience. 2. Resigna∣tion. 3. Confidence. 4. Good de∣sires. Therefore in all our fears, crosses, and troubles, let us make use of these four points in this or The pra∣ctice. the like manner. O my Lord God, who deservest from me all love and honour, and whom I desire to serve with all my soul; behold I come out of confidence in thy mercy, having no other end, but only to please and praise thee: wherefore I resign my self to thy will, beseeching thee to turn all to thy glory and my good.
The 4. Doubt. If we are doubtfull that God is angry with us, that we want grace, that we only seek our selves, that we yield to all temptations? &c. LEt us build upon these three foundations: Humility in ac∣knowledging our own deformity; Sincerity in confessing it; and Con∣fidence of pardon for it: and so persevering constantly and couragi∣ously in a course of Prayer, accord∣ing to direction and obedience, we shall soon find ease, rest and peace. The 5. Doubt. If our Consciences are unquiet, and our souls fearfull, by reason of our proness to sin? &c. LEt us Apply these following plasters, and put these tents in∣to our spiritual wounds, as deep as we can, every day for a time, till the cure be perfected.
1. Let us be assured that we are Plasters for a troubled consci∣ence. now at this present in the state of grace (supposing we have already, or are now resolv'd to do what is necessary for the expiation of our past sins, and the avoiding all sins for the future.) 2. That having a will to please God, and perform our duties, our Prayers are profitable to us and acceptable to God, and we may without presumption take courage and comfort, though we are yet full of passions and mperfections. 3. That the feeling of troubles, fears, temptations &c. are neither sins in us, nor signs of Gods anger against us. 4. That we are not bound to reflect continually whether we have consented to sin or not; nor to judge whether this or that consent he mortall or veniall: Nor to meddle with the sins of our life past, having endeavoured to dis∣charge our consciences once of them in Confession. 5. That we may and must con∣vert our hearts to God at any time,
humbly and confidently, in what estate so ever we be, without hesita∣tion or apprehension, preferring his will before our own quiet. 6. That in saying our Office, or Prayers, it sufficeth that we have a good intention to praise and please God, and satisfie our obligation, u∣sing morall diligence in driving out bad thoughts, and we need trouble our selves no further. 7. That so long as we make choyce of God for our God, and of his will for our only end; and can say cordially, I love God, I will no sin; we need fear nothing. 8. That we are not bound to do still that which our Conscience dictates, or what our fancy tells us is a divine call; for this is the way never to have true peace, and to be ever subject to illusions. Therefore The old plain rule: Trust and obey, Let pass and Pray. let us follow the old, simple, and secure rule: 1. Trust and 2 Obey, 3 Let pass, and 4 Pray: these will prove our safest haven in the Sea of this world, and our heaven upon earth; thus we may enjoy the peace of God, and lodge in our
hearts the God of peace; be blind, and yet see God. Note well, that these aforesaid warrants, are to be followed accor∣ding to discretion, and with the ap∣probation of our spirituall director. The 6. Doubt. If we are full of fears and ap∣prehensions of our estate, by reason we feel in our souls such slender ef∣fects of Gods grace and love, and have little devotion, no inward peace? &c. SUch souls can never be cured▪ till they submit their judgements, look with more confidence upon Gods mercy, and seek less their own satisfaction and assurance: For, this is an infallible truth, That in An infal∣lible max∣im. this life (without revelation), we can have no certainty of our estate, but must still live in ignorance as to that knowledge; to hold the contrary is an heresie, and to seek it inordinately is self-love and curio∣sity. We must therefore work our
salvation betwixt fear and hope; and if we should see or feel any thing in our selves which should make us secure, it were very suspi∣tious and dangerous. Let us humbly observe these three points. 1. Resolve still to serve and please God in the best manner we can. 2. Resign our selves to his will and divine ordinance, for time and eternity, without further reflexions. Read Blo∣sius, in spec. spirituali. cap. 7. Read the Imit. of Christ. l. 3. cap. 59. 3. Build upon the word and war∣rant of our guide, and rest quiet and confident. They who seek more knowledge and satisfaction by fee∣lings and reasons, seek but their own trouble and ruine; and if we find not here peace and comfort, we may thank our selves, since it is our disobedience and self-seeking which causeth it. The 7. Doubt. If some extream cross, calamity, or affliction, hath seized our hearts? &c. LEt us hasten to our Lord God with an humble and confident
affection, and placed before him, 1. Kiss the Crucifix, saying, O my The pra∣ctice. dear Lord, O my sweet Jesus, O my all and only good! 2. Then tell him you are troubled, as you would tell your Spirituall directour, and that you know not what to say or do. 3. Acknowledge heartily that you deserve no comfort, but to have heaven shut against you, and hell let loose to torment you. 4. If you would seek comfort, you would not have it out of him, or in any thing contrary to his Divine Will and liking. 5. Then say; O Lord, I have no other Physician for my soul but thee, behold my wounds; thou art my Father, behold my wants; thou art my only Friend, behold my wishes and desires: then expose them unto him, and hearken what counsel and comfort he will give you. 6. Take again the Cross, kiss it, embrace it, resign your self to suffer; 7. And with an internall act of indifferen∣cy, being confident that this cross and trouble is his will, and will be for your good, desire to bear it and whatsoever else he shall lay upon
you, knowing he will enable you to do it. 8. Have no recourse to creatures for your contentment, but drink purely and plentifully at the fountain head: and be not weary; you suffer for eternity. The 8. Doubt. If we desire to conquer the Devil, and overcome all temptations whatsoever? LEt us often read, observe, and General Remedies against temptati∣ons. The 1. Re∣medy. Jam. 4. 7. practise these generall Re∣medies. The first is, A strong courage, and firm resolution, to fight and get the victory, and not to yield even to our last gasp. If we resist the De∣vil, he will fly from us; if we fear him, he will follow us, and insult over us; If we play the Pigmeys, he will play the Lion; but let us be Lions, and he will soon shew him∣self a coward: Let us then fight manfully as befits Christs Souldi∣ers, to give him the honour, and the Devil the terrour, who is already
chained to our hands, and may bark, S. Hierome Thou maist per∣swade, but canst not precipi∣tate. 1 Cor. 4. 9. but cannot bite, unless by blindness and madness we come within his reach. Let us remember in our com∣bats, that we are made a spectacle to God, his Angels, and all his hea∣venly court: who would not fight valiantly and confidently before such spectators? God beholds us, as our Judge to reward and crown us if we overcome; Christ as our Captain helps us to overcome; all the rest pray for us that we may overcome. Fear not my soul, there 2 Par. 32. 7 are more with us than against us: God and his Angels are on our side, who can withstand us? Let us further reflect, that we plead not only our own cause, but Gods; whom in our persons the Devil seeks to injure and dishonor: Let us then rather dy than suffer our good Masters honour to be stay∣ned by our cowardise; our dearest blood will be well spilt for such a King and countrey? Oh! what pri∣vilege, to suffer for Jesus sake! Arise Lord, let thy enemies be dis∣persed, Psal. 42.
judge thine own caue: Thine is the quarrell, We are thy Cham∣pions. Let us also ponder well what S. Paul tells us on Gods part; That he is faithfull in his promises, and will not permit us to be tempted 1 Cor. 10. 13. beyond our strength, but will draw our good out of our temptations: he knows what mold we are made of, what force we have, and (which is above all) he loves us as the apple of his eye: If he seems sometimes to sleep a while, yet he both sees and succours us. Courage therefore, if we be already at hell-gates, he can & wil bring us back again, if we walk amidst the shadows of death, Psal. 22. 4. let us fear no ill, &c. The second Remedy, is, A distrust The 2. Re∣medy. Psa. 17. 31 in our own forces, and trust in Gods help. God protects them that hope in him; and the generall reason of the Scripture why God helps his servants, is, because thy hope and trust in him; so that his honour be∣comes interessed, if we rely upon his succour: whereas if we trust to our own forces, we have little to do
with God; and challenging much to our selves, quickly fall into blind∣ness of heart, unless God bring us to the acknowledgement of our own nothing by some strong afflicti∣on, and make us cry out with Job, There is no help for me in my self. The third Remedy, is Prayer: The 3. Re∣medy. Mat. 26. 41 Watch and pray that you enter not into temptation. Let us turn our hearts to converse with God, which is better than to reflect upon our temptations and troubles. Let us be so attentive to him, that we have neither leave nor leasure to give ear to devilish suggestions, but transcend them by a generous resolution, ra∣ther to dy than admit any thing contrary to our Lords love and pleasure. The fourth Remedy, is, To ob∣serve The 4. the root, groundwork and occasion of the temptation, and to pull it up, cut it off and destroy it. The fifth Remedy, is, to cure one contrary by another. If we be The 5. tempted to Pride, let Humlity be our aym; let us never cease from speaking, writing, reading, medita∣ting,
praying and practising it, till we get an habitual loathing of pride. The sixth Remedy, is, to Resist at 6. Resist. at the begin∣ning. the beginning, when it is yet weak. Let us kill the Cockatrice in the shell, lest being hatched it poyson us; let us be wise, and not save a penny, to pay a pound, nay to lose all we are worth eternally. The seventh Remedy, is, to reveal 7. Reveal it. it to him who is incharged with our souls: this diminisheth our grief, lessens our trouble, is an act of hu∣mility meriting grace and comfort, and confounding our enemy, who cannot brook to have his deceits discovered. The 8. Remedy, is, to avoid I∣dleness: 8. Avoid Idleness. This was the rule of the Egypti∣an Monks. Let the Devil always find us well employed, and we shall easi∣ly avoid his temptations; He that is idle hath ten Devils to impugn him he that is well busied, hath but one: Let us therefore distribute certain exercises for all times▪ that we may be sure to avoid this mother of all sin and mischief, and the greatest bane of our souls, Idleness.
The 9. Doubt. If we want Comfort in long and dangerous temptations and trou∣bles? LEt us consider what Experi∣ence and Scriptures teach us: That the life of man is a continuall Job. 7. warfare. That wars and commoti∣ons James. 4. are within us from our concu∣piscences and originall corruption. That there is a law in our Mem∣bers, Rom. 7. rebelling against the law of our minds, That when we are re∣solv'd Eccles. 12 to give our selves to Gods service, we must prepare our hearts for temptation. The great Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 8. and vessell of election was sore tempted, and shall we poor worms, and sensuall creatures, wonder to feel contradiction and combats in our nature? Let us not deceive our selves, thinking to find present quiet, as soon as wee convert our selves to God by prayer, for then chiefly the Devill will storm, the Flesh rebell,
the World murmure, when they most fear to lose their possession: And if it were not so, what need Colos. 3. 5 such continuall Mortification? Why did our heavenly Master Luc. 11. 4. teach us to pray that we might not be led into Temptation? Christ himself was tempted, and Mat. 4. 1. why should we be dismayed? Are we less pleasing to God for that wee are tempted, and not rather more acceptable for suffering for his sake? Thou errest, brother (says St. St. Hierom ad Heliod. Jerome), if thou thinkest a Chri∣stian can be ever free from persecu∣tion; thou art then most dangerously impugned, when thou knowest not that thou art impugned. For all 2 Tim. 3. 12. they who will live devoutly, shall suffer persecution; whereas others, who live sensually may seem to feel no rebellion: because having nothing of Gods Spirit in them, their enemies find nothing to war against. Let us not then be troubled that we are tryed with Temptations; for it is a most assured sign that we fight not under the Devils banner,
but are revolted against him; who persecutes not his Friends but his Enemies, &c. The 10. Doubt. If we wonder that God will have us suffer Temptation: sithence our frailty is subject to yield, and so offend his divine Majesty? HE hath good Reason; 1. Lest we should become careless in our duties: Therefore he tels us, I Isay 54. have for saken thee for a moment, but I will return and recall thee, and be mindfull of thee in my eter∣nall pitty: What is a moment in respect of Eternity; wherein hee means to overflow us with delights, Ne viator tendens ad patriam a∣met stabu∣lum pro domo sua. S. Aug. 2. Tim. 2. 12. Pro. 17. 3. Revel. 2. 17. in his own kingdom? &c. 2. Lest we should take this place of ba∣nishment for our Country, this Pilgrimage for our Paradise, &c. 3. To purge us for our past follies, sins, and ingratitudes, to satisfy for future Purgatory, and to prepare and perfect us for a Crown of glory. 4. To make us truly wise,
truly humble, truly vertuous. 5. To Isay 28. 19. keep us in exercise: for many would otherwise neglect prayer, slight o∣bedience, and shun mortification, whereas now they stand carefully upon their guards. 6. To teach us how to help our neighbours by our own trials: whereas he that hath Ecclus. 43. never been tempted, what knows he, either for himself or others? The 11. Doubt. If we are solicited by our enemy to Unchastness? 1. KNow, that God hath calld us Read and put in pra∣ctice the 11. chap. of the Spir. Con. to serve him with purity and integrity of body and soul: this is the end of our Vocation, Let us look how we walk worthy of it, lest that terrible sentence of the holy Ghost be pronounced against us; He ath done wickedly in the land Isay. 26. 10. of Saints, he shall not see Gods glo∣ry, which none can see but clean eys. 2. Let us comfort our selves in Wisdom. 8. 21. this; That as it is not sinfull but
naturall to feel rebellious motions; So it is not only possible, but easy Philip. 4. 6 I can doe all things in God my comfor∣ter. to overcome them; not in our selves, but in God the gracious gi∣ver of strength and comfort. 3. Let us have an ardent desire to live chast, and make firm and frequent resolutions so to continue what ever it costs us: How many thousand chast spouses of God, made of the same mould that wee are, keep perpetual integrity? &c. 4. Let us seek diligently, and practise seriously such Remedies, as are proper for the preservation of this Jewell. Amongst which the chiefest is Mortification of our re∣bellious flesh by Austerities: hence S. Thomas cals Chastity from cha∣stising: S. Thomas of Aquin. It is better our Stomakes pain us, than our Consciences, and that we lose health of body, than pu∣rity of soul, and salvation of both. This remedy of Mortification is absolutely necessary when car∣nall motions arise first in the body, and thence redound into the Ima∣gination: but if from the Fancie they descend to the body, we are to
apply these following remedies: 1. Let us avoid idlenesse. 2. Let us Amor otio∣sorum nego∣tium. change our Employments; if we are assaulted in company, let us seek solitude, if in solitude, let us hasten into company, &c. 3. Silence, tempe∣rance S. Ephrem. and custody of senses, are three powerfull preservers of Chastity. 4. Let us make great account of little things, and shake off the first Motions of this nature, as wee would a burning coale from off our new garment. 5. Ler us humbly (but modestly and discreetly) lay open their nature and manner to our spirituall guide. 6. Let us care∣fully avoid all suspected company, familiarity, meetings, &c. though our intention be never so spirituall. 7. Let us strive rather to slight, scorn, and neglect these temptati∣ons, than formally to resist them. 5. In vehement temptation. 1. Make the sign of the cross upon your heart. 2. Use some brief and burning aspirations; as, Lord, de∣liver me. I suffer violence; O my God, answer for me. I am thine, O Jesu, body and soul, help me. 3. Defy
the Devill with St. Antony: Fy Isay 38. 14. S. Antony. beast! thou wert an Angell: I who am now a beast, will aym to be an Angell, and get thy lost place: be gone, the lodging is already taken up; Iesus is here, who is my Lord and love, I am preingag'd in a for∣mer and purer affection. 6. Let us prepare before-hand cer∣tain places of refuge for our shel∣ter and succour till the storm be pass'd over. 1. The presence of God and his Angels; saying, How is it possible? God sees me, and shall I sin in his sight? 2. Death and eternity; The delight is momen∣tary, the punishment is eternl; death is at my dore, and shall I adventure? 3. Christs sacred wounds; let us there hide and secure our selves, and say, My God hangs on the Cross, and shall I think of taking my pleasure? 4. The love of God; O Iesu! my love and my life! I will either love thee, or love nothing at all; Let me rather lose my life than thy love. 5. Humility; Thou art just, O my Lord God; thy will be done. My Pride is cause of this
villany which I feel, &c. And take We must be hum∣ble, or we shall not be long chast. this for an infallible truth; wee must be humble, or we shall not be long chast: Let us be obedient to our Superiors, or let us not look to have our flesh obedient to our spirits. 6. Devotion to Saints ex∣celling in this vertue, especially to the chastest Virgin Mary. 7. The last Remedy, is, to make use of these antidotes timely, or∣derly, and discreetly, without which no rules, documents, or directions will ought avail us. The 12. Doubt. If we are in extraordinary De∣solation and darkness? WE must live by Faith in this case: and know that a sen∣sible choice of God and goodness, is not now necessary; but a Ratio∣nall adhering to him is sufficient. Our fidelity to God, is shew'd, in the performance of our duties now as at other times; without losing either our Confidence in him, or
seeking Comfort in our sufferings▪ but aspiring, if not sweetly yet sin∣cerely, in this or the like manner: Lord I choose thee, and accept of thy divine pleasure and providence in all things. I reject whatsoever may possess that place and dominion in my soul, which is due to thee alone. Dispose of me and mine, as shall be most for thy honour and glory. Let me be either all thine, or nothing at all. The 13. Doubt. If wee are tempted to despair of Gods mercy, by reason of our frequent falls, and relapses into sin? THis grievous Malady springs from three causes or errors: For they who are troubled in this point, doe not truly weigh, 1. What God is. 2. What sin is. 3. What contrition and sorrow of heart is.
1. Almighty God is a boundless 1. What God is. and bottomless Sea of mercy; he is natural bounty it self▪ he is ever ready to receive, revive, and relieve a penitent soul, though she alone had committed a thousand times a day the sins of the whole world. He considers not what she hath been, but what she desires and resolves now to be: and who so denys his power or Will to pardon sinners, as often as there are moments in time, goes about to deprive him of his honor and divinity it self; for he could not be God if he were not good, and faithfull in his promise. O loving Lord God who art not only ready to receive a penitents petition, but even wooest him to present it; Who can truly consider what thou art, and despair of thy mercy? 2. Sin 2. What sin. is a voluntay and deliberate Aver∣sion from God, and Conversion to creatures. 3. Contrition is of that efficacy, that it delivers from all sin, 3. What Contri∣tion. giving confidence of pardon for the past, and courage to avoid it for the future. Let us apply this to our comfort.
The 14. Doubt. If we are perplexed with great sadness? THis Passion, is a great hindrance to devotion and perfection; it is the bait of the Devil, the bane of our spirits, the root, mother, and nursery of infinite miseries and mis∣chiefs. The chief causes of Sadness, The cau∣ses of sad∣ness. 1. Nature. are these, 1. Nature, when Melancholy over-sways the sanguin humour, this can neither merit nor demerit, but the Devil takes thereby occasion to fill our spirits with unquietness. These have need aswell of corporal as spiritual Physick. 2. A tenderness of heart, and 2. Self-love. passionate love of our selves: we cannot brook the least contradcti∣on, &c. but we sigh and sob, as if all the world were interessed in our misfortune, and should bear a part in our dolefull ditty. The Remedy
were to bid such weep on for their penance, or use some coporall au∣sterity. 3. An immortification of our Passions, which (when we seek in 3. Passions good earnest to root out), assault us so strongly, that it seems impos∣sible to cure them, and hence we grow sad. The Remedy is, to con∣quer this bad nature by counsell, courage, and diligence, &c. Let us pray heartily, suffer willingly, stoop humbly; 'Tis for heaven we fight and suffer. 4. A secret root of pride, vain 4. Secret Pride. esteem, and false opinion we have of our selves, when things fall not out according to our liking, expe∣ctation, or importunate desire; whereupon, we grow sad and trou∣bled. Surely the proud have no true Isay 48. 2 rest, there is no peace to the wicked. Let us Remedy it therfore by learn∣ing of Christ true humility, and meekness, out of which there is no hope of quiet. 5. An indiscreet Zeal, and 5. Indis∣creet zeal. over-greediness of perfection, which makes us eat more than we can dis∣gest,
and so cast it up again with great pain▪ undertaking austerities, exercises, introversion, &c. beyond our capacities without counsel; and so we remain afflicted, being unable to go forward, and ashamed to go backward. Let us Remedy this by humble obedience to a discreet guide. 6. Want of fervor in our voca∣tion, 6. Instabi∣lity of heart. instability of heart, and incon∣stancy in our exercises, leaving, changing, interrupting them through laziness or lightness; This leaves a worm gnawing upon our consci∣ence, with continual disquiet and sadness. Let us Remedy this with S. Bernards counsel; Wilt thou ne∣ver S. Bernard. be sad? live well. A good man is alwayes merry; and a good con∣science is a continuall feast. 7. Disordinate love and affe∣ctions 7. Love to creatures. to creatures. Let us love all only for God, and we shall be con∣tent and quiet in the loss of the most lovely and beloved creature in the world: God alone will supply all other loves and losses. 8. A jealous and envious eye: 8. An envi∣us eye.
This is a dangerous and lamentable cross; For all the Perfections of o∣hers are ours, when we love them n others; but when we hate them, they are nails in our eys, and thorns in our hearts, which do extreamly torment us. O madness! Have we Parum tibi est, si ipse sis foelix, nisi alter sit in∣foelix? not sufficient miseries at home, in our selves, but we must suck poyson like Spiders out of others Hony, and what is their crown, must be our cross? What greater wickedness than to pine away with grief at o∣thers good? The Remedy of this is by endeavouring to get true Cha∣rity, the property whereof, is to weep with the weepers, rejoyce with the joyfull, to love others good, as our own. Let us avoid Curiosity if we wil eschew Envy, for a Curious eye is the fewel of an Envious heart; let us remain like Bees in our hive of Intro∣version, & there make provision for the Winter of Death & Eternity, &c. 9. Frequent failings in good 9. Fre∣quent re∣lapses. purposes, and relapses into sin. We question whether our sins past are pardoned, and are uncertain that our present Confessions are good;
This is of one evil to make two; fo we have done amiss, and now by losing Courage and confidence, we make our selves unfit to do better. Let us Remedy it, by acknowledg∣ing our fault, using violence to our selves, and following direction. Other Remedies against Sadness. Orher Remedies against sadness. Jam. 5. 13. 1. Prayer. 1. Prayer is a soveraign Re∣medy. Is any one sad amongst you? Let him pray. God is our only joy and comfort: Let us lift up our hearts to him, and lay open our wants and desires before him with Resignation, who both can and will abundantly comfort us. Ah! my poor soul, why art thou sad, and whence comes it that thou thus troublest me? Is not our God good and gracious, who hears thy sighs, and sees thy sorrow? what wantest thou, which he cannot or will not give thee, when he sees it most expedient for thee? 2. Somtimes let us sing spiritual 2. Singing Songs; which greatly confound the Devil.
3. Other times we may fitly di∣vert 3. Recre∣tion. our thoughts by some external Recreations or imployments. 4. Let us endeavour to make 4. Fervent acts. external and internal Acts with fervour, though without gust; as, embracing and kissing a Crucifix, and speaking reverently and loving∣ly unto it, &c. 5. A discreet taking of a Disci∣pline, 5. A dis∣cipline. obtains wonderful comfort; for the soul is called from the in∣ward troublesom pensiveness, to the outward pain: and the Devil flyes away, seeing his companion the Flesh so hardly handled. 6. Frequent Communinn is an 6. Com∣munion. excellent cordiall, strengthning our hearts, and rejoycing our spirits. 7. Let us discover the effects 7. Disco∣very of it. and manner of our sadness to our spiritual guide, and take his advice simply and humbly: This is the re∣medy of remedies. 8. Let us take heed of making 8. Indiffe∣rency. use of these Remedies, only that we may be at ease, and avoid affliction; but for the prevention of danger which may ensue; and for the rest,
remain perfectly indifferent and re∣signed. 9. If we will be free from Sad∣ness, 9. Few de∣sires. we must labour to keep far from us unquietness of mind; if we wll have our minds quiet, we must have few desires, and those few only to love and please God. 10. Finally let us beware of 10. Plain∣dealing. three things. 1. Of following our Sensuality, in meat, drink, talk, ease, &c. 2. Of vain Complacence, and self-opinion, &c. 3. And above all of Hypocondriacy, Hypocrisy, double dealing & sleights with our guide; for no mervail if he starves and pines away, who les to the holy Ghost. If we are simple as children, our loving Father will give us sweet∣meats: Wo be to Hypocrites, for it Mat. 23. 13. wil go il with them in the latter day. Another Antidote against Melan∣choly and Pusillanimity. The reason of our being so often Pufillani∣mity pro∣cees from want, troubled and shaken, is because our spiritual edifice is not supported by these solid props. 1. Faith: For if we captivate 1. of Faith
our Understandings to believe what God himself hath told us, what his Church hath taught us, and what our ghostly guides still preach unto us, how can we chose but be com∣forted and satisfied? 2. Abnegation: For if we have 2. Of Ab∣negation. made good Confessions, have en∣deavoured to satisfy God, and our guide, and have a will to obey them in all things, we may rest secure: Let us not say, What shall become of us? Shall we persever? for the desire to know this, argues our hearts of secret pride and propriety: Let us therefore deny our selves, saying, Gods holy will be done in and with us for all time and eternity, and what ever becomes of us, we will serve him till death, because his love deserves it: What need we seek a further se∣curity of Gods friendship towards us in this life, than to find in our souls these two things; First, for the time past, we have done penance, consisting in Confession, Contrition and Satis∣faction: Secondly, for the time to come, we give our selves totally t God, to serve and please him the re∣sidue
of our life, in the best manner possible. Let us put our souls in this estate, and go on with courage, and never more trouble our selves. 3. Solid Confidence. For if we 3. of Con∣fidence. know God is mercifull and Jesus hath suffered enough for all sinners, (whereof we are the chief) how can we but hope that he will be our Je∣sus? Let us think thus: God loves us, and we desire with all our hearts to love him, & we trust in his love, and for it we wil both sigh and suffer, pray and obey, deny our selves, and dy to all creatures: This sauce will disgest all our bitterness. The 15. Doubt. If we suspect that our Sadess, and temptations proceed from our own fault or negligence, or some se∣cret sin, or our want of corresponden∣cy with Gods grace? &c. 1. IF it be so; must we therefore complain, and not rather the more conform our selves to Gods Will? We have often deserved hell; Our past sins, and present negligen∣ces
merit eternal punishments; and is it not a special favour to be pu∣nish'd in this life with smal troubles and temptations? This is not Hell; nor Eternity of discomfort, nor what we deserv; Why then are we not both Content and Gratefull? 2. In this fatherly chastisement there is both Mercy and Justice: Justice, because we have often shut the doors of our hearts against God, giving a deaf ear to his calls, and therefore it is just that we should now call and knock at the gate of his mercy, and not be heard: Mercy, because our sufferings are small in comparison of our deser∣vings. If this be most true, why la∣ment we our mis-fortune? Is there any proportion between time and eternity? betwixt this desolation, and the never-ending lamentations of the damned in hell? 3. Let us then receive and kiss his paternal rod with a filial reverence, crying out with S. Augustin: O S. Augustin Lord, spare us not here, so thou spare us hereafter? We have merited Hel, and dare we ask Sweetness in prayer?
O pride and presumption! 'Tis suf∣ficient Lord that thou admittest us into thy presence, and permittest us to open our unworthy mouths unto thee, and lament our misery before thy Divine Majesty: And shall we have hearts to Murmure, or tongues to complain of any Vsage? The 16. Doubt. If we doubt that God is displeased with our Prayers; that our Af∣flictions befall us through our own occasion, and cannot satisfy our selves to think we have done what God requireth? 1. WE must firmly believe, that (besides our own fault which deserves it) our chastisement is a disposition of the most high and holy Providence of God, whose wisdom imparts his blessings as he knows best for his servants: If all receive not spiritual gust and joy in Prayer, let them say with S. Ber∣nard, Give me O Lord, Simplicity, S. Bernard. Humility, and Charity; but for higher favours, as I am unworthy of them, so I am uncapable to
make use of them; I leave them therefore for thy special friends and favourites. 2. Let us therefore conceive these afflctions to be sent us from God, 1. To humble us: for should he visit us with great lights, and ele∣vate us in Contemplation; we should presently take complacency in our imaginary devotion, and pre∣fer our selves before others. 2. To try our Fidelity and perseverance in his love: for the chief end of Pray∣er, is to obey and please God, and offer him all that we are and have; but to receive relief and comfort is only the secondary end. 3. Let us further consider, that this very internal Trouble and an∣guish, may and ought to comfort us, as being a token of Gods love: for Love is the first wheel of our natural and spiritual clock, setting all the other passions a work; if therefore we grieve that we serve God so tepidly, &c. this Grief pro∣ceeds of love, and is an evident sign of a good will to serve him. 4. Let us ground our selves in
that often repeated Maxim; That al things do not only befal us by Gods permission, but also that he sends them for our good: And therefore let us say with confident and coura∣gious Judith; Take heart, for our Jud. 8. 27. God hath sent us these Afflictions to amend us, and not to destroy us. The 17. Doubt. If Nature hath shew'd her-self a Step-mother unto us, in giving us a hard and harsh disposition; whence proceeds a reluctancy to works of Vertue, and mortification of Vice; So that we distrust of ever over∣coming our selves? LEt us take courage: The violent Mat. 11. 12 get the Kingdom of heaven: And let us lay hold on these two Truths, 1. That Gods will is, all should Two veri∣ties. 1. Gods will is, that all should be sav'd, be saved; and therefore gives every one sufficient Grace and means to that end: if then we have the worst Nature in the world, and do but correspond diligently with that Grace which God gives us, we have no reason at all to fear. Let us fight valiantly under Christ our good
Captain, with the Armor of Prayer and Mortification, and not cease to be his Souldiers as long as any blood and breath remains in our bodies. Let us learn to discover, and then (as others do) to detest our own peevish and perverse disposition; Let us not flatter our selves, but lay the ax to the root, not to the branches; to wit, Resolve to humble our proud hearts in all occasions with courage, constancy & confidence, for one year, and we shall find more peace and quiet than we can imagin. If we sweat drops of blood, it is for Eter∣nity; where not one drop shalbe lost, nor one wound uncounted, nor one souldier uncrowned. 2. That to have bad natures, and 2. Bad na∣tures are no sins, &c. to feel motions against grace, reason, &c. is neither Sin nor Imperfecti∣on; so long as we yield not our con∣sent to their leading, &c. The 18. Doubt. If on the contrary, our Nature is so facil and flexible, that we scareely find difficulty in any thing; we won∣der
to hear mention of Rebellions, Contradictions, Desolations, &c. from all which we are secure and quiet: And therefore we fear our actions are rather of a naturall promptitude, than solid Vertue? 'TIs true, that Devotion and Per∣fection consist not in this ex∣ternal quiet and ease; but in the Victory over our selves, in habits of solid Vertues, in pure Charity and Indifferency. We are therefore in A dange∣rous peace. this case to Humble our selves, and to conceive we know not what Mortification▪ and Abnegation mean. What marvail if a soul, which is seldom Introverted, is rarely distracted? if they who have no care of their Senses, nor custody of their Hearts, are not troubled with their Evagations? If where there is no sap of solid Devotion, there is no sense of Dryness and de∣solation? O dangerous and unquiet Peace!
The 19. Doubt. If we so addict our selves to Re∣collection, that we look upon works of Obedience and Charity, and the externall practices of our duty, as impediments to Perfection? SUch know not by what Spirit they Luke 12. 25. are led. Let us not vainly adhere to our imaginary Devotions, so as to neglect the least work of Ob∣ligation. Without Charity and O∣bedience, all our prayers are abho∣minable Prov. 17. 15. in his sight, who said, Not every one that crys, Lord, Lord, shall enter into my Kingdome, but Mat. 7. 25. he that doth my Will, &c. The 20. Doubt. If wee find such a calm in our Passions, imperfections, and temp∣tations, that wee hope the worst is past? LEt us never flatter our selves Read the Conflict. ch. 20. with such fancies, or admit the least conceit, that we have intirely conquered any one passion or im∣perfection:
but humbly, vigo∣rously, and constantly, keeping on in our track of Mortification, Re∣collection, Introversion; think that these calms, comforts, and Time vi∣dere unde possis ca∣dere; Noli fieri per∣versa sim∣plicitate securus. S. August. cessations, are sent us as hony-sops, and milk for children, because we are yet weak, and want courage to encounter such stronger Temptati∣ons, wherewith others are tried; And that our Loving Lord, com∣municates these his favours and friendships unto us, not as best meriting them, but most needing them. The 21. Doubt. If Scrupulosity overwhelms us? AS Carelesness is a dangerous impediment of Perfection, when one shall say, This is not Mortal, this is but a Counsell, not a Precept; this of Perfection, not of Obligation: (For whosoever will obtain the true Spirit of Devotion and Recollection, must be far from this opinion:) So Scrupulosity is another extream, equally hindring
our spirituall progress, and hurting more than sin it self. For this trouble of Spirit, takes The dan∣ger of scrupulo∣sity. away all internall strength, com∣fort, and courage of well-doing, and makes us slide insensibly into Despair of doing better; till at length, we give up all, and either pine away in these melancholy and desperate thoughts, or else yeeld our selves to Pleasure and Sensuality, and sometimes to the Devill himself, to find some means of solace and satisfaction. Beleeve it, inordinate Fear, Sadness, and Scrupulosity, will soon bring a soul into a laberinth of miseries, and a hell of mischiefs; and therefore she must speedily get Confidence in Confi∣dence in Gods mercy is the reme∣dy. Gods mercy, and raise up her self to Alacrity of mind, or she will never be able to overcome her dif∣ficulties, nor persever long in Spirit. The way to get this Confidence and Joy, is briefly this: The means to get this confi∣dence. 1. To Trust and Obey her dis∣creet guide: who is to assign her a set form of Confession for once a
week. 2. He must be resolute and rigorous, taking all upon his own conscience, if she promise faithfully to obey him. 3. He must assure her, that she more offends in want of Confidence and Obedience, than in all other sins; and that if sh will not beleeve this, her disease is incurable. This is the short and safe cure of tbis dangerous Disease: but that we may better understand the nature of our malady, Let us Note Seven sorts of Consciences. 1. A cauteriz'd, corrupted, large 7. Sorts of Con∣sciences. and libertine Conscience, making scruple of nothing, but swallowing down all things. 2. A chiverell Conscience, stretching to all, and caring for nothing, but to avoid great and grievous sins. 3. A quiet Conscience, yet not good, because they take occasion to sin out of a confidence in Gods goodness, and hope of his mery. 4. A troubled Conscience, but not good, for want of confidence. 5. A troubled, and also a good Conscience, yet weak; of those who being newly conver∣ted to God, lament their past life
with bitter tears, and yet are full of rebellious passions, &c. 6. A good, quiet, and confident Conscience of those who are carefull to please God, to avoid all sin, to be benefi∣ciall to all, burthensome to none; making use of friends by favour, foes by patience, and all men by good will, &c. 7. An erroneous, ti∣morous and scrupulous Conscience, making doubts and difficulties of all things. So that there are, generally spea∣king, 2. Sorts of bad conscien∣ces. two sorts of bad Consciences: The one too large, calling good evill, and evill good; The other too narrow, finding sin where there is none, and taking imaginations for offences, and shadows for sub∣stances. The first of these Consciences, 1. Over large: Whch must be cured by remo∣ving the causes. 1 Cor. 14. 38. (which is over large) must be cu∣red by removing the causes, which are generally four. 1. Negligence to learn what belongs to our Religion, vocation, profession, obligation and salvati∣on: for who so knows not what he is bound to know, shall not be
known by God. 2. Pride, and shame to ask and inform our selves. 3. Obstinacy and presumption, when we will trust to our own judge∣ments and abilities, and not sub∣mit to our betters. 4. Bad affecti∣ons, and perverse wils, led by pas∣sion, and blinded with self-love, from seeing the truth. These have one foot already in hell; which they must pluck out by violence, using the contrary remedies. The Second Conscience, which 2. Over-strait, which must also be cured by the re∣movall of the cau∣ses. is over-strait, and scrupulous, may be also cured by the removall of the causes, which may be reduced to these. 1. A fearfull nature, coming from aboundance of cold; here is need of a twofold Physitian, One for the Body to prescribe them good diet; The other for the Soul, to confirm them in Hope, by the consideration of Gods mercy, Christs merits, Scriptures promi∣ses, Superiors warrants, &c. 2. Some infirmity or sickness, as Mania, which hurts the forepart of the head, and diminishes the Ima∣gination; Melancholy, which in∣fects
the middle part, and dimini∣sheth Reason; Phrensy, which seizeth on the purses or nets of the brain, which are the cells of Judge∣ment. This cause hath need of the like cure. 3. The Devill, by Gods permission, for divers causes. This is cured by not caring what hu∣mour we are in, but to endeavour with courage and confidence to please God, whether we are sad or merry, fervent or desolate; making use of Prayer and Counsell. 4. An indiscreet and preposterous trea∣ting of our bodies. The way to cure this is to follow the rules of Dis∣cretion, and to find out their own strength and complexion; yet still taking heed of the contrary extre∣mity, of flattering our sensuality under pretence of spirituality. 5. The keeping company with scrupulous persons, or misunderstanding some Spirituall Books. Remedy this by shunning such Company, laying aside such Books, and obtaining from your Director, a Rule to rely upon, and beleeving nothing a∣gainst that. 6. A secret and subtill
Self-love and Pride, under the counterfeit mask of fear and care of our souls. Against which we must submit our judgment to Obdience, for we are all blind in our own cause; and this is not only the best, but even the necessary Remedy▪ for such as are particularly bound to Obedience. 7. Ignorance of the mysteris of our faith, and of Gods mercy, which makes us think our obligation greater than indeed it is, God more severe than he is, and his yoak more heavy than it is. Which to Remedy, we must see and consi∣der wherein we judge amiss, and whereupon wee ground our par∣ticular fears; for that is the easiest way to remove them. 8. Let us weigh the vertue of the Physick The ver∣tue of the Physick which must cure us. which must cure our Disease: to wit, First, the infinit goodness of God, and Christs merits: And what Soul can fear, having so gra∣cious a God, and so great a Ran∣some? 2. The Credit and Com∣passion of the Blessed Virgin, and the Prayers and Patronage of Saints and Angels, who being se∣cure
for themselves, are solicitous for us. 3. The testimony and sweet promises of holy Scriptures: For how often hath God told us; I am prone to pitty; I am ready to re∣ceive sinners; I will help them who doe their endeavours. If therefore he denys not his mercy to them that seek it, and they seek it who doe what lys in them, let us bee confi∣dent he will not deny us his mer∣cy. He also frequently calls on us, Turn to me, and I will turn to you: Now he cannot but say truth, aad fulfill his promise; and doth not that soul convert her self to God, who doth her best to get his grace, and be reconciled unto him? Who then can choose but be of good Comfort, if he be of good Will? By this Doctrine, and these pre∣scribed Remedes, it appears that the only way to overcome Scru∣ples, is, 1. To obey our Spirituall Dire∣ctor. 2. To doe our best endeavour. But here arise two difficulties, in this easy lesson.
The first is, If our Directo The first difficulty. knowledge be small, his experience lesse, and his conscience not very good, how dare we trust our souls upon his Warrant? Gerson answers: Thou wie Gerson's answer. Judger, I say thou errest and a deceived, for thou hast not com∣mitted thy self and thy soul to a man, because of his discretion and learning, but to God himself; and for his love thou obeyest man, be∣cause he is by him ordained thy Prelat and Superior. Therefore our obedience wilbe oftentimes so much more pleasing to God, and profitable to our souls, by how much more infirm and unworthy he is whom we refuse not to obey for Gods sake. The other difficulty is; If wee The se∣cond dif∣ficulty. cannot satisfy our selves, that wee doe our best Endeavours, nor know that we have performed our duty? S. Thomas answers; We must St. Thomas answer. first remove that which hinders grace, to wit, Sin: 2. We must convert our hearts from creatures
to our Creator. In a word, we must detest Sin, and choose God, and fol∣low his ordinary means appointed in his Church for our direction: and this is the Summary of our duty. The 22. Doubt. If we fear we detest not Sin suf∣ficiently, because we feel not so great sorrow for the offence of God, as we doe sometimes for a temporall losse? LEt us assure our selves, First, We can never have so much sor∣row for our Sins, as Gods justice in rigour requires. 2. God doth not exact it of us, because it is not in our power. 3. True sorrow consists not in feeling, but in Reason and Freewill. 4. It is better to have sorrow sometimes only in desire than feeling. 5. It is not necessary this corporall or sensible grief be so great for spirituall as for tem∣porall loss, but it sufficeth to use humane and morall diligence, with firm purpose of a voiding Sin. 6. It ls dangerous to make such com∣parisons and reflexions for weak
and fearfull Consciences: as, If such a thing should happen, what should I doe? Should I rather chuse death, than such a Sin? and the like: I say, there is no obligation to make such acts. The 23. Doubt. If we cannot ground our selves in a firm Hope of mercy; for that we are so frail and inconstant; We sin daily, and amend not our lives; We receive Gods blessings, and re∣pay ill for good; Wee promise, pro∣test, and vow fidelity, and practise nothing lesse. TEll me, afflicted Souls! Should you see Christ dye daily for your daily sins, would you despair of mercy? Even so efficacious is his former death. If you fall hourely, rise again couragiously, and pur∣pose to stand more constantly, and fear nothing; but draw Humility out of your Frailty, saying, Where∣of am I proud now? Where are my strong Resolutions? Why doe I judge others? Who is so feeble sickle, frail, as I am? O Lord this is the
Worm that is so proud: Then cast ll into Christs sacred wounds; and leaving all there, go on with as much quiet and Confidence, as if you had not sinned. The 24. Doubt. If we go not on wth alacrity, because we know not that our Sins are for∣given, that our Confessions are good, and that we are in state of Grace? WE must take notice, that in seeking these assurances, we may oftentimes directly lose them: 1. In seeking them too eagerly and unquietly. 2. In being self-lovers, and unwilling to be troubled. 3. In being ignorant of what we are bound to know: for (it seems) we conceive those works nothing worth, which are performed with∣out gust, content, satisfaction to our selves, and quiet. The way then is briefly this: 1. To seek true peace. 2. In God. 3. From his mercy, not our own industry. 4. To be resigned to want peace if
he please. 5. To omit nothing we would or should do by reason of the trouble we feel. The 25. Doubt. Though we cannot (in this life) assure our selves infallibly to be in good estate, yet if we could comfort our selves with most probable tokens of grace, whereby we might feel the pulses of our hearts, and somewhat ease our anguish? SAint Thomas and S. Bernard as∣signe 4. Signs of a good conscience out of S. Tho. and Bernard. these four signes of a good conscience. 1. To feel a ready Wil∣lingness in our hearts, to hear Gods word, and to learn the means to love and serve him. 2. To feel a Forwardness to do good Works. 3. To feel a hearty Sorrow for the offence of God. 4. To feel a firm Purpose to avoid all Sin. Gerson adds a fifth: Who so can A . out of Gerson. To pronounce these three verities. pronounce heartily and sincerely these three Verities, though he had committed all sins, and should be prevented with sodain death, let him secure himself he is in state of Grace.
The first Verity. O Lord! If in Oh! that we would often re∣cite these three truths; e∣specially when we feel our conscien∣ces bur∣thened! What in∣finite pro∣fit and comfort would re∣dound to our souls? this or that I have sinned against thy goodness, it truly displeases and grieves me, and I am ready to do penance for it, because I have offen∣ded thee, who art worthy of all ho∣nor, and have transgressed thy Law and Will, which is most holy, just, and reasonable. The second Verity. O Lord! I have a good purpose and desire by thy grace to take heed I fall not into sin again, and to avoid to my power the occasions thereof, and to mortify my passions, and bad inclinations. The third Verity. O Lord! I have a good Will and purpose to Confess my sins entirely, in due time and place, according to thy Ordinance, and that of thy holy Church. We may ad to these, the devout fre∣quentation Three o∣ther signs. of the Sacraments, which give life and justifying grace; The warrant of a skilful guide; And a lively confidence in the Divine bounty.
The 26. Doubt. If we are troubled, because we know not well when we give consent to sinful Thoughts? 1. IF when the Thought is repre∣sented, Rules to know when we consent to sin. we presently fly to the crucifix, expell it, disdain it, dislike it; it is not Sin, but Merit. 2. But if we carelesly linger in it when well perceived, it is Venial. 3. And if we consent to the Thought, and desire the Action, our sin is equall to the act, if it were committed. 4. But if we intend not the Act, but linger delightfully in the Thought, and the thing it self be Mortall, and delibe∣rately entertained, it is also Mortal. The 27. Doubt. If we cannot well distinguish be∣tween Venial and Mortal sin? 1. WHat need we determine; let us Confess it, as it is committed. 2. Mortall sin cannot be com∣mitted without great corruption of Him who commits it, or great hurt
to his Neighbor, or great contempt and neglect of God, (says Richar∣das a S. Victore): And S. Thomas Rich. à S. Victore. S. Thomas. says; He sins Mortally, whose to∣tal intention of mind is withdrawn from God, who is our last end. 3. Let us conclude with S. Au∣gustin S. August. Gerson. and Gerson: That it is dan∣gerous, even in Prelats and Confes∣sors, to define what is mortall sin, or give Rules therein. The 28. Doubt. If that saying of Divines terri∣fies Faciens contra du∣bium inci∣dit in pec∣catum. In dubiis securior pars est eli∣genda. us; He that does against his doubt, sins: And, In things which are doubtfull, the securer part is to be chosen? WE may, in things which are Doubtfull, securely follow a Probable opinion: Now Scruples are not Doubts, but false apprehen∣sions; and therefore on all sides, we may (and somtimes must) go against our own erroneous consciences, espe∣cially when Obedience commands
it. Let us therefore, with S. Augustin, S. Augustin Tene cer∣tum, dimitte incertum. lay hold of that which is certain, and let go the uncertain: And what way is more sure and secure than Obedience?
The 29. And last Doubt. If finally we are apprehensive and fearfull lest we should grow weary in the way of Vertue, and not Perse∣ver constantly in our Spiritual Ex∣ercises? LEt us excite our Tepidity by the frequent perusall of this fol∣lowing discourse, and practise ac∣cordingly. The Patriarch Jacob, in hope of obtaining the beautifull Rachel, serv'd Laban seven years with dili∣gence and patience: But being cou∣sened by that disloyal worldling with il favoured Lia; what doth he? He neither loseth Courage nor Confidence; but with new con∣stancy begins his other seven years service, with such admirable alacri∣ty, and a heart so fix'd upon his de∣sired reward, that the time seem'd Gen. 29. but a week to him. O my soul! thou seekest and sighest after eternal Beatitude, consisting essentially in the blessed vision and fruition of God, (signified by Ra∣chel, according to S. Bernard); For S. Bernard.
this thou hast bound thy self to serve God; But alas! The world, the flesh, and the Devil, do so often be∣guile & blind thee, that thou takest blear-ey'd Lia, for beautiful Rachel, the world for heaven, the flesh for the Spirit, and diabolical Illusions for Divine inspirations. But what? Lose not courage, nor confidence; Renew thy protestation of loyal service; Serve God one o∣ther seven years; Suffer another sla∣very to get heaven, to dy in finall grace, and to be eternally joyned to that blessed beauty thou lovest; Fol∣low Jesus to mount Calvary, to con∣summatum est, to thy last gasp; If thou stumblest, fall not; If thou fal∣lest, up again and march; Stand not, but go forward; for he only that persevers till the end, shall be saved. Let neither frequent tempta∣tions, nor fearfull imaginations, nor strong passions, nor bad inclinations, nor often fallings, nor ordinary frailty, daunt or dismay thee. God is good and gracious, meek and mercifull; Thy reward is infinite and eternall; Thy friends are moe
in heaven, than on earth; persever then, and go forward; if thou canst not run, at least go fair and softly, and securely, after Christ thy Cap∣tain, crying, Draw me unto thee, ô most dear Lord; for I desire to fol∣low thee and no other: but I am weak and lame, and therefore I make use of two crutches, A strong resolution never to forsake thy love, and a lively confidence in thy grace, goodness, and mercy. O holy and happy, O pretious and highly to be prized Perseve∣rance! O finall grace! the patri∣mony only of the elect, and portion of the predestinate! Fight manful∣ly, ô my soul! get good habits time∣ly; resist sin valiantly; fast, watch, pray, sigh and suffer perseverantly: heaven is worth thy pains. Perse∣ver, O my soul! Persever, Persever; that done, all is done; that wanting, all is undone. This, O Satan! thou knowest full well; and therefore little car'st to see me zealous for a Lent, for a year, for a time, so in the end thou may'st make me tire, tepide, and careless of my progress
and Prseverance: 'tis my Perse∣verance S. Bernard. which thou only enviest at; because that only conquers thee, and crowns me eternally. I discover thy two main snares, (ô subtill enemy!) into which thou wouldst allure my unwary soul; and thy first design failing, which was to delay my eon∣version to Gods service, thou pur∣suest thy Second, which is, to weary me in my well-begun enterprise. To shift off my Conversion, thou urgedst youth, long life, time e∣nough; (thy dayly and dangerous deceits, by which more Christians perish, than by any other thy guiles and stratagems:) Thou knowest the peril of delay, in a matter so important, as is our conversion, perfection, salvation; Thou art not ignorant how one sin draws on an∣other; how he that to day is unfit, will be less to morrow; how custom grows into nature, breeds blindness, hardness of heart, and insensibili∣ty; how old diseases are hardly and rarely cured; how God withdraws his grace when 'tis abused, refused, neglected; how much his justice by
delay is exasperated, and that we heap coales on our own heads by our negligence. Thou art well skill'd in the uncertainty of our frail life, know'st the dangers, chances, changes, and accidents, which may speedily overwhelm us: therfore thou whisperest, stay a little, deferr yet for a time; till God in whose hands are the moments of all time, takes from us all time, (who have so long abused the opportunity of time), and sends us into pains eter∣nal without time. But seeing me resolutely and vio∣lently breaking all thy chains, run∣ning and crying with S. Augustin; S. Augustin Why shall I longer say to morrow? why not now? even at this instant? thou now strivest to undermine my Perseverance: But take courage, ô my soul! thy time of enduring will soon end, and thy ensuing joy will be without end. Hearken not to thy sworn enemies enchantments; sit not, stand not, sleep not; but pray, watch, and walk, whilst thou hast light and life, that the darkness of eternal night and death overtake thee not.
And since thy Loving Lord, is both able and willing to succour and support thee, and to turn every thing to thy advantage, ven thy imperfections, frailties and failings, (For thou art warranted, that so Rusbrochi∣us. sure as God is God, so sure it is, that he will permit nothing to befall us, but for our greatest good, and his own glory, and that it is most grate∣full unto him we so judge of him;) doubt not of his providence and protection, not fear to permit him to deal with thee as he best plea∣seth, and to remain in a perfect in∣differency to all his divine ordinan∣ces and dispositions, saying; Since it is thy will, O Lord, it is certain to be ny good; be it so: I am as sure thou lovest me, as that thou livest with me: A way then all diffidence, disloyalty, inconstancy: How many Saints have you perverted? how many souls have you damned? With∣out thee O holy Perseverance all is lost, with thee all is seure; Grace till the end, Glory without end: Welcome holy Confidence! the main support of my life, and the life of my Perseverance; I am content, O my
Lord, to be conducted by thee for time and eternity, as thou best plea∣sest; Lead me by land or water, by desolation or devotion, by darkness or day, by sickness or health, I will adhere to thee constantly. If it be thy blessed will, O Lo∣ving Lord, that I creep as a snail towards Perfection, I will neither be troubled nor dismayed, I desire not to fly faster than thou enablest me, I quiet my self with the grace thou givest me, which I acknow∣ledge to be not only beyond my deserts, but better for me than my own desires. Finally I here make a generall Resolution, and a generous Resignation of my whole self into thy holy hands; hoping that it will give worth and value to all my actions and sufferings. O my Soveraign and sweet ma∣ker! A form of generall Resoluti∣on. my whole Will and desire (ac∣cording to my great obligation, for∣mer profession, and present prote∣station) is to serve and love thee, and to fulfill thy blessed Will in all things, and to be wholly thine at all times, and in all things whatsoever. 'Tis thy Honour I only aym at, thy
Glory I only intend, and thy Will, I only seek to accomplish: To thee alone I render and wish all benedi∣ction and eternall praise, and with cordiall Joy I say Amen to all that is possessed by thy most amiable and perfect goodness; and joyning my humble desires and devotions with all those that love thee, I im∣plore that we may be all thine, and that thou wilt be All in us all. And now, O my soul, since thou hast in some sort happi∣ly begun a course of Prayer, Re∣collection, Abnegation, and Hu∣mility, according to Obedience, and supported by Confidence; For fur∣ther helps to perse∣verance, read the 22. 23. 24. ch. of St. Teresa's life, Writ∣ten by her self; And her book entitled, The way to Perfe∣ction. Let the Devill storm, let Flesh and blood rebell, let the World mur∣mure; Answer them all, Quod scripsi, scripsi; my Vows and Pro∣mises must and shall stand & I am content to sign it with my blood: I will sooner dye than swerve from my well-setled Resolutions, or can∣cell the free deed and gift of my self to my Saviours service; Dark∣ness, Desolation, Death and De∣vill shall never make me change.
Live my good Purposes to love my dear Lord unchangeably, irre∣vocably, eternally. Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his.
2 Tim. c. 4 v. 7▪ 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which our Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto them also that love his appearing. James 1. 12. Blessed is the man that indureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which our Lord hath promised to them that love him. Revelation 2. 10. Be thou faithfull untill death, and I will give thee the crown of life. FINIS.
Errata. In the Conflict. PAge 32. line 2. for from read form, p. 45. l. 15. for weary r. wary, p. 69. l. 25. for mediations r. meditations, p. 143. l. 28. for his r. he, p. 143. l. 29. for its r. his, p. 161. l. 29. for ordinary r. ordi∣narily, p. 201. l. 2. for pleasure r. please, p. 277. l. 2. for many r. may. In the Conquest. PAge 3. l, 29. for some r. son. In the Exercises. Page 103. l. 12. for at his r. eat a his. In the Maxims.
