C4509 08608469 41457
ENGLANDS COVENANT PROVED Lawfull and necessary Also at this Time, both by Scripture and Reason. TOGETHER With sundry Answers to the usuall Ob∣jections made against it. By S. C. Preacher at B. F. Eccles. 5. 4.When thou vowest a vow unto GOD, deferre not to pay it; For Hee hath no pleasure in Fooles; Pay that which thou hast vowed. LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton in Popes-head Alley, 1643.
Courteous Reader, AT the first impression hereof, the time prefixed by the Parliament, for the Cities taking of this Covenant, being almost elapsed, & my immature conceptions not ready for the birth, yet importunity like an overhasty Midwife, would needs deliver me of it: whereupon I presumed that it would have perished in the birth, or have found no better en∣tertainment than a misshapen Embryon: but beyond my ex∣pectation it hath been accepted of, approved, and (as I under∣stand) given satisfaction to many, and was now this second time put unto the Presse before I knew of it: Had the Stationer given me but some few dayes warning, I would according to my poore abilities have added something for the enlargement of it: but presuming yet that some abler Person may happily undertake the worke: in the interim this is once againe sent abroad, that so the Ignorant may be informed of the weightinesse of avow, and Covenant: that the doubtfull may be resolved concerning the Lawfulnesse of this in hand; and that all may be excited to the carefull performance of what they binde themselves to here∣by: If in any of these thou receivest satisfaction, and Benefit, praise God, and pray for him who is Thine in the Lord S. C. July, 28, 1643.
ENGLANDS Covenant▪ THe Reasons that have induced the Parliament to frame, and propose this present Covenant to be taken by all the well-affected Subjects of this Kingdome (as I conceive) are especi∣ally two. 1. By reason of Gods hand which lies so heavie upon us in this present Judgement of the devouring Svvord, which being one of the greatest outward miseries which can befall a people, shewes that their sinnes are grown to a great ripenesse, and that gentler Physick will not serve turne to purge out their strong corruptions: whereupon after the godly examples of the pious and renowned Kings of Iudah, they have pitched upon this course as a speciall meanes to pacifie Gods vvrath by a generall Covenanting with God to indeavour a Reformation of our hearts, and lives. 2. Observing the incessant and indefatigable Plots of the Enemies of God, and his Cause, either by open violence, or secret fraud to oppresse, or undermine the Power and puri∣ty of our Religion, and to introduce Popery instead thereof: They have therefore thought fit by this Covenant, to lay a stronger engagement upon every one to detect and discover, and oppose whatsoever may tend to the prejudice of the one, or to the furtherance of the other: but withall consider¦ing
that the major part of those which are to enter into it either for want of Information may scruple some part of it, or doe it aubitante conscientiâ, with a doubting Conscience, which will make it a sinne to them) or through inconside∣ratenesse may doe it hand over head, without understanding, or a just prepondering of the strong engagement which they lay upon themselves hereby, which will make them to breake it as lightly, as they undertooke it rashly. I have in∣deavoured therefore for the Information of the one, and ballasting of the other in these few ensuing Lines to shew the severall sorts of Covenants, and the requisites of a Lawfull Covenant, and by the Application of this present to those Rules, to prove the lawfullnesse of it: as also by shewing the great ingagement that a sacred Vow, layes upon the Conscience of the undertakers of it, to deterre all, ei∣ther from a giddy taking, or a rash and inconsiderate breaking of the same. Vowes and Covenants are of 2. sorts Unlawfull and sinfull. Lawfull and good. A sinnefull Covenant is a bond whereby wee ingage our selves to something that is evill: such was that of those wic∣ked Jewes, 23. Act. 12. who bound themselves under an Oath of execration, that they would neither eate, nor drinke, till they had killed Paul. A Lawfull Covenant is either Civill. Religious. Mixt. A Civill Covenant is a bond whereby we ingage our selves each to other in civill respects:Civile. such as was that betwixt A∣braham and Abimelech, 21. Gen. 27. &c. A Religious Covenant is a bond whereby we engage our selves to God,Sacrum. to yeeld obedience to Him in those things which are agreeable to his will, 2 Chron. 29. 10, 10 Ezr. 3. 10. Nohem. 29. And this Religious Covenant is either Universall, Singular. A Universall Religious Covenant is a bond of all the Faith∣full
vvhereby they engage themselves to the service of God in abstaining from sinne, and indeavouring to keep all his Commandements: this Covenant is made by all in Baptisme, and renevved so often as vvee come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. A singular Religious Covenant is a bond vvherein some one Person for some speciall cause doth en∣gage himselfe to God. And it is either Absolute, and perpetuall. Conditionall, and Temporary. An absolute perpetuall Covenant is a bond whereby wee engage our selves, absolutely to God, and during the whole terme of our lives, from which wee can never bee released: such was that of David 119. Psal. 106. I have sworne and I vvill performe it, that I will keep thy righteous Judge∣ments. A Conditionall and Temporary Covenant is a bond vvhereby we engage our selves, upon some condition, and for a certaine time onely, vvhich being expired, or the conditi∣on unperformed vve are freed from the same: vvhereof wee have examples, 1 Sam. 1. 11. v. 18. Act. 18. A mixt Covenant vvhich is partly Religious,Mixtum and partly civill, is a bond whereby vve engage our selves both to God and men: Such is this Covenant now appointed to bee en∣tred into: and such was that 2 King. 11. 17. Iehoiada made a Covenant betvveen the Lord and the King: and the King, and the People, that they should bee the Lords People: be∣tvveen the King also and the People: thus having conside∣red the severall sorts of Covenants, I shall come in the next place to collect such requisites, and ingredients, as are neces∣sary to the constitution of a Lavvfull Covenant, that so by examining this present Covenant thereby, wee may more cleerely be convinced of the lawfulnesse of the same. Which Ingredients are especially these: 1. That the Subject matter of it be lawfull, or else it's no Covenant,De Lic but a conspiracy, and they which enter into it are like Simeon and Levi, brethren in evill, or like those wicked Jewes, vvhich bound themselves by an Oath, and a curse that they would neither eate, nor drinke till they had killed Paul, 23. Act. 12.
Neither is it sufficient that the matter of it be lawfull, but it must be knowne also to be so by those which enter into it, at the time when they undertake it: for as in an Oath wee must sweare in truth, i. e. the matter of it must be true: so in Judgement also, i. e. knowing it to bee true, 4. Ier. 2. or else we are guilty of perjury: so in vowes, and Covenants which are sometimes accompanied with an Oath, we must be well informed of the lawfulnes of the matter thereof, or else we make our selves guilty before God: and that of Solmon may be applyed to such persons, 20 Prov. 25. It's a snare for a man to devoure holy things, and after the vow to enquire. 3. It's also further required, that they which enter into a Covenant should before hand, and at their entrance into it, fully resolve with themselves to the uttermost of their pow∣er to observe and keep the same, and that in every part, and branch of it: whereunto tends that advice of Solomon, 5 Ec. cles. 4, 5. When thou vowest a vow deferre not to pay it, for God hath no pleasure in fooles. Pay therefore that which thou hast vowed? Better it is that thou shouldest not vow, then that thou sholdest vow and not pay▪ 30. Num. 2. 4. It must be of things within our povver: or else to en∣gage our selves by a vow to impossibilities,De possi∣bilibus. what is it but to prophane the sacred name of God? and bring downe his curse upon us: this was the sinne of those after the floud which covenanted among themselves, to build a Tower which should reach up to Heaven: a thing impossible, if God had not confounded their Language: and it was also an aggravation of their sinne, who vovved that they would neither eat, nor drinke till they had killed Paul: which be∣ing out of their power, made their vovv the more unlawfull unto them. 5. The Persons which bind themselves by a vow, must be sui Juris, such as have power of their owne heads; and bee not under the jurisdiction of another, or else they must be care∣full to take along with them the consent of their Gover∣nours, if they meane to free themselves from sinne: a Maide in her Fathers House, or a woman that hath an Husband
may not vow without the consent of their superiors, 30. Nu. 3. &c. the Reason is because they are not at their own dis∣posall, and therefore not able to performe their vowes with∣out the approbation of another, verse 13. Having thus shewed the severall sorts of Covenants, and what is required to make a lawfull one; I shall now come to apply this present Covenant to these rules, and thereby not only vindicate it from all unlawfulnes, but also shew the use∣fullnesse, if not necessity of it, at such a time as this is; for which end I shall take it in sunder, and cleere the lawfulnesse of it in each branch, that so it may appeare to be free from just exception in the subject matter of it, which is the first thing required in a lawfull Covenant. First, in the first part of it we professe our hearty sorrow for our owne, and the Nationall sins, which have deserved the Calamaties and judgements which now lie upon us, and that our intention is by Gods grace to endeavour the a∣mendment of our owne wayes: which clause is so cleere that I presume that every Christian at the first vievv, will not onely see a lawfulnesse, but a necessity of the same: for in Gods judgements wee may read our sins, in the generality, and greatnesse of the one; the generality and greatnesse of the other, and in that day (when Gods hand lies heavie up∣on a Nation) doth the Lord God call to weeping and mour∣ning and to baldesse, &c. 22. Isa. 12, Wherein wee see that same thing which is undertaken in this Covenant, imposed as a duty by God himselfe, who doth not onely require a sence of, and sorrow for our sins, but a resolute endeavour of Reformation also; wash you, make you cleane, take away tbe e∣vill of your workes, from before mine eyes, &c. Isay 16. Or else our humiliation is but hanging downe our heads like a bull rush for a day, 58. Isa. 5. meere mocking of God, and delu∣ding our owne soules. 2. That we doe abhorre and detest the late vvicked, and treacherous designe, and that we never gave, or will give, or assent to the execution thereof: but will according to our power and vocation oppose and resist the same, and all other
of the like nature: this branch no one may take which hath in any measure been privie to the said Plot, till they have first unburthened their Conscience, by acknowledgeing what they have been privie to, and craving pardon for the same; otherwise they devote themselves to the curse of God, who will be a swift witnesse against such perjured Persons: and whose flying role will enter into their Houses, and re∣maine therein, and consume them with the timber thereof, and stones thereof, 5 Zach. 4. But for such persons as are free from the guilt of so foule a blot, they not only may, but ought to professe their detestation of so horrid a Plot, as in the execution must necessarily have tended to the death and ruine of so many Innocents: and had the Plotters obtained their ends; would without all question have ended in the dis∣solution of the Parliament. And therein in the Fatall peri∣od of Religion, Lawes, Liberties and all future free Parlia∣ment, also; as the Commission granted to them, will cleerly evidence and evince. 3. That in case any other like designe shal come to our know∣ledge, we will make such timely discovery, as may best con∣duce to the preventing of it: By like Designe we are to un∣derstand, such as are destructive or prejudiciall to the Parli∣ament, Citie or Kingdome, as this former would have been: and this no one that is friend to any of these, or to himselfe in them can refuse to promise. Some of the very Heathen from the light, and Principles of Nature it selfe, have refu∣sed to survive their Countries Liberty: and shall not Chri∣stians put to their helping hands, to wrest the Liberty of their Religion from the attempts of Papists: the Liberties of the Parliament from the Complotters of their ruine, and the Liberties of the City, and Kingdome fromthe Power of Tyrannicall Oppressours, which is all that wee promise to doe when we engage our selves to a timely discovery of the like designes? The Kingdome is a Ship: the Parliament our Steeres men: the Citie the principall Cabbin: and Religi∣on the precio us Fraught wherewith God hath laden our Ship, and he is a Traitour to all these which shall refuse to tye himselfe to indeavour their preservation.
4. That we do in our Consciences beleive that the Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and con∣tinued for their just Defence: and for the Defence of the true Protestant Religion, and Liberties of the Subject against the Forces raised by the King: by the beliefe here spoken of (as I conceive) wee are not to understand such a Faith, as is grounded upon indubitable & infallible Principles, as we be∣lieve the Articles of our Religion: but only such a credence as is grounded upon probable Arguments, and Reasons, which first working upon our Judgements doe afterwards convince our Consciences to believe the same. Now that we have sufficient reason thus to believe, let us but a little call to mind the Plot of bringing up the Army out of the North: The attempt made against the five Members: the with∣drawing of the King from his faithfull Councell: the active instruments which have been imployed into forraigne parts to provide Armes, Ammunition, and Commanders, the bringing of them over from time to time, their designe: to seize upon many of the strong Holds of the Kingdome: the putting of the Armes into the hands of untrusty Com∣missioners of Array: the Arming of the Papists contrary to Law: the correspondence held with the Scottish, and Irish Papists, and Rebells: the indeavour to raise a party in this City to seize upon the Persons of some principall Members of Parliament and City: and the late Plot as bad, if not worse then all the rest if by Gods mercy it had not been strangled in the birth: these are sufficient Arguments to in∣duce us to believe that it was but high time for the Parlia∣ment to raise Forces, and to continue them for their just Defence: Againe consider also the setting up of Masses in Yorke, and Oxford: the many Jesuites, Priests, and Jsui∣ted Papists that are in the Adverse Armies, whose Romish Plots are only to advance the Catholique Cause, and ruine our Religion. Besides the granting of so many Commissi∣ons for Array; which were so destructive to the Subjects Liberty: the pillaging and plundering of the Houses and E∣states of the best Subjects, and burning of their Habitations, and we cannot but be convinced, it was high time to raise
and it is just to continue these forces for the defence of the true Protestant Religion, and the liberties of the Subject, and hereupon vve doe declare, vow and covenant, that wee will according to our power and vocation, assist these For∣ces thus raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament against the forces raised by the King without their consent: If we be upon the former grounds, or the like once convin∣ced, that these forces are justly raised and continued for the ends aforesaid, then it will necessarily follow that wee are bound in Conscience to be aiding and assisting to them ac∣cording to our power and vocation, i. e. with our persons, if we be fit, and have a calling thereunto, or with our purses according to our abilities if we be not set to serve in person: and with our advice and prayers also for their good suc∣cesse; and he is no true friend either to Parliament, Reli∣gion or Liberties, that upon information shall refuse to make this Vow: Besides, it is but high time that men should by such a sacred Bond bee quickned unto this assistance in these times, wherein so many grow wearie of the worke, and by withdrawing their persons and purses from assisting do much endanger the Cause of God. 5. That vve will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this Oath in what they shall doe in pursuance thereof, neither can this be justly scrupled, for if we enter into this Covenant our selves, and in pursuance of any thing con∣teined in it, vve shall stand in need of the assistance of others: As we shall desire, so wee cannot but thinke our selves much injured if wee find not assistance from them, and then the Law of requitall doth require, that when occasion is offered we shall not withdravv our help from them also: besides, by this Union among our selves, the common Cause of God, and the Kingdome will bee much strengthned, and every undertaker in it will be much encouraged when they see so many by so strong a Bond to be engaged to their help. A∣gaine, it cannot bee conceived but that this Covenant will excite & provoke the hatred of the adverse Party against the undertakers of it exceedingly, whereof we had late experi∣ence in our Brethren of Scotland so much hated and prose∣cuted under the Name of Covenanters, and therefore wee
have need to tye our selves to mutuall assistance for our bet∣ter support against the Odium and rage of the Adversary. 6. That wee will not directly or indirectly adhere unto, nor shall willingly assist the forces raised by the King, with∣out the consent of both Houses of Parliament. Herein pro∣vision is made against equivocation, & those cunning tricks and evasions which many find out to cosen both themselves and others, as when a man will not send himselfe, but will suffer his wife, or children, or other friends to doe it, as hath been the practice of many hundreds in severall parts of the Kingdome, who themselves have lent Money, or sent an Horse to the Parliament, but have suffered their Wives or Sons to send twice so much to the King, that so by comply∣ing with both, they might escape the displeasure of either, Besides many who (living in some places have been ashamed to owne the supporting of the Kings forces, yet under hand they have contributed much to them: but now its required that neither directly nor indirectly wee bee aiding to them, and yet because many whose hearts are upright with God and his Cause, live under the power, or fall into the hands of the barbarous and bloudy Cavaliers, so that the not con∣tributing to them, may endanger their lives, liberties, and e∣states, therefore is that word put in, that we shall not wil∣lingly assist, but only in the cases aforementioned: And if we do but seriously consider the aime and drift of the Kings for∣ces evidently discovered to all that are not wilfully blind, and their wayes and manner of prosecuting the same, wee may easily conclude that they are enemies to God and his Gospell, and to the Parliament, and their Liberties, to the Kingdome and its lawes, who will vvillingly be assistant to them. And thus I have briefly run over this Covenant in e∣very branch of it, and thereby endeavoured to prove the lawfulnesse of it in the subject matter: I shall now proceed to examine it by the other rules required in a lawfull Cove∣nant, that so I may fully vindicate it from all hesitation. The second thing required is, that it bee knowne to bee lawfull at the time of the taking of it, for which end the Par∣liament hath long since caused it to bee published in Print,
that so all men might see it, and have time fully to informe themselves of the lawfulnesse of it; And in case that any doubts should arise, they might repaire to those which are fit and able to resolve them, that so no scruple might remain at their taking of it. Thirdly, it must be with a purpose of keeping it, and ill may hee faire that shall make this Covenant with any other purpose whatsoever: for if it be lawfull, as is proved before, and that thereupon we engage our selves by it, it must needs argue a prophane and Atheisticall heart in any that shall re∣solve for sinister ends to take it, and yet purpose afterwards to break it; and what doe they therein▪ but pray for a curse upon themselves, whilst invocating the sacred name of God to be a witnesse of their sincerity in making this Vow, yet withall they resolve that he shall dispense with them in their future breaches of it; and how will such dissemblers be able to answer it at the dreadfull day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Fourthly, it must be of things within our power, and so is this Covenant in all the branches of it. Lastly, the persons that enter into it are either such as have power of their owne heads, or that have the consent of their Superiours: and therefore having all the Ingredients that are required to make up a lawfull Covenant and Vow, it must necessarily follow that it is lavvfull: but let us a lit∣tle further consider whether there be not a kind of necessity also that this, or the like Covenant should be entred into at such a time as this, which I conceive will fully appeare if we consider. First, That there is no readier nor more effectuall way to pacifie the displeasure of God and to procure a removall of these judgements which lye so heavy upon us then by sor∣rowing for our sins acknowledging God Justice, and vowing a Rformation this Isa, Hezekiah Iosiah, and Nehemiah knew, and therefore had recourse to this meanes, which according∣ly they found sucessefull. Secondly, It will appeare to be necessary if we doe but con∣sider the restlesse attempts of the adversaries to corrupt and
seduce incautious persons, to their owne, and others ruine, they have had their emisaries, and instruments in every Ci∣ty, and town, to propose the specious baits of honours Offices, Riches, Favour, Friends, & what not? that so they may invei∣gle the simple by working upon every humor, to betray both Church, and Common-wealth into their power and there∣fore it cannot but be necessary that by the sacred bond of a Vow, we should be fortified against such inticements. If wee doe but consider the pronesse that is in our natures to be seduced, and led aside by such importunate sollicitati∣ons and strong provocations to evill, especially vvhen they come, backed with large promises, and great hopes of ad∣vantage, wee must needs confesse it necessary, that at such a time provision of a remedy, should be made against such as∣saults, and there can be no better found out then a solemne Covenant, whereby vve are to engage our selves before the searcher of all hearts, to stop our eares against such Syrens songs which would enchant us, to rush upon our owne de∣struction, and to prefer selfe-ends before the peace and wel∣fare of Church and State. It cannot be imagined that this late Plot is as yet fully dis∣covered, but that there still remaine many persons undete∣cted vvhich have their hands deeply in it. And therfore this Covenant is necessary that so such per∣sons out of a deep sence of that great guilt, which they pluck upon themselves, in case they sweare falsly therein, may be brought to an acknowledgemnt and confession, of what they know about it, and to crave pardon for the same, before they enter into this Covenant, vvhich would bee a great meanes to prevent much mischiefe that may otherwise ensue, in case it remaine undiscovered. It cannot bee doubted but that many both in this City, and in other parts of the Kingdome have either openly, or secretly; sent Money, Plate, Armes, or other necessaries to the adverse Forces; whereby they have been much strength∣ned, and this uncivill Civill and unnaturall Warre hath bin much fomented, and therefore it is but necessary that every one should disavow his contribution of such assistance for
the time to come, that so by withdrawing the fewell, this fire of contention may the sooner be extinguished. It is evident that this war continuing longer, then was at first expected, the spirits of many well affected Persons are much cooled, and deadned in the prosecution of the worke, whence it comes to passe that they withdraw their persons from the service, and close their purses from contributing to it, whereby the cause of God and the Kingdome lies a bleeding almost to death, and therefore it is but need that we should be all quickned to prosecute it, with more zeale and fervour, and not by our remissenes basely to betray so good a Cause, which if not upheld, will certainely turne to the ruine of our selves, Religion and all. Thus having cleered these two principall points, concer∣ning the lawfulnesse and necessity of this Covenant, I shall briefly in the last place, indeavour to answer such Obje∣ctions as are usually made against it, which are especially these. We are bound by our Oath of Allegiance and the late Pro∣testation to defend the Kings person, honour,Object. and estate, and how then can we enter into this Covenant? This Covenant ties us not to any thing that may be pre∣judiciall unto them.Ans. By it wee are bound to assist the Parliament forces,Obj. against the forces raised by the King, unto which his person is ad∣joyned, and in assisting against his Forces, his person may be indangered. Severall Petitions have been tendred to his Majesty to re∣tire his person from their Company,Ans. and thereby to secure it from danger: if notwithstanding the same, hee shall suffer himself to be over-ruled by evill Counsellors the guilt will lie upon those which have seduced him; it's necessary for the Parliament, to raise forces for the apprehending of those Traytors against his Majesty and the Kingdome, which are protected against Justice, and who are so strong that the or∣dinary Ministers of Justice cannot lay hold upon them▪ to bring them to a Legall Tryall, and therefore, as is usuall in cases of Rebellion, an Army is sent against them, which the
King himself ought to assist, and not endanger his person a∣mongst the other.Object. But the King commands me to assist his forces, and for∣bids mee to bee aiding to the other, and I am bound to obey him. The King is to be considered under a double notion or ca∣pacity,Answ. either as a King, or as a man; as a King he can com∣mand nothing, but vvhat the Law commands, and then eve∣ry Subject is bound to obey him therein; but as he is a man his Judgement may bee corrupted, and his passions may mislead him, so that hee may command that which is de∣structive both to himselfe and the Kingdome; and herein he is the best Subject that disobeyes him. The Amalekite that said that he killed Saul, at his own command, was just∣ly put to death by David as a Traytor for that fact, 2 King. 1. 15, 16. And if a King in his passion shall proffer violence to a mans person, or command another to doe it, I am bound by the Law of nature to defend my selfe against him, and it's no breach of my Oath of Allegeance to doe it. But taking up of Armes against the King,Object. hath been gene∣rally cryed dovvne by the godly and Learned. 1. Here is no taking up of Arms against the King,Answ. but against his evill Counsellours, who have imbittered his spirit against his great and faithfull Counsell, and doe still captivate his person amongst them. And till such bee brought to con∣digne punishment, wee can never enjoy either Religion, per∣sons, Families, or Estates in safety. 2. Many Learned Divines have affirmed, and sufficiently proved both by the Law of God, Nature, and Nations, that if a King turne Tyrant, and oppresse his Subjects in their Religion, Lawes; or Liberties, it is Lawfull for them vim vi repellere, as was done by the Netherlanders, and Protestants in France: neither was it condemned in Queene Elizabeth by our English Divines, when she sent auxiliary Forces to both those places, to assist them against their owne Kings: and did not King Charles also send a Navie for the reliefe of Rochell when the poore Protestants were besieged therein, by their owne King: and hath hee not also declared the Scots to bee
his good and faithfull Subjects though they took up Armes to defend their Religion, and Liberties against oppression. In this Covenant we binde our selves to assist all others, in what they shall doe in pursuance thereof: What if they doe any unlawfull Act in the pursuance of it?Quest. In the pursuance thereof doth necessarily imply,Answ. that it must be done lawfully, and therefore that Word was inser∣ted in the late Protestation, & must be understood here also. But how will it appeare that it is lawfull for the Parlia∣ment to raise Forces without,Quest. much lesse against the Kings consent. An. This question is so fully, and largely discussed, and the thing proved to be lawfull both in case of Law,Answ. and Consci∣ence, by Mr. Prin in his third part, and by diverse of our Di∣vines in their Answers to Dr. Ferne, that I shall referre the Reader to seeke for satisfaction there, where it may be had abundantly, if they come with unballanced Judgements and shut not their eyes against that light which shineth therein. Thus these usuall objections being answered, I shall adde only thus much, that if there be any which have not already enter'd into this Covenant, seeing the lawfullnes and neces∣sity of it by this which hath been premised, they will no longer deferre to doe it, but speedily undertake, with all cheerefulnesse and alacrity, as the men of Iudah did in A∣sa's time, 2 Chron. 15. 14, 15. and not onely so, but that they will indeavour also to draw as many as possibly they can to doe the like. The worke is great and needs many hands to help it for∣ward: Multorum manibus grande levatur onus. The Enemies are vigilant and active to disunite us, they cast in many bones of Division: therefore we have need by this Covenant to cement our selves together, or else wee are undone. Divide, & impera is the Old Motto. And lastly, that having once entered into it, wee must re∣solve with our selves, that we can never be freed from that tye which it layes upon us, and that therefore wee must be al∣wayes mindfull of it, and carefull to observe it in every part, and branch thereof, that our hearts being knit together in a firme bond of mutuall assistance, and love the God of love, and Peace may be with us, and for us. Amen.
