C5045 16997773 105667
The Perfect Pharisee UNDER MONKISH HOLINESSE, Opposing the Fundamentall Principles of of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Scripture-Practises of Gospel-Worship manifesting himselfe in the Generation of men called QVAKERS. OR, A Preservative against the Grosse Blasphemies and horrid delusions of those, who under pre∣tence of perfection▪ and an immediate Call from God, make it their businesse to Revile and Disturbe the Ministers of the Gospel. Published, for the establishing of the People of God in the Faith once delivered to the Saints. And in a speciall manner directed to BELEEVERS in Newcastle and Gateside. Isay 8. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speake not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them. 2 Epist. of John, ver. 8. Looke to your selves, that we lose not those thing which we have wrought. Gateside, Printed by S. B. and are to be sould by Will: London Book-seller in Newcastle 1653.
Christian Reader. THe great Designe of that old and subtill Serpent in the latter dayes, doth eminently appeare to be, to over-turne the Faith of Soules▪ For what else is the Reason of so many monstrous shapes, and varieties of appearances into which he transformeth himselfe, but that he may have somewhat more probably successefull, to intangle, according to the diversities of the temper of hearts? Yet such is the wise, and good dispensation of our God, that even when Satan would appeare most like an Angell of light; yet something ever doth breake forth in his closest contrivances, that makes the designe of the Serpent very visible. There is indeed something which pretends to holinesse in this up∣start Generation of men; as the meannesse of their Apparrell, some∣times more then ordinary Abstinence, their forsaking the World (though to a sinfull neglect of their Callings and Families) and many triviall observances, which the Apostle calls, The rudiments of the World, Col. 2. 23▪ (in which they yet place a great part of their perfection) These things have indeed, as Paul said, A shew of Wisedome in Will-Worship and Humility, and neglecting of the Body; But alas, are narrower coverings then can conceale the wickednesse of the Blasphemies, Cursings, and Raylings, which under these are ushered in, to destroy the foundation of the Saints. Seeing therefore their folly is very fully, by the demonstration and wit∣nesse of the Scriptures, made manifest to our selves, and their Principles and practises (hereafter specified) undeniably known to some of us. We are as those that Watch for your soules, as those that must give account, Pressed in Spirit to Publish the ensuing Discourse; With our Prayers, that as their folly is made manifest herein, so it may proceed no fur∣ther. This is the Method of our proceeding in this Tractat. First, we lay downe their Doctrines. Secondly▪ prove them to be theirs from their own Words and Writings. Thirdly, confute them from the Scriptures. Tho. Weld. Will. Cole. Rich. Prideaux. Will. Durant. Sam. Hammond.
The Doctrines of the Quakers produced from their owne Words and Writings, layd downe in the Po∣sitions following. To which is subjoyned full Proofes of their asserting of those Doctrines. As also Arguments for the disco∣very of their unsoundnesse. Position 1. Equality with God. Proofe 1. THat this hath been asserted by the chiefest of them, upon whose mouth its fully known they much de∣pend, will thus appeare; George Fox being by Warrant from M. Toluson, and M. Lawry (now a Member of Parliament) two Justices of the Peace in Lancashire, to be apprehended, for affirm∣ing he was equall with God; before the said Warrant was put in execution, the said businesse was heard over againe at Lancaster, at a private Meeting of the Justices, where George Fox was pre∣sent; Where after severall distinctions, and occasions favourably given in behalfe of the said Fox; Dr. Marshall in presence of the said Justices, proposed the case to Fox himselfe▪ to speake his heart, Whether he did beleeve himselfe equall with God. The said Fox in answer thereto, positively affirmed thus, I am equall with God. The said Dr. Marshall, and Mr. Altham Schoolemaster at Lancaster, deposed this at a generall Sessions in Westmerland, in the hearing of one of W. C. us; and deposed the same againe before the Honouradle Judge Pulston at Lancaster, the next Assizes. 2. At a meeting with Iames Nayler, where a discourse was con∣cerning Persecution, William Baldwinson of Under-barrow in Westmerland, proposed to the said Nayler, Whether he beleeved, that any could be as holy just, and good, as God himselfe? To whom the said Nayler answered, That he did witnesse, that he himselfe was as holy, just and good, as God. This the said M, Baldwinson did
offer to Collonell Brigs to depose▪ and hath very often affirmed the same to one ofW. C. us, and is besides a man fearing God, of eminent trust, where he lives in the service of the Common∣wealth. 3. Mr. George Berkett offered to depose, that George Fox did affirme himselfe to be the judge of the World. And it is fully known to some of us▪ that the generall body of that irreligion▪ do pre∣tend to know the secrets of the hearts of men: its their com∣mon expression to all they speake unto, that they know their hearts; and when they charge Persons with sins (which is usuall with them▪ even to such whose Faces they never saw before▪ nor heard of) which they can finde nothing outwardly to prove, their common ascertion is, that they can see their hearts; and ac∣cordingly doe call them damned, Devils, and pronounce their judgements. Nor is it impertinent to this▪ that Iames Nayler to one of us did affirme, that he wondered that God should revealeW. C. any thing to me, and he not know it. One Wrote thus from Carlile, that he was threatned to be put in Prison with George Fox, whom he called, the Sone of God. Confu∣tation 1. 1. That finite, and infinite should be equall, is a grosse con∣tradiction, which all spirituall and naturall light abhorres. Heare what an infinite God, ascerting his owne inequality sayes to the creature, Isay 40. 15. To whom then will ye liken me▪ or shall I be equall, saith the holy One. Reade the whole Chapter, as also Iob 38. 39 40. 2. If so, then the creature must needs be eternall, à parte ante,2. viz. must never have had a beginning of their being, unlesse they will either affirme▪ that God himselfe was created, or that man is a created God. Reade the Creation of man, Gen. 2. 3. If equall with God then as holy, as just, as wise, as power∣full, as omni-present; some of these the proofes will cleare to be affirmed by Nayler. To whom we propose. If he be as holy, just and good, as God, then he hath been so either from his Birth, or from some worke of conversion since upon his soule. If he say he was so from his Birth, then we cry out Blasphemy, For 1. Are we not sinners from the Wombe? Psal. 51. Isay 48. 8. Children of wrath by Nature, Ephes. 2. 2.
2. Is there not in all a body of death? Rom. 7. 23. 24. And shall sinfull man be equall with God? he whose righteousnesse is but raggs, drosse, and dung; whose goodlinesse but as the Flower of the Field, Isay 64. 6. Phil. 3. 7. 8. Isay 40. 7. Whose Breath is in his Nostrils, Psal. 144. 4. Whose station is lower then the Angels, Psal. 8. and the best of whom is so farre from being just with God, as that he cannot answer him one of a thousand, Job 9. 2. 3. If they affirme he is so, from some worke of conversion since he was Borne, 1. Then the worke of conversion is to make new gods. 2. And growth in Grace shall be the growing of God; and so God shall be lesse or more God according to the different de∣grees of Grace on the soule. But the Blasphemy is so horrid, that to name it, is enough to make true Saints loathe it, and ab∣horre this pretence of Naylers to an holinesse, justice and good∣nesse equall unto Gods. As for the other Attributes, powerfull, omni present &c. we send them to Gods Challenge of Iob. in Iob 38. Where wast thou when I layd the Foundations of the Earth ver. 4. Canst thou binde the sweet influences of the Pleia∣des? and loose the bands of Orion? Canst thou bring forth Ma∣zath in his season? Or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sonnes? ver. 20 31. to chap. 40. 9. Hast thou an Arme like God? Canst thou Thunder with a voyce like him?4. 4. If equall▪ then the same God or another: other there can be none, but he that was before all time. Tis a contradiction if another; so many Saints, so many Gods: if he be the same, then God wanted something of his infinite perfection which he receiveth by Naylers being god, &c. These things we should not mention, but that Saints might be warned of such devilish Doctrines, the very smoake of the bottomelesse Pit. Position 2. That there is no distinction of Persons in the God-head. Proofe. George Fox layes downe such a Principle, as you may see in their Booke called, Sauls Errand to Damascus, pag. 12. with other ascertions of the same kinde, knowne to some of us.
Confut. We hope we need not say much to the confuting of so knowne an Heresie, raked up out of the dust, and which the Saints have ever loathed, as pulling downe one great Pillar of their Faith, the Personall Deity of Christ being the maine ground of the infinite value of his merits; and the Personality of the Spirit being so fully evidenced by the Divine Attributes appropriated to him in Scripture. But we referre you to these unanswerable Scriptures, Heb 1. 3. Mat. 3. 16. 17. 1 Iohn 5. 7. Mat. 8 19. Isay 6. 1. 3. compared with Iohn 12. 39. 40. 41. and Acts 28. 25▪ &c. Position 3. That the soule is a part of the Divine Essence. Proofe. One of us W. C. had this positively asserted by Coll. Benson, and Captaine Ward, at Kendale, and discoursed the controvercy with them. Confut. Let the Christian Reader consider, 1. That if this could be so, then should the Essence of God be divided into so many finite beings or parcels, as soules. 2. Yea, and by this Doctrine, that Essence of God which is infinite in him should come to be finite, when it becomes a soule in man. The Heavens of Heavens are not able to contain him! and the finitenesse of our created spirits, who doth not know? 3. How shall the All Creating Essence of God, become a Creature, and who understands not the Creation of soules? Gen. 2. Heb. 12. 9. 4. If this be so, then shall a part of God be sinfull? which how blasphemous? unlesse men most wretchedly dare deny that there is a sinfulnesse in any soule. 5. And then shall God hate himselfe▪ burne in wrath for ever against his owne Essence, and it lye under damnation for ever∣more; for so is the state of thousands of soules. How horrible i any of this to be ascerted of him, in whose presence is fulnesse of joy. Psal. 16. and that is God blessed for ever, Rom 9 5. 6. Hereupon▪ when Jesus Christ gave himself to death for the soules of men: either he dyed for himselfe, and for the Essence of God; or else he dyed altogether in vaine. What soule not grossely Apostatized, dare vent such things?
Position 4, That Christ is in every man; and in the repro∣bates he is held under corruption. Proofe. W. C. One of us received this assertion from James Nayler, in con∣ference with him; wherein he extended the in-dwellings of Christ to Indians that never heard the Gospel 2. Those whom they call Rebrobates, Devils, they usually tell, notwithstanding, that they Crucifie Jesus Christ within them As is cleare in a Letter one of us hath Read, from John Adland, to Edward Brigs, an holy, humble Saint in Westmerland, whom God was pleased to deliver out of their snares, with which, for some time, he was entangled. And in ordinary experience it is very much apparant. Confu∣tation 1. 1. If so, then either Christ Personall, or els he is in them by his Spirit: we rather suppose, they understand Christ Personall: and our reason is, because Mr. Higgison in his Booke, pag. 5. (which he offred the Supreame Power to make good, in his Epi∣stle) affirmes it to be their Doctrine, That Christ, as Man, dwells in them; which is so grossely Blasphemous, and horrid, a con∣tradiction to the Personall Ascention of Christ, Acts 1. 9. and his sitting at his Fathers right hand, till the restitution of all things, Acts 3. 21. that it needs no further confutation. If Christ dwels in every man by his Spirit? Then 1. Are the fruits of the Spirit in all men? Gal. 5. 22. the fruits of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith, meknesse, temperance. Are these in Turks, Indi∣ans, Papists, Drunkards, whoremasters, Atheists? &c. 2. Where the Spirit is, it is a quickning Spirit, Ephes. 2. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 6 9. yee were such and such, but now yee are sanctified by the Spirit of our God; but it is most apparent, that there is no such quickning in all. Nay, the whole world lyes in wicked∣nesse, 1 John 5. 19. If they shall affirme (as they have done) that the Spirit of God is in such kept under by corruption; then it is so, either first, for want of will in the Spirit of the living God to get the Mastery over sinne. Or secondly, for want of Power. Not for want of will. For the will of the Father, Christ, and Spirit, are all one; which will is, To destroy the works of the Devill, wheresoever the Spirit dwels, 2 Cor, 3. 17. where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is Liberty, and so not kept under corruption? For the Apostle comfortably concludes, that sinne shall not have Dominion over those who are implanted into Christ, because they are not under the Law, but under Grace, Rom. 6. 14. Nor can he secondly, be kept under for want of Power, 1 John 4. 4. You overcome the World, because greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the World; the very ground of their over-comming, is the greatnesse of the Spirits Power above corruption, where∣soever he is, Mat. 13. 29. Luke 11. 22. And if the Spirit be in all, then all must be saved, or it must2. necessarily goe to Hell with the damned. But enough of this so horrible an assertion. Position 5. That Christ in the Flesh, with all he did and sufferd therein, was but a Figure, and no∣thing but an Example. Proofe. 1. This is expressely found in their Booke called, Sauls Er∣rand to Damascus. 2. As also Mr. Higginson, pag. 5. sayes▪ The Lancashire charge stands cleare against them in this Principle, and nothing answered to evade it, in Sauls Errand to Damascus, pag. 8. 3. Also this was Written in that Letter which Nayler wrote to one in Lancashire, which was objected against him by Dr. Marshall, upon account of another Principle in it, (viz. that he that expected to be saved by him that dyed at Ierusalem, should be deceived.) And this Mr. Iaques Minister at Bolton in Lancashire, sent his Testimony under his hand, that he would make appeare, if the Justices of Westmerland pleased to call for him at another season, being detained at that time upon other occasions. Confu. 1 1. This wholly destroyes the grand foundation of the Saints justification and confidence at the Throne of Grace. For if he were but a Figure, then there was no merit in his death, Heb. 9. 26. 2. If but a Figure, then he must Type out another Christ yet to come, Col. 2. 17. But surely they doe not meane the Jewish Messias; or doe they intend a Type of Christ in them yet to come▪ and to appeare there in the time of their conversion, as their Notion is. See Geo. temans Pamphlet, pag. 29. How absurd is such a Doctrine, That all the Acts of Christ, while here on Earth, must be acted over againe
within them? As, that the Virgin Mary must be in them, and bring forth a Christ, and be espoused to Joseph in them; that John Baptizeth in them; that the eleven Apostles are in them▪ Iudas, Herod, and Pilat in them; that Christ is crucified, dead, and buried in them, and risen againe, and ascended to the right hand of the Father in them. And all these not allegorized, but really, personally, and bodily acted in them, and as they were acted at Ierusalem, &c. For all these are the necessary appen∣dices of that sottish Doctrine. 3. If an example onely, this, in plaine tearmes, cuts up the satisfaction of Christ, which is the very Anchor and Refuge of soules. Let the Reader seriously consider these Scriptures fol∣lowing, because the denying of this, doth wholly make fruit∣lesse the blood of Christ, Acts 20. 28. Rom. 5. 8. 9. Ephes. 1. 7. Col. 1, 14. Col. 1. 20. 1 Peter 1. 19. 1 Iohn 1. 2. Rev. 1. 8. 4. If an example, How then is the justice of God satisfied? it must be either by the obedience of him the example; or by our owne that follow it: they deny it to be by Christs obedi∣ence, in making it meerely figurative; and that it cannot be by any obedience of our personall actings; we referre you to what follows in the confutation of the Principle of justifica∣tion by workes. And thus the justice of God shall be un∣satisfied still. What desperate ruine doe these Doctrines bring to guilty soules. 5. What comfort shall a guilty Conscience ever finde, but in the satisfaction of Iesus? and what Peace shall he have, if Christ be onely an Example, unlesse he doe fully came up in every tittle of his life and death also, to answer the Patterne? which it is impossible for man to doe, Heb. 4. 15. he being with∣out sinne, and in that alone accepted, as to a likenesse to us in all things: and the same impossibility is there of comming up to that patterne in the great matters of his Nativity, death, and Passion, and the like. Position 6. That men are not justified by that righteousnesse of Christ, which he in his own Person did fulfill, without us. Proofe. 1. This was the cleare sense of that expression in Naylers Letter, formerly hinted, That whosoever expects to be saved by
him that died at Ierusalem, shall be deceived. 2. In Naylers de∣livering his sense of that expression before the Justices in West∣merland, he clearely states the righteousnesse of Christ, by which we are justified, to be fulfilled in us. 3. The proofe for their next Position fully cleares it. 4▪ Collonell Benson a Kendale, asserted the same to one of our selves, and disputed for the main∣tenanceW. C. thereof. Confut. 1. Then, what ground had Paul▪ to bast and glory in the Crosse of Christ? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Who shall condemne me? upon this account, Rom. 8. 34. It is Christ that dyed; setting the blood of Iesus as a full answer to all the challenges of guilt. 2. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, Rom. 5. 10. 80 3▪ He his owne selfe, bare our sinnes, in his owne Body, on the Tree, 1 Peter 2. 24. And 4. He reconciled us in the body of his Flesh, through death. Col. 1. 21. 22. This body, this death, this crosse, were certainely all without us. Rom. 5. 9. We are justified. And Ephes. 1. 7. Have Redemption through his blood, even the Remission of sinnes. 5. Nay, justification clearely im∣ports, according to the designe of the Gospel-Grace, a non-im∣putation of sin, and a cloathing with that which is the righte∣ousnes of Christ, fulfilled in the world, imputed through belee∣ving, Rom. 4. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20. 21. What spirituall man, may not clearely observe the Scripture, laying the weight of justifi∣cation upon the death of Christ, and his bloody sacrifice on the Crosse? Heb. 9. 26. Position 7. That men are justified by that Righteousnesse, which Christ within us enabled us to performe, or (which is in effect, and some of them have expressed) by inherent holinesse. Proofe. Affirmed by Iames Nayler, in a Booke of his, This light within you will let you see your sinne, bring to repentance, and tendernesse of heart, bring you to feare God, and so leads up to justification and peace, pag. 3. Fawnworth in one of his Pamphlets, thus, Condemnation is onely the disobeying of light within, pag. 30. Nayler saies, We are not reconciled to God, till we be perfectly holy, and able to stand so in our owne power, pag. 25. A. P. to the
same purpose, in a Book set forth by him, pag. 13. Christ recon∣ciles God and Man by renewing the Image of God in purity and holinesse. Collonell Benson and Captaine Ward, were positive in the same Principle, in a discourse with one of us at Kendale in Westmerland. Anthony Hodgshon, one of that way, being asked by Mr. Ward Minister at Wolingham, an account of his Faith; at first denyed so to doe; but he pressing with that of Peter, an∣swered,1 Pet. . 15. then I tell thee, I beleeve to be saved not by the righte∣ousnesse of Christ imputed to me; but by the righteousnesse of Christ inherent in me. Confut. 1 This assertion is fully and industriously confuted by the Apostles; and we may cry out, Gal. 3. 1. Who hath bewitched the hearts of these men. Gal. 3. 10. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things, &c. clearely holding forth an universall impossibility to fulfill the righteousnesse of the Law. Ver. 2. and ver. 21. If there had been a Law given which could have given life, verily righteousnesse should have been by the Law. But the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that beleeve. Rom. 4. 5. To him that worketh not, but beleeveth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for righteousnesse. Even as David himself describeth the blessednesse of the man▪ unto whom God imputeth righteousnesse without works, v. 6. This Doctrine (beleeved and practised) was the very reason of the Iewes stumbing at the Gospel▪ Rom 9. 30. 31. Rom. 10. 3. 4. We might weary you with quoting such Texts as Rom. 3. 19. to the last; multitudes of Scriptures fully clearing up this soule∣ravishing truth of justification not by inherent holinesse, but by Faith in the blod of the Lord Iesus: but we shall close it up with these in stead of all, 1 Cor. 4. 4. Phil. 3. 8. 9. 10. Position 8. That God and man cannot be wholly reconciled, till e be brought into the state of the first Adam, and able in his owne power to stand perfect. Proofe. We referre the Reader for proofe hereof, to a Booke of Naylers, pag 26. where he is so confident of this Doctrine that he proposeth it as a Quaere to all, as if none should have
the boldnesse to gain-say it; your owne Eyes may satisfie you there. Confut. 1. Is not this to bring us perfectly under the covenant of workes and to make us our owne reconcilers, and so to make voyd the death of Christ. But he that hath an Eare to eare, let him heare what the spirit saith, Rom. 5. 10. When we were ene∣mies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, Rom. 8. 3. what the Law could not doe, in that it was weake through the flesh, God sent his owne Sonne to performe. 2. And let the Reader observe, that as the merit of Christ is by their horrible Doctrine (before mentioned) wholly made uselesse as to righteousnesse; so by this Position, the very spirit and power of the Lord Iesus is wholly cast out, as to sanctifica∣tion and holinesse. And so this Anti-Christian Generation have totally renounced the Lord that bought them: For▪ this our standing perfect, is in that assertion attributed, wholly to our own power. Alas! who knowes not that Iohn 15. 4. 5. Iohn 1. 16. It pleased the Father that in him should all fulnesse dwell, Col. 1. 19. Phil. . 13. it is God that worketh in you both to will and to doe, that is the Alpha and Omega, the very athor and finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12. 2. Phil. 1. 6. These are the Peo∣ple that pretend to leade you to Christ, that thus leave you to the meere strength of your weake and rotten natures, both for life and holinesse. 3. This bringing us againe to the state of the first Adam, (till which time, this people say, God and we, cannot be fully reconciled) is nothing else but to bring us againe under a cove∣nant of workes And though perhaps, to be restord to the state of Adam may seem a glorious thing, yet it will clearely ap∣peare to be short of that Gospel-state you are translated into, to the more infinite advancing of Free Grace. Are you not clearely told, the second Adam, the Lord Iesus (Heb. 7. 22.) is made a surety of a better Covenant. Heb. 8. 6. Established on better Promises? For whereas the first Adam by that Cove∣nant, First, Was to doe▪ and live. Secondly, Had no Promise of perseverance in that state, Thirdly, Nor was there a Mediator to enterpose in case of breach, the tenour of the Law in it selfe considered as a Covenant, clearely dis-owning any Me∣diator.
4. In a word, the sad condition of Adam under such a covenant, though for a time in so good an estate, if it be not enough experimentally seen in all our falls by his; yet may, in the ruine of damned Angels, standing upon the like tearmes, be known apparantly: First, Yet in the Gospel-state, Iesus Christ purchased life for us to be received, not by working, but by be∣leeving, Rom. 4. 5. 6. And secondly, None can take out of hisIoh. 10. 28. hands. Thirdly, If any man sinne, we have an Advocate with the Father, 1 Iohn 2. 2. And fourthly, Are delivered from the wrath to come, Rom. 5. 9. So that it will appear, that this resti∣tution to the state of the first Adam, being so magnified by these men, fully speaks how low their spirits are as to the things of God, how Legall their conceptions of the way of salvation; and that it is but a miserable state, in comparison of what you are brought to by the Covenant of Grace; For how doth the ministration of righteousnesse exceed in Glory? 2 Cor. 3. Position 9. That no man that commits sin, or that is not per∣fectly holy▪ can ever enter into the Kingdome of Hea∣ven, unlesse there be a Purgatory. Proofe. Iames Nayler in his Booke before quoted, pag. 26. puts it by way of quaere. And the very reading of the said page, will evi∣dently manifest it, that this is not onely his Principle, but any assertion to the contrary, looked upon by him as an impossibili∣ty or grosse absurdity. Confut. Our Purgatory is the blood of Iesus, which cleanseth the soule (otherwise, as to its personall actings very guilty) from all sinne, as 1 Iohn 1. 7. And though perhaps these tremblings and quakings (which the Administrator at Haxham in his Banners affirmes▪ pag. 18. doubtlesse his false Iew could doe, and which kinde of extasies, pag. 24. he derives from the Francifan Fryars) may be looked upon by these People as a Purgatory from their sine et we dare not trust our eternity upon such impo∣str▪ or (be they never so reall) on things so evidently, rather the e of Legall conviction, and the horrour of an unbeleeving ol,  of any saving knowledge of the Gospel. How  doth this one Position lay the very whole designe of ably naked and bare, as to an overturning
of righteousnesse by the blood of Iesus▪ Our way, and the one∣ly way into the holy of holies is by that blood, Heb. 10. 19. 20. by Faith in which a soule, otherwise wicked, ungodly &c. Rom. 4 5. is justified; and though guilty, as to his own actings of many infirmities▪ shall be absolved, and stand undeniably righ∣teous before the Tribunall of the Father. But alas! how sot∣tish are the spirits of these men in this discovered to be? how grossely ignorant of the great businesse of justification of sinners by Faith of Iesus Christ, that dare trust to so filthy raggs in the presence of so just and so holy a God. Position 10 No reall Saint but he that is perfect, and per∣fectly holy in this life, and doth not sinne. Proofe. It is the designe of Nayler in his Booke in severall Paegs to prove this, see his Book pag. 21. 22. Nayler hath oft spoken it of himselfe, and said, he witnessed it. So G. Fox, hath done: others (some of us doe know) have said, they witnesse perfection in Nay∣ler.W. C. Nay so farre doth Farnesworths ignorance of the Gospel proceed, that in his Booke pag. 20. he thus writes, They say they can never overcome the body of sinne▪ or be made perfect here; and they say▪ no un▪ lane thing shall ever enter into the Kingdome of God. How doth this agree? Its one of their ordinary out-ryes against the Ministers, because they oppose this Doctrine. And tis the most generall Doctrine of all their Books and Papers Confut. 1. Let the Reader consider▪ there must be of necessity a di∣stinction of the word perfect and perfection in Scripture; though we know this Generation of men will cry downe distinctions, and pronounce that cure against us, Rev. 22. as if we added to the word Yet the following cases will evidence the absolute necessity of distinctions, if the unity of truth, and the faith∣fulnesse of the word be owned at all. Reade 1 Iohn 1. 8. 10. If we sy that we have no sinne the truth is not in us; compared with 1 Iohn 3. 8 9. Whosoever is borne of God doth not commit sinne. Reade 1 Iohn 5. 16 There is a sinne to death and there is a sinne not to death So Isay 9 7. Of his Gouernment there shall be no end; compared with 1 Cor. 15 24 Then commeth the end, when he shall deliver p the Kingdome, &c▪ 2. Now as to a necessity of it in the case in hand, consider
the various use of he word in Seripture, Phil. 3. is very full, ver. 12. Not as though I had already attained, either were alrea∣dy perfect; compared with ver. 15. (where tis a word of the same root) the Apostle speaking of the Saints, and taking in himselfe in that expression, adds, Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be th minded▪ In which is plainely evident, that Paul shall grossely contradict himselfe, unlesse there be a distingui∣shing betwixt the variety of the sense of the word perfect. 3. That perfection therefore, ver. 12. is perfection in Glory▪ as the verses both before, and presently following it, doe fully cleare; its that for which Paul was apprehended of Christ, as is evident 1 Cor. 13. 10. where tis opposed to Pauls present state; When that which is perfect i come, then that which is in part shall be done away; clearely meaning his injoyment of God in glory▪ as is plaine, ver. 12. Now we see through a glasse darkely, en face to face. Now the same word (perfect) in ver. 15. that it cannot possibly be meant of the same sort of perfection is evi∣dent; For as the Apostle tells you, that he enjoying the perfection, v. 15. is yet short of, & is pressing forward towards the perfection, in ver. 12. as to a thing thats yet before, so taking the word in both places in the same sense; it were a contradiction for him to say, he is perfect, and is not perfect. For the true meaning thereof, we give you three Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2. 6. Howbeit, we speake wisedome amongst those that are perfect. 1 Cor. 14. 20. In malice be yee children, but in understanding be yee men▪ or be ye perfect (for the word is the same with the former Text.) Heb 5 last, Stong meat belongs to those that are of full age, or that are perfect. In all which places, it is evident in it selfe, that the word imports, Christians growne up to more knowledge in the Gospel, then others had, who are in these quotations, called Babes. From the consideration of this Text, it may be fully seen, that perfection of Saints here, is not that absolute perfection in glory, which Paul professed he had not attained to; but that comparative perfection, of being growne up to, more then or∣dinary measures of Grace and understanding, much beyond the attainement of Babes in Christ. 2. As for our perfection by justification▪ the Scriptures fully hold it out upon the account of the imputed righteousnesse of
Christ▪ whereby the spouse appeares altogether lovely; not up∣on the account of her own holinesse, for so she is blacke, and an infant in her blood; but we know that tis not this perfecti∣on they speake of, as he that hath but looked into their Books may presently discover. 3. There is a perfection which the Scriptures expresseth in∣tegrity by; as that word speaks the truth of grace in opposition to hypocrisie. Thus Iob is called perfect, Iob 1. 1. but that this perfection doth not imply a totall absence of sinne▪ is plaine; witnesse his sinfull passionate cursing the day of his birth, Iob 3. 3. Let the day perish wherein I was borne. Job 6. 8. 9. Oh that is would please God to destroy me, that he would let goe his hand, and cut me off. See his owne confession, Job 9. 20▪ 2▪ If I say I am perfect, my owne mouth shall prove  perverse. Thus Asa is called perfect, 1 Kings 1, 14▪ The high places were not re∣moved; neverthelesse Asa's heart was perfect with the Lord all his dayes. Here is the perfection of Asa's heart with God, and that all his dayes; yet you shall nd first, He tooke  away the high places, which was a  ▪ Secondly, He tooke the gold and silver ou o the se of the Lord, and sent them to the  and ue▪  Chron. 16. 7. 9▪ Thirdly,  an put him in the Prippressed the People at ▪ And  his Das sought not to the Lord ▪ So that you may clearely see in wh h was sd to  perfect. As for other examples in this kinde▪  this time it may be clearely understood in what sense the spirit cl them perfect, who otherwise had their per∣sonall grosse infirmitie. 4. You are to distingsh betwixt the perfection of God, and the perfection of the creature, in reference to that Text▪ Mat 5. last. In which place, perfection cannot signifie that which brings up to an equality with God, but a similitude; unlesse you runne upon that blasphemous Principle of equallity with God, of which we have said enough before. 5 By our thus comparing Scripture with Scripture, we ex∣pect (from their former usage in this kinde) they will charge us, with pleading for sinne, though we are but discovering the
imperfections of the best Saints, lest they shou'd live upon their owne righteousnesse, (which to set up and establish, in oppo∣sition to that of Christs imputed, is evidently the designe of Quakers) And that so the strength of the Lord may be made perfect in their weakenesse; Did the spirit pleade for sinne, when he rehearsed the faults of Saints? or Paul, Rom. 7. when he cryed out of the body of this death? or when he discovers the unevennesse of Peters Judaizing? Gal. . or Christ, when he writes to the seven Churches, and discovers their sin, Rev. 2▪ 2. 3. 4▪ and tells the purest of them, their strength is yet but little, Rev. 3. 8 Hence you may discover from Christ, the Spirit, &c. their manifesting the imperfections of the choysest Saints, that to discover it, is not to pleade for it, un∣lesse you will blaspheme the holy one of Israel. And let all Christian Readers consider, that it is farre from us to pleade for iniquity; but the great part of our worke is to reprove it in whomsoever, and to presse Mortification and spirituall life, and communion with God, that so they may presse forwards to per∣fection as the designe and marke of their soules, Phil. 3. 14. and have the attaining to that blessed state upon their hearts exceedingly, though it be to the best at present a thing before, and that which they have not already attained, nor shall doe, till this corruption have put on incorruption. Yet are their glori∣oer and fuller measures of holinesse then yet the best enjoy, that may be attained here, which though attained to, doe leave us short of that perfection we doe wait for in glory; yet may be a quickning Argument to draw out and exercise their souls in pressing forwards continually. Position 11. That every man in the world hath a light within him sufficit to guide him to salvation, without the help of any outward light or disovery. Proofe. Farnsworth in his Book pag. 51. Every one minde the light of God within you. James Nayler in a Booke of his, pag 2. All people cease from your out▪ side lights, and turne to the light of God within you▪ (and this he ignorantly makes to be the sure word of Prophesie. 1 Pet 1. 19▪) The said Nayler in discourse with one of us, W. C. at Kendale, affirmed, That every man in the world had
a light within them sufficient to guide them to salvation, &c. and this he extended even to Indians, that never heard the Gospel▪ But the generall streame of their Words and Papers, speake it fully. Confut. By their constant expressions both in speaking and writing, and by their calling off from all outward teaching; it is evident that by this light, they meane the principles within, left in the spirit of every man since the fall, the same light which an Indian hath that never heard of Christ by any outward discovery. For one of us, in discourse with Nayler, proposing whether IndiansW. C. that never heard of Christ by any outward discovery had a light within them sufficient to guide them to salvation; e affirmed, they had; and when the experience of the Saints in New-Eng∣land, to the contrary was produced, he answered, If any Indian were present, he would justifie the contrary. Thus will men to beare up an opinion affirme the things they doe not know. Now that this naturall light which an Indian that never heard of Christ, may have, cannot bring to salvation, we desire to pro∣pound these considerations following: 1. No light ean bring to salvation, but that which discovers Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, its hid to those that are lost. Where the Apostle positively concluds the hidings of the Gospel to an evidence of a lost estate, John 17. 2. Now Christ is not knowne by the light of Nature, Mat. 16. 17▪ Flesh and blood hath not revealed those things unto the. 2. God doth clearely shew a distinguishing grace in the dis∣covery of Christ, Mat. 13, 11. To you it is given to know the mysterie: of the Kingdome of Heaven, to them it is not given; in which, is apparent▪ all have not the knowledge of the Gospel given. 3. Those that lived in the highest improvement of reason, being without Gospel discoveries, did not, and could not appre∣hend God in Christ, 1 Cor. 1, 21. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The naturall man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, &c. neither indeed can be, &c. here is the impossibility of naturall principles to give out the knowledge of Christ. 4. Rom. 10. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; not by the inward light or discovery, which all men
have, but by the word of the Lord outwardly made knowne. 5. If they shall say that every man hath the knowledge of Christ by speciall revelation, and that immediate▪ then they speake that which is contrary to the common and knowne expe∣rience of thousands? who conversing with Indians never found the least hint of a Christ amongst them? Many of them, whose confessions are in Print, having bin wrought upon by the Preach∣ing of the Word by Mr. Eliot, &c. have clearely declared they knew nothing of the true God and Christ, before their Publish∣ing of the Gospel to them. 6. We pray the Reader to consider what sad and lamentable effects will flow from this Doctrine, to the utter undoing of the soule▪ 1. This is to forsake the Fountaine of living Waters▪ not go∣ing out to Jesus for light; but Ier. 2. digging to themselves broken isterns, leaving the Sunne of Righteousnesse, to live by the light of their owne Candle. 2. Tis a confining our attainements to the improvement of this naturall light, which must needs keep men both as to light and power under Legall performances and discoveries. 3. Hence doe men account their tremblings and quakings as their perfection▪ they being, at the best, but the improvements of an awakened naturall conscience, without the soules ap∣plying of Gospel Promises as to justification by the blood of Jesus. 4. Hence the soules beleeving, and the acts of Faith in the blood of Christ are such strangers to these People, as never to have the least hint in any of their words or writings; and what they have spoken of Faith in generall▪ as Farnesworth in his discovery of Faith doth manifest their exceeding ignorance and darknesse in the great businesse of the soules beleeving in the Lord Jesus. 5. Hence come men under the unavoydable chains of Satan, who leads them captive at his will, whilst by this means they de∣prive themselves of any standing rule to try the spirits by, but walk in such irregular and sinfull wayes, as doe evidently speak how unable that their light is to distinguish betwixt duty and delusion.
6. And what is else the reason of their bitter rayling and re∣proaching the Institution of the living God, the Ordinance of Preaching the Gospel of Christ Crucified, speaking all manner of evill against us for the works sake, their designe being in their reproaching of the Ministers, evidently apparent to strike downe the very worke of Preaching the Gospel. Position 12. That there is no need of any outward teaching by Reading or Hearing the Scriptures opened or applyed, &c. Proofe. George Bateman in his Answer to Mr. Ledgard, pag. 21. af∣firmes, If the promises (there named) be fulfilled in any man, then what need have such of Scripture teaching without them, when they have received the same spirit within them by which all true Scri∣pture was written. Pap. 22. If any soule be once made one with God, who dare deny but that all VVhat means that exps▪ on te re∣peated tue Scri∣tu. Is any of the Scripture false? true Scripture is fulfilled in them, and that such soules have no need of any to teach them. Farn∣worth in one of his Books, p. 29. minde the light within, here is your teacher, this light obeying it, and here is your condemna∣tion this light disobeying it. See James Nayler in a Book of his called▪ The Glory of the Lord shining out in the North, pag. 2. All people cease from your outside lights, and returne to the light of Christ in you, and this light is not a Chapter without you in a Booke; and this light did the Apostles every where bid to take hed to, till the day dawned, 1 Pet. 1. 19. [Let the Reader observe the palpable blindnesse of the man in the grosse mis-interpre∣tation of so plaine a Text.] What need we the teachings of men, saith another, in a Paper of his, in the hands of one of us. William Strickland walking up the streets in Kendale naked ex∣cept that he had a shirt on, published the said Principle; one ofW. C. us both heard it, and saw him in that immodest garbe. Miles Bateman affirmed the same before the whole Congregation at Kendale. And George Fox pretended; he had all from within, though his jugling was presently discovered, a Concordance be∣ing sent to him from Yorke to help his Memory. Miles Hawd in the same Congregation affirmed, That whosoever did referre any man to any light but that which is within him, is a Deceiver. And being by one of us admonished to take heed of such Blas∣phemy,
and urged with Christs referring to the Scriptures, and Pauls referring to the Doctrine he had Preached before, Gal. 1. 8. he Blasphemously, and in much heat of spirit▪ repeated the same againe. John Andland affirmed, No need of outward teaching, in discourse with us as Newcastle. Confut. 1. This is clearely to make Scriptures uselesse; for as they are a light without, so there is no taking in of them▪ but by Hearing or Reading, the Spirit going along therewith. And are the Scripture uselesse? Then why doth Christ command the Jewes to search the Scriptures? Iohn 5. 39. Paul commands Timothy to Reade the Scriptures, 1 Tim. 4. 13. Give attendance to Reading. 2 Tim. 13. 15. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable, &c. and so not uselesse. Col. 4. 16. the Apostle saies, When this Epistle is Read amongst you, cause it to be Read to the Laodiceans, and that you also Reade that from Laodice. Luke 4. 16. Christ himselfe stood up for to Reade the Scriptures. 2. Wherefore were the Apostles sent forth, if outward Teach∣ing be uselesse or needlesse, Mar. 16. 15. Mat. 10. 7. As you goe, Preach. Goe Preach the Gospel to every creature▪ Mat. 28. last, Goe teach all Nations. And let the Reader observe they did not onely goe to Preach for conversion, but for the building up of Saints; as Acts 14. 23. they returned againe to Lystr, and Iconium, and Antoch, confirming the soules of the Disci∣ples. Acts 15. 36. Let us goe againe and visit every City where∣in we have Preached the word of the Lord, ver. 41. they went through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches. And why left they Elders in every Church, but for the building up the body? Acts 14. 24. Acts 20. 17. Ephes. 4. 11. 3. The great worke of Christ at his Ascending to his Father, was to send forth Officers for the perfecting of ints, for the worke of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, as is most undeniably proved, Eph 4. 11. 12 and to continue to the end of all things till all the Saints (even those yet unborne) be come to a perfect stature. 4. The Apostles, in pursuance of the will of Christ, Ordai∣ned Elders in every City, Acts 14. 23. who are Officers for the teaching the house of God, labouring in Word and Doctrine, 1 Tim.
5. 17. Set downe qualifications of Pastours. 1 Tim. 3, Bishops and Deacons, to Tit. 1. 5. For this cause left I thee in Creet that thou shouldest Ordaine Elders in every City. 2. Tim. 2. 2. Commit that thou hst heard to faithfull men, able to teach others. Now let every Christian judge, to what end doth Christ send forth his Apostles, and other Officers, if outward teaching be needlesse? what folly, nay what sinne had they been guilty of to hazard, nay to ruine themselves, 1 Cor. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 4 8. 9. 2 Cor. 11 3. if outward Teaching were needlesse. To what pur∣pose should Christ so eminently engage by Promise to goe along with them, both in their successe and sufferings. Mat. 28. last. Luke 10▪ 16. 1 Thes. 4 8. he that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, if outward Teaching be needlesse: For they can but speake to the eare, as appears by the fruitlesnesse of their la∣bours often, and the worlds resisting them, Acts 7. 54. Acts 13. 45. the Jews spoke against the things spoken by Paul, contra∣dicting and blaspheming: And though it were necessary th word of God should be first spoken to them, yet they put it from them, Acts 28. 24. How cleare is it from Scripture asserti∣on and example▪ That Faith coms by Hearing, and not by mind∣ing a light within, as Rom. 10. 14. 15. Gal. 3. 2. Acts 13. 48. Ephes. 1. 12. 13. And lastly, (though we might much more) yet we shall adde but this, the Lord was pleased eminently to seale to their outward teaching, as to his owne Ordinance, by those▪ aire Epistles Ministred by them, and written by the spi∣rit of the living God, viz. the multitudes of men converted from darkenesse to light by their Ministry, and from the power of Satan unto God, 2 Cor 3. 3. 1 Cor. 4. 15. Acts 2. And we dare appeale to the experience of the Saints in England whe∣ther the Ministry in England have not full and undeniable seales to their Ministration, in the witnesse of Christ thereto, in ma∣king them fruitfull Fathers to beget many soules to conversion by the Gospel. Position 13. That the Scriptures are not the Word of God, but a declaration of the conditions of them that spoke them forth. Proofe. Iames Nayler being asked by the Justices in Westmrland, whether he beleeved the written Word to be the Word of God,
answered, I know no such thing. See Mr. Higgiss Booke, pag. 78. and this Passage one of us also heard. Farnsworth in his BookeW. C. called, A discovery of Faith, pag. 6. cryes out against Mini∣sters, because they say, The Letter is the Word; and the foure books, Matthew, Marke, Luke and Iohn the Gospel, pag. 12. A Paper one of us hath from them, hath this passage in it▪ they say, the Letter is the Word, which is false. To this purpose is that of George Bateman to Mr. Ledgard, pag. 25. 26. a also their casting away their Bibles. W. Strickland told Mr. Archer, If he had never Read the Bible, it had been better for him. How constantly doe the Scriptures passe under no better name from them, then the Saints conditions, Davids, Moses, Isays, Pauls con∣ditions; and a declaration of the condition of them that spake them forth. Confut. This Position is so grosse, that we hope it will never sinke into any Christian heart, but will be a confutation to it selfe in the thought of any sober minded Christian: yet we shall pro∣pose these things. 1. That when the Word of the Lord came to the Prophets, Samuel, Isay, Iremiah, &c. it cannot be understood of the Word that was made Flesh, the Lord Iesus; but must necessari∣ly signifie that minde or message of the Lord contained in those words or Scripture Writings, as 1 Sam. 15. 10. Then came the Word of the Lord to Samuel saying, It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be King. Isay 38. 5. then came the Word of the Lord un∣to Isay, saying, Say to Hezekiah, &c. I will adde unto thy dayes fifteene yeares. Ier. 14. 1. The Word of the Lord that came to the Prophet Ieremiah concerning the dearth, Iudah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish. Its a grosse absurdity to say this word of the Lord was Christ; and it is as much to say, they were the experiences of those Prophets, or their conditions; but they were the word of the Lord by these Prophets▪ spoken to the Persons therein concerned. 2. As for the Phrase in the New Testament, the Word of God, it is cleare, both Christ and the Apostles in their mention there∣of, doe understand, that which they Spoke▪ Preached, or Wrote, and not the Person of Christ, of the Father, or Spirit, So Christ speaks to the Iews, Marke 7. 13. making the word of God of
none effect by their Traditions, which word can be understood alone of that fifth Commandement, ver. 10. Honour thy Father and Mother. Luke 11. 28 Blessed are they that heare the Word of God and keep it; which plainely hints, a word spoken, writ∣ten, or engraven, &c. not the eternall word, the Lord Iesus, Rom. 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, hearing by the Word of God, where the word Preached, or the Scriptures of the Apo∣stles which we now have, is plainely called, the Word of God. 3. As for those Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, that they are the word given forth from the living God▪ and of au∣thenticall and undenyable authority over every conscience good and bad▪ we could fill Pages with the proofes and evidence there∣of; but the Reader may observe we are speaking of the Scri∣ptures in reference to these mens cavills▪ and no further. And so shall (leaving so plaine, so Funmentali a Principle) rather fall upon their owne notion of the word of God, calling it, A declaration of the conditions or experienc of them that spoke them. 1. This is fully to take away the very Foundation of the Faith of Saints, which is onely built upon the authority of God, not upon any experience of the best Saints or the declaration of it. Luke 24▪ 25. O fooles and slow of heart, to beleeve all that the Prophets have spoken; where Faith is bottom'd upon Scripture authority, as Acts 18. 28. Apollos mightily convinced the Jews, shewing by the Scriptures that Iesus is the Christ. Acts 28▪ 23. Paul perswaded them concerning Iesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophes. Now, be this Law and the Pro∣phets what they will, if they fall any thing lower then the truth and word of God▪ they can be no bottome for the Faith of Saints▪ and Paul takes a weake argument to convince them by. And yet, that those were not the conditions of those Pro∣phets, or the experience of things fulfilled in themselves, is as cleare as the day, to any not grossely ignorant▪ and especially from 1 Pet. 1▪ 10. 11. 12. Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, who propheied of the grace that should come unto you, Searching what or what manner of time the shirit of Christ which was in them did signifie when i testified be∣fore hand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should fol∣low. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but
unto us they did minister the things which are now reported unto you, by them that have Preached the Gospel unto you. And as in this its cleare, that they spoke not forth their own conditions and ex∣periences; so also the Apostle sends the Saints to a word of Pro∣phesie, as a more sure foundation of Faith, then the most glo∣rious experience or enjoyment in the World, 2 Pet. 1. 18. 19. 2. This is to make the Scripture lose his authority, save one∣ly when we experience it, or where it is fulfilled in mens soules, and so doth make voyd every command and Promise; and all wicked men that can experience little of it, shall be left excu∣sable before God at the last day▪ because not having the Scripture fulfilled in themselves (according to the Quakers Doctrine) it had no authority over them. This is the most pleasant Doctrine for desperate Atheists that can be. Whereas John 12 48. He that receiveth not my words (hath them not fulfilled in him) yet the words that I have spoken, they shall udge him at the last day. 3. This at once nulls and destroyes the Divine Authority of the whole Hystoricall and Propheticall Part of Scripture, toge∣ther with all the threatnings of Scripture, of Hell, and iudge∣ment (unlesse they say, the Sainss have those threats of Hell fulfilled in themselves, and that condition of Dives in Hell, is the condition of Saints) as also the promises therein of mercies yet to come▪ their futurity denying their being the already ex∣periences of the Saints. 4 Consider what impossibilities, contradictions▪ falshood, doth this woefull Doctrine bring upon most parts of Scripture; wherein such things there spoken of, were not could not be the conditions of either God that gave the Word, or the Pro∣phets and Apostles that Published it, In the close of this consideration, we disire to mind you of the reproachfull earmes this people every where give to the Written Word, though the Spirit. Rom. 15. saith▪ These things were Written, that we through patience, and the comfort▪ of the Scriptures might have hope. And the holy Ghost still referres to the Written Word Luke 20. 17. John 15. 25. Heb 10. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 17 because it is Written, Be yee holy as I am holy; where the Spirit of God doth evidently put an authority upon the Written Word, which is the same in signification and thing, with the
word Scriptures, of which see how glorious things the holy Ghost reports thereof (how sleightly soever the Quakers esteeme▪ thereof) 2 Tim. 3. 15. 16. 17. The holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise to salvation. All Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproffe, for correctir▪ for instruction in righteousnesse: that the man of God may be per∣fect, throughly furnished unto all good works. Position 14. The Spirits are not to be tryed by Scripture. Proofe. Miles Hawd in the Congregation at Kendale, asserted that he that referred to any light without, was a deceiver. In a Paper of theirs, one of them reckons this up as one of the Errors of the Priests, (as he alls them) they professe the Scripture to be the rule, and the touchstone to try withall. A Book called Severall Papers, set forth by A. P. pag. 19. sayes, the worlds touchstone is with∣out them and they try the living by the dead, the spirit by the letter; the Saints touchstone is within, whereby they try the spirits whether they be of God or no: which evidently demonstrates they allow no tryall of the spirits by the written word. Confut. . Heare what the spirit saith, Isay 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speake not according to this, it is because there is no light in them. 2. This is to withdraw the soule from the judgement or determination of God, whose revealed will the Scripture is, as above is shown. 3. This is to open a gap un∣avoydably to all Satans delusions, as you may see by the short Relation of the Quakers Shaken, in the case of Iohn Gilpin; and we can no otherwise look upon this, then the very Hold Satan hath to keep this people under his delusions, by cousening them thus, to stop their eyes against the light, Iohn▪ 3. 20. for what else shall be the Touchstone but the Word of God? 4 And how strong are the perswasions of errour? how fully doth Satan pretend in the soule, to be an Angell of light? and wherein shall man distinguish? The Berean searched the Scriptures whether these things were so, Acts 17. 11. trying the Apostles them∣selves by the Written Word. 6. And Christ himselfe leaves the very proofe of himselfe to be the Messias to the Scriptures▪ Iohn 5▪ 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye thinke ye have  all life▪ and they are they which testifie of me.
Position 15. That there ought to be no sinse, meaning, or ex∣position given, or studying, of the Scriptures. Proofe. Their common expression is to him that opens or shews them the interpretation of any Scripture▪ Cursed is he that addes, or the plagues are upon thee for adding to the Scripture. John Audland▪ a few days since, being for his Rayling, and Publique disturbance, called before the Magistrates, and there pleading against the Mi∣nistry, alledging that Text, Ier. 5. 31. The Priests heare rule by their means; One of us laboured to convince him of this igno∣ranceW. C. in that grosse mis-interpretation, for by means he under∣stood by their maintenance; shewing, that that Text doth most evidently hold this sence, That those Priests bare rule by the means of the false Prophets: The said I. A. presently cryed out, Thou addest, thou addest. The same man having called ano∣ther of us Deceiver; was asked, Whether he heard him PreachS. H. any thing contrary to the truth the day before; telling him withall, he Preached that which he had Prayed, and studied the Scripture for; presently the said Audland (as if studying the word were e∣nough to convince a man to be a deceiver) cryed out, there thou shewest thy selfe. One of their Papers in the hands of one ofW. C. us, wickedly rayles thus, Away with all your conjuring studying, away with all your stage▪ play Preaching. And tis their knowne and constant Principe. Though their grand master Fox, was not able enough in this point▪ but discovered his Imposture by his Con∣cordance to the Bible, sent him from Yorke to Kendale. Confut. As to this, let the Reader consider, Neh. 8. 8. Ezra Read in the Booke of the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sence, and caused them to understand the Reading. Luke 24 27. Christ be∣gan at Moses, and all the Prophets, and expounded therein all things concerning himselfe. Marke 4 34▪ He expounded all things to his Disciples. Acts 28. 23. Paul expounded and testified the Kingdome of God out of the Prophets Act, 8. 30. to ver. 35. Phi∣lip expounds the mende of the holy Gho in that Prophecy of Isaiah, to the Eunuch who Read it, and yet without Interpretation knew not the meaning of it. Christ sends the Pharisees to study the mean∣ing of Scripture, in stead of cavelling. Mat. 9 13. Goe learne what that meaneth. And Peter tells you in the writings of
Paul, there are many things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. which the unlearned, and unstable▪ wrest, as they doe also other Scripture, unto their owne destruction. But to say there is no sense or meaning in the Scriptures, shewes so grosse ignorance, nay, such senselesnesse in these people, that this may suffice▪ And for the studying of the Word, reade the command of Christ for searching it, Iohn 5. 39. of Paul 1 Tim. 4. 13. Give attendance to Reading Col. 3. 16. Let the Word of God dwell in you richly in all wisedome. Tiethy must be nourished up in the Word of truth, and of that good Doctrine to which he had attained, 1 Tim. 4. 6. must give himselfe wholly 1 Tim 4 15. to Reading, Exhortation▪ Doctrine, that his profiting might ap∣peare to all. 2 Tim. 2. 15. Study to shew thy selfe approved un∣to God▪ a workeman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth. 2 Tim. 3. 15. From a childe thou hast learned the holy Scriptures, &c. out of which the man of God must labour to be throughly furnished unto all good works. Position 16 They cry downe Baptisme with Water, and the Lords Supper, a being but types and shadowes ceasing upon the appearance of Christ within them. Proofe. A Booke called Severall Papers, set forth by A. P. pag. 19. thus▪ The worlds Baptisme is without them; the Saints Bap∣tisme is within them: the worlds Communion is without them, taking a little Bread and Wine, &c. which is carnall; the Saints Communion is within. Compare this with George Batemans answer to Mr. Ledgard▪ pag. 29. disputing with him about Bap∣tisme, &c. sayes, That Baptisme and the Lords Supper▪ &c. Christ when he was in the flesh left them as types of another nature▪ and this pointed at Christs appearing in the spirit; and as the types under the Law ended when Christ appeared in the Flesh; so these types (viz Baptisme and the Supper of the Lord; for of them he speaks there) end, when Christ appeares in spirit. To which adde that of Farnsworth in his Pamphlet, entituled, A Discovery of Faith, pag. 11. All your Baptisme, such as are in∣vented from the Letter▪ the carnall minde invents them these are for the Fire, for they are the workes of the Flesh. Reade him also, pag. 13.
Confut. What soule that lives under the Kingdome and Scepter of the Lord Iesus, will not abhorre these opinion, that destroy and wholly take from the Saints these two grea Mysteries. We shall but briefly therefore propose, 1. That our Lord Iesus ap∣pointed his Dsciples to Baptize with Water, Iohn 4 2. Mat. 28. last. 2. The Apostles practised it quite through the Acts, Acts 2. 41. Acts 18. 12. 13. 16. 36. Here is Water, what hindes but I may be Baptized? reade ver. 38. Acts 9. 18. Acts 18. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 14▪ 15. 16. And for the Supper of the Lord see the Instituti∣on, Mat. 26. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 23. where it is an Ordinance establi∣shed▪ to continue in practice till▪our Lord Iesus come againe, ver. 26. which comming, cannot be meant of that comming in the spirit, which these men speak of, for so he was come already to them being already saints. And as this Text doth fully cleare their continuance in the Churches till the last day▪ so where Baptisme and the Supper of the Lord are called types in Scripture, to cease upon the comming of Christ in spirit▪ we demand a Text What a plaine addition is this to the Wrd of God, by those who so frequently curse the Ministry, in their explications and applyings of texts, as if they added to the sayings of the Prophecies of that Booke? And how apparantly doth this Prin∣ciple speake their teaching, in stead of Gospel-Doctrines, and the commands of Iesus, the fond imaginations of their owne braine, and divinings of their owne heart. But we tust we shall need to adde no more to the satisfying of those, who have eaten of the Flesh▪ and drunke of the Blood of the Lord Iesus, and been Baptized into his Death, and found the power and vertue of these blessed Ordinances. What soule that is not under the strong delusions of Satan, dare cast off as so sleight things▪ or blaspheme with so vile reproaches (as these men doe) those sacred Institutions, which the Lord Iesus left to his Churches, as such eminent memorialls of his blessed love. Position 17 That there is  ediat Cll Call to the Ministry. Proofe. This was asserted by Thomas Willan of Kendale in the Pub∣lique Congregation there▪ on a Lecture day, in the hearing of one of us, W. C. the said T. W. (according to the custome of
that Generation to Prophesie lyes in the name of the Lord) pretending to the man that Preached, he was sent of God to speak to him: then the said Minister demanded, Whether he was sent by a mediate or immediate Call: upon which proposall, being bassled in the proofe of his owne immediate Call, which he pre∣tended to; with a lowde voyce cryed downe all mediate cals to the Ministry, as not of God. and tis one of their common ex∣ceptions against the Ministers of the Gospel, as being sent forth by the Ordination of men, not considering the Institution of Christ for such proceedings. Confut. That a mediate call (since the time of those Apostles, who be∣ing to be witnesses to the world of all that Iesus said and did, were to be such as had accompanied the Lord Iesus in the dayes of his Flesh. Acts 1. 21. and received their Call from Christ im∣mediately, being inspired by the holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 1. 21. and able to evidence their Call, and confirme the Gospel they com∣mitted to posterity, by infallible testimonies of mighty signes and reall miracles, 2 Cor. 12. 12.) is the way of the Gospel for sending forth its Ministers, is apparent to whomsoever shall reade those texts, Acts 14. 23. When they had Ordained them Elders in every Church▪ &c. 1 Tim. 4▪ 14 Neglect not the gift that is in thee, that was given thee by Prophesie and the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Titus 1. 5. For this cause I left thee in Creet, that thou shouldest Ordaine Elders in every City. 2 Tim. . 2. The things thou hast heard of me that com∣mit thou to faithfull men, able to teach others▪ In Titus 1. and 1 Tim. 3. chapters▪ the Apostle at large leaves direction for the qualification of such as should from time to time be Ordained to the Office of Elders in the Churches in a mediate way; for to prescribe Rules to an immediate call, is impossible But how confident soever these men are against this mediate call to Mi∣nisteriall worke; yet as we dare oppose the above-written word of the living God, against all raylings and revilings as enough to crush in piece all gaine-saying plas▪ so there hath been so much, and so convincingly on every hand written in defence thereof, that we dare not question the establishment of all sober spirits in that truth, and shall adde no more to overturne the gaine-sayings of this besotted people.
Having thus gone through the more grosse Positions, which are the very foundations and principles that support this Anti∣christian Rabble; we shall presume to stay the Reader with some of their principles of lesser value; which though (as the Reader may observe) are of inferiour note, yet this sort of people lay no lesse weight upon them, then to place the greatest part of that great Diana of their imaginary perfection in the obser∣vance of them, and even to damne all that oppose them there∣in, and cry downe the Ministry of the Gospel, because of their non complyance with them in these so rotten principles. We could have given proofe sufficient, that these principles that follow, are clearely and fully owned by them; but they are so evidently the very markes and distinguishing badges of their Irreligion, so constantly practised by them, and so plainly known to all that know this sort of men, that we shall, once for all sa∣tisfie the Reader. We shall not need to produce any evidence, but onely stand upon the Confutation. Principle 1. Not co-salute any. Confut. THe commands of our Lord Iesus and his Apostles may be a sufficient answer to shew the folly of this Principle, which they stand so much upon, and for which they so often call the Ministery Priests and Anti-Christian, &c. Let the Reader seri∣ously consider that full Scripture▪ Mat. 5. 47. If you salute your brethren onely, what doe you more then doe others? doe not even the Publicans so? In the verse before, our Lord Christ commands the duty of love to all men; and in the same way of commanding doth also impoe the duty of salutation; not onely of some, but all; of Friends but Enemies: If yee sa∣lute your brethren onely, what doe you more then doe the Pub∣licans? (which how fully it speaks to the snarpe reproofe of Quakers, that salute none but one another; we beleive their consciences will as cearely tell them, if they be not seared, as any observing eye may presently see) Mat. 10. 12. When yee come into an house salute it. The Apostle Paul almost in every Epistle, especially Rom▪ 16 is full of such commands. And for the practise of the Saints, see 1 Sam. 25▪ 14. David sent mes∣sengers▪
to salute Abigails Husband. 1 Sam. 17. 22. David came and saluted his brethren. Acts 21. 18. when Paul had saluted them, he declared &c. where you fully see the practie of Paul, e first saluted them. For that so much objected text, Luke 10. 4. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shooes; and salute no man by the way. 1. You may see that by the same command the seventy Dis∣ciples were forbid to weare shooes, or carry a purse: and yet these Qurkers, who doe so imperiously impose upon all men this not saluting, make no conscience at all of these commands of not wearing shooes▪ and not carrying purses as is evident to any that observes them, especially if they be travelling a far journey. And this was very fitly objected by one in Lanca∣shire to Iames Nayler, reproving him for his salute, who retor∣ted the words upon him againe, as being guilty of the breach of that command, by wearing shooes. Is not this to picke and choose in the Scriptures such things as doe most agree with their humors, and according to their owne fancy to take away from the Scriptures, and bring upon themselves that cure, Rev. 22. which they ponounce against others? if it be so, that this ex∣ample be any wayes or in any part binding to us at this day? 2. Further, Let the Reader know, this is no binding example to us▪ but a particular dispensation and command to the seveny Disciples at that time, as will appeare. For 1. When he sends forth the Apostles he imposeth not that command upon them; but layes upon them a contrary injunction, Into what house soe∣ver yee enter, salute it, Mat. 10. 12. And 2. The Apostles pra∣ctice above shewed, cleares▪ they were under no such command, for as much as they walked contrary, unlesse you charge Paul with sinning, in that Rom. 16. Asts 21 As 3. They comman∣ded this worke to others, as above is proved. 4 That generall command to the Saints, to salute all▪ not onely brethren but al∣so enemies, Mat. 5 47. evidenceth fully▪ this that wa but a par∣ticular dispensation, and so to us it is not binding. 3 To close up this▪ to us it appears a very ungrounded di∣stinction of the nature of salutes, which is practised by these very men▪ for all their trouble in salutes, is about mens putting off the Hat; whereas themselves doe ordinarily salute their
brethren as doe the Publicans, not onely with saying, How dst thou; but also with putting forth the hand, &c. Now the Hand, and the Language, with the moving of the body being the way of saluting among the Iewes in those dayes; if the manner of our salutes be so much dis-relished; its evident, the practice of Quakers more directly contradicts that command, then the pra∣ctice of any others. Thus the Reader may take notice how groundlesse their cla∣mour is, in crying out against saluting; and how malicious, in making this an Argument against the Ministry. For it being clearely a command to salute all; as for the manner of it, whe∣ther by Words or putting off the Hat, we shall not be determined by their judgement: For as one Country is not bound to the habits of another; nor is it the duty of a Saint in England to weare that kind of garment which was worn by a Iew in the time of Christ; so neither did the Apostles take it their duty to be conformed in their salutes to the fashions of salutation used ei∣ther in other Countries, or by the Patriarches in their own. Principle 2. Not giving any outward tken of Reverence to Magistrate, Parent, Master, or any other. Confut. Gen. 42 6. Ioseph being the Governour of the Land▪ when his Brethren came before him, they bowed themselves before him with their Faces to the Earth. Gen. 23. 7 Abraham stood up and bowed himselfe to the people of the Land, even to the Children of Heth. 1 Sam. 25. 23. That holy Woman Abigail when she saw David, she fell before David on her Face, and bowed her selfe to the ground. Gen. 33. 3. Iacob bowed to Esau seven times. Gen. 48. 12. Ioseph bowed himselfe with his Face to his Father Iacob. 1 Kings 1. 23. Nahan the Prophet bowed himselfe to the King with his Face to the ground. Now this was a knowne token of Honour due, and by these holy persons given to Magistrates and Parents. Let any Christian Reader consider the fifth Commandement. Honour thy Father and thy Mother. And Rom. 13. 7. Render to all their due, tribute to whom tribute, honour to whom honour. Now as tribute and honour are here apparent to be due; so it is also plaine, that they are due outwardly. For otherwise, to pay tribute in the heart onely▪
would be but a ridiculous illusion; as also is their saying, their heart doth honour men, when there is no outward expression thereof at all. But they will tell us▪ they honour the power, not the persons. To which we say▪ What is the power, without the per∣son? Government without Governours, but a meere fancy? This is an high way to powre contempt upon persons in supreame Authority; as if a Souldier should say, He would ho∣nour the supreame Office in the Army, but would not heare the Lord Generall Cromwell. How doth this notion cause so much irreverent carriage in their practice generally before the Magistrates? And we leave it to the Magistrates to consider, how impossible it shall be for any to commit treason against the person of any Magistrate▪ if there be no honour due to their person▪ but their power? But so much may satisfie for that. Principle 3. That no man must have the title of Master. Confut. In the old Testament the Saints frequently were so caled▪ ts no lesse then seventeen times spoken of Abraham, Gen. 24. Exod. ▪ 5  Sam. 24 6. David calls King Saul Master. 2 Kings 6. 5. One of the Prophets gives that also to Elisa, Alas Master▪ it was boowed. So the Apostle, Eph. 6. 5. 9. Servants be obednt to your Masters▪ Col. 3. 22. So in 1 Tim. 6. 1. Let  Servants count their owne Masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphmed. Now for what is objected, that this onely speaks to the case of servants to their owne Masters; we wish the Reader to know that the Pro∣phet, 2 Kings 6. 5. was not a servant to Elisha, though he called him Master; nor David servant to Saul▪ when he was in actuall armes against him, (we meane, he was not his Family servant) when he gave him that title of honour, and called him Master,  Sam. 24. 6. And if the Quakers stand so punctually upon the command of Christ, Mat. 23. 10. let them know, that if that command were binding in this sense which they put upon it▪ it should hold in the case of the heads of Families as fully as any others; and so the Apostle should sinne in calling them Ma∣sters, 1 Tim. 6. 1. Further, consider the word Sirs, is the same expression with Master, in our English compellation, and in the Originall; and you shall frequently▪ finde it given to those
that were not Masters to them that called them so. Gen. 43 20. Sir, we came downe at the first, &c. John 12. 21. Sir, we would see Jesus. Acts 7. 26. Sirs, yee are Brethren; as Moses speakes to them that strove. Paul and Barnaba, Acts 14. said to them that were ready to sacrifice to them, ver. 15. Sirs, why doe you thes things? Acts 16. 30. the Jaylor cryes out, Sirs, What shall we doe to be saved? So Paul. Acts 27. to the Mariers, ver. 10. 21. 25. useth the same expression. Thus you see the vanity of their evasion, and the lawfulnesse of using the word Sir, or Master. Adde hereto, that titles more honourable then Master, are often given in Scripture; as Luke 1, 3. most excel∣lent Theophilus. Acts 26. 25 most noble Festus. 2 Epistle of John, the elder to the Elect Lady, ver. 1. For that text which they urge as to this principle, Be not yee called Masters, Mat. 23. 10. we have given you some account already; and shall adde but this, That a Lording and domineer∣ing over the Faith of Saints, as that 1 Pet. 5. 3. and a vaine affe∣ctation of titles, are the sins forbidden by Christ in that place; for therein was the pride and folly of the Pharisees, not in the expression of that civill honour, which is largely proved before, the Saints and the Apostles gave to others. What is here said to the case of the word Master, will fully answer as to the like quarrell, about calling any Father. There are many other things which we might speake to, as being their principles, for they are indeed, the very distinguish∣ing characters of that Generation of men, whereby they owne one another, and dis-owne others that are not as lowde in the anders of the Ministry, because of these things, as themselves: but we shall rather lay them downe as their charges against the Ministry, by reason whereof, they ridiculously would seeme to prove them Anti-Christian. Charge 1. That they love the high places in the Synagognes. Confut. We might here justly bmoane their ignorance in the Scri∣ptures. For he that i acquainted with the Tongue the Evange∣list wrote in, will know that , cannot signifie Pul∣pitsMat. 23 6. (which these men cry out so much against) nor any thing of that kinde, which we use as the best advantage, that all may
heare; but as it is truely interpreted, the chiefe Seats, which the Pharisees so much affected. 1. Let the Reader observe, That of those uppermost Seats that Christ speakes of there were many in one Synagogue, and so its nothing to the case of Pulpits 2. And they had their Disciples sitting at their Feet▪ called Scabellum pedum Phariseorum, The Pharisees foot-stoole, out of a proud ostentation; which is no way applicable to our case. 3. Those their chiefe Seats also were such, as they, out of a vaine affectation of honour, by reason of their extraordinary thoughts of their owne holinesse and learn∣ing, did assume to themselves, and is so yet further different from our case who use Pulpits as conveniences for the peoples hearing not for our owne vanity. 4. Those their Seats also were such as were places in the Synagogues, chiefe, or upper∣most, as where the chiefest and more honourable persons sate, and such of these the Magistrates and persons of honour in our Congregations deservedly enjoy, and not the Ministers; for the word  which is interpreted chiefe, or uppermost there, doth not signifie altitude, or height (for so we could tell them, that the Galleries in which the Boyes doe fit, are higher then our Pulpits▪ &c.) but preheminence, as in the case of Magi∣strates, who doe enjoy the chiefest places, by reason of the emi∣nency of their Office, and as is plaine in that Luke 14. 10. Friend sit up higher. 5. If yet their quarrell be at the Pulpit, we have warrant for it in Scripture from the example of Ezra, Neh. 8. 4. Ezra stood up in a Pulpit of Wood, which they had made for the purpose, when he expounded the Law. 6. And lastly, The necessity of a place higher then the body of the hearers, will appeare to any serious considerate Reader▪ from the impossibi∣lity of having the Voyce heard and understood in so numerous an Auditory, which we doe usually Preach the Gospel unto, if we should not use such advantages to help the Voyce, for Edifi∣cation of the people. So that any serious Christian we doubt not, will conclude, that tis not our selves, or our owne glory we seeke in this, but their good, that they may the better all be informed of the things of Christ. Were it not for which, as it were all one to us, to speake in secret, or one the house top, so we dare appeale to these mens consciences, whether in their
clamourings in our Congregations, they doe not desire to be heard of all which they cannot be in their standing amongst the people? You see the unreasonablenesse of these men to lay so great a charge as Anti-christianism upon our thus Publishing the Gospel, that all may heare. Charge 2. That they weare long Robes. Confut. We suppose they ground this Charge upon Luke 20. 46. where it is said, Beware of the Scribes that desire to walke in long Robes, and love greetings in the markets, and the highest seats in the Synagogues, and the chiefe roomes at Feasts. Now any that compares this, with Mat. 23. he will finde it to be an epitome of that, which the Evangelist sets downe there, ver. 5. where you may observe, that what Luke calls here, a walking in long Robes, Matthew there more fully expresseth in these words, They make broad their Phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their Garments; and so goes on in adding the same that Luke there repeats, as loving the uppermost seats, &c. so that it is ap∣parent, that they signifie one and the same thing; and their long Robes spoken of by Luke, are their broad Phylacteries, and en∣larged borders of their Garments. By Phylacteries, from 'Deut. 6. 8 the Reader may understand, certaine Frontlets or pieces of Parchment tyed upon their Foreheads and Armes of the Jewes, whereon were written some places of the Scriptures; and the borders of their Garments were such Fringes at the bottome of their Garment, which all the Jews were to weare; as you shall finde▪ Numb. 15. 38. Speake unto the Children of Israel▪ and bid them that they make them Fringes in the borders of their Garments throughout their Generations. But the vanity and pride of the Pharisees appear'd in this, that they made their Fringes as pompous as they could, labouring to exceed all others in the bignesse of them, placing much piety therein; and this was the pride and hypocrisie which the Lord Jesus charged them with in that particular. Now Reader judge thou what ground they have from hence, to charge this Scripture against the Mi∣nisters, because of their Cloakes? Have they either their Frin∣ges, or Phylacteries? And had not Paul a Cloake? 2 Tim. 4 13. for the colour or length whereof, we desire him that pretends to
the greatest ttainement, to tell us what they were? How un∣deservedly we are called Anti-Christian upon this account, up∣on such pittifull grounds as this, we leave it the Reader to con∣sider? Charge 3. That they stand Praying in the Synagogues. Confut. We suppose this their Charge is grounded upon Mat. 6. 5.Thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are, for they love to stand praying in their Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. First, it is evident, that the chal∣lenge of Christ there against hypocrites is, for their perform∣ing their private duties in publique places, that they may be seen of men, as is cleare from ver. 6. But thou when thou pray∣est, enter into thy closet: they were much in praying in publique, in the Synagogues and streets, that so they might get the esteem of being holy men, but little or nothing in secret before the Lord. But that this text dyes either the worke of Prayer in publique Congregations, or the gesture of standing in time of Prayer, is most absurd to affirme: for 2. Chron. 6 32. Luke 18. 10. two men went up to the temple to pray. Mat. 21. 13. my house shall be called, &c. and that in Acts 16. 13. is understood of one ofAct, 3. 1. their Synagogues. And in the time of the Gospel, prayer in the publique meeting places of the saints, is fully proved from 1 Tim. 2. 8. I will therefore that prayer be made every where. 1 Cor. 14. 14. If I pray in an unknowne tongue, &c. where the Apostle is treating about prayer in Church-meetings; as also in 1 Cor. 11. 4. Every man praying or prophecying with his head covered, &c. So Acts 1. 14. 24. the Apostle prayed. Acts 2. 4. the converted Christians continued in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayer. The Apostles joyne together prayer, and the ministry of the Word, Acts 6 4. See Acts 13. 3. Acts 14. 23. Acts 20. 36. Acts 12. 5▪ And for the gesture of standing. reade Marke 11. 25. and when yee stand praying forgive, spoken to the disciples. Luke 18. 3. the Publi∣can stood afarre off and prayed. So that tis neither praying in the publique meeting places, nor standing in Prayer, that Christ reproved▪ but the hypocriticall ostentation of Pharisees. But what is this to Ministers, who neither performe their private du∣ties
in publique places, nor pray in the corners of the streets, but are employed in the performance of that solemne part of the worship of God; and yet for this cause are by these men reproached as Anti-Christian? Charge 4. That they Preach for Hire. Confut. It is chearefully acknowledged, that we doe receive wages in our labour in the Ministry. But as to our making hire the end of our worke, we doe abhorre it: and do appeale to the searcher of hearts, to cleare up the unrighteousnesse of this reproach, who tryes and judgeth all things. But we are the lesse troubled with this aspersion, because these inveterate adversaries of the Ministry doe condemne it, because we doe receive wages for our worke. Now as to our warrant in so doing, we shall shew you the evident practice of the Apostles▪ and the expresse au∣thority of Scripture; 2 Cor. 11. 8. I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them. Here you see the Apostle receiving wages of the Churches amongst whom he laboured. 1 Cor. 9. 6. I onely and Barnabas, have not we power to forbeare working; where it is cleare, that the Apostles lived by not their working with their hands, but their Preaching of the Gospel; and if some∣times he say, he laboured with his hands, 1 Thes. 2. 9. I Preached to you the Gospel of God freely, 2 Cor. 11. 7. Let the Reader con∣sider, First in that same verse he calls it an abasing of himselfe▪ yea, and secondly▪ in 1 Cor. 4. 12. he reckons his labouring with his owne hands amongst his great afflictions. Thirdly, Nor was this a deniall of his right to maintenance, but a suspension of it for present reasons to himselfe best knowne. For 1 Cor. 9. 6. I onely and Barnabas, have we not power to forbeare working? 2 Thes. 3. 8. 9. that we might not be chargeable to any of you, but not as though we had not power▪ Now for the fuller authority of Scripture, as to this our practise, reade Luke 10. 7. the labourer is worthy of his hyre; where Christ layes it downe as the very reason why the Apostles should make no provision for their subsistence▪ Provide neither gold nor scrip. &c. but wholly de∣pend upon the maintenance due to them for Preaching the Gos∣pel, because the labourer is worthy of his Hyre. And we hope any ingenious Reader will beleeve that we in our places might
be inabled as well as others for subsistence in the world (if they will looke upon us as capable to understand and practice the Callings in which others live) but that in obedience to this au∣thority, we doe freely cast our selves upon the Gospel mainte∣nance; but we know, our worke is to give our selves continu∣ally to Prayer▪ and the Ministry of the Word: and remember that 2 Tim. 2. 4. No man that warreth ntangleth himselfe with the affaires of this life. But if there were no more, we should propose these following Scriptures against any objection, 1 Cor. 9. 7▪ Who goeth a warfare at his owne charges? ver, 9. You shall not muzzle the mouth of the Oxe that treadeth out the Corne; Doth God take care for Oxen? ver, 10. or saith he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is Written. Ver. 11. If we have sowne unto you spirituall things? is it a great thing if we should reape your carnall things? If others are partakers of this power over you, are not we rather! Doe you not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the temple? even so God hath ordained that they which Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. So 1 Tim. 5. 17. 18. as to that you may see it is a Gospel-Ordinance, [God hath Ordained it.] And thus you have the Scripture fully asserting that, which these men doe so malitiously charge upon us as Anti-Christian. There are many other cavills which these men doe rayse a∣gainst the Ministry: as that first, We have been at Universities, as if Pauls Learning had truely made him mad, according to the the false charge of Festus. Secondly, Our making use of an houre▪ glasse (though our respect is herein to the weakenesse and capacities of people, for though the spirit be willing, the flesh is often weake.) Thirdly, Our Preaching upon a Text, (though our worke be to divide the word aright, 2 Tim. 2. 15. and Christ and the Apostles practis it, Luke 4▪ 12. 22. they won∣dred at the gratio words that proceeded out of his mouth; which must needs be his opening of that Text. So Acts 28. 23. but of this we have spoken before.) Fourthly, As also, that we run to the powers of the world to uphold us, (as if it were a sinne for Paul in case of wrong and persecution, to appeale to Caesars judgement, and no blessing for the Churches to be protected by the Magistrate, to live a peaceable life under their authority.)
Fifthly, That we steale from the Prophets and Apostles, while we quote them, and Preach from the Scriptures. Is not this blasphemously to charge Christ and his Apostles, who so often quoted the Prophets, and spoke out their words, Mat. 1. 22. Mat. 2. 6. Mat. 4. Acts 28. 25. Well said the Prophet Esaias, &c. And lastly, our not thouing all we speake unto, and yet thouing God, as is their expression. For this last, we are taught to owne the simplicity of the essence of God thereby; and as for the Phrase you, given unto men, it no way intrencheth upon God, either his attributes or commands, but being according to the use thereof in England, and expression of civill respect, as Sir, Master, most Noble, &c. we see not why the same freedome in our Dialect may not be used amongst us. But in such indiffe∣rencies and triviall cases▪ that rule of the Apostle holds, Hast thou Faith, have it to thy selfe, Rom. 14. 22. These, with many other such, we shall passe over, as being the perverse disputings of men of corrupt mindes▪ being afraid we have kept you too long in discussing things of leser moment. But truely when we consider, that many illy soules are catched by them with such cobwebbs as these, we thought it our duty to undeceive poore creatures, and to discover the vanity of these Principles and Slanders against the Ministry. Some Considerations as to their Practises. Pract. 1. Quaking. THat there are such, those that have lived in these Northern parts, are sufficiently satisfied. And for the manner of it, the trembling of all the parts of their body grovelling upon the ground, foaming at the mouth, horrible noyse, running na∣ked in the streets and markets▪ with other the like passions, are fully knowne; and the Narration of John Glpin in Print▪ will give any that desires more particular information, a full ac∣count. 1. First, There are in Scripture three sorts of tremblings held forth. One is, when the Glory and Majesty of God hath been more extraordinarily revealed in Visions to the Prophets, as in Moses at Mount Sinai, Daniel, Habakkuk, &c. For this trem∣bling under Visions of the Lords majesty; First, We doe fully
and admire the glorious appearances of God unto and in those blessed Prophets. But secondly, We are fully convinced that the quakings of these men doe not proceed from any such Visi∣ons of God; For 1. By those that have been delivered out of their snares, it hath appeared to be a Diabolicall delusion, as is convincingly apqarent in the example of Gilpin. 2. Tis not Gods way to confirme such Blasphemo Doctrine by any myracle, though the Scripture plainely foretells 2 Thes. 2. 9. that the comming of the sonne of perdition shall be after the working of Satan, in all signes and lying wonders. God will ne∣ver set his seale, by any miraculous act of his, to the blasphe∣mies of men. For Deut. 13. 1. If there arise amongst you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreames, and giveth thee a signe, or a wonder, and the signe or the wonder come to passe whereof he spake unto thee, sying, let us goe after other gods; thou shalt not hearken to the words of that Prophet, for the Lord your God proveth you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soule. 3. Who knowes not that alse Prophets have been under Satnnicll extaies? as Mahomet, John of Lydn, Knipperdol∣ling; and amongst the Papists, multitudes of examples of pre∣tended aptures and exasies, which, we hope now will gaine no Pro clytes to their impous Doctrines. 4. What glorious Visions and Revelations did Milner in Lncsire, one of these men, pretend unto? As that a sheet with fore corners should at such a time come downe from Heaven, &c. with many more; which said apish imitation of that Vision of Peter, together with all the rest of hs presum∣ptacus prophesies, God did lay very naked to the eyes of all, to be a meere delusion, and imposture of Satan. Deut. 18. 22. When a Prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow nor come to passe, that is the thing which the Lord hath not soken, but the Prophet hath spoken presumptuously, thou shall not be afraid of him. 5. Lastly, we wonder how such bitter cursings and raylings, such Blasphemous and Anti-Christian Doctrines, should be the ruit of the Visions of God in his majesty and glory. Surely
they would strike downe the soule to more selfe-loathings and abaings, then that it should presently dare to rayle or avouch in it selfe perfection; when such Visions made Isaiah to cry out, I am uncleane: and Job, to abhorre himselfe in dust and ases. Now as to the second sort of trembling, arising from sight of sinne, and sense of the wrath of God. 1. We gant, not onely the Scriptures, but the experiences of many doe witnesse the terrors of God sometimes upon the soule for sinne. 2. Those workings of wrath upon the soule, we doe con∣ceive▪ are vastly different from the tremblings and quakings of these mens. For first, Some of us doe know, that very youngW. C. children have been under these extasies amongst them. Second∣ly, Sense of sinne never caused foaming▪ and running naked in the streets, that we doe know of. Thirdly, By the Narration of Gilpin, you may clearely observe, that he was often under those quakings when he was purely possessed by Satan. Fourthly, Be∣sides, it is looked upon by them (as we could instance in parti∣cular in some that have been long quakers) as a great attaine∣ment; and they have exceedingly desired to be in these fits of trembling; not as to the terrifying of the conscience, but as to the trembling of the body. 5. Lastly, we propose this to tm, How comes it to passe, that many of their partners and compa∣nions, are owned by them as saints, and as brethren, who yet ne∣ver had those fits of quaking? For if their quaking doe proceed from a true sense of sinne, how come they to be saints before they have attained it. 3. But thirdly, Let us put the case that these their quaking do proceed from sight of sinne, and sense of wrath (though truely we are convinced to the contrary) yet we say, that this, which they call their great perfection, First, Is nothing but the start∣lings of a Legall conscience, farre short of the happy state of a soule made free by the blood of Jesus Christ. Secondly, Doe not the Devills beleeve and tremble by legall fights of sinne, and through sense of wrath, as also the damned soules in Hell; and shall we call this quaking their perfection? Thirdly, These quakings, under sense of sinne, can be at best, but an establishing of selfe-righteousnesse, while they are cryed up, and carried on
to the neglect of the righteousnesse of Christ, imputed to the soule, through beleeving (not through working) as we have largely proved before, against their establishing of their owne righteousnesse. And so, what is Felix better for all his trem∣blings? And what are these quakings, but a fore-runner, and fore-taste of that eternall wrath of God, which is to fall short∣ly upon him, who resteth under the convictions and actings of the Law, but embraceth not the righteousnesse of the Lord Je∣sus, to be found in that at his appearing. 3. There is indeed a mention of trembling in a third sense in Scripture, as a Cor. 7. 15. where the Corinthians are said to receive Titus with feare and trembling, which they grosse∣ly apply to their case▪ as also▪ Ephes. 6 5. Servants obey your Masters with feare and trembling; which holds forth no more, then a reverentiall carefulnesse and obedience. These last we mention, lest they should charge us with passing over that which they presume to make so much for them. In all this, Reader, we desire to professe, that our so large discovery of the nature of quaking, is not to discourage any poore soule, that under tremblings of spirit, is onging for Christ; but to warne every man of the danger and seduction of these methods which establish such Doctrines and practises, as leade the soule into the covenant of workes, and leaves them there. Pract. 2. Rayling, &c. Their practice herein is notoriously knowne, to whomso∣ever hath had to doe with them; and our selves, some of us▪ have had a large measure of this revilings throwne upon us▪ In one Paper of theirs, which one of us hath, you have all these horrid raylings against the Ministers, calling them Priests, Con∣jurers, Theeves, Robbert▪ Anti-Christs, Witches, Devills, Sir-Simons, Serpents, Bloody Herodians, Searle coloured Beasts, Babylons Merchants, Wolves, Dogs▪ Swine, Sodemites, &c. Rea∣der, we are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, no of the re∣proach of men, because of it▪ But consider how fully they make good that of Jude 13. Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming▪ m their owne shame, &c. though Michael the Aarchangel when
disputing with the Devill, durst bring no Rayling accusation against him. But is not the condition of the Ministers of Christ in England▪ such, that we have reason to take up the complaint of David, Psal. 57. 4. My soule is amongst lyons, and I lye even amongst them that are set on fire, whose teeth are speares and ar∣rowes, and their tongue a sharpe sword, their mouth is full of cur∣sing and bitternesse, the poyson of Aspes is under their lips. Nei∣ther is it onely mentioned as the Saints complaint, but as the strict prohibition of the spirit of God. Ephes. 4. 31. Let all bitternesse, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evill speaking be put away from you, with all malice. As also that of Timothy, 2 Tim. 2. 25. The servant of the Lord must be gentle towards all men, in meeknesse instructing thse that oppose themselves▪ if God per adventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledgement of the truth. How clearely contradictory is the way of these men to the rule of Paul, when they in all their speaking to men▪ not of their way, or that oppose themselves, doe fly out in those bitter raylings, in calling them Devills, damned, and that they see the Devill in their Faces, and such like expressions? So 1 Peter 3. 4. The Apostle calls for meeke and quiet spirits, which in the sight of God are of great price. But we shall close up this with that of our Saviour, Mat. 7. . Judge not that yee be not judged. And Mat. 5. 5. Blessed are the meeke, for they shall inherit the Earth. Pract. 3. Their pretending upon all occasions to be sent by spe∣ciall Commission from God, as we shall instance in some cases following more particularly. Some of them came to Kendale Church, about a yeare agone▪ and pretended they had a Commission to pull downe the Steeple▪ Another Thomas Castley came in the time of the Preaching of one of us to the Congregation at Kendale▪ and had▪ he said, hisW. C. Commission from God to pull downe the Houre-Glasse. And the same man came a long mile, with no other Message from God (as he pretended) but this, to tell of one of us, Thou at an high Priest; which words having spoken, he went his way. Another time he came with a Message from God (as he preten∣ded) to the house of the abovesaid one of us, at which time IW. C.
was not at home; yet confidently affirmed to my Wife, that God had sent him and that I was at home. Againe also, the same man came with the like Message to my House, and said, that God had sent him to me, and that I was at home; but it be∣ing denied▪ he was by the Schoolemaster Mr. Turner, taken ver to his house▪ where (by providence, being presently come home) I went to him, and asked him, What message e had from God to me? whereat, he denied that he had any message to me fromW. C. God at all. Mr. Richard Stookes Minister at Grayrig▪ told one of us that discorsing with Fox at a meeting appointed, concern∣ing his immediate call; the said Fox affirmed, He was called by a Vyce from Heaven to Grayrig; and at his affirming the ame▪ the simple deluded soules that were there with him, af∣firmed, they knw it to be true; he asked them, whether they saw any vision, or heard any voyce? they answered, No; but all the account they could give of it, was▪ That where he was walking towards Firthbane, suddenly he faced about, and said▪ he was commanded to e to Grayrig. One of these people, when they were lately at Newcastle, told a Merchant there, Mr. H. T. ha∣ving on his blacke cloathes, that he was a deceiver, &c. but be∣ing told he was no Minister, he shuffied pittifully▪ as eeing how naked his mistake was layd. Concerning this horrid pretence of being sent of God, to the commission of abominable practi∣ses in Yorkeshie, we referre you to a Booke called▪ The Second Hearing of the cause betwixt the Quaerer and Anti-Quaerer, &c. In the view of the Stories above-written, the Reader may make these Observations. 1. Is it the way of the Lord to call men immediately from Heaven▪ on purpose to tell onely of an Houre-Glasse; and to have nothing to say, but to call a man Priest, with no other Message? Were ever the Prophets of God sent forth with such triviall messages as these? How fearefully is the glorious name of an holy God abused in this particular. 2. Is not this to bely the all-knowing God, to say in the name of the Lord▪ That one of us was at home, when he was not? And that he had a Message, which presently after he denied againe, being demanded what it was. 3. How emient is that judgement upon the followers of
these men, that they are delivered up to strong delusions to be∣leeve lyes themselves, and delude others▪ who confidently af∣firmed, that they knew that Fox was so sent as he peetended by an immediate voyce from God, and yet upon enquiry, de∣nied they either saw shape, or heard voyce. 4. That this their pretence of being commanded, or sent forth immediately by God, is most wicked and vaine, and meer∣ly their way to get populer applause or acceptance, is plaine. For, 1. If they be with-held in publique from delivering their message there (as they may pretend) yet why doe they not de∣liver it in private? or at other times? When they came to Newcastle, and were with us before the Magistrates, they deli∣vered not their message there; and they might have had liberty with freedome to come to any of our Houses; nay, some of them were invited thither by some of us. How fully doe theyW. C. contradict themselves, and are faithlesse messengers to their master, neither true to God nor Satan. 2. If they were under such powerfull impulses of the spirit to speake, (as they pretend they are) that they cannot hold; we desire to know how they can now of late forbeare till our publique worship and exercise be concluded? At their first breaking forth it was otherwise; but since they have found that their speaking in the time of our publique worke, is pu∣nishable by Law, they can now be silent till we have closed up the worke. Certainely, such politique proceedings doe evi∣dently make plaine, that their pretence of an extraordinary command, and strong impulses of the spirit, are absolute coun∣terfeit, either against their owne consciences, or by the strong delusions of the Father of Lyes. 3. Their usuall charge in publique against us, is that we a Deceivers, and doe teach lyes in the name of the Lord; yet when they are charged to produce any one tittle by us delivered that they particularly can call a lye, there is nothing that they doe ordinarily produce, or can except against us, but will pre∣sently runne to such expressions as these; Thou wearest long Robes, and Prayest standing in the Synagogues; and therefore
they tell us in the name of the Lord, we Preach lye: this wa fully apparent lately before the Magistrates of Newestle, where John Audland, Stubbes, and the woman their partner, were called, and challenged to instance in any one particular of the Doctrine delivered by either of us, which they durst affirme toS. H. W. C. be a lye, but had no syllable against it to object; and as we could instance in many other cases. 4. But would you lastly, see their folly in pretending to an immediate light, take this following Story; George Fox meet∣ing with ne Mr. Nichols in Carlile, told him, that he was an Hypocrite &c. he replying▪ asked him, if he knew his heart? he sayd, he did. He asked him againe, and Fox affirmed againe, he did. He then asked him, if he knew his Name Fox answered, I know by thy questions thou art an Hypocrite, shuffling so la∣mentably to evade his question. To whom Mr. Nichols answe∣red, Dost thou know my heart and not know my name? And so shaked him off as a most notorious Impostor. Reader, they that live in the Countries where these people come, or doe reside, doe know, we might discover much more of their Principles and Practises, then what we have done▪ We might pleade against them the fruits of their casting off the Word and way of God; and the more, because they justifie them in stead of mourning for them. Such as George Fox▪ his curing of Mr Ftherstone: Miles Ralhead, his cursing of master Walker Minister of Kendale very lately in the presence of master Archer▪ and Mr. Cooke. Christopher Atkinson, (a grand leader of this people and a Propheticall Impostor) or a good while to∣gether, his very immodest familiarity with (to say no more) a woman of his way, in the sight of a godly Minister at Kendale M. Waoe. The wife of Edmund Adlington of Kendale going na∣ked (November 21. 1653.) through Kenda'e streets &c. but these we have named are the very badge of their profession; and we are satisfied that this will suffice to enforce that rule of the Apostle upon every watchfull heart [from such turne away.] VVe shall now adde the reason of our Title; and how fully that title of Pharisee which they ordinarily give to others will fall upon themselves, will thus appeare.
1. The Pharisees it is fnowne, did seperate themselves from the rest of the People, upon an account of a conceit they had of their owne surpassing holinesse: This is the very reason of their Name, as Luke 18. 9. Christ spoake that Parabe about the Publicans and Pharisees, unto certaine that trusted in them∣selves, that they were righteous, and deised others. How fully is this the spirit of these men? all that are acquainted with their Principles and Practises know. Not any (whatsoever be∣ing owned of them as Saints) but such as walke in their way, ptonouncing damnation to all others. Let them Reade and consider Isay 65. 5. They which say, stand by thy selfe, come not neere to me, for I am holier then thou; these are a smoke in my Nose, and as a fire that burneth all the day. 2. Their undeniable conformity to the Pharisees is in their knowne rash censuring, John 7. 49. When the people had spoken to the prayse of the Lord Jesus, the Pharisees presently censure, saying, This people who knoweth not the Law are Cursed. What is this but the ordinary Phrase of Quakers, i pronoun∣cing every one cursed and damned▪ that is not of their way. Iohn 10. 20. There was a division amongst the Iewes, and many of them said, he hath a Devill, and is mad. So Iohn 9. 16. Mat. 11. 19. Behold a man gluttenous, and a Winebibber. No man dare say, that Christ sinned in excesse, as to meat and drinke, but onely this was their Pharisaicall slander, because of his law∣full use of meat and drinke. Here you have them againe per∣fectly acted, in pronouncing others cursed, and rashly judging the lawfull use of meats, &c. and appearing the most absolute successors to Pharisees. 3. Mat. 23. 13. Christ is there charging the Pharisees for shutting the Kingdome of Heaven against men, which is known to be by putting people upon a righteousnesse within them, in opposition to that of Christ. And how fully this is the very businesse of Quakers, we referre you to that Position of theirs in pag. 10. of this Booke. But we shall adde that, Mat. 5. 20▪ Except your righteousnesse exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, yee shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven. 4. Mat. 23. 15. There Christ pronounceth a woe to the Pha∣risees,
for compassing Sea and Land to make one Proelyte, which so made, is two-fold more the childe of Hell, then before. Consi∣dering the blasphemies of these men before alledged, and their wandring up and downe to carry on that designe of poysoning mens hearts with their Doctrines; any Reader will see the fulnesse of the parallell. 5. Mat. 23. 23. You have another woe pronounced against the Pharisees by Christ, for tything Mint, &c. but neglecting the weightier matters of the Law, &c. How evidently is this the frame of these men who laying all the weight upon triviall ob∣servances of Hats, Thou, Cloathes, &c. doe wholly neglect the great mysteries of Faith, righteousnesse of Christ▪ and Ordi∣nances of the Gospel? Thus they straine at a Gna, and swal∣low a Camell. 6. Mat. 23. 27. 28. A woe pronounced to the Pharisees for making cleane the outside of the cup, being whited sepulchres, outwardly appearing beautifull, but within full of hypocrisie and iniquity. How fully doth this set out the condition of these Quakers, as if it were a Prophesie of them? who are inwardly so full of cursing and bitternesse, and being onely cloathed with some seem seemgy beautifull raggs of the Law, doe put from them the very righteousnesse of Christ imputed, and deny the Prin∣ciples of the Gospel. We have the rather given you the Description of them out of this Chapter, because it is their presumption▪ and usuall rse from this Chapter, to perswade the credulons world, that the Ministers are these Pharisees. But alas, how fully doth it make these men naked and open, and pull off the fig-leaves of their hyocie We might also adde that, Mat. 23. 5. All their workes (as the Pharisees then) they now doe, to be seen of men, ise whence is it, That no place will serve them to vent their messages in (though but to particular persons) but in the mee∣ting-houses or Synagognes? No place heares of their Religion so much as streets, and market Crosses: For though they Pray not at all, as constant experience is a most convincing witnesse, (no, they are the Heathen that know not God, and the Families that call not on his name) yet, what of Religion is pretended
to by them, is most in crying up their owne holinesse, and Pha∣risaically despising and scorning others publiquely in the streets and market places. And though they be not called Master, and Rabbi, yet they fully doe affect the whole of that Pharisaicall vanity, in crying up themselves as extraordinary Prophets, ac∣counting themselues the onely Rabbies or Authenticall Doctors of truth in the world. We could acquaint the Learned, from Jewish Antiquities with many other affectations of the Phari∣sees, their minicall gestures, hypocriticall carryages in the streets, wherein these men are a most exquisite picture of them. But we rather leave them, as they are plainely set forth in these Seripture discoveries for Monkish Holinesse, which we also attri∣bute to them: He that shall compare their neglect of Apparell, the pretended frequent Fastings, their dissembng seperation from the world (though James Nayler being asked, how he left,W. C, and gave away his Estate, when he entred into this way, said, in the Publique Sessions at Appleby, He gave it to his Wife? a pretty shift) their counterfeiting Visions and Revelations, the laying weight of justification, upon their outward ob∣servances, and many other things of the same nature; we say, he that shall compare them in these things, with Po∣pish Monkes and Fryars, will questionlesse conclude, That as their way in these things, is clearely the superstition of Monkes and Fryars, so we have not been injurious in giving that Title to all the pretences of their holinesse: Nay we could produce instances of Visions, Revelations, Fastings, &c. in that shaven generation, which might let these people know, their perfection they boast of, leaves them many Leagues short of this kinde of perfection which hath more fully been attain'd to by that Popis Rabble. And now Brethren, you, for the establishing of whose Faith in a speciall manner we have Published this, having forewared you of grievous Wolves entring in upon you; not spring, but endea∣vouring to make havocke of the Flocke, and of the Faith once deli∣vered to the Saints. We commend you to the Lord, and the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an In∣heritance amongst all them that are sanctified. FINIS.
