E177 R24946 8700788 41577
Prae-Nuncius Sydereus: AN ASTROLOGICAL TREATISE Of the Effects of the Great CONJUNCTION of the two Superiour PLANETS, Saturn & Jupiter, October the Xth. 1663. and other Confi∣gurations concomitant. WHEREIN The Fate of EUROPE for these next twenty years is (from the most rational grounds of Art) more than probably conjectured, AND The Success of the present Design of the Turk against Christendome, occasionally hinted at. By RICHARD EDLIN, Astrophil. Aliquod dictum, quod non dictum prius. Prius intellige, tunc increpa. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1664.
Licensed March 14. 1663. Roger L'estrange.
TO THE EMINENTLY LEARNED, AND NO LESSE HONOURED, ELIAS ASHMOLE, OF THE MIDDLE TEMPLE Esq. WINDSOR-HERALD AT ARMS, AND COMPTROLLER OF THE EXCIZE For HIS MAJESTY, A KNOWN MECAENAS TO ALL INGENIOUS ARTS. THE ENSUING ASTROLOGICAL TRACTATE IS MOST JUSTLY DEDICATED BY THE AUTHOR R. E.
To the READER. READER, THis Treatise so long expected (because so long promised) is at length made publick, although not without much labour and difficulty in the composure, as well by reason of the Intricacy of the Subject it self, as the various interruptions in my own Affairs. The Intricacy of the Subject will appear, if we consider that there are few or no presidents extant, or to be obtained, of any moment, that treat of this Subject, especially as to the measure of time, whereby we should know when the effects will most principally manifest themselves; However I doubt not but I have sufficiently handled the subject in all the parts there∣of, to the satisfaction of the Ingenious, or at least to incourage them to make a further disquisition; what I have done I dare presume to say is performed from most rational principles, not hitherto so copiously hand∣led. And indeed it is not this part of Astrology alone, but there are others also, wherein we finde great deficiency in the Ancients, by reason of the insufficiency of their Astronomical Tables; so that they were oven forced upon many absurdities to salve up the errours they were fre∣quently subject to; and how observable is it even in our late Professors al∣so (and in some now living) that (following the steps of the Ancients without due examination, or taking notice of their mistakes) have been constrained to wring and scrue accidents to agree to their positions of Heaven, whether they have been congruous or proper one to another, or not! and so have wrested their time many minutes, and sometimes some hours from the truth, as I could plainly and sufficiently instance; but I forbear: This I say is frequent in some, which in Nativities (the most necessary doctrine in particlar judgements) how great injury it may be to the person concerned, the judicious do very well know, and our reason may inform us. As to the irruptions, or rather interruptions, that have happened in my own affairs (which hath also been one main cause of prolonging of time) indeed they have been many and great (Ratione so∣lis ad Corp. Saturni & M. C. ad corp. Martis and other untoward Configurations) But it is the providence of God that (in the language of Dr. Brown, in his Relig. Med.) hath so constituted the Configura∣tions of Heaven at my Nativity, and I am therewith content, till it be his pleasure otherwise to dispose of my fate, which at present (I thank
God) I am in no wise ashamed to own, since, I say, it is his providence, who for our transgressions visueth at his pleasure (both in Mercy and Justice) to the third and fourth generation. But these I say, have been one main cause that have obstructed the publishing of this Book, which was long since intended to be published; but this is not all, there have al∣so been many delayes and hinderances since it went from my hands, through one occasion or another; however, for what concerns my self, by reason of those enormities I have been so abundantly subject to, let me be excused, if I have been more careful of the substance and plainnesse of the matter it self, than the elegancy of Style, or the curiosities of Stops and Pointings, for which I must submit to the censure of the judicious. Notable transactions have indeed been acted upon the stage of the World before the Book came forth (but not before it was penn'd, as di∣vers of my friends do very well know) but let me tell you, those accidents are not so properly the effects of the Conjunction it self, but of some con∣comitant Configurations preceding, as you may perceive I have mention∣ed in its proper place, the ♀ it self not manifesting its effects so sud∣denly to the World, so that in that respect the Book is come forth time enough; and to what accidents have happened already (as those between Portugal and Spain, the Pope and the King of France, &c.) I dare presume to affirm without ostentation, they were timely predicted from the principles and reasons there mentioned. Some there are that have objected, that nothing could be predict∣ed from this Conjunction; these are such who deny any Influence at all in the Stars, especially as to mundane affairs. But these may be convin∣ced by their own sense: for there is nothing more apparent, than that the configurations of the Celestial Powers, especially of the Superiours, do cause various and notable mutations of the Air; that the application of the Moon to the fortunate or malevolent beams of the good or bad pla∣nets, doth cause notable & apparent changes and alterations in the bodies of sick people, over whom she hath an especial influence; that by the Sun's transit through the several parts of Heaven, and his various de∣clination to the Northward or Southward of the Equinoctial, the sea∣sons of the year are not onely divided, but all things that are produced out of the Earth, have their Vicissitudes, their Generation, Growth, and Corruption; though in different manner, in several parts of the world, and in different years, which is caused by the configurations of the other Planets, either to the Sun, or among themselves. And who should deny
their influences in matters political & civil, as well as in natural, sure I am many instances might be produced to the satisfaction of the most scru∣pulous; I desire (with Bellantius) onely to have the Nativity of such as are so incredulous of the celestial powers, that by Arguments taken from the experience of their own affairs, I might convince them, to avoid all other arguments that might be produced sufficient enough to the purpose. But one, and he no man professor (as he thinks himself) will make us believe, that little can be known of certainty from the Conjunction; First because that great Conjunctions do happen but once in 794 or 795 years, and there being few or no presidents since the Creation. Ergo. Secondly, the House of Heaven cannot be obtained, in which the Con∣junction happens, therefore judged impossible to know the effects; as if all depended upon the House of Heaven. But to the first, I answer, this is no such great Conjunction, that happened in the year 1603 (its in the discourse you may see at large) and this is the third Conjunction that hath happened in that Trigon, which indeed should have beeen the fourth inorder, &c. But suppose it had been their first Conjunction, we have some general rules (though but short) to judge of great Conjunctions; nor are those presidents we have of so little use, as to be neglected; but must we have presidents of necessity for all we write or judge? then I fear this Astrologer will hardly ever be capable of judging a Nativity true while he lives; I have great reason to think, and do verily believe he never yet did, or very rarely. As for his position of Heaven, I have said as much of that in the Discourse it self as is necessary; and certainly there are other things of more principal concernment to judge of, than the House of Heaven, which I need not stand to mention here, because sufficiently handled in the Book it self; and if we consider the great variety of judgement in respect of different Meridians and Elevations of the Pole, who is there will satisfie or incourage an Artist for the great la∣bour it will require? But why do I trifle time in answering one, who with much confidence and as much ignorance doth cavil at the labours of others (nay most in∣gratefully against those who have been his greatest support and pro∣moters) whilest it may be made evidently appear that in all or most that ever he did yet, he hath committed (frequently) most gross and absurd er∣rours in his very fundamentals? and this appears not to be want of care or through oversight, but absolutely for want of judgement; and yet he must be a corrector of (or rather a caviller at) other mens labours, al∣though
though, as I could make it appear, he understands them not; But I shall refer my Reader to a particular Treatise shortly to come forth, wherein this boasting Ignoramus is anatomized to the full, his Absurdi∣ties, Ignorance, and gross abuse of Art particularly laid open and made known to undeceive the world. But, to thou that art courteous, this Book is commended to thy judici∣ous censure; the subject it self is not able, and I have been carefull to my power to perform what lay on on my part, without playing the Plagiary, or robbing any man of his Labours; nor have I had the assistance of any, either in Calculations or Judgement; not that I am ambitious of any Igenuity therein, but having used an honest endeavour in the per∣formance thereof; if thou meetest with any errours or deficiency, either in the Pen or Press, let me crave (as I doubt not of) thy courteous censure, and care to correct; And as for the envious, I challenge and expect their emendation, or be silent. Farewell. From my Study next door above the four Swans in Bishopsgate-street. I am thine. R. E. Observationes Astrologica, A Treatise of a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, whererein are also many things of principal concernment in Astrology not frequently practised; A most Learned and Ingenious Discourse of the true visible Systeme of the World, according to Capernicus, and our late best Astronomers. The second Edition: to be sold by the Author, and at the Angel in Cornhill.
I have perused this Astrological Discourse of Mr. Richard Edlin's, and may truly say, It is not more Elaborate then Learned, and very wor∣thy the view of all Judicious Artists. Die ♀ Feb. 12. 1663/4. G. WHARTON. I have read over this Piece, and averr, it is excel∣lently and judiciously penn'd; and know not what could have been said more of this Subject. ☽ 15. Feb. 1663/4. W. LILLY. I have seriously read over this elaborate Treatise of Mr. Edlin's, and so far approve thereof, that I wish it were made publick, for the satisfaction of all ingenious persons. 17. Feb. 1663/4. JOHN BOOKER.
PART I. CHAP. I. Containing some General Considerations of Natural Causes. THe Causes of all Natural Mutations (next unto God) whether as to the World in ge∣neral, or more particularly as to Humane bodies, are the vertues and influences of the Celestial bodies; whereof some are ter∣med more, others lesse principal. The more principal causes (as they are distinguished by the Learned) are the trans∣mutations of the Absides or Aphelions of the Planets, Great Conjun∣ctions of the Superiours, new Stars and Comets; to which some have added (though as it is conceived not upon sufficient grounds) the change of the Sun's excentricity, and the obliquity of the Ecliptique. Causes lesse principal, or adjutant Causes (as Spineus termes them) are Eclipses of the Luminaries, Lesser Conjunctions, An∣nual Revolutions; to which are supposed the motion of profe∣ction of the great Orb, of great Conjunctions before the Floud, the Birth of Christ, Mahomet, &c. All which have their variety of Effects, according to their dif∣ferent qualities, and the nature of the subject they operate upon;
which (although some are scrupulous) is confirmed by the insti∣tution of the Almighty himself, Sint & Signa, &c. Let them be for signes and for seasons; And indeed, in order to the will and power of the Lord, they are but as signes of his providential will and pleasure; but as to natural Operations, they are not improperly called Causes; for Sub Deo semper agunt, is a true Motto; And not onely this institution of God himself, but the consent of the Learned do also confirm it; For S. Austin the Divine hath this saying, Deus inferiora regit per Superiora, God governeth all inferiour things by their Superiours: And the Philosopher, Cardanus Segm. 2. Aph. 58. Dei igitur altissimi coe∣lum est instrumentum quo agit, impellit, regitque; Heaven is the instrument of the most high God, by which he acteth, inforceth, and governeth all things. Amesius in his Medulla Theologica, lib. 1. cap. 9. de providentia Dei, terms it modus ordinarius, the ordinary and usual way of Gods providence, wherein we are to consider both the antecedent and the consequent, as it is in Hos. 2. 22. Exaudiam coelos & ipsi exaudient terram, &c. I will hear the Heavens (saith God) and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Fruit, and the Corn, and the Oyl, and they shall hear Israel. And this or∣der (saith he) is that Law of Nature adhibited by God himself at the Creation, Fiat esto, sit ita, Let it be so, and it was so. Hence the Prophet styles them, the Statutes and Ordinances of the Sun, and of the Moon, and Stars, Jer. 31. 35, 36. ver. and chap. 33. 20. he calls it Gods Covenant with them. And God himself asketh Job (chap. 38. v. 31, 32, 33.) among other inter∣rogaties of the powers of Heaven, whether he knew the OR∣DINANCES of Heaven, or could set the dominion there∣of in the Earth. Hence then we may conclude with Cardan. Seg. 1. Aphor. 20. Astrologia altissima scientiarum est, tum quia de coelestibus, tum quia de futuris, quorum scientia non solum divina est, sed etiam utilissima; of the Sciences, the language or influences of the Stars is the su∣preme, because it treateth of celestial things, as well as of things to come, the knowledge of which is not onely divine, but also profitable; a good reason is also rendered by Great Alber∣tus, Ʋniversi ordinationem nulla scietia humana perfectè attingit, ficut
scientia judiciorum Astrorum. No humane Science doth perfect∣ly attain the ordination of the whole Universe, so as the know∣ledge of the Astral influences. But I am not to dwell upon this. Now seeing by the consent of the most learned in this Sci∣ence, it is not one configuration of the Celestial powers alone, Porrò multa necessaria ad hanc inquisitionem, &c. Rig. 53. But there are moreover many things necessary to this disquisition; as the knowledge of former superiour configurations; the con∣comitancy of great Eclipses, and such like, which are to be con∣sidered in general Events: it is necessary therefore that we take some consideration of those forementioned causes of Natural Mutations, for the better amplifying the discourse of the present subject. For, Nullus planetarum effectus, sive parvus à revolutione vel ab aliis significantibus erit, quod non primum à raedice habeat exordium, qua∣re summa diligentia radices considerandae sunt. No effects of the Planets shall be, whether from revolutions (which of themselves are of little force) or from any other such like significations; which are not first founded upon some Radix, wherefore the first Radixes or Grounds of things, are with special diligence to be considered. CHAP. II. Of those accidents signified by the Mutation of the A∣phelions of the Planets. ANd first, for the mutation of the Aphelions; That principal transactions do attend these, take the authority of Cardanus Segm. 1. Aphor. 37. Per mutationes absidum regna & Regiones & Religiones mutant. By the change of the Absides or Aphelions of the Planets out of one sign into another, Kingdoms, Regions, Religions, Faith, Sects and Opinions of men, are altered. So Rigel. Aph. the 9. and he gives this reason; If the Planet, whose
Absis it is, be ascending in these or the opposite places, he con∣tracts vertue of the nature thereof, which vertue is most strong in the Absis, but depraved in the opposite place. Grandes so∣lent imperus causare, & rerum honoribus mutationes, transitus augium in diversa signa, & diversos terminos. Anonym. 244. The transits of the Auges or Aphelions of the Planets in divers signs and parts of Heaven, do use to cause grand mutations in Empires, and in the glory and honour of things. And if I may add my own conjecture or opinion in this point, The Aphelions of the Pla∣nets being those parts of their Ellipses or Orbites, in which when the Planets are, they are at their greatest distance from the Sun, (their proper focus and center of motion) and where they may be said to begin and end their peculiar perids and revolutions, and consequently their apparent motions are encreased or dimi∣nished, being measured from thence, It therefore seems rational to me, that as they are varied from one point or part of Heaven to another, they should cause proportional mutations on Earth. And if we would know where and in what nature these acci∣dents will be, the forementioned proposition of Lud. de Regiis in∣forms us. Illarum gentium quarum significator erit planeta. augis per∣mutata; those mutations will happen among those people, whose significator is the Planet whose Aphelion is so chan∣ged. Mutatioque erit bonum vel malum, secundum naturam significato∣rum superiorum illorum temporum, & secundum naturam significatio∣nis. And this mutation shall be to good or ill, according to the superiour signicator of those times, and the nature of the signifi∣cation. But-since this doctrine hitherto hath not been sufficiently hand∣led (as indeed no wonder) I must here of necessity give caution to prevent mistakes: For indeed, it must be Reason must guide us to the knowledge of the true effects; our Experience in this particular being very deficient, and that for these two reasons especially. First, the slow motion by which it is varied; which is onely 48 seconds in a year, (ex Tabulis Carolinis In other Hypo∣theses, the mo∣tion is slower in some, though swifter in o∣thers.) occasioned by the precession of the Aequinox, and not from any motion that is in
the Aphelion (as the Author of the Caroline Astronomy hath ju∣diciously prov'd) which slow motion varies but one sign in 2250 years; so that the Aphelions have not transited above two signs and a half since the creation of the World, (as we generally ac∣count it) and therefore were there no other reason, it were enough, since we should have almost no examples to verifie this doctrine. But another argument may be taken from the unhappy mi∣stakes of almost all Astronomers, especially the Ancients, whose Astronomy being founded upon a mistaken Hypothesis, might very well be deficient in the motion and places of the Aphelions; nor is the difference so small among the Moderns, as that we may trust to any Radix whereon to build any solid judgement; for if we believe Spineus, the Aphelion of Saturn was translated out of Sagittary into Capricorn, Anno 1630. but by the Tables ei∣ther of Kepler and Bullialdus, that Aphelion is not changed till after the year 1700. almost 100 years difference; and by the accurate tables of Astronomia Carolina, not till the year 1818. neer 100 years after that. So likewise the Aphelion of Mars by the computation of the Authors aforesaid, should have entred Virgo, Anno 1650. but by the Caroline Tables it is not till the year 1691. where, by the way we may note, that what grand alterations or changes have been conjectured by some, to be the effects of these or such like mu∣tations of the Aphelions, cannot be expected to happen accor∣dingly; or if any such accidents should happen neer those times, they must be the portents of other causes. These things (I say) I thought necessary to give caution of, not to be critical against those Learned Authors, whose mistakes are rather to be pitied than cavill'd at; since we are so much ingaged to Antiquity for their willing endeavours. And because it may be worth our observation, let us examine the last mutations of the Aphelions, that so by comparing the Times with History, we may see what notable transactions have happened in the World. If we substract 2250 years from the year of Christ 1818. at what time the Aphelion of Saturn enters Capricorn (that is by the Caroline Tables, which I rather accept of, because they are more
harmonious and demonstrative in themselves, more consentaneous to all undoubted observation; and (though but new) yet more approved of than any other, by the most able and learned of our English Astronomers) I say, by making substraction it brings us to the year before Christ, 432. when the Aphelion of Saturn entred Sagittary. The Aphelion of Jupiter is this year 1663. (in the beginning thereof) in 8 deg. 15 min. 36 seconds of Libra, which is the mo∣tion or retrocession of the Equinox in 619 years, which if we substract from this year, it brings us back to the year of Christ 1044. for its entrance into that sign. And so the Aphelion of Mars (by the same computation) entred Leo, Anno anto Chri∣stum, 559. The Apogaeon of the Sun entred Cancer, (or rather the Aphelion of the Earth Capricorn) in the 1156 year of Christ. The Aphelion of Venus entred Aquarius, Anno Christi 1506. and of Mercury the 746 of Christ into Sagittary. Nota. By all which it appears, there is not any mutation of any of the Aphelions of the primary Planets, during the effects of our present Conjun∣ction. If we would more particularly know the nature of these transa∣ctions, from Saturn we judge of Antiquities, renovation of an∣cient customes, of things already begun; of Sects, Schismes, He∣resies, destruction and depopulation of Kingdomes and Coun∣treys, all manner of Idolatries, Jesuitism, Monkery, all Jewish Superstitions, sordid and inhumane debauchery, ruine of Build∣ings and ancient Foundations, Dearth, Famine, Captivities, Shipwracks, &c. From Jupiter is known the change of such things as chiefly concern the Law, Religion, and the worship of God, especially as to Church-discipline. He hath signification of the Gentry of any Kingdome or Countrey, and particularly of the Clergy and Lawyers. From Mars is judged Wars, Commotions, Insurrections, Re∣bellions, Massacres, Persecutions, Murthers, all Martial and Military affairs; firing of Houses and Cities, Rapine, Theft, all manner of Tyranny and Oppression. The Sun signifies new Monarchies, Empires, Kingdomes,
which should continue in great Majesty, glory, and Re∣nown. By Venus we judge of Sports, Games, all manner of Pleasure and Delight, Voluptuousnesse, Adulteries, Fornications, but great peace and plenty of all things, and a general Tranquillity she also signifies. From Mercury we know the fate of Arts and Sciences, the discoveries of all ingenious Inventions and secret Devices; he signifies Philosophers, Astronomers, and such as are lovers of all curious Arts; also Merchants, Arithmetick and Accomp∣tants. The Apogaeon of the Moon (depending upon another law of motion) is more frequently changed out of one sign into another, viz. in or about nine months. It entred the sign of Scorpio in June 1662. about the 18. day (by the Carol. Tab.) and it enters Sagit∣tary about the 17 of March this year 1663. and into Capricorn December following. So that by the swiftnesse of this we may indeed have experi∣ence enough; onely we must note, that the Moon is but the Earths attendant, a secondary Planet, and cannot signifie any such grand transactions to the world as those of the primary Planets; yet let us observe what considerable Events may happen in those Countreys subjrct to the sign Sagittary, during the Transit of the Apogaeon through the sign. Astrologers say, that under Sagittary are Spain, Portugal, Hungaria, Dalmatia, Slavonia, Arabia the Happy, and divers other Southern Countreys, which with the dominions of the other signs over their several Countreys and Regions, are plentifully mentioned in other Books. Thus (I say) who please, may by comparing the Histories of former times, see whether such like, or what other notable transactions have succeded those times, for the better correction of this (hitherto) uncertain Doctrine.
CHAP. III. Of the several Conjunctions of the Supe∣riour Planets. BUt there are other principal causes more certain (if we take them in a general sense, as to time) and those are the several Conjunctions of the superiour Planets, Saturn and Jupiter, who are the most ponderous Planets, and slow of motion, and therefore called the Superiours, as well as by reason of their remote di∣stance from the Sun, who is their center. And of these is the pre∣sent subject of our discourse in particular, together with a consi∣deration of other causes in general. But of these Conjunctions there are three kinds, as by the Learned they have been distinguished; and they are Great, Mean, and Lesser Conjunctions; and these (I say) are to be understood of the two superiours themselves, not of those Lesser Conjuncti∣ons of Saturn and Jupiter with Mars; of which more by and by. The Greatest or Great Conjunctions are those after a full period and revolution of the whole Circle, viz. when Saturn and Jupiter have made their several conjunctions in the several triplicities, and do again begin to conjoyn in the first triplicity (which is also called the Fiery and Regal Triangularity) and this is a period of 794 years and some odd dayes. Mean Conjunctions are those which are made, or do happen after the leaving of one, and conjoyning in another subsequent Triplicity, as from Aries, Leo, Sagittary, which is the first; into Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn, which is the second; and so succes∣sively into Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, which is the third; and lastly into Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, which is the fourth and last Triplicity or Triangularity. And this is a period of neer 200 yeares, or more particularly in 199 yeares and some odde dayes. Lesser, or the least Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, are those which happen (after the entring of any one Triplicity) in signs
of the same Triplicity, and these do happen once in or about 20 years; so that by making ten Conjunctions in one and the same Triangularity, it doth appear they are neer 200 years ere they remove out of one, and enter by conjunction into another Tri∣plicity; and consequently neer 800 years ere they perform these conjunctional Revolutions of the four Triplicities of the whole Circle. And here note, that the true distance of any of these (whether Great, Mean, or Lesser) Conjunctions, cannot be obtained with∣out careful calculation, and that from the best Theories (by rea∣son of the great discrepancy among themselves, as hereafter will appear.) For if we take the distances of time between one Con∣junction and another, since their last return into the Fiery Trigon, the variety will appear too great to be confided in, whereby any certain rule can be made without calculation: For, from the 7. of December Anno 1603. the time of the first, to the 7. of July Anno 1623. the time of the second, are 19 years 212 dayes, and from thence to the 16. of Feb. 1642/3. the time of the third Conjunction, are 19 years 224 dayes; thence to the year 1663. October the 10. the time of a fourth Conjunction (and that which is now the principal subject here intended) is 20 years 236 dayes; and from thence to the next Conjunction in October Anno 1682. but 19 years just; yet there are two more Conjuncti∣ons not long after in the same sign, the one in January following; (which is a retrograde Conjunction) the other in May, Anno 1683. (a most wonderful congression) of which I have nothing to say here. If you would have the Authority of the Learned, for the seve∣ral distinctions before mentioned; I must refer you to Mr. Lil∣ly's Prophetical Merlin, where this particular is principally handled, from the Precepts of Cardanus, Naibod, Origanus, and divers others; I shall onely from him quote you the authority of one, and that is Avendris, pag. 56. Merl. Proph. Conjunctio autem magna Jovis ost cum Saturno, in signo Arietis, quod est, quia sunt stellae graves, & tardae, & non significant super particularia, imo super communia: & quia signum Arietis est signum primum inter sig∣na, ergo haec conjunctio vocatur magna, sed quando vadunt à Triplicita∣te ad triplicitatem, tunc vocatur media, conjunctio verò ipsorum de 20
in 20 Annos in signis triplicitatis quaecunque sit, illa vocata conjunctio minor. That is, the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter is called great, when it happens in Aries, because they are ponderous Stars, and of slow motion, and signifie not common or particu∣lar things: And because Aries is the first among the signs, there∣fore this Conjunction is called great; but when they go from one Triplicity to another, it is called mean; but those Conjunctions that are made in signs of the same Trigon every 20 years, in what Triplicity or Sign soever, that Conjunction is called lesser, or the least. This is the same in effect with what was before premised, one∣ly the Author calls that onely a Great Conjunction, which happens in the Sign Aries, which is the First Sign of the Zodiack, and of the Fiery and Regal Triplicity. And indeed, all the Masters of this Science do agree in this (as you may see in the foremen∣tioned discourse of Mr. Lilly's) viz. That those Conjunctions onely are called Great, which are first made in the Fiery Triplicity, and especially in Aries; which Conjunction, if at any time it should happen to be (as Mr. Lilly there terms it) might properly be cal∣led Maxima, or the Greatest Conjunction; for, not onely is that Sign the first of the Zodiack, as was said but now, but also the vertues signified, or operating from such a Conjunction, must needs be more universal, by reason it happens so neer the Equa∣tor, whilest those that happen in Leo have more respect to the North; those in Sagittary to the Southern parts of the World; because their declination is such from the said Equator. But all the Conjunctions of these Planets, at their entrance in∣to the Fiery Trigon, since the Creation of the World, have been in Sagittary, as by calculation will appear, and as I shall afterwards manifest, and never any in Aries. What the will of the Almighty herein is, we may not inquire; but certainly there is some Ar∣canum therein. From Jupiter (whose prerogative this Sign is) we naturally judge of Religion & holy Worship (which is our Al∣legiance towards God) and of Justice, Tranquillity, Peace, and Charity, which should be among men: What shall we say? but that God, and Nature (which is his Instrument) have condescen∣ded to teach us our Duty here, and intend no less than our Eter∣nal Happiness hereafter, if we were not perverse and obstinate;
Per visibilia invisibilia cernuntur, &c. Rom. 1. 16. But I di∣gresse. That most eminent transactions have succeeded these Conjun∣ctions in general, but more especially these Revolutional periods, the Observations of the Judicious in all Ages, and the various Experiments of former times are sufficient testimonies. Conjunctiones Saturni & Jovis res mutant & convertunt; The Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter do convert and change things, Almans. propos. 127. Divisae sunt generationes hominum per conjunctiones superiorum majores, medias, & minores; The generations of men are divided by the Great, Mean, and Lesser Conjunctions of the Superiours. Ludov. de Reg. Aph. 31. Many Authors more might be quoted for the verification hereof, but let these suffice, and let us examine preceding times, and see what accidents have succeeded those grand Revolutions of the Superiours. The first Conjunction of these Planets in the Fiery Triplicity was Anno Ante Christum, or before Christ 3958. but of the Juli∣an period 755. in the beginning of February (Stilo Jul.) in the 8th. deg. of this very Sign Sagittary. This was not many years after the Creation of the World, as it is most generally recei∣ved. The second was in the year of the Julian Period 1549. and 3164 years before Christ, in the beginning of November, that is 794 years 8 moneths distance. And this restitution was in the 5. degree of the same Sign Sagittary, and happened, without doubt, in the dayes of Enoch and Methuselah. The third Entrance, (but second Restitution of this Trigon) was Anno J. P. 2343. 2370 years before Christ, about the latter end of Decemb. in the 8. degree of Sagittary: The distance be∣tween these two returns is 794 years, and almost two moneths. The Universal Deluge, or Noah's Flood, happened not many years after this Restitution; for certain it was during the Con∣junction of the Superiours in the Fiery (or First) Triplicity. Anno 1575 before Christ, but of the Julian Period 3138. there happened three Conjunctions in this Trigon. The first was about the 12 of March, in 9 degr. of Sagittary; the se∣cond
was a retrograde Conjunction, and happened about the 20. of May, in the 8 degree of Sagittary; and the third and last was about the 26 of September, in 4 degr. of the same Sign. The fourth Return, but the fifth time they entred this Trigon was 781 years before Christ, of the Julian Period 3932. about the beginning of December, in the 13 degree of Sagittary. The fifth Restitution was Anno Christi 15. about the begin∣ning of December also, in the 12 degree of the same Sign. The sixth was in 809 year of Christ, about the 20 of Octob. in the 6 deg. of Sagittary. The seventh and the last Return was in the year 1603. De∣cember the 7. in the 8 degree of Sagittary. And this is that un∣der whose influence we now are; which being considered by Leotitius some years before, caused him to say, Cum ergo nunc no∣vus Trigonus, impendeat qui igneus est, &c. Seeing now therefore there is a new Trigon at hand, which is the Fiery, without doubt new Ages will follow, which will produce rash and violent Mu∣tations in the World. There were many eminent Mutations (saith Mr. Lilly) over all Europe in this change of the Planets into the beginning of the Fiery Triplicity; We are now in this Age (and so must some Ages succeeding be) under the dominion hereof, and therefore it is no wonder to see and hear every moment of so great alterati∣ons in the Kingdomes and Common-wealths of Europe; Ever and anon we must expect such sudden change, in these our times, as no Age can parallel; and these sharp and bitter contentions are assuredly to have their beginning from Religious pretences, or breach of Customes. Thus he; which how true and judi∣ciously spoken, out present experience, and certainly future times will abundantly manifest. What the various accidents have been that have succeeded these Revolutions of the Superiours, let such as are furnished with Nota. History inquire. Yet it must not be expected that such great al∣terations should immediately succeed, but sometimes sooner, and sometimes later, according to the will of the Creator, and the intentions and remissions of other Natural Causes. For, Corpora coelestia non agunt in instanti, sed cum tempore, the Coelestial
bodies do not act in an instant, or not alwayes on a sudden, but many times at length, and with some delay; there must be Coi∣tion and Conception, before there can be a birth or bringing forth of things. If we add to either of the forementioned Revolutions 200 (or more truly, 199) years, it brings us to the entrance of the supe∣riour Planets into the next Triplicity, which are called Conjunctiones Mediae, their Mean Conjunctions, for notable transactions have succeded these also (Anonim. 85.) Mutationes Trigonum ab uno signo ad alterum, vehementes & durabiles mutationes efficient in pro∣vinciis & gentibus; The Mutations of the Triplicities from one Sign to another, do effect vehement and durable mutations in Provinces and Countreys. For example. The last Restitution of the Fiery Triplicity (ex∣cept this we are now under) was Anno Christi 809. (as was mentioned before) about the 20 of October: to which if we add 199 years, it brings us to the year 1008. in which year, about the middle of June, Saturn and Jupiter made their first con∣junction in the next (which is called the Earthly) Triplicity, and that about the 10. or 11. of Virgo (ex Tab. Carol.) the Invasion of ☜ William the Conquerour was during the effects of this Trigon, and succeeded about 60 years after. And thus the same proportion of years being added, we are directed to the third and fourth Triplicities; and so to the Lesser Conjunctions, which do happen in signs of the same Triplicity, and are once in 20 years; the particular times of which, for the reasons already mentioned, are not to be obtained without cal∣culation, Vid. Proph. Merl. p. 52. & Seq. As to the quality of the Events, according to the precepts of Astrologers, besides what hath been already mentioned, shall be more fully handled in the following discourse, and perhaps may hereafter be inlarged. I have been the more large upon these things, because they have principal relation to the present subject; nor is this doctrine of Conjunctions hitherto sufficiently handled; the best Trea∣tise I have hitherto met withall (in general) is that foremention∣ed of Mr. Lilly, viz. Prophetical Merl. from which I have received great light, to the discovery of the effects depending on this Conjunction I am now to treat of.
CHAP. IV. Of Comets and new Starrs, &c. to be considered in generall Accidents. THere are also other principal Causes of natural Mutations (as was mentioned in the beginning) and they are Comets, New Stars, Parahelii, and Paraselenes, or Mock-suns and Mock-moons, and divers other Meteorological Appearances, which by the Learned we are also advised to consider in future Events, Ptol. Quad. fol. 105. & Cardanus Segm. Aph. 133. In consideratione ge∣neralium eventuum, &c. In consideration of general events, Comets and all such things as are incident thereto, are to be consider'd. For (by the 99. of the Centiloq. Ptol.) they also carry a second part in judgement. History makes plentiful mention of these, and the notable events that have succeeded, and our own experience of late years are a sufficient testimony; not to mention many, how ominous was that Comet or Blasting Star that appeared in the year 1618. to Germany especially, and divers other Countreys, too fresh in our memories to be denied? What strange alterations succeeded suddenly after the Comet of the year 1652. here in England, (as∣sisted with other causes concomitant, as the Eclipse of the Sun, &c.) New Lords, New Laws, New Governors and Government, New Customes, (and what not?) But of this Comet I shall have occasion to speak more in the sequel. Nor can it be with good reason conceived, that such Prodi∣gies as these should appear in vain: Signa quae videntur in coelo aut Luna vel cum aliis stellis, quae apparuerint extra motum & cursum na∣tura, nunquam evenient sine magna mutatione regnorum illius climatis in quo apparuerint. Rig. Prop. 87. Signs which are seen in Heaven, either with the Moon, or with other Stars, when they appear beyond the motion and course of Nature, they never happen but they portend great mutation of those Kingdomes, or the Kingdomes of that Climate in which they appear.
And here I cannot omit the repetition of those excellent ex∣pressions of Herodotus, mentioned by Mr. Lilly, When God intends to punish a Nation or a City, he first signifies his will by Prodigies; Lo∣quitur cum hominibus non modo lingua humana, &c. God doth not speak to man with humane tongue onely, As by Prophets, Apostles and Pastors, but also by divers forms and Images composed in the Ele∣ments. And indeed it is worthy of note, that seeing those ordinary and more frequent signatures of the will of the Almighty (the Influen∣ces of the Celestial Bodies instituted by God himself at the Crea∣tion, Gen. 1. 14.) are not so diligently observed by all, nay deri∣ded by some, he therefore many times sends us such prodigious and unaccustomed Appearances, such extraordinary and irregu∣lar Accidents in Nature, that he might thereby leave a more deep impression of his Almighty power and Will in the hearts of the sons of men, that all might be left without excuse. Not that hereby we limit the more secret purposes of God in the ordering and governing his Church, for whose glory and promulgation all Monarchies and States have their being here. But that we may observe that God seldome bringeth any extra∣ordinary transactions to pass in this world; but he first fore∣shewes his Will and future purpose by some (ordinary or extra∣ordinary) productions of Nature. Thus the Birth of our Savi∣our was accompanied with a glorious Star, that the wise men of the East (who no doubt were conversant in the Astral Influen∣ces) might also come to the knowledge of the Messias and God of Nature. For having seen HIS STAR we are come to worship him, Mat. 2. 2. Of the New Star of the year 1604. and the Comet 1652. whose influences are cooperating with our present Conjunction, they are handled in the following discourse in their proper places.
CHAP. V. Of Eclipses, and Lesser Conjunctions of the Planets. HItherto of the most principal causes of such accidents as do naturally happen in the World; Lesse principal causes are Eclipses; lesser conjunctions of the Planets, Revolutions, &c. And by lesser conjunctions of the Planets, I mean of Saturn, or Jupiter, or Sol, with Mars, which I term lesser Conjunctions com∣paratively to those of Saturn and Jupiter alone. And in this sense may Messahala be understood, when he terms the conjun∣ctions of Saturn and Jupiter Great, of Saturn and Mars, Mean, of Jupiter and Mars, the Least. These, although they produce many times very forcible effects, yet those effects are not so universal (especially of Eclipses, because they variously appear in different places, and the defect is sooner varied) but do operate therefore more especially upon some particular places and persons; which although it be some∣times with a malignant kind of violence, yet is the duration thereof of far shorter continuance. Rightly therefore was it said of Cardanus, Segm. 7. Aphor. 121. Nulla Eclipsis omnino toti orbi penuriam, aut pestem pronunciare po∣test. Pestis autem ex his, quatuor annis durare nunquam potest. No Eclipse can signife Want or Scarcity, Pestilence, or such like Accidents, to be general to the whole World, because those Acci∣dents signified by Eclipses cannot last above four years. Nor do the effects of Saturn or Jupiter with Mars, or of Sol with either, continue above two years, because once in or about two years they make conjunction, and those in different parts of Heaven: but the conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter do happen but once in twenty years, and that in signes of the same Tri∣plicity. These therefore are properly said to dispose of the times in ge∣neral, and those lesser Causes do more particularly shew the in∣tention and remission of the effects; For it is an Axiom, That by
how much a Planet is more ponderous and slow of motion, the more pow∣erfully doth he leave an impression of his influence. This is very evi∣dent in the Transits and Aspects of the Planets by the Hylegiacal places of Nativities, and in the mutation of the Air, and as de∣monstrative in other Astrological Judgements. And these therefore are also to be considered in general judge∣ments. For (as hath been already mentioned) it is not onely the Conjunctions themselves, or any one Configuration that doth operate alone, but the concomitancy of succedent (yea and pre∣cedent) causes that are also to be considered; according to that notable saying of Naibod, sup. Alcabit. pag. 357. Tempora vero magnorū eventuum non à Saturm & Jovis conjunctionibus solummodo, sed etiam à deliquiis esse supputanda, &c. The times of Great Events are not onely signified from the conjunction of Saturn and Jupi∣ter, but also from Eclipses; or from hence it may be inferred, that their Effects (that is of the Superiours) are portended to longer times, by reason of the many and infinite Transits of themselves and other Planets through the several Regions of Heaven, therefore it is necessary their influence should oft-times vary and change; but the effects of Eclipses do seldome exceed two years and a half. Nay it is the judgement of Dasipodius, Propos. 65. Conjunctio∣nes magnae nisi ab Eclipsibus vim recipiant non sunt magni faciendae; That great Conjunctions are not of so great force, or to be so much esteemed of, except they receive strength from Eclipses, (that is, as to the particular times of the events) although as to generals they have great signification: For by the 61. and 62. Propositions, Judicia temporum in magnis eventibus ex Eclipsibus su∣muntur. The Judgements of the times when great Events shall happen, are assumed from Eclipses; Ex Eclipsibus magni effectus proveniunt; For from Eclipses great Events do happen. Thus I say are these considerations to be understood; that al∣though the General Accidents of the World are produced from the more superiour causes, who have a more general and univer∣sal signification; yet then shall those accidents most evidently appear, when they are put forward by inferiour causes, such as are Eclipses, Lesser conjunctions of the Planets, &c. who never∣thelesse produce many times very notable effects of themselves,
which yet are subordiate to the general disposition of the times. Annual Revolutions also are to be noted, which strictly ta∣ken, cannot indeed be said to be causes of Natural Events, but rather as onely signes of what accidents shall happen in such or such a year, to those Countreys and places for which the Revo∣lution is set, according as it hath relation to the then predomi∣nant Configurations (I mean of preceding causes) of Heaven. Thus Bonatus doth plainly inform us: Fol. (mihi) 224. Per revolutionem Annorum mundi, scitur quid in illo Anno sit futurum de bono aut malo, utrum tranquillus aut guerrae, &c. By the Revoluti∣ons of the years of the World, is known what will ensue in that year, whether Good or Ill, Peace or War, Plenty or Scarcity, what the condition of Kings, Princes, Nobles, the Religious, and all other sorts and degrees of men, and quality of things whatso∣ever, according to the property of man therein, of the dearnesse and cheapnesse of things, of the fruits of the Earth, &c. But this being not so pertinent to our present purpose, I omit further discourse thereof. Nor is it my task to handle the whole doctrine of General Judgements; who please may be further satisfied as to Effects of Great Conjunctions in general, from that judicious Treatise of Mr. Lilly's mentioned already; of the doctrine of Eclipses I re∣fer to his Annus Tenebrosus; of Coets there is not any thing to purpose in English; somewhat there is in the Prophetical Mer∣lin, but more in the Annual Prognosticks of Mr. Lilly, Mr. Booker, and Mr. Wharton, for the year 1654, to which also I refer you. As for those other Inventions of the Ancients, as the change of the Excentricity, Profections, &c. since they are not grounded up∣on sufficient demonstrative principles of Natural Motions, I have no more to say of them, onely, That as divers acci∣dents have happened contrary to expectation, others not accord∣ing to prediction, as well in this as in other parts of Astrology, did the Ancients invent (or conceive there were) other grounds of Judgement, which indeed do scarcely deserve the name of Natural Causes. These General considerations I thought necessary to premise, as conducing much to our present purpose. What is farther neces∣sary to the amplifying of this doctrine of General Contingen∣cies, as occasion requires, is more fully handled in the subject it self.
PART II. CHAP. I. The Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter 1663. Octob. 10. Astrologically handled. FOr such as are not acquainted with Astrology and its prin∣ciples, I think necessary to premise, That the twelve Signs of the Zodiack, are by the Ancients divided into four Triangularities or Triplicities. The first, which they term the Fiery Triplicity, is of Aries, Leo, Sagittarius; which they also say is Cholerick, Masculine, and the Regal Triplicity, and doth therefore signifie the most princi∣pal accidents of the World. The second is of Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn; this is called the Earthly Triplicity, Melancholy, Feminine, and signifie more sor∣did and vulgar accidents. The third Triplicity is of Gemini, Libra, Aquarius; is Mascu∣line, Sanguine, Temperate, beholds the first by benevolent Aspect; and do also signifie very eminent Transactions to en∣sue, when conjunctions are made therein. The fourth and last is Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces, Watry, Flegma∣tick, Cold and Moist, inimical to the first Triplicity. The several Conjunctions of these superiour Planets, Saturn and Jupiter (as hath been said) in these Triplicites, are such as have the most prin∣cipal signification of the affairs of the whole They con∣joyn but once in 20 years, making 10 conjunctions in signs of the same Triplicity, and then in order they enter the next. This Conjunction I am now to treat of, happens in the first of these, which because it is the most eminent, most principal Ef∣fects (in their proper times and places) will ensue: What they are more hereafter.
The day on which this Conjunction happens, is the 10 of October (by the best Tables, or about the 11) as most have it. By the Caroline Tables (the best extant) it should be about 20 min. past 9 in the morn. By the Rudolphine Tables, 37 min. past 2 in the morn. By Astronomia Instaurata, about 24 min. past noon; but by another new Theory of the same Authors, not till 24 min. past 2 after noon. Argoll will have it about 8 of the clock the 12 day, a great mi∣stake. But such is the difficulty of finding the true moment of any of these Conjunctions, by the most exact Tables that are, or can be framed by the Art or Industry of Man, by reason of the slow motion of the Superiours. It was therefore truly said of Cardane, Segm. 4. Aphor. 79. Nullius planetae cum altero praeterquam cum Luna, exacta conjunctio, ut per seipsum signum ascendens sciri queat, haberi potest. The exact conjunction of no Planet with another, except the Moon, as that the Sign ascending may be known, cannot be obtained. Nay such is the disadvantage (saith he) Nullus mortaliū nec instrumento nec aliter discernere potest, in Ptol. fol. 215. no mortal man, neither with instrument nor otherwise can discern it. Humanus intellectus non comprehendat, saith Naibod. The reasons I have more fully explained in my Treatise of the conjunction of Saturn & Mars, An. 1658. And therefore, accor∣ding to the rule there prescribed (which is to take the next sub∣sequent new or full Moon, or preceding, especially if it be a new Moon) I have taken the new Moon following, which I the ra∣ther accept, because it is almost the same with the Revolutional Figure for this year, in which the Conjunction happens, which in some sense we are advised by Ptolomy and others to consider. For the Ascend. of that Revolution is the 23 deg. of Leo, of this the 10 of the same Sign. Which Lunation, according to the Carol. Tables, is as follow∣eth, and it were to be wished, that such as are furnished with con∣venient Instruments, would carefully observe some dayes before and after (if the weather will permit) that so we may have a foun∣dation of further speculations.
astrological chart 19.8. 1663. Octob. 20 d. 10 h. 56: P. Mer. Temp. Appar. ☽. a ☉. ad □. ♂. London. Novilun postvent. This is the Conjunction we are now to handle; it happeneth to be the third Conjunction, since their last entrance into this Triplicity; the first being in the year 1603. December the 7. carefully observed by Sir Christopher Heydon in England, and by Kepler at Prague; between whose observations was very little difference (the difference of Meridians considered) as any may more fully see in his defence of Astrology. This their Inition or entrance into the Fiery Triplicity, is the seventh Restitution, after their first conjunction therein since the Creation of the World; Andcertainly (as Mr. Lilly well expres∣seth it) hath a more secret mystery of Sabbatism in it than any other, and promiseth something of more singular moment to
the World; where by the way, I cannot omit a judicious ob∣servation of Mr. Whartons in his Hemerescopeion for the year 1653. It is good reason (saith he) like as Rome was built soon after the beginning of the fifth Fiery Trigon, (the first being that un∣der which the World was created) and afterwards by little and little increased, and amongst other Cities the great assembly of the Inhabitants, People, and Kingdomes she had subdued; bore up her head, until at length about the sixth Fiery Trigon, she had reduced very many Kingdomes of Europe, Asia, and Africa, to the form of a Monarchy and soveraign Empire, and flourished in great glory. And that from thence this Empire being divi∣ded into two, (East and West) was observed to have fallen to de∣cay, being troubled with intestine Wars, and exhausted by Alie∣nations of Kingdomes and Provinces, untill about the seventh Trigon it was restored by Charls the Great, and in some sort received its pristine beauty; so shall this Empire at this time al∣so (during the effects of this eighth Fiery Trigon) sustain great mutations. Thus he. And surely with good reason it may be so conjectured; it is the judgement of Alstedius, that the Fire of this Conjunction (that is of this Restitution of the Fiery Trigon) will consume all the dregs and refuse of the City of Rome. I say, there will no∣table Accidents happen to the Roman Empire, during the Effects of this Return of the Superiours into the Fiery Triplicity; and those transactions will also in abundant measure be manifested, these next 20 years; especially about the years 1665. or 66. (as many conjecture) yet do I not conceive that Rome it self will be subject to such grand Mutations, as some have conceived, till the year 1683. or after; in which there happens three Conjun∣ctions of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, the Ascendant of Rome, which undoubtedly will have great force thereon, though I cannot say to its subversion totally. However, before these Superiours have performed their period in this Triplicity (which will be about the year 1801.) there will assuredly be very great altera∣tions, if not a finall Catastrophe of the Soveraignty and Dominion thereof; For if (as Dasipod saith, Aphor. 77.) the Fiery Trigon hath dominion over the Christians; then must the See of Rome
be much concerned herein: And besides, from the position of Mars in Leo at the time of the Conjunction, and some other con∣siderations, we shall speedily hear of some grand Commotions, Wars, Fires, Tumults, and Uproars, &c. that will afflict both City and Countrey in great measure. King James, upon this first Entrance of Saturn and Jupiter into the Fiery Trigon, was established into the English Monarchy; and in the year 1623. was their second meeting in the same Triplicity, viz. in Leo; not long after was the death of that Glorious Prince, and King Charls the First (of happy Memory) was crow∣ned King as rightful Successor. But behold in the year 1642/3. when according to the accustomed order of the Celestial Pow∣ers, and the natural course of those Superiours, it was to be ex∣pected they should have their Conjunction in Aries, a Sign of the same Triplicity; contrary (I say) to that orderly Method they usually observe, they made conjunction in Pisces a Sign of the Watry Triplicity, and so of quite contrary nature to the for∣mer. Excellently was it observed therefore of Campanella, in his Astrologia, sub quarto Trigono, qui primum respicit hostili radio, Mo∣narchia prima frangitur, incipium haereses dirae, armisque protectae, ob Martem & Lunam, fides plus armis quam miraculis ampliatur, &c. Under the fourth Triplicity, which respects the first by hostile A∣spect, the first Monarchy (that is, the Monarchy or Monarchies that arise from the first Trigon) shall be broken, direful heresies begin, protected with Arms, by reason of Mars and the Moon; Faith more inlarged by the Sword than Miracle; new Religi∣ons and Tenents arise, checking the former Austerity, or ra∣ther Superstition: and all this to a good intent, because it is the properties of the Stars to incline. Conjunctiones in Signis Aqueis, quia est Trigonus Martis, significant multa bella; inventiones operum mechanicorum propter martem, haere∣ses graves & magnos, &c. Dasipod. Aph. 66. When Conjunctions happen in watry Signes, which is the Triplicity of Mars, they sig∣nifie Wars, and the invention of mechanick Works and Instru∣ments for that purpose; great and grievous Heresies do also abound; the Law and Religion of Mahomet had its beginning from this Triplicity; to which agrees Cardan, Spineus, and others.
And if such accidents do attend the orderly course of the Supe∣riours in this Triplicity, how much more when it happens so irre∣gularly, as this in the year 1643. did, viz. after two Conjuncti∣ons in the Fiery Trigon? And who is there now living that can∣not seal to the truth of such preposterous Effects, that have attended the English Monarchy these last 20 years? But let us now observe, that after this digression (if I may so term it) of the superiour Planets, Almighty providence hath ordained them in this their next meeting Anno 1663. to return again to their former path, and there to make conjunction, not onely in the same Triplicity, but very neer to the place of their first meeting therein. From whence we may with good reason conjecture, that those Kingdomes or Common-wealths, those Monarchies, States and Governments, all those Families and persons, as had either original or progresse to greater Dignity or Authority, from the influence of the Great Conjunction of the year 1603. or of that Minor Conjunction Anno 1623. And which during the effects of that preposterous Congresse Anno 1643. did receive restri∣ction, and almost total subversion, shall from the effects of this Restitution of the Superiours be again restored, and firmly esta∣blished upon their former principles; and all those Schisms, Heresies, and factious Inclinations, that were predominant in the unruly minds of men, will be either totally abolished, or greatly suppressed; so that all matters, both in Church and State, ge∣nerally shall be reduced to their pristine beauty and lustre, and for these next twenty years shall continue in great Glory and Majesty; although perhaps afterwards matters may for some time be carried on with greater austerity, &c. Yet will not these things be altogether free from Disturbances, Molestations, and dislikes of a ruder sort of distempered spirits, especially the for∣mer part of the Effects of the Conjunction; or especially till Saturn and Jupiter do make their first Sextile Aspect. For the Comet which appeared in the year 1652. in opposition to the Great Conjunction; which also exhausted mens spirits to Rebel∣lion, Tyranny, &c. is yet cooperating with the effects of this Con∣junction we now treat of, and so will be for some years; which conjunction is almost directly in opposition to the place in which the Comet first appeared.
And although we cannot obtain the hour of the Conjunction so precisely, yet this is certain, that the Moon that day (and I do believe near the true time) passeth by the forementioned Co∣met, and applies to the opposition of the Conjunction, and Mer∣cury (her dispositor) in that pernicious Sign Scorpio, having lately been in Square with Mars. Hence I say, although from the prerogative of Jupiter in the Conjunction, we may expect much Tranquillity and Happi∣nesse, and that matters should be carried on with much mild∣nesse and sobriety, in matters both Legal, Political, and Reli∣gious; yet there will appear a factious and distempered kind of people, of the rural or more common sort, men of unsetled judgements, that I say, will molest and disturb the peace of the Kingdome, and of all those places where otherwise the bene∣volent influence of the Conjunction will operate; and what they cannot accomplish by force (by reason that both the Moon and Mercury are weak, and Mars disposing of Mercury) they will endeavour by private Conspiracy, false Rumours, and sedi∣tious Pamphlets, nay and sometimes by tumultuous Insurre∣ctions. I cannot call this Conjunction Great, although it be as it were a restitution of the Fiery Trigon, considering that irregular one of the year 1643. Yet let me tell you the effects thereon de∣pending will be no small moment, in all or most of the King∣domes and Common-wealths of the world; but more especially in the European and Christian part thereof, by reason of the Great Conjunction it self, and other eminent causes. For, besides the Great Conjunction Anno 1603, there was also in the year following a most eminent New Star, which continued visible about 16 moneths in a most splendent manner; whose place of appearance was not onely in this Fiery Trigon also, but in or neer the Ascendent of the Great Conjunction, as it was carefully observed by Sir Christopher Heydon, and Jo. Kepler. Now our present Conjunction being so near the place of the Great Conjunction 1603, the Ascendent thereof, and the new Star of the year 1604. (for the Great Conjunction was about the 8th. deg. of Sagittary, the Ascendent and new Star about the 18 deg. of the same sign, and our present Conjunction in the 14
deg. thereof) interposing the Conjunction and new Star; with∣out doubt very eminent effects must be expected to happen du∣ring the effects of the Fiery Trigon in general: And what was more particularly signified by the great Conjunction, and in a more especial manner by the new Light, whose effects must conti∣nue during the influence of the whole Trigon, and certainly pre∣notes some extraordinary effects to ensue therefrom, by reason it appeared so near the beginning of the Fiery Trigon (that is the first entrance of the Superiours therein) and continued so splen∣dent in the same place for above one year; I say, the effects hereon depending shall be exceedingly renewed, excited, put forward, and in an especial manner manifested to the world, by the influence of our present Conjunction, seeing it hath so neer alliance to those eminent preceding causes. And therefore it was not in vain, that which Cardanus and other of the Learned adviseth, Cum videris conjunctionem vel op∣positionem superiorum in triplicitate Ignea vel Aeria, non festines ju∣dieium, nec idem tradas in rebus parvis, maxime si Sol vel duo de supe∣rioribus in ipsis Triplicitatibus manserint; praeeminentes enim sint hae duae ab aliis triplicitatibus, prima quidem in celsitudine & gloriae, secunda vero in bonitate & profanditate ingei. Cardanus in Ptolom. When thou seest a Conjunction (or an Opposition) of the supe∣riour Planets in the Fiery or Airy Triplicity, be not hasty to give judgement; neither let it be of small matters, (especially if the Sun, or two of the Superiours be in those Triplicites) for the actions of these are praeeminent above the other Triplicities; those of the first or Fiery Triplicity do exceed in height and glo∣ry; those of the Airy do signifie or operate in Goodness and pro∣foundnesse of Wit. Notable to this purpose is that of Mr. Lillies in his An. tene∣bros. pag. 26. The most material changes and alterations of this world (saith he) have alwayes succeeded either a great Conjun∣ction of the Superiours, or some grand and wonderfull Eclipse in the Fiery Trigon, of which these Conjunctions have been the Pro∣dromi. And that which is yet further worthy of note, is, that seeing the Conjunctions of Mars with Saturn or Jupiter (according to the precepts of Albumazar, Leovitius, and other Astrologers) are
necessarily to be considered to the magnifying of the Effects of great Conjunctions; let us observe that Mars doth make two Conjunctions with Saturn in this very Sign, (not to be neglect∣ed) one in the latter end of the year preceding (viz.) in Novemb. 1662. in the 6 deg. of Sagittary, which was neer the place of the great Conjunction 1603. The second happens in the year after our present Conjunction, in the 27 deg. of the same Sign, and near the place of the Sun in the said great Conjunction, his place now being neer the same it was at the Conjunction 1623. Nor is it unworthy of our observation, that in the latter end of the year 1662. there was no lesse than 9 Conjunctions of the Planets (besides Lunar Conjunctions) in this very Sign Sagittary, which (of the 120 Conjunctions Ptolomy adviseth us to consider, Aphor. 50.) are of very principal concernment; the rather, as they are the Prodromi of this superiour conjunction; Memorabi∣le aliquod significant, plures planetae conjuncti eodem signo: When ma∣ny Planets are conjoyned in one and the same Sign (or Division of Heaven) they signifie something memorable to happen to the world. Not that such accidents are signified by these infe∣riour Conjunctions: For by the 39 of Ludov. de Reg. Cum supe∣rioribus nunquam judicia de rebus parvis, cumque inferioribus de rebus magnis, trades. As from the Superiours we are not to judge of small or trivial matters to ensue, so neither of great matters from the Inferiours: For according to the 282 of Anonymus (or an unknown Author) Conjunctio superiorum efficacior & utilior infe∣riorum. The Conjunction of the Superiours is more efficacious than of the Inferiours. Nor let any mistake me, or think by these eminent transacti∣ons Nota. I here judge may ensue; that I accord with those erronious Judgements, who from the Conjunctions (or rather Position) of all the Planets in this sign, the first of December 1662. that the consummation of the Universe, or that the calling of the Jewes, or a Fifth Monarchy (as some have vainly conjectured) is there∣by signified I do only urge, that seeing this Harmony of Celestial Configurations, and such an agreement of natural Causes, espe∣cially of the Great Conjunction and New Star, It cannot be with any sound reason (as some on the other side have vainly) imagi∣ned, but that the Almighty doth hereby signifie unto us some
grand Mutations and Accidents to happen in the world, from the effects of this last return of the Superiours; and those in an espe∣cial manner to be manifested these next twenty yeares, being excited by the influence of this Conjunction we now treat of. Therefore, for the better finding out what those events more particularly are, it is necessary that (by the 51 of Hermes) that we consider those eminent preceding Causes, severally and apart, especially of the Great Conjunction and New Star, who have the general disposition of the times for almost 200 years, from the year 1603. Causae Ʋniversales effectuum sunt potentiores causis singularibus, & generaliores, minus generalibus. Dasipod. 57. Causa universalis vincit singularem ubi par est magnitu do effectuum significatorum. Aphor. 59. Causa Ʋniversalis in comparatione ad proprium effectum, potentior est quam singularis. 60. Most Excellent Aphorisms, according to which are the first and second of Anonimus. Constellatio particularis reducit ad actum, suo tempore, eaque signifi∣cavit constellatio universalis & superior. Potentior causa destruit significata contrariae causae minus po∣tentis. The summ of all is, That general and universal Causes are of more power than singular and particular causes; for a particu∣lar Constellation doth but reduce those things to action in their proper times, which a more superiour Configuration hath signified.
CHAP. II. Of the Great Conjunction, Anno 1603. LEt us begin first with the Great Conjunction; the Scheme of which, according to the observation of Sir Christopher Heydon, is as followeth; astrological chart 1603. Decem. 7 d. 7 h. 35. A. M. ☽ a ☍ ☿ ♃ & ♄. ad ☍ ☉ & ♀ London. Who pleases may reduce it to other Meridians; That whichis very observable is, that this great Conjunction (contrary to the usual order and custome) happened before the full Period and compleat Revolution of the preceding Triplicity, as if the effects
depending hereon should by the Ordination of the Almighty be sooner manifested to the world, than for some natural causes could otherwise have been predicted. And seeing the nature and property of this Triplicity (by the general consent of the Learned) is diametrically contrary to the former; it may be rationally conjectured that the more emi∣nent changes and alterations are likely to happen, ere the ef∣fects thereof be at a period. Undoubtedly there will be a great suppression (if not a total subversion) of some Ancient Digni∣ties, Laws, Customs, Privileges, Monarchies, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, and also of some ancient Families who had their first foundation of greatnesse, from the effects of those pre∣ceding configurations; And either the Erection or restauration of others; who must continue in great Glory and Majesty, and shall be firmly established, during the effects of this revolution∣al Congresse; or till some contrary Configurations of Heaven do produce their dissolution. So many Planets posited in the sign of the Conjunction (sepa∣rating and applying) considering also that the Conjunctions of Mars the year following with Sat. first, then with Jupit. both neer the place of the great Conjunction, and the Ascendent of London, these may induce us to conceive, that some more than ordinary effects are to be signified by this return of the Superious into the Fiery Triplicity. I say more than perhaps hath usually happened, from any or most of those that have preceded since the Creation of the World, and that amongst other places, London, and gene∣rally the whole Nation is herein concerned. And what those effects are, Campanella and others do inform us. Sub Arietis triangulo sunt Monarchiae ingentes, leges justae, sapi∣entes divinorum, pietas bona coeli & Europes in nostro Hemispherio; Under the Triangle of Aries (which is the first, and called the Fiery Trigon) are mighty Monarchies erected, just Laws; the Europians of our Hemisphere will be more pious, and searchers after divine things. Tranquillitas, pax, ex Solis & Jovis dominio; Tranquillity and Peace, by reason of the dominion of the Sun and Jupiter: Item sapientes insignes, sterilitates magna ob Triangulum Igenum. Also wise and famous men do appear in the world, great barrennesse
in many places, because it is the Fiery Triplicity, and the Pla∣nets that have dominion therein are more hot and dry, than moist. And seeing it is the Sign Sagittary, in which these superiour Planets, Saturn and Jupiter do make their first Conjunction (by the doctrine taught us in the 59 pag. of Merl. Proph.) the world seems weary of former wars, and upon small intreaties will be ready to hearken to peace. Some ancient Family decaying, and a new one repairing and exalted; an appearance of Schisms and new Doctrines, but none privileged by Authority; the Church troubled with curious niceties, men stumbling at Straws, and leaping over Blocks; the Majesty of Jupiter is such in Sagittarius, all things tend to peace, and do the Devil and Jesuits what they can, there will be tranquillity in most parts of Christendom, during the first twenty years of that Trigons government; all the actions of those years ending in Treaties, Leagues, Messages, and the like; many men will be in hope to aspire to greatnesse; the end crowns onely one: but because the Sign is double bo∣died, two Generations pass not without superlative discord to the actions and beginnings of this Conjunction, much double dealing among men. I need not repeat what hath happened in the affairs of the World from the year 1603. to the year 1643. in which happen∣ed that preposterous Conjunction in the Watry Trigon; they may be yet remembred, or called to mind by looking a little back∣ward; let it suffice to note in general, that soon after this great Conjunction, very notable Mutations happened in the World; the English and Scotish Monarchy was conjoyned in King James, a general Peace over all Europe, divers years of Drought, and great Scarcity, and Dearth. But this is not all, there are yet many notable Transactions to happen the world from the effects hereof; Signum bi-corporeum significant homines & reges, Majestratus, &c. Dasipod. 85. By-corporeal or double bodied Signs do signifie or operate most upon Man, and of Men upon Kings, Magistrates, and Rulers in any Kingdome or Common-wealth; therefore (as Sir Christo∣pher Heydon hath it) the effects hereof may be applied to mat∣ters and persons both of State and Religion.
And secing that whatever had its rise or original from any eminent Configuration of the superiour Powers, must also ex∣pect to receive a great suppression and molestation from its con∣traries; so now (in the judgement of Spineus in his Catastrophe Munds, ingeniously translated by the Learned Elias Ashmole Esq;) as Mahomet had his rise from the influence of the Watry ☞ Trigon; so from the effects of this Restitution of the superiours in places of contrary effects, must that Law and Religion receive great abatement and molestation in its dominion and govern∣ment, if not a total subversion; yea in pag. 25. of that Book, from the influence of this Conjunction, Mahomet shall be de∣stroyed, then shall follow a universal peace, and a general Em∣pire of Christians, or the Faith of Christ more enlarged through∣out the World. But (saith he) these things will not be without labour, great Difficulty, Blood-shed and by infinite Infelicities, Rebellions, Dissentions, and Treacherousnesse, by reason of the Scorpions heart, the presence of Mercury, and the treacherous Sextile of Mars, equivalent to a Quartile in the Equator. And if we do consider the nature of the Star, which for the most part is Martial, the constellation being generally received to be also of a malevolent nature; and that the Moon, who is disposed of by Mercury, is separating from an opposition of Mercury and the conjoyned Planets, and applies to an opposi∣tion of Sol and Venus, the Conjunction it self, and Mercury be∣ing so neer this violent fixed Star, with the forementioned Quar∣tile of Mars. These considered (I say) with good reason did Spineus judge there would happen such malevolent effects in the world, ei∣ther before the benevolency of the Conjunction would take place and operate, or notwithstanding what was otherwise por∣tended thereby; so I say, let the Policy, Care and Industry of Saturn, the Integrity, Wisdome, Justice, and Piety of Jupiter, or in more plain terms, let the Wisdome and Prudence of the Ru∣lers and Magistrates of Kingdomes and Countries, whether (and both) Civil and Ecclesiastical, endeavour what they can, there will be divers treacherous Oppositions and Molestations, secret Plottings and Conspiracies, publick Calumnies and Reproaches,
yea and sometimes Insurrections and Rebellions, contrived and acted by a rude, seditious, and treacherous Multitude, an unset∣tled and giddy-headed Generation, who will not want their sup∣porters and associates in the very Courts of Princes; for Mars is Lord of the 11. and all this attended with the pretence of Re∣ligion and Justice, &c. by reason of Mercury his dominion in the 9. and of Jupiter in the sign of the Conjunction where Mer∣cury is. But what will be the issue (may some say) of those contrivan∣ces? the Moon in opposition to the Ascendent, and 12th. from her own house, and Mercury not onely peregrine, but in his detri∣ment will inform us; and we usually say in other Judgements, that he or they, whose significators are most strong, shall over∣come; Saturn, Jupiter, and the Sun (who in this sense are oppo∣sed and afflicted) are much better dignified; All comes to as much as nothing; and GOD hath certainly a great work to do by the effects of this Conjunction, the generals whereof you have heard. Yet let me not omit the judgement of Mr. Lilly upon this Conjunction, viz. That GOD will restrain Monarchical pomp, and reduce all to an Aristocratical mediocrity both in Church and State: But before this be effected, Omnia nutu unius regentur, as Cardane long since predicted; after which God will give so long a peace, and such tranquillity to the Earth, as she never enjoyed the like; in the mean time (saith he) as Saturn, Jupiter, and Mercury, in the Scheme are in the 12th. I conceive that privately by Lies, by Treachery, by feigned and dissembling Treaties and Ambassadors, and by the policy of a Jesuitical Fa∣ction all over Europe, the true Protestant Religion shall infinitely be distressed, and the Heavenly intentions impedited, and all those Countries that professe Protestantisme exceedingly be mo∣lested, by so secret and close a compact of Villains and false-hearted Traitors, lurking in the bosoms and closets of Princes, as that many will thi Popery and Papism shall return to its old seat in every Country. But that it will never in our Kingdoms, for Jupiter being in his chief house, cannot but in fine overcome, and the rather, because he receives the Sun and Mercury in the Ascendent, which shew that God will miraculously by the means of some young Prince or Commonalty of people, discover and
bring to light the close mysterie of those plots, that from the year 1603. untill almost 50 years be expired, shall involve all at some times, and part at other of Christendom in most bloody broyls. For the more particular times of the Events, and those many accidents yet to be compleated, I handle afterwards; yet if we take the Ecliptical distance of Mars from the place of Mercu∣ry, and the Conjunction, and convert it into time, it shews the times of some more than ordinary Events suddenly to ensue. But thus much of the Great Conjunction alone. CHAP. III. Of the Effects of the New Star, Anno 1604. ANno 1604. about the beginning of October, this Star was observed first to appear in the Heavens, whose effects co∣operate with the Great Conjunction, because it appeared so near the place and time thereof, and by reason of its stability and long continuance; the greatnesse of which effects are known by its Place, Magnitude, Distance from the Earth, its form, colour, and time of continuance. For its Place (although there is some small discrepancy among Authors) it was observed and generally concluded to be in the 17 degr. and about 40 minutes from Sagittary, with 1 degree 54 minutes North Latitude, so that (I say) it was not much elongated from the place of the Great Conjunction, which evi∣dently shews the concordancy of its effects therewith. For its Magnitude, Ricciolus and others say, it was bigger than Jupiter or Venus, as to its apparent Diameter and visible quantity; but Kepler, Spineus, and some ers do say, that it was indeed bigger than Jupiter, but not altogether so big as Venus; For certain its apparent magnitude was more than any of the fixed Stars, whence also the effects are of the greater mo∣ment. As for its Distance from the Earth, its nullity or insensible
paralax (by the consent of all Astronomers) shews it to be situ∣ate among the fixed Stars far above the planetary Orbs; For (as Spineus hath expressed it) from Jupiter and Mars, it was so much distant every day, as was their Diurnal motion; so that by its equidistance from the fixed Stars, it appears it was fixed also, and had no motion at all in Longitude, as the Planets and other wan∣dering Comets usually have. In Form it was exactly round, casting no hairs or tail con∣stantly to one place, but more like to the order and apparent cu∣stome of the other fixed Stars, it appeared with a most clear twinkling and shooting of beams on every side, and that with such glistering and sudden brandishing, as hath not been usually seen or observed to be in the Heavens among the Stars. The Colours (as must also the effects be) were very variable, like (in the simile of Spineus) to a many-angled Diamond, by which turning the Sun-beams upon the eys of the beholders, will reflect with a variable brightnesse, so from a bright Yellow (saith he) anon it became Croceal, and in a moment like a Pur∣ple, and reddish, and many times it did appear white, and with a most pure twinkling light. Its Continuance was above a year, even till the moneth of Fe∣bruary 1605/6. and constantly in the same part of Heaven, as to its Longitude in the Ecliptick: And notable to our purpose is that observation of Kepler, That all the Planets were in conjunction with this Star, before it was extinguished: to which I may add, that its first appearance was neer the times of the conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter with Mars, as by the following Figure appeareth. This is the true Historical relation of this rare Phenomenon, or unusual appearance; which though it be brief, yet is it as full as is necessary to our present purpose. But who would be further sa∣tisfied, I refer to Ricciolus his Almagestum Novum, and Kepler, de Stella Nova. The places of the Planets (ex Ephem. Orig.) at the next Luna∣tion preceding the first appearance of this Star, is as followeth.
astrological chart 1604. Septem. 27 d. 14 h. 22. P. ☽ a ☍ ☉ ad ✶ ♃ & ♂. London. That Aphor. of Anonimus the 253. Post magnas conjunctiones in signis Aereis (why not Igneis) solent apparere Cometa, cum redeunt planetae superiores ad aspectum) is here verified; so also after the ☌ in 1623. and therefore (as some have conjectured) it may be expected we shall have a Comet or New Star ere the year 1665. be expired. I shall not trouble my self or my Reader with the various controversies of the Learned, about the generation and existent matter of these or such like productions of Nature; I say from its place, being so related to the great Conjunction, and the reputed Ascendent thereof, we may learn the concomitancy of its effects therewith, and the extraordinary events that must en∣sue from this last return of the Superiours into the Fiery Trigon.
From its Magnitude, Distance, Stabillity, Continuance, &c. is the Greatness, Quality and Duration of the effects declared. And by its Habit to the Sun, the time thereof in general; for con∣sidering that it was occidental of the Sun, and so appeared not till after the Sun-set, viz. was vespertine, if we may apply the Do∣ctrine of Ptolomy, then must not the effects thereof be so sudden∣ly manifested to the world; but as the Sun did approach nearer and nearer, and so by degrees, and for some time did obscure the light of the Star, so will the effects be obscured or retarded for some time, or till excited by subsequent Configurations; yet so, as that it must cooperate with the Conjunction, because it was neer the Ascendent thereof; or we may from hence infer, that as the great Conjunction was Oriental and Matutine, and so might denote some sudden changes and alterations to happen in the world, or that the effects thereof should quickly be manifested; and that after Saturn and Jupiter were separated one from ano∣ther, and were about to make their conjunctions with Mars, for the further augmentation of their effects; that then this Star ap∣peared occidental (as hath been already mentioned) neer to the place of the Conjunction, denoting, that at length, and even be∣fore the effects of the Conjunction are compleated, must there be some eminent and more than ordinary accidents to happen to the world. Very little hath hitherto been taught us by the Astrologers, of the effects of these or such like Prodigies of Nature, so that we cannot attain so exactly to the particular events. We may ge∣nerally conclude from extraordinary Causes, that some extraor∣dinary Events will ensue; and from Astrological principles and grounds of Nature conjecture, from such inordinate signatures as inordinate and prodigious effects must happen. The judicious do say (saith Spineus) Circa illam partem, in quae pseudostella refulxit ascendere virum aurum visu repraesentantem. That about that part of Heaven in which a Mock-star appear∣eth, shall a man arise, which in shew shall resemble Gold; Come∣tes in oriente maximi exortum significat viri magni legum latoris, saith Cardanus Segm. 2. Aph. 204. Comets appearing in the East, do signifie the birth of a great Man, who shall be a Maker or a giver of Laws.
And by the third Segm. Aph. 117. Cometae immobiles, seditiones, &c. Immovable Comets do signifie Seditions, and being in the Fiery Triplicity it excites Wars, Commotions, Conflagrations, &c. to happen in the world; And this the rather, for that the Star was of a Mars-like colour; yet seeing at length it appear∣ed of a more bright and Mercurial colour (or rather a Jovial) Spineus will have it, after so many misfortunes; as Wars, Sediti∣ons, Burnings, Slaughters, &c. to signifie the Kingdome of Peace; with him we may conclude, that there will be great change of Laws and Customes, Destruction and Detriment to divers States and Monarchies, beyond what is signified from the great Conjunction, for else why was it visible so neer the place and time thereof? To which we may adde that notable observation of Sir Chri∣stopher Heydon; that as Saturn was elevated above Jupiter, and so might seem to retard or remit the benevolent influence of Jupi∣ter in the Conjunctional effects (who was otherwise better dig∣nified) yet this Star, when Saturn came to passe by him, was ele∣vated above him, which doth also further evidence the greatness of the effects of this New Star; and what Saturn would do by Subtilty, Craft, Hypocrisie, self ends, &c. shall in a great mea∣sure by this New Light be discovered and suppressed, whether it be by new Laws or Decrees, in matters either Civil or Ecclesi∣astical. And forasmuch as this Star was fixed and situate above the planetary Orbs, even among the fixed Stars, and that the Sun al∣so among the Planets the year following, suffered an Eclipse in the M. C. of the great Conjunction, and in perfect Sextile to the Ascendent thereof, and the place of the Star, which was also then yet visible; from whence it may be (saith he) proportiona∣bly collected, that what was decreed in this notable Synod of the Planets (in this sign, which he calls the Court or Temple of Hea∣ven) was also ratified by the fixed Stars, and by all the spheres of Heaven; neither is it to be neglected, that this New Star was not onely elevated above the Planets in the Conjunction, both in respect of its Latitude from the Ecliptique, and situation or di∣stance from the Earth, but also excelled all the Planets in magni∣tude and light.
So that as the Sun, metaphorically representeth Kings and Ma∣gistrates, and Nobility in Astrology are resembled to the Pla∣nets about the Sun, so the fixed Stars are compared to the peo∣ple and Commons, among whom some excell others in Great∣nesse; and therefore, whether there be a new Democracy or Ari∣stocracy of the Church and Common-wealth, founded while the Sun suffereth his light to be eclipsed, I take not upon me to decide; but he conceived there would be a breach of Leagues and Trea∣ties, and a renovation of the Wars, great detriment to the King of Spain, that he should be beaten out of the Indies, and the Go∣spel should be propagated unto the Southern parts: For to what end is this Star perpendicular to the Indian Seas, and to the best parts of America? if we consider the place of the tar, in relation to the Figure of the great Conjunction, it was in the Ascendent thereof, therefore what great Man there is (or to be) born that must come from the East to excite Wars, and change Lawes, we must leave to time to determine. Considering that all the Planets, except the Moon, are subter∣ranean, that Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, and the New Star, are in∣tercepted in the fourth House, without doubt it will be long be∣fore the effects will manifest themselves fully to the world, which at length will be the more effectual, because the first ap∣pearance thereof was so neer the conjunctions of Saturn and Jupi∣ter with Mars, and all nigh the place of the Great Conjunction and the Ascendent thereof; and therefore I may add, that be∣cause our present Conjunction is so neer these former Configu∣rations, therefore the effects thereof shall in abundant measure shew themselves these next twenty years, and likewise during the effects of every of those Conjunctions that shall happen in this sign Sagittarius, so long as the influence of the Fiery Triplicity shall continue. But what those effects yet further are, give me leave also to add the judgement of Spineus in his Catastrophe mundi, where (treating of the Mock-stars of the years 1572. and 1604. he saith, That the appearance of this Star in the Fiery Triplicity, and (as he terms it) in the direct of Sagittary, signifies the vehemen∣cy of some King over his people; his coveting of moneys, de∣pressing of many of his subjects by violence and injustice; the
death or deposition of such Nobles as had their honour under the Fiery Trigon (I suppose it should have been the Watry) and consequently it foreshews a Drought, and great Mortality among the Inhabitants of the Earth, a decay of Fruits by the vehemency of Heat, a dearth of Cattel, the death of Kings and Citizens, and that there will be much lewdnesse in many parts. And further, without doubt in the latter years there will be almost a destruction of Monarchies especially, because of the most powerful influence of the Stars that then will happen; we conceive (saith he) not onely the final destruction of the Turks, but also that there will be a great decay among Christians, and that not onely all the Kings and Potentates of the Earth shall be hurt by the several evil Constellations of Heaven, But take heed all you KINGS of SPAIN and FRANCE; ☞ you Princes and Potentates of ITALY, behold and dread the Sign sent from GOD, viz. the Mock-star of the year 1604. let down in the Fiery Triplicity to provoke Wars and Conflicts (by Seg. 7. Aph. 34) Rebellions, Treasons, Desolations, sudden and utter Ruine and Mischiefs of all kinds; so that all men living, of what degree soever, shall be naturally inclined to the shedding of Blood. For every inordinate constitution of the Stars brings Death among old and infirm people, but in others sudden and utter ruine: And at length he thus concludes, Oh! quot mutatio∣nes Regnorum; Oh! quot lugubres & flebiles infortuniorum Casus! &c. Oh! how many changes of Kingdomes! Oh! how much lamenting the condition of Disgrace! Oh! how many sorts and differences of dangers are to be feared, what great and grievous Villanies! what turbulent and damnable Seditions! Oh! what sudden and unlook'd for mischievous kinds of Deaths! Oh! what exalting of wicked and reprobate men do the Stars of Heaven belch out! what wretched and indigent persons are every where extoll'd, and the rich oppressed and impoverished! how many subjects and servants will rule, while Kings and Ma∣sters obey! Oh! what Princes shall be thrown down out of their Dominions! what insolent, drunken, and luxurious men, who shall have the habit of Whoredom! what inventors of new and unheard of Lusts, Buggerers, Gluttons, Murtherers, cruel
Deceivers, Traitors, and Thieves (without cause) such as shall deride, torment, tear in pieces, and kill with very vexation, all men that be endowed with Prudence, Knowledge and Wisdome, who will neverthelesse be of a firm and constant mind. And if you would also know when in general these things Nota benè. shall be, he adds, Although they shall be fierce after the year 1630. yea more fierce after the year 1650. yet shall they be most terrible and rigorous after the year 1660. God divert the Evil that is yet further portended from the ef∣fects of this Star, from the Kingdom of England; for seeing the Star did first appear so neer the body of Mars, and that Sa∣turn was also applying, whose influence Mars translates first to the New Star, afterwards to Jupiter; it may probably be conjectured, that many violent and turbulent accidents must ensue in the world, which as they do proceed from such natu∣ral causes, whose influences are universal, so that all places more or lesse shall be sensible of the effects; therefore England cannot be excluded, and the rather, because we are under a sign of the same Triangularity: But if we consider the dominion of the Sign it self, or their situation in Heaven, the effects are for certain extended to the more Southern parts of the World, and such as are both South-East and South-West from England; and in Europe, more particularly Spain, France, Italy, Portugal, &c. But let this suffice for the effects of the New Star also, onely if we consider the time of the Sun's coming to the place of the Star, Mars and Jupiter, it informs us of some superlative transactions to fall out in the years 1664, 65, and 66.
CHAP. IV. Of the other Lesser Conjunctions, Anno 1623. and 1643. OF these we are not to take any great notice, seeing the ef∣fects extended but to the following 20 years after each Conjunction; among which we may not forget that the death of King James succeeded the Conjunction of the year 1623. and that King Charls, whose Ascendent was the sign of the Conjun∣ction; came by rightful succession to the Crown; there was also several years of great Drought, Scarcity, and a most furious Plague. And therefore seeing such like Evils did also succeed the great Conjunction of the year 1603, especially that great Plague in England Anno 16, and that (as Mr. Cambden observes) Saturn cannot (or seldom doth) passe through the Fiery Triplicity, b afflicts the City of London with a Plague; and as at other times it hath been observed, so God grant it not to be so now: But truly, when I consider (beside the Transit of Saturn through the sign Sagittary) that besides other Enormities great Plagues have also succeeded those preceding Conjunctions of the years ☞ 1603. and 1623. & that there are also two conjunctions of Saturn and Mars in the same Sign; me thinks we have too great cause to fear an approaching Plague, and that a very great one, ere the year 1665. be expired; I dare not be positive in such determinations, but I say, from these reasons taken from such eminent natural causes, it is greatly to be feared; and if we con∣sider how the Fruits of the Earth have been corrupted by intem∣perate seasons and unwholsome airs, and thence a great destru∣ction of Cattel, we cannot but look on those also as the Prodro∣mi of the same; and how hath Almighty God visited most Nati∣ons about us, and a long time spared us? (LIBERA LIBERA NOS DOMINE.) Notable is that expression of Mr. Lilly's; We in England (saith he) have had two of our best Princes fol∣lowed with two Great Plagues, viz. Queen Elizabeth 1603. and
King James 1625. There's a Mysterie in it, if I durst unfold it. God grant we have no more such Plagues, I wish such Princes. I onely further note in this Conjunction of the year 1623. that as Mars his next Aspect is a Quartile with the Moon, who tran∣slates the light and malevolent influence of Mars to the Sun by a hostile Aspect, viz. a Square from Cardinal Signs, and that the Sun being separated from the Opposition of Mars, applies next to the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, doth evidently denote most violent Transactions to ensue, though not suddenly, because of the distance of the degrees; which if we convert into time, viz. of the Moon to the Quadrate of the Sun, and Mars to his opposite place, it gives about 16 or 17 years, which brings us to the years 1639. or 40. And who knows not what troubles were then agi∣tating and beginning to come upon us? And seeing that the place of Mars at the time of our present Conjunction, is the place of the Conjunction of the year 1623. (or near it) which sign being the Ascendent of Rome, and of Italy in general, it threatens detriment to them especially, by Fires, Tumults, War, and such like Enormities; by which means those who especially had the Original of their greatnesse from the effects of that Conjunction, shall be deposed, and lose much of their Honour and Dignity, whiles others by some Noble He∣roick Exploits, and principal Martial performances, will be ele∣vated to greater dignity and power, which will be also of longer continuance. But as for the Conjunction in 1643. which, according to the usual order of the Superiours, should have happened in Aries, and so have made their third Conjunction in the Fiery Trigon; but contrarily it happened in Pisces, which is a sign of the last Tripli∣city, so that after two Conjunctions made in the Fiery Triplicity, this preposterously comes in to finish the period of the former Triangularity. And indeed the effects thereof were of as contrary nature, ac∣cording to that of Lud. de Reg. Aph. 32. Deterior ur general ho∣minum per transmutationes illarum magnarum, cum succedetes inimi∣cabiliter configurantur cum figuris praeteritarum, &c. the kinds of men are made worse by the transmutations of those Conjuncti∣ons, when those that succeed are inimically configurated to those
that are past. So I say did this preposterous Conjunction pro∣duce as preposterous Effects, viz. the suppressing and abrogating of former Laws, Religion, Customes, Privileges, Governments, &c. which now from the effects of this Restitution, or return∣ing again of the Superiours into the Fiery, First, and Regal Triplicity, must all those exorbitant abuses both in Church and State be abolished, and all or most of those former Rights and Privileges, Laws and Customes, be restored and established upon their former principles and foundations. But if we consider moreover the malevolent configurations of the Planets, at the time of the Conjunction; Mars is neer the oppo∣site place of Mercury and the Conjunction of the year 1603. the Sun separating from his Quadrature, and applying next to the place of the Conjunction: the Moon separated from the body of Mars and Square of the Sun, is in Square to Mercury, and oppo∣sition of the Ascendent of the great Conjunction and New Star, and applies next to the Square of a Conjunction: All which (I say) considered, are all Arguments in Astrology, of much Faction and Division, of much turbulency and disturbance in Affairs, which although they were carried on under pretence of Religion and Justice, Rights and Liberties of the people, yet were the intents of those Enormities nothing but self-ends; and who knows not how fraudulently and deceitfully matters were performed, how∣ever they were at first otherwise pretended. Those who please to observe the distances of the foremention∣ed Aspects, and convert them into time, as is already prescribed, or as is more precisely used in the determination of the effects of our present Conjunction, may see how those times did concur with the directions. The effects thereof being fully expired, up∣on (or rather before) this Conjunction of the year 1663. (by reason of some other notable reasons that might be taken from general as well as more particular causes) and this Conjunction being largely (and as judiciously) handled by Mr. Lilly, being the subject of his Prophetical Merlin, I forbear any further observa∣tion thereon, and hasten to what I intend.
CHAP. V. Of the Comet that appeared in the year 1652. ANno 1652. December the 9. by most (the 6, 7, and 8 by some) was the first appearance of a great Comet, or blazing Star, having a large Tail, which at some times and in some pla∣ces appeared bigger than at other times it seemed. It continued visible about 23 days, therefore the effects must continue so many years from the time of its appearance, viz. till the year 1675. so that the influence thereof must be manifested, and also co-operate with the effects of our present Conjunction, according to the determination of the times thereof; and be∣cause it was of great Magnitude, even (in the simile of Mr. Boo∣ker) as the full Moon in her Apogaeon, or farthest distance from the Earth, or as Mr. Lilly and Mr. Wharton have it, about 14 or 15 inches diameter, and the Tail extended to 3 or 4 degrees North-east-ward, or opposite to the Sun; Hence the effects are of the greater concernment; For, Quo magis Stella eo efficacior est; By how much greater a Star is, the more powerful and efficacious: The times of its Appearance, its Longitude, Latitude, Diurnal motion, as it was observed by Mr. Rook sometime Reader of Astronomy at Gresham Colledge; and the declination by Mr. Wharton, is as by the following Table appears. Where we must observe, that the 9th day was the first time of the observation thereof by Instrument, though it did appear two or three days before, nor could it be every night seen, so as to observe it, therefore there is no more set down than the observa∣tions were. The nature of the Effects we come to know from the colour of the Comet, and the ruling Planets, &c.
Ephemexis Cometae. Decemb. H. M. Long. Lat. Declinat. 9 7 0 10 ♊ 0 39   10 16 46. A 10 7 0 5   29 27 M 51 0 4. A 11 11 0 2   45 18   20 2 46. B 12 7 0 1   0 9   0 11 36   14 11 0 27 ♉ 30 4 S 55 24 21   15 10 0 25   30 9   10 28 4   16 10 0 23   45 14   10 32 25   18 9 1/2 22   50 19   0 36 48   19 9 0 21   40 21   30 38 50   21 9 1/2 20   40 25   30 42 19   22 8 0 20   25 26   45 43 25   23 10 0 20   10 28   10 44 39   25 10 0 19   30 30   35 46 41   30 6 10 18   50 33   30 49 9   Which because they are particularly handled by Mr. Lilly, Mr. Booker, and Mr. Wharton, I shall onely make some general obser∣vations conducible to our present purpose, as they are concomi∣tant with the influence of this Conjunction. And that which therefore is most observable, is, that the place in which this prodigious Comet was first observed to be, was in the exact place of the Moon, and opposite to the place of the great Conjunction, Anno 1603. and the New Star of the year 1604. which also is in opposition to our present Conjunction; so must we expect that what inordinate effects are thereby signi∣fied, are such as must contradict or disturb the influences of those more eminent causes. And if (as by the consent of the Learned) those Conjunctions did signifie the erection of some new Monarchies, Empires and Dominions in the world, some new Laws and Customes, Ceremonies and Privileges, both in Church and State, so likewise from the effects of this Comet, should those Laws and Customes, &c. receive
great alteration and disturbance; and who knows not the great change of Government, and consequently of Customes and Privile∣ges that succeeded and happened the year following in England, as the influence of this Comet and the great Eclipse of the Sun in Aries the preceding March; which Eclipse signified some new Government, which by reason of the contrary effects of this Comet to those preceding causes, must be by the subversion and abroga∣ting of the former Power, Laws and Customes, and not as that of the coming of King James from Scotland to the Crown and Regal Government of England, which was in peace and tranquillity. And seeing from the influence of our present Conjunction, which (as hath been already mentioned) is so neer the place of the great Conjunction and new Star, all those former Rights and Privileges, Laws and Customes shall be restored, and those exorbitant abuses both in Church and State abolished; yet we may infer from hence, that seeing the effects of this Comet do co-operate yet for several years to come; therefore will not the effects of the Conjunction take place, without great troubles and disturbances to ensue. And although (for the forementioned considerations) we may most rationally conclude, that Almighty God hath some great and eminent work to do, and doth signifie to us some extraordina∣ry events to happen in the world by this last restitution of the Superiours, which shall be augmented and excited, or stirred up and put forward by the influence of the New Star, and that those wonderfull events will in a great measure be manifested these next 20 yeares, by reason of the concurrence of the Conjuncti∣on with those preceding Configurations; yet I say (by the 32 of Rigel. forementioned) will mens minds, or the minds of some men be excited by this preposterous Comet (if I may so call it) to Mischief, Sedition, Insurrection and Disturbance, to secret Conspi∣racies, Mutinies, and Rebellions, and all such irregular Enormities, as such malevolent spirits can be capable of contriving; which by reason of the Retrograde motion of this Comet, and that with such celerity or swiftnesse, cannot but redound to their own de∣struction or detriment, in as much as also it opposed those more regular, and more natural and accustomary causes, which indeed have the more principal and general disposition of the times. So
that I say that at what time soever, whether it be in England, or in what other parts of the world whatsoever, there may happen any irregular Transactions, any violent and unexpected incursi∣ons; although they may at first very furiously go on and seem to prosper in such irregular, unlawful and unjust designs, whether it be by war, or other more cunning or politick Stratagems; yet ☞ The Turk may be herein concerned. must they run Retrograde, till they have destroyed themselves, or in a more peaceable manner come to be extinguished. And if we do observe the place of the first appearance of this Comet, (though it was not then observed by Instrument that we hear of) it is very probable that it was in or very neer the degree of the Ascendent of the great Solar Eclipse the 29 of March 1652 (as Mr. Booker well noted) as the time thereof was observed by di∣vers Astronomers; so that no marvel that such turbulent transa∣ctions did so suddenly succeed in the several parts of the world, as England, Holland, Denmark, Swedeland, and divers others, as co∣operating with, and exciting the influence of the preceding Eclipse. But because we cannot attain to the precise time of the first ap∣pearance thereof, by reason of its uncertainty, it is necessary for such as may make further speculation, for more particular acci∣dents to insert the figure of the Lunation preceding; for according to the 252 Aph. of Anonimus, Ne fabrices figuram in puncte appari∣tionis Cometae, quia non est verum punctum, cum Cometa habeat aug∣mentum & diminutionem. Erect not a Figure to the point of time of the Comets first appearance, because it is not the true point of time, when the Comet may have increase or diminution.
astrological chart 1652. Decemb. 4 d. 14 h. 40. P. ☽ a ☍ ☉ ad ☍ ☿. Postea ad Cometaus. London. If (as Mr. Lilly notes) that Comets portend pratia in locis ad quem tendent; Wars in those places to which they project their tails, then Germany and those places that lie North-east and Eastward from England, must expect a principal share in the effects, Den∣mark, Poland, Swedeland, &c. Mr. Booker in his discourse of this Comet, tells us, that it is re∣lated of an Italian Astronomer, that upon the sight of this Comet cryed, Vae, Vae Germaniae; And who knows not what mischiefs have happened in those Countreys, but especicially to Germany and Hungaria, into which the Turks this year 1663. have made an invasion with almost an innumerous Army, firing and killing and carrying captive all those poor Christians they come nigh to? all which have been portended partly by this and such like prodigious appearance; for it is reported (and Mr. Booker him∣self
hath shewn me a Treatise) of another Comet that was seenin Germany Anno. 1661. But seeing from the influences of these there hath happen'd such great and grievous Calamities, & besides what succeeded not long ☞ The success of the present de∣signs of the Turks proba∣bly conjectu∣rep. after the Comet here in Engl. Holland, and other places, there is now such great fear of the further designs of the Turk against Christen∣dome, by reason of his present preparations, attended with such great and devilish Threatnings; give me leave to add my con∣jectures thereon, in which I shall not be too presumptuous, but (with submission to better judgements) give such reasons as I conceive are grounded upon rational principles. For as those violent and inordinate accidents do happen from those unnatural, unusual, and irregular causes, and this Comet ap∣pearing so opposite to the great Conjunctions of the superiour Planets, which are more natural and regular, so it may be conje∣ctured, that the fury of those Evils and Calamities that do happen from thence, will not, neither cannot continue long; but either (as was said before) by a forcible retrograde motion in their affairs, or a willing condescension by little and little, they (as the Comet) come at length to be extinguished or appeased. Again, seeing (by 77 Aphor. of Dasipodius) that the Fiery Tri∣plicity hath most signification of the Christians, and the Roman Em∣pire (by the consent of Cardane) so many Planets in that Trigon so benevolently configurated, especially that Mars who is in Leo, is saluted with the Trine of Venus, and applying to the Trine of the Conjunction; I say, that what cannot be accomplished by Treaties (of which there will not be wanting the assistance of divers Princes and Potentates) will by the power of the Sword, though with labour and difficulty, wherein one Heroick spirit attains to great Honour, by his more than ordinary Martial Poli∣cy and Atchievements. To which we add the reason already mentioned, pag. 32. that as the Law and Religion of Mahomet & the Turks had their rise from the Watry Triplicity; so now from the effects of this Sabba∣thical return of the Superiours into the Fiery Trigon (so accounted by some, and almost all the Ancient Astrologians, which distinction is questioned by some now) must that Law & Empire receive great restriction and abatement of its power and
Dominion, if not a finall and totall Subversion. For what Law, Religion, Rule or Government, had its ori∣ginal of rise or greatnesse from the celestial Influences, must ex∣pect to receive great detriment and molestation from contrary causes; so that because the effects of this returne shall most powerfully operate, and be put forward by the effects of this Conjunction of the year 1663. therefore (I say again) all those enormities that do arise from contrary causes to these, must spee∣dily be subverted and exstinguished. And although I take not upon me to judge the time precisely when the period of these Revolutions shall be; yet seeing they were excited hereunto by the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars Anno 1662. which happened neer the place of the great Conjunction Anno 1603. and this of 63, so I conceive that from the effects of their second Conjunction in the year 1664. in the same Sign (if not before) will they receive their final and full period of prosecuting any further designs at this time against the Chri∣stians. So that I dare presume to conjecture from these natural prin∣ciples, that the Turk will not be so successful in his attempts upon Europe as some (and indeed with great reason) have feared; but that either matters will be reconciled by Treaties, Embas∣sies and Solicitations, or he will be forced by the Christian Sword to retire. And if we do but consult with the Histories of former times, and that frequently after the apparition of such like unaccustom∣ed prodigies, we shall read of divers invasions of the Turks into Hungaria, Bohemia, Germany, &c. and that with almost innume∣rable Armies, in which they have made great spoyl and havock, and caused great desolation among the Christians, yet hath God in his infinite Mercy been pleased to deliver them (as he did of∣ten times the children of Israel against the Philistines) by far lesse power and force, and contrary to all humane reason; And who should now distrust his Power and Will? Surge ô Domine, Arise, arise ô Lord and help,) Notwithstanding I have heard of some Atheistical wretches, who most blasphemously and audaciously have asked, Where is now your crucified Saviour? why doth he not come down and save his People? &c.
Oh most horrid and detestable blasphemy! But why doe the Heathn rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? He that sit∣teth in the Heavens shall laugh: The Lord shall have them in derision. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth, &c. Psal. 2. v. 1. 4. 10. But again to the Comet; It is a Generall rule, that all those places more or lesse shall be sensible of the effects, in which they appear; therefore this Comet being visible, not onely to Eu∣rope, but also to more remote parts of the World, the Influence thereof is the more Universal and not restrained to those fore∣mentioned places only; but if we take it as to its declination, then from the effects of its first appearance, the more Southern parts of the world must also share therein: From the Sign, England, France, but especially Spain must also have a great portion there∣of, and that especially towards the latter part of the time deter∣mined, because it then becomes nearest Verticall to those places. If we consider the Figure of Heaven at the Lunation, which was without doubt about the beginning of its appearance, we shall find but an untoward position; for the two Malevolents do afflict the principal Angles, Saturn in the Meridian, and Mars neer the Ascendent or Horoscope; they also malevolently be∣hold the Fortunes, who are in abject places; Saturn is in Quartile to Venus, and Mars (who is neer the opposite place of the great Eclipse) is applying to a Square of Jupiter; the Moon, after her opposition with the Sun, applies to an opposition of Mercury and the place of the Comet: The tenth House signifies KINGS; The Ascendent and the Moon the People; both are afflicted, and both will suffer; Kings, Emperours, and Governours, by Fraud, Treachery, Sorrow, Fear, Depopulations of divers of their Ter∣ritories and Dominions, the people they will in a great measure suffer by Oppression, Warre, Fire and Swotd, Imprison∣ment, and such like. Mars doth not onely oppose the place of the preceding great Eclipse of the Sun, but is applying to the Medium Coeli of the great Conjunction An. 1603. & the place of the Sun that is now in opposition to the Come, is at this Lunation neer his place at that Conjunction; this portends some more than ordinary Calamity, Death, or deposition to some Grandee or Great persons of the
World, who had either original or rise from the influence o those preceding Configurations; and this chiefly must happen in those Countries, and to those Persons subject to the Signs Libra and Sagittarius, among which (they say) Spain and the Austrian Family are very much concerned. Not onely the Lunation but also the Comet it self happened in the ninth House of Heaven; Mercury, who is Lord of the ninth is in the third in his detriment and combust of the Sun, the Moon applying next to his opposition, out of those houses which have signification of Religion and the Laws of Kingdomes and Nations; so that much of the matters and accidents attending this Comet will happen by reason of some niceties in Religion, there will happen (as it is to be feared) great hazard and spoyl of the Church in many places: For so Cardanus doth also inform us, Segm. 5. Aphor. 15. Cometes valdè clarus ac conspicuus, tum eti∣am mobilis ac diuturnam mutationem alicujus imperii descernit. And by Segm. 3. Aphor. 117. Immobiles seditiones, mobiles autem bella indi∣cant ab externis; in Cardinibus regum mortes, in nono loco Religionis jacturam, in octavo vel duodecimo loco pestilentiam, aut jactu∣ram segetum, in undecimo loco nobilium mortes. Comets that appear clear and very conspicuous, and if then also they be moveable, they signifie War from Foreiners, and the mu∣tation or change of some Empire; but if they are immo∣vable, they signifie Seditions; if they appear in Angles, they signifie the death of Kings; in the ninth hazard and detriment to the Church and matters of Religion; in the eighth or twelfth houses Pestilence, Mortality, or the spoil of Corn; if in the ele∣venth, they signifie the death of Nobles. This Comet (as we mentioned before) appeared very conspi∣cuous, the Diurnal motion thereof (as appears by the foregoing Table) was very swift: its first appearance was in the ninth of the Lunation; but by its irregular Retrograde motion it de∣scended to the eighth, even to the Cusp thereof; but as to its vi∣sibility in the part of Heaven at the first observation, and at the new Moon following, it was in the twelfth and eleventh houses of Heaven; we may therefore rationally judge, that what acci∣dents soever are hereby portended, whether by War from Forei∣ners, the change of some Empire, &c. according to Cardane;
those may be conjectured to happen in the change or sub version of some Laws or Customes, in the throwing down or spoyling and hazarding Religion, and the Church of God in many places, and will therefore bring great Sorrow and Desolation, as well to the Nobility as to the viler sort; all which Calamities must end in Mortality and violent Death, either by Pestilence or Sword. Seeing now therefore, that according to the opinion of Bona∣tus, that all Comets do signifie Bella, terrores & magnos eventus in mundo, Wars, Terrours, and great Events to happen in the world, and that according to the precepts of Ptolemy, the effects of Co∣mets are generally such as are produced from Mars and Mercu∣ry, as Droughts, violent Commotions, Sedions, Tumults, Wars, and such other Enormities as accompany them; so likewise, be∣sides the reasons already given, if we consider the great preroga∣tive of those two Planets, either by reason of its Colour, which (significat naturam Planetoe dominantis) signifies the nature of the ruling Planet; or its Form, (Quae crinita versicolor vel benè caudata) which was Tailed, or Hairy, and of divers colours [at several times;] or if we consider its Place, by reason of those fi∣xed Stars which it passed by: All which being more particularly handled by those judicious persons formerly mentioned, I there∣fore onely say, that besides what hath happened already since the appearance thereof, as well in other parts of the world as with us in England, and they such accidents as may well be ap∣propriated to the effects of the Comet; There is yet a time re∣maining for many such turbulent actions to break forth; I say turbulent, both as to the bodies of men by pernicious Diseases, in the body politick by War, Sedition, Tumults, Robberies, Murthers, &c. and Ecclesiastick, by Divisions in the Church, oppression of the Godly and Religious, by mutation of Laws & Religious Customs; and also in the Air, by violent and destructive Winds, and the like. All which will work and manifest them∣selves most powerfully in the European part of the world, at what time the Effects of our present Conjunction doth al∣so forcibly begin to break forth, because then by its declina∣tion (giving so many years for the days of appearance) it becomes nearest Verticall to those places.
But I conclude all with those notable and significant Verfes of Pontanus in Meteorolog. Ventorum quoque certa dabunt tibi signa Cometa, Illi etiam Belli motus, feraque Arma minantur, Magnorum & clades populorum & funera Regum. CHAP. VI. Of the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, and other Lesser Conjunctions of the Planets, Anno 1662. THere were also (as the Prodromi of this Conjunction of the year 1663.) no lesse than 15 Conjunctions together of the Planets among themselves, in the latter end of the year 62. nine of which were in this very sign Sagittary; which although of themselves they produce no such grand effects (as I said before) yet because they have generally such coherence with our present Conjunction, and those eminent preceding causes, we may the rather (according to the 50 Propos. of Ptolomy) take the more cognizance thereof; and the rather, because that at the Lunati∣on which was on the 30. of Novemb. in that year, the Moon was passing by all the Planets in that very Sign in which all these most eminent Configurations have happened, viz. Sagittary, which by the forementioned Aphorism of Anonimus, signifie something me∣morable to happen to the World; But I have already given cau∣tion, that these must be looked upon onely as the promoters and forerunners of those great effects that attend those more principal causes, whatever are or have been the high con∣ceptions of some. The most principal of these Conjunctions, and that which is more remarkable as to our present purpose is the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars the 5 of Novemb. in that year 1662. in the 6 degree of Sagittary, whose effects do particularly operate but till the latter end of the year 1664. at what time they make Con∣junction
again in the latter degrees of the same Sign, and neer the place of the Sun in the great Conjunction; this Conjunction of the year 1662, being in the place of Mercury, and very neer, viz. within or about two degrees of the great Conjunction, and not far elongated from the place of our present Conjunction of the year 1663. the New Star 1604. and the opposite place to the Comet 1652. I say, by reason of these great Concomitances of the great Conjunction, and this in 63. this Conjunction of Saturn and Mars is the more remarkable, because it certainly excites the influence of the one, and prepares matter for the effects of the other. And therefore seeing the Conjunctions of Saturn and Mars (according to the doctrine of Haly in his Jud. Astror. and other Astrologers) do of themselves cause notable transacti∣ons, as sudden Commotions, Uproars, sometimes War, Murders, and very violent and cruel Enormities in those places that are under the dominion of the Sign in which they are conjoyned, and this happening with such relation to those eminent causes; it is then no marvel that from hence also we hear of very grand Transactions in those places of the World, even before this Con∣junction of Saturn and Jupiter doth happen, and can take place to operate. And (which I must now add) who is there that is not sensible of very eminent Transactions, to have brake forth in those places which have been chiefly subject to that very Sign and Trigon, viz. in Spain and Portugal, France and Italy, Germany, Hungaria, &c? and more yet are likely to happen, either there or in other places of the world, because it hath yet a longer time to operate; and I say, must prepare matter for the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, and seconded by another Conjunction in the same Trigon; so that by the way I may also note to you, that although (as I mentioned before) the Conjunctions of Saturn and Mars do work suddenly, violently, and generally operate but two years; yet because of these notable concurrences so often (though but necessarily) mentioned, it may be conjectured, that they may extend their influence to a longer time, viz. till the year 1666. or till Mars comes to the place of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, of which he wants about 7 degrees from his Conjunction
with Saturn; However, seeing there are certainly yet a longer time for the effects thereof, and that among other enormities that have already happened in Forein parts, the Plague hath late∣ly afflicted many Countreys; I must once again take notice, that seeing the power of Mars is so great at his Conjunction with Saturn, and being with the Scorpions heart a most violent fixed Star of his own nature, there being other reasons which I men∣tioned before; these I say do give cause from natural grounds to fear an eminent Plague or pestilent Disease to afflict us, ere the effects be at a period (Quod Deus avertat.) And although Mars hath such power to excite Wars, Sediti∣ons, Tumults, Ʋproars, Murthers, Fires, &c. yet by reason Sa∣turn hath greater elevation, as well by Latitude, as in his Orbite, and approaching to his Aphelion, so it may be feared that he will produce great Scarcity and want, if not a Famine in some of those places subject to the influence of the Conjunction, from both great Drought, destruction of Catell, and Mortality among men, Shipwracks at Sea; and these the rather, because the Moon agrees with Saturn in Latitude, which (by the 132 of Almans. and the 91 Aph. Segm. 5. Cardani) doth add to his ver∣tue and power with whom she so agrees in Latitude, which I un∣derstand is when she passeth by them in Conjunction, to whose beams she is nearest united. I have no more of any moment to say of this Conjunction of Saturn and Mars; but that as those grievous Enormities that have happened in the world, have succeeded their Conjunction, and may well be attributed to their malevolent effects, so I hope that much of their violence will be taken off by the effects of this Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, of which I am coming now more especially and particularly to treat, having both as fully and as briefly as I cloud, touched all those things as were directly necessary to the prosecution of our present subject. So the next thing we are to treat of is in
CHAP. VII. The quality of the Events attending the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter more particularly. WHich must be known by the nature of the Planets that are conjoyned, and which hath the greater power and fortitude, the place in which they are conjoyned, with relation either by Position or Aspect to other Planets, or that have dig∣nity in the Conjunction. As for the Planets themselves, you may remember I told you they were the two Superiours, Saturn and Jupiter, who have the chiefest signification of the order and governing the times, of the most material changes and accidents that do happen in the world, all other Configurations of Heaven, or that are made among the Planets, are subordinate to their influences. That this their Conjunction is in the Fiery, Regal, and most eminent Triplicity, and the third Conjunction they have made therein, since this their last return, which is the seventh return in∣to this Triplicity, since the Creation of the World, and will there∣fore produce the more eminent effects. And because that after an inordinate Conjunction that inter∣vened in contrary parts of Heaven, which produced as contrary effects; this Conjunction happens in the sign of the great Con∣junction and New Star, and so makes a restauration (as it were) of the Fiery Trigon; which because it hath such relation to all the forementioned causes and configurations of the Heavenly bodies, do certainly denote unto us the greatness of the accidents to hap∣pen from this last return in general; and that those accidents shall more especially be manifested these next 20 years from the ef∣fects of this present Conjunction. These considerations being already handled in the foregoing discourse, let us now come to particulars, wherein we must first consider the Planets themselves; of both, because it a conjunction of two; Cum duo simul planetae dominantur, erit judicium ambo∣rum significatio mixto; when two Planets together do rule, the
judgement shall be a mixt signification of both. One of these Planets (as Saturn) is an infortunate and very malevolent, destructive, and inimical; the other (as Jupiter) is a fotunate, benevolent, and friendly to Nature; Et generaliter si fuerit infortuna fortunae copulata, & infortuna elevata fierint duae in∣fortunae, nihil firmè juvanies, sed multum nocentes; quod si fortuna elevatur infortuna juvabit quidem, sed & nocebit, &c. Cardan. Segm. 5. Aph. 122, 123. And generally if an Infortune be joyned to a Fortune, and the Infortune be more elevated, both are made In∣fortunes, helping nothing firmly, but hurting much; and if the Infortune be depressed he may do some good, but he will also do much hurt; Quoniam detrimenta magna facilius est inferre, quam felicitates, impediuntque detrimenta magna faelicitates, felicitates autem detrimenta impedire non solent. Because, saith he, great detriments are more easily inferred than happinesses, and detriments do usu∣ally impedite felicities; but felicities are not wont to impedite or keep back mischiefs. But besides this elevation here spoken of, which (as Mr. Lilly observes) was of great esteem among the Ancients; it is the judgement & precepts of the more judicious Astrologians, since the time of Ptolomy, that the Fortitudes and Dignities of the Signifi∣cator is also to be considered; so Almansor Propos. 60. but more plainly and full by Cardanus himself, Seg. 2. Aphor. 189. In omni conjunctione planetarum, eum planetam dominatorem constitue, qui sublimior, & qui in loco plures habuerit dignitates, & plures stellas suae naturae similes. In every conjunction of the Planets constitute him Ruler, that is the most superiour in his excentrick (that is neerest his Aphelion) and hath most dignities in the place of the Conjunction, and the fixed Stars that they are with, are most of his nature. This (I say) is the judgement of all (vid. Proph. Mer. pag. 75. & Seq.) In our present Conjunction Saturn is most elevated, having about one degree more North Latitude, and being neer the su∣periour part of his Orbite; but Jupiter is better dignified, as to essential dignities, therefore both the forecited Aphorismes of Cardane are in force; and it is a general rule, Quod ligat Saturnus Jupiter dissolvit, & haec significatio est super res magnas, that what Saturn binds or hinders, Jupiter dissolves or furthers, and this
hath signification of great matters, saith Almans. Propos. 36. and by 51 Proposit. If the Fortunes have dignity in those places; Minuitur malitia infortunarum, the malice of the Infortunes is diminished; or (by the 18th. of Anohim.) is made more mode∣rate and temperate. By all which we may gather thus much, that seeing from the influence of such like conjunctions of the Planets, viz. of Saturn and Jupiter, there usually succeeds such superlative Transactions, deep Consultations, and matters of great moment in the world; what mischief soever is portended by Saturn in this Conjunction (which will not be a little to some persons and in some places) will not be so vigorous, or at all times so efficacious, and in such a plentiful manner executed, by reason of the greater prerogative of Jupiter, yet so as what general benefit and felicity Jupiter doth promise to mankind herein, will be remitted, retarded, and sometime abrogated by the malignant power of Saturn. If you examine the dignities of each Planet, you shall finde Jupiter to be more strong, though it be by few testimonies; yet is he essentially dignified, and onely suffers by affliction from Sa∣turn, whose dignities and support are chiefly from Jupiter and Venus: Oh what Craft and Subtilty, what Fraud and Hypocri∣sie, &c. will there be used even by those who receive their Interests, Being, and Subsistence from others! yea, even against those very persons that do intrust them, and this as well among great persons, as those of lower degree. For from Saturn is signified matters Political and Civil, all sub∣til and politick Counsels, Deceitful, private and cunning Stratagems, Covetousnesse, Self-ends, Destruction to some an∣cient Family and Buildings; in this Conjunction to Lawes, Li∣berties, Customes, and Privileges, Depopulations, &c. this he signifies in Political matters. In Ecclesiastical affairs he portends great Superstition, Idola∣try, Hypocrisie, Monkery, Jesuitism, and the several Orders of Friers; all manner of Debauchery and Basenesse under Religious pretences, Sects, Schismes, Heresies, Jewish Superstitions and Ceremonies. To Mankind in general he threatens great and difficult La∣bour, Poverty and Want to many; he afflicts the body with te∣dious
Infirmities and Diseases, as the Gout of all sorts, the Scia∣tica especially, because in Sagittary, Hectique Fevers, Defluction of Rheum, Quartan Agues, and such like Diseases as are not ea∣sily remedied by the most skilful Physician; he afflicts the mind with Sorrow, Fear, Lamentation, Trouble, Banishment, long Im∣prisonment. In Natural things he portends great Want and Scarcity, De∣struction of Cattel, Corn and Fruits, Famine and Mortality, un∣wholsom Airs, Cold, Cloudy, Misty, Foggy weather, and some∣times long and tedious Frosts. At Sea he signifies Shipwracks, and great damage by Ruine and Decay, by Inundations of Waters, and breaking of Sea-banks, Dearth and Scarcity of Fish and Fowl, especially Water-Fowl. Of Persons he signifies those of Superiour Rank and Quality, because he is the most superiour of the Planets, Rarò applicatur Saturnus alteri Planetae, quare propter hos significat magnos Principes & Monarchas stabiles. Anonim. 35. Saturn seldom applieth to another Planet, but generally all the other Planets to him, where∣fore he signifies great Princes and stable Monarchs; but gene∣rally he signifies the laborious Countrey-man, Husbandman, Farmers, Yeomen, &c. In our Conjunction he signifies a deceitful, sordid, pernicious kind of people, who will inhabit even in the Courts of Kings and Princes, who will undermine and deceive, endeavour to spoil and subvert the more wholsom purposes intended, to set up and promote their own Interest and Profit. This (I say) is the general signification of Saturn, which in some measure, at some time, and in some places, will be manifest∣ed, according as his influence is augmented or excited by those Revolutions, Eclipses, lesser Conjunctions of the Planets, or other Configurations of Heaven; but with this caution, that these or such like accidents must not be expected to happen in all places nor at all times alike, as well for the reason before rendered, as the benevolency of Jupiter, with whom he is in conjunction. From Jupiter, who is here oppressed by Saturn (as much as in him lies) we judge of Religion, and all sorts of Religious men, the Laws of Nations, and the practitioners thereof of all degrees;
he signifies (when and where he rules) much Integrity, Up∣rightnesse, Justice and Faithfulnesse among men, great Peace and Tranquillity obtained by Prudence and Moderation, Reli∣gion exercifed with much purity and sincerity of Life and Do∣ctrine, just Laws freely executed, the Rulers and Magistrates much honoured and reverenced, the People receiving great Ju∣stice and benefits from their Princes, Honours conferred on ma∣ny, new Laws, Customes, and Privileges bestowed. He generally signifies Plenty and Increase of all things for the benefit of Man, health of Body, tranquillity of Mind, wholsom and feasonable Air, fortunate Voyages by Sea, and as prospe∣rous Endeavours by Land, and generally remits all the Evils Sa∣turn can inflict upon a Kingdom or Nation. And verily, were it not for the power of Saturn (though it be by accidental fortitudes, as was mentioned before) there were great hopes that Jupiter would operate to purpose: nor will there be great endeavours wanting, which in the end will pre∣vail though with difficulty, and that with some variation and uncertainty; for double bodied Signs do signify things not to continue long in a station; and (I say, from the power of Sa∣turn) there will be such secret Consultations and Juglings, such private ends and fraudulent pretences used both in matters of State, and also of Religion, that the honest intents and purposes of Jupiter, (viz. of Magistrate and Divine) will receive great Restriction, and sometime suppression, though not to a total subversion or extirpation. For both Planets having such power in the Conjunction, viz. Saturn being almost equally dignified, both will struggle hard (that is) the policy of a Saturnine, Malevolent, and Jesuitical spirited people, and the more moderate disposition of the Jovia∣list; and although those persons and matters (or many of those) signified by Jupiter, shall be much supprest, debased, and suffer much in their several functions and degrees, and instead thereof many sordid and indigent persons, and such as are of more wic∣ked and superstitious dispositions, exalted and promoted into their privileges and prerogatives; yet I say again, will they not so prevail, but that Jupiter will have time to exercise his more bene volent influence; so that in the end Religion and Religious
men in truth shall be exalted, just Laws executed, the just Rights, Privileges, and peace among the people, restored and established. But let us hear what Authors say to this matter; Haly de Jud. Astr. pag. 8. informs us, Si Jupiter fuerit junctus Saturno, nobiles & alti homines, judices & largi & factores bonorum operum distruen∣tur, & significat mortem Regis alti & potentes multas locustas, & damnum in divitibus; If Jupiter be joyned to Saturn, Noble-men, and of high degree, Judges, and such as are inclined to do good, will be destroyed; some great and potent King will die, there will be many Locusts (Anglicè Catterpillers) great detriment and hurt among rich men; Si Saturnus elevetur supra Jovem, signi∣ficat quod interficieutur nobiles & alti homines; if Saturn be ele∣vated above Jupiter, he signifies slaughters among Gentle∣men. Escuidus fol. 30. tells us there will be, Infortunia in pluribus cli∣matibus, multa bella in Babylonia & mortem Regis ejus, & rumores terribiles; many misfortunes happen in several climates of the Earth, much war in Babylon, the death of the King thereof, ter∣rible rumours also will ensue; Prohibetur omne malum a potestate Jovis, saith Haly; From the power of Jupiter all these evils shall be lessened; and besides the power of Jupiter in the place of the Conjunction, there is an eminent Fixed Star, which is partly of the nature of Jupiter, not much elongated from the place of their Conjunction, yea almost ariseth with the degree of their Conjunction: From all which we cannot but judge from the in∣fluence of this Conjunction, that very high and notable Consul∣tations and Debates about the settling of matters both in Church and State, and removing of those obstructions that may hinder the peace and safety of both, which will not onely be strongly endeavoured, but notwithstanding all difficulties, will in the end be accomplished; for Jupiter is also more assisted by the pre∣sence of Venus than Saturn is, by reason of the more Southerly latitude, from whence we may judge great Treaties and mode∣rate Solicitations will be used. Notable to our purpose is that of Bonatus, fol. 324. Si Jupiter Saturno corporaliter junctus, erunt opera quae homines facient cum silen∣tio, & operabuntur per modum religionis, & cum apparitione fidei &
observatione praeceptorum justicia. If Jupiter be corporally joyned to Saturn, the actions of men shall be performed with much si∣lence and secrecy, under pretence of Religion, and with ap∣pearance of Faith, and the observation of the precepts or commands of Justice. If we consider the habit of these Planets to the Sun, we shall find them occidental; nor doth the Sun behold them by any per∣fect Aspect, being separated from their Sextile about 14 degrees, so that we may note by the way, that it may be long ere much of the effects do manifest themselves; but matters for some space of time will be carried very obscurely and ptivately, Effectus planetae orientalis cit solet apparere, occidentalis tardè. Anonim. 59. At the time of the Lunations, both before and after the Conjun∣ction, not onely the Conjunction it self, but also all the Planets, except the Moon, are subterranean, or under the Earth. If we consider the Revolution of the year in which this Con∣junction happens, which we are advised to consider by Cardane, Seg. 2. Aphor. 187. Nam magna eveniunt juxta domus naturam; for great things do happen according to the nature of that houses the place of the Conjunction is then also in the fifth house, en∣tering into the fourth (ex Tab. Carol.) so that still they are sub∣terranean, which doth further shew the great privacy, under∣hand dealing, and obscurity of things before they are fully ma∣nifested. So Ptolomy hath it, Aphor. 26. Latet plane res, quum ftel∣la eam significans ant sub terra est, aut in alieno loco soli conjun∣gitur, &c. And yet both Planets are swift of course, which denotes the celerity or readiness of many to propagate such matters, and the vehemency of things that are obscurely hatched, although they cannot so suddenly break forth. And although the aforesaid Aphorism of Cardane cannot be applied to an Universal judgment, because revolutional Figures are varied by reason of the difference of Meridians, & the several elevations of the Pole, yet this is very observable, that at the time of the Vernal Ingress these two superiour Planets were very near their Conjunction, neither were they much Elongated all the year, even till the time of their true Conjunction. Which con∣sideration, together with the several Conjunctions of the
Planets, the latter end of the preceding year (especially of Saturn and Mars) in the same sign; these I say are very notable, for as much as from hence matters were preparing forcibly for the ef∣fects of this Conjunction; though perhaps not manifest them∣selves so powerfully, as when the Conjunction it self begins to operate. At the time of the Conjunction the Sun is separated from the Sextile of Saturn and Jupiter, Mars applies to their Trine, Venus is the place of the great Conjunction, 1603. applies to a Trine of Mars, and to the bodies of Saturn and Jupiter; but before she comes to these, she becomes Retrograde; what may we from hence judge, but that certainly the endevours of many will be for Peace and Reconciliation of Differences, for quieting the fears and jealousies of the people, and the suppressing of that ma∣lignant humour that is the cause of their sorrow, grief and com∣plaints? but some are discouraged, and are either willing or forced to fall off, their Embasses prevailing but little, or having not liberty to treat, the Sun is weak in his Fall, and Saturn and Jupiter are possessed of his dignities in part; he (viz. Kings, Emperours, &c.) have not power to prevail, many are dejected; Mars, who is disposed of by the Sun, is very powerful in a com∣manding Sign, with majestical Stars of his own nature, and hath great dominion in the Lunations preceding and subsequent, so that what he cannot effect by Martial policy (which indeed will be very prevalent) he will conclude by force and violence. The Moon at the time of the Conjunction, is in or neer to an opposition of the Conjunction, disposed of by Mercury, who is malevolently posited in that treacherous and pernicious Sign Scorpio, lately in Square with Mars his Dispositor, the place of the Moon being neer the same, as at the great Conjunction, and of the Comet 1652. Good God! what a multitude of factious and unsettled Judgements there are also in some places, that will plot, contrive, and oppose the Superlative Consultations of the Superiours, and cause Tumults, Insurrections, and various Di∣sturbances, though to their own destruction? She is elevated above the Sun, if we either consider her as being in a command∣ing Sign, & so great North Declination; or her position in the fi∣gure of the preceding Lunation. And, Si magna conjunctio fiat in tri∣plitate
Ignea, & Luna elevatur supra solem, rebellabunt populi adver∣sus proprios principes. Anon. 65. When first I had thoughts of writing upon this Conjunction, and considering the great dominion of Jupiter therein, and that there was no malevolent Aspects among the Planets, or to the Conjunction it self, except those of the Moon and Mercury; but that the Sun a little before, even then when they were within one degree of their Conjunction, was in Sextile, first to Jupiter, then to Saturn, translating the Sextile vertue of Mars to Jupiter; of both to Saturn; Mars applying by Trine to the Conjunction; these being the whole (or the general) Configurations of the Planets at and about the time of the Conjunction; I say, conside∣ring these, I had thoughts much good might have been expect∣ed from the effects of the Conjunction, that is to say, that Tran∣quillity and Peace should have been established, Religion and Religious men propagated, encouraged, and purely and with sincerity exercised; just and wholsome Laws, Priviledges, and Customes, restored and executed; without doubt there will not onely be much endeavour used to promote these things in seve∣ral places of the world, but also there will be at some times, and in several places, an accomplishment thereof. But when I found Saturn to have also such power by accident, and that he did suppresse Jupiter by being more elevated, and neer his Aphelion, so that he would not onely have great power and prerogative in swaying the Consultations and Affaires of the world, for these next twenty years especially (for the Con∣junctions of the year 83. are in his detriment) but by this his re∣mote distance from the Earth, he operates closely, subtily, and with some kind of moderation in his Counsels; and observing also that the Conjunction was in Opposition to the last Comet, which in its motion opposed the place of the Sun, the New Star, and the great Conjunction it self, it gives us cause to fear that which hath been already mentioned, viz. that a malevolent kind of spirit, will both in matters Politick and Ecclesiastick, cun∣ningly, and for self-ends, endeavour to subvert and suppresse those more sober and honest intents endeavoured for the peace and tranquility of the People, Nations, and King∣domes.
These things (I say) have been already mentioned; yet let me not be blamed for repetitions, since they are the substance in general of the whole matter; and indeed I am warranted by Cardane, Repe∣titio in hac scientia necessarià est, vel ob difficultatem, vel ob necessitatem, vel ob utilitatem ingentem, vei ob contradictionem; That repetition in this Science is necessary, either by reason of the difficulty, ne∣cessity, great benefit, or to avoid contradiction. In page 4. of the Prophetical Merlme, there is a very notable observation of Ganeverus upon a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupi∣ter, wherein Saturn was most elevated; Quod potestas Ecclesiasti∣ca in multis partibus opprimetur à temporali potestate, maximè in sub∣stantiis Ecclesiasticis; That therefore the Ecclesiastical power in many places will be suppressed by the Temporal, especially in their substance and Ecclesiastical benefits; so will it be endea∣voured in many places of Europe from the influence of this Con∣junction. But that which Sir Christopher Heydon observed in the great Con∣juction, is also observable here in this, viz. that as Saturn, who is the president of Antiquity, doth challenge such prerogative to himself, by being so elevated above Jupiter, and will therefore endeavour to carry on his pernicious and subtil Stratagems; yet is the New Stars place elevated above the place of Saturn in this Conjunction also, for though Saturn had 1 deg. 18 min. North Latitude, the Star had 1. 54. or thereabouts, by the con∣sent of all Observators, which may therefore further confirm our judgement in this, that although a Saturnine, Close, Hypocriti∣cal, and Jesuitical kind of people, may carry on their designs ne∣ver so privately at some time, when they have the most conve∣nient opportunity, yet at length must those privacies be discovered and by the influence of this new light, whe∣ther it operates in new Laws, Customes and Privileges, in matters civil, or in new Decrees, Orders or Discoveries in matters Ecclesiastical, shall all those malevolencies signified by Saturn, be at length not onely brought to light, but also very much suppressed, if not totally subverted. The Moon also after her opposition to the Conjunction, applying to the Trine of the Sun, doth well signify and confirm such Discoveries. But for the further discovery of the Events attending this Con∣junction,
let us consider the place in which the Planets are con∣joyned; For, In magnis coujunctionibus, signum in quo apparet esse considerandum; and so Eseutdus, Fol. 17. when he comes to in∣form us of the quality of the Events, attending any eminent Eclipse, great Conjunction, or other notable Configuration of the Stars, Hoc scietur ex qualitatibus, formis & figuris signi conjunctionis, & signorum in quibus stellae erraticae & non erraticae consistunt; This is known (saith he) from the qualities, forms and figures of the sign of the Conjunction, and of the Signs in which the fixed Stars and Planets are. As for the qualities of the Sign, it is the chief prerogative of Jupiter; and therefore the actions of the Conjunction, generally for the next twenty years, will operate much in matters of Reli∣gion, much endeavour being used in many places, and accompli∣shed in others to the reformation and correction of the abuses thereof; but there must also be in many places a change of Laws and Customes, which Jupiter also signifies, and a restauration of others, because it happens so neer to a Tropical point; which by the 84. of Dasipodius, Significat mutationem Aeris, legum, morum, &c. signifieth a sudden change of the Air, of Laws, and Man∣ners of men. But it may be some will say, It was not in the Tropick of Ca∣pricorn, or in that Sign. To which I answer, that seeing they have equal declination, and the place of the Conjunction, having but very little variation from the declination of the Tropick, the judgement holds good. So that from hence I say, that besides what is signified in mat∣ters of Religion, in which there will be much to do, in those places subject to the Sign of the Conjunction (what if you here of a new Councel?) there will also happen great alteration of Laws, Customes, and Privileges, and those mutations rather to the better, new Honours and Dignities conferred upon the No∣bility and Gentry. But not onely the Sign it self is herein considerable, but also the Triplicity to which it pertains; and that is the first and chie∣fest of the whole Zodiack, which is said to be governed by Sol and Jupiter, and therefore by the 67 of Dasipod signifies the or∣daining or constitution of some new Empire or Monarchy in the
world, which must continue in great Glory and Majesty; many wise and famous men do also appear; and though Mars, who by the Ancients hath a general prerogative in the Fiery Trigon, may at some time excite Wars and Commotions, yet they conti∣nue not long; Peace in most places is suddenly concluded, and there will be Tranquility in the world generally for the succee∣ding twenty years; but there will be great Drought and Bar∣rennesse, by reason the Planets are more hot and dry than moist; and this is confirmed by Campanella, which was mentioned be∣fore; and indeed all others have attributed the greater and more superlative Events to procced from the Effects of this Triplicity, Miros effectus producit magna conjunctio in signo Regio. Anon. 292. A Great Conjunction, in a Regal Sign, produceth wonderful Ef∣fects; by Regal, here is understood the signs of the Fiery Trigon, according to that of Cornel. Gemma: Elementi Ignei praedomi∣mum ad reges civitatumque praefectos, enim ignis agendi efficacia ma∣xime valet; The pre-dominion of the Element of Fire pertains to Kings and Governors of Cities, for the efficacy of Fire prevail∣eth especially inacting; and when it exceeds its bounds, it breaketh forth with a horrible heat and violence dissipating and consuming all things. Escuidus, Fol. 17. doth also inform us, Quod conjunctio magna, si fuerit in signo Igneo, significat siccitatem & destructionem, & gravita∣tem infortunii, That great Conjunctions, if they happen in Fiery Signs, drought, destruction, and the greatness or heaviness of Mis∣fortune is signified thereby to happen. And although (as formerly I noted) this Conjunction cannot be said to be Great, because it is not the first that is made at their return into the Fiery Trigon, yet for the reason before given, seeing after the intervening of a Conjunction in a Sign of contrary nature, they now make con∣junction, not onely in the same Trigon, but in the same Sign in which the great Conjunction happened, so that as it may be said to be a restitution of the Fiery Triplicity in general, and a promo∣tion of the effects of the great Conjunction in particular, there∣fore the Judgements pertaining to great Conjunctions are appli∣cable to this. But Escuid. Tract. 1. Distinc. 4. doth further teach us, That, Sa∣turnus cum fuerit aequidistans in Sagittario, accident hominibus bubones,
cum vehementibus doloribus oculorū, interfectio ex parte orientis, angu∣stiae mulierum, locustae, & mortem in avibus; When Saturn hath do∣minion in any great Eclipse, Conjunction, or in the resolutions of the years of the World{is}, and be equidistant in Sagittary, there will happen such distempers among men, as will cause Sores and Boyls (I doubt he means the Plague) and vehement griefs in the Eyes; there will happen much Sorrow and Anguish among women, Slaughters among men from the Oriental parts; Locusts also will abound, and there will be a great Mortality among Birds; Si fuerit ejus latitudo septentrionalis, significat flatum ventorum, etsi verspertinus siccitatem. And if this Latitude be North (as now it is) and vespertine, he signifies great blasts of Winds, and also Drought. And because Jupiter hath also such great prerogative, he informs us in the same Distinction, and fol. 25. what Jupiter signifies when he rules and is in Sagittary, Significat multas infirmitates hominum ex dolore capitis, & praecipue in quarta autumnale; mortem in bestiis & praecipue in bovis, multas pluvias; Frigus mediocre in principio hyemis, & fortitudinem ejus in medietate ejus, & novs & destructionem panis & fructuum, cum vehementia Caloris in quarta aestivaeli, & du∣rabilite ventorum orientalium, &c. viz. that he also signifies many Infirmities among men from grief in the head, especially in the Autumn of those years in which Jupitaer rules; there will be a mortality among Beasts, especially among Oxen and such great Cattel; in the Winter a mediocrity of cold, but much rain in the beginning thereof; there will be a destruction of Corn and Fruits, by reason of the vehement heat and drought of the Sum∣mer, and the long and tedious Easterly winds, which if his La∣titude be also North and he Vespertine, he helps forward or en∣creaseth the great blasts and gusts of winds. Thus Jupiter as he is oppressed by Saturn, may signify such Enor∣mities, which God divert, especially from this our Native Coun∣trey: And indeed, seeing Mars is so powerful in the Conjun∣ction, and that Aries, which is the reputed Ascendent of England, is no wayes afflicted; I do believe that the malevolen∣cy of the Effects generally operates upon Forein parts, more especially as to the mutation of Laws, Religion, Customes, Go∣vernments, and such like, rather then in Engl. yet by reason of the
forementioned position of the Moon and Mercury, some Di∣sturbances, Seditions, Insurrections and Conspiracies there will be, though to the destruction of the Contrivers, because of the debility of both the Moon and Mercury: And the next Con∣junction of Saturn and Mars, Anno 1664. co-operating, it may be feared, the Plague, or some pestilent Disease will afflict us, especially in the year 1665, and 66. (from which once again I pray, Good Lord deliver us;) were it not for these (I say) the Conjunction promiseth well to England. But of this more by and by. But the same Escuidus, Fol. 40. yet further tells us what may be signified by a Great Conjunction, or an Eclipse in Sagittary; Apparebunt in civitatibus & Regionibus super quas dominatur, forti∣tudo Regum & Nobilium, & providentia eorum & aliorum ex popu∣lis; multa fraus, ingenium largitas, congregatio pecuniarum & dispersio earum; aegritudines multae, & infirmitates ex sanguine, dolor impregna∣tarum, multi lupi & bestiae nocivae; That then in those places sub∣ject to the dominion of that Sign, the Kings and Nobles will fortify, and be more than ordinarily provident for themselves and their allies, and that by the help and assistance of the peo∣ple; for there will be much collection, or gathering and disper∣sing of moneys, wherein as well as in other things there will be much fraud and deceit used among men; yet will there be many wise and famous men, who will be very bountiful of their Knowledge and Understanding: But among other things he tells us of many Sicknesses and Infirmities that the body of man will be afflicted withall, from the corruption of Blood, and that women will suffer much grief in their conceiving and bearing of Children. And this may very well be, for at the Revolutional Figure Jupiter is Lord of the Fifth; so also at the Postventional New Moon, neer which place the Conjunction happens, and at the Full Moon preceding it happen'd in the Sixth: so that not onely various Diseases will afflict the bodies of men in those places, but women will be subject (as our Author sayes) to conceive with grief and pain; there will be many abortive Births, with diffi∣culty and hard Labour in Child-bearing, yea, as the Sign is Bi-corporeal, I judge there will be more than ordinary Monstrous
Births in divers places; and withall we may rationally conje∣cture, according to that of Cardane in confirmation thereof, Seg. 2. Aph. 204. that during the Effects of this Conjunction, some ☞ Great Person will be born, which must be very instrumental in those grand action and affairs of the World, which are signifyed by this Sabbatical return of the Superiours; and that the end for which this man is born, or the general intent of his attempts, is to change Laws and Religion, that is, for the reformation and correction of the abuses thereof, which will be performed by great difficulty, and with many obstructions: But to return to our Author. There will be many hurtful Beasts, as Wolves, and such like, which in those places subject thereto, will encrease and do much hurt; and if it happen in the Autumnal quarter, and in the North part of the Sign, it prenotes great Winds and Destru∣ctive. And not unworthy of our notice it is that the place of the Con∣junction is neer the Aphelion of Saturn, as was before noted; but that which adds much thereto, is, that the next Conjunction of Saturn and Mars is neer the very degree thereof; Si Saturnus fit loco in quo dignitatem habet, gens antiqua locū inhabitans quemcunque, devicta non erit, neque de loco suo extracta, & propter naturam Sa∣turni, multiplicantur per mundum odia, rancores, turbationes, fames & infirmitatum species; If Saturn be in a place where he hath dignity; an ancient people inhabiting in what place soever, shall not be drawn forth, or overcome in their places or habita∣tion; but by reason of the malignant nature of Saturn, Hate, Rancour, Trouble, and divers kinds of Infirmities will be mul∣tiplyed. And besides that Conjunction of Saturn and Mars hap∣pening so neer the place of the Sun in the great Conjunction, it points out great Detriment to some great Potentate, or Death, or some violent Casualty to some Eminent persons of Europe, especi∣ally to such as had their Original of Greatnesse from the Effects of the great Conjunction Anno 1603. But more particularly where, I shall acquaint you by and by: and by the 7 Segm. Aph. 124. there will be great Drought and Barrennesse, Conflagrati∣ons or great Destruction by Fire, during the effects of that Con∣junction, which will continue till the latter end of the year 1666.
but I have no more to say to this Conjunction of Saturn and Mars here. These are the general judgements of the Ancients upon these and such like Configurations of the Celestial bodies when they happen in this Sign, which as it is Regal and Humane, prenotes such actions as are more peculiar to Man, viz. to mat∣ters of Church and State, of Religion, and things Civil and Po∣litick; and among men, Kings, Emperours, and the greatest Potentates of the Earth, are principally concerned; and as the Fiery Triplicity, it may well signify great Drought, Barrennesse, or Scarcity, Conflagrations, or sudden and vehement Desolati∣ons by Fire, hot and pestilent Diseases in the bodies of Men, strange Meteors, or fiery Apparitions in the Air; some New Star or Comet appears not long after; some say or conjecture, in the year 1664. I fear a great Plague in sixty five or sixty six. And of this Trigon, wherein Jupiter hath a general dominion, this Sign wherein there hath been so many Conjunctions of the Planets, is the proper and chief prerogative of Jupiter, which certainly intimates to us some grand Counsels or Consultations about the Reformation of Religion, Laws, Customes, and Pri∣vileges; Venus also hath something to do there, the Conjunction being in her Term according to the opinion of Ptolomy, and the Egyptians; therefore much endeavours there will be for Peace and Tranquillity, many Treaties and Embassies for that purpose; But seeing it falls in the Constellation of Scorpio, and that Jupiter and Venus are so afflicted by the presence of Saturn, it portends not onely a pestilent and unwholsom Air, prejudicial to the bo∣dies of Men, but that even in the very Courts of Kings and Prin∣ces there will be much treachery, fraud, deceitful and pernicious Counsels, many that pretend fair, but perform little or nothing. The Conjunction happens in the second Decanate of the Sign Sagittary, which is disposed of by the Moon, who generally sig∣nifies great mutability and oft change of Affaits; She is unfor∣tunately posited and disposed of in the Figure by Mercury, who disposes of the first Decade of this Sign, in which the great Con∣junction happened, and which according to Albumazar, Jo. Angelus, and others, signifies Boldnesse, Liberty, & War. This De∣cade of the Moon signifies Weeping, bodily Sorrow, Fear, as if we
should say, that seeing the actions or effects of the great Conjunction shall be in a very great measure excited & put in agitation from the influence of this Conjunction of the year 1663. and although from thence there is generally much good to be hoped for from the influence of Jupiter and Venus; yet seeing there are a sort of people in the world, who will take the boldnesse to plot, con∣trive, seduce, and under the pretence of Liberty, Religion, &c. endeavour to raise Sedition, War, or such kind of Rebellious Disturbances; so from the influence hereof will they bring de∣struction to themselves, and great Fear, Sorrow and Lamentation to others. And if the judgement of Proclus upon Eclipses, when they happen in any, or in the several Decanats of every Sign, may be applyed to Conjunctions (which method is generally used by Escuid.) then are we further confirmed of what shall generally happen, viz. from the first Decade in which the great Conjuncti∣on happened, is signified Seditions among men, many will be averse to Peace and the accommodation of Treaties, each man fearing and finding deceit from others he deals with, nay even among Princes there will be much delusion one of another, a∣mongst the vulgar there will be many Thefts and Robberies, Cheats and Rapines; and indeed as much is signifyed by the Moon and Mercury in the Conjunction. From the second Decanate, in which this Conjunction hap∣pens, and in which was the New Star of the year 1604. he tells us of a Mortality, or Murrain and Destruction among the greater Cattel, and such as are most useful for the food and sustenance of Man; the Seas are extraordinarily molested with Pirates, as well as the Land with Thieves. From the last Decade (wherein the second Conjunction of Sa∣turn and Mars happens, which we are to consider) Proclus tells us, that also signifies destruction to Horses, and great prejudice to such Armies as are then on foot; matters will go very hardly with the Nobility in many places, many of which will rashly and wil∣fully undo or prejudice themselves to no purpose, others are very subtil and crafty for themselves, averse to the counsels of others, or very slow to that which is good; the Plague, and other great Evils do afflict mankind, Consumptions abounding more than ordinary.
And seeing the accidents signified by this Triplicity are the most superlative, it is worthy our notice that those transactions are the more excited by the positions of other Planets, for not onely Saturn and Jupiter, but we have Mars and Venus also in this Triplicity posited, applying to a Trine at the time of the Con∣junction; And therefore by the 38. Propos. of Lud. de Reg. Quanto nobilior est Ignea triplicitas, triplicitate aquea, tanto dignior est aerea triplicitas, triplicitate terrea; Ideo cum videris tres planetas fortes in triplicitate ignea vel acrea, non festines judicium, nec idem tra∣das in rebus parvis, maxime si Sol sit in ea triplicitate, &c. By how much the Fiery Triplicity is more noble than the Watry, by so much is the Aiery Triplicity more worthy than the Earthly; therefore when thou seest three (or more) Planets strong in these or either of these two Triplicities, be not hasty to give judgement, neither deliver the same in small matters, especially if the Sun do behold them, or be also therein, or two of the Superiours. This is also the advice of Cardane, which I mentioned before. In this Conjunction all the superiour Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, were in this Trigon, Venus in the Sign of the Conjun∣ction it self, the Full Moon preceding was in Aries, and the Sun in Libra, a Sign of the Aiery Triplicity, and the tenth of the great Conjunction; so that these are yet further testimonies, that not onely from the great Conjunction, but also from this of the year 1663. are great and superlative alterations and transactions sig∣nified to happen in the world, generally for this next twenty years; the particulars of which you have heard at large, among which this also is to be added from the position of the Sun in the tenth of the great Conjunction; that some great Persons or Po∣tentates of Europe, who have been much depressed and detrimen∣ted in their Honours and Dignities, will not onely be restored to their former Prerogatives, but shall also have an enlargement of their Dominion, and Honour, and Renown, from the effects of this Conjunction, though others must be deprest; but in what places these shall be, I shall shew by and by. But let us consider the fixed Stars also, that accompany, or do arise with the Planets conjoyned or configurated thereto, and have dominion therein; for so are we advised by Ptolomy, Aph. 96. Considera etiam naturam stellarum simul consistentium, tum erra∣ticarum
tum fixarum, ac etiam simulacra coorientia, & secundum haec pronuntia. Consider also (whether it be in Eclipses, or in Grea∣ter and Lesser Conjunctions of the Planets) the nature of the Stars, as well of the Fixed as Erratical, and the Images coarising, and according to these also pronounce judgement. So Anonimus, Aphor. 254. Ne obliviscaris Imaginum stellarum fixarum, in quibus accident Eclipses vel magnae conjunctiones, quia se∣cundum has accidunt notabiles effectus. Forget not the Images of the Fixed Stars (nor the immovable degrees of the ninth Sphere, saith Rigel) in which either Eclipses or great Conjunctions do happen, because according to these, notable events do come to passe; For by the 19 of the same Author, Efficacissimae omnium in agendo sunt stellae fixae, quia ea quae causant ingentia sunt; The Fix∣ed Stars are most efficacious in action or operation, because those things which are caused or signified by them are the more fa∣mous and eminent; And Aphor. 20. Imitantur naturam & actio∣nem errantium, quare illarum actiones ad eas inferunt; They do imi∣tate the nature of the Planets and their actions, wherefore the actions of the Planets are transferred unto them. Not that these vertues, or such like operations, are to be altogether understood of the Fixed Stars themselves, but when joyned to the Planets, according to the 13 Aphorism of the same unknown Author; Stellae fixae non conjunctae planetis, multo minores effectus habent quam planetae ipsi, sed conjuncti planetis vehementissimos producunt ef∣fectus; The Fixed Stars conjoyned to the Planets, do many times produce lesser effects than those Planets, whose vertues they as∣sume; but joyned to the Planets they produce most vehement effects. And here I cannot but give caution in the examining of the ef∣fects of those Conjunctions that happened in former times; that no wonder if there hapen some variation of the effects, seeing the Constellations are since varied out of one Sign into another, cau∣sed by the retrocession of the Equinoxes; Multae actiones signo∣rum mutantur, pro mutatione imaginum stellarum iis conrespondentium in figura. Anonim. 120. Many actions of the Signs are changed, by reason of the mutation of the Images of the Stars correspon∣dent in Figure to these Signs. And although this motion be slow, viz. 1 deg. and about 20
minutes in 100 years (that is a Sign in 2250 years) yet in time the whole Signs (and in some sence the Constellations, by rea∣son of different declination) are varied; so that although (as I mentioned in the former part of this Treatise, cap. 3. of Great Conjunctions) the several restitutions of the Superiours since the Creation of the World, did happen in Sagittary, accounting their Longitude from the Vernal Equinox; yet reckoning the several Constellations from the First Star of Aries, we shall find a very great variation in this Age we now live in; for the place of the Conjunction now, viz. the 14 degree of Sagittary, is about the middle of the constellation of Scorpio; but by computation you will find that the first Conjunction which happened 3950 years before Christ, in the 8 degree of Sagittary, was in the be∣ginning of the constellation of Aquarius, and so from one revo∣lution to another they recede about 10 deg. and a half. But to return to our purpose. The Constellation in which these Conjunctions do happen, is Scorpio, of a most viperous, wicked and malicious nature, false and deceitful, venimous and corrupt, so will many of the trans∣actions thereby signifyed be, or the more wholsome and bene∣volent influence will thereby be polluted, retarded, and some∣times suppressed. The Fixed Stars that are with the Planets conjoyned in that part of the Asterism, are not very eminent, because of small mag∣nitude; Stellae fixae majores sun efficaciores, parvae imbecilles; The greater the Stars are, the more efficacious; if they be of small magnitude, their influence is weak, Dasipod. 45. But those that are near the Ecliptick in that part of the Sign and Constellation, are of the nature of Saturn chiefly, but partly Venus; this adds to the power of Saturn, and indeed there are many small Stars of his nature near that place, so that Saturn will not want for Com∣panions, Associates, and Assistants (though of themselves of lesse repute and power) to carry on, and to connive at his subtilties, hypocrisies, and his private and cunning stratagems, whereby he would endeavour to suppresse the more benevolent intents and endeavours of the Jovialist, both in matters of Church and State; how many pitiful sneaking fellows will there be, to attend and incroach into the Courts of Kings and Princes, and of Justice,
and search into the Counsels and Consultations of the judicious & more pious Magistrates, for to promote such designs as those? ve∣rily some such thing may be fear'd; but however such men may at some time, in some sense, carry on their cunning devices; and the judicious Magistrate, and pious Orthodox Divine may be the more retarded and hindered in their honest endeavours; before the effects of the Conjunction be expired (I will not say with Alstedius, that all) but the greatest part of this fordid, hypocri∣tical, Romish and Jesuitical refuse will be purged away. But with Saturn and Jupiter doth arise a most eminent Star, viz. the Scorpions Heart, for by reason of its great South Latitude it riseth in our Horizon with the 10degree of Sagittary, Saturn and Jupiter about the 12. the Star is of the nature of Mars and Jupi∣ter; this adds to the strength of Jupiter; Venus being also with the Star in Longitude, Mars also applying to the Conjunction by Trine, are of very good signification; Jupiter, or the Religi∣ous will struggle hard with the temporal powers, and by Martial Policy, rather than Violence, will evade the malignity of Saturn, viz. of that subtil sullen crew, that would pervert their Counsels and endeavours; For Mars, who signifies the Souldi∣er, or the Military part of Kingdomes, is the most potent of all the Planets in the Figure, having about 27 dignities at the time of the Conjunction, and is chief dispositor of both the Lunati∣ons, viz. of the Full Moon before, and the New Moon after the Conjunction, and applying thereto by a Trine; This plainly intimates, that although he hath power to execute Violence, to conquer and destroy, yet will he use great policy and industry to mitigate and perswade (for the Stars with him are of the nature of Saturn and Mars) and by reason of his great strength will have power to prevail, and be a means to reconcile those diffe∣rences and disturbances that might otherwise arise from those cunning, deceitful and Jesuitical Factions; and although Mars performs this by direction (or under the Authority) of his Supe∣riours, yet is it much of his own care and prudence, that will be the means thereof. For Sol, who signifies Kings, Emperours, Princes, and Rulers of Nations and Kingdomes, and who disposeth of Mars in Leo, is of himselfe very weak, and in his Fall, the Fixed Stars with him are of the nature of Mercury, and partly
Venus and Mars, very variable and uncertain in their operations; and so will the Affairs of Kings and some Monarchs be for these next twenty years, viz. great difficulty they will find to carry on the affairs committed to their charge, many dejected and sup∣pressed, if not deposed; yet as he is in the tenth of the great Con∣junction, some ancient Family or Potentate of Europe, is restored in some sense to his formerly lost Dignities, Rights and Privile∣ges, though not so illustriously as formerly; others come to great Honour, though by the ruines of many of the Proprie∣tors. Venus, who disposeth of the Sun and is in reception, thereby signifying Kings, Favourites, Embassadors, Messengers, Women, Ladies, &c. She (I say) is with the Scorpions Heart, of the nature of Mars and Jupiter; she applies indeed to the Conjunction, but before she comes to the businesse, she becomes Retrograde; the Sign is double bodied; what double dealing, fear and neglect, doth she signify in those persons? what fair pretences, but slen∣der performances? and what luxury and wantonnesse in excess, by such as have the profession of Honesty and Religion? how willingly would Jupiter entertain the friendly assistance of Venus, but cannot, she is at her greatest distance from the Sun, viz. hath gone as far as her Commission extends; and though unsatisfied, must be forced to come back and retire. From Mercury we judge of Secretaries, Arts and Sciences, of Merchants and Scholars, Clerks and Scribes; he is most unfortu∣nately posited in Scorpio, in Square with Mars his dispositor; and those Stars that are in Conjunction with him, are of malevo∣lent nature, viz. of the nature of Saturn and Mars; therefore great Detriment, Sorrow and Tribulation is portended to them; the Merchant suffers by Piracies and War, the rest by Cheats, false and counterfeit Writings and Accounts; And for certain he excites men, such as are intrusted with treasury and accounts, and such like, to Fraud & Deceit; many will be animated to notorious Robberies, others to Sedition and Tumultuous Insurrections For, With the Moon (who signifies the Common People in general) is divers Stars of the nature of Mars and Mercury especially, and by reason of her great South Latitude she receives vertue of some most eminent Stars, of the same malevolent nature; she is dis∣posed
of by Mercury, he by Mars; is in the 12th. from her own house, and dispositirx of the 12. at the Lunation and the Revo∣lution of the World; but of the second at the Full Moon prece∣ding the Conjunction; these are very bad testimonies of great Sorrow, Losse and Lamentation, that many of the Commonalty will sustain, by reason of their great inclination to Sedition, and Disturbance; others by the aforesaid Cheats and Robberies, and such like Enormities as are of the nature of Mars and Mercury and if the Sun signifies Kings and Emperours, the Moon particu∣larly signifies Empresses, Queens and Princesses, both are ill posi∣ted, therefore both will be subject to great Misfortunes; hath any such any hand extraordinary in the affairs signified by the Conjunction, or do they seem to undermine, and privately by cunning Stratagems, endeavour to retard or oppose the more hopeful proceedings of Peace and Tranquillity, or of the grand Consultations now or to be on foot, for the propagating of the just Laws and Privileges of the People, or of Religion, and the most pure and holy Worship of God; God forbid there should be any such; but if there be, this malevolent disposition of the Moon tells them what great Mischief and Sorrow they bring to themselves, if not Destruction; and it may be feared such E∣normities will happen in some parts of the world, during the ef∣fects of this Conjunction, for these are the reall and plain signi∣fications of the several positions and configurations of the Planets at the time of the Conjunction. I onely add this consideration, that as Saturn signifies the Countrey-man, in particular, viz. the Farmer, Yeoman, &c. he being so benevolently irradiated at the Conjunction by both Jupiter and Venus, gives probable testimony, that notwithstanding his remote distance and oblique position from the Earth, viz. so neer his Aphelion, and greatest declination Southward, so that he cannot project his beams so forcibly (as Sir Christopher Heydon most judiciously observes, and proves by example) whence the Winter becomes more temperate and unseasonable; yet after∣ward shall the Farmer receive great plenty of Corn generally, ex∣cept in those years when Saturn rules, and is malevolently posited and configurated; but as to other Fruits of the Earth, many times great scarcity.
Perhaps some, who make a more curious search, may finde out some other niceties from hence, but these are the most prin∣cipal; Cardane, Segm. 4. Aphor. 107. doth also confirm this manner of judgement, Magnorum principum Sol est significator, Jupiter autem magistratuum, Mars operarium, Mercurius qui indu∣stria non labore aries perficiunt, Luna mulierum, Venus puellarum. In general judgements the Sun is significator of Princes and great Men, Jupiter of Magistrates, Mars of Operators or Workmen, handy-crafts Tradesmen, Saturn of the Countrey-man, Mercury of those Arts and Industries as are performed without labour, but by Ingenuity, the Moon of Women in general, Venus of Maids. But this we must observe, that whatsoever is signified by the other Planets from the former considerations, which do acci∣dentally happen among themselves, yet the grand actions of this next twenty years are principally signified by Saturn, Jupiter and Mars; which although he hath great power and strength, yet not so as to signify much War, but rather, as was said be∣fore, by a Military Posture and Policy, keep a general peace in most parts of the world; the accidents of Saturn and Jupiter do spend themselves in superlative and serious consultations, but with great variation and uncertainty, because the Sign is double bodied. But I conclude with that of Dasipod. Aphor. 20. Res quae ex si∣deribus, ex generalibus constitutionibus eveniunt, non sunt unae sed plu∣res, & hae variae atque multiplices. Those things which do happen from the Stars, are not of one nature or signification, but many, and those various and multiplied. I therefore leave further search thereof, to such as can make a more curious inquiry therein, and come to
CHAP. VI. The places where the Effects will most princi∣pally operate. ALthough the conjunctions of the superiour Planets have the most general signification of Mundane affairs, and are most universal in their operations (as in the first part of this Treatise I proved) yet it must not be expected that the effects should ope∣rate in all places alike, but (as in the judgement of the Learned) those places subject to the Sign (especially) and its Triangle or Triplicity, and the Quadrangle, with consideration had to the situation of the Significators, whether to the North of the Equi∣noctial, or to the South, shall be most sensible of the Effects; for undoubtedly, according to those positions will those parts of the world be passive in the Effects, while those Conjunctions, Eclip∣ses, or other of the Celestial appearances that doe happen in or neer the Equinoxes, do operate more universally, and have their influence; more equally distributed throughout the World, as well on one side the Equinoctial, as on the other. Dasi∣podius 86. This is also a certain rule, that those places of the world shall be subject most to the Celestial Influences, to which the Signi∣ficators do most directly project their beams, viz. to which they are neerest perpendicular, and especially those which are under the dominion of the Sign in which the Significators are in. Hence it is, that according to the 72 of Lud. de Reg. Those Stars that have North latitude and declination, are more efficacious than those of the South; For by the 55 of Doctor Dec, Quo stellae ejusdem mo∣ra super horizontem major fuerit, eò ad suae virtutis, &c. they are not only the neerer the Vertex, but a so make a greater Arch above the Horizon, and by how much a Star doth make the longer stay above the Horizon, by so much more is he fitted by those his di∣rect beams to make a stronger impression of his vertue over or upon those parts, and so on the contrary the lesser Arch or Stay above the Horizon, the more weaker the effects in those places.
So then, seeing that not onely the places particularly subject to the dominion of the Sign wherein the Configuration happens, and the Triplicity and Quadrangle thereto belonging, according to Ptolomy; but also by the 86 of Anonim. Longitudo, Latitudo, & Declinatio Stellae locum suorum effectuum in orbe terrarum significare possunt; The Longitude, Latitude, and Declination of a Star, may signify the places of their effects; Let us consider where the most principal effects will manifest themselves. Ptolomy attributeth Europe generally to the Fiery Trigon, Dafi∣pod. Aphor. 77. saith also that Trigonus Arietis, Leonis, Sagittarii est Christianorum, &c. The Trigon or Triplicity of Aries, Leo, Sa∣gittarius, is the significator of, or doth most operate upon the Christians; And by Cardane upon the Roman Empire; which if re, then by the declination of the Planets, the Southern and South-east parts of Europe will be the most principal places de∣signed for the operation of the effects, according to that Maxime, Stellae quae septentrionalem habent latitudinem & declinationem in nos, quae verò meridionalem inhabitantes versus meridiem efficacius agunt. Those Stars which have Septentrional or North latitude, or declination, do operate most among us that live more Northerly, but having South declination and latitude to those that inhabit more to the South, the effects are more efficacious. The declination of Saturn and Jupiter at this their conjunction, is very neer the greatest they can be, onely having North lati∣tude from the Ecliptick, doth diminish it somewhat, so that al∣though all places more or lesse, will be subject to the effects, though in a different manner, yet without doubt those places that lie South and South-east will be the places where the grand effects of the Conjunction will most evidently and powerfully shew themselves. But which are they (you'l say) according to the Prescripts of the Ancient and best Modern Astronomers? I answer; First, under Sagittary, the place of the Conjunction, is Spain, Portugal, Dalmacia, Sclavenia, Hungaria, Mova, Misnea, Celtica, Tyrrhenia, Arabia the Happy. Under Aries, the first of this Triplicity, is England, France, Ger∣man, Suevia, Silesia, the higher part of Polonia, Burgundy, part of Denmark, Basternia, Syria, Palestine.
Under Leo (the other Sign of this Trigon) is Phaenicia, Chaldea, Orchinia, Gallia Togata, Italy, Sicilia, Apulia, Bohemia, part of Turkey, Aemilia, Sabina. These are the places generally attributed to this Triplicity, wherein there is some decrepancy among Authors, which I shall not trouble my self or my reader with in this place; therefore, be∣fore I proceed further, let us examine what may more particu∣larly happen in those places; seeing by the aforesaid Aphorism of Dasipod. the operations of the Celestial Bodies are of divers natures, and those as diversly operating in different places of the world. But is Spain (especially) and those other Countries before mentioned, subject to Sagittary, wherein so many Conjunctions of the Planets, but especially this of the Superiours happen? I believe it is, then that and those Countries will be most highly concerned in the effects thereof, great consultations there will be about reformation of Religion, great debates between the Spiritual and Temporal Prerogatives; and nothing but the pow∣er of the Sword of Martial policy can make peace, the Religious much dejected and depressed, not onely by the temporal Powers and Authority, but even by those more private and hypocritical Functions, who are of religious Orders and pro∣fession. Jupiter is Lord of the Sign, he doth not onely signify the King, but the Nobility also; Saturn afflicts both Sign and its Lord, both King and Kingdome, with Sorrow, Fear, Lamentation, Famine, or great Scarcity; the death of many Nobles; others dejected are cast out of their Dignities and Prerogatives, and others more base and fordid, by craft and subtilty, exalted there∣in, and pretending thereto by right from Antiquity. The King of Spain hath Sagittary ascending at his Nativity, this Conjunction and those of Saturn and Mars happening there∣in, will undoubtedly produce very cross transactions in his con∣sultations, produce death or detriment to his health ere the year 1666. be expired; which if he should die, there would be vari∣ous contentions and differences about the propriety to the Crown beyond expectation; certainly as great are the consul∣tations, so will great be the afflictions and sorrows of that King∣dome,
and those other Kingdomes subject thereto, during the effects of the Conjunction, but more especially in the years 1644. 65, and part of 66. For besides the malevolent Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, that happens the latter end of the year 64. it is not to be neglected, that the Planet Mars comes by direction from his place at the great Conjunction 1603. to the degree of the said Conjunction, about those years, which undoubtedly will produce very notable events in the world, but especially in those places subject to the dominion of the Sign. And seeing the accidents hereby signified (that is of the whole configuration of Heaven) must especially be of the nature of this Sign, because it is the place of the several conjunctions of the Planets, we are therefore to note, that as it is of the regal and most noble Triplicity, so are the most eminent persons of those places concerned therein, especially with whose Nativities the Conjunction or Conjunctions of the superiour Planets are concomitant. Therefore not onely in those places (forenamed) under the rule and dominion of the Sign (of which Spain is chief, so also Hungaria) but also in other places, according to the quality of the effects, there to be manifested, this generally is to be under∣stood, viz. That those eminent persons who have the Sign Sagittary as∣cending at their Nativity, or of that Trigon, and neer the degree of the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, or of the New Star, those persons will be the most active in carrying on the affairs of those places; to the great good and satisfaction of the people thereof, and also greatly to their own advantage; but if the de∣gree of their Ascendent be neerer to the conjunctions of Saturn and Mars, or in Square or Opposition thereto, it portends great detriment to them, both as to the health of their bodies, great contentions, and other crosse transactions in their affairs; so likewise if it have the same respect to the place of the Moon at the time of their birth, and withall to those it portends much damage in publick matters, that is, to those that are in such em∣ployments or offices in those Kingdomes or places signified by this Sign. Is there any great person who hath his Medium Coeli, or place
of the Sun, in or neer the place of the great Conjunction or new Star, or our present Conjunction? those persons (without the ma∣lignity of the Infortunes) shall receive great Honour and Digni∣ty, be very famous for heroick actions, and attain to most emi∣nent repute and estimation in the world, by reason of their great Prudence, grave and wise Counsels, great Learning and Judge∣ment; but on the contrary, if it happen in Square or Oppositi∣on ☞ thereto, the contrary happens—Deposition, Infamy and Disgrace (though their actions be never so wise and prudent) various contentions with Noble men, much detriment and ob∣struction in Affairs, and if it happen to be neer the place of the conjunctions of Saturn and Mars, it portends great danger of a violent death, or the more hurtful accidents to those persons, ei∣ther in Life or Fortune. But if it happen neer the part of Fortune, or second House, or place of Jupiter, or other significators of the substance or Fortune of any person (especially I say of such persons as are of eminen∣cy, and concerned in the affaires of those Kingdomes and pla∣ces where they inhabit, to them it prenotes an addition of rich∣es and fortune, &c. Et sic è contra.) These are the persons particularly concerned in the effects of these eminent Configurations; those that are studious in this Science, do know this to be a general truth, being sufficiently warranted by the authority of the Learned herein. Thus Junctine de Eclipsibus, pag. 307. which we may also apply to greater or lesser conjunctions of the Planets; his words are, That those Eclipses (or malevolent Conjunctions of the Planets) that do happen in or neer the Horoscope, or other principal places of the Nativity, do portend some eminent evil, either to the body or vital substance, or plunged into many misfortunes, which cannot be avoided without great difficulty; and if other malevolent Configurations at the Birth do also concur, or some bad direction at that time, many times Death or violent Casualties do happen. But as to the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, we must observe this distinction, that when they happen in those eminent places of the Radical Figure, they portend good (ex∣cept prevented or diminished by some malevolent rayes therein) or some contrary direction or revolution; but if in Square or Opposition thereto, evil is signified, but in a different manner to
different persons, and the variety of the significations at the birth. And this also is worth our notice, that those persons who are thus concerned in the effects, if Saturn shall be Lord of any of their Genitures, or have most dominion therein, those persons will be very active to put forward the influence of Saturn in the Con∣junction, viz. will act very politickly, privately, cunningly, &c. and so on the other side those who are signified by Jupiter, will suffer and be suppressed, however will act very wisely, prudently, faithfully, and zealously, both in matter politick and Ecclesiastick. These things I say are generally known to the more judicious, though not sufficiently considered by all; and those that either have (or may have) their Nativities carefully rectified, and that without wresting, (of which too many professors are guilty) may hereby see how much they are concerned in this or any other Configuration of Heaven; For my own part I shall not presume to meddle or take any publick notice of any Nativity whatsoever of our English Worthies; what I am otherwise or more privately employed to do, I shall be faithful therein; some there are, I am very sure, that are highly concerned in the effects hereof. But enough of this. There are yet other places subject to the Influence hereof, besides England. what are under the dominion of this Sign, as you may perceive by what is mentioned before: For under Aries all Authors say is England, France, Germany, &c. if so, Mars is the most potent Planet in the Figure in Trine to his own House, the Sign of the Conjunction is also of the Trigon Arguments of the pow∣er and fortitude of these places against all Forein or Domestick Adversaries or Disturbances; this shews in what an excellent Mi∣litary posture we shall generally be in for the preservation of our selves and our friends, from or against all Insurrections and Re∣bellions, sudden Commotions, Tumults, or other seditious Con∣spiracies, that may casually happen. And indeed if Gemini be the Ascendent of LONDON, which is the Metropolis of England, and also part of the Nation according to some, the unhappy posItion of the Moon therein, and of Mercury her dispositor, doth evidently denote that there will happen such Enormities therein,
greatly to the prejudice of the Contrivers and the Fomenters thereof. And indeed, were it not for these or-such like mischiefs, that ever and anon will break forth, from the exasperated spirits of a seditious multitude; this Conjunction of it self portends in ge∣neral great Tranquillity to the Kingdome of England; for see∣ing that preposterous Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, Anno 1642/3. did in a large manner excite, put forward & augment these Commotions, Rebellions, and by all manner of violence and illegal practises, suppresse and subvert all former Laws and Cu∣stomes, Governments, Rights and Privileges, &c. so now from this restitution of the Superiours into this Trigon again, and more especially as it is the same Sign, in which the great Con∣junction and the New star the following year happened, may ra∣tionally be conjectured, not onely the abolishing of all those exorbitant abuses both in Church and State, and all former Rights, Customes and Privileges restored and firmly established, yea even many of those who have been stiff opposers thereof, shall be reconciled and become conformable thereto, and the ra∣ther, because there will be much endeavour used for the corre∣ction of the abuses of Laws and Religion; these were general∣ly mentioned before, but now particularly applied to this our Kingdome and Nation of England. We are now at the time of this Conjunction, through the pro∣vidence of God, at peace with all Nations, I think, in the world, and indeed, generally are like so to be, nor can any forein Adver∣sary attain any victory or advantage over us, should they attempt it; No, the Kingdome of England for this next twenty years espe∣cially, will continue in great honour and glory, great Peace and Tranquillity (except some home-bred differences and disturban∣ces, which (I hope) will not continue long:) Nay, it seems pro∣bable to me, that England and those other places under the domi∣nion of the Sign Aries shall be very instrumental, either by Mar∣tial power or policy, to put a period to the Enormities and Dif∣ferences that either are or shall be among other Nations; in which some by very eminent heroick attempts attain to very great ho∣nour and dignity, or do in a large measure excel others, both in action and renown.
Thus much as to the National affairs in general, from the ef∣fects of the Conjunction it self, or from its proper Significators; but as to matters Physical, or from the natural Effects, give me leave to add what (indeed) is already mentioned, viz. that seeing af∣ter those preceding Conjunctions of Saturn & Jupiter in the Fiery Trigon there hath happened great Plagues in England, as in the year 1605. and 1625. so may we fear the like to happen amongst us, either in the year 1664. or rather, and more especially in the year 1665. by reason of the malevolent Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in the latter end of the year 1664. which will operate most forcibly in the following year; and some there are who have with good reason conjectured, that seeing after the Con∣junction of the Planets in this Trigon, usually some Comet or New Star hath consequently happened, as the more notable Prodromus of those eminent accidents to succeed, so is it concei∣ved that some such may ere long be expected to be visible to the inhabitants of some parts of the Earth, whereby those accidents signified by this and the other conjunctions of the Planets, may be more evidently presignified and foreseen, and that thereby the future purpose and will of the Almighty may take more impressi∣on upon the hearts of the sons of men. France, which now is not generally at variance, or in any actual hostility with none, (except the present Pope) is also promised well from this Conjunction, viz. that they will alwayes be in an ex∣cellent posture of defence, and sufficiently capable of maintain∣ing their dignity and prerogative against all opposers; but gene∣rally Peace and Tranquillity is promised that Nation for these next twenty years; nor will that difference that now is between the King and Pope, long continue, without reconciliation, yet with some restrictions and amendments, greatly to the honour and benefit of the Kingdome, and satisfaction of the French Na∣tion. Germany, and the whole Empire, now much threatned, and in great danger of the Turk, ere long will be delivered from that Egyptian or Babylonish Cruelty, hower they may suffer and be in great fear of desolation and destruction at present, and may be so for a time; the power of Mars is such, and so friendly in gene∣ral to those people and Countreys, that either by the power, po∣licy,
or treaties of some Christian Princes, it may be hoped that ere the year 1664. be expited, all or the greatest part of that fear will be diminished, if not wholly extirpated, though some Coun∣treys that are under the dominion of the other Signs more unfor∣tunate, will suffer more than ordinary. For Hungaria is under the dominion of Sagittary, where hath already been a malevolent Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, and another to succeed in the same Sign, before the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter will forcibly manifest themselves; Zealand, Prussia, &c. are under Cancer, and the Moon is afflicted. Bohemia is under Leo, which Sign is sorely afflicted by Mars, viz. Wars, Fires, Plague, and such like evils of the nature of Mars. Austria is under Libra, and Venus is going retrograde before she comes to the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, or the Trine of Mars, and so other Countries and places of the Emperours Dominions, lying under the Jurisdiction or Dominion of other Signs, must accordingly expect to be sensible of the effects signi∣fied by the disposition of their proper significators. Under Leo (as was noted before) it seems are Italy in general, Rome in particular, Sicilia, Bohemia, part of Turky, the city of Prague, Syracuse; Mars I say afflicts that Sign, and the Sun, who is ruler thereof is in his Fall; therefore to those places are great calamities threatned by Fire, the Sword, Uproars, Tumults, Murthers, grievous Contentions and Quarrellings, deposition of many Nobles, Princes and Rulers, from their Honours and Dignities, without hope of restitution, Death and Destruction to others; ROME, many or most of these Enormities are threat∣ned thee; if peace be not speedily concluded with the French King, great detriment is thereby threatened. But besides the Triplicity we are to observe those places also subject to the Quadrangle, for to determine the places of the E∣vents, viz. of Gemini, Virgo and Pisces, Gemini is the the Sign op∣posite to the Conjunction, in which the Moon is, and very weak; and under this Sign is part of Flanders, Brabant, the Dukedome of Wittenburg, the Cities of Noremberg, Corduba in Spain, Turin, Bru∣ges in Flanders, Mentz, Kitzing, Hasford, Bamberg, and divers others; Mercury you have heard is very much depressed and affli∣cted by the Square of Mars; so must all those places be, some with
Tumults and Insurrections; notorious Robberies and Cheats; the common people in many places are dissatisfied, the Merchants and Tradesmen suffer great losse by Piracies and Thieves. Under Virgo is Achaia, Greece, Athens, Mesopotania, Baby∣lon, Assyria, part of Rhyne, Silesia the lower: of Cities, Jerusalem, Rhodes, Novarr in Italy, Paris, Lyons, Basil, Heydleberg, Erphord: these are also under the dominion of the unfortunate Mercury, and must therefore expect to meet with such like misfortunes as are of his nature, which was mentioned before; among which Paris is like to suffer much by most notorious Fraud, Cheats, Mutinies, Tumults, and most horrid Villanies, secret Conspira∣cies, &c. Under Pisces are Portugal, Normandy, Cilicia, Galitia, Lydia, Pamphilia, Egypt the higher, Alexandria, Compostella, Rhemes, Wormes, Ratisbone; Jupiter is Lord of this Sign, and Venus hath also exaltation therein, this promiseth well generally to those places, viz. a general peace, yet some new Monarchy or Go∣vernment, or alteration of Laws and Customes, is also signified, and these more just and profitable to the people of those Nati∣ons than those they enjoyed before, or are more to their satisfa∣ction; Christian Religion in those places where it is professed, is more zealously practised, there will be many corrections and amendments therein, many superstitions Ceremonies abolished, and a propagation or an increase of the knowledge of the Christian Religion in those places where it is yet scarcely be∣gun. But we are yet further to consider the Signs that are either af∣flicted by the Infortunes, and wherein the Planets are, or that are subject to the rule or dominion of the Planets; for accord∣ing as those are well or ill dignified, so will the Event be in those places subject to the Signs; And this is the Doctrine ge∣nerally and more plainly laid down in the Proph. Merl. pag. 90. than elsewhere I can find. I conceive it most rational (saith the Author) First, to consi∣der the Sign of the Conjunction; 2. The Angles of the Figure (if it can be obtained;) 3. The Signs afflicted by the presence of any of the Infortunes; 4. Those places of Heaven the Conjuncti∣on casteth its Trine, Square, and opposite Aspects to; 5. The
Lords of those Signs and Quarters of Heaven they are in; And 6. Whether they are strong or weak? According to which rule I judge, that as Cancer is the Ascen∣dent of Scotland, so also of Holland, and that the Moon is weak, but in opposition to the Conjunction; there will much discontent and sorrow happen to many of the common people there, various murmurings and repinings, a giddy multitude unsatisfied, and endeavouring to oppose the consultations of their Superiours; But let me tell you, be not tumultuous, or endeavour to raise Se∣dition, nor strive to oppose the Resolves of your Superiours, lest you bring great Damage, if not Destruction upon your selves; verily it may justly be expected that some secret Conspiracies will be contriving and agitating in the Northern and north W. parts from England. Those other places subject to this Sign must also be passive in the Effects hereof, though in a different manner in several places; and they are, Holland (who I doubt will produce their own ruine by their obstinacy, breach of Peace and Articles) Zea∣land, Prusia, part of Burgundy, Constantinople, Tunis, Venice, Genoa, Lucas, Millan, York in England, S. Andrews in Scotland, Lubeck, Wittenburgh, Corlitz, &c. Next let us consider Saturn; under Aquarius is the South part of Swethland, part of Denmark, Westphalia; of Cities Ham∣borough, Breme, Satzburgh, Ingoldslade, &c. Mars afflicts this Sign by opposition, causing some Domestick broyls among them, various Strifes and Contentions, whence proceed Duels, Murthers, &c. But neverthelesse, Saturn being so assisted by the benevo∣lent beams of the Fortunes, and the Conjunction being in Sextile thereto, promiseth well generally as to the affairs of those places, some matters of very high and superlative concernment is signifyed to be acted therein, the Merchants and Tra∣ders thereof finde good trading and returnes of their Com∣modities; Tartaria the great, Wallachia, Muscovia also are sub∣ject to the dominion of this Sign, and accordingly will share in the like effects. Norway is under Scorpio the other house of Mars, where Mer∣cury is unhappily posited, and Mars himself casting his Square
thereto, the New Moon following being also in that very Sign, the Moon next applying to the Quartile of Mars, shewing the great misfortunes these people are likely to endure by War, Up∣roars, Rumours, Tumults, Shipwrack, and the like; yet Den∣mark generally will be free from molestations, and matters there very highly carried on. Taurus the opposite Sign is the Ascendent of Ireland, Poland, the North part of Swethland; Mars is in square to this, and Mer∣cury in opposition; nor can Venus help much, onely being so neer the place of the Conjunction of the year 1603. the first en∣trance of the superiours into the Fiery Trigon, may prenote the restoring of former Rights and Inheritances to the people; but withall there is portended some notable disturbences and Commotions, Plots and Conspiracies to break forth from thence, to great mischief, if not prevented. Let it not be objected, that because I said the Conjunction doth chiefly extend its influence to the more Southern and South∣east part of the world from England; why I mention some places more North; for seeing the influence of the conjunctions (both greater and lesser) of the Planets, especially of Saturn and Jupi∣ter, do more or lesse operate upon all places (though differently, according to the nature of the object or matter they are to work upon) but more especially upon those subject to the dominion of the Sign, whilst Eclipses, Comets, and such like prodigious appearances, do chiefly manifest themselves in those places to which they are visible: Therefore we may with good reason judge those places to have share in the effects; and besides the reasons in Art therefore given, this is further and more especi∣ally to be added, viz. that the effects are varied (both in Quality, Place, and Time) according to the difference of Meridians, and the elevation of the Pole; according to that of Cardan, Segm. 5. Aphor. 98. Climatum differentia facit, ut celerius aut tardius eventus proveniant; the difference of climates maketh that the event may happen more swift or slow, sooner or later, which although it be chiefly applicable to the times of events, yet it is also to be con∣sidered as well to the quality what, and the places where such events will be manifested. For example, the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter we now
treat of, happened with us in England and some other adjacent places, not onely under the Earth, which signifies an obscurity of the effects, or that they may be retarded for a time, but being in and neer the Fifth House of the Revolution, and the New Moon following the Conjunction it self, may signify to us and those places many abortive Births, and some more than ordinary monstrous Productions, and that there should be many Treaties, Embassies and Messages of Peace; all which are signified by the Fifth House; but to those places that lie more Westerly, the Conjunction may fall in the Sixth, which signifyes many Infir∣mities and Diseases, to others in the Seventh, betokening Wars, &c. And so on the other side to those places of the world that ly far Eastward, whether to the elevation or depression of the Pole, those places may have it in their third, second, or in the Ascendent it self, Et sic de caeteris; by which it appears how in all respects the effects are or may be varied; but to enlarge upon this is too great a task; let what hath been said in this Chapter suf∣fice for the Places, and also in general the Persons concerned in the Effects. CHAP. Ult. Of the most principal times wherein the Effects will be manifested. AS this is the most necessary Doctrine of the whole, so is it the most difficult, having few or no precepts or presidents left us by Antiquity for instruction or certain direction to the dis∣covery thereof; and indeed it is not enough to know onely the kinds or qualities of the Events, and the places most subject thereto, or concerned therein; but the great question is, when will those accidents signified by the Celestial powers appear, or more especially manifest themselves to the world? For it was a
good observation, Non semper eodem modo evenium, sed aliàs plus grassantur, aliàs minus; That the effects do not alwayes come to passe after one and the same manner, but sometimes more forcibly, other whiles more remisse or with lesse force. It hath been already mentioned, that seeing they are occiden∣tal of the Sun, and vespertine, can onely be seen in the evening, and that in the occidental part of Heaven, and that at the Luna∣tions both before and after, as also at the Revolution of the year, the Conjunction was subterranean, thereby signifying an obscu∣rity of the Effects, and that many things will not manifest them∣selves till the latter part of time determined for the influence thereof, according to that of Almansor Propos. 30. Cum planetae ponderosi fuerint occidentales à sole dabunt probitatem circa finem vitae & è converso; when the ponderous Planets are occidental of the Sun, they give proof, or do manifest their effects in the end or latter part of life: this is proper to Nativities especially; but as to the general influences it prenotes, that in the latter part of time alotted for their operating, the grand Events shall manifest themselves to the world, matters being for a long time kept in great obscurity. But for the discovery of the more particular year or years, wherein eminent transactions will fall out, the Rule laid down by Ptolomy is this, Conjunctionis locum, quo in loco ab anni ascendente est, inspice, siquidem cum profectio illuc pervenerit tunc eventus erit. Behold the place in which the Conjunction happens from the Ascendent of the year in which it is; for when the profecti∣on comes thither, then shall the event be; so also saith Almans. in his 82 Propos. The accidents or impediments that are to happen, will shew them∣selves in the years of profection, when the year of the World comes to the bodies of the malevolents; give (saith he) to every Sign one year. This is the general judgement of all or most of the Ancients, (which I shall not stand to repeat, but refer you to the 95. page of Merl. Prophet.) which Doctrine remains very dubious, and that for these reasons, which I must also give caution of, be∣fore I proceed any farther. First, Profections of themselves, as they are generally taken,
are not sufficiently demonstrative; for all Influences depending upon the harmony of some real Motion, this of Profection being not grounded (sufficiently) upon any, is therefore not unfitly questioned by some, and they the most judicious in Astronomy now living; yet not so, but that it may relate to something more rational, if understood: For (as I have sometimes had it from my ingenious friend Mr. Thomas Street) as Directions are the Harmony of the Earths Annual & Diurnal Revolutions about the Sun, so Profections (if any thing) are the Harmony of the Moons Diurnal and Mensurnal Revolutions about the Earth, and therefore more properly called Lunar Directions; but as in Directions founded upon these proportions, there is a great dis∣crepancy from that method commonly used; so also is there in this kind of Profection; but I forbear further mention hereof in this place, and leave it to the consideration of the judicious, Qui capiat, &c. But secondly, another reason is taken from the difference of the Ascendents of revolutional Figures; for if they vary a sign from the truth, it causeth at least a year errour in time; and it is ap∣parent that some Theories differ more than a sign one from ano∣ther, especially when it happens to be among those signes that are of more oblique (or short) ascensions; so that were there certainty in proportioning the times by profection, yet the un∣certainty, or at least the discrepancy among Authors about the true Ascendent of the revolutional Figures, leaves the matter in doubt. But because I would not be thought too critical, the rather seeing there are yet very judicious Artists that do not altogether relinquish this doctrine of Profections, let us examine in what time we may expect the Effects of our Conjunction to ma∣nifest themselves. The Ascendent of the Revolution for this year 1663. is the 23. degree of Leo (by the Caroline Tables, which by a general consent of Observations is without doubt very neer the truth) the place of the Conjunction is in the 14 degree of Sagittary; the distance is 3 signes 21 degrees, which being added to the time of the Conjunction October the 10th. 1663. viz. three years and two third parts, directs to the year 1667. about the middle of the
year, wherein, according to this proportion, very superlative transactions must happen and appear upon the Stage of the World, in those places subject to the Sign Sagittary, very great counsels and consultations both in matters Politick and Eccle∣siastical. But if then matters do begin to manifest themselves more publickly, or many things then come to light that before were obscured, why shall not there be some more glorious actions, or some illustrious accidents to fall out, when by the same pro∣portion the Medium Coeli comes to the place of the Conjun∣ction, and consequently its Opposition? The place of the Med. Coel. or the degree culminating in the Meridian of London is the 9th. degree of Taurus; one sign and about 5 degr. which gives in this measure of time one year and two moneths, viz. the latter end of the year 1664. at what time the mid-Heaven comes to the Opposition of the Conjunction; so that let us observe, if about that time we hear of some notable contentions and struglings among some Grandees and most eminent persons in the world, about some ancient Rights or Customes, &c. This must be understood to happen at that time with us in England, for in those places where the Meridian and elevation of the Pole is varied, the time accordingly is varied, which is also another reason of the scruple that may be made of this kind of measure of time, viz. because it cannot be universal, as other Rules and Directions are. But if we also direct the Ascendent to other Planets in this manner, we may find that the Ascendent comes to the body of the Sun, about the latter end of the year 1665. which may also discover something of moment to the world, because the Sun was lately in Sextile to the Planets conjoyned; perhaps there appears some eminent person that would by policy and intreaty effect something to the composing of differences; but attempting and being willing to do more than he hath power to effect, falls of himself into some ignominy and dis∣grace. The Medium Coeli comes to the Conjunction, and to the Opposition of the Moon, towards the latter end of the year
1670. or the beginning of 1671. which accordingly must produce the effects thereof in a most illustrious manner, be∣cause the influence of the Conjunction is then almost at the highest. For this is observable in Conjunctions (and also agreeable to Nota. the precepts of Ptolomy upon Eclipses) that the effects thereof do increase till they come to Opposition, which is about the middle of the time determined for the continuance of the ef∣fects, from one Conjunction to another, and after by degrees they decrease, or do operate more remisly, till excited again by the influence of another Conjunction, or remitted by some contrary Configurations. This is to be understood of lesser Conjunctions, but may al∣so be applied, and is as considerable in the effects of greater and mean Conjunctions, whose effects do last in general neer two hundred years, whilest those that are called lesser Conjuncti∣ons, which happen every twenty yeares in signs of the same Triplicity, do accordingly intend or remit, increase or dimi∣nish, or do more particularly shew the times of the effects sig∣nified by those more eminent Configurations. Our Conjunction (as I formerly mentioned) cannot pro∣perly be said to be great, being not the first entrance into the Fiery Trigon; yet as it may be termed the restitution therof (by reason of that preposterous Conjunction of the year 1643.) the effects thereon depending must be the more eminent, or of the nature of a Mean Conjunction; and this the rather, because it is the fourth Conjunction since their entrance into this Trigon, Nota. which falling alwayes in the same Sign with the first Conjun∣ction, and the effects thereof increasing, viz. in the first hun∣dred years, is therefore (I say) the more forcible in exciting and manifesting the effects of the great Conjunction it self for the next succeeding twenty years; forasmuch also, as all the Planets come then to a Sextile of their own places; the like is to be understood of the mean Conjunctions. But for the intentions or remission of the effects by the Aspects (which was the first consideration in this digression) I shall have occasion to handle afterwards, these I thought ne∣cessary to premise.
There are yet other wayes more safe (because more demon∣strative) and more necessary (because universal) to all parties (though differently) of the world; and these are Directions, Transits, lesser Conjunctions and Aspects of the Planets (espe∣cially of the Superiours) also Eclipses of the Luminaries, and what other configurations or appearances there may happen concomitant: These do most certainly shew the particular times of the events; all which, as may be most necessary, I shall handle, not troubling my self or my Reader with niceties, or too many curiosities; such as are studious may wade further if they please. These in themselves are not onely demonstrative and most rationally to be observed, but it is also the judgement of the ancient and modern Astrologians, as by these notable precepts will appear. Non solum per revolutiones annorum civitatis vel mundi, aut sectae cognitionem futurorum habueris, oportet enim directiones ipsorum principiorum considerare. Not onely by the revolutions of the years of the World, or of a City, or of a Sect, may'st thou have the knowledge of future events; but it behoveth thee also to consider the directions of those Radixes or begin∣nings. Ludov. de Rig. Aph. 44. Moventur nova mala in civitate, quando directio pervenerit ad quadraturam vel oppositiones infortunarum, &c. New evils are mo∣ved or stirred up in a City, when the direction cometh to the quadrature or opposition of the Infortunes; which if they be retrograde, the evil will be the worse, &c. Rig. Aph. 47. In magnis conjunctionibus utere directionibus, ut tempora grandi∣um mutationum urbium & climatum cognoscas. Anonim. 245. In great Conjunctions use directions, that thou maist know the times of the grand Mutations of Cities and Countreys; so al∣so in the 293 Aph. of the same Author, he adviseth us to use Directions (yea, and Profections too) in the beginning of Sects, that we may know the accidents attending, which is also to be understood in all other Radixes. The very same rule is prescribed in the 53 Aphor. of ano∣ther unknown Author; In maximis conjunctionibus & in nativi∣urbium,
& provinciarum, & gentium, utere directionibus pro inveni∣endo tempore eventuum; In great or the greatest Conjunctions, and in the Nativities of Cities, Provinces, or People, or Sect, use directions for the finding of the time of the events. But a more general and special Rule is laid down in 52 Aph. Eventus magnae conjunctionis ad actum reducuntur, quando atmuten ejus pervenerit ad suam domum vel exaltationem, vel ab angulo fi∣gurae conjunctionis redierint ad aspectum, vel quando constellatio E∣clipsis, vel annuae revolutionis similis fuerit significationis. The events of a great Conjunction are reduced to action, when the chief significator thereof comes by direction to his own house, or exaltation, or when they are taken from an Angle of the Figure to an Aspect, or when the Constellation of an Eclipse, or annual Revolution, shall be of like significa∣tion. Many more Aphorisms might be produced to this purpose; but I must hasten: What hath been said of Directions, is also as true in Aspects and other Configurations, according to that of Cardane, Non solum conjunctiones verum etiam oppositiones & quadrati radii superiorum planetarum magnas in mundo mutationes designant. Not onely the Conjunctions, but also the Quadrat and opposite Rayes, or Aspects of the superiour Planets (No∣ta, the Aspects or Conjunctions of the Inferiours are little sig∣nificant, de minimis non curamus) do produce great mutations in the world, not that they enforce any thing contrary to the in∣fluence of the Conjunction, but being subordinate thereto, do shew the times of the events. For by the 8 Propos. of Her∣mes, Aspectus non potest diminuere significationem conjunctionis, nam conjunctio fortitor est aspectu. As for the method used in Directions, I shall wholly adhere to Kepler, who directs all the Planets in the Ecliptick, allow∣ing the motion of a day for a year, which as in it self it hath been sufficiently proved to be more harmonious, true and de∣monstrative, so in this case is it alone to be admitted, since for the reasons already given, we cannot attain the true figure of the Conjunction, so as to take the circles of Position to direct in the Equator.
And seeing, as hath been said, that in our judgements we are to take in the great Conjunction, and the new Star of the years 1603 and 1604. I must therefore begin with those, and see what directions of any moment do fall within the limits of our present Conjunction. As for the Comet in fifty two, no cer∣tain directions can be gathered from thence, because of the un∣certainty of its first appearance; and besides the influence pro∣perly of it self is diminishing, although something may now and then break forth. The first Direction observable is that about the year 1663.  or 1664. even neer the time, or at least within the year which this Conjunction happens, do the conjoyned Planets come to a Sextile of their own places, viz. to the place of the Conjun∣ction; and consequently all the other Planets; so that from hence it may be hoped there may be great inclinations and en∣deavours to compose differences, especially such as have been formerly or not lately broached or begun; and who knows but the effects of Mars his Trine to the Conjunction, may produce much to that purpose about the time of the Vernal In∣gresse 1664? For about that time the Sun in the great Conjunction comes  also to a Sextile of Venus in the 26 deg. 3/2 of Aquarius, not far from a Trine of the M. C. thereof; the Sun signifies Kings, Emperours, and great men; Venus signifies Treaties, Embas∣sies, by Marriages, and such like, many differences may be composed. But in this year there happens a total Eclipse of the Moon in the 16 degr. of Aquarius, that is in Sextil to the place of the Conjunction, but in Opposition to the place of Mars therein; Mars at the time of the Eclipse is nigh to his place at the great Conjunction, and the M. C. thereof; is lately separated or se∣parating from a Quartile of Jupiter; both Planets are in Car∣dinal Signs, the one in his fall, the other in his detriment; these are of no small moment, they prenote great detriment to some eminent persons, some of the Clergy in those parts called to question, some Uproars and Commotions are to be feared.
The Eclipse is visible in England, and begins with us in the 11th. which signifies Favourites and Assistances of Kings and Princes; the Middle is the 10th. which signifies Emperours and Great Men in general; the End is in the 9th. which signifies Religion and the Religious, and shews the successe of Voyages and Adventures by Sea. And that which is very observable is, that Mars after his separation from the Square of Jupiter, comes next to the Sextile of Saturn, who disposeth of the place eclipsed, and is posited very neer to the place of the Sun in the great Conjunction; so that the effects of this Eclipse will in a great measure put forward the influences of those preceding Confi∣gurations, and that the events are of a superlative nature, viz. do operate chiefly upon the most eminent persons and matters then acting upon the Stage of the world. The Eclipse happens upon the 27 of July, but the effects will most forcibly manifest themselves towards the latter end of the year, or about the beginning of 1665. The places more especially concerned are those that lie more Southward and South-east, and some that lie full East from England. Aquarius, in which the Eclipse happens, signifies great Tar∣taria, Amazonia, Sarmatia, Valachia, Muscovia, the South of Swethland, Westphalia; of Cities, Hamborough, Breme, Trent, Ingolstade. Mars afflicts Libra, viz. Austria, with Fires and Commoti∣ons, if not Wars; so also Lisbon, Vienna in Austria, Frank ford, Antwerp, &c. And if Capricorn be the Ascendent of Oxford, Jupiter, who represents Scolars and Divines, and men of Reli∣gious Orders, is unfortunately posited therein, and afflicted by the Quartile of Mars: God grant Unity and Peace among the Reverend Clergy, and deliver the City from Fire and Pe∣stilence. Towards the latter end of this year also is that other Con∣junction of Saturn and Mars, neer the place of Sol and Ve∣nus in the great Conjunction, which doth also manifest its ef∣fects most effectually in the following year; yet it may be fea∣red
that there will be notorious Robberies and Murthers com∣mitted in the latter end of that year 1664. This Conjunction operates most forcibly upon Spain, Dal∣matia, Hungaria, &c. in which Death or Deposition is signi∣fied to some eminent person therein ere the year 1665. be ex∣pired. In the year 1665.  Son to the New Star. and 66. I find in my inquiry very nota∣ble configurations or meetings of the Planets, which do abun∣dantly manifest the Conjunctional effects in those years in most parts of the world: For first, the Sun from his place at the first appearance of the new-star, comes to the place of the said Star about the beginning of the year 1665. (if not the latter end of the preceding year) and then to the Conjunction of Ju∣piter and Mars, the year following; Mars and Jupiter about the same time to the sextile place of the same Star, and of their own Conjunction; Venus to the trine of Mars in the latter end of the year 1665, or beginning of sixty six, and the Conjun∣ction of the year 1603. to the trine of the Moon in Autumn of the year 1665. These I say are very notable, and do undoub∣tedly about those times produce most glorious actions in seve∣ral parts of the world: Some eminent person comes to greater dignity and renown; those matters signified more especially by the new-star, do now most apparently shew themselves both in matters of Church and State. Some treaties of peace or reconciliations may be conjectured by Inter-marriages, signified by the trine of Mars and Venus, and some notable conspiracy of the turbulent or seditious multitude discovered and appeased; Mercury in this year and about the middle thereof comes also to the Sextile of the Conjunction, in the second of that Figure and in Aquarius where he hath dignity, so that from hence the Merchant may expect good returns by his adventures, especially such as deal into the Eastern and South east parts of the world, nor will such as adventure into the south-west have cause to complain of their ill suc∣cesse. But we are also to observe that there is a partile Eclipse of the Moon, Jan. 20. 1664/3. in the 12 degree of Leo, the ascen∣dent
of Rome; She is also separated from the opposition of Jupiter, and applying to the opposition of Mars; this pre∣notes some molestation by tumults, uproars, and seditions in Italy, and more especially in Rome it self. In March following, there happens a Conjunction of Sol and Mars in the 25 of Pisces, exactly in square to the place of the Sun in the great Conjunction, and the conjunction of Sa∣turn and Mars 1664. both the Sun and Mars applying to the Square of Saturn; both Spain and Portugal are herein concer∣ned; the death of some eminent persons are thereby signified, and if Peace between those Princes is not ere this time conclu∣ded, it is to be feared the Wars will again break forth greatly to the prejudice of the Spanish Monarch. But that which is yet very observable, is the configurations of the year 1666.  Mars to the place of the Conjunction, 1603. The M. C. to the Sun. The Conjun∣ction of the year 1663. to the Oppositi∣on of the Moon. that year so frequently pointed at by the Learned to be so famous for those eminent Mutations or Transactions then or neer those times to be expected to happen in some parts of the world, but especially in the Church of Rome. In this year I finde that Mars by directi∣on comes to the place of the great Conjunction, and that about the Spring, or in the moneth of April is the meeting of the Sig∣nificators; the M. C. of that Conjunction to the place of the Sun; the Conjunction of this year 1663. may be conjectured about the same time to come to the Opposition of the Moon, if we take the distance at noon, about which the Conjunction I believe did happen; the effects of these do chiefly concern the Spanish Monarchy, some great alterations and disturbances do happen therein, in some other parts of the world a new Mo∣narchy or mannner of Government is erected, or some emi∣nent person doth then appear, and come to great honour and dignity, beyond former expectation; Insurrections, Tumults and Commotions in England, perhaps in London; to the destru∣ction of the contrivers thereof. In June there appears a great Eclipse of the Sun, above half the Suns body will be obscured; it happens in Cancer a Cardi∣nal Sign, and the Ascendent of Scotland, Holland, Zealand, &c. both the Infortunes afflict the Luminaries, having been late∣ly
in Quartile with Mars, and applying to the Opposition of Saturn; these prove very ominous to those places, and among the rest great Inundations are threatned in Holland; in Scotland Insurrections and Rebellions to be feared; there is al∣so a conjunction of Saturn and Mars in the 18 deg. of Capri∣corn, in Square to the place of the Sun at the New Star, and in our present Conjunction, denoting some differences and other detriments to great persons: But seeing therefore that about these times there happen such notable concurrences of the superiour Powers, we may in general conclude, that the accidents signified by the Conjunctions and those other con∣comitant Configurations, do forcibly manifest themselves about those times especially, so that we then may expect to hear of the most eminent Mutations and Transactions to hap∣pen in the several places of the world, from the effects of those Conjunctions: And among the rest it is not to be forgotten, that Saturn and Jupiter in this year also, do make their first A Sextile of  Sat. and Jup. Sextile Aspect after their Conjunction, Saturn being in the 21 degree of Capricorn, Jupiter in the same degree of Pisces; both Planets are essentially dignified, from whence, notwithstanding the great stirrings and actions then on foot, there will be much endeavouring for Peace and unity in most places of the world; yet Mars having lately been in opposition to Jupiter by Re∣trogradation, and now applying again by direction to his Op∣position, will be prejudiciall to the Religious in many places, and may therefore retard or crosse the designs of the more prudent and judicious, by Contentions, factious Opinions and such like; yet neverthelesse there will be a very great compo∣sure of differences in many places, a more right understanding of those mistakes that have occasioned such disturbances and commotions. Mars,  who in the Conjunction applied to the Trine of the Conjunction, ♂ ad △ of ♄ and ♃. so signifying the endeavour of the Martialist, not so much by power as by policy to make peace, and cause a re∣conciliation and composure of differences among the European Princes and Potentates, especially of Italy; he (I say) in the year 1667. comes by direction to the same Trine, and will
then be very active and stirring to that purpose. There is in this year an invisible Eclipse of the Moon in the An invisible Eclipse of the Moon 1. 15 deg. of Sagit. 15 deg. of Sagittary, the same Sign of the Conjunctions and New Star; this Eclipse happens on the 27 of May; Mars at that time is in opposition thereto, the Sun lately in conjuncti∣on with Mars; God preserve the City of London from Fire and Plague, from Combustions and Tumults; and let Spain beware of Seditions, War, &c. for these are more particularly concerned in the effects of the Eclipse. In June this year Saturn in 0. 26 of Aquarius retrograde, A Quartile of Sat. and Jup. is in Square to Jupiter (the 18 day) in the same degree and mi∣nute of Taurus; some small doubts and fears do arise, close con∣sultations about matters political; but the Sun applying to the Sextile of Jupiter, discovers something in the end, by which some come to great honour and esteem. There is also a little Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in the A conj. of Jup. and Mars. beginning of the year, in the 6 deg of Aries, in Trine to the Conjunction, which doth also put forward the effects of the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, which doth operate most forcibly in England; and indeed, considering also that in the moneth of November, there doth not onely happen another Quartile of Saturn and Jup. from Cardinal Signs, Jupiter being in the 27 deg. of Aries, directly in opposition to the place of the Sun at the time of the Conjunction; the Sun then applying to the Sextile (and Mars to a Trine) of Saturn; but also there A total Ecl. of Luna. happens an Eclipse of the Moon (though subterranean) total, in the 9 deg. of Gemini, opposite to the Conjunctions of the years 1603. and 1663, and also to the New Star of the year 1604. is in the place of the first appearance of the Comet 1652, &c. These are of principall concernment, and as is to be feared will excite some new commotions and disturbances in many places; many dubious counsels are now on foot in most parts of Europe; in England some Domestick differences among some grand persons, private murmurings and grudgings; the acti∣ons of some eminent person somewhat in dislike, for which he himself receives some disrepute or losse of some credit there∣by; and indeed there is a very notable Congression of the su∣periour
Planets, which I am constrained to be silent in, which will operate or manifest it self in the latter end of the year 1667. or the beginning of 68. which unexpectedly will cause some private differences, &c. The like might have been ob∣served ☜ in the preceding year; But I must forbear. Anno 1668.  the most material Configurations are a third Quartile of Saturn and Jupiter April 3. in 13 deg. of Aquarius A Quartile of Sat. and Jup. and Taurus, Saturn in Sextile to the Conjunction, Jupiter in Quartile to the place of Mars, who beholds both with malevo∣lent aspect. An Eclipse of the Moon, almost total, May 16. in the 6 de∣gree A total Ecl. of Luna. of Sagittary, the place of the great Conjunction; Saturn in Sextile to the Conjunction, Mars in the then place of the Sun; a conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Novem. in the 9 deg. of A conj. of Sat. and Mars. Aquarius, the opposite degree of Mars at the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter. These, I say, are the principal Configurations for this year; they denote some principal Consultations in remote parts, especially in Spain and Italy; some new Commotions, or old Breaches not sufficiently reconciled, doe now again break forth. There is no considerable Direction in this year from either of these preceding eminent Configurations, onely the Moon comes to a Trine of the New Star about April, and Mercury to the Trine of the Moon; the M. C. also of that great Conjun∣ction is in this year directed to the body of Venus, these may produce good successe to those that travel or adventure by Sea, and may discover some petty counsels or contrivances among the vulgar or common people, and it is very probable some come to great preferment by honourable Marriages, beyond any former expectation. In August the 10th. Saturn and Ju∣piter make their first Trine in the 9 degr. of Aquarius and Ge∣mini, Jupiter being in opposition to the Conjunctions, and mee∣ting with an opposition of Mars neer the same place; some preparations for Peace and Unity, but that many do injure themselves by their own rashnesse. In the year 1669.  Saturn and Jupiter come to a Trine Aspect, Sat. and Jup. in Trine.
Saturn then in 25 of Aquarius, Jupiter in Gemini; here is again some Treaties of Peace, many Embassies to that purpose in most places of Europe; Saturn is very strong, Jupiter is in his detriment, combust, and in direct opposition to the place of the Sun in the great Conjunction; this is a bad configuration for ♀ in this year by direction comes to the 12 de. of ♐ viz within 1 de r. of the ♀ from whence she goes retro∣grade. the Jovialists, viz. the prudent Magistrate, and the pious and Orthodox Clergy; a subtil spirit there is in most places about these times, that pretends fair, but deludes many; but Venus be∣ing so very neer the conjunction of Jupiter and trine of Saturn, it may be expected that through the many Treaties and Em∣bassies that then will be emitted, there may be a right under∣standing of the things and matters in the end, though with some difficulty reconciled; and this the rather, forasmuch as it is the third Trine they make, the second happening in November the year before, which I forgot to mention, which neverthelesse doth manifest its influence in this yeare 1669. But in this year Mars comes by direction to the opposite ♂ ad ☍ ☽. place of the Moon in the great Conjunction, and will afflict the people with either a pestilent Disease, or else excite them to Combustion and Tumults; Spain suffers much hereby, some Uproars in London and other places; for the conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, and of Sol and Jupiter, the one in May, the other in June, both in Gemini, opposite to the Sign of the Conjunction, and more especially to the place of the great Conjunction and New Star, these also do portend some di∣sturbances in those places subject to the Signs Gemini and Sa∣gittary; those seditious and factious effects of the Moon and Mercury in the Conjunction are now stirred up among the vulgar, and very notable contentions and differences among persons of higher degree. About the year 1670.  Mars comes to the Sextile of the ♂ ad ✶ ☽. Moons being directed from the time of the Conjunction of this year 1663. this intimates, that what was signified by the Moon in the Conjunction, viz. disturbances from a factious people; these now are brought to submission, rather by the policy and solicitations of some Martial men; or men of Mi∣litary
command, in what place soever such enormities shall happen to break forth. In September 19. a partile Eclipse of the Moon in 6 degree of Aries, neer to a Trine of the Conjunctions, puts forward the influence thereof in England; the defect being in a bestial Sign, denotes destruction to our smaller Cattel, as Sheep, Hogs, and such like; the place of the Sun is neer the degree of Mars in the great Conjunction; it threatens detriment to some great Man in Austria, or of the Austrian Family, and some dome∣stick quarrellings in other places. In November of this year Saturn and Mars are conjoyned in Conj ♄ & ♂. the 2d. degree of Pisces, both in Square to Mercury now, and to the place of the great Conjunction 1603. from whence ari∣seth various transactions in those places subject to the Sign, of which they say Portugal hath a principal share; it happens upon the 26 day; the Sun then is in the 15 degree of Sagitta∣ry, the place of the New Star, and of this Conjunction, Anno 1663. and not much elongated from that of the year 1603. so that whatsoever is hereby signified in particular to those places under the dominion of the Sign, yet much of the influence thereof will manifest themselves in the effects of those Con∣junctions; and will certainly prepare and excite the minds of men to various distempers and disturbances; here are many notable consultations in many places of Europe, about the set∣ling or retarding and hindering of those approaching evils that are even ready to break forth in the world; but it is to be fea∣red all will not do. For in the year 1671.  is the first opposition of Saturn and Jupiter, An Oposit. of ♄ and ♃ Oct. 25. which though it happen toward the latter end of the year, yet it is to be feared very notable disturbances will break out before, as it were to prepare matter for the influence of the Opposition. It happens in the 13 degree of Virgo and Pi∣sces, both Planets in a direct Quartile to the Conjunction; the Sun is in Trine to Saturn, and Sextile to Jupiter, he, viz. Kings, Emperours, and great Potentates, would compose and recon∣cile the differences; but Saturn hath gotten possession of Jupi∣ters prerogative, and Jupiter is in his detriment; there is a pri∣vate,
malicious, subtil spirit, that having gotten power and opportunity, will not be satisfied but with the ruines of their adversaries (as they take them to be) though they are men far more just, faithful and prudent than many of themselves, al∣though they have the habit of Religion, or however they may be accounted by these hypocritical incendiaries. Authors do judge of notable events to happen in those years, wherein there happens an Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter; of the Ancients, Bonatus, Fol. (mihi) 253. saith, That there will be Wars and Contentions, and great detriment to the great men of that Countrey in which Jupiter is; from the great men of that Coun∣trey where Saturn is; so I understand Bonatus; and yet as he saith, those places under the dominion of the Sign Saturn is in, will also suffer great calamities and miseries; Jupiter, as to persons is most afflicted, because in his detriment, but those places subject to the Sign Pisces, where Saturn is, will be most afflicted by such calamities as he signifies, viz. Scarcity, Po∣verty, Depopulations and Ruines of Buildings, and such like. Of our European Countreys Pisces hath Portugal under its do∣minion, Rhemes and Wormes in Germany, &c. under Virgo where Jupiter is, is Paris, Lyons, Tholouse, Novaria in Italy, and some Cities in Poland and Denmark. Haly's judgement of an Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter is, Quod significat rixas, lites & contentiones inter homines, &c. That there will be many strifes and contentions among men; in those years one Nation will go to war with another, and there will be notable divisions among themselves, the people sub∣ject to rebell against their Kings and Governours; rich men will suffer much, many of them made equal with the poor, saith Albumazar, the King will depose many out of their Offi∣ces and Honours; Fiunt strages, & interfectiones, saith Cardane Segm. 5. Aphor. 49. there will be many Slaughters and private Duels, Inter alios homines qui sunt inferioris gradus quam Reges, unus animabitur contra alium; one man animated or stirred up against another, among those that are of inferiour degree to Kings. In a word, Origanus saith, That Eo in anno nulla quies cum Jupiter & Saturnus in oppositione sunt, nunquam enim mentes
hominum quiescum. In that or those years wherein Saturn and Jupiter are in opposition, there will be no quiet, for the minds of men cannot rest. Who lives to see the years of 1671, and 1672.  will see and hear of very notable Disturbances, Confusions and Commoti∣ons in all or most parts of Europe: I say in the year 1672. also, and especially, because this first Opposition is towards the lat∣ter end of the year 1671. and there happening two other Op∣positions of the same superior Planets in the following year, the one on the 17 of Jan. in the 17 deg. of the same Signs, ♍ & ♓, Jup. then not only in his detriment, but also retrograde; Mars in the very deg. of the great Conjunction, and within 5 degrees of this Conjunction of the year 1663. (for which we may give 5 moneths) he applies to a Quartile of both Planets, and in this year comes by direction to the Square of Mercury in the conjunction, so that those Factions and Disturbances signified by Mercury as dispositor of the Moon, will undoubtedly very evidently be manifested; Piracies and Robberies in abun∣dance, &c. he (viz.) Mars, is in Sextile to the Sun almost platick. Good God! will the persecutions and afflictions of the Godly and Religious, that then in many places will be ma∣nifested, whether by War, Fire, Sword, Captivities, or whatever, shall these (I say) be countenanced by the power and authority of those places? God forbid: Certainly great Calamities are then portended to all those persons signified by Jup. especially, who signifies the Laws and Religions of Nation & Kingdoms, and the Ministers thereof; and after many of those evils have hap∣pened, and even then when it may be thought that the fury of those outrages are at a period, Saturn and Jupiter in Septemb. the same year 1672. die 11. come a third time to an Opposi∣tion, Saturn then being retrograde and in opposition to the Sun, and Venus, who were lately also in conjunction with Ju∣piter; one mischief upon another, more confusion and distur∣bances; but here the subtilty, hypocrisie and deceit of Saturn is opposed by the superiour powers, and the poor, weak, and captivated condition of Jupiter something assisted and relieved. Not onely these Oppositions of the Superiours, (although
they do most forcibly manifest the transactions and the affairs of those times) but there are also other concomitant Configu∣rations of the Celestial Powers, that will also produce notable mutations and accidents in the world. For in August 1671. die 18. Mars is in conjunction with Conj. of ♂ & ♃. Jupiter, in the last degree of Leo, the Sun being lately in con∣junction to both; the place being almost in square to the great Conjunction. In September there happens a total Eclipse of the Eclipse of the ☽. Moon in the 26 degree of Pisces, in square to the place of the Sun in the great Conjunction; some great Potentate dies, or receives great detriment in his affairs; both Lumina∣ries afflicted with the Infortunes, the Sun by Mars, the Moon by Saturn; Mars applying to an Opposition in the 15 degree of Virgo and Pisces; both Kings and People suffer, the one by Wars, and grand Differences and Disturbances in affairs, the other by Fires, Drought, Famine, or great Want and Scarcity, Earthquakes, &c. The Eclipse falls to be in the third of the great Conjunction, viz. opposite to the 9th. in the house of Ju∣piter; the next application of the Moon, after a little void of course, is to an Opposition of Mercury, who is Lord of the 9th. but in the 10th. of that Conjunction; This shews great stirrs about Religion, much of the commotions and troubles of those times being occasioned from thence; the Merchants re∣ceive great losses by tempestuous Winds, and by Pirates. And that which is yet worth our notice, is, that about these times Saturn to a ✶ of the New Star. Saturn by direction comes to a Sextile of the New Star; this adds to the power and strength of Saturn; a subtil, fordid and crafty people will act very high, and aim at no small matters, and will carry on their designs with very specious pretences and shews of Honesty and Religion; great stirs about some ancient Rights, newly discovered or brought to light, which for a long time have lain obscured; In a word, the eminent configurations of those times do denote as eminent mutations and transactions to ensue both in matters of Church and State, in Religion as well as in things civil and moral. Nor is the year 1673.  without its action, for the conjun∣ction ♄ & ♂ conj. in ♓. of Saturn and Mars November 18. 1672. in 26 degr. of
Pisces, in square to the Sun in the great Conjunction, and the Sun now in the very degree of that Conjunction; these also put forward the conjunctional effects, and are of concernment to some eminent persons of Spain, Hungaria, or Portugal in the year 1673. for then doth that Conjunction most forcibly operate and aggravate the differences and disturbances about Religion, and the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church. Among other enormities (I say) these are the chief intents of that malevolent Conjunction. The Sun in the great Conjunction to a square of Mercury ☉ ad □ ☿ in the great ☌. discovers some plots and conspiracies, and some pilfering Se∣cretary or Treasurer, pernicious Pamphlets do prejudice the credit of some great man; notorious Robberies in many pla∣ces, especially Southwest-ward; frequently committed. But toward the latter end of this year Saturn and Jupiter to a Sextile of Sa∣turn and Jupi∣ter to the place of the Sun in the Conj. Sextile of the Sun in this Conjunction, denotes the desires of some principal persons, Members of State and Church; their ad∣dresses to Kings, Princes, and other Governours & Rulers of Na∣tions, for peace, and for reconciliation of former breaches and tedious calamities that both rich and poor have been afflicted with, who now are ready for, and would be glad of peace. Anno 1674.  upon the 8th of July, Saturn and Mars make Conjunction ☌ ♄ & ♂ in ♎ in the 28 deg. of Libra, the place of the Sun in this Conjunction, and in the M. C. of the great Conjunction of the year 1603. This portends to some great persons either death or detriment, especially those (or in those place) under the dominion of the Sign Libra, by some domestick differen∣ces among themselves, Murthers, Slaughters, and cruel hatred among men generally; the Sun is applying to a square of both Planets, which aggravates the evil to persons of high degree. But towards the later end of the year, the Moon to the Trine ☽ ad △ ☉. of the Sun, denotes a discovery of some affaires, that for some time have been obscured; Kings and their people do better accord; some are preferred to great honour and dignity in dublick affairs beyond expectation, even from low degree; others that have been for more factious, turbulent and unsetled i mind, do upon this direction become conformable, or more yedient to their Superiours.
In the year 1675.  there are very notable meetings of the Planets; ♂ by direct. to Nov. ✶. ☉ ad □ of the ☌. for Mars about the moneth of October comes to the New Star from his place at the great Conjunction, and Sol to a square of the said Conjunction it self; here are for a time very notable disturbances among the Kings and Princes of Europe, great debates and superlative counsels about ancient Rights and Privileges, much wrangling and discord among great and eminet persons. But these things continue not long,  for upon the first of January 1676. △ ♄ ♃ 5 ♉ ♑. current, these two Planets Saturn and Jupiter, come to their first Trine after their Oppositions in the 5 degr. of Taurus and Capricorn; both planets are weak, Jupiter in his fall; in their 2d. Trine June 4. in 21 deg. Mars is in the 25 deg. A second △. of Aries opposite to the M. C. but in Trine to the place of the Sun at the great Conjunction, and lately in Quartile to Jupiter, who is this second time retrograde; in November die 17. they make a third trine; Mars is in the 15 deg. of Can∣cer, A third △. applying to the Sextile of Saturn, but to the Opposition of Jupiter; the Sun is neer the degree of the great Conjunction, Venus in the 20 of Libra, the Cusp of the M. C. at the same, ap∣plying to the Quartile of Jupiter. These benevolent Aspects of the Superiours, Saturn and Ju∣piter would very much excite the minds of men in authority to peace and amity, to a full composure of the most grand diffe∣rences that are now, or lately have been, but some controver∣sies and difficulties do often intervene, so that the hopes of a Period of those Cumbustions and molestations that have lately been in several parts of Europe, do go on but very slow∣ly, and things are with no small difficulty performed. For besides those forementioned malevolent Aspects and Po∣sitions of Mars, I find also that in this year, and about the ☉ ad □ ♂. moneth of April, the Sun is directed to the Square of Mars in the Conjunction, which signifies some contentions and de∣bates among the most principal persons concerned in the af∣fairs of Kingdomes; a factious spirit will not suffer matters to be thorougly performed. But seeing that toward the latter end of the year the Moon comes by direction to the Trine of
the Sun in the great Conjunction, gives hopes that then (not∣withstanding the difficulties and cross transactions interve∣ning) matters will be brought to a better and more peaceable conclusion. A conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Taurus,  in Opposition to the place of Mercury, Conj ♄ & ♂ in ♉. threatens detriment to the Irish Nati∣on, by factious Confederacies, by notorious Robberies, Cheats, and such like, by destruction of Buildings by Fires, Combustions and Tumults, which will be most fiercely mani∣fested in the year 1677. and that is all the considerable confi∣gurations for our present purpose in general for the year 1677. But in the year 1678.  these two superiour Planets do make two Quartile Aspects, ♄ & ♃ n □, twice this year, he one in the beginning the other towards the latter end. the one Jan. 20. in three degr. of Gemi∣ni and Pisces, one in Square, the other in Opposition to the great Conjunction within 5 degrees. The other is a platick Quartile, about the beginning of Novemb. Jupiter then in the 23 deg of Pisces within half a degree of the Quartile; but then he becomes direct; and happily meets with a Trine of the Sun. There is also in this year, and in the moneth of July die 21. a notable conjunction of Saturn and Mars in the 22 degr. Conj. ♄ & ♂ in ♊ in ☌ to the new Star. of Gemini, viz. in opposition to the New Star, the Ascendent and place of the Sun at the great Conjunction, and not over much elongated from our present Conjunction, and the place of the Moon therein; hence I say, this may also be expected to be a year of very principal action. Here will be notable struggling and debates in many places about Religion, dis∣cords among great men, commotion in Spain, Hungaria; some uproars and disturbances about Religion in England, especial∣ly in London; which will also suffer much by Fires, Slaugh∣ters, Sicknesse, and such like evils; factious spirits do now en∣deavour to promote their ends and interest; and some of the superiour quality and degree do act and aim very highly; mat∣ters are carried on generally now with great majesty in many places, & with great severity; so that many people do manifest their dislike by murmuring and repining; many are about these times put out of their Offices and Employments; some eminent King and Queen of Europe falls out.
Towards the latter end of the year 1679.  viz. 26 Sept. Sa∣turn and Jupiter come again to a Sextile Aspect; Sat. and Jup. in Sextile. Saturn in 9. deg. of Cancer, Jupiter in the same degree of Taurus, Saturn in his detriment, Jupiter retrograde. And on the 20 of Jan. fol∣lowing a second ✶ of ♄ and ♃ they make a second extile in the same Signs, but in the third deg. thereof. In the first Sextile Mars is in the place of Mercury in the Conjunction. Lately in Trine to Saturn, but in opposition to Jupiter. The Sun near the M. C. of the great Conjunction and his own place in this of the year 1663. is lately in Square to Saturn, Mercury applying to his Square, were it not for the private Interests of some fraudulent per∣sons, who fearing lest they should now be called to an account, and the late domestick Controversies of some Grandees, that causes obstructions in the Affairs and Counsels of Nations; The Actions and Consultations of the years 1679. but of 1680.  especially, would wholly tend to peace and to reconciliations of differences, and indeed great will be the endeavours of the Superiour powers of Kingdoms and Countries to that pur∣pose, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, many having suffered in∣finite loss by those calamities that have preceded and would now gladly accept of a Period and Conclusion; Saturn in this year is directed into Capricorn his own house, it is a Cardinal point, the private Consultations of a subtile Generation is 5 and Jupiter directed into Capric. now more fully discovered, things tending to Amity and Peace, many do act more honestly and publickly than formerly: But the affairs of the World are of great and Su∣perlative concernment generally, a great settlement of Mat∣ters formerly in debate and doubt. A Conjunction of Saturn Conj. of Sat. and Mars in Cancer. and Mars in Cancer, this year in Quartile to the Sun in the Conjunction, he being in the seventh of Virgo in quartile to the great Conjunction and place of the Moon denotes some disturbances in the Northern parts, some Commotions in Scotland, Inundations in Holland; Notorious Robberies and Seditious Conspiracies in England, extraordinary Piracies at Sea. But although these things may begin to be manifest towards the latter end of the year 1680. yet more manifest in the year 1681.
In which year  there is little else of Concernment as to gene∣ral Affairs, Mars to the sextile of Sol. only the planet Mars by direction to the Sextile place of the Sun in our present Conjuncton shews the Heroick attempts, and the great Honour and Dignity of some Martia∣list about those times; especially in Italy, the Alpes, or some place under the Dominion of the sign Leo, who by his great Power, Policy, and Prudence doth mightily sway the Affairs of some European Princes to good purpose, or is mightily assi∣stant to their advantage in composing some differences which before they might suffer under, and could not be otherwise concluded among themselves.
The Conclusion. I Have now done this discourse, and in what is most observable therein, have faithfully (according to my ability) communicated to the world. As to those more particular accidents that might have been discovered, (though of less concernment) the times thereof must be known from the revolutions and other configurations that have any similitude to these more Eminent preceding causes; consideration be∣ing had whether those Concordances be from the Figure of Heaven, which do only shew the Accidents of particular places or persons, or among the Planets themselves, which indeed are more universal in their operations. I have omitted all the Conjunctions of the Inferiour planets, and indeed of the superiours where they have not some concomitancy with our present subject, as of little concernment therewith; And of all the Eclipses since the year 1672. because of the uncertainty thereof from Argoll's Ephemerides, and the great errors frequently committed in that particular; all which are left (for those years) to the more diligent inquiry of those judicious Artists; that in their Annual Prognostiques shall have occasion to make use thereof. There are some notable configurations as to the affairs of England, to be deduced from this Conjunction, which are purposely omitted, as having no sufficient warrant to meddle withall, which with some other reasons may be sufficient excuse for my publick Omission; yet that I may not be thought too negligent, know that the years 1666. towards the latter end, and 1667, 68, 72, 74, and 75. do produce very notable Transactions as to the affairs of the Kingdom, but in what nature I forbear; I say those years do most effectually shew the Conjunctional Influences amongst us, seeing that generally it intends more the affairs of other Nations, especially Spain, Italy, France, and Hungary onely: As to what may be Physically observed, I have in several places hinted, and have great cause to fear, do therefore once again premonish you of a great Plague in the year 1665. and pray God divert it.
It is possible there may be some accidents happen that I have not mentioned, which some more curious inquiry may afterwards dis∣cover, or perhaps by my own further experience, I may afterwards come to the knowledge of; For according to that of Manilius, lib. 1. Per varios casus, Artem experientia facit, &c. And by the 77 of Rig. Res multae sunt quae non videntur ratione naturali esse, effectus quidem, per formas superiorum corporum considerare possumus, habereque eas, si in tempore proprio Investigatae quaesitaeque sint. However let not any carp at me, till they are cer∣tain they have or can correct me, Humanum est errare; It is the property of humane nature to err, and nemo vivit sine crimine, no man liveth without committing faults. We are now arrived to the year 1682. in which happens another Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, October the 20. in the 20 de∣gree of that Regal sign Leo; There being in the preceding moneth of Septem. first a Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, and then of Saturn and Mars in the same sign; And (which is very notable, because un∣usual) these two superior Planets do make two more Conjunctions in the same sign, the one on the 20. of Jan. following in the 18. degree of Leo; the other the 16 of May in the 16 of the same. But what the portents of those may be, must be the subject of some other dis∣course and time; This is all that is necessary at present. Gloria Deo omnibus. Finitur Die veneris Feb. 5. 1663/4. Ad captum lectoris, habent sua fata libelli. FINIS.
