E3335 13037568 96840
THE EARLE OF ESSEX His SPEECH in the Artilrie garden to the Souldiers on Tuesday Last. WITH HIS MAJESTIES Propositions to the CITIZENS OF LONDON, LIKEVVISE TERRIBLE AND BLOVDY NEWS FROM YORKE Concerning the great affront, which was given to the said City, by the Cavileers, and how the Citizens gave them a repulse and shut up the gates.Whereunto is annexed, Londons Resolution for the defence of the King and Parliament. Ioh. Bro. Cler. Par. Hen: Els. Parl. D. Com. July. 28. Printed for Thomas Baley. 1642.
His Maiesties PROPOSITIONS TO THE Citizens of London. Wherin he declares his Royall intentions concerning the said City. BY wofull experience we have knowne and found, the rebellions insurections & wick∣ed pollicies and stra∣tagens of these most hellish Papists, and malignant party are grown to such a head that it is feared, with∣out the great mercy of God, we are like to in∣dure the hardest Censure, and bloudy devises: they possiblely can inflict upon this our King∣dom; For these Counties viz. YORKSHIRE, LINCOLNSHIRE, LANCASHIRE, are so greviouslie perplexed, with the feare of a Civill Warr, which still these Cavileers with oaths and threats, do daily insist to the fears of all good Christians; they are now growne to so in∣solent and turbulent spirits, being countenan∣ced
with the smiles of many Peers, of this King∣dome, and they are growne to such a higth that they began to vse such lacivious actions that the inhabitants of these parts, are growne to a most miserable thinking daly and hourely when these men will cease upon their goods, and they began since His Majestie went into Lncolne, and Be∣verly, to vse many outrages against the City. Wherevpon the Citizens of Yorke foreseing the danger that would ensue, caused the gates to be shut up, they having a long time groaned un∣der the dominering of the Cavileers. The truth whereof was reported to the Ho∣nourable House of Commons, on Saturday last the sixteenth of Iuly, both Houses taking into consideration the Militia, of the Kingdome pro¦pounded and Ordered, that it is against the Lawes, and liberties of the Kingdoms, that any of the Subiects thereof should be compelled by the King, to attend him at his pleasure but saith as is bound therto, And the Lords and Commons, in Parlia∣ment doe declare. That it is both against the Lawes of the Land and the libertie of the Subiect, for any Messen∣ger or Officer, to cease upon any His Maiesties Subjects. And likewise declare that it s against the Publique Peace of the Kingdome, and that the same be forthwith Printed and Published, and Assigned vnder the Clarks hand- His Royall Majesty likewise declareth that
neither the testimony of, so many of our Lords now with vs can credit, with divers men that they proceed to Levie Men, and Money, and raise Horse. Therefore Wee are not to be misliked if after so many gratious expositious vpon consi∣derable purposes and reasons, which they answer by Ordering that wee answer to be Reason and so appear to leavie Warr against Us. And there∣fore Wee make such Provision, that as we have beene forst from London, and kept from HVL Wee may not be surprized at YORKE, but in a condition to bring Iustice on these men, who would perswade Our People that their Religi∣on is in danger, because wee will not consent, it shall be in their power, and that their Votes and liberties are in danger, because Wee will allow no Iudge of that liberty, but the knowne pow∣er of the land. Yet whatsoeuer prouison, wee shall be compel∣led to make for our securitie, Wee shall be ready, to lay down▪ so soone as they shall have revoked their Orders which they have made, and submit those persons, who have detained Our townes carried away our Armes, and put the Militia in Execution contrary to our Proclamation, to that triall of innocencie, and to which they were borne.
and if this be not submitted Wee shall with as good a Conscience, and wee beleeve Wee shall not want, the good affections of our Subiects to that end, proceed against those who shall pre∣pare to exercise that pretended Ordnance of the Militia, and Sr. Iohn Hotham who keeps Our Towne of HUL from Us, as Wee would re∣sist persons that come in a farre greater way; And therefore Wee shall repose and require our City of London to obey our Commands, and not to be misled by those men who are led desperat by their fortunes who tell them that their Re∣ligion, liberty, and propertie, is to be preserved by no other way but by their disloyalty. Therefore wee propound unto them that they are now at the brincke of the Riuer, and may draw their swords when nothing pursues them but their owne evill Consiences. His Royall Majesty likewise declareth that the worth and glo¦ry of the City is not like to be destroied any other way but by rebelling against Us, or their wives and Children to be exposed to uiolence and villanie, but by those who make their appitite and will, their measurs and guid to all their Actions. And his Royall and Sacred Majesty doth lik∣wise againe propound and declare that he is re∣solued to proseed against all those persons that shall assist by furnishing of Horse, Men, and Plate as against the disturbers of the publike Peace of the whole Kingdome in generall protest∣ing
that for his one parte his intenciones are Royall as alredey hath be published and de∣clared to all the world.
