E3426 12680262 65631
A COPIE OF A LETTER FROM SIR MAURICE EUSTACE Out of Jreland, and to a worthy Gentleman, a member of the House of Commons, concerning divers passages in the Parliament there. ALSO, Another Letter from Mr Bacon Drum-major, to Collonel Gibson of many desperate and resolute exploits of English Souldiers, worthy all mens knowledge. July 13. 1641. LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Edw. Husbands and Iohn Frank. 1642.
A Copie of a Letter from Sir Maurice Eustace out of Ireland, to a worthy Gentleman a member of the house of Com∣mons, concerning divers passages in the Parliament there, &c. SIR, your last dispatch of the sixth of this Moneth, came to my hands in the absence of Master Arthur Jones, who was gone with the Army to Connagh But I di∣spatched it after him. Vpon Tuesday last both houses of Par∣liament here did meet, And that day wee expelled out of our house by one order, as many of our house as were endicted of Treason or knowne in actuall rebellion, which upon search were found to be 46. and so many were cutt of from us by one blow as vnprofitable and canckerd members. The next day being Wednesday wee passed an ordinance in our house that none should be of the house this Par∣liament or in future Parliaments, but such as should take the oath of supremacy and the same day as many as were, in the house tooke the oath which, will make a greater slaughter whensoever wee meet, then the former did; And this day being Thursday, both Houses have agreed upon a Petition, to have all the
penall Lawes of force in England against Recusants, to be enacted here with some severe Lawes to bee ad∣ded unto them; And what the consequence of this wil be, you may Imagine, I am sure if the effect thereof be granted, it will either make both Nations one or it will be an everlasting wall of seperation betweene them; God direct all for the best. This is all that I have for the present to acquaint you with, I am your most assured friend Mau. Eustace. 24. Iune 1642 DEare friend, since my last Letter, I have bin from Dublin this two months at a Towne called Trim, which sir Charles Coore took in and the day before we came up to this town of Trim, the rebels with three thousand foote came to take it in, Sir Charles Coore having not above foure hundred foot and horse; then Sir Charles fell out of the Towne, killed many of the Rebels, and forced the rest to flight. Wee lie one halfe of our Regiment in Trim▪ in Garrison, with three Co∣lours more of my Lord Generals Regiment, a troope of Horse of the Governours Sir Richard Greenfields, a Troope of Dragooners, under the command of Cap∣taine ite; this Towne is twentie miles from Dublin. Since we came to Trim one Wisely of the Dighon yeel∣ded his Castle up to us, standing to the Kings mercie where hee and all that were in it had free quarter for their lives but turnd all to shift for themselves not having any thing more then the Cloathes to their backs: since that Wisely was found faultie against the
State and banished our Town of Trim, turnd out of the ports, he one way, and his wife my Lady Foard another with their children, there we left, in the Castle of the Dinghon, a▪ Garrison which two miles from Trim. On the 12. of Iune there was commanded men out of every Company in the Towne that went out vnder▪ the Com∣mand of Captaine George Vaine who Commanded the foote, the horse vnder the Command of▪ sir Richard Grinfield our governour of Trim we went to hem them in till our Ordnance came to us, this Castle was called Linches of the knock, a maine strong Castle well provi∣ded. We besieged this Castle foure dayes, where we have lost, and have had shot Dyvers men where the rebells scornd any quarter for they would neither give quarter nor take quarter, Calling vs English dogs, and English rogues, and pillaging rogues, and Parliament rogues, & told us they fought for the King, and we fought against the King. Upon the 13. day of Iune came our Ordnance from Dublin, they that came to us were but Field-pieces, they were not for battery; we made many shot with them, but they jeared us then worse then before; We made many approaches upon it, thinking to have spring some part of the well by un∣dermining it, but they heaved such great stones down upon us, killed some of our men, and hurt others, that we could doe no good that way for their stones and scalding water, then a Gunner making shot at a win∣dow, forced the frame of the window into the house; Then our men, my Lord Generals, and part of my Lord Jones, that lay a mile from us, being com∣manded as well as we, under the command of Collo∣nel Monke, and Lievtenant Collonel Kirke fell on to
this breach, making a Skaffold up to the window, where the Rebels and our men were at push of Pike▪ a long time Lievtenant: Collonel Kirke was shot in the backe, who lyeth very sore hurt; And Collonel Monke shot quite thorow the Hat, and mist his head, thankes be given to God Captaine Vaine, and Lievte∣nant Konnocke entred the Castle with divers Souldiers where he was quickly forced to come out againe (for the rogues had set the Castle on fire) else they had beene choaked with the smoake, the rogues got to the top of it into the foure corners of this stone castle; ma∣ny of them were burnt; the next morning all that were alive cryed for quarter, which was some seven∣score persons, men, women & children, most of the wo∣men and children had quarter, but the men came out of the Castle gave up their arms; We stripped 60. of these rogues, and then killed them, leaving them unburied, and buried our owne men; they were commanded by one Lievtenant Plunket, Collonell Plunkets Captaine, Lievtenant of the Rebels, which is within seven miles of us at the Castle of Longwood: my Lord of Tremble∣stone one of the Rebels lying in Tremblestone Castle, within a mile from Trim, hearing wee had taken this Castle, run away, and left his Castle for feare. There we have another Garrison in that, and the Rebels a mile from that, run away that night, and fired the Castle of Kilbride, for feare of our Army, which is gone out for 14. dayes march into the Countrie. The 23. of Iune there went a party out of Trim to range the woods, where wee found divers of the re∣bells but they run away, there wee tooke a hundred
good head of beasts, besides horses and sheep, the same night 50. musquetiers fell out of Trimblestone Castle a mile from their garison and tooke 100. and 50. head of Cattell from the rebells the enemie pursued us, but could doe no good for wee brought them to the gar∣rison I pray when you wright direct your Letters in Collonell Gibsons name for him, who is at this time his Drum-Major and yours to command Iohn Bacon From Trim this 29. of Iune FINIS.
