e3418a r31453 11987760 51965
Europes Transactions, DISCOVERED IN A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Democritus an English-man, Ernestus a German, and Landerlu a French Monsieur. Lisenced According to Order. Democ. TIS high time for me to put on my considering Cap, and leave Laughing, for these are sad times, all Europe being as it were in a Flame, Ernestus. Or rather in a dangerous Sickness, and (as the late King James said of England) In∣fected; but the Country (God be thanked) has had a Royal Antidote since: But of all Germany, more than any Country, labouring under a French Disease, now and then hot burning Fits, French Plotches, even disfiguring the finest Fea∣tures (Cities and Castles, &c.) of all Europe. First Heydleberg, which being the Seat and Ca∣stle of the Electors of Palatine; where was a stately Seat, a famous University, and a stately Library: Manheim, the newest and regularest Place for Building (with the fine Castle Frede∣riksbourgh) in Germany; Keyserlauther, and now Spire, a large ancient City, as is also Worms, (though both Roman Catholick Places) and Op∣penheim. The poor People of Worms shelter'd themselves in Caves under the Earth, but the French Furioso drave them out with Cudgels, to others they sunk the Ground, and so buried some under Ground alive; and now we hear they have new Orders to Burn 18 Villages more thereabouts. At Spiers they perswaded the People to bring their best Goods into the great Cathedral Church (under pretence that they had orders not to burn it) which when they had so done, they Stole and Plunder'd all; then Burnt the Cathedral, City, and all to the Ground, as also the Bishops Palace. The Bi∣shop, Canons and Prebends of the said Cathe∣dral a Foot, they drove before a Troop of Horse as Prisoners of War to Landaw; though the Bi∣shop was esteemed a Man of singular Piety, Age, and Noble Family; but the Bishop of Worms had a worse Fate than all that, for he hoping to preserve his Cathedral, went to say high Mass at the Altar, exposing the Eucharist, thinking that the French would not prophane or commit Sacriledge: but after the Soldiers had severely cudgel'd him (though a Man of 80 Years of Age) they cast him and his Breaden God upon a Cart, and carried him Prisoner to Landaw, to his Brother Collegue. And now very lately they came to a place called Losheim, in which place they had been drinking the day before, Plundered and Murthered all Men, Women and Children, and those in the very Cradle, Burning the Town to the Ground. At Francfort they brought in three Incendiaries, which were sent out by the French to burn the Imperial Camp. And in Upper Hungary, as Ternaw, they caught three of them which had set the Town a Fire (being sent out by Teckley, who doth no great matter since his Wounds at Clodova, or No∣vigrad) but they gave them their due reward, cutting of each a Finger at 10 distant places in the Town, afterwards cast them in those Flames alive, which they had kindled. Landerlu. Po! Po! that is nothain, the King de Fronce doth act by Maxime of State, he is a grand Monarch, and being in League with Teck∣ley must send him some of his Stoakers, as well as he has done Money and Officers; he so do thing, alla Merveille, that Hermanstad and Croonstad (be∣ing the two chiefest Cities) and Onoth in Transyl∣vania are burnt to the Ground, and no Body knows who has done it.
Democritus. Certainly, if ever there was a Tophet prepared for a King, Louis XIV. will have a great place there; and as the Woman said of her Husbnd, of his Loving Fire, so God grant him (that which he Loves) enough of it; but I hope the Duke of Lorrain and Bavaria, &c. will stop his Procedings, the former is passed the Rhine with 7 Regiments, above Coblents, and they are followed by a great many more: 3000 Men from Juliers, are on their March to Join them, and a the Confederate Forces in the Ele∣ctorate of Cllogn, re the same way in a Moti∣on, so that it is believed, they will Besiege Hon and Mont Royal, both at once, which will give him imploy another way. Landerlu. You are mistaken, we have News that the King de France has demanded 140000 Crowns of the Burgers and Citizens of Mentz; and that 100 Waggons are coming to fetch▪ all the best Rhenish Wines away, and the great Ca∣non is already removing; and after the Burgers have given all they can by way of Contribution, the King de France will shew them his pretty French trick, to plunder their Houses, and burn the City to the Ground. Ernestus. It is certainly confirmed, that there is such a horrible Order come out of France. That as soon as the Germans are passed the Rhine, to burn Ments; tho the Electoral Seat; and the City Landaw, and all other Cities, Town, and Villa∣ges to Strasborg: Nay, some doubt if Strasborg it self will not be so served, if the Popes Nunclo can ingage the Romis C. Cantons to cast off the Neutrality, for the Governors (Monsieur Cha∣millys) Wife is removing already her best Goods, and Houshold Furnitures. Landerlu. The King de France is of that Fine∣ness and Policy, that he has already blinded them of Success, especially those of Solithurn, and Sweits Cantons, that they have given Permission to raise 4000 Men, so that the French Pistol do out do the Canon of the Vatican and that shining ettal is more effications to those Roman Suissers, than the Holy Fathers Admonition or Benedi∣ction. Democritus. It is pity to see so many fine Ci∣ties and Towns laid in Ashes, so that there is not so much as a token of any Building left in lan∣ders, they threaten to burn the Subburbs of Brus∣sels; but the Governor has a watchful Eye upon them, and has made a Declaration to all Gover∣nors, Majors, and other Magistrates, to give their Aid and Assistance to all French Disserters, pro∣mising 2 Ducatons to every Trooper, and a Market Price for each Horse, and to every Foot, or Dismounted Dragoon half a Ducaton, exhor∣ting all Subjects belonging to the Empire, to leave the French Service, according to the Imperial Advocatoria, wherein they are declared Traitors that shall continue of that Service. We hear they Desrt in great Numbers, 20 and 30 at a Time, there being an Officer from King William, who in a short time Listed 300 Men, most Swis∣sers and Germans, giving them 8 d. a Day. We hear from Flanders, that a Party of Lieutenant General Calvo's Horse, came to a place, called Cocheim, near Gaunt, were they committed se∣veral Out-rages, amongst others, they entered into a Carpenters House, where there was a poor Old and Lame Chirurgion, called Robert Smett, whom they bid to abjure his Allegiance from the King of Spain, under whom he had served 12 Years, and swear for Lowis XIV. which he de∣nying▪ said, he was but for one God, and one King, upon which, they laid him before a great Fire naked, roasting him, and he still remaining constant, turn'd him, and so made a perfect Lawrence of him, he dying in less than half an Hour after. They Write from Flanders, that the Dutch and English, had sunk 7 Vessels, with Stones and Gravel, before the Haven of Dunkirk, which hinders them from going out or in. London: Printed for W. B. 1689.
