E3563 R30445 11322590 47449
An Exact ACCOUNT OF Major General Kirkes Safe Arrival and Relieving of London-Derry. With all the Particulars Relating to this Glorious ACTION. Licensed, August 1689. Inch-Island in Lough-Swilly, July 26. 1689. SIR, THERE is jut now come an Account from Ballyshannon, That the Forces of Enniskilling being on their way to Bally∣shannon, to joyn the rest of the Protestants there, in Order to March to the Relief of Derry, was vigorously attaqued (by the Duke of Berwick and 5000 Horse and Foot, who on purpose was drawn there with his choice Men to Oppose their intended Conjunction with the Men of Ballyshannon) was received with that Bravery and Re∣solution, maintaining a very Regular and Bloody Fight for some hours, until their Powder being spent, they fell in upon the Irish Army with the Butt-end of their Muskets; who, not being able to withstand their Extraordinary Courage, were totally routed, having taken divers Pri∣soners, and all their Baggage and Carriages, remaining sole Masters of the Field: We have great Reason to believe there were divers Officers of Note killed, the Souldiers having stript the slain, found two hun∣dred Scarlet lac'd Coats; so that having defeated this Considerable Party, they are now in a Capacity to march and joyn the Forces at Lough-Swilly, for there lies nothing now betwixt them and the rest of the Protestant Army, so that we do not Question, but our next from thence will give us an Account of their Relieving of Derry. I am Yours, &c.
London, August 5. 1689. YEsterday Morning Mr. Bales the Messenger, formerly sent Express to Major-General Kirk, return'd, and brings Advice, That the Defeat of the Duke of Berwick, and Coll. Sarsfield afore∣mentioned, being brought to the Camp before Derry, put them in a mighty Disorder and Confusion, which was not only aggravated by the nearness of Relief with the Major-General, and his daily Expectations of Reinforcements from England; but more imminently from their ap∣prehensions of Coll. Gustavus Hamilton, and the Enniskilling Mens pro∣secuting their Victory, and marching direct against them, for Relief of London-Derry; and either to attacque the Rear of their Camp, or march more compass Northerly, and joyn the Major-General, who was now gone with all his Forces and Ships out of the Lough of Derry, and joined Coll. Steward, and the Protestants that were come to him in Lough Swilley on the Isle of Inch. On which Considerations they called a Councel of War, and for preventing the Mischiefs feared, resolved, there being no Enemy in Derry Lough, to command off all the Guns and Forces that lay on each side that River, and make a united Strength on the other side of Derry, ready to oppose the Danger that threatened them; which they did ac∣cordingly: Of all which the Major-General having Advice, and daily expecting the Forces from Enniskilling, and more from England, and Derry in distress for Provisions, made use of the opportunity, and the Wind favouring, with such Ships, Ammunition, and Provisions as he thought necessary, in the Night return'd back into Derry Lough, and forcing the Booms that lay across the River, without the loss of one Man, having no opposition bur from Kilmore Castle, and from thence but Two Guns, came up to the City Walls, and put in a plentiful Re∣lief of Ammunition and Provisions, which was joyfully received, and a Message return'd from the Garrison, That they knew not what Or∣ders the Major-General might have, but as to Men they wanted none, but could spare him five or six thousand; to assist him in prosecuting His Majesties Interest, and the Defence of the Country; withal, desiring him not to Land any Men, for that it might occasion some Divisions a∣mongst them, they now knowing one another extream well, and in an extraordinary Unity and Obedience to their present Commanders, reciprocally resolving to live and die with one another in his Majesties Service, and in Defence of the Place; and as they had entirely suffered together, desired they might rejoyce together, not doubting but God by their hands would accomplish their Deliverance. FINIS. London: rinte for J. Wilson, at Charing-Cross. 1689.
