e3567 r10298 13289937 98830
An Exact ACCOUNT OF THE Duke of Schombergs Happy Voyage from Highlake, to his Safe Arrival at Carrick-Fergus. With the Particulars of the Engagement with Three French Men of War in that Bay. Licensed, August 21. 1689. THE News of General Schomberg's safe Arrival in Ireland, being a thing of such Publick Concern and Joy, it is thought a piece of Service to the Publick, to give a faithful Narrative of his Happy Voyage from Highlake to Ireland, and the Circumstances that attended the same; which are as followeth: His Excellency having here prepar'd all things for this Expedition, and Shipped his Men on Board, sent away the Artillery-Ships, with some Draught-Horses before, to the Isle of Man, intending to Rendevouz there. He himself Embarqued on the 11th Instant, and as soon as he came on Board, he called all the chief Officers together, and held a Coun∣cil about the fittest place of his Landing; which being resolved on, and on Munday Morning, the 12th instant, the Wind blowing fair, at N. E. by Twelve a Clock they weighed Anchor, and stood out to Sea: The Weather was very fair; so that towards Night it was concerted, whether they should go to their Rendevouz at the Isle of Man; but con∣sidering afterwards the uncertainty of meeting with so fair an opportu∣nity; and being also loath to delay any longer the Succouring that di∣stressed Country, it was resolved to continue their Course directly, and afterwards to send for their Artillery-Ships. The Wind continued still so fair, as that on Tuesday Morning they spied the Coast of Ireland, and about Ten they came up to the Islands of Laune and Copland, two little Islands at the Mouth of Carrick-Fergus Bay. Here they lay by for two Hours, till their Spy Boats brought them word, That they saw Three French Men of War in the Bay: Upon which Intelligence our Men of War immediately prepar'd to attack them, and leaving their Convoy, went up to meet them; which they did, near the Castle of Carrick-Fergus, and there engaged them so warmly, as that in Four Hours time they overcame them, taking Two, and sinking the Third; as also some little Boats which tended on them. These were those Ships which took the Two Scotch Frigats, who defended them∣selves so bravely. While this Action lasted, the Irish were so allarum'd
at the sight of such a Fleet, as that they immediately set Fire to the Town, and blow'd up part of the Castle: But the General so timely prevented the fury of the Flames, by some Boats full of Men which he landed, as that part of the Town was preserved: Also, at the same time he sent up several Boats arm'd to Belfast, (which lies at the bottom of the Bay) and thereby secured that place from their Fury: For at their approach the Irish quitted the place, and fled in great confusion and dis∣order into the Country. However at Night they perceived several Fires in all parts of the Country, which whether they were Beacons to give Notice of the Landing, or Houses and Towns on Fire, was not then known. The General himself landed at Carrick Fergus, which is a large Town, Seven Miles from Belfast; they are both in the County of Antrim: The latter is Sixty Miles from London-Derry, and the like distance from Enniskilling, lying in a Triangular Figure, which does take in all the North, and secure that Province from the Irish. So that when the Forces are joined, 'tis supposed they will march directly to Dublin, which is about Seventy Miles from the place of Landing. We shall now every day expect to here of Action; unless the natural Bashfulness of the Irish before the Face of an Enemy, prevent us, longer than we could wish. On Munday there Sailed out of Chester, an Hundred Sail of Ships, laded with Men, and Ammunition, who intend to joyn the General. I have here enclosed a List of those Regiments that went with him; and also of those which were to follow him; the rest will Sail this Week. A LIST of the Regiments that Embarqued with Duke Schomberg Being all Foot. Earl of Kingston's. English. Earl of Droghedah's. English. Lord Lisburne's. English. Sir Hen. Ingoldsby's. English. Sir Thomas Earl's. English. Coll. Beamont's. English. Coll. Wharton's. English. Coll. Herbert's. English. Coll. Calimose's French. Coll. De la Meloniere's French. Coll. Du Cambon's French. 2 Companies of Cadets. French. Coll. Carolston's. Dutch. A Battalion of the Guards. Dutch. A LIST of the Regiments for the Second Reinforcement; most of which Sail'd last Munday. HORSE. Lord Delameer's. Lord Hewit's. Lord Cavendish's. Coll. Villiers's. Coll. Coy's. French Regiment. FOOT. Duke of Norfolk's. Duke of Bolton's. Earl of Meath's. Earl of Roscommon's. Lord Lovelace's. Sir Edward Deering's. Sir George St. George's. Sir Thomas Gower's. Coll. Hamilton's. FINIS. London, Printed for R. Brown. MDCLXXXIX.
