F2212 08958999 42096
A TRUE COPY OF THE PAPERS Delivered by Sir John Friend, and Sir William Parkyns, TO THE Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, at Tyburn, the Place of Execution, April the 3d. 1696. Published by Authority. Sir JOHN FRIEND's Paper. KNowing that I must immediately give Account to God of all my Actions, and that I ought to be especially careful of what I say in these Last Hours, I do solemnly profess, That what I here deliver is from my very Soul, with all the Heartiness and Sincerity of a Dying Christian. The Cause I am brought hither to suffer for▪ I do firmly believe to be the Cause of God and true Religion, and to the best and utmost of my Knowledge and Informa∣tion, agreeable to the Laws of the Land, which I have evermore heard do require a firm Duty and Allegiance to our Sovereign; and that as no Foreign, so neither any Domestick Power can alienate our Allegiance. For it is altogether new and un∣intelligible to me, that the King's Subjects can depose and dethrone him on any ac∣count, or constitute any that have not an immediate Right in his place. We ought, I think, not to do this; and surely when it is done, to assist him in the Recovery of his Right, is justifiable, and our Duty. And however things may seem at present, I do believe, I am sure I heartily pray, That he shall be one day Restored to his Right∣ful Throne and Dominions. As for any sudden Descent of his Majesty upon these his Dominions, in order to the Recovery of them, I declare I had no certain knowledge of it, nor can I tell what grounds there was to believe it, so little reason had I to be in a present Prepara∣tion for it. I suppose it is not expected I should here endeavour to clear my self of the Assassination▪ which was not the Thing alledg'd against me; however, it was mentioned, through what means I know not: As it was insinuated to my disadvan∣tage, I forgive such as were therein instrumental: And I do also from the very bot∣tom of my Soul, freely forgive, and beg of God to do so too, such as were any ways accessary towards the taking away my Life, which I really look upon to be their Misfortune more than mine. I profess my self, and I thank God I am so, a Member of the Church of En∣gland, though, God knows, a most unworthy and unprofitable part of it; of that Church which suffers so much at present for a strict adherence to Loyalty, the Laws, and Christian Principles. For this I Suffer, and for this I Die. Though I have a perfect Charity for People of all Professions, and do heartily wish well and would endeavour so to do to all my Fellow Subjects, of what Persuasions soever. And indeed, I have met with a great deal of Uprightness and Sincerity among ome People of very different Opinions in Religious Matters. And I hope and desire it may not be taken as an uncharitable Censure, or undue Reflection, that I objected to the Legality of Popish Evidence, being advised so to do for my better Security, upon the Foundation of a Statute-Law. Having own'd my self a Member of the Church of England, I must take this Opportunity, and I do it for God's Glory, to apply my self to you that are Roya∣lists of that Church, and of the same Faith and Principles with my self: And I
beg of you for God's sake, and the love of your Souls, to be very constant and serious in all Religious Offices, and holy Duties of Divine Worship and Service, which I have too much neglected, as I own to my great Sorrow: Let no Excuse, no Dan∣ger, prevent or hinder you in these most necessary and serious Matters; and be, I beseech you, very careful and circumspect in all your Actions, Behaviour, and Conversation, as I earnestly exhorted all that came to me. I have, I thank God, a great deal of Satisfaction in my present Sufferings, and have found it so ever since I have been under them: And blessed be God▪ it doth con∣tinually increase upon me. And I do now lay down my Life with all Chearfulness and Resignation, in sure and certain Hope of a Resurrection to Eternal Life, through our Lord Jesus Christ; through whose Merits alone I hope for the Pardon of my Sins, and the Salvation of my Soul. And so, O Lord, into thy Hand I commend my Spirit, for thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of Truth. And I do heartily and humbly beseech Thee Almighty God, and my most Gracious Father, to forgive and bless this Sinful Nation; Deliver it from the Guilt of Rebellion, Blood, and Perjury, that is now on all sides more than ever, and from all those other  Sins which cry aloud. Preserve and Bless this Church. Comfort our Distressed King; Restore him to his Right, and his Misled Subjects to their Allegiance: Bless also his Royal Consort, Our Gracious Queen Mary; his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, That he may grow in Stature, and in Favour with God and Man; Support and strengthen all those that suffer in any kind for a good Cause; give them Patience under all their As, and a happy Deliverance out of them. Forgive all my Enemies Pardon my former neglect, and remissness in Religious Worship, and holy Duties, and all the Sins I have been guilty of to this very Moment. Consider my Con, Accept my Tears; And now thou art pleased to take me hence, take me into thy Favour, and grant that my Soul may be without Spot presented unto Thee, through the Merits of thy most dearly Beloved Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. John Friend Sir WILLIAM PARKYNS's Paper. IT hath not been my custom to use many words, and I shall not be long upon this Occasion, having Business of much greater Consequence to imploy my thoughts upon. I thank God I am now in a full disposition to Charity, and therefore i all make no Complaints, either of the Hardship of my Trial, or any other Rigours put upon me. However one circumstance I think my self oblig'd to mention; it was sworn against me by Mr. Porter, That I had own'd to him▪ that I had seen and read a Commission from the King, to Levy War upon the Person of the Prince of Orange: Now I must declare, that the Tenour of the King's Commission, which I saw, was general, and directed to all his Loving Subjects, to Raise and Levy War against the Prince of Orange and his Adherents, and to Seize all Forts, Castles, &c. which I suppose, may be a customary Form of giving Authority to make War; but I must confess▪ I am not much acquainted with Matters of that Nature: but as for any Commission particularly levelled against the Person of the Prince of Orange, I neither saw nor heard of any such. It's true I was privy to the Design upon the Prince, but was not to act in it; and am fully satisfied that very few, or none, knew of it, but those who undertook to do it. I freely acknowledge, and think it for my Honour to say▪ that I was entirely in the Interest of the King, being always firmly perswaded of the Justice of his Cause, and looked upon it my Duty, both as a Subject, and an Englishman, to assist him in the Recovery of his Throne, which I believed him to be Depriv'd of coy to all Right and Justice; taking the Laws and Constitution of my Country for my Guide. As for my Religion, I die in the Communion of the Church of England, in which I was Educated. And as I freely forgive all the World, so whoever I may any ways have Injur'd I heartily ask them Pardon. April 3. 1696. William Parkyns. LONDON, Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-street. 1696.
