F2304 13744988 101697
A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the GREAT BATTEL Fought betwixt the Turks, Hungarian Rebels, and Polish Army, Before the City of Presburg. WITH The Glorious VICTORY obtained by the Polish Army, under the Conduct of Prince Lubomierski, sent from his Camp. With Two Latin Letters, One from the Empe∣ror, the other from the Duke of Lorrain to the King of Poland, and Communicated to the Polish Envoy in London. Translated from the Original. London, Printed for Edw. Brewster at the Crane in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1683.
A True and Exact ACCOUNT OF THE DEFEAT OF THE TƲRKS and HƲNGARIANS BY THE POLISH ARMY, Under the Command of Prince LƲBOMIERSKI, now in conjunction with the Duke of Lorrain. Written out of the very Camp. NOtice was given to the Duke of Lorrain, Generalissimo of the Imperial Forces, That Count Tekely was drawing with his Army under Presburgh, to joyn the Ottoman Troops, and that he had Commanded the City, which had surrendred it self to him, That they should under the loss of their Goods, repair with all expedition to the Bote-Bridg,
perhaps to the end he might have Correspondency with the Turkish Army under Vienna. Since therefore it was altogether necessary to prevent this their Communication, the Duke of Lorrain moved with his whole Army he had, about the Bridges of Vienna; But having scarcely been gone Two Miles, notice was given to him, as if Count Tekeley was with his Armies passing the River Mark; for which reason the Army, whereof the Polanders held the right Wing, proceeded in Battalia to the very River, where they also had their Nights quarters. The Hungarian fore-Troops were burning the Villages at the other side of the River, and in several places appeared in some small Bo∣dies. The next day about Noon, the Army drew up towards Presburg, and passed the River; the German Horses passing above half a Mile higher; but the Polish Army partly swam over with their Horses; and partly, waded the River. Thus the River being pas∣sed, Three hundred of Hungarian Horse-men, under the Command of Colonel Pelinatssy, came forth out of the Wood; against whom Prince Lubomierski Commanded a Hundred Horse of Polish Knights, which were seconded by Two Companies; one whereof was of Sieur Mroczek, and t'other of Sieur Kroyets; and they having met the Hungarians, made them quit the Field, pursuing them a whole Mile, till Night overtook them. So that it being impossible upon that Day to reach Presburg, the Army staid all Night about a Mile from the City, in that same posture as it had Marched in before. That same Night Prince de Croy, with his Regiment of Dragoons, went towards Presburg, for the Recognizance of the passages, and of the posture the City was then in, where he was acquainted, there was 3000 Hungarians left for its safe guard. Next Morning the City would not open the Gates to Prince de Croy, when in the interim the whole Army drew nearer before Presburg; under which, from t'other side, at the distance of about a good Ordnance-shot, the Turkish and Hungarian Armies were standing at their fore-Troops, somewhat further drawn out in∣to the Field. Hereafter a Councel of War was call'd; whereof these senti∣ments were the chiefest: That since the City had shut up their Gates, and the Enemies Armies stood ready, neither had they any information about the number of the Enemy, they having convey∣ed some hundreds of Men into the Castle, which was kept by the Imperial Garison, and having cut off the Bridg, should betake themselves to the above-mentioned River. But Prince Lubomierski
and Prince Lewis of Baden judg'd otherwise, That, viz. since the Army had drawn before the City, and was seen by the Enemy, it was not expedient to deny them a Battel; otherwise, 'twould be to make the Enemy more stubborn and resolute, to make him think we fear'd him, to give him an occasion of Pursuing us closely, since we would not do it to him; to lose the City, to dishearten the Castle-Garison, to afford them Liberty for the Rebuilding of the passage over the Danube; and by this means, to grant them a Cor∣respondency and mutual Intelligence with the Armies under Vienna. So that the last Reasons bearing sway, Two Regiments were left about the City-Walls, and the whole Army set in Battalia, upon a Plain under the City. Prince Lubomirski did take the Right-Wing, and from about the half of the Field, drew out his Polish Squadron to the very Banks of the River Danube; whereto was added a Re∣giment of Dragoons, under the Command of General Schultz. But the Left-Wing, and the Main Body, was managed by the German Forces, which did Possess themselves of the rest of the Field, to the Very Mountains. The Hungarians with a Troop fell out to Skir∣mish, and Advanced very near under us; against whom, Prince Lu∣bomirski, sent his Advance-Guards, to the end they should free the Camp from the Skirmishers, themselves keeping close together. Af∣terwards when the Army was ready to give Battel, Trumpets, Ket∣tle Drums, Shalms, sounding, the Squadron was rearing towards the Enemies Forces, which presently begun to Skirmish; the Skirmishers did not proceed so furiously, till at length, within the space of some Minutes, they begun to retire: Prince Lubomirski seeing this, desired the Duke of Lorrain to grant him leave for the sending out of some Fore Troops, and Seconding of the same with some Com∣panies of the Polish Nobility, in order to his obtaining an Infor∣mation about the strength of the Enemies Forces. As soon there∣fore as the Fore Troops had fallen upon the Enemy, being Se∣conded by Sieur Protskele a Captain of the Horse, and by Sieur Perewitsh, with some Hussarian Companies, the Gentlemen of Prince Lubomirskies Court, Sieur Hilski, Crogoledi, and Sieur Soboski having in the mean time Assaulted them from the side, they took a No∣table Turk, Secretary to Bassa Giuli; by whom having understood, That though the Turkish Forces under the Command of the Bashaws of Eger and Waradyn were not inconsiderable, together with these Troops that were under Count Tekely, whose Armies were all in one Body; yet they had sent away their Field-pieces the Night be∣fore, and had no resolution to stand out a Battel. Prince Lubo∣mirski upon this thought sit to Attack them with all his Forces, and not to grant them time for their Reinforcement. Accordingly for their first Recruit, he commanded out the Companies of Sieur Modrzejefski the Crown-Hawkier, and the Companies of Sieur De Niszewits, who very timely came to the succour of Sieur Krotsek,
who having Thrice already met, and pursued the Enemy, and be∣haved himself dexterously, shewed a great deal of Valour and Cou∣rage; as having by his own Hand laid upon the Place above Twen∣ty Turks, and taken some of them alive. Sieur Modrzejefski At∣tacqued the Enemy from the other side, and Valiantly broke his Spear upon him. Immediately after, the Third Two Companies of Colo∣nel Groboleski, and Sieur Bieleski being ordered, the latter Fronting his Enemy, brought him to a great deal of Confusion, who with∣out any further Opposition, turn'd filthily his back, and fled. Which Prince Lubomirski perceiving, sent instantly the rest of his Division, and all the Polish Companies after them; as also the Magni∣ficent Lord Tetwin Underchamberlain of Derbia, together with his Blunderbuss-Regiment, under the Command of Sieur Butler Lieute∣nant Colonel. In this Fight the Polish Companies did so vigorously Attaque the Turks, that they presently Cut them off from the Body of the Hungarians, who betook themselves to the Left-side towards the Mountains: The Turkish Forces in the mean time Flying towards the Isle of Schuts. Thus the said Collonel going to Recruit the Fighting Polanders, and having immediately with Sieur Butler, perceived Two Hun∣garian Companies, they did proceed by certain Bushes (that they might not be discovered) to Face the Enemy with a Noble Resolution. Whereupon, presently Sieur Glasnob, a Captain of the Horse, and Sieur Debeli, Fronted the Enemy; but Lord Tet∣win Attacked the Enemy from the one, and Sieur Butler from the other side, who was presently Dispersed, and so in Pursuit put to the Sword; till at last, the Enemy being Dismounted, and Flying into the Vineyards, made the Polanders to leave their Horses also, and to Pursue them thither, where they after the like manner severed their Heads from their Bodies. Upon the Place there fell many Thousands of the Hungari∣ans; and for the most part in the Vineyards. Hence the Polish Companies having resumed their Horses, did with great Fury kill the Turks, Pursuing them to the very Elbow of Danubius, where after the Turks had Reinforced themselves, (as being near their Camp) afterwards seeing the Polanders to approach, fled further by the side of the River Danube, having left their whole Camp, wherein many Thousands of Turks were put to Death; besides them that were taken Alive. Afterwards his Highness Prince Lu∣bomirski not thinking it convenient to Pursue the Enemy any fur∣ther, set up a Standard in their Camp, which became a Prey to the Polish Army; who then obtain'd a Reward for their Mag∣nanimous
Courage, in Moneys, Clothes, Tents, Horses, Oxen, Hous∣hold Goods, and all sort of Attire, the half of which they did not possess themselves of, having had many Hundred of Oxen, with Wagons richly loaden with Provision, about many Thousands, and above many more of Sheep; which Cattle after they had driven over the River, they left at Maydan, and so they fell into the hands of the Imperialists. The whole German Army, during the time of the Battel, was about a German Mile and a half, in a Park, except that two Regi∣ments of Dragoons, under the Command of General Schultz and Stremow, were Commanded to approach about a Mile nearer; from whence the Polish Army (God forbid they had stood in need of a recruit) could expect but very little subsidy. The Servants of the Polish Nobility fell afterwards to Plundering, in so much that it was not possible for them to be repulsed, till at last Prince Lubo∣mirski Commanded that the Camp should be set on Fire at three Corners, by which means he asswaged the disorder of the Rab∣ble. This so notable a Victory, must of necessity be totally ascribed to the Polish Army; but in particular, to the Conduct of their Superiors, who used great moderation in Opposing the Ene∣my, and in pursuing him according to occasion, where the No∣ble Colonel Grochofski gained a great deal of Immortal renown. The City on the other side, seeing the Enemy fled, did again surrender it self to the Prince de Croy, and delivered those 3000 Hungarians, that were put in for their safeguard, together with the Se∣cretary of Count Tekeley. In this Expedition, many Turks and Hungarians were taken alive, amongst which, those of the best rank being preserved, the rest were put to the Sword. That same Night the Army rested upon the Plain at Presburg, from which they had repulsed the Enemy, and the next Morning returned to the River Mark, for the refreshment of their Horses, since about Presburg there is no Corn, besides only Vineyards. And above all, this must be counted the greatest happiness the Polish Army had obtained, That not one amongst them was ei∣ther taken, kill'd, or wounded; And that the Turks did not fix Place
until they came before the New Castles; And Count Tekeley, not be∣fore he came before the Cappathian-hill, where they did pass the Ri∣ver Waage all Night long. This is the True and the Exact Account of that Fight and Expedition.
COPIA LITERARUM A B IMPERATORE AD SERENISSIMUM REGEM POLONIAE Serenissime ac Potentissime Rex, Frater ac vicine Charissime, IN aerumnosa quam Hungarorum Persidia & Turcarum velo∣cissima immanitas, Austriae nostrae inflixit; Literae Serenita∣tis, 18. Augusti, peramanter nobis scriptae, insigniter nos recrearunt. Etenim relictis omnibus aliis armo∣rum destinationibus, Serenitatem vestram rapto cele∣riter, expedito{que} exercitu suo, festinatis itineribus pro∣gredi; ut Viennam arctissimo pressam obsidio è fancibus Barbari hostis eripiat, perjucundo sane nuncio intelleximus. Quam grato autem synceroque hanc auxiliorum promptitudinem non ex per∣cussi tantum Foederis ratione, sed Serenitatis vestrae proprio ergo nos fortunas{que} nostras prospensionis benevolo affectu provenientem amplectimur. Et quibus hoc in salutem totius Reipublicae Chri∣stianae redundans benesicium in posterum officiorum retortimen∣tis agnituri summus, Ablegatum & Consiliarium magnificum nostrum
Sacri Romani Imperii Fidelem dilectum, Liberum Baronem de Sierowa Sierowski planius Interpretari Jussimus. Ispraeterea in man∣datis habet ut quae ad strenuam belli administrationem & impri∣mis oppugnationem dictae urbis abrumpendam ex usu presenti proficua & necessaria, censuimus Edisserat, & sublimi militari Serenitatis vestrae prudentiae submittat. Quapropter fraterna ami∣ca{que} siducia Serenitatem vestram obtestamur, velit Memoratum ablegatum nostrum in cunctis quae nostro nomine expositurus est cum omnimoda side audire, tunc quam ingressus est viam alacriter prosequi. Siquidem hac suppetiarum praestatione Liberatae assertaeque Urbis sibi cum aeterno nominis decore parare animum{que} nostrum, Serenitati vestra pridem auctius devinctum Magis Ma∣gis{que} Regiae suae prosapiae obstringere valeat, quem in sinem eidem omnigenae felicitatis cumulum a proposito nomine vovemus.
A COPY of a LETTER FROM THE EMPEROUR OF GERMANY TO THE KING of Poland. Most Serene and most Potent King, Brother and Dearest Neighbour, IN the midst of these Troubles, which the Perfidiousness of the Hungarians, and the swiftest Cruelty of the Turks have inflict∣ed upon our Austria, Your Serenities friendly Letters have af∣ter an eminent sort refreshed us. For We have understood, by a very pleasing Message to Us, that Your Serenity, (laying aside all other Appointments of War) hav∣ing quickly Raised and Dispatched an Army, cometh with all Ex∣pedition for the Deliverance of Vienna (oppressed by a very narrow Siege) from the Jaws of a barbarous Enemy. But with how grateful and sincere a Heart We embrace this Rea∣diness to Assist Us, not only proceeding from our Confederacy, but also from the benevolous Affection of Your Propension towards Us
and Our Fortunes; and by what future Returns of Friendship We shall acknowledge this Benefit, tending to the Safety of the whole Christian Common-wealth; We have Commanded our Envoy and Privy-Council, the Magnificent, Faithful, and Beloved of the Sacred Roman Empire, Christopher free Baron de Zierowa Zierowski, to expound more plainly to Your Majesty. Moreover he is Commanded to discourse at large with Your Majesty, and to submit to Your Serenities sublime Military Prudence, these things which we have judged profitable and necessary in this jointure of Affairs, for the Administration of the War, but more especially for the Raising of the above-mentioned Siege, before the City of Vienna. Wherefore with that Brotherly and Friendly Confidence of Ours, We beseech Your Serenity, to give full Credit to whatsoever the said Ambassadour is about to declare in Our Name and Behalf; and lastly, to prosecute your Journey with all speed and alacrity; since in Effect, by the Means of these Your Subsidies, Your Serenity shall purchase to Your Self the Glory of Delivering and Asserting of the City of Vienna, together with the ever-during Honour of Your Name, and shall more and more engage Our formerly bound Propension towards Your Serenities Person, to Your Royal Family, upon which, for this end, We desire the Propitious Heavens may accumulate all manner of Happiness, &c.
COPIA LITERARUM DUCIS LOTHARINGIAE AD SERENISSIMUM REGEM POLONIAE. SATISFACTURUS desideratis a vestrâ Majestate referre necessum credidi, quemadmodum heri castra metatus super Marchiam, circa Angerinam, ex slammis & fumo judi∣cavi adesse Rebellos incinerantes circumvicinos pagos. Quae cum mihi confirmata fuerint, ex relatione Praefectorum, Principis a Leitenstein, eorum{que} numerum esse ad 400 circiter, dimisi Sexcentos Polonos, quatenus Rebelles ad terminum praesixum insequerentur; Duobus abhinc milliaribus non 400 sed 4000 inve∣nere. Quos licet in numero longe inferiores aggressi sunt fortiter, at{que} sugaverunt, redemptis Austriacis captivis, praeda Rebellibus recu∣perata, eorum occisis usque ad tria millia, aliquot centenis equorum Hungarorum, cum aliquot vexillis, ad castra haec Caesarea reductis, Informatus circa noctem de numero hostium, Accurreram
cum cattafracto equite, assistendi ergo Polonis verum pugna jam sinitâ ad castra revertentes inveni, id{que} mirum fuit, quod licet a tergo & a fronte habuerunt Rebelles, Indefessa eorum virtus talls fuit ut numero nec cesserint nec unum hominem perdiderint, ubi Latius intelliget ex duce Lubomerski. Mihi sufficit vestris Majestatis Laudare actionem, inclitae Nationes innatum ardorem, & in omni occasione Generositatem. Intelligo ex Literis Praefecti Possomieres, Tartaras qui us{que} ad numerum 15000 in opido Kitensi castra∣mentabantur, post tentatum inutiliter ad has partes transitu, Per diversos in Insulae Schutensis Danubii, ramos per Aterburgum ad pontum Strigoniensem descendisse. Ideo{que} non gravabitur vestra Majestas (uti spero) si hesternas instantias renovem pro prae∣mittendis copiis Magnifici Dom. Sieniuski & Generosi Dom. La∣sinski, & accelerando motu suo regio pro liberandâ Viennâ ad incrementum Gloriae Majestatis vestrae cui omnia prospera Devovio.
A COPY of a LETTER FROM THE DUKE OF LORAIN To the Most Serene KING of Poland. I Being desirous to satisfie your Majesties desire, I found it neces∣sary, viz. having fixed my Tents upon Mark, about Angerin, I discerned by the Flames and Smoak, that the Rebels were at hand, burning the Neighbouring Villages into Ashes. Of the truth of which things I being assured, by the Account I had from the Go∣vernours, and the Prince Leitensten, and that their Number amount∣ed to about 400, I dispatched away 600 Polands in pursuit of the Rebels at the place prefixed; About two Miles from this they found their Number not to be 400 but 4000. Whom they assailed (tho' they were far fewer in Number) Valiantly, and put them to flight, together with the Redemption of the Austrian Captives, besides the Spoil recovered of the Rebels, three thousand of them being kill'd upon the place, some hundreds of the Hungarians Horses, with some Banners reduced to the Imperial Tents. I being informed about night concerning the Number of Enemies, hastened thither with a
Company of Horsemen in Armour, for the Assistance of the Polan∣ders. But the Battel being already ended, I found them returning to their Tents; And this was remarkable, that though both behind and before they had the Rebels, their indefatigable Valour was such, that they neither yielded to their Number, nor lost any men; these things shall be more amply expounded to you by General Lubo∣mierski It shall suffice for my part to applaud to Your Majesty the Activity, the Natural Affection, and the Generosity of the Nation upon all occasions. I understand by Letters from Governour Possomiers, that the Tartarians, about the Number of 15000, have fixed their abode in the Town of Keiten, after that they found their Passage to these Parts difficult and unprofitable, and that they came down upon Danubeus, near the Island of Schuten, by Aterburg, towards the Strigonian Sea. Therefore I hope Your Majesty will not be displea∣sed, if I renew my yesterdays Instance for the sending forth of the Forces of the Magnificent Sir Sieniawski, and likewise those of the Generous Lasinski, and also for Your Majesties hastening your Jour∣ney for the Deliverance of Vienna, to perpetual increase of Your Ma∣jesties Glory, to whom I pray for all Happiness, &c. FINIS.
