F385 R32020 12295083 59000
THE FAMOUS TRAGEDY OF King Charles I. As it was ACTED before White-Hall, By the FANATICAL Servants OF Oliver Cromwell. LONDON: Printed for J. BAKER. Price Sixpence.
beheading of King Charles I
THE PROLOGUE To the GENTRY. THough Johnson, Shakespeare, Goffe and Davenant, Brave Sucklin, Beaumont, Fletcher, Shurley want The Life of Action, and their learned Lines Are loathed, by the Monsters of the Times; Yet your refined Souls, can Penetrate Their depth of Merit, and excuse their Fate: With this position, those rude Elves that dare 'Gainst all Divine, and humane Laws, make War; Who count it treble Glory, to transgress Perfect in nothing. but imperfectness. Can find no better Engine to advance Their Thrones, then Vile, and Beastly Ignorance: Their Bloody Mirmidons. o' th' Table round, Project to raise, our Theaters to the Ground: No marvel they lap Blood, as Milk and Glory, To be Recorded Villains, upon Story. "For having Kill'd their King, where will they stay "That thorough God and Majesty, make way, "Throwing the Nobles, and the Gentry down "Levelling all distinctions to the Crown. So that (which Heaven forbid) should they reduce Our English World, to their confused Use; 'Twill be admir'd, more then a Prodegee, To hear an Herald, state a Prodegy, An 'twill be thought a sharp and bitter Blur To salute any, by the Title (Sir.)
We here present you, his deplored Fall, Whose Death will prove a Ruin general; (If Fates forbid not) and we hold to view What the World knows, is not more strange then true: Anotomizing Treason, damning them Who Murther'd Charles, to share His Diadm And to preserve their Souls in Flesh whose Unto the Ruin, of all Europe tends: But Joves all Potent Thunder shall divide Their Plots, and sink them, in their height of Pride. Exit. The PERSONS. Fairfax. Ireton. Rainsborough. Peters. Bosvil. Cromwell. Pride. Sir Charles Lucas. Sir George Lisle. Blackburne. Lord Capell. Lord Goring. Treason, Ambition, Lust, Perjury, Sacri∣ledge, Revenge, Par∣liament-men Mess∣engers Mrs. Lambert. Mutes. Soldiers. Servants
THE TRAGEDY OF KING Charles the First. ACT I. Enter Hugh Peters and Oliver Cromwel. Cromwell. MY fine Facetious Devil, who wear'st the Livery of the Stygian God, as the White Emblem of thy Innocence: Hast thou prepar'd a Pithy Speech against the Essence and the Power of KINGS? That when to Morrow all my Mirmidons do meet upon On∣slow-heath, like the Greek Exorcist, Renowned Calchas, when with his Magick Numbers he incouraged great Alreus Son, and Marshal Diomed to Prosecute their Seige 'gainst Priam's Town, by thy insinuating per∣swasive Art, their Hearts may move, like Reeds, when Boreas Breath smites the huge Oakes, that on Mount Pelion grow, I know that Nec∣tar hangs upon thy Lips, and that the most absurd Syllogisme, or Ear-deceiving Paradox, maintain'd by thee, shall seem Oraculous, more dangerous to question than the Sacred Writ: Sing then (my Hugh) and so thy Numbers sing, All those that hear, may jointly curse their King. Peters. Most valiant and invincible Commander, whose Names as terrible to the Royallists, as e're was Humades to the Turks, or Talbet to the French; thy Nose, like a bright Beacon, sparkling still (the Aet∣na, that doth Fame our English World) hangs like a Comet o're thy dreadful Face, denouncing Death and Vengeance; the Antients Fam'd Alcides for his Acts, thou hast not Slain, but Tane the Kingly Lyon, and like great Tamberlain with his Bajazet, canst render him within an Iron Cage a spectacle of Mirth, when e're thou pleasest. Had the Snake-footed, Earth-born Sons of Old but had thy aid, Imponere pelien ossae, Old Saturne might have laugh'd to see his Son sit sadly by him in the Cimerian Shades, while thou didst sway the Empire of the Skies; Englands best Patriot, and my Noble a Sermon (such as Ignatius Loy∣alla himself, where he to Morrow to supply my place, for dangerous, Doctrine, direful Use and dreadful Application, would glory to Name his) I have provided such an one, As shall confirm our Faction ten times more Then all that they have known, or heard before: In it I'll prove Kings (ab origine) have been the Peoples plague, gi∣ven them by the Angry God's in Wrath, the meer Exuberance of their Crimes, the Sordid Vulgar being delighted much to Honour, those dull Images which themselves Erect, and dread those Anticks which them∣selves
depaint, themselves affording both the Horns and Nails which make them either dangerous or Ugly, I will assert, that Regal Power is Devilish, and inconsistent with the Peoples Freedom: I will make it good, the Tyrant now in hold, (whom some yet call, their Lord King CHARLES) doth Merit violent Death, as Guilty of the many Thou∣sand Horrours committed in the late most bitter War, I will demonstra∣tively— Crom. Enough, Enough, (my dearest Hugh) thou art my better Geni∣us, thy Advice, I will rely on with more sure respect then on a Sybills Words, or Delphian Oracle, drink the Elixar of that precious Metal 'tis Sovereign 'gainst that Perilous Disease, call'd [he gives him Gold] Speaking Truth, 'twill prove an Animation to thy Mind, for to proceed in thy Audacious Practise (I mean, against the King and 's House of Peers) thou'lt find it a most precious Antitode against the Poyson, wa∣vering Fame shall spit, and to conclude, a perfect Supplement of all de∣fects that Time, or Fate shall by harsh Doom appoint, But what will please thee best (my dearest Hugh) 'T will purvey for thee, Wine and Wenches too. Peters. Sir, you are pleased to make my Faults your Mirth, I do con∣fess the Luscious Paphian Sin, hath ever vanquish'd all my Virtuous Powers, the Cyptian Queen (in full aspect of Mars) being predominant solely at my Birth, besides the Constitution of my Body made up of moisture and venerable Humours, though some great Ladies say, (lean Mex do best) may help for to extenuate my Crime of being too often prov'd beneath the Navel. But Noble Sir, this Colloque is too poor, if we consider our most high resolves, our Language should be like those Laws we mean to give, awful and to be wonder'd at by Mortals, Sa∣ble-brow'd Saturne, and Blood-thirsty Mars must seem sole Rectors o∣ver us Abroad, though Venus and her sort Son the sightless Boy, chal∣lenge our utmost Faculties in private. Crom. Thou art that Load-stone, which shall draw my Sense to any part of Policy in the Machiavilian World, we two (like Mahomet and his pliant Monk) will Frame an English Alcoran, which shall be written with the self same Pencil, great Draco grav'd his Laws, but first we must subdue the Testy Scot, and send the Beggars Home as lousie, though not so propt with Limbs, or so well shap'd as when they chose the Politi∣que Hamilton to be their General: Mean time if those auspicious Stars of Sin, whose Influence hath prosper'd Treason hitherto, shall still con∣tinue Gracious to our Villany, Tom Fairfax may take the Town of Col∣chester, and force that stubborn Truly-valiant Heroes (for in my Thoughts I do esteem them so) who have tane shelter in that Antient City at least for to comply on remiss Terms; my next Work then is, to New∣mould our Army, and give a strong Purgation to those Punies who act for me, and may be called my Parliament, whose great work yet re∣mains to do (my Hugh) the King shall die, and they shall Father the most damned Act upon the Power of Justice; that done, all Earls and Lords shall down for to make way for me and those I favour. Then thee and I, and those whom we create Will Reign like Princes, and the Lords of Fate. Pet. I knew before the scope of your intents, and do applaud them as magnanimous, and the sole way left to preserve our lives; in order unto which your dear design, it shall be my task, both at Press and Pul∣pit, to render Kingly Government obnoxious and incompatible with the Peoples Rights; to prove the imprisoned King a truculent Tyrant whose blood alone can expiate Heavens wrath, and purchase an attone∣ment
with the Deities; expect me all I may (renown'd Sir) for pro∣mulgation of our well-fixt Cause, from which no fear of pain, or hope f profit shall be of force to draw me. For he that dares attempt, and goes not on, Doth leap for safety into Phlegeton. Crom. Our conference here must end, some three days hence I march towards the old North to meet the Bannock feeding the fiery Scots: They have (I heard) already worsted Lambert, and puff'd up with the pride of victory come on like Lyons, flush'd in humane gore, I shall not need to pray your readiness. Pet. Command me as your Creature; Sir, you were pleased to impose a task upon me (which by the Aid of some one amongst the Nine, I know not which to thank for the good turn) I have performed, after a tedious pumping: The Theam you gave me, Sir, you know was this, The Peoples rights transcends the power of Kings. Sir, I have done my best to justify your learned Axiome in this Scrowl. [gives him a Paper. Crom. Your love to my requests makes your performance of them swift and punctual by the great Genius of this Land (o're which I hope to Reign) I had forgot what late I urg'd you to, this shall oblige my love — What's here I am an ill Verse-fier or Verse-maker, (what do you call your Trimeter-men?) and none but those have sipt of Helicon (I've heard) can grace a Verse i'th' reading it — pray sing them your self. gives the Scrowl back to Peters. Pet. How Sir? sing them! Crom. Sing them, or say them, all's one; think not I take you for a Baller Poet, but I want terms of Art. Pet. At your pleasure Sir. [Peters reads. Even till this Age People durst not see The pride of Pomp in formal Tiranny, The People who raise Kings unto the Crown Are ladders, standing still, to let them down. Crom. The Peoples backs is the worst pair of Stairs a Man can pos∣sibly adventure upon they are strong, but slipery, firm, but false: You are an excellent Similist (my Hugh) 'tis an apt comparison to similize the People to a Ladder; but I pray Heaven thee and I have not ascend∣ed so high upon this tall Ladder, that we shall never have an opportu∣nity to descend without breaking our necks. Pet. I beseech you Sir, either hear me, without paraphrasing, or com∣mand me to read no more— Crom. Nay, now I see thou art a pettish Poet; read on, I'll be as si∣lent as a Statue — Pet. Abolish these false Oracles of might, 'Cause we were once blind, shall we now hate light? Why, like the Wood that yeilds helves to the Ax Should we upon our selves lay heavy tax, Setting up Kings our freedom to confound With our own strength, exhausting our own ground? Crom. So, so, enough of this, I'll hear the rest in private, let it suf∣fice (dear Hugh) that I accept your Verses with all love, and do as∣sign you if (Apollo please) a Grove of Bay to shade your learned skull from his all-peircing Beams; Wing'-Time hath sent one of his Sons to warn me hasten hence; my ate moves swift, and I must move with it (my Hugh) Farewel, fall not to offer up the strict Orisons unto our swarthy if now I prove victorious:
A King and Kingdom is my valours prize, By both their ruines, I intend to rise. manet Peters. [Exit Cromwell. Pet. This Fellow (sure) was born (as the III. Richard, who once rul'd this Land) with his mouth full of Teeth, Nature hath given him an Ion Soul, able and active limbs, a politique brain, which is indeed a store-house of politique stratagems, as if she meant him for the fall and ruin of all Mankind, his stout Confederates work their ends amain, but he outworks 'em all, the very Mine they 've plac'd for to blow up their pious Soveraign, shall countermine by Him ruin to themselves, and I Sail with them to the invisible Land (my Hugh) the King must die, those were his words: O sad and fatal Project! when they have ser∣v'd their utmost ends upon Him, and on their knees took Oaths to reinstate Him, must a black Coffin be his Throne, and a cold Vault his garnished Pavillion? Let the fam'd Villains of all former times have their dire deeds razed out of Fames black Book as trivial accidents and neglected dreams, that these may take up all the room on Record for the most glorious Miscreants e're Rebell'd; but what strange fancy lurks within my brain, which makes me tax their ways with whom I act, whose deeds I do applaud as meritorious, deserving honour, and the best repute? what vile finister fate governs my Life? I loath the ills I do, yet hugg them next my Heart. Pardon great Jove and my most gracious Prince, whose Vertues do deprive thee of a being; I must go on, though Oreus yaun upon me, and Demogorgon (with his damn'd crew) dictates in person what I preach or Write. Cromwell I come with a disguised face, with as reserv'd a cunning as that Greek that brought in Pallas's Horse to half rais'd TROY; thy craft I will repell with double care, resting as jealous as I lay purdue behind a potent Foe; thy guilt is great, so mine and all of us; 'tis policy that must protect my life, and place me a degree above you all. For he that will the Devils Master be, Must have a mind, mischievous than he. Exit. The end of the First Act. ACT II. Enter Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow, in Arms, Drums beating, Colours flying with Soldiers as before the Town of COLCHESTER. Fairfax. THus having ram'd our Enemies in Kent, quieted Cornwal, and secured Devonshire; what now remains but with ac∣customed courage to take in this strong Town of Golchester? Within whose Walls do lodge divers of note, who are profess'd and open Ene∣mies unto the State we serve. Ireton. The fate was just, that with delusive hopes hath led them to a receptical of ruin, from whence they cannot budge without our knowledge. Rainsborow. They're taken in our Toyles, and must not scape with Life quickly let us draw out our Line, and raise our Batterries, girting the Town with a close Seige, and let the Cannons dreadful voice pro∣claim to them their certain ruin. Fairf. First let us Summon them to yeild on Terms; if they prove so Fool hardy as to refuse, then let our Iron-ball in smoak and sulphur sing
a sad Requiem in their fearful ears, sound loud the summons, that the Foe may hear we wish a Parlee. [A Parlee sounded. Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle, Lord-Capell, Lord Goring, &c. appears as upon: he Walls. Sir Charles. Who gives this hasty Summons? Fairfax. Know Sir, the General and the Army rais'd for the preser∣vation of the State of England for to support and vindicate their Privi∣ledges; in their Nam, that you yeild up your selves, and all are under your  with this  use. Sir Charles. Traytor  I hold this City) chosen  and these my loyal valiant  survive, and rather then  (with i) into the A. Fairf. Thou and thy  boure such Men as  to a hundred, and a hondred  I do confess (thou hast triumph scend unto Helis shades like him) but that proves not the  thy cause: For, by the same rule Ottaman may boast, The partial Deities favour him the most. Rainsborow. By that God whom I serve thou traytor Lisle, I'll see thee hewen in pieces, and thy curst body thrown unto the D. Sir George. A vaunt thou hom-bred Mungrel, who art (intruth) meer∣ly a valiant Voice, an hollow Cask in which some rumbling with delights to sport it self; Thersits thus, durst menace Agamemnon, Know Fellow, I have been viciorious even against a multitude, have trod the thorny path of cragged War, my Body naked, and my eet unshood have view'd those horrors of a purple neld untroubl'd and un∣tuch'd, which but to hear summ'd up would fright thy Coward-Soul, from forth her dirty Dog-hole. Rainsborow. Why spend we time in Dialegue with these Miscreants these cautift Elves, who fight for Yoaks and Fetters, with as much zeal as half starv'd Wretches beg a boon to sate their hungers and wish pro∣fesedly to spend their bloods to please a Tyrants lust. Lord Capell. Away mechanick Slave, whatsaucy Devil prompts thee so to prate, when the meanest here thou ought'st to stoop with all obse∣quious Duty? Thou sordid Groom, whom of a Skippers-Boy, the Westminsterian Rebells made thee their Admiral, whom even the dull∣est Sea-men so despis'd, they scorn'd to hale an Anchor at thy bidding, and at last (tir'd with thy loathed Company) intending to have sowz'd thee in the deep (mov'd with thy trickling Tears and Pitious plaints) set thee on shore to Foot it back to Westminster; how dares thy perjur'd Tongue to challenge us, serving our dread Lord, His Sacred Majesty, Him whom all Europe wonders at, as the best of all the Christian Kings, who for his discreet valour Rivals Scipio, for prudence Solomon, for tem∣perance without Parallel, as are his Sufferings, and griping Griefs by you (base Traytors) each day heap'd upon Him, having immur'd His Royal Person up in a strong Den, fit for untamed Lions, banish'd his Loyal Imperial Lady, and with Her the Two Eldest of his Issue, bereav'd Him of his Navy and Revenue, and what e're truth called His, know perjur'd Rebells, ere this Summer end, (perhaps e're Sol doth hunt the Nemean Lion) we shall have strong relief, you a just Punishment, if not,
Our comfort is, though we be left i' th' lurch, We Martyrs fall, for God, the King and Church. Ireton. You'll not accept then of our proferr'd Summons, or come to composition. Lord Goring. Compound! Confound we may (perhaps) some Thou∣sands of you. Sir Charles. I am resolv'd ye Traytors, and so I know are my Honour∣ed Friends, which is the Sense of all within the Town, to hold this place even to the utmost hazard; nor are we destitute of much Provision, e∣nough for to supply us many Months; when that fails, we have Horses many Hundreds, of Dogs and Cats even a Multitude: Zeno and Chri∣sippus, the two main Pillars of the Stoick Sect, pronounce such Meats as useful to Mankind, as the best Sheep or neat; the Antient Almains held the self-same Doctrine. We'll be their Imitators, and that you may know 'tis our resolution, forsake your Station, e're we leave the Walls, or the hot Breath, that lightens from an Angry Cannons Throat, shall try to wast you hence, away, away we'll meet you in plain Fed. Thou true Jehovah, now own thine own Cause, Thou know'st we Fight for thee, our King and Laws. Fair. Draw up our Troops we'll make these Boasters feel, The potent Rigour of our strong Edge Steel. Alarum excursions, a shout within and crying. [Fair. cum sus Exit. Open the Gates, On, on, on, Enter Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle and Lord Capel, their Party; at the other Door, Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborough, with their Party, they charge Three to Three, while the Soldiers on both sides Encounter, the Round heads are beaten off, a Retreat sounded. Sir Charles. The Power superior to the God of War, hath Grac'd our first Attempt with Victory; the Rebells (with exceeding loss) are Fled, whom the most Valiant Capel hath in Pursuit; see how they scutover the Neighbouring Plains, like Flocks of Sheep before an hungry Lion; so for the uture, let Almighty Jove infatuate their proud Hearts with Panick Fear, who strike at himself in his Vicegerent. Kings are Earths Gods, and those that Menace them (Were't in their Power) would share his Diadem. He speaks this looking upon some Round-heads lying dead on the ground selves for your Impieties! Alas, deluded self-destroying Men! whose Erring Souls by this winged Hermes, hath usher'd unto the depth of Barathrum, in blew Flames for evermore to howl, Cursing your selves for your Impieties! Oh Erring Vulgar! Oh besotted People, that take such pains to become Miserable, who (with the Phrygian Fabulators Dog) catch at vain Sha∣dows, and lose the substance: So the Athenians Courted Thirty Ty∣rants to be the Party that should gall their Heart-strings; and the fond Syracusians laboured sore to have the Dionisii be their Consults: Was ever any Nation bless'd with so good a Prince (as Charles our King) that so opprobriously desserted him? Succeeding Ages cannot chuse but say Nations have suffer'd cause their Kings were Ill, But Britains Charles, his Peoples Sins did Kill. But let it hap as God shall appoint, if it be written in the Book of Fate, the Rebells shall dissolve the English Monarchy, with the Life blood of their most Gracious Prince, yet let us hinder that dire Ominous Day, (while we have Being with our utmost Might, and e're we Fall and be Coixt with new and stranger Earth, by hard Atchievements and He∣roict
Acts (perform'd for Charles, and for our Countries sake) let us pro∣vide us Fame when We are Dead, that the next Age, when they shall Read the Story of this Unnatural, Uncivil War; and amongst a Crowd of Warriors find our Names Filed with those, that durst pass through all Horrors by Death and Vengeance, for their King and Sovereign. They may sing Peans to our Valiant Acts, And yeild us a kind Plaudit for our Facts. Sir George. If we defend this Town against the Rebells Fury but One Month longer, Hamiltonian Duke (who now hath pasted Tweed with a Numerous Army, full Twenty Thousand Scots, Ten Thousand English Commanded by the Truly-Valiant and invincible Knight, Renowned Langdale, we shall have Honourable and sure Relief; mean time by frequent Sallies, we'll indeavour to break in peices Fairfax his guilty Forces; the Prince of Wales is now upon the Downs, and with him most part of the Royal Navy; the Londoners speak against the Junto, and e∣very Day are fear'd to rise against them; the Loyal Welch continue strong in Arms, and eke in every Angle of the Land the People wish for Action; the Face of things at present, promise fairly: But should you fail (by force of Destiny) Our comfort is, we (when we list) can Die. Sir Charles. I heed not Hamilton or his Resolves, knowing him to be Ambitious, Treacherous, a Proteus that can shift into all Shapes, a sly Insinuating Sicophant, who by his most Falacious Machinations, hath been the Ruin of the King and Us; 'twas he that Instigated first the King to raise a War against the Covenanters, (yet under Hand Incited them against Him) 'twas he that gave His Majesty Advice to go in Per∣son to the Senate-house, there to demand the Five Seditious Members (yet secretly sent them Word of His Intentions) 'twas he (howe're he seemed in show Averse) that when His Majesty scapt to the Scots, when Fairfax wholly had subdued His Forces, procured the Damned Sallary of his Master, for Twenty Thousand Pounds; and I much fear, 'tis he and only he, that will betray the Army he now leads (know'st thou not George) he ever did aspire to be the King of Scots. 'Tis he that made England all on Flame, Blasted its Beauty, Burnt its goodly Frame; And the Armilla which his Zeal doth twist, Is to be Cataline, yet a Calvanist. Sir George. Let him be Damn'd and sink to Hell withal his Sins about him, let us do our Parts, and leave the rest to Heaven (Faith Sir Charles) since we have Beat the Foe, while Swarthy Tom flies with his, Timerous Troops, here let us Frolick one half Hour, Mars and Thalia sometimes do accord, only a Health or two unto our Royal Master. Sir Charles. George, I am easily led by thy Advice, although it suit not with our present state to play a Barly-break in a Golgatha, or Drink down Sorrow 'mongst a heap of Trunks, as liveless as those Clods they lie upon; I prithee do thy pleasure: But, say that Ireton (who stands facing us) should in the midst of our intended Mirth, come up and turn our Triumph into Purple Tears, and in our Goblets mix our Sanguine Gore. Sir George. Why? 'twill be rare, I'd wish no other sport; we Lape∣thites should soon repel those Centaures, the scuffle (sure) would be as strange and famous, as that wherein all Ixion's Horse-hoof'd Race, were sent to Hell (swift Nessus only scaping) who was reserv'd for a more dreadful Fate, they shall have nought to boast of, (come they hear) but Iron in their Flesh, and Gun-powder in their Noses.
Sir Charles. Be it as thou dost wish, I'll strive to be as Merry as De∣mocritus, and Laugh at War and Damages. Sir George. You highly Honour us (most Noble Governour) [Speaking to the Soldiers. My Fel∣low Soldiers, have all your Arms in readiness as you were now to Charge the Surly Foe, we will not jest away our Lives, or give the Round-heads Cause to boast a Triumph in their Ca∣thedrated Conventicles; two of you fetch that [Sends two Soldiers. Runlet of Old Sherry, that's placed behind the Door of the Town-hall, bring also store of Pots, for we shall use 'em here (as the Trojans, when by Atrens Sons they were beleaguer'd close for Hellens Rape, Hector Sar∣pedon, Troyolus and Old Pryam, beneath fair Illions Walls (girt in bright Arms) sat Banqueting before the Black Hair'd Greeks, we'll sit securely and pledge full Crown'd Cups, (perhaps) 'twill Mad the Rebels: Which if I know, I shall grow Fat with Laughter, And I will use to drink them down hereafter. Sir Charles. The same good Fellow (George) thou ever wert; see how the Rebels Grin and Gape upon us. Sir George. They should Participate of our flowing Cups, wou'd they take but the pains to come amongst Us, such as the Roman Cateline did provide for those he had drawn into his Confederacy, Wine mixt with Blood (an Horrid Sacrament) by which the Swore to Level Romes proud Battlements. So, set it down (my [The Soldiers return with the Wine. Friends) and quickly peirce it, and then draw out with as inlarg'd a Mind as Princes give Gratuities—'tis Rich and Lusty Liquor, such as would make Heraclitus to Laugh, and Dull Diogence Dance, even in his Tob! Here Noble Governour, this Bowl brimful, unto the Happiness of Him, whom Fame of all the European Kings do call the best. Sir Charles. With as much willingness as one half-spent with a Con∣tagious Feaver, receives a Dose he hopes may bring him Health, will I solemnize it upon my Knees. All kneel, they drink the health round while the Chambers are sht, and Trumpets perpetudlly sound. Sir George. So, this was as well perform'd, about again with't. Sir Charles. Once more receive it Soldiers, and that done, let us retire unto our Garrison, believe me (George) we play with Lightning too se∣curely; you know I dare as much, as him dares most, but dare not be too confidently Rash. Sir George. By Heaven (Sir Charles) we will not part so tamely, we'll have one Catch e're we forsake the Ground, if you please for to aid me with your Voice, (for't must be Sung in Parts) You (Soldiers) all joyn  in the Close, what saith Sir Charles. Sir Charles. You may command my Suffrage (worthy Lisle) I know  you Fancy; begin— SONG. Sir Geo. Plump chcek'd Bacchus, we to thee Will yeild all honour as befits, For sure thou art a Deity That canst refine the dullest wits, The liquor of thy Vine Is precious and divine, It makes even Cowards fight. Sir Cha. It prompts our tongues to talk, Though not our feet to walk, And dictates what to write.
Omnes. Drink then (Boys) and drown all sorrow, Who knows if we shall drink to morrow? Sir Geo. Even in the midst of danger When safety is a stranger And no hope of relief, Take a Bowl full of Canary, We of our woes grow weary, And cry a fig ser grief. Sir Cha. Drink each a hearty draught Till by thy brains y'are caught, 'Twill quite expel all humours; Cry God preserve the King, And shield him with his wing, And d—for the Round heads rumours. Omnes. Drink, &c. Sir Geo. Judge you Gentlemen, is not this better then to be always moiling in Sand and Salt Peter, continually imployed in raising Rampires throwing up Sconces, and inventing Stratagems, to foil that Foe who fears to look upon us? Hath not this added to your former Vigour? We must not always fight, lest we become all but one Wound, nor e∣ver tipple, lest the Circaean liquor do Metamorphose us into Swinish shapes; he that's a true Soldier Will undertake all Horros, for his chink; And no less venture for a Wench and Drink. Sir Cha. This doctrine (my Friend Lisle) is dangerous, yet too much preach'd and practis'd in all Armies; Soldiers do him their Glory, and detract from their own worth, that Love to drink and drab; he only may be term'd truly Valiant, that can Repulse and vanquish his own Passions; but this Dish I perceive (my Soldiers) is too much stuff'd with Sage, for you to palliate—I wonder Noble Capel stays so long, I fear he hath in∣gag'd himself too far after the Flying Foe; he knows not which way back for to Retreat. Sir Geo. He's an experienc'd Soldier, and so inur'd unto the several stratagems of War, that 'twere a sin Mars would severely plague, but for to doubt his Fortune. Sir Cha. I would not be too confident, or to careless, Heavens bring him off with safety and with Honour—let's now re-enter our invincible Fort, and there consult for safety; we must expect the Rebells will once more make their Approaches to our Walls (perhaps) with new Supplies, we will prepare a Tempest 'gainst they Storm. But if great Jove remember whose we are, His ponderous Thunder will their Onset Mar. Exit. The end of the second Act. ACT III. Enter Cromwell, solus. Crom. THus far my policies run smooth and currant, deep Rivers glide as silent as the Night, when shallow Books fall with a troub∣led noise; wherefore was Man created like the Gods, but that like them he should dispose his Acts to the great dread of some, envy of others,
easily deluded the King my Master, I have led on with hopes of Re∣establishment so long, that now he doubts my feign'd reallity; and a∣strong Party in the Junto sit, who without me, are now in Treaty with him, but I shall break the Neck of their Design, (perhaps) before they think it, the several Commanders of the Army are now all of my Facti∣on, while Fairfax (silly Fool) sits like a Statue, as if he nothing knew, or nothing durst, I have proposed unto the several Officers to forsake the King, and yeild him up (as one not fit to live) unto the Block; I have in∣formed them, (and it takes exceedingly, so forward are the Fools to work my ends, and their own certain Ruin) that the King is a Man of Blood, by no means to be Trusted, being of a rigid and implicable Spi∣rit, hating (even to the Death) all have opposed Him, and that should He regain his former Power, he quickly would make use on't to their Ruin, that therefore they should make a Retreat in ti nor yeild their Necks unto a Tyrants Mercy, that they have declar'd  highly for him, might the more easily (by far) entrap him; nor was it a discredit so to do, since in all Ages such Politick course hath been thought just and safe, they (snared with my words) resolve to do , for to remove the King by violent Death, and to set up a Mitary ower; now my Plots work, the Stage grows great with Horror, the English Mnarchy grows sick to Death, its very Basis hath an Age-fit which will not cease to shake it, till it be Levell'd to the humble Earth. Mount, Mount my Thoughts, unite like scatter'd springs, 'Tis a strong Torrent that must bear down Kings. Enter Peters, Bos∣will, Pride, with Soldiers. Here I appointed my dear Buffoon Peters, and Col. Boswill, Pride, and my whole Army to meet about this hour—See, they come; Welcome dear Friends, you have observ'd your Time: My Hugh, how thrives our Counsel in the Army, that our Great General the Lord Fairfax guides? I am sure these Gallant Souls serve under me, are all unanimous to shake off Kings, and while the Iron's hot to strike that Blow, which shall for ever free the English Nation from Tyrants, and their awful Power. Pet. Heroick Sir, they all (even as one Man) applaud even to the skies your rare projection, both Officers and Soldiers, Covetous for to Accomplish what's by you propos'd, and as a signal of their Resolutions, see here, the more part of a queint Remonstrance, which must by us be brought to a Period, wherein we will divulge unto the World, the Reasons and Grounds of our Intents. Crom. As I would wish, never till now could England hope a Hap∣piness; why, how now Boswill, Why art thou so sad? The Noble Pride stands—like a Man astonish'd, or like a Marble Statue whose Aged Feet are wrapt in Wither'd Moss, what's the matter? Pride. Nothing (dear Sir) but an excessive Joy which hath surpriz'd my Faculties, and craz'd upon the Organs of my Speech, my Mind is busied about the Kingdoms Fate, my Soul in a deep Conference with my Sense about Mature Affairs. Bos. The Constitution of my Soul agrees with thine in each degree of Temper, (most honoured Crom.) from our late sworn Principles I'll not recide, though Heaven Rain'd down Fire upon me, though Earth yawn'd wide, and Hell gorg'd Balls of Sulphur, the King (that Man of Blood) shall lose his Head, and all his prime Adherents wait on Him unto the other World; the People we will Rule by the Sword's power, their Lives and Goods, (by Conquest) we have gain'd, our sway must be maintain'd by Strength, not Law. The Sword that cut a passage to our Sphere, 'Tis that alone must secure us there.
Crom. Oh let me put thee in my Bosom (Boswill) henceforth let us converse more neerly, and like the Zod caks gemini mix our Loves, we'll be a second Pylades and Orests, and never part till death (my Hugh) let's hear some part of that Remonstrance, 'twill highly spur us on to Action. Pet. You shall, the most material Clauses (Sir) are these, which take with this Exordium I Penn'd late Yesternight: [He Reads Absolute power of necessity must subsist and keep above water, though all else be assur'd of drowning, to the loss of all (or at least many) branches of universal Freedom, and therefore the Fox did not conclude amiss when he saw his fellows stps march towards the Lions Den. Nos vestigia terrent, if we enter into a strict scrutiny, we shall find that our choice and our nature gave us Kings, the dignity conferr'd upon a single Man, was (sure) intended for the good of all, but where one draws from all, can that be pleasing or fortunate? or to leave this one, can that be injury? and there∣fore in order thereto we declare, That we call King CHARLES to an ac∣count, as the prime Promoter, Abetter and sole Occasioner of all the Mur∣ders and Outrages, committed this many years, during the war, and bring him to a Tryal for his Life; that with him we will bring to judgment all those of his Party, who (in order to his Arbitrary Commands) have Mar∣thered, spoil'd and impovert shed the Free-born People of England— Crom. Hold, I have heard enough, why this is done to the purpose, and shews all Gallantry did not Die with Brutus, and his Confederate Consuls; now Lawrel wreaths commixt with Mirtle branches shall deckt our fortunate Brows as the true Patriots of our native Country, (we'll give the whole world cause for to remember us) aside the ensuing Ages when they read our Acts, shall bless our Memory with devout respect, but flying Phoebus now hath left our Hemisphere, black Night hath now put on her Ebbon Robe and wrapt the Welkin in a sable shrowd, we must away now towards the frozen North, (my fellow Soldiers) we must direct our March to jerk the Scots back to their Sedgy Cottages, Male∣volent Saturne, oh! be thou propitious, prosper thy Agent in his Deeds of Death, Which are so grim and horrid, full of ire, Some will suspect, the Devil, was my Sire. Exeunt Omnes. Enter Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow, cum aliis, as in a Tent, a Table, and Tapers. Fairf. How goes the Night? Ire. About the hour of Twelve. Fairf. Now then, while all the World's involv'd in silence, and Man and Beast takes their Repose and Rest, let us determine about these Cap∣tive Heroes, who with this Town of Colchester to Morrow, must yeild themselves unto our Mercy. Rain. Renowned General, under whose Conduct we have been fortu∣nate and Victorious, I need not now recite, since you well know what vast Expence of Blood, of Toil and Treasure, we have been at since we Be∣sieg'd this Town, the Third part of our Army quite Consum'd by the Immured Enemies frequent Sallies, by our unfruitful Onsets, and hard Duty, and how Merciless they have shewn themselves to those (of ours) whom Fortune gave them Prisoners; all which considered, I do give my Vote (and Justice speaks the same) that Capel, Goring, Lucas, and Stout Lisle, Die without Mercy, even that very Day which we receive the Town. Ire. Which is to Morrow.
Fairf. The Law of Arms will not allow of that, they yeild themselves on Quarter, and for the Peers (I mean Goring and Capel) our Power doth not extend to question them, they must be order'd as our States decree; the antient only Captains of the World, Hambal, Scipio, and Themistocles esteem'd it far more Glorious, having Conquer'd their proud Antagonists, to preserve their Lives (given them as their Boon) then to inctici an ugly censure on them: I love an Enemy that is truly Valiant, these have exceeded story in their Acts, And have repeli'd a Siege, such as Breda Never beheld, nor famous Ravena. Rains. Then let them live to be a Terror to us, and once more to en∣gage the Land with Broils, (know Sir) we are not false whilst these sub∣sist; and should your Clement Mind so sway your Sense, as not to take their Lives, who have sought ours, we shall have cause to disesteem your Person and your Power, as him, whose easie Nature and soft Temper is incompatible with our Persons safety, and Honour our Repute. Since, if by you, Mercy to them is shown, You seek our Ruin, and project your own. Fairf. Ha! Ire. Though in a rough unpolish'd Phrase (he utters Truth) most No∣ble General, let not his seeming Rudeness raise your Anger, since Time hath taught you he is truly Faithful, no less Magnanimous in active War; Sir, it concerns you neerly not to permit your inuate Love to Valour, so grail the Wings of just deserved Fury. you must not tollerate these Men to escape with Life: For 'twill be thought if you remisly do, You love their Actions, and Applaud them to. Fairf. You then are Generals of the Host, not I; but be it as you Counsel, share you betwixt the Brave Spirits of Two that (if Pithagorus Transmigration were) would make a Thersites, or Thraso Valiant, (Rans∣borow) see them shot to Death as Soldiers destin'd by Fortune to a Noble end; some two Hours bence I shall expect to here you say, they are dead My Soul (I feel) is wondrously perplext, Who knows but mine or your turn may be next? Exit. Rains. He's much distemper'd, sure they have bought his Mercy, how stoutly did he argue to preserve them, with what reluctancy denounce their Doom! Ireton. An ardent Love to worth and honour moves him (without all doubt) to pitty their sad fate, for though Mountains may meet, and ge∣nerate e're they, and we, enter firm Union, yet we must needs acknow∣ledge they are Men of most approved Valour; but see the cheerful Lady of the light appears in the Horizon deck'd in her saffron Robe, having old Tithons chill Embraces, she summons every young and sprightly Sol, to wrap her in his Odoriferous Bosom—hark, they shout; What may this portend? [A shout within. Enter a Soldier. What News doth thy Tongue Labour with? Sol. The Town of Colchester is just now surrendred unto the Generals Hands, the Governour Sir Charles Lucas, his Lov'd Associate Sir George Lisle, with the Lord Capel, Old Goring, and a Number more of Gen∣tlemen are cried up as Prisoners. Rains. Be it thy Charge forthwith to certifie Lucas and Lisle, that they prepare themselves two Hours hence to Travail toward the Em∣pire of the Skies, or to the shades of Dis. I mean to Die. Sol. I shall Sir. Exit.
Rains. Come Commissary, let's go view the Town to chear our Friends, and doom our scornful Foes. It glads my Soul, and is the only good That I delight in, for to spill their Blocd. Exit. Enter Sir Cha. Lucas, and Sir Geo. Lisle, as in Prison. Sir Cha. The Iron Hand of Jove lies heavy on us, (Oh George) the proud Rebellious Crew prevail, Loyalty sinks with Plumets at his Heels, while curst Rebellion rides on the Sun Beams, justles Jove from his Seat, and fathoms Clouds. Sir Geo. They may thank that invincible Champion, Hunger, had not he help'd, the Town had yet been ours, the woful cries of Women and Children, imploring Bread to stanch their pining Stomacks, their Guts almost congeal'd to Stone within them, their Faces black with Famine, stalking the Streets like (Magick summon'd) Ghosts, together with our own dire need, inforc'd us to surrender to those Rebells, but Joves dread vengeance (sure) will seize on them that mought (but would not) have prevented this; degenerate London, who hast shaken Hands with thine Allegiance, thy aspiring Fabricks ere long must lie—What speaks thy hast? Enter a Soldier. Sol. From the Commanders, Col. Rainsborow, and Commissary Ire. I have in trust to let you know, some Minuits hence you are to die. Exit. Sir Cha. Oh perjur'd Miscreants! is this your Mercy? this my Pro∣phetick Soul still whisper'd to me; I knew they in our Bloods would bath their Guilt, and sacrifice our Lives to their God Treason, these Vic∣tims befit Molech, not Messiah, whom these professed Saints, but real De∣vils, seem to make the Umpire of their Deeds. Angry Rhamnusia, though we fall to Dust, Punish these Traytors, for their Acts Unjust. Sir Geo. Then 'tis decreed, we must take leave of Day light, and tread the Paths of Immortality. Jove. art thou just, hast thou reward for those Who unto pious acts their lives dispose? And hast thou lost thy vengeance, can it be That these aspiring Titans, scape Scot-free? Where are thy dire Cyclopean balls, the same That mudling Mulciber, doth in Lemnos frame? 'Tis thy Olympick vigour can alone Ding down these Rebels unto Phlegeton. Enter Three Soldiers Armed. Ha, what are you? Sol. Your Executioners. Sir. Cha. You are our welcomest Friends; who is alloted to make his Exit first? 1. Sol. Your self must lead the Dance of Death. Sir Cha. Here then I bid fairwel, unto this Stage of Misery, my Life hath been but one continued Scene, woven with perturbations and An∣xieties— But stay, whither must now my fleeting Soul take Wing? Into you Starry Mansion, or Steep Tartarus, up to the Milky way, she'll take her flight?
Where Souls of Heroes do enjoy their bliss, Where all Celestial comforts, meet and kiss; Mankinds Redeemer, Oh Emanuel! Who in Mans shape on Earth were pleas'd to dwell. Receive my better part—are you prepar'd— Sol. We are. Sir Cha. Charge me then home, I love to chew those Winter-plums, they are those Cordial comfits I accept, as sick Men do great Gallens Antidotes; methinks the Earth goes round Copernicus; thou didst re∣late a Truth, that Tellus ever hath an Ague Fit; Sol wrap thy Glorious Head within a Cloud, or if thou needs wilt view my Destiny, put on a Mask of Blood, Death is but Somnus Harbinger, we visit his All-peace∣ful Monarchy, e're we arrive at Heavens Golden Gates, where such as knock with a Religious Hand, do never miss of Entrance; Let me Em∣brace thee (George) e're I part hence, Thou wilt not long survive me—Shoot, Shoot. [They Embrace. Incomparable Strafford (see) I come To wait on thee in blest Elizium. [They shoot. So, you have done it bravely, you are good Marks-Men, I applaud you for't even in Death—so many Passages are allow'd my Soul, She knows not which to Issue out at, this Fabrick of my Flesh now begins to Totter, like to some City (for it's Peoples Sins) rock'd by the humerous Winds; what a fierce Combate is there now maintain'd be∣twixt my wounded Heart and mighty Mors, who grasps it b'twixt his Hands, squeezing it like a Spunge; so furious Boreas smites the Solid Oakes that on Mount Pelion grow, making them Nod like unto feeble Reeds, (George) thy Hand, my Twins of Light, have lost their wonted Property, Death with his Icy-fingers seals them up: Farewel, Great CHARLES, I Die thy Loyal Servant. George, we shall meet some Minuits hence (I doubt not) in a place where all Joys injoy one Center; the Worlds great Architectresse never saw two of Her Sons Murther'd so Barbarously after fair Quarter promised. Therefore great Jove, if thou lov'st Loyal Breath, Take vengeance on the Authors of my Death. Sir Geo. There crack'd the Cords of Life, Oh noble Lucas! [He dies. let me breathe out my Soul, upon thy Azure Lips: So [Kisses him. Brave a compleat Man, no Monsters (these excepted) would have But∣cher'd; my turn is next, is it not? Sol. It is. Sir Geo. Nor would I purchase Life with one Intreaty, this Object so inflames me, I am grown weary of this Fleshly Weed, and fain would put it off, exchanging it for an Immortal Robe, Invelloped with Car∣buncles, and Saphires—I, but to have our Lives bereft by a sharp vio∣lent Death, to Sleep in a thin shrowd, involv'd in feigned Earth, our Nerves and Atteries shrunk up like sing'd Lute-strings, or the wither'd Wreath of some Fam'd Heroe, made away in the dark for to converse with Worms, and half form'd Creatures, such as the slime of Seven-Headed Nile, produceth by the aid of Phoebus Beams: Oh! there's a Contemplation that would stagger the most resolved Spirit, but Destiny must be Obey'd, Death is still Death, thongh diversly inflicted: To have ones Throat sluc'd with a Golden Knife, or to be thrust through with a Silver Sword, mitigates not the Wound, more than the sufferance. But Oh ye vengeful Furies of dark Hell! ye Three-fell Sisters of steep E∣rebus, awful Aenyo, all ye dreadful Hags ominous to Mortals, forsake your Black Cimerian Cells, and with your steely Whips ascend the
Earth, Lash, Lash Traytors to despair and Obliquy; let Strife, Con∣tention, Fraud, Guile and deep horror seize on great Charles his Foes, severing their strength, and frustrating their Hopes till they sink lower, underneath their Treasons, then Plumets cast into the Baltick Sea: Now do your Office, I am prepar'd; Oh! you have [They shoot. put Balls of Wild-fire in my Bowels, I am but all one Aetna; Farewel, base gloomy World, in which deluded Man, ravish'd with Toyes, hunts after Bubbles; till them he break and vanisheth as he had never been, I sink beneath the burthen of my own weight, would with my Fall, the Machiny of the World might be Unriverted and shook to pieces, the Air commixt with Earth, the humid with the tumid Element, and active Fire contesting against them both, reducing all to the Original Chaos; but I contend in vain, the Gods created Man but for their sport, and its fit I should fullfil their Ends, wishing but not prevailing; I spy the pure Immaculate Soul of Lucas, Travailing through the Air to find a residence: Stay gentle Spirit, company is good, when tedious Journies are prescribed, we'll both fix in one Sphere, when looking down, we will behold and smile. To see these seeming Saints, but real Friends, Fall by their devilishly devised Ends. 1. Sol. The Traytors both are Dead. [He dies. 2. Sol. Traytors, those are Traytors, whose most rigorous Doom, we have Obey'd, in Murdering these Brave Men. 3. Sol. How's is this? let's seize upon him. 1. Sol. Do, and make hast to most assur'd Damnation. 2. Sol. I am no longer of your Base Society; Heaven Par∣don [Draws. what is past, my future Deeds shall amply expiate my former Crimes, the Blood of Noble Lucas, and Brave Lisle, On Rainsborow's base Head, I will requite, And send his Soul unto Eternal Night. Exit. 1. Sol. Let us remove the Bodies, and make after him. Exeunt, bearing the Bodies. The end of the Third Act. ACT IV. Enters Peters, with Mrs. Lambert. Pet. THis he impos'd as a Command, it hath not been my Practice to to solicite in Causes of this kind for other Men. Mrs. Lamb. Too soon you have made Tryal of your skill; doth your Grave Habit suit with such Course Employment, Reverend Sir? Pet. Faith Mistress, among Friends, the outward Garb ought not to cause a Nicety: He is my Honoured Patron, took me half frozen from the Foodful Earth, and warm'd me in his Bosom; and 'twere a dull In∣gratitude in me not to reward his Bounty with my service: The Ra∣diant Lustre of your Star-like Eyes, makes him to Bow as your Obsequi∣ous Vassal, whom Thousands count it Honour to Obey, so great an Influ∣ence hath your excellent Beauty upon his manly Faculties: He's now re∣turn'd, deck'd with Triumphant Wreaths, from chasing the Blew-bon∣nets to their Mountains, having taught that stubborn People, his Name can make the Genius of their Country tremble, the Politick Havilton is his Prisoner, all Knees bow to him, as Great Caesars Rival, nothing doth want for to compleat his Conquest, but your Assent to Love him.
Mrs. Lamb. Why so I do, and all Men else that do retain his Temper. Pet. Your Love admits of too vast extent, I mean, can you Affect him so, as to admit him to your Bed? Mrs. Lamb. St. Winifrid forbid it; you know (Sir) that I have a Lord and Husband, a Man made up of Magnanimity, whose Love is mixt with an Indulgent Care, should he but doubt of such an Injury, your Master, I my self, and all by him suspected, had better enter a Phalarian Bull, or stand the Thunders shock—alas! I dare not. Pet. These are but Womanish Fears, Incident unto all your Sex; come you must yeild to Love him, how should your Husband know of your Day Banquets, your Nightly Revels, and sweet Paphian sports? He's now in Lancashire, Disbanding Troops of Horse; or should some Way-ward Fiend, convey the Knowledge of your stoln Embraces unto his Jealous Ear, my Masters Greatness, countermands his Fury, circled within his Arms, should Heaven, Earth, and Hell conspire to wrong you, 'twere sin to doubt a Danger: Consider (Lady) what a potent Friend, what Treasure, Honour, and content you'll gain (if Mundane Glories do Af∣fect you) by yeilding Love to him, whom other Dames of highest Blood and Fortune would sue for such a Favour. Mrs. Lamb. Although my inward Thoughts do tax my Levity, yet won with your most sugred Eloquence; I here yeild all of mine, Lamb. calls his, unto your Masters Bosom. Crom. I accept it (Lady) nor shall my most delicious Parragon ever have cause for to Repent Her Favour, my self, my Sword, all under my Command, the spoils Enter Cromwell, having been seen to peep through the hang∣ings, during the Collequie b'twixt Pet. and Mrs. Lambert. of Nations, all that Earth can boast, shall at thy beck be prov'd for to be summon'd (Pope like) Bath thou thy delicate Body in Asses Milk, commixt with Almond Flower, (with Cleopatra) dissolve inestimable precious stones in every Glass or luscious Wine thou drink'st, tread thou on Tyrian silks and Ermins skins let Art and Nature both, industrious∣ly conspire to sate thy lavish Wishes, my Treasure is Inexhaustible; Three Kingdoms (Dear) I grasp thus—in this Palm, their Riches and their Glories all are mine, the Goddess of the World my Patroness For∣tune hath given all into my Hands; as for the Man (they call the King) he hath not Four and Twenty Hours to Live, I h've hir'd a Dapper Lad, a Neat-Tongu'd (but inexorable Fellow) for Fifteen Hundred Pounds, to ease Him of the Burthen of His Cares (good King) he's fitter far to converse with Saints and Seraphims, than with Erronious and Ambiti∣ous Mortals, and 'twere a sin (a grand one) for to deter the Hopes Ce∣lestials have for to enjoy His presence) my Bradshaws Brains do Brood, and hath discover'd a Line of Law that never yet was talk on, which saith, If Kings do not obey their Subjects, they may chastise them with Imprisonment, Banishment, or Death; with him a Crew (whom I have ke in pay) do sit as Judges to make good this Maxim: My Bradshaw is grown Proud of his Great Office, I've order'd him for to be Cloath'd in Purple, all Heads for to stand bare on every Shoulder when the Lord President (for so I have Created him) shall be in presence, his Co-adju∣tors all have Honour too; and when assembled, have no worse a Title then the High Court of Justice: These all are sworn for to fulfill my Ends, and Doom their King to Die; which once perform'd, then I am a Lord alone, though not a King by Title, yet by Power, and thou (my Dearest) shalt share Glories with me, thy Lovely Brows deckt with a Coronet of Ophir Gold, inchas'd with Onix stones; nor do thou dread thy Husbands Anger, his open Violence, or his Clandestine Plots,
he is my Vassal meerly at pleasure; and if I hear he but Repines at our Embraces, I'll spurn his Soul out with my Foot. (My Hugh) this Busi∣ness was well manag'd, thou art a Fluent Orator, when Cyprian Venus, and her wing'd Son, waits at thy Elbow, this Service hath oblig'd me more unto thee then all thy former Industries. Pet. I am your humblest Creature. Crom. But why (my dearest Mistress) is that Face of yours (which e∣ven the Gods gaze at with greedy longing) obscur'd with sullen Mists? What sorrow claims a Superiority o'er your Harmonious Senses? Oh let not Care Plow Furrows in that Forehead! is (now) more smooth than Polish'd Ivory, or the true Turtles Feather; give but your Grief a Name, and if it lie in humane Power to ease you, resolve a speedy and a plea∣sing Remedy hasts to your Comfort. Mrs. Lamb. Sir, can you think my Heart is so Obdurate? Or that I can so soon be lost unto a Feminine Temper, as not to cogitate with what hasty Rashness I have extinguisht Hymens Tapers, which (some Hours since) Rivald Sols Beams in Lustre, with what a forward Zeal I have in∣fring'd my Marriage Vow, and given away that which is none of mine? Oh Heaven! Pet. 'sfoot Sir, she's fallen into a Relapse; Kiss her Sir, (quickly) or she'll cool so fast, and her Heart freeze into so hard a Lump, not all your future Courtship or activity, shall be of force to melt her to your wishes. Crom. How stupid am I in these Amorous Arts Dear Mistress! let not Penitential Fancies (the spurious Issues of dull Melancholly) gain the least Power over your Faculties: What can you fear, while I dare be your Friend? Think on the Glories that I late proposed; all which shall be made yours, with eminent safety. Mrs. Lamb. I shall endeavour Sir, to bear my self as her that Loves and Honours you. Crom. Now thou sing'st sweetly, in a far more Melifluous Tone than Quires of Nightingals, and that this Temper never may forsake thee, our Time we'll spend in various Delights, such as Caligula, where he a∣gain on Earth would covet to enjoy; enter ye Six Prime Westminsterian Senators, Musick, strike high, our Spirits to advance, While we do mingle in an Active Dance. Enter Six Masquers, Habited for Ambition, Treason, Lust, Revenge, Perjury, Sacriledge, Musick; they Dance with them, joyn Cromwell and Mrs. Lambert, Peters singing out last, they Dance together by themselves. SONG. Let these Joys ever be in prime Nought but virture is a crime; Maugre the wise, Mean men must rise, Every Olimpiad of time. Tast them boldly, terrine pleasures, Yours is the Earth, and all its Treasures; Rifle, Plunder, And keep all under, Let Murmurers wait your leisures. Exeunt Masquers. Crom. This was perform'd as I would wish, now Sweet let's in for to
compleat our Happiness, and tast those Joys which Jove himself will Envy, knowing Agenors Daughter, or Calisto, Inachian Io, or his blast∣ed Semele, were not indu'd with Beauty so Immense as thee (my dearest Happiness) Set on unto the Chamber of delight, Do not Dream (Lambert) thou art Horn'd to Night. Excunt. Enter Fairf. Ireton, Rainsb. &c. Fairf. I need not advertise you Col. Rainsborow, not to be Implaca∣bly severe, against the refractory Chomly; or when you are sate down before that most impregnable Pontefract-Castle, to Storm more oft than rair advantages calls you to Action: Mars go along with you, I am for London with my Prisoners. Rains. My Lord, your humble Servant, Victory and Triumph ever wait upon you. Ire. Farewel Noble Col. [Exeunt Fairf. and Ire. Rains. Adieu, sweet Commissary. Alone, and in all haste to take my Journey, to so Remote an Angle of the Land, there to take charge of those I never saw, discard their Ge∣neral, and make my self their Leader, this is a strange Injunction, but I must do it. Enter his Servant. Hast thou delivered what I gave in charge? Serv. I have Sir; he will not fail punctually to perform it, and sent you, the true and exact relation (as neer as he can gather) who were the Prime Promoters (of your unlookt-for) Journey. Rains. Let's to Horse, I'll Ride Twelve Miles this Night, they shall have no Cause to blame my Tardiness, away. Exit. Enter Blackburne (being the Soldier that escaped from amongst the Fair∣faxians, with an intent to Kill Rainsborow, Act 3) with him Three Soldiers, their Pistols and Swords. Black. Hist, this way the Villain Posted, only his Man and he toge∣ther; I hope the Divine Justice will not suffer him, for to escape our Hands; that way, that way. Exeunt. Enter Rains. and his Servant. Rains. We have quite lost the beaten Road—there let our Horses Graze a while; I feel strange Thoughts fighting about my Heart, either my guilty Fancy did delude me, or I beheld the Ghosts of Lucas and of Lisle, all full of Wounds staring just now upon me, there! there! dost thou see nothing? Serv. Not I Sir; good Sir let us forsake this gloomy Glade, it presents Horror, and besides the Night is neer half spent. Rains. A Grim, but Supine Terror clogs my Soul; Morpheus with's ieaden Mace Arrests my Senses, I needs must Sleep a while [Lies down Enter Blackburne and his Mates. Black. Kind Fates, I thank you; this is that cruel, Tyger (my Fellows) who contriv'd the much lamented Deaths of Generous Lucas, and of Va∣liant Lisle. Rains. Ha, who sent thee hither? [He rises up. Black. Thy Sins; I come to Kill thee. Rains. It is no easie Task that thou hast undertaken, I have an Arm as Vigorous as thine, a Pistol that will lighten e're it Thunders, a Sword too that ne'r yet forsook his Master in time of danger.
Black. If thou but call to Mind thy Damned Treasons, thy Charnel Plots, and vile Conspiracies, thy Murthers, Rapines, and fell Outrages, a Child of Seven Years Old, may quell thy Force and lead thee Captive in a. String; if thou dar'st think thy Numerous Crimes have not barr'd up the Door of Heaven against thee, pray be but speedy in thy Orisons, I have no mind to Kill thy Soul. Rains. Sawcy Slave, think on thy own sad End; and either at my Feet implore Remission of thy Rash Attempt, or thou art Dead. Black. So brave, have at you Sir. They charge with their Pistols, Rainsborow's Man falls; also one of Black. Confederates. Serv. This is Honour beyond thought to fall, or to survive my Masters second. Rains. Come on, Sir. Black. Though thou hast scap'd my scalding Lead, my cooler Steel shall find a Passage to thy Heart. [They fight. Rains. Thou art not (sure) invulnerable, even Thetis Son was Slain by Phrigian Paris—but, Oh my guilt Hangs heavy on my Arm! and Impedes the Violence of my Blows—there [They fight. Black. Will you not sink, or have you many Souls that take their reign by turns? If it be so, I have so good a Cause, I cannot shrink beneath the Trenchant Blade, till by my single Force I have dismiss'd them all; there Dogge— Rains. Injurious Destinies, have you inrich'd my Fame with many Victories over whole Troops of Men, for to permit my fall in the Catast∣rophe, by a most despicable Knapsack bearer, who Carves my Flesh as Butchers do their Meat, and bores me till I grow transparent—Oh! my Blood drills like to some prodigious Spout, which Huswifes set a tilt to clense their Linnen—but shall I fall without Revenge—He falls Black. Oh! are you measuring out your length in Clay? Ye Twins of Valour, Lucas and Brave Lisle. Your heads, up from your earthly pillows rear, And see your Murderer lie weltering here. Rains. My Spirits faint, my Heart is sick to Death, I hold the pan∣ting lump betwixt my Teeth, but 'twill not brook to stay; let all those that have sought their Sovereigns Ruin, look upon me and my deserved Destiny, I would invoke the Powers above, but them I have so much exasperated, they'll stop their Ears to my complaints: Oh! die— Thou King of flames, let me in Sulphur swim Near to that Caudron, hold my Patron, Pim. [He dies. Black. Oh! dire and dreadful end, he's gone to his own Home, (the cursed Dungeon) with as much willingness as holy Anchorites surrender their white Souls to Holy Angels, his Body we will throw in yonder Ditch for Beasts and Birds, to Prey on: I have some [They remove him Wounds, but none (I think) are Mortal. Come fellow Soldier, let us hast to shelter, this Deed when once Divulg'd, will be examin'd strictly— Beyond the Seas, for safety I will flie. Till England once more be a Monarchy. Exeunt. The end of the Fourth Act. ACT V. Enter Crom. with Mrs. Lamb. in their Night Robes. Crom. APollo is too hasty in his rise, and emulates my Happiness; had Jupiter injoy'd so rare a Creature as thy self (my dear) in his
lascivious Arms, he would have charm'd bright Phoebus to the East, and have united Day and Night in one, as when he Revell'd 'twixt Amphi∣trios Sheets; how likes my Love of her new Bed-fellow? Mrs. Lamb. You are as Valiant Sir, in those soft Skirmishes Venus ex∣pects in her Pavillion, as in those Deeds of Death, Mars doth approve of in his Tent of War. Enter Peters. Pet. Good Morrow to the most Renowned Crom. and his most Ex∣cellent Mistress; Sir, I this Morning have receiv'd a Letter directed un∣to you, I think it comes from Commissary Ireton. Crom. Some News of more than ordinary Consequence if it bare date from him. [He opens and reads the Letter. Lieut. General. THe deed is done, (which either ever makes, or mars us all) the King (according to the Doom of our high Court of Justice) this Morning lost his Head, Thousands of People being Spectators of his Tragedy: His Body we have given to the Duke of Richmond, to be disposed off as he thinks fit; the Vulgar (generally) are much inraged at it, and say (ha∣ving proceeded so far in our Treasons against him, that we despaired of Pardon to preserve our own Lives, and to make our selves Masters over them) we have Murdered the most Virtuous Prince in Europe at his own Door, but we shall Muzel the Mouths of that Many-headed Hydra e're it be long; and in the mean time must resolve to keep what we have got by Frand and Force, by Oppression and Violence; we have Outlawed the El∣dest and Second Son of the dead King, and Proclaimed, That if ever they be taken on English Ground, they shall die without Mercy; we are now modelizing the Common-wealth, in the prosecution of which, both Soldiers and Senators, desire your Aid; this I was commanded to cetti∣fie you; and had I not been commanded, it had been done of his own ac∣cord by Your assured Friend to serve you, IRETON. Crom. Then now I am above the reach of Fate, prepare (my Hugh) though not to be a Bishop, yet to dispose of a whole Diocess; you Lady (the sole Mistress of my Hopes) are yet untainted in your Husbands Thoughts, let him again Repose his Horn'd Head betwixt your Deli∣cate Paps, I must with speed to London, whence I will send thee thy Lapful of Gold (my Danae) and Jewels Rich and Sparkling, for to A∣dorn thy only Eminent Beauty; nor shalt be long e're I in Person visit thee. Mrs. Lamb. Sir, you have Robb'd me both of Honour, and my Heart at once; so strange a Fate doth sway me, that whatsoever you judge to be convenient, I must not contradict. Crom. Thou art as Wise as Beauteous, rest confident of my Fidelity, Farewel Star of the North. [Kisses her, she goes off Come (Hugh) lets post unto the Famous City, To sit in Council with the State Committe. Exeunt. Enter Chorus. Now all is lost to humane Sense, The King is Murther'd on pretence, He was a Tyrant, and in Him Our Laws and Rights to Laethe swim,
Buried for ever in his Death, Since they subsisted by his Breath. 1. See here, what would make Indians weep, 2. And force the Monsters of the deep; 3. Shed Tears into the Briny main, 4. And after drink them up again; 5. That which forc'd Sol to hide his Head 6. Pierc'd into Graves, and wak'd the dead; 7. And that which made the Angels hide He discovers behind the travers the Dead body of the King, also the Bodies of the Lord CAPEL, Ha∣milton, and Hol∣land. 8. Their Faces (deep in Scarlet Dy'd) 9. With their soft Wings, and doth compel 10. The Catholick to turn Infidel, 11. And to believe Presbyters Johns, 12. And strictest Solifidians, 13. Are damn'd (even from their Cradle) since 14. They Murther'd so Divine a Prince.These 14. Ver∣ses are spoken wholly in re∣lation to the Kings Mur∣ther. This Body, when possest with Life [pointing to Hamilton Was the sole Causer of the strife, And Breach (which so our Land hath rent) Betwixt the King and Parliament; 'Twas he, that by his Hell-bred Plots Decoy'd the King amongst the Scots; Yet afterward (his own to hold) Sold Him to Traytors for their Gold; All this in hopes to win that Crown, Desire of which, hath brought him down Unto the Earth, slain (even by them) From whom he hop'd a Diadem; His Soul the Furies mean to ply, With tortures to eternity. This Body when it it us'd to walk, [Pointing to Holland. Knew better how to Drab and Talk, To wear Gay Cloaths, and Complement, Then to be wisely Eminent; For Loyalty unto his King His folly not, his Faith did bring Him to the Block. But here lies one, [pointing to the L. Capel. The Glory of his Nation, A Man of Valour, Virtue, Wit, Who Learning Lov'd, and clierisht it Without compare; his Charity Extended unto each degree, Ages and Sex, (had they no more But this one Devilish Act in store Of Murthering him) the Rebells (sure) Could not, yet eight Year more procure, To Reign by Blood, by Rapines, Horrors, Treason, inexplicable Terrors; But what the Fates allot we must Submit to, and in them we trust To see these Monsters fall and Rot, By God and Virtuous Men forgot. Exit. FINIS.
