f394 12039500 52956
THE Phanatick in his Colours: Being a Full and Final Character of a WHIG; IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TORY and TANTIVY. Tantivy. WEll, Tory; did not I tell thee we should vex these Plot∣ting Countermining Whigs to the heart? Tory. You did so, and your Prophesie is fulfill'd. But who would have thought Christian Patience and those Godly Zealots should part Habitations; And that the Whig should become as great a Sepa∣ratist from that Essential of a Saint, as he is from the True Church? Tan. Nay, rather, who was ever so mad, to take a Phanatick for a passive Creature, who for these 40 years and upwards, has been shewing the mastery of his heels, in spurning and kicking at a Rider that has been so merciful to that Beast: Nay, and has been so pamper'd and high-fed, that tho' he was never so peaceably led, he always slipt the Rein, or violently broke the Bridle? To. 'Tis true, they are an awkward sort of unthankful Cattel, that were ever mur∣muring in the midst of their Manna; and instead of keeping the right road to Peace and Tranquility, burst furiously thro' the hedges, and beat down its fences; That to be in the Reer of a herd of unruly Swine, or command a drove of yelping Turkies, seems a far more comfortable Dominion. However, me thinks, there might be a Cure found for this Distemper. Tan. Yes, if they were to be driven as the Butcher drives his Calf, with a Cudgel at one end, and a Halter on t'other. To. But did you observe lately, how the Faction fretted it self in the Character of us Tories, (as they call us) as if 't had been flead, and basted with Vinegar? Tan. Yes, and it seem'd to be taken with Convulsions, by the drawing up its ugly livid Chaps, and making so many wry-mouths at the Loyal Party. To. No, no; that's only the working of our Physick. They are grip'd with Addres∣ses, weekly Heraclitus's, and honest Observators, and Tory Thompsons, and cannot digest the present manner of proceedings, without a shrug and a sowr face. Tan. I marry Sir! now you talk of a Drench indeed: This has strength enough to purge a Trojan-Horse, and force a Traytor out of a wooden Fundament: On my word, Tory, those will try their constitutions for 'em. I perceive, indeed, their flesh is fallen; for yesterday I met with two Arch-Whigs, and to my think∣ing they look'd very malitiously and very thin upon't, just like a couple of grim Satyrs carv'd upon an old-fashion'd Cupboard. To. Say you so; and do you find their Courage so cool'd, since those excellent Medi∣cines against Rebellion were publish'd?
Tan. Yes, those, together with some Princely Resolutions, have prevail'd much; and (saving Mr. Titus's presence) I think have been the Saviours of this Nation; For now the poor Whig walks sleepishly about the streets, as melancholly as an empty Bagpipe, gogling in your face like a Creature bewitch'd, or a Fellow half choak'd, with his lop-ears hanging quite over his eyes, like an Ass under his Load. To. Then you are of opinion that they are supports to our present Constitution; That they 'wake us out of a dead sleep, and are the only things that belong to our Peace. Tan Yes, they are our undoubted security, as they are perpetual scourges for the Fool's back, that would bind his King in Chains, and his Nobles in Links of Iron. They're the unerring Clocks, that go always with the Sun, keep a constant motion, and alarm when the Traytor touches the strings; No Birds of Prey, from the tow'ring Hawk to the mousing Owl, dare quetch while these Eagles are upon the wing; They have a Charm of Truth, that lays the evil Spirits, and tho' they can never hope to be belov'd by the Fiends, yet they have thunder-struck them with fear and trembling, and so made their Dominion divine over a Legion of Devils. To. In troth, a miraculous Change! For you may remember when they snapt us up in every Coffee-House, like a company of peevish ill-natur'd Step-mothers, that would prog for none but the Babes of their own Bodies. New measures were to be taken both of Church and State, and they themselves were to shape the Cloth, and cut out a Sute for a wooden Lay-man of their own carving. The old Counsellors were to be turn'd out to Nurse, and Majesty clapt into Swadling-clouts; and instead of a Princely Inheri∣tance, reduc'd to a curs'd Guardian, and a Sucking-bottle: In fine, every little Insect durst vilifie the Royal Prerogative, with a freedom so Malicious, Positive and Tyran∣nical, as nothing could well justifie, but a second Ʋsurpation. Tan. But it seems their Zeal was so hot, that they have rotten-roasted their Cause, and 'tis just now dropping off the Spit. To. I, and I believe that's the reason why the Author of the Character has shew'd himself so indulgent a Father to his Generation of Vipers, and frets so excessively at the Cooks, for spoiling the Joynt that should have feasted his Family. However, I cannot but wonder that a despicable Cur, that has had so many of his Teeth beaten out with good sound Arguments, almost putrified with his own matters of fact, should ven∣ture his Brains too, by snarling and barking still at so potent an Adversary. Tan. Alass! the Monster is hunger-starv'd, and fury is its last shift; so like a parcel of desperate Rats pent up in a Buttery, when they can find no hole to creep out at, they fly in your Face. Besides, the Whig is bewitch'd with his old founder'd Jade, and rides his Cause as the Monkey rides the Mule in the Bear-Garden; and tho' she tumble him, and jumble him never so often out of the Sad∣dle, yet he is sure to get hold of the Main, or cling fast to her Crupper. And to the boot of all this, we have torn his Fig-leaves, and discover'd his Nakedness; and nothing is more natural than for a poor Worm to come forth, when the Earth that covers it is trampl'd on. To. Why then, I perceive they are a sort of incorrigible Slaves, that swear perpetual Revenge against their Master, because he has beaten them for running away, and gi∣ven 'em Choak cheese in their 'Prenticeship. Tan. You have hit it. But I'l put the Case; Suppose you your self were in pursuit of a Lady of a known Beauty, and as Eminent a Fortune, and after a multitude of private Intrigues, Subtile Designs, smooth Plots, and plausible Tales, you had flatter'd her and Fawn'd her into some favourable opinion of you, and prevail'd so far as to find some opportunity to escape with your Prize; would it not vex the Liver and Lights of you, think you, to have a third person step between, and out of a pure honest Principle to his Neighbour, come and knock you off the Horse back with a Cowl-staff, rescue the Girl, and restore her to her distracted Parents?
To. I confess this would be on insupportable piece of ill luck; But is this a paralel Case? Tan. O! the very same; For, just as this Phanatical-Renyard had got the Church upon his back, and was running sheer away with her, in comes Loyalty and Resolution, arm'd Cap-a-pee, and like two English-Champions, redeem'd our Daughter of Sion, that had been Condemn'd at Rome, and was going to be Sacrific'd at Geneva. To. What? and are the Phanaticks our mortal Enemies, as well as the Papists? Tan. Yes, and 'tis as true as Gospel, That our Danger is not less fatal, if the Phanatick swells by the same blast that blows him down; it being so far from securing either the King or the Church, that the Malignity would be only trans∣planted, and two Pestilential Sores united in one; which, as it could lose nothing of its violence, so its effects would be equally pernicious. They are like two un∣ruly Whelps in a Chain, that pull two several ways with th' same intent of getting loose; a couple of pure sticks, that make the same use of each other to consu∣mate their several ends, as two Knavish Executors, that have both an inclination to defraud the Right Heir. These two Utensils together make for his most Fal∣lible Holiness a most Infallible Tinder-box; and when he would strike sure Fire out of his Jesuitical Steel, he takes the Phanatick for his Flint. To. O! But he seems to be of quite another Kidney; and when he calls us (Tories) Debauchees and Damme-boys, does he not shew his zeal for Religion? Can so much filth and nastiness lie behind so fair a Wainscot? Tan. Alass! there is no Pretext more ancient, or more familiar; and the surest place to find a Toad in, is to search under a Bed of Sage. Religion is his Iron-bo∣dies, which this crooked Disciple wears to cheat the world with a shew of Up∣rightness: and whatever the Meat is, this is sure to be the Sawce, and is look'd upon as his best Ingredient, to make a savoury Frigacee of a stinking Dish. And now, since my hand's in, I'l give him one turn more; take off the long Robe that hides his Cloven-foot, and shew you the Canvas on the back-side of his Doublet. To Come on; 'Tis as comfortable a Scene, to have a Knave strip'd before one, as to see the casing of a Rabbet after a long Fast. Tan. Well then; upon the true Faith of a Christian, a Phinatick is a Canibal, a State-man eater, a Land-Cormorant, that by blasting our good Name would swallow us alive; a sly Sheep-biter, that feeds upon nothing but Bloud and Vitals, first sucks out our Reputation, and then leaves our Carcase for the Crows. He's the Offil of old Nol, that's wheel'd about in a Tub to infect the People, and feed the savage Bears. He's Powder-Monkey to a Regiment of Rebels, and at∣tends the Camp with Lectures against Loyalty, and Aspersions on the Clergy, as the best. Ammunition to blow up the Government, and Cashier Monarchy. He's a Coffe-House-Recorder, that Arraigns Regal Power, like Felons at the Old-Baily, and is sure to sum up the Evidence like a Knave, and give Sentence against Prerogative; But if you touch upon Property, he grins like a Deaths-head in a 'Pothecaries Shop; and like a sullen Baboon, chatters if you do but finger the Chain. This is a sort of Leaf-gold, which he never produces to the standers by, but they must stop their Breath, upon pain and peril of being re∣gister'd for TORIES. He is an Infallible Almanack, that points out the motions of the Dog Stars, and other Intemperate dissaffected Planets; and shews us how to find out a Rebel for ever. He's a down-right Cheat, and should be Curst by the Congregation for removing his Neighbours Land-mark, and Transplanting the Sacred Right of Kings; for he, to make the Fools Lamp burn, steals the Oyle from the Lord's Anointed, and like an Impudent Pro∣metheus, Snatches his fire from Heaven, to give life to his Image of Rye-dough. He's a State-lowse, with a black list upon his Back of the well-affected, that Crawls to and fro, and would drop in ill Principles; like Nits in the cleanest
Linen. He's a sure stick for a new Oliver to build a Scaffold on, and has a Head as round as one of his Shillings; and for love of the Usurper has kiss'd the Coyn, till you may see the Impress of the Breeches upon his Face. He's a fair Copper Plate of the late times, with the Brewer on the one side, and Republica on to'ther. He's the Lyon in the Fable, that invites all the Wild Beasts to a Solemn Feast, that he himself may be sure of a Meals Meat, dissembling his own Hunger, under general bounty, and cloaking private Interest with publick good. He's the Son of a Succubus, half Witch half Devil, throwing the State into Convulsions, and envying that Peace in others which he himself cannot ac∣complish. A Malicious Dog, that Barks at the Moon because it Shines. A buisy Bawd, that Preaches up Innocence, that he himself may have the better oppor∣tunity to Debauch it. He's a Puritanical Jacket-Scowrer, that uses railing against the Pope, as his Iullers-Earth, to fetch the Spots out of his own Cloath; or at least, so far to obscure them, that they may not be seeen by the less Curious and Discerning Eye. He's the best Prosecuter of Popery for several Reasons, especially that of set a Thief to Cah a Thief; and like an old Stanch'd Villain knows, that to Cry Stop the Rogue, is the best way for himself to get off with the Prize. He's B — r's Boar-Catt, that not only Mouses for his Master, but like a Lascivious Representative Puss, goes a rutting to the House-top, and Cat-calls the whole Faction. He's a travel∣ling Juggler, that would not only make the world believe the Moon's made of Green-Cheese, but that it's cut out into Penn'orths, and sold off as it wasts; Preaching up the Whig for the True Protestant, who is but the stinking fishy part of the Mermaid. He's a turbulent Wasp, and nothing will please him but a change of Government, which would be as sweet to him as a Hony-pot. He's a Puritanical shark, and can stare Majesty in the face, while he picks his Pocket; A Phánatick indeed by Profession, but by Principle a Jew; and would pervert his Mosaick Laws to Circumcise the Church, and Cut off all decency like a foreskin: and as, on the one hand, he can think it no offence to ease himself in the Popes Triple Crown; So, on the other, he wou'd not stick to wipe his B— with the Bishops Sleeves. In fine He's a Sirreverence in my way, which in my own defence I stop my Nose at, till he's wash'd away by the next Showr. To. Well, Heaven deliver me, both from the Popish Hawk, and this Phanatick Buzzard; for 'tis as plain as the Nose on ones Face, that there is never a Barrel the better Herring. And now, Honest Tantivy, give me thy hand; and since we must part, I tell thee, thou hast learnt me to distinguish the Rebell from the Royalist; The Parasite from the Preacher; The Jew from the Gentile; The Pharasee from the Publican; H Reformed Church of England man from a Crop-ear'd Presbyterian; A Pulpit from a Tub; A long Coat from a Jump; An Oath of Allegiance from a Scotch-Covenant; The Blessing of a King from the Curse of a Commonwealth; Reli∣gion from Roguery; and the Devil from a Saint. LONDON: Printed for N. Thompson. 1681.
