F861 13031587 96758
AN APOLOGY For the PEOPLE called QƲAKERS, And An APPEAL to the INHABITANTS OF Norfolk and Suffolk, Or whom else it may Concern. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call Heresie, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets, Acts 24. 14. London, Printed and Sold by T. Sowle, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, 1699.
TO THE INHABITANTS OF Norfolk and Suffolk, And all to whom these may come. SUffer me to Expostulate with you, on behalf of those abused People in your Counties, that have of late been render'd Blasphemers, and to Apologize a little for them; whom some among you have lately often Assembled and Consulted toge∣ther, how they might (by Subtilty and Misrepresen∣tation) Incense you (and by you, those in Autho∣rity) against this Innocent People, and your peace∣able Country-Men and Neighbours, that the Monster of Persecution might be again raised and let loose on them to suppress them. But consider, are there not many things in your Counties, Towns and City, more needful to be suppressed than these Industrious and Well-meaning People, viz. reigning Evils, yea, gross Vices, and abominable Oaths and Execrations, to the Blaspheming the Name of God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ; Swearing by his Blood, and calling upon God to Damn their Souls; against which crying Sins many wholsome Laws are made:
Is there not more need that these Oaths, and all ungodly Plays, and Bear-baitings, and Bull-baitings, and things that tends to corrupt the Youth, defile the People, and to provoke God, should be pre∣sented, and Application made to the Parliament, and Endeavours used, that they should be sup∣pressed, rather than your Neighbours, those sober and honest People among you, called Quakers, whom you know are not such, but those that fear God, love their Neighbour, and do good to all, and pray for their Enemies; and only for their Religious Dissent from the Established Religion in this Na∣tion, and matter relating to the Worship of their God, have been great Sufferers in this Land, and among you, especially in the City of Norwich, in whose Goals and Dungeons they have lain like Men buried Alive, to the imparing their Healths, and weakning them in Body and Estate, and to the Endangering their Lives, and making their Wives Widows, and their Children Fatherless? And now the Lord, by his Divine and Over∣ruling Providence, Glorious and Eternal Power, in tender Mercy and Compassion to his Suffering and Afflicted People, hath inclined the Heart of the King, and those in Authority, to Indulge them in the free Exercise of their tender Consciences, in their Peace∣able and Religious Assemblies; for which they are truly Thankful unto God, and those in Authority. And whatever evil things have or may be sug∣gested against them, by Men of corrupt Minds, and evil Designs, who are of Cain's Nature, in Hammon's Pride, of Ishmael's and Judah's Spirit, and of that Seed of Evil-Doers that shall never be Re∣nowned; and that do not consider what the Lord
hath said, and will certainly perform, viz. I will punish the World for their Evil, and the Wicked for Isa. 13. 11. their Iniquity; and I will cause the Arrogancy of the Proud to cease, and will lay low the Hautiness of the Terrible. And the Destruction of the Transgressors and Isa. 1. 28. to the end. Sinners shall be together, and they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed. But these People, for whom I Apologize and Appeal to you, however they are or may be Rendered and Represented by Men of Evil Designs and Persecuting Spirits, Have, Do, and and by the Lord's Assistance, are Resolved to continue Quiet in the Land, and in their Christian Duty and Practice, of making Supplica∣tions, 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all Men, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the Truth. Notwithstanding some called Clergy-Men in your Counties have (as the Chief Priests, Scribes and El∣ders in days past did our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ) accounted his Followers, your Neigh∣bours called Quakers, to be Blasphemers and Decei∣vers, and have made them the Objects of their Wrath, and what they cannot do, would incite you, and stir up others too, and as Herod and Pontius Acts 4. 27. Pilate, and the People gathered together against the holy Child Jesus, so one or two Presbyterian Preachers now joyned with the rest, and thereupon owned in Print, Ministers of the Gospel, and notwithstanding the Difference that hath been between them, they are so far become Friends now, as to unite against this poor People.
The Lord behold their Threatnings, and grant unto his Servants, that with all boldness they may speak his Word. But Charity obligeth me to hope, it is but some, whose Interest and Enmity are against these Christian and Dissenting Protestants, and who are so officiously concerned, and have espoused the Cause of one who hath broke the Bond of Charity, and let in secret Enmity, which, as a Canker, hath eat out what was Good; so that he hath Apostatized, and left those, I am perswaded, he once enjoyed the presence of God amongst, and whose Power he hath acknowledged was with them, and by the Ministry of some of them was reached: But now like a Flood, hath he poured forth Lyes against them; and by Forgeries, and gross Misrepresentations, hath and doth seek to be∣spatter them, and to kindle Strife; which, as Solo∣mon said, is As Coals are to burning Coals, and Wood to Fire; so is a Contentious Man to kindle Strife. Prov. 26. 21. And those few Clergy-Men, in those Counties, that have espoused him, May well be compared to him that passeth by, and medleth with Strife belonging not to him: Who is like one that taketh a Dog by the Ears, and as a Mad-man who casleth Fine-brands, Arrows and Death; Prov. 26. 17. 18. so is that Man that deceiveth his Neighbour, and saith, Am not I in Sport? Be not therefore, in Love, I intreat you, of this Number, let not the lying Stories, base Suggestions, or wicked Insinuations of any, or their false Pretences, be they what it will, prevail with you to joyn with such, or to become of that Number, That speak evil of their Neighbours without Cause, or that lay to their Psal. 35. 11. Charge things that they know not of.
But rather observe the Conversation, and Examine the Doctrines of those your Neighbours, called Qua∣kers, against whom this great Rage and Combination is; and take not things upon Trust nor Report: Re∣member the Excellent Advice of Wisdom, follow her Direction, take her Councel, for she is worthy, who said, Blame not before thou hast examined the Matter, first understand, and then Re∣bake. Inspect their Conversations, and see if you can find that they are such, that either Curse, Swear, Revile, Blaspheme or speak Evil of God, or Jesus Christ, or if any of them Contemn Magistracy, as they are falsly charged: It's hoped their Patient Suffering and Peaceable Deportment, under all the various Revolutions of Government, will sufficiently Evince the contrary; and their Passive and Patient Suffer∣ing, wherein for Conscience sake they could not Actively obey, may well demonstrate their Regard to Magistracy. And altho' in some things they have seemed to differ from those of other Perswasions, yet who can Convict them of Error in any Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Religion; or of their not holding that which is truly Essential to Salvation, and agreeable to the holy Scriptures? Which holy Records (how ever they have been Misrepresented, or falsly Accused, as Slighters and Contemners of them) I do declare on their behalf, they have always had, and still have, a high Esteem of, and true Va∣lue for them, above all other Writings, or Books; and their frequent use of them, and pressing their Children and Servants to the reading therein, may sufficiently Demonstrate to those that know them, the Innocency of this abused People.
Be you therefore like the Noble Bereans, search the holy Scriptures, and you may see their Writ∣ings and Doctrines are not contrary thereto, but may be plainly proved thereby: For they desire not any farther to be Credited, or to have what they Write or Preach received by any, but as its conso∣nant thereto, and answers that Holy Principle, and Divine Oracle, that the Great and All-wise Crea∣tor of all things, hath placed in every Man's Heart and Conscience. Suspend therefore your Censure, and forbear your Complaints, till the Contrary of these things are cleared to you, by sound Reason, and plain Scri∣pture, without any corrupt Meanings, false Glosses, or Interpretations. And if they were a People mistaken in any Point, or were Clouded in their Understandings; would it not (I beseech you consider) much more become those that esteem themselves Learned Ministers of the Gospel, in Meekness to Instruct, and by sound Doctrine to Convince them; rather than to call them, and Charge every one of them to be Blasphemers, and make no Proof thereof. It's true the Quakers complied to meet them at West-Dereham, the 8th of December, 1698. altho' there was not a Mutual Consent, of the things pro∣posed, in the Letters that passed between them, re∣lating to the Conference, as those that peruse the Letters may find, yet so Eager were these Men, and Resolute, that in their last Letter to the Quakers, they tell them, Their Measures are Fixt, and they may chuse whether they will Meet them, upon the Terms resolved upon or No: Yet the Quakers went, and in the presence of the People, requested to have the Au∣thors Names, Titles of Books, and Pages, they pre∣tended
to prove their Charges out of; but instead of that, were Hallowed and Hissed at by some of those Clergy-Men, as such of you, as were present, may well Remember. And if these People must be accounted Blasphe∣mers, if they disown not those Books, or their Friends that Writ them, without seeing the Books, or what's in them; how can they be either just to their Friends, or true to themselves; for ought any Man to condemn another, without full Hearing and due Examination, or would those Clergy-Men account it just, that any should charge them as the highest of Criminals, and Condemn and Sentence them as such, for what some of their Brethren have Writ in Books, which they never saw nor read, nor knew the Contents of; or would they be so unjust to themselves, and false to their Brethren, as to ac∣knowledge them Guilty in such sort, and condemn them for Writing that they themselves neither knew or never saw: If not, Why should the Quakers, without seeing the Books and examining the Con∣tents, be obliged to condemn their Friends for Pub∣lishers of Blasphemy, or be esteemed Blasphemers. Consider this I beseech you, and examine whe∣ther it agrees with Christ's Doctrine, All things what∣soever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets: Or whether there is any ground to conclude, that the Chargers would ever have refused to have given the Account desired by the Quakers, if they had been well assured, that by the Express words of these Books, out of which they pretend to prove their Charge, it would be clearly and evidently proved. Let these things be duely considered, Oh ye In∣habitants of the Counties aforesaid, or to whom this
may come, and let Christian Moderation be exercised towards your Peaceable Neighbours and Country-Men. Remember the Anthem the Angels sounded when they published the Gospel, was, Glory to God on High, on Earth Peace, and Good Will to Men. And if we all endeavour to be found in the Pra∣ctice of this, it will render us more like to him that we all Profess, who said, By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another: John 13. 35. It's those that dwell therein that wear his Badge. For whoso hateth his Brother, is a Murtherer; and ye know that no Murtherer, hath Eternal Life abiding in 1 John 3. 15. him, for Envy slayeth the silly One, and Hatred is the Badge of a Persecutor, and renders People too like Job 5. 2. him, that first Envied and was Wrathful, and then Murthered his Brother, because the Lord had re∣gard to his Sacrifice: Yet the Lord said to Cain, If thou dost well, shalt thou not be accepted? And if thou Gen. 4. 7. dost not well, Sin lies at the Door. And while Sin lies there, it's a Bar to keep Man from Acceptance with God, altho' he may Sacrifice and Offer, he'll fall short of his Duty whilst that's loved and lived in. But he that Envies not, but Loves his Neigh∣bour Mat. 22. 38. 39. Lev. 19. 18. Rom. 13. 9. Gal. 5. 14. James 2. 8. as himself, keeps the great Commandment of him that in all things we ought to hear; and it's those that abide in his Love that knows of his Do∣ctrine. Therefore, Oh ye Inhabitants aforesaid, and all Peo∣ple of what Degree, Rank or Quality foever, let a se∣rious Consideration, which is an Effect of true Wisdom, and a due Examination, which all Wise Men ought to use, be had and made by you, before you Exclaim against a People ye know no Evil by; be not hurried into a Misapprehension of this Peoples Doctrines by
Men filled with prejudice, and whose Interest prompts them in General to Lurk, in which lies Deceit, and therein under pretence of Mischief, Threatning Danger, Venemous Doctrines, Blasphemous Books, and Pernicious Principles, tending to subvert the Fundamentals of Christianity, do but endeavour to draw you into the like Enmity with them: Let your Experience now, which you have had of this People, under the various Revolutions of Govern∣ment in this Nation, for above Forty Years, speak for them, whether they have not been of those that are quiet in the Land; but these things which are false and slanderous Stories suggested without Ground or Proof, are like Demetrius's Exclamations against Paul, saying, Moreover ye See and Hear that Acts 19. not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much People: But Demetrius was so Ingenuous then, as to confess it was That Craft by which he and his Brethren got their Wealth, that was in Danger, and plainly in∣timated that was the Cause of his Wrath; And when they heard those things they were full of Wrath. But Remember the Town-Clerks Advice, when this Ʋproar was, he said, Ye ought to be Quiet, and to do nothing Rashly, for these Men are neither Rob∣bers of Churches, nor Blasphemers of your Goddess. Wherefore if Demetrius, &c. hath matter against any Man, the Law is open. And Oh my Friends! to you I appeal, whether ever ye knew, or did observe, the Demetrius's of our Age present any Man, or prosecute him at Law, or Incense or Stir up the Magistrates, and endeavour by Petition to Incense the Government against him, whilst he lived in Pride, Gluttony, Drunkenness or any Excess of Riot. But this hath often been seen,
that when those, or any have turned from their Evil Ways, become Conscientious, and could not pay their Tithes, or comply with some other things that are acknowledged but Outward and Visible Signs, of an Inward and Spiritual Grace. Then, Oh then! how have these been prosecuted, if but for a few Farthings, a few Pence and Shillings; the Justices and Officers troubled, the Courts and Lawyers imployed, and Mony spent, Revenge vented, and Havock and Spoil made, Two, Three or Four times more taken then demanded: And yet these Suffering People are ex∣claimed against as Men of Pernicious Principles, the great Growth and daily Increase of whom, threatens the Nation with Mischiefs and Dangers. And although the Law is open to Punish Romish Emissaries; yet these Petitioners cannot be con∣tent to take that way, but would falsly insinuate, there were such among the Teachers of the said People. And yet are not many of these Clergy-Men in Ro∣mish Practices, viz. Bowing to the Alter, and to the East, and having God-fathers and God-mothers, as they call them, and Signing Children with the Sign of the Cross, and their Surplace, and their Absoluti∣on, in which the Minister is to say, I absolve thee from all thy Sins; are not these things Romish, see the Mass Book? And also their Prosecuting for Mor∣tuaries and Smoak-Penny, &c. Oh! consider all People, to whom this may come, and know assuredly this, that the Great and Ever∣lasting God, who hath measured the Waters in the hallow of his Hand, and meted out the Heaven with a Span, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a measure, Isa. 40. 12. and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance? He sees and beholds these things; for the
Lord is a God of Knowledge, and by him Actions are 1 Sam. 2. 3. weighed; and he marks the ways of the Children of Men, and records their doings, as with a Pen of Iron, and Point of a Diamond, in the Books that shall be opened, when the Dead, both small and great shall stand before God, and him that John see sat on a great Rev. 20. white Throne, from whose Face the Earth and the Hea∣ven fled away, and there was found no more place for them that went on the breadth of the Earth, and com∣passed the Camp of the Saints about, and the Beloved City; and Fire came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured them: And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented Day and Night for evermore. And therefore let all consider their Ways, and amend their Doings, for Time here is short, and our Moments uncertain; but sure it is, that God will bring every Work to Judgment, with every secret thing; and there are none can appear before him with boldness, nor give their Account with joy, that take pleasure in Unrighteousness, and die in their Sins, such can never go where Christ is, as he said. John 1. 21. Therefore in Bowels of tender Love, and in Good-Will to your never dying Souls, I tenderly beseech you, Turn to the Lord, and from the Evil of your Doings, and put away the Violence that's in your Hearts; and against this Innocent People entertain no Prejudice, neither hearken to the lying Stories, and false Suggestions of Men, whose Fruits and Works declares, they neither follow the Doctrine, and blessed Ensample of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who taught not as the Scribes and Pharisees, but as one ha∣ving Authority, and who enforced his Doctrine by his Ensample, and said, Learn of me, I am meek and lowly Mat. 11. 29. in Heart; He was full of Love, and was moved with Mark 6. 34.
Compassion on the ignorant, and them that are out of the way; and come not to destroy, but to save; and by Luke 9. 5, 6. him Grace and Truth is come, and it appears to all, and his Light shines in all, and his Spirit strives with the John 1. 17. Titus 2. 13. John 1. 9. Children of Men; it's he shews Man what is good, and what the Lord requires at your Hands; it's he, that Micah 6. 8. by his Spirit Convinces of Sin, and reproves for it in John 16. 8. the secret of Mens Hearts; it's he that is the great Wisdom of God, that calls to the Simple Ones, saying, How long ye Simple Ones will ye love Simplicity, and ye Prov. 1. 22. Scorners delight in their Scorning, and Fools hate Know∣ledge? Turn ye at my Reproof: Behold I will pour out of my Spirit unto you, and make known my Words unto you: Oh! It's this, and the Grace that Comes by him, that appears to all, and would teach all, if they would come to him, believe in him, and learn of him, to deny all that which is the cause of God's Wrath, and would teach them to live Soberly, and Righteously, and Godly. Titus 2. 13. Therefore, while ye have Time, prize your Time, and the Day of your tender Visitation, which God, through Christ, is affording to you, that the things that belong to your Peace you may come to know, before they are hid from your Eyes; these things will be of profit to you, and your so doing will be∣speak you Christians indeed; for if you bear that Name, and are not guided and led by Christ's Spirit, Rom. 8. 9. 14. you will be found none of his, nor Sons of God, pro∣fess what you will, if you remain Workers of Iniquity Christ will profess, he knows ye not, and will bid you depart from him into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil Mat. 7. 23. Mat. 25. 41. and his Angels. And therefore, if you would be of that Number which he will say unto, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from Mat. 25. 34. the Foundation of the World; then you must be Righ∣teous,
and that you cannot be, unless ye do Righte∣ousness; for, said the Apostle, He that doeth Righte∣ousness, is Righteous, even as he is Righteous: He that 1 John 3. 7, 8. committeth Sin is of the Devil. And none can do Righteousness but those that learn of his Grace, that teached to deny all Unrighteousness, and are guided by his Spirit, which he promised should guide into all John 16. 13. Truth. And walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, 1 John 1. 7. where the Blood of Jesus Christ is known to cleanse from all Sin. And this is the Doctrine the Holy Scrip∣tures, and this People teach, against whom this great Rage is. And if you would come to that Spirit the holy Pen men were moved to write the holy Scriptures by, and in and by that Compare the Doctrines of these People, and their Practice, and the Practice of those Men that preach against this People, and their Doctrines, and that charge them with Error, Blasphe∣my, and Pernicious Principles, you would quickly find whose Quodrat most with them, and are most agree∣able to the true Prophets and Ministers of Jesus Christ. Therefore remember the Excellent Counsel of the wise and learned Apostle Paul, Prove all things, and 1 Thes. 5. 21. hold fast that which is good; you may remember it was said of the Christians, that they were a Sect every Acts 28. 22. where spoken against: And yet the true Ministers in all things approved themselves as the Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6. 4 to 9. in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labour, in Watchings, in Fastings, by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-Suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, and by the Power of God, by the Armour of Righteousness on the right Hand and on the left, by Honour and Dishonour, by evil Report and good Report, as deceivers, yet true.
Observe, they were not impatient, they did not Afflict, they had not great Revenues, nor large Bene∣fices, or forced Maintenance, they did not Stripe and Imprison, nor cause Tumults, by incensing the Peo∣ple against their Peaceable Neighbours; they were not idle, nor exercised in Feastings, received not the Honour nor high Title, did not Lord it over God's Heritage, but by Pureness, Knowledge, Long-Suffering, Kindness, and the Holy Ghost, Love unfeigned, and by the Word of Truth, &c. approved themselves the Mini∣sters of Christ; they were not defiled, ignorant, hasty, angry or hateful: Consider these things seriously, and let all endeavour to amend what's amiss in them∣selves, and rather mend faults where they are, than suggest faults where they are not; let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind, and so let him act; and hate nothing but the Devil and Sin, but love God, and one another. So having in Love and Plainness discharged my Spirit of what, as a concern, remained upon me, in the Love of him that hath loved and died for us all, I Conclude and Remain Your sincere Friend, and hearty Well-wisher to the People called Quakers, and all Men. J. F. FINIS.
