G1312A 99832874 37349
Gospel-Baptism OR, PLAIN PROOF, That the Mode of Dipping, Plunging or Immersion, now commonly used by the People called Anabaptists; is ac∣cording to the Primitive Institution: In a LETTER TO Mr. Samuel Young. Occasioned by his Sharp Reflections in Contempt of that Way, and the Defenders thereof in a small Book, ENTITULED, A Second and Last New-Years-Gift, &c. With some Notes concerning the True SUBJECT. By a Lover of Truth. Magna est Veritas & prevalebit. LONDON, Printed by K. Astwood, and Sold by William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street. and John Marshal, at the Bible in Grace-church street. 1700.
Plain Mathematical Demonstration, that (according to the present Mode of Bap∣tizing, commonly used by the People called Anabaptist) the Person Baptized is plunged, or dipt, by the hands of the Ad∣ministrator; even from the Crown of the Head to the very Soles of the Feet. To demonstrate that a persons going wn into the Water, hinders not his total mersion or Plunging by the Administra∣tor;
Supppose a K to be a Staff standin upright, with the foot K on the bottom o the River I K; let h c represent the Su face or upper part of the Water, let a per∣son be supposed to take hold of the To of the Staff, and impel or immerge th Staff towards the Earth, till the head  covered in the Water. Tell me then, you can, the least particle of such staff that hath not receiv'd an Immersion  plunge by the hand of such person; not∣withstanding its being in the Water be∣fore. You may imagine infinite parallels be∣tween the surface of the Water and the Earth, the least motion of the top of the Staff towards the Earth, makes an Imme∣sion of every particle beneath its form parallel of Altitude. The same may be said, of a person to  Baptized; the going down into the Wa∣ter is no part of the immersion: That pa is effectually, and really done by the Admi∣nistrator, and in no part Imaginary; whi I think, now a Child may understand a therefore I need not doubt a Philosopher This may suffice to Answer the n Objection, that the Baptists act contrary to their own principles; by going down  to the Water themselves.
To the READER. I Humbly beseech a Favourable Eye, a Smooth Brow, a Pleasant and Complacent Aspect, the Abdication of Morose Animosity, Pre∣dice, Rancour, Enmity, and the Exercise of umanity, Patience, Self-Denial, Coolness and edateness of Mind; at least for so long or little  while, 'till he supposed Criminal hath propo∣sed and pleaded his Cause, made his Defence and Appeal; and then, being fully heard; to ss Censure, give Judgment, and pass Sen∣nce impartially according to Merit or De∣erit, either unto Condemnation, or Vindi∣cation and Acquittal; like a Righteous and nbyassed, and not a Sufflated-Aetnean-Evo∣itant-Sententious-Judge. It is too Natural, and hath been too Ʋsual, r Adversaies to throw Dirt at, and bespatter e another; though thereby they foul their own ingers: And commonly they are Lynx-eyed  the discovering others Blemishes, though as ind as a Bat in the Observation of their own ot. It is Ʋndeniable, That there is no Church or ciey of People of what Denomination soever,
but there may be found, or hath been, som whose Ignorance or Scandalous Life hath been, o may be a Reproach unto them; and such who ar faulty may justly pass under a severe Censure but it is very unjust to condemn the Principle of any Society, for the ill Practice or Ignoran of a Few. What Intolerable Reflections have been made upon the Innocent, and upon a true Prin∣ciple for, or because of the Extravaganci (whether all were true or no, which may b questioned considering these times) of Knip∣perdolin and John of Leyden, as if a that profess'd Believers Baptism were such Calvin calls them Furiosi, or Madmen, and most Writers contemn them, as if their Prin∣ciples were prodiglously Erroneous. Dr. Feat∣ly on the Title-Page of his Book, has the Picture of the Heads (with a little more) of several with Faces of such Features as renders them con∣temptible, and as if God had not given them  good shapes as other Men; with design thereby to make himself admired, as a Famous Oppose and Mall to that People. Many unfa Ways have many at this Day used, to beg an ill Opinion of this People, that what the say for themselves may not be regarded. On main Argument against them is, That the Ministers generally are no Scholars but illitera Tradesmen, and guilty of great Impropriety
Speech. It is true, that it is the unhappiness of ome to be so, tho' probably we may find as Learn∣ed men among us as among others, and also as nlearned persons amongst others as amongst us; esides, it is evident on the other hand, that the eatest Scholars do not always make the great∣est or best Preachers. And considering the ad∣vantages of School Learning that some men have, they make as great flaws as those which ey contemn, though not in the same thing. Where there is Grace and a Gift for preaching in some mechanick, the goodness of God is the more to be admired: and a man of Learning, earing such speak well, may be drawn into ad∣iration at a disappointment. The graces and Gifts of God are still unlimited. The Spirit oweth where it listeth. To be short, to under∣stand the Tougues is but a humane (though it  a useful and ornamental) Accomplishment. And in those who have it not, it is no defect in ature, but an unhappy want of Education; which may be where there is plentiful Grace, therefore people should have a Care, how they cast ntempt upon a gifted Tradesman. First, In this little Tract. I have (I hope) oved, that John and the st of the Disciples have not declared that they Plunged not. Secondly, That Plunging is not contrary, t according to the Doctrine of Baptism, and therefore the only Lawful Baptism.
Thirdly, That as it is a Duty and Com∣mand, we rightly practice it. And if so; Then to some it will appear, that those who have Screw'd their Brains, to squeeze out the Quintessence of the derivate verb Bapti∣zo, to make it a diminutive inceptive; and s not exceeding, nay hardly amounting to so much as Rantizo; have thereby so exalted their own Wits, that to them the Old Lexicographers and the Learned in past Ages seem to have im∣posed upon ignorant posterity; nay, the Greeks have not understood their own tongue. And a this to bring the real extensive, significative ordi∣nance of Baptism, to no more then a little sprink∣ling or pouring a little Water from the Palm of a Mans hand, which they falsly call washing. Tertullian, Id verum quodcunque primum∣id adulterum quod posterius: I shall add no more, but beg of God t open the blind Eys, that they may behold  Splendor of Truth, and be in Love with it.
Mr. Sam. Young's Letter. SIR, BEfore your Papers go to the Press, I pray you to see my next; where you shall find ings done Ex professo and not Obiter. That John and Peter declare they plunged not. hat Plunging is contrary to the Doctrine of Bap∣tism. That if Plunging were a Duty and Com∣mand of Christ, you practice it not. The Papers have been read by many Learned ivines, who approve what I have done. I under∣stand you are no Minister, and therefore, I think sit to meddle with me in this thing; tho' the Hand f Joab may be in all this. (I wish your great en would appear.) Whether you are a Learned an I know not, or a good Grecian, many common atia School masters in this City are not; as I too ell know, who have occasionally taught them. If you run the beaten Road, Follow not my Ar∣uments closely and concisely; I intend not to read n Leaves of your Book if this be not so: One sheet ere enough for an Answer, or two at the most. Do ou think, I will take Notice of Thread bare Col∣ctions out of Danvers, Russel; or such Men, whom olly and Dishonesty have contended, which should nder them most Infamous. A wise Man and holar of Yours, desires we may meet first. I will elore Mr. Collins, Mr. Stennet, Mr. Steed, Mr. Piggott, Mr. Adams, or other Scholars. I pray let me see ours before my next Book goes to the Press. hen if I am convinced by you I shall not proceed,  not I may make Addition to your Convictions. I am well satisfied in my Cause, say who will  the contrary; name your Time and Place, where ou may meet your Friend and Servant, Sam. Young.
The Answer. SIR, I Being naturally Pusillanimous, and being sud∣denly smitten with the Ponderous Thunder∣bolt of your Pen, and mine Eyes dazled and set a Twinkling, by the Circumvolitant Coruscati∣on its usual Concomitant; my Spirits which be∣fore had some Elevation, immediately were de∣prest to a Nullity of Altitude, and being igno∣rant of Longitude for some time, I could scarce tell where I was; but after a while, being re∣animated and raised, look'd out; and with a Cir∣cumspicient Eye, by the help of the Opticks, de∣scry'd Land; and then with a Huzza, like a wild Sailor, made Speed with Top and Top-Gallant to get to Shore, and set foot on it. Sir, Now to the Business: I assure you that I am not Ambitious of hasting my Papers to the Press; I am not so Over-opinionative of my Ac∣complishments, as to Expose my self by Expo∣sing them, to Universal View and Censure  without the Approbation and Encouragement o Men of Profound Learning and Solid Judg∣ment. I have Expatiated farther than at first I in∣tended, and indeed, if what is writ be Valuable I shall be unwilling, that they should fall under the sole Hands of one Adversary; that shall stiflle them in a Gold-finders Treasury, with the Greatest Contempt: Or, barbarously condemn them to a French Martyrdom, of cutting out their Tongue to spoil their Speaking, and then com∣mitting them to the Unmerciful, Consuming Flame As to your three Things, take middle and bot
Ends together, I have luckily (if pertinently) spoke to. If my Papers had past the Approba∣tion of many Learned Divines, perhaps, I might old up my Head a little higher; but you know, e Anabaptists are generally contemptible Mecha∣icks; and our Spirits are kept under the Hatches nd cannot peep up: But it is a Kindness to keep s humble. Indeed I am no Minister, and therefore must con∣fess with the most Debased Soul, that I am unfit to meddle with you in this thing; and do believe, you hink so, because you tell me so. I need not advise you to glory over me, but I think you cannot think too meanly of me: However, in this matter, I have not been so Effeminate, as to have Words put into my Mouth by any Man living hitherto; tho' I should think it no Shame to take Advice, and learn to o a thing effectually: And I could wish I had he Woman of Tokoah's Tongue, Wisdom and Cou∣rage; to manage Truth for the Conviction of boast∣ing Gainsayers. As for Learning, I must play at Bo∣eep for that; look not for it in me, if you do, ou will loose your Labour. I profess not my self Master either of the Latin or Greek; but am willing o learn, tho' not with the Common City-Masters o be scorn'd for it. You have said so much to dash me out of Coun∣tenance, and brought me to such a Confession, that  know not with what Face I shall appear before such Majesty. The Papers must speak all, for I am unfit or a Logomachical Duel, though I should have Se∣conds. As for my Collection of Forces to attack ou, I give you this Encouragement, you will not nd a Brigade of Gigantick-frightful-astonishing exten∣ve-bearded-Switzers: I have no such Forreigners as Danvers and Russel, for they never came under my Eye, and therefore are Remote from my Conduct:
but they are your own familiars, that never designed to hurt you; if they do give you a By-blow by Chance, in Wielding of their Weapon, you must Ex∣cuse them. It is ill skirmishing in a Cround. If my Arguments are Old; I believe they will come in with such smooth faces, being new trimm'd, that you will hardly know them; and I assue you, I ne∣ver met with them in this dress before. I hope, we shall answer each others desires (if yours are a mine) to be friends, though we cannot jump in Opi∣nion.) As for the mutual sight of each others papers and a meeting I oppose it not; but crave time to give you notice of my resolves further, therefore burthen you with no more at present, but suscribe Your Friend AND very Humble Servant, Tho. Minge.March, the 8th. 1699/1700.
Gospel-Baptism: OR, Plain Proof, &c. Reverend Sir, PArdon (I beseech you) my Bold∣ness, in that I presume to divert your Mind from that which you esteem more weighty; than the eading of Lines concerning a Matter, wherewith you are already thoroughly acquainted, You are a Gentleman of that Learning and Free Conversation, that I be∣eve (to you) there is no new Thing under the Sun; and therefore I may justly suspect ou will charge me among the rest, with ain Repetitions and Impertinencies. Shall  hold a Candle to the Sun? what more ri∣iculous! The Light of the Candle must be Ecclips'd, if not Extinguish'd. However I ay hope, that a Pleasant and Serious
Gentleman will take what I write pleasant∣ly, and think that so I write; and tho' wea∣ly, yet, as the Matter really requires, ser∣ously: For tho' the Manager and managi of a thing may be justly ridicul'd, and  may play one with another; yet the Tru or Thing it self must not be play'd with, a therefore not play'd away; but hearti with the best of our Judgments maintain and defended. Thus far you may Wond what's the Matter. In short, Having read in your last Ne-Years-Gift, (for which I now again tha you) and also personally heard you, Vi∣voce, contemning the Mode of Dipping used by the People vulgarly called A∣baptists: I now offer a little Water, whi I hope may extinguish the Flame, a abate the Heat of over-grown Zeal; whi seemed to appear against the Example our dear Lord and Master, and Practi of his Disciples. As to those with your∣self, who maintain and defend Infant-Bap∣tism, I blame them not; I believe th are sincere, and that they think they a in the right, and act not against th Light; perswading themselves from Cir∣cumcision, and their Childrens being  the Covenant by virtue of their Paren Faith: However, as to the Mode, I could
almost be as censorious as another, in judg∣ing a Man of Learning to speak against is Knowledge, and so his Conscience also; when he denies Dipping to be un∣derstood by the Word Baptism. I shall ot undertake to run through the whole ontroversie, I knowing I may unwilling∣ly and weakly abuse a good Cause, which as not wanted Men of Learning and Piety  defend it. As to the Word , with its De∣vatives, your self knows better than I; ho profess my self no Master of the reek Tongue, I know you are well ac∣quainted with Scapula, and he tells me, that ΒΑΠΓΩ, signifies Mergo, Immergo. em tingo (quod fit immergendo) item avo, &c. , Mergo, seu Immergo, bmergo, Obruo aquâ, Abluo, Lavo, , Mersio, Lotio, Ablutio, ipse im∣ergendi item lavandi seu abluendi actus. And so he goes on with his Derivatives,  denoting the use of a great (and ot a small sprinkling) Quantity of Water. George Pasor in his Lexicon hath he same, with which other Authors a∣ree; as is very well known also to you. endrick Hexham renders the Word Bap∣tism, Doopinge, which in English we know  Dipping, which the Translators of our
Bible might as truly have done if they ha pleased; but we, and most, whose Lan∣guages border upon the Latin, follow th Greek; which I think is something of a∣buse, occasioning doubt when perhaps there would be none. In three other Dutch Dictionaries (which I have also Baptism is rendred, Een doopsel & do which again turned into Latin, is Bap∣tisma, &c. Immersio, &c. , Ick doop doopen; baptizare, mergere & immerge &c. , Een dooper, baptized. Gedoop The day of one's Baptism, Den dagh v yemants doopinge; den doop-dagh. No to the Text it self, in Dutch Bibles  several Translations, Matth. 3.5, 6. D is tot hem uytgegaen Jerusalem ende ghehe Judea, ende 't gheheele lant rontom den Jo daen. Ende wierden van hem ghedoopt in  Jordaen beliidende hare sonden. Verse  Hy dan siende vele van de Phariseen en Sadduceen tot siinen doop komen sprack, & v. 11. Ick doope u wel met water tot beke ringhe: maer dic na my komp is sterck dan ick, &c. die sal u met den heylig geest ende met vyer doopen. Here  pleased to Observe, that the Dut are not ashamed to say according to the Original (if the Word [with]  there). I dip you with Water, which
you were pleased to say was Nonsence. beg of you to excogitate (and declare)  way how to be dipt in it, without it. er. 13. Doe quam Jesus van Galilea na  Jordaen tot Joannem om van hem ghe∣opt te worden. Jesus came, &c. to be pt. Doch Joannes, &c. My is noodich n u ghedoopt te worden, I have need to be t of thee: v. 16. Ende Jesus ghedoopt inde, is ter stondt opgeklommen uyt het Wa∣, &c. And Jesus when he was dipt went  straightway out of the Water. The three veral Bibles of several Translations, hich I have by me, though they ex∣ess truly other things in differing words, et they all agree in Words signifying  Baptizing Dipping. Now a little of the Text in Greek, at. 3.11. .  (saith Pasor) ex Hebraismo hîc redundat. go quidem baptizo vos aquâ, I baptize you  with] Water; as you affirm in opposition  Dipping. Suppose  be superfluous, here is nothing of the Cause lost by it: or there can be no Dipping in it without , and therefore they must dip with it. ut forasmuch as  is in the Text, why
should it be turned out? Some Transla∣tors continue it it. I have three Transla∣tion that have it, One in Flemish, ano∣ther Spanish, and a third in Italian: The former in Dutch hath it thus, Matth. 3. Ick doope u in't water tot penitentie, ma by die na mij comen sal, is stercker dan ick wens schoenen ick niet waerdich en ben  draghon die sal u doopen; in den heylig gheest ende vier. This Version printe 1548. In the Other in Spanish it is thus Mar. 3. v. 11. Yo ciertamente os baptizo  agua, para conversion: mas el que viene tra m, mas poderoso es que yo. cuyos çapat yo no soy digno de llevar. El os baptizan en Espiritu sancto y fuego. Testament printe 1596. Here you have [In] retain'd, a in the Greek; and so, I baptize or dip i Water. In Italian thus, Jo certamente vi batt zo in acqua alla penitentia, ma quello  viene doppo me, è piu possente die me, d quaele io non sono degno di portare i Calzament esso vi battezera in Spiritò santo et fuc If dipping with Water be Nonsence, the pray accept of dipping in. The Sen you have in the 2 Kings 5.14. , &c. Then went Naaman down and dipped him∣self
seven times in Jordan. Here we may ob∣serve that he went down into the Water, and yet is said to baptize or dip himself [in] n Jordan, Immersit se, as Pasor has it. Therefore his going down was no hin∣erance to his total Immersion or Dip∣ping, (which you have been pleased to intimate) but did facilitate it. It is too trifling to talk of an Engine. The usual way of Plunging, is certainly as near the Original Pattern and Institution, as can enter into the Heart of Man; and that Submersion that is usually made, if con∣sidered, will be found to be an Immer∣sion even of the very Feet, by the Ad∣ministrator. Beyond what is possible, God expects not from Man. Baptism as is respects Doctrine, whether it be of Wa∣ter, or of the Spirit, or Affliction, signifies more than a Sprinkling or Pouring; and the two latter are an Allusion to the for∣mer, Joh. 20.22. Are you able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and to be Baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized with? That Baptism of our Saviour was the Bap∣tism of Afflictions (more than a Sprink∣ling) He was a Man of Sorrow and ac∣quainted with Grief. The Metaphor (saith Pasor) is familiar to the Scriptures, in which Afflictions are compared to Whirl∣pools
of Water; with which, those wh are annoy'd with the Miseries and Cala∣mities of this Life, are as it were plunge down, nevertheless, so plunged down tha they may rise again. The Baptism of th Spirit is a plentiful Effusion of the Spirit and not a sprinkling or small pouring, Act 2.4. And they were all filled with the Ho Ghost. These Baptisms are neither Insper∣sions, Conspersions nor Aspersions. The Example of our Saviour's being bap∣tized by John in the River of Jordan, wherein it's plain that they went down into the Wa∣ter; and express that he came up out of th Water, after he had been there baptized o dipt rather; for so it certainly was, the na∣tural signification of the word Baptism being so; and the Ordinance it self to Believers signifies the ablution, washing away or remission of Sins, Death, Burial, Resurrection; th Death and Burial of Sin, and Resurrection o Renovation to Life, through the Death an Resurrection of Christ, Acts 8. v. 38. An they went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and (Philip) baptized him. Ende by doopte hem. Dutch. and he dipt him. The reason why they were dipt in Rivers was given, Because there was much Wa∣ter; A little would serve to sprinkle o wash the face. A good man may, and
doth sometimes, speak rashly and inconside∣rately, that, of which he may have cause to humble himself and repent. What Man n a sedate mind, will affirm that our Savi∣our ever said one word, or did one Act hat was needless, or might have been said r done better? Or that John and the other Disciples of our Lord, in imitation of him,  the ministration of that Ordinance of Baptism, put themselves and the people who elieved and obeyed them, to unnecessary Trouble and Labour? which certainly they d, if it ought or might rightly be done otherwise, with more expedition and ease. nd common prudence of a man would di∣rect (if that were to guide, and not the  fallible example) to the shortest Course. or it is a saying amongst men, or Philoso∣phers. Frustra fit per plura, quod aeque bene ri potest per pauciora. But our Saviour did  things well, who durst say otherwise?  is to be lamented, that so many in the se∣veral Ages since Christ and his Apostles, ave attempted to correct, or rather deface nd deform their unerring Pattern. They ave made a great deal of Work by attempt∣g to shorten it; who should make a mock f Going down into the Water to be bap∣tized? when we have no other Example  all the New Testament. If a little water
sprinkled or poured on the face be enough as they say it is; no marvel that they alte the Primitive Custom of going down into the Water, and count it not only needless but ridiculous and contemptible: Certain they know not what they say or do; an therefore (though their Sin be horrid they ought to be prayed for. What yo quote out of John meerly about washing without relation to the other Circumstan∣ces of the Ordinance of Baptism; nothing weakens the Baptists Cause in following th Primitive Example: But may (if you way of Arguing be fair) be sufficient Pro and Reason for your self and Party, (wh durst alter Institutions) to change sprink∣ling or washing of the Face, to washing  the Feet for sufficient Baptism; since it  also undoubtedly true, what our Saviour said, John 13.8. If I wash thee not, th hast no part in me; yet he wash'd only th Feet, and says, He that is wash'd need  wash the whole, but the Feet only; If the Feet only, then not the Face: But this  trifling. What has been said is sufficient to prove Baptism by dipping (without a Engine) after going down into the Water. But I have more to say, out of your own Authors, who are for Pedobaptism; for in deed I have not one Author in my House
that manages the Controversie for, (but several against) the (so called) Anabaptists. Therefore I entreat your patience and ex∣cuse, if I burden you with some impertinent repetitions or frivolous Inferences. But y the way, while it is in my Mind, I ould ask a Question or two; whether is  not a Marvellous Thing, that any should ave it entred into his Heart to think, that ur Saviour went down into the River and John with him, to have a little Water taken p in the Hand, to sprinkle or pour on the ead or Face only? Certainly that Act of rinking, or pouring on the Face or Head only with a little Water, might have been one with greater facility. And whereas in contempt, the Question hath been asked, whether they went in naked or with their loaths on. I think it is sufficient that we ave an Account, that they undoubtedly went down into the River for an holy End;  baptize and be baptized: And who in their right Wits, durst question the Mode∣y or Decency of the Act, performed either y our Saviour, his Apostles or Disciples. Now to go on, Let us consider the Agree∣ment or Disagreement, between the Mode f Sprinkling used by the Pedobaptists; and he Things represented or signified by true Baptism.
Berchetus (with whose Book (I doubt not) you are well acquainted) in one of his Catechisms hath these Words §. 48. Per Baptismum quasi ingredim in Dei Ecclesiam. Testificatur enim nobi Deum nos, qui alioqui peregrini sumus, cum domesticis collocare velle. Baptismus duo no∣bis repraesentat, tum remissionem peccatorum videlicet, tum spiritualem regenerationem. §. 49. Quam vero proportionem cum h habet aqua, ut signum horum esse possit  Respons. Quia peccatorum remissio similis es quodammodo lavacro, quo ea quae sunt in no∣stris animis inquinamenta eluuntur, quemad∣modum corporis sordes aqua abstergimus. A regenerationem nostram quomodo aqua in∣nuit? . Which in Latin he renders thus. Quo∣niam initium quidem ipsius est, ut nostr natura mortificetur: Finis verò, ut novae cre∣aturae simus, infusa in nestrum caput aqua signum mortis est. Sed somul etiam nostrum ad vitam reditum subindicat, in eo quod nom submersi in aqua perpetuo simus, sed tantùm
puncto temporis, quasi in aliquod sepulchrum subimus, ut statim ex eo emergamus. In English thus, By Baptism we do (as it were) enter into the Church of God. For it is testi∣fied to us, that God is willing to place us who otherwise are Strangers, with those of his own House. Baptism represents two Things to us, that is to say, both Remission of Sins and Spiritual Regeneration. § 49. But what Proportion, Analogy, or Agreement, hath Water with these things; that it may be a sign of these things? Answer. Because Remission of Sins, after  sort, is like a Laver; wherein the filthinesses which are in our souls are wash∣ed out, even as we put away the uncleanness of the body with Water. Question. But how doth Water signifie our Regeneration? Answer. Because indeed, the beginning thereof is, that our nature may be mortifi∣ed; but the end, that we may be new Creatures; the water poured on our head, s the sign of Death. But together there∣with doth also somewhat demonstrate, that forasmuch as we are not continually sup∣prest (or continued immers'd) in the water, ut only for a moment of time; we go down, as it were, into some Grave, that we may presently arise out of it.
Now am I necessarily induced to treat of the subject proper to be baptized, together, with the Mode or Manner how; in doing which, some other things perhaps may fall under cousideration. First, What a Church is. The Catholick Church consisteth only of the Predestinate, and comprehendeth the universal number of all those which shall be saved; not only those now living on earth, but all that have been since the beginning of the world, John 10.16. A particular Church is a member of the Universal and Catholick Church, and it is a Visible Company and Congregation of men, among whom the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments rightly administred, &c. Vid. Willet's Synopsis Papismi. Page 51, 52, 53. That Baptism gives entrance into the Visible Church. So Ʋrsinus. Page 412. Baptism is instituted to be a Token and Symbol of our receiving, and entrance into the Church. For these are opposed and contradictory, To be, and, Not to be in the Church: To enter, and Not to enter into the Church. For God will have all the Citizens of his Church thus enfranchised, and those who are not bap∣tized; when they may, he will not have Reckoned in the number of his Church.
Hither appertain all those places, in which those who were become Christians, (by believing, for there is no other way) as the Ethiopian Eunuch, Cornelius, the Jaylor of Philippi, Lydia the seller of purple, Paul &c. are said to have been presently baptized: Wherefore the Supper also is given only to them who are baptiz'd, for they only are received into the Church, of this end bear Witness those words of Christ: Mat. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, &c. where the Word , which Christ useth, properly signifieth, make Dis∣ciples; thus it is expounded by John: Joh. 4.1. The Pharises heard that Jesus made, and baptized more Disciples than John. Again, That it should be a mark whereby the Church may be discerned from all other Nations and Sects. This end followeth on the former, For they who by a Publique Sacrament are received into the Church, are by the self same discerned, and as by a Badge distinguished from the remnant, the filth of the World. Go and teach all Na∣tions, baptizing them; as if he should say, Gather me a Church by the Word, and whom ye shall make my Disciples, believ∣ing with their whole heart, all them, and them alone Baptize, and separate unto me. Again, Baptism should be a signification
or an advertisement unto us of the Cross, and of the preservation of the Church therein, and of the deliverance of the Church from it. For it signifieth that they who are baptized, are plunged, as it were, in affliction, but with assurance of escaping thence. Hence afflictions are termed by the name of Baptism, are ye able to be baptized with the Baptism, that I shall be Baptized with? Deliverance from the Cross the ve∣ry Ceremony it self of Baptism doth shew. For we are Dipped indeed, but we are not drowned or choaked in the Water. More∣over in respect of this end, Baptism is com∣pared to the Flood &c. and to the red Sea. &c. What the Learned Ʋrsinus brought in as the first and chief end of Baptism, I de∣signing brevity, and not thinking to tran∣scribe so much, have omitted, and therefore inverting the order, think now to mention it as that which is material, viz. that the end of Baptism is to be a Confirmation of our Faith, that is, a solemn testification when Christ testifieth that he washeth us with his blood and Spirit, that is, that he bestoweth on us remission of Sins, Justifi∣cation and Regeneration. Or the Chief end is, To be the Sealing of God and obsigna∣tion of the promise of grace, that is, of our Justification and Regeneration, and a testi∣mony
of God's Will, that he giveth the baptized these gifts at this present, and will give them ever hereafter. Again, John's Baptism and ours the same for substance. John preached the Baptism of repentance for remission of Sins, saying unto the people that they should believe in him that should come after him, that is, in Christ Jesus; ours that they should believe in Christ Je∣sus already come. Pag. 414. you have this. The right and lawfull use then of Baptism is, when the Converted are Baptized with observation of that Rite, and End which Christ appointed. They who are Baptized, cannot receive that which is promised but by Faith. pag. 409. The Word Baptism, sig∣nifieth a Dipping in Water, or Sprinkling with Water (saith he). But the Reason his saying this latter, is not because it is e proper signification of the Word, but cause Custom hath brought it in use,  Sprinkling instead of Dipping. Those of the East Church (saith he) were dip∣ped their whole Body in the Water. Those of the North in Colder Countries, re only sprinkled with Water, &c. Thus  Ʋrsinus. Perkins his Golden Chain, Page 132. The Ancient custom of Baptizing, was to dip, and, as it were, to dive all the
body of the Baptized in the Water; a may appear in Paul, Rom. 6. (Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death; that like as Christ was raised from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, eve so we also should walk in Newness of Lafe. And the Counsels of Laodicea and Neoca sarea, but now, especially in cold Coun∣tries, the Church useth only to sprinkle the baptized by reason of Childrens weak∣ness: for very few of ripe years are no a days baptized: we need not much ma vail at this Alteration, seeing Charity an necessity may dispence with Ceremonies and mitigate in Equity the sharpness  them. Thus far Perkins. Whether the may be a dispensation for an Alteration  that part of the Institution, is a Question. But if it be proved, that Believers on and not Infants, are the proper Subjects  Baptism; the Reason for Alteration will  out of Doors. Now I will present you  Account of the Opinion and positive As∣sertion, of that undoubtedly Learned a Pious Divine John Calvin, out of his Ins∣tations; a Book worthy high Esteem, a by your self thought so Excellent; th you say, he said true; who said, th
since our Saviour's time none but the postles have equalled it. Folio 470. age 2. §. 19. His Words are these (having eated about Baptism.) Caterum merga∣ne totus qui tingitur, id que ter an semel, an fusa tantum aqua aspergatur, minimum re∣t: sed id pro regionum diversitate Ecclesiis li∣rum esse debet. Quanquam et ipsum bapti∣ndi verbum mergere significat, & mergendi um veteri Ecclesiae observatum fuisse constat. English thus, But whether he that is bapti∣d may be dipt all over, (or wholly plunged) d that thrice or once, or whether Water be∣ing poured on, he be sprinkled only, it matters ry little; but that ought to be (left) free to  Churches, according to the diversity of Re∣ns or Countries. Although also, the Word it self of Bap∣ing signifies to Dip, and it is manifest, at the Rite of Dipping hath been ob∣ved by the Ancient Church. The for∣er Period is, Sua fert Opinio, his Opi∣nion, or Think so; and is the Matter in spute: The latter his positive Assertion  the Primitive Mode of Baptism, accord∣ing to our Saviour's Institution, Mat. 28. . Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, tizing them, &c. which ought to take ace with the Exclusion of all other Modes.
And his true Assertion of the Primitive Practice and Example, (and I should say Command) leaves no room for his Opi∣nion of Indifferency in the Matter. Especially (we may judge so) since we find him upon solid Grounds, employing his worthy (and in many things uner∣ring) Pen in the use of that so much de∣cry'd, contemn'd and ridicul'd (by your self recounted, and so accounted in your Second New-years-Gift, Pag. 22.) way of arguing used by the Anabaptists. See Calvin's Inst. cap. 17. fol. 509. of the Lord Supper. §. 50. Tertio, cur de pane simpli∣citer dixit ut ederent, de calice ut omnes bi∣berent? Acsi Satanae calliditati ex destinat occurrere voluisset.— Imò qua id fiducia hod usurpant, ut plebeculae symbolum Christi Corpor distribuant, si nullum habent Domini vel Man datum vel Exemplum.—Why did our Lord s plainly that they should eat of the Bread, and th they should all drink of the Cup? As if it ha been his Pleasure and Design to meet with and oppose the Subtilty of Satan.—Yea, with what confidence at this day do they usurp th thing, that they should distribute to the poor people the Sign of Christ's Body, if they have neither th Lord's Precept nor Example. Thus far Calvin And this occasioned by their cutting the Sa∣crament of the Lord's Supper shorter, or ta∣king
away what they thought was superflu∣ous in the Institution; administring the Sa∣crament in one kind only, to wit, the Bread, and with-holding the Cup from the People, rguing that the Bread was the Body of Christ, and therefore, that the Blood must eeds be there by way of Concomitan∣y: So that receiving one, they received oth. Calven tells them, There's no Pre∣ept nor Example for this: The Argu∣ment was good, and of like weight is it, against those who add to, or diminish from e other institution of Baptism; either, as  Matter, Manner, or Subject. In your opinion, a little Water to sprinkle, may rve to represent all the things signified by Baptism, to wit, the word it self, Dip∣ng; which is clearly another thing, Washing, Death, Burial, Resurrection, tting on of Christ, overwhelmed with flictions, a being filled with the Spirit, &c. ll which are plentiful expressions and sig∣nifications. That I may speak after Calvin: Our Sa∣viour did (as it were) of set purpose, ob∣ate the subtilty of Satan in the error of rinkling instead of Baptism; in being mself an example of going down into the River, where was plenty of Water, therein he was Baptized or Dipt; whereby
was fully represented all things without di∣minution. But perhaps you may say. Quo sum haec? To what end is all this? Have w not had enough of this already? Perhap you have. But since I have gone thus fa and farther then I thought for at first.  for a Hundred, in for a Thousand, I a minded to run the hazard of the best pa of my Stock; therefore beg your patience and entreat you to get your bags ready, f in a little time, (Deo volente) I will pay you all. Now it will be convenient to walk ba and over-hall part of the Thread already spun, to see whether I can mend it. L me say something among the rest of the Quality of the Subject to be baptized. I must to the Catechism; for I find ( least) that he must be a Catecheumen, S Berchetus before. By Baptism we do  it were, enter into the Church. T Church of Christ is built up of live Stones, upon the Living Stone and Ro Christ, 1 Peter 2.4, 5. The Life o Christian is Faith, the just shall live by  Faith. Hab. 2.4. John 17.3. This  Life Eternal, that they might know thee  only true God, and Jesus Christ whom th hast sent. This knowledge of God a and Christ is by faith only; what is not  Faith is sin. All Acts of Religious w∣ship
ought to be in Faith, which is the rue knowledge of God in Christ. Baptism s a part of Religious Worship, therefore  ought to be performed with Faith by he Subject: There is Confession with the Mouth, Rom. 10.9. If thou shalt confess with by Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in e heart, that God hath raised him from the ead, thou shalt be saved. Faith which is er joyned with repentance and confessi∣on, qualifies for Baptism, and Baptism r a Regular admission to Communion at he Lords Table; in a True Regular Vi∣ble Church: It is true also, that Belie∣vers and Elect Children do first belong to he Invisible Catholick Church before, ea, and if they should never be joyned  a Visible Church; But that is not our usiness to discourse of; our business is ith a Visible Church, which admits of one, but such as make an Audible and isible Profession of Faith, which in Chari∣y, may be judged Real. For man knoweth t the heart. The next in the Catechism , For it is Testified to us, that God is willing  place us, who otherwise are Strangers, with ose of his own house. Testified to us: Can this be meant to a abe or babes, that have Eyes and see not, ars but hear not, neither do they under∣stand:
No, it cannot be, therefore the pro∣per Subject must be a Believer, Young or Older, who otherwise are Strange that is, being without Faith; for th are we Strangers to the Common-wealth of Israel. That God is willing to place  with those of his own House, which is,  Church. We are to know God's will, th before our Admission or Orderly Reception into his Visible Church; for of the Invisi in respect of Election, we were Member before: In short, all the Representations Baptism that can be reckoned up, are no  presentations to a Babe; that hath no Un∣derstanding of Things done or said. Neither indeed is any thing in a Catechi significant, but to such who have a com∣tent Understanding; and so some ground  Hope, that as they understand Things, G will work Faith to believe them. The∣fore since no Man can find out a reason  cause in the Creature, why a Creature  of Understanding and Reason, should h an Act of Religious Worship performed  to him; which is proper for himself to ∣lieve, desire, and act; and that also wher is performed by another for him, that Ac confessedly by the Person so acting, that  of no profit or advantage at all to such C∣ture, without his future concurrence in
approbation and belief of the things done nd required: What can enforce the per∣rming of that Act, but the sole Authority  four only Law-giver, the Lord Jesus Christ, which whether it be his Law, that Infants ould be Baptized, I shall by and by con∣der: Only, by the way, (passing by any things, that might be said from the atechism besides.) I shall make a Collecti∣on from the Greek Word (whereby Bap∣tism is signified) of the import thereof, as e Author gives it. viz. — , &c. Eo od non submersi in aqua perpetuo simus, sed ntum puncto temporis, quasi in aliquod sepul∣rum subimus, ut statim ex eo emergamus. , and more often  submer∣s, quasi , qui est in profundo, profun∣s. A , fundum, ima pars, imus rges, à quo  & , in pro∣fundum jacio, demergo. , subimus, &c.  & . nitus ingredior, me abdo, &c. hîc verò sig∣ficat demergo, vel submergo, itemque submer∣r & Latine, in profundum defigo, à , deorsum, &  figo; unde dicitur, l  & , quum occidit, aut se ab∣t, vel descendit , sub terram, &c. ontra  vel  emerso, sursum pro∣o, vel erumpo, e profundo usque ad super∣ficiem
aquae erumpo. Item orior, , ab  sursum. What more different from sprinkling than all this, which is brought to signifie Baptism, and in that Death, going down into the Grave, and Resurrection or Coming out again? Here are a plentiful number of Words, and more might have been mentioned from the same Author, signifying dipping, plunging, casting, yea sixing (momento temporis, tamen, in baptismo) to the Bot∣tom, into the Deep, the lowest part: A going down, under, hiding. Again, a rising up, a coming forth, a breaking out, a breaking out from the Deep, to the up∣per part of the Water. Call this sprink∣ing if you can. If not sprinkling, then dipping; if dipping, then a plain Re∣presentation of Death, Burial and Resur∣rection, as aforesaid; according to the Design, Property, Practice and Example of the primitive Institution. I might bring in more Authors, who give a plain and plentiful Testimony against their own practice; but these may suffice, there being, in your own Opinion, more than enough. Now a Word or two about the Cove∣nant with Abraham, and the Sign of it Circumcision, Gen. 12. Now the Lord had
said unto Abraham, get thee out of thy Coun∣trey and from thy kindred, and from thy Fa∣thers house, unto a Land that I will shew thee. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy Name great; and thou shalt be a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee, and in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed: Chap. 13. v. 14, &c. And the Lord said unto Abraham, — All the Land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever. And I will make thy seed as the Dust of the Earth, so that if a Man can number the Dust of the Earth, then shall thy seed also be numbred. Arise, walk through the Land in the length of it, and in the breadth of it, for I will give it unto thee: Chap. 15.4, 5, 6. A Son promi∣sed, and the multpilication of his Seed: And he believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for Righteousness. Chap. 17.2. I will make my covenant between me and thee, and I will multiply thee exceedingly. v. 10. This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee; every Man child among you shall be circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your Foreskin, and it shall be a Token of the Covenant between me and you. And he that is eight days old shall be cir∣cumcised among you, every Man-child in your
Generations, he that is born in the House,  bought with Money, of any Stranger which i not of thy seed — must needs be circum∣cised, and my Covenant shall be in your Flesh &c. Here was Abraham's Call from his own Country, &c. and a promise of another Earthly Country, and the multiplication of his Seed that were to possess that Coun∣trey (there was no other exprest that Earthly and Corporal, though thereby Abraham the Father of the Faithful, un∣derstood the Promise of the spiritual See and heavenly Canaan also; and Abraham believed, &c. Rom. 4.11. Circumcision was called a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, in respect of Abraham, wh actually believed the Promise; which was as a Writing or Evidence to which th Seal was put, and the Promise, being that he should become a great Nation, and  separate and chosen People distinct from a∣other Nations. God was pleased to com∣mand, that Circumcision should be a Sea of his Covenant with Abraham, in th flesh of all that made up the Body of that Nation. Every Male child born in the House or bought with Money. We read not that Faith was a Praerequisite to the Admis∣sion of any, to the Sign or Seal of Cir∣cumcision.
The Master buys, the Servant is circumcised. Circumcision was restrain∣ed to Abraham and his Seed, and the Re∣tainers to their Families; as they were to be a distinct and separate Nation and Na∣tional Church, differing in that indelible Character and External Worship from all others. It hath pleased God that they a∣bove all People of the World, should have a distinct Character; that they should be known above all People of the World, however scattered. I deny not, but Cir∣cumcision had its spiritual Signification to all the Faithful in that Nation; but what was commanded them, was binding to no People of the World besides, tho' they were Believers. Job and Cornelius were not circumcised. We need not go the Old Testament for a Gospel Institution. In the Institution of Baptism, by our great Law-giver Christ Jesus; The Com∣mand was, Go teach all Nations baptizing. No such Command preceded Circucision, Mark 16.16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved. Belief is set before Baptism, because they which were then to be baptized, were Adulti, Men of sufficient Years; in whom Faith and Confession of their sins
was first required; as Mat. 3.6. They were baptized, confessing their Sins. Se∣condly, That Salvation dependeth o Faith, not of Baptism; it may appear John 5.24. He that believeth is passed from death to life; he that believeth shall be saved and it followeth in this place, h that will not believe shall be damned He saith not, he that will not be bapti∣zed. Baptism is joined notwithstanding to Belief, that no Man should neglect o despise the Ordinance of God. Willet Symptis Papismi. pag. 463. Acts 10.47. The Holy Ghost went be∣fore, and then Baptism followed; the thing signified appeared first, and then th Sign or Seal was added: Can any forbid water (saith St. Peter) that these should m be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we. Willet quotes Augustine, Per fidem renas∣cimur in baptismate, By Faith we are bon again in baptism: It is then the proper Act o Faith, to regenerate us, not of Baptism the Use and End whereof, is to strengthen and increase our Faith: If so, Faith must be before Baptism, or how can it be a Instrument to increase it. Willet pag. 492. That Infants neither have Faith in themselves, nor yet are pro∣fited
or furthered to their Salvation by the Faith of others; it is thus proved. 1. St. Paul saith, Faith cometh by Hear∣ing, and Hearing by the Word of God, Rom. 10.17. But Infants can neither hear, nor understand the Word of God: Ergo, no Faith is wrought in them. 2. There is no habitual or potential Faith, that pleaseth God, but the Justi∣fying Faith is always actual, working by love; Gal. 5.6. Ergo, Children have ei∣ther no Faith, or it must needs be an actual or working Faith. 3. Infants are not justified, nor reliev∣ed or helped forward towards their Sal∣vation, by the Faith of their Parents or God-fathers, when they are baptized: For the Scripture saith, The just shall live by Faith, Rom. 1.17. that is, by his own Faith, not the Faith of another; — be∣fore God they are no more helped, by the Confession of anothers Mouth, than by the Belief of anothers Heart: Where∣fore it is not either the Faith of the Pa∣rents, or the Confession of the Witnes∣ses; that supplieth the lack of both in Infants. Ʋrsinus pag. 414. Teach all, &c. bapti∣zing them, that is, all who by your doctrine come unto me, and are made my Disci∣ples.
The Order here is to be noted and observed, He willeth first, that they be taught, and after, that they be baptized. For he speaketh of Men of Years, which should be converted unto the Faith and Gospel of Christ. Wherefore he will not have the Sacraments to be dumb, but signifyeth, that the Word ought to go before, and then the Sacraments to fol∣low. Very true thus far. This is Gospel. But I will give something more of his own Opinion, and what is also in com∣mon with other Pedobaptists, which is this And among them are numbred, the In∣fants also of such as come unto Christ; or are Christ's Disciples. For their In∣fants also are Disciples, as being born in the School of Christ. For to be born in the Church, serveth to the Infants in∣stead of their Profession. There's his ipse dixit for that, and not one Word o God for it. But I doubt not, but that he has a Friend to stand by him in it. See him further. The Use of the Sacrament with∣out Faith doth not save, therefore with Faith it doth save. The want of the Sa∣crament doth not condemn: Yet so, as that want of the Sacrament be without con∣tempt. For not the want but the contempt of the Sacraments condemn, as which
cannot possibly be where Faith is. This last Paragraph is sufficiently wit∣nessed to, by Calvin and other Authors. See Calvin concerning Infants in Covenant; Shewing that their Salvation is undoubt∣ed and independant of Baptism, or any other Helps or Accessions; if it should happen that they pass out of this Life, (antequam aqua mergi datum fuerit) be∣fore they are baptized or dipt. Instit. folio 471. Now to come close to the Business, it is certain, that the Spiritual Part of the Pro∣mise made to Abraham, was to his Spiritual Seed. He spake not of Seeds as of many, but of one, that is, Christ; and if you are Christs, then are you Abrahams seed, and heirs ac∣cording to promise. What is plainer, to ex∣clude a Carnal Seed from all pretences to spiritual Priviledges. The promises are to you and to your seed, and to as many as the Lord shall call; that is, such as shall have an Essectual Call; for it must be such as obey the Call. Otherwise the unbe∣lieving Jews; to whom this was preached must really be Heirs, and certainly pos∣sess the Kingdom of Heaven; For such as are in the Everlasting Covenant, shall cer∣tainly never perish, but inherit Everlast∣ing Life; for whom God loves, he loves
to the End. We are all by Nature Chil∣dren of Wrath, we are Children of God no other way, then by Faith in Christ Je∣sus. But whether go I? Is this true Do∣ctrine? Is there not a mistake? Pray what becomes of Infants, who have not Faith, neither capable of it? Must these be lost? God forbid, who durst say it? nay, who durst think it? But we are speaking of Church-members. Pray what Church? Is it a Visible Church or the Invisible Church of all God's Elect, that Infants are born Members of? If by their Birth into the World, they have an Entrance into, and an Existence in this invisible Church; then are they certainly in the Everlasting Covenant, which shall never be broken, and all the Powers of Dark∣ness shall never prevail against them to exclude them; and if they dye in Infancy they are certainly safe. If they live to be adult, they shall certainly be made par∣takers of the Graces of the Covenant, God will write his Law in their Hearts, they shall have Faith. God will be to them a God, and they shall be to him a People, and they will conform to his revealed Will. If they are born in (and so are Mem∣bers of) a Visible Church. I think I need
not question, but that you mean a Church of Christ; and if so, then the Question is not to be, Ʋbi? Where? for it must be where the Child is born: But the Questi∣on must be How an Enquirer may know, that to be a Church of Christ, where the Child is born? This is somewhat wild. If it be said the Parent is a Church-member, and so, being in the Church, the Child coming into the World at the same time, falls into the Churches Lap; and is also a Church-mem∣ber, and under the Churches care, even be∣fore Baptism; and consequently must be baptized. So much for the Infants. Now for the Adult: How can it be said that they are Members of a Church, (visible I mean, according to the former desinition) till they have made a profes∣sion of Faith, and have had a formal Ad∣mission, and that by Baptism? If you say they are Members of the Invisible Church, and so have a Right to Baptism: No Person that I know of, denies it. But who knows which do, and which do not belong to the Invisible Church? It is the Searcher of Hearts, God alone that knows who are his. Man can make Judgment of no more than Profession and Practice, which fall under the Observation of the
Senses. Can they be said to be of, and not of a visible Church at the same time? In your New-Years-Gift, pag. 22. your words are these, Brethren, be sober, — Are not all that are added to the Church to be baptized? Are no Infants added to the Church? are they lost? were they not once added to the Church? Page 24. of ditto, Again you say, For my part, I have been long of the Opinion, Baptism is not properly an initiating Ordinance, whe∣ther of Infants or Adult; they are no baptized, and so made Church-members; but they are Church-members, and so baptized. Coronation doth not make a King, but declare him so, &c. Acts 2.38. And Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, &c. v. 39. For the promise is unto you and to your Children and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. v. 41. Then they that gladly received his Word were baptized; and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand Souls: And they continued sted∣fastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and breaking of Bread and in Prayers. (no In∣fants could be of this number. And fear came upon every Soul, (Infants know nothing; therefore can fear nothing)
— And all that believed were together, &c. 46, 47. And they continued daily with one ac∣cord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart. Praising God and hav∣ing favour with all people, and the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. None of the Characters of these People, which were added to the Church agree with Infants: And was it not next to a Miracle, if none of these three Thousand, had an Infant or young Child; and would it not be a greater wonder if they so had, that they did not make hast to baptize such Child, lest it should go out of the World, before it was made a Christian by Bap∣tism: And if it had been so baptized, is it not as great a Wonder that we have no Record of any such thing; especially if it were of that weight for Infants to be baptized, as some People esteem and affirm. Certainly it is more probable, that some of these three Thousand had Infants, than that there were Infants baptized in the two or three Families; whereof it is said, They believed with all their House, and that they rejoiced with all their House. For In∣fants cannot properly be said to do either. But why should we expect a Record of that, for which, there was no Prescript or Com∣mand
by the great Law-giver; which if it had been his Will, certainly he would have been as plain and positive, as the Lord was in the Command to Abraham, in the Covenant of Circumcision: But the Gospel is more spiritual, is a New Covenant, the Right of Gospel Ordinances comes in by Faith; and the Pedobaptists themselves, as I have shown, acknowledge the Insignifi∣cancy of Infants baptism; unless they con∣firm it by their own Faith, when they are grown up. You your self are pleased to use pro∣bable Arguments, you see here I have imitated you: You see those who were added to the Church, they were such as were baptized: Are no Infants added to the Church (visible)? No none with∣out a Profession, and Profession they are not capable of, because they have not Faith as I have shewed out of your own Wri∣ters. Are they lost? No, ne'er the more nor sooner for want of Baptism; as I have made it appear out of your own Writers, Calvin, Ʋrsinus, &c. First, It is Contempt and not the wan of the Sacrament doth condemn. Ʋrsi∣nus, &c. Now Children cannot contemn, for they know nothing of the Matter.
Secondly, The Parents who are Godly, and are for Believers Baptism, they con∣temn not Baptism by retaining their In∣fants from it; but so retain them, because their Consciences tell them that it would be a profaning of the Sacred Ordinance; by preferring an improper and unqualified Subject to it: And if they should so do, it would be their Sin. If the Parents sin therein (I mean, by retaining the Children from Baptism) the Child will not suffer for their Parents sin. Well, say you, Were not Infants once added to the Church? I answer, Yes. To the Jewish Church-National according to your sense, (if I mistake not) as soon as they were born; but had not the Seal of the Church-Covenant till eight Days after. But what is that to the Gospel-Church state? The Church state now, is not Na∣tional but Congregational; as many as God shall call into the Houshold of Faith; as hath been sufficiently demonstrated already. It is not buying with Money will give a Right to Baptism. Excluding Infants from Bap∣tism, excludeth them not from Salvation, as hath been said before. I must have one probable Argument more, about the three thousand. Is it like∣ly, that among these, there was not one
Woman, when commonly they are the more plentiful Sex: If there was one, cer∣tainly she must be a Communicant; for they brake Bread from House to House. We read of Womens believing, and being baptized, and Believers were commanded to observe all things that were delivered unto them. Now if you can prove that any Infants believed, then you may find out another probable Argument on your part. But let that pass, we have enough without far fetched Things. You say Infants are Church-members, and so baptized. Coronation doth not make a King, but declare him so. But Kings have become so by God's choice immediately, whereof the Prophets have given Testimony; others mediately by Men, others so by Conquest: So others Hereditary, and are so by some standing Law; and all these precede Coronation, and by all these ways God sets up Kings. S when God by his Law qualifies a Person, and makes him a spiritual King, by giving him Faith, and writing his Law in his Heart, mak∣ing him his child, then is baptism as a Crown to declare him such in the Church of God. A Word to your Comparison of the Table (it looks a Kitchin one, for such Tables are wont to be wash'd) Pag. 24.
Suppose you had a Table equally dirty every where, and your Maid should pour Water on, and that but a little, at one end; or if it were a round Table, and so, had no end, only a little on one part, and there wash'd and no further; would you then say that Table was wash'd? Even such is your Parties Practice. If she had washed all over she had done the Business, and in doing that, there must have been not only Insper∣sion or Aspersion, but Frication and Ab∣stersion: Thus you see for one Trifle, I but in another. Pray condemn me not for my presu∣ming Ingratitude, in that I so saucily take part of your New-Year-Gift, and throw it n your Face: For it is to a good End, only to act the part of an Occulist, to make you rub your Eyes, that you may the better e the Vanity of your own admired Argu∣ments; in opposition to the solid Judgment f the primitive Christians, the very Nature nd Native Property of Languages, the As∣everation of the most Pious and Learned, who would not lye for God, nor talk de∣ceitfully (in a cause that they thought) for him; and had so much Candor and Integri∣ty, that they would acknowledge the Truth f the Thing, though it made most against them; in the management of a Cause with
their strenuous and utmost Skill, Dexterity and Wit: Nay, you have opposed two Councils, mentioned by Perkins, a Pious and Reverend Divine. To stick by your Ar∣guments against Dipping, is as absurd and ridiculous, as to say there is no such place as China, or the East or West Indies. Whe things are Evident in themselves, and wherein all Parties are agreed; as con∣cerning Womens Communion at the Lord's Table, they having the same Essential part that gives a right; to wit, Faith and Ad∣mission by Baptism into the visible Church There need no Dependance upon the Rule of Grammar. And for a Man that he must bear Rule in his own House, it is Evi∣dent in its own Nature. Can there be as Ordinance, and no Coherence of the Qua∣lity of the Subject that is to Obey? Th very Word [Ordinance] denotes in th Institution, a Subject capable of Obedi∣ence; and to all right Obedience there must be Faith, unless it were otherwise de∣clared in the Institution. The Stones i the Spiritual Building ought to be Liv∣ing Stones. You were pleased to say, That Dip∣ping [with] Water was Nonsense. I say, That to say a Man that is distracted is out of his Wits, is also Nonsense; fo
the proper Meaning is, that his Wits are out of him. But the Phrase hath obtain∣ed so much Reputation by Custom, and runs so smooth; that I should be accounted little other than delirious, if I should at∣tempt to alter the Vulgar, and Smooth, and bring in the Rugged and Harsh sound∣ed Expression, The Wits are out of the Man. And indeed, there is need of no Altera∣tion, since every one understands the Mean∣ing to be good Sense. Well, I have proved the manner of Baptism to be by dipping in Water: I beseech you let it pass smooth, by the Name or Phrase, Baptizing with Water; since several ways there are, and have been shewed Reasons for it. There is one Argument comes into my Mind, that is much used by your Party; The Foederal Holiness of Children: 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband, else were your Chil∣dren unclean, but now are they holy. If this Holiness were a Fruit of special Grace, and of the Everlasting Covenant; or a Sanctification in the Womb, such as John's was, it would certainly end in Glo∣rification, and the Way leading to that end, would be a Holy Life. But common Experience hath found, that the Life and
Death of the Childrne of the Believer have many times appeared as bad, as the Life and Death of the Children of the most profane: And therefore, the Holiness can∣not (as they come of their Parents) be the Holiness of the Everlasting Covenant. I tell you, or rather all Men know, what it is not by the Issue and Event. I leave it to others to define what it is. The Papists affirm, That the Baptism if Children and Infants, is grounded upon Tra∣dition, and not upon Scripture. The Protestants answer, It were very hard, if we had no more certain Ground for the Baptizing of Infants, than Tradi∣tion; which is but a feeble Weapon to fight against Hereticks withal. Willet's Synop. pag. 491. Then they produce Scriptures, Gen. 17. 1 Cor. 7.14, &c. as is usual, and need no Repetition. Dr. Stilling fleet, late Bishop acknowledgeth (in his Scripture proof i Opposition to the Papists) a necessity of a Profession of Faith, in order to Baptism; and so, brings in a necessity of Sponsors, and af∣firms that what they cannot do personally by themselves, they do by their Sponsors.
In a Book, Entituled, Duplies of the Mi∣nisters and Professors of Aberdene, to the Second Answers of some Reverend Brethren concerning the late Covenant; Pag. 97. you have it thus, Lastly, Of the Stipula∣tion of Godfathers in Baptism, instanced by us in our Fifth Demand, ye have spo∣ken nothing particularly either in your First or Second Answers. We have no Precept or Example of it in Holy Scrip∣ture: Yea, some of our Learned Divines affirm, that it was instituted by Pope Hi∣gynus; and ye will not deny, that it hath been much abused in Popery. How cometh it to pass then, that this Ceremony is allowed, and used by some of you; We say, some; for we are in∣formed that some of your Mind do not use it at all. See Dr. Morton, in his Defence of the Three Ceremonies, pag. 24. See Pet. Martyr on the 6th. Chapter of he Epistle to the Romans, and Gerard in Loc. Theolog. Tom. 4. Here by the way Observe, that the Do∣ctors and Ministers of Aberdene (as I no∣ed Calvin did before) did esteem the not having Precept or Example in Holy Scrip∣ture (for Practice of a Thing) an Ar∣gument of sufficient weight to perswade
them against it, and to reject it. You may be pleased to observe, the seve∣ral Shifts that the Pedobaptists have been put to, to support the Ungospel-like Practice of Sprinkling, or Baptizing (as it is called) Infants. First, As to the Subject: The Gospel-Church-member is expresly declared to be a Believer, not a Word in the Scriptures of any other but such baptized. That Infant-Baptism may be proved, they have recourse to the Practice of Cir∣cumcision, enjoyned to Abraham and his Seed, though we read not of any Doctrine of Faith preached to any, that were admit∣ted to it. They that were bought with Money, by an Express Command from God, were to be circumcised. Infants (say they) were circumcised then, and why not Children baptized now; since it is evident God hath as much care of Infants now, as he had then: And yet generally confess'd, that their Baptism signifies no∣thing in respect of their Estate before God, helps them nothing, without their perso∣nal Faith when they are grown up. The Question then may be, why they may not as well defer Baptism, till they are capable of Faith and Profession; for there will be no time lost, all that time wherein they were
not bettered by what they could do as In∣fants, or Parents and Godfathers did or could o for them. Circumcision did not belong o the Priest's Office, the Parent usually cir∣cumcised. Baptism belongs to the Gospel-Minister, he that teacheth is to baptize. Some say, the Parents Faith gives a Right to Baptism: Pray who can say,  though they may in Charity be thought o have had) that they had Faith, sup∣posing the Parents to be dead, before the Child is preferred to Baptism. Others say (or at least it is constructive∣ly so) if they are born in a Christian King∣dom or Common-wealth, they are then orn in the Church; and as such are Church-members, and therefore have right  Baptism. This is absolutely National, nd confounds the World with the Church, nd differs little from a Wilderness. For  is not the being born in England, tho'  be a Land of Light, that makes a Chri∣stian. Others affirm, there must be a Pro∣ssion of Faith, and therefore there must be onsors. Others say, there is no need of them, t prove it an Unscriptural and Anti∣ristian Practice; being introduced by a pe as you may plainly see. So that necessa∣ Crutch being taken away, by which only
it is supported, by that Party who own a Profession of Faith; Baptism of Infants falls to the Ground. More might be said to shew what an amaze they are in, by leaving the plain Gospel-way. Errantium a via multae sunt differentiae. Of those that wander out of the way there are many differences. Qui a recto tramite divertit, quo plus incedit eo plus errat. He that turns out of the right way, the far∣ther he goeth the more he erreth. The Word of God is plain in all things necessary to Salvation; It is a Light to th Feet, and a Lanthorn to the Path. The two Institutions are so plain, th nothing can be plainer; if they had no been so, can we think otherwise, but tha some words to this purpose would have been left. You that believe, Baptize your Infants. This had been enough to have setled th Subject to perpetuity: But there was n need of it, God knew how things would be, and he is wise, and brings Good o of Mens Folly and Sin. The Word of God pure, enlightning the Eyes.
What the Scripture teacheth not, we may willing and safely be ignorant of; and say with Calvin to that purpose: Nos, ne in eandem (errantium) incida∣nus foveam, aures, oculos, corda, mentes, inguas penitus defigamus in sacra Dei Do∣trina. Fst enim ea Spiritus sancti optimi Magistri Schola, in qua sic proficitur, ut ni∣il sit aliunde asoiscendum: ignorandum ve∣ò libenter quiid in ea non docetur. We, lest we should fall into the same pit with hose who wander out of the way; let us fix uy Ears, Eyes, Hearts, Minds, Tongues, holly in the Sacred Doctrine of God. For that s the School of the Holy Spirit the best Master, n which Men so profit, that nothing is to be got r learned elsewhere, and whatsoever is not aught there, we may willingly be ignorant . The Gospel is a plain Path-way to Heaven, the way-faring Man tho' Fool, hall not err therein. He that believeth and is baptized shall be aved. Go teach all Nations baptizing, &c. John was baptizing in Enon near Salim, ecause there was much water there, &c. The plain Man believes, and thinks one but Believers ought to be baptized;
and also that it must be done according to Prescript and Example; and that therefore Infants, not having Faith, are not to b baptized or sprinkled, especially having no Precept or Example so to do. How now, (saith the Pedobaptist) What have this Tittle-tattle-Prittle-pratt Nonsensical-Plebeian-Taut ological-More Hebetico-Rustico-Mechanico-Fullonico-An∣torio-Trituranti-Sutorio-Cerdonico-Plumb bean-brained People to do? Must the not? Ought they not to be diffident  their own Judgments, and refer Mat∣ters of Divinity to those, whose Pro∣vince it is? A Company of Block-head they cannot speak Sense. Fools no Lat know, and they know no Latin. May they not rather trust us, who are Gra∣matico-Dialectico-Rhetorico-Historico-Eth∣co-Physico-Metaphisico Theologi? We, we speak truly, according to the Propriety of Languages, Dispute well, Act th Orator elegantly, Give an Account o the Transactions of Things past in th World, Humane and Divine: Understan the Precepts of Morality, know the Na∣ture of Things, and mount above, t the abstract Notions of things super-na∣tural; and for Divinity, with that w have the greatest Familiarity: And there∣fore,
being best acquainted with it, know best how to define and determine things of it, or aboutit: And may with Au∣thority tell you. That you (Fullers, Thrashers; a Draper is too fine a name) and other base Artizens, such as for the most part, Anabaptests are. (Theseare the very words of Ʋusinus) need not trouble your Noddles about Rivers and much Water, your concern for that is as su∣perfluous as the Water, it is not a farthing matter; tush, it matters nothing: A little Water is of the same Nature with a great Quantity, 'twas needless, and is needless to go into Rivers, or into Water. A Bason full will serve for half a Score. We know how to shorten Work, and improve time. We stand upon our Ancestors shoulders, ond see farther than they. Then you talk of Faith, as necessary. A Fig for Faith and peofession, yea Re∣pentance to; they are superfluous and redundant things. It was enough if the Parent believed, it's on matter for the Child, if the Child were Sprinkled it was a good Christian. And it is somewhat strange, since the way was so easy, that when the 3000 were converted, the Apostle did not charge
them to take heed, that all their Infant that they had, or any should have there after, should forthwith be Sprinkled; for asmuch as their Parents Faith gave them Right to Baptism: That also, it migh never be heard that any Persons Adult ha been Baptized, whose Parents were Bap∣tized long before. But if no Persons but Adult were Bap∣tized, we can hear of no other. As for Holiness, the Children have i though in respect of Salvation they are ne∣ver the better for it. As for Infants Baptism, we tell you (though the Gospel be silent in it, and La People cannot find it there), we can fet it from far, rather than the Children sha go without it, though we cannot make o what they are the better for it. Wha we cannot find of the Institution in New we have found in the Old Law. And  Philosophically we prove, that round about is the nearest way home. Thus with Rombusian Elocution & Language-fustian have done. Sir, Though I as much slight and con∣temn the principle of Pedobaptism,  your Self does that of the Anabaptists (vulgarly so call'd, though wrongfully yet I must tell you, that I have as grea
respect and veneration for the Persons nd Piety of the Men of that perswasion, s I have for those of my own; and doubt s little of their Integrity. The coming nto the World, and so into the Church, nd finding it the general opinion and ractice of the Learned and others; in∣much that it was both a matter of ame and danger, to oppose what they und, and to maintain a Doctrine that eemed new; both pious and impious bent eir wits to aggregate Reasons, why they ould keep what they had got; and the rther off the Reasons were fetched the reater the Applause. So the matter be∣g prejudged, determined, and by Au∣ority maintained; they rest contented ith what they got, especially, because one of the Rulers are of another minde.  you have given your self the trouble to ad what I have writ, I crave once again ur pardon for the occasion I have given, d assure you I should be joyful to plea∣re you in what I may, in Quality of SIR your very Humble Servant T. Minge.
Postscript. IN your New-Years-Gift, Pag. 23d. and 24th. You express your self thus, As for the Way of Plunging, it doth not look with me, like an Ordinance of Christ. If it were such, they and we are all Trans∣gressors. We baptize the Face only, they the Head and Shoulders. I aver little more: For no more say what you will, can be called Baptism, but what is the Baptizer's Work, &c. You say all must be baptiz'd; for all must be mortified, every part, as all was defiled by Sin. You would be angry, if I should whisper you in the Ears, and ask, Must nothing be mortified but that above the Waste? For no more do you plunge, the Baptized do all the rest. For shame never say any more, &c. All Attempts to An∣swer it vanish in the Empty Air. You must get some Engine, or such thing to do the Work by; and change your own Practice. Who would change ours, if there be any
Consistency between your Doctrine and acting in this Case. Answ. I say as you say, thus far; That no more can be called Baptism, but what is the Baptizer's Work; and that there∣fore going down into the Water is no part of the Immersion, but a way to stand fair for it. I need not repea what you have said, or that which you say that we say; but I may dare tru to affirm, that from what I have said upon solid Fundamental Grounds, out of Scrip∣ture the Primitive Institution, the Ex∣ample of our Blessed Lord, and Practi of the Disciples, with other Reasons for Plunging; it must or ought to be conclud∣ed, that Baptism by Dipping or Plunging is the true and only lawful Baptism with Water (and no Nonsence). And further that I have sufficiently proved, that th present Mode used commonly by Baptist is regular and true, and fully agrees with the things thereby represented; there be∣ing, even by the Hands of the Admini∣strator, a total Dipping, Plunging or Im∣mersion of the Person; yea, every Par∣ticle from Head to Foot; as may evi∣dently appear to all that without prejudic will exercise their Reason, and conside of the Mathematical Demonstration. In∣somuch
that there is no room for fur∣er Denial or Opposition, without the enial of the proper use of their Senses. r shame never say any more: All At∣mpts  answer it vanish in the Empty r. You see or may do, that there is  need of an Engine; and that there is Consistency between our Doctrine and actice, or acting in the case. And if u see it to be so, then you have bound ur self by Promise to change your Pra∣ce, which were it done would be good ews to hear. You were pleased to say, I would be gry with you, if you should whisper  in the Ear, &c. I tell you that u mist it, I was not, but on the trary pleased at your Freedom. But w since matters lye so fair, I beg of  not to be angry but pleasant, if I uld whisper you in the Ear again, for  equal Ballance by way of repartee;  is but Talionis Lex, and every body es not know what you and I say when we isper) and ask, whether that last Costly, erfine, Diaphanous, Delicate, Silk-soft, dear-eloved and admired New-Shift, esteemed  duration like Asbestinum or the Incom∣table Flax, Mundified and not consumed  Fire; is not, at the very first wearing
not only egregiously merdify'd and Lutose, b thorowly outworn, tatter'd, torn and use less, to be cast a way and contemned, an that the Owner (if that were all he had without a Miracle must be and contin shiftless. Answer I expect none. FINIS.
