G1724C R36562 15725298 104540
Great News from IRELAND, Being a True ACCOUNT Of the Late King JAMES'S Quitting that KINGDOM, And going for FRANCE: Accompanied with the Dukes of Powis and Tyrconnel, &c. LIKEWISE A true Account of the Surrender of WATERFORD, KILKENNY, LIMERICK, and several other Places of less Note. Dublin, July the 15th. 1690. Honoured Sir, I Presume ere this, you have re∣ceived the Letter I sent you from our Camp near the Boyne; Since that, you have known by o∣ther Hands, that by one Fight we have frighted and scattered our Enemy, and were presently pos∣sessed of the strong Town of Dro∣hedah, and are now as quietly set∣led in this City, yet in much bet∣ter Condition than was expected. They left Stores filled with Provi∣sion of Mouth and War: They have great Stores likewise in the Country; which are all open for our Receipt. Their King is run away, with the Duks of Powis, Tyrconnel, and some few more, towards Kingsale; their Army all scattered in the Country; so that the War seems now to be at an end. Galloway,
Limerick, and Athlone are, as I hear, the only places like to stand out against us; and having no hopes of Relief, will, as its thought be easily surrendred. His Majesty you see hath con∣quered this Kingdom, with a Veni∣vidi-vici, it will require more of his Trouble to settle than to con∣quer it: I cannot now further en∣large, the Express waiting the mo∣tion of my Pen, but to tell you, this day by the Post, if possible, I will send you a more particular Account. Dublin, July 10th. 1690. Honoured Sir. I Sent you one of this Date by the Express, and have now to add, That we have sure Adver∣tisement sent us by an Express, That the late King James on Wednesday-Night last embarqued at Duncannon, a Fort that com∣mands Passage-Harbour, viz. the Harbour of Waterford; and that he, Duke Powis, and Tyrconnel, and some others, are gone direct for France. Their Army is scattered in the Country, and are forced to turn Ti to get them a support; so that it's believed our King's work will be applied rather to set∣tle than make further Conquests he. The Protestants of Wexford have seized that Garrison, and de∣clared for King William and Quen Mary, the other Towns where Protestants are, will we expect, follow that President, of which we have already some reports, par∣ticularly as to Waterford and Kil∣kenny. We cannot learn that there is 5000. of the Enemy in a Body, nor understand that there are any of them appears within Thirty Miles of this City, what Forces they late had of the Germans who are Protestants are come into us. The French are gon with three Field-Pieces near Limerik, but its thought they will be met in the way, our Horse are now scattering to pick up the scatterers of the E∣nemies scattered Army. We all believe that there will not be struck one stroak more in this War, and we have many rea∣sons to wish and expect it but none more important, then that we hope thereby our King may return to you as safe as he came to us. His active and Invincible Cou∣rage gave us horrid frights, find∣ing that he acted in the Field, ra∣ther as a Couragious Captain, then a great King; this Success may, we may hope justly entitle him to the Character of the greatest Mo∣narch in the Europe World. Our Enemy is run in that hast, that they have left vaster Stores then we could have imagined they had, not only of War, but Pro∣vision behind them. Not an hour but we have some News of loss to them, and gain to us. I am under those straits of time, that I can neither be so full or methodical in Account of Per∣sonr and things as I wish. London, Printed for Richard Balding, the Old-Bayly.
