G1747 R27392 9825881 44214
THE GREAT ROBBERY IN Hatton-Garden. A True Account how about Twenty Thieves on Sunday the 29th of Decemb. 1678, in the Even∣ing, entred a Gentlemans House there, under pre∣tence of a Search, and putting the Family in fear of their Lives, Rob'd them of about 400 Ounces of Plate, Two Diamond Rings of very great value, near Twenty pounds in Money, &c. With a Relation how they were Discovered, and Five of them Apprehended in Shooe-Lane on the Tuesday night following: Their Commitment to Newgate, where now they remain, &c. Licensed Jan. the 1st, 1678/9. LONDON: Printed for L. C. in the Year 1679.
The Great Robbery in Hatton-Gar∣den, &c. FOR some time (considering the season of the year) the Town has been pretty free from Attempts of Burglary and Robbery, which may in great measure be ascribed to the nume∣rous Guards and diligent Watch kept in all places, thereby preventing them of any op∣portunities to put their mischievous Villa∣nies in practise; yet still their intentions (no doubt) were as bad as ever, and a considerable Gang had it seems been Club∣bing their Pates for some new Stratagems to carry on their Trade; (for so those Vermine call Stealing and Robbing innocent and more industrious people) as appears by the following Attempt, of which the notable Circumstances oblige us to give a true Ac∣count for publick satisfaction, though not
in the least intending to prejudge the Cri∣minal before their lawful Tryal, nor fore∣stal the Evidence as to particulars, but on∣ly to relate matter of Fact in general, be∣ing thus: On Sunday the 29th of December, about Eight of the Clock in the Evening, several persons Arm'd came to the House of a Gen∣tleman of considerable Fortune and Ovali∣ty in Hatton-Garden, and knocking, pre∣tended they had an Order from Authority to search the House for dangerous persons, making use of the publick Distempers of the Times to colour their wicked design, and had by some means obtained the know∣ledg of some Circumstances that at first rendred what they said a little plausible to belief: But being desired to produce their Warrant, &c. they in an Hectoring manner refused, only alledged themselves to be Soldiers, and one took upon himself the quality of a Lieutenant, and commanded the rest, setting Centinels at the door, &c. In short, after some discourse, they letting in more of their Crew, declared, That it was
money they wanted, and money they must have, setting Pistols to the peoples breasts, and so locked up all or the greatest part of the Family in a private Room (as they sup∣posed), and so fell to ransack the House. Taking away two large Silver Candle∣sticks, one great Salt, two Caudle-cups, one Bason and Ewer of Silver, two other Silver Cups, a Salver, one great Tankard, one Silver Plate, a Silver Sugar-dish, a small Salt, several parcels of Silver Spoons, two Cruses (all which are since taken again); two Diamond Rings of very great value, and between fifteen and twenty pound in Money, with several other things here o∣mitted. And 'tis probable had stoln many more, but that by good luck some of the Family so shut up as aforesaid, got out at a passage unknown to them, backwards, and crying out Thieves, startled them so, as they thought fit to go off with what they had got, rather than hazard staying for a further booty. Their flight was so manag'd, that none of them were taken, it being a pretty while before Neighbours could get
round, and gather together, and the people of the House get out to pursue them. However Bills being loft at all probable places, as Goldsmiths, Brokers, &c. and a reward proposed for discovery; On Tuesday following a Woman came to a certain Bro∣ker, asking him if he would buy a quanti∣ty of Plate; to which he seeming willing, she told him the place, being the Horse-shooe Tavern in Shooe-Lane, which it seems was the Thieves Rendezvouz; but the Broker having one of the before-mentioned Bills, and upon the Circumstances suspecting this might be the same Plate, like an honest man resolves to apprehend them if he could; the better to effect this, he seemed very willing to accept of the bargain, and sends in a full bag to the said place, as money to pay for it, though in truth it was only a bag filled with farthings to amuse them. In the mean time he acquaints the person rob'd, what was of∣fer'd to be sold him, and where he was to meet them; who procuring a Justices War∣rant, Lieutenant Salter a Constable living by Fleet-Bridge, went to seize them, who had
with him two Files of Musquetiers, and se∣veral of his own Watchmen that he sent for to assist him on that occasion. Having beset the House, and placed necessary Centinels abroad, they entred, there being at that time six of the Thieves there, each or whom had a Pistol and a Sword; but guilt makes Cowards; they made some shew of resistance, for they perceived themselves discovered be∣fore the Constable came at them, and en∣deavoured every one to shift for himself; one leaped out of a Window into a Court back∣ward, where being stopt by a Centinel, he run him into the body, but 'tis hoped the wound may not prove mortal; and the Thief though he had done the mischief, was taken, as was another that got out at the Balcony, and so on the Sign-post, and three more a∣bout the top of the House; but one escaped, whether over the Houses, or what other way is not known. Besides the Five Men, the before-mentioned Woman that went to the Broker was taken, who acknowledges that on Monday night they sent for her, and desired her to wish them to a Customer,
which she did as aforesaid, and that the same is all she knows of the matter. The Plate before recited was found in the Cellar of the said Tavern; the Five Men be∣ing examined before a Justice, were Com∣mitted to Newgate, and the Woman to the Counter. FINIS.
