G1947 99830406 34857
At a Meeting of the Council of the Royal Society, Octob. 21. 1675. Ordered, THAT a Book Intituled, The Compa∣rative Anatomy of TRUNKS, to∣gether with an account of their Vegetation grounded thereupon; In two parts: the former read before the Royal Society February 25. 1674/5; the latter June 17. 1675. the whole explicated by several Fi∣gures in Nineteen Copper-plates; Presented to the Royal Society in the years 1673. and 1674. by Dr. Nehemiah Grew; be Printed by the assigns of John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society for Walter Kettilby. BROUNCKER P. R. S.
The Comparative ANATOMY OF TRUNKS, Together with an Account of their Vegetation grounded thereupon; IN TWO PARTS: The former read before the Royal So∣ciety, Feb. 25. 1674/5; the latter, June 17. 1675. The whole explicated by several Figures in Nineteen Copper-Plates; pre∣sented to the Royal Society in the years 1673. and 1674. By Nehemiah Grew, M. D. and Fellow of the Royal Society. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Walter Kettilby at the Sign of the Bishops Head in S. Paul's Church-yard. 1675.
To the most August Prince, CHARLES II. OF Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland, King, &c. May it please your Majesty, HAving formerly dedi∣cated two Essays to the Royal Society, of the Anatomy of Plants; and both with good ac∣ceptance: and Your Majesty like∣wise, upon Your view of them, having been pleased to speak well
of the same: I am now embold∣ened most humbly to present a Third into Your Own Royal Hands. By which Your Majesty will find; That there are Terrae In∣cognitae in Philosophy, as well as Geography: For the discovery of this Part whereof, I did re∣solve to make an Adventure. And I may, without vanity, say thus much, That it was my for∣tune, to be the first that ever gave a Map of the Country. Your Majesty will here see, That there are those things, which are little less admirable within a Plant, than within an Animal. That a Plant, as well
as an Animal, is constituted of several Organical Parts; some whereof may be called its Bow∣els. That every Plant hath Bowels of divers kinds, contain∣ing divers kinds of Liquors. That even a Plant lives partly upon Air; for the reception whereof, it hath peculiar Organs. So that a Plant is, as it were, an Animal in Queers; even as an Animal is a Plant, or rather several Plants, bound up into one Volume. Again, that all the said Or∣gans, Bowels or other Parts, are as artificially made; and as punctually, for their Place and Number, composed together; as
all the Mathematical Lines of a Flower or Face. That the Sta∣ple of the Stuff is so exquisitely fine, that no Silkworm is able to draw so small a Thred. So that one who walks about with the meanest stick, holds a Piece of Natures Handicraft in his hand, which far surpasses the most ela∣borate Woof, or Needlework in the World. That by all these Means, the Ascent of the Sap; the Distri∣bution of the Air; the Confe∣ction of several sorts of Liquors, as Lymphas, Milks, Oyls, Bal∣soms; with other Acts of Vege∣tation, are all contrived and brought about in a Mechanical
way. In sum, Your Majesty will find, that we are come ashore into a new World, whereof we see no end. It may be, that some will say, Into another Utopia. Yet not I, but Nature speaketh these things. T only true Pallas, wherewith it is Treasonable for the most curious handed Arachne to compare. In whose name, I, the meanest of her Pupils, do in all humility crave Your Ma∣jesties Most Gracious Patronage. Whereof I cannot doubt, whilst I consider Your Royal Propen∣sity in all other like cases: that You are too Great to be moved by the suggestions of Ignorance,
or Prejudice: and that You are of∣ten exercised in much higher de∣monstrations of those Princely endowments of Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness. All which illu∣strate Your Majesties Impe∣rial Crown, and make You truly August. Withal, there is  some thing Royal, in Your Maje∣sties Philosophy, as well as Incli∣nations and Power. Agreeable to the Principles whereof, You have been pleased to Institute that Society, whose business is, an Unbyassed, and Universal search of Truth. Your Majesty deem∣ing it to be as Noble a Design, to enlarge the Territories of
Knowledge, as those of Domi∣nion. If I shall make any further Ob∣servations of this, or other na∣ture; I must needs wish, still to seat my self in a clear Light; as is that of Your Majesties Fa∣vour. You being, as it were, Sol & Anima hujus Insularis Mundi. And therefore no less to so small a part thereof, as is, Your Majesties most humble and most obedient Servant and Subject, N. Grew.
To the Right Honourable WILLIAM Lord Viscount BROUNCKER THE PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY▪ (Together with the rest of the Fellows of the said Society.) My Lord, HAving in all humility pre∣sented the following dis∣courses to the King, our Royal Patron: I next crave leave to do the like to Your
Lordship. You being, in some sense, His Majesties Chancellor in these Af∣fairs; and having highly justifed his choice of you, by that great Pru∣dence and Integrity you have upon all occasions shewed herein. One Instance whereof hath been afforded us by this present Subject, sc. the Anatomy of Plants. Which having been some years since under∣took; and since then Additions made thereunto; and both published by the Advice of the Royal Society, and the Order of their Council, wherein your Lordship presides: Your Lordship hath thought fit, notwithstanding, lately to give the same Order for the publishing of a like undertaking, by another (indeed a most accurate) Hand. As well knowing, That it would be no disadvantage to the cre∣dit of those Matters, which were so new and strange, to be offered to the World from a twofold Authori∣ty.
For one, although he have no mind to deceive, yet may sooner be deceived, than two may be. Especi∣ally living in divers Countrys, and having had no correspondence. Like∣wise, that although the same Subject be prosecuted by two Hands; yet would it be still more Illustrated by the various Examples of Both. As also, that like as in other matters, so here the defects of both the Undertakers, would mutually be supplied. Of these, with Your Lordships leave, I shall give some Instances. In the third Chapter of my first Book I have assigned an Aerial Content to those I here call the Air-vessels; and in the second Chapter of that Book, have given a description of them. Yet so far only, as the unassisted eye would discover: having resolved, for divers reasons, to reserve the Microscopical Part for a second at∣tempt. But what could not be ob∣served
by the bare eye, the Learned Marcellus Malpighius, by the help of Glasses, did in his first Book (which the Learned Mr. Oldenburge calleth his Idea) superadd, sc. their Spiral Texture. By which Observation, I do say, in the words of the Learned Grotius upon the like occasion, Pro∣fecisse me non diffeor, quin gaudeo etiam gloriórque. In like manner, such observations as Signior Malpighi had not inserted into his first Book, were to be found in my first. As for example, A descri∣ption of the Florid Attire, in all Co∣rymbiferous, and other similar Flow∣ers: of the Acetary in the center of all sorts of Pears: of the Stone in all sorts of Plums: of a third and inmost Cover, found in almost all Seeds whatsoever, and often analogous to a Secundine: The prodigious swelth of the Covers (especially in Stone Fruits) upon the Generation of the
seed, and their contraction afterwards; after the manner of the Womb in some Animals: with divers others: some whereof are now to be found in Signior Malpighi's second Book, and some are there still wanting. The same worthy person being now plea∣sed likewise, to use the self same Names which, having procured my Book (sent him by the Learned Mr. Oldenburge) to be translated into La∣tine, he saw I did therein give to some of the said described Parts. Again to his observation of the spiral Texture of the Air-vessels, in my second Book I have added a fur∣ther description of the said Vessels. Once more, whereas saying little of Roots, he hath applyed himself chiefly to discourse of Trunks: on the contrary, in my second Book, I have made it my business, to treat more largely, and to give the Com∣parative Anatomy of Roots. For this
amongst other reasons, that hereby the nature of both Parts might be still more fully and perspicuously re∣presented betwixt us Both. Upon the consideration of all which I am, my Lord, very sensible, as of that great Justice you have done to the Subject treated of; so honour to my self, in having assigned unto me so eminent a Collegue. As to the following Anatomy, I shall give your Lordship the trouble of noting; That I have varied from Signior Malpighi in, I think, all the Examples here exhibited. As also, that some progress is here made be∣yond what your Lordship will find in the abovesaid Learned Author. As for example, in a further discovery of the Fabrick or Structure of the Lym∣phaeducts; of the Air-vessels; and of the Pith: and in sundry particulars more. For which reason, I thought it more proper to follow the said
worthy Author, in the publishing hereof, rather than to precede him: although the Figures, your Lordship may remember, were presented to the Royal Society long ago, and most of them two years since. Lastly, that I have chosen to give my examples chiefly in the transverse Section; whereas those of Signior Malpighi, are prin∣cipally in cutting by the length. Which I have done chiefly for this reason, Because, that as the Variety of the parts (as to Size, Number, and Position) in every species; so their Regularity and Constancy in the in∣dividuals of each, are this way, much more clearly and certainly re∣presented. Without a distinct re∣mark of which circumstances, the Ge∣neration of the various kinds of Li∣quors in Plants, and divers other par∣ticulars, cannot possibly be under∣stood. All which your Lordship will best observe, by comparing our seve∣ral Figures together.
And for the subsequent discourse, grounded on this Anatomy; I hum∣bly submit the same to your Lord∣ships Judgment; which must needs be candid and benign, because it is great. I have only this to say, . Your Lordship will not disapprove the Enterprize, though as yet it falls short of perfection. It being the re∣sult of your Lordships manifold Vir∣tues and Abilities, That you know how far to encourage the meanest attempts; as well as rightly to va∣lue, and assist the greatest performan∣ces. Upon the account whereof, it is even my ambition to be, My Lord, Your Lordships most obsequious and humble Servant, N. Grew.
THE CONTENTS. THE FIRST PART. Chap. 1.A Description of 6. several Trunks, as they appear to the naked eye, viz. Of Borage, p. 2. Of Dandelyon, p. 3. Of Colewort, p. 4. Of Holyoak, p. 5. Of Wild Cucumer, p. 5. Of Endive, p. 6. Chap. 2. A description of several Trunks and parts of Trunks, as they appear through a good Microscope. First a general description of the several parts of the Bark, p. 7. Of the skin, p. 7, 8. Of the Parenchyma, p. 8, 9. Of the Ves∣sels, p. 9, 10. Next a particular description of the Barks of 8 several Trunks; sc. of Holly, Hazel, Barberry, Apple, Pear, Plum, Elm, Ash; The Vessels of all whose Barks are Lym∣phaeducts: and those of two kinds, p. 10, 12. Of 3 more, sc. Wallnut, Fig, and Pine: the
Vessels of the Barks of the two first being Lymphaeducts and Lactiferous, p. 12, 13. Of the next Lymphaeducts and resiniferous, p. 13, 14. Of 3 more, sc. Oak, common Sumach, and common Wormwood, the Vessels of whose Barks are of 3 kinds, p. 14, 17. A Further observation of the Sap-vessels in general, p. 17, 20. Chap. 3. A description of the Wood in all Trunks, p. 20.In the several Trunks aforesaid. As of their Parenchymous part, or Insertions, p. 21, 22. Of their Vessels, p. 22 Of the Vessels originally containing Sap; being the true wood. p. 23, 26. Of their Air-vessels, p. 26, 29. A farther observation of the Air-ves∣sels in general, p. 30. Chap. 4. A description of the Pith in gene∣ral, p. 31. In the several Trunks or Bran∣ches aforesaid. As of the size, p. 32. Of the Vessels, p. 32. Of the Parenchyma, and its bladders, p. 32, 34. Its Apertures or Ruptures, p. 34, 35.Some further observations of the Pith in gene∣ral. And of all the pithy and parenchymous parts of a Plant, p. 35, 38. THE SECOND PART. Chap. 1. OF the motion of the Sap in the Pith, p. 41. In the Wood, p.
42. In the Bark, p. 43. Two kinds of bleeding in Plants, p. 43, 44. The Causes of both, p. 44, 45. The cause of the ascent of the Sap, p. 46, 47. Chap. 2. Of the motion of the Air.That it first enters the Plant partly by the Trunk, proved, p. 48. But chiefly by the Root, p 49. The manner of its distribution thence throughout the Plant, p. 50. The use of the Insertions herein, p. 51. A Compa∣rison betwixt the use of the Insertions, and the Membranous parts of the Lungs, p. 52. Chap. 3. Of the strcture of the parts.The Union of the Bark to the Body of the Tree, p. 52 The cause of it, p. 53. Of the various surface and falling off of the Bark, p. 53. Of the lessening of the Pith in the elder Branches. Of the Ruptures of the Pith, p. 54. And for what ends, p. 54, 55. How the Air-vessels come to be less in the Trunk of the same Plant, than in the Root, p. 55, 56. And those of the first year, usually much less than those of the years following, p. 56, 57. How the Air-vessels come to be formed always late in the year, p. 57. Chap. 4. Of the Generation of Liquors.The Sap nutritive by a double Tincture from the Lignous and Parenchymous parts, p. 58. The Vessels of Plants of the same use as the Viscera in Animals, p. 59. By what means a Winy Sap is made, p. 59, 61. By what
means a Resinous, p. 61, 63. And how a Plant comes to have Oyl in all its parts, p. 61. By what means a Milkie Sap is made, p. 63, 64. How the Liquors of Plants come to be white, p. 64. All the Milkie liquors of Plants more Oyly proved, p. 65. What a Rosin properly so called, p. 65. What a Gum, p. 66. What a Mucilage, p. 66. Chap. 5. Of the Figuration of Trunks.The Cause of a Shrub, p. 68. Of a tall Tree, p. 69. Of a Slender, and of a Thick Tree, p. 69. Whence Trunks round or angular, p. 70. Chap. 6. Of the motions of trunks. The cause of the ascent of Trunks, p. 71. Of their de∣scent into the ground, p. 71, 72. Of their Horizontal motion, p. 72. Of their spiral motion, p. 73. Whence Solar and Lunar Plants distinguished, p. 73. Chap. 7. Of the nature of Trunks as variously fitted for Mechanical use.Whence woods are soft, and with what diffe∣rence, p. 74, 75. Whence they are fast, p. 75. Fast and Hard, p. 76. Clevesome, p. 76. Tough, p. 77. Durable, p. 77. Why the heart of Timber most durable, and why some trees have heart and not others, p. 78. Whence the Toughness of Flax, p. 79. What sort of Plants serve for the best Toe, p. 79. How all prosperous conjunctions in Graffing may be known, p. 80. The use of Graffing, p. 81.
ERRATA. Pag. 7. line 2. for sight; read, light. p. 9. l. 24. r. upon, or near. p. 11. l. 18. r. cutis. p. 22. l. 27. for many; r. any. p. 28. l 1 r. but alwayes. p. 29. l. 25. r. Branchiae. l. 27. r. being of▪ p. 32. l. 17. r. Lacteals. p. 39. l. ult. r. conforma∣tion. p. 42. l. 14. dele, the. p. 44. l. 15. r. not from the Bark, but the Air-vessels in the wood. p. 45. l. 7. r. also. p. 48. l. 8. r. reception. p. 49. l. 10. r. whereas. p. 57. l. 7. r. moister. p. 72. l. 20. r. standeth.
THE Comparative Anatomy OF TRUNKS. CHAP. I. TO the end we may know and clearly understand, what the Trunk, Stalk, or Branch of a Plant is; I shall, by these Figures here before us, describe the several Parts whereof it is compounded. And, for examples sake, I shall in the first place, describe the Trunks of six seve∣ral kinds of Plants, as they appear to, and are observeable by the naked eye. Which having done, I shall next proceed to a more particular Description of divers o∣ther
Trunks and Branches as they appear through the Microscope I made use of. In both shewing, not only what their several Parts are, as belonging to a Branch; but also by a comparative prospect, in what respects they are specifically distinguished one from another, in the several species of Branches. LET the First Trunk then to be descri∣bed, be that of Borage: in a slice where∣of cut transversly, appears, first a tough, yet fine and transparent Skin. Within this Skin there is also a slender Ring of Sap-Vessels: which, without being crushed in the least, do yield a Lympha. Next standeth the Parenchyma of the Bark. Which is every where made up of a great number of very small Bubles or Ve∣sicles. Upon the inner Verge of this Paren∣chyma, standeth another Ring of Sap-Ves∣sels: which also yeild a Lympha; and that different, as is probable, from the Lympha in the utmost Ring. Hitherto goes the Bark. Adjacent to the Ring of Sap-Vessels, on the inner Verge of the Bark; stand the Air-Vessels, on the outer Verge of the Pith. Not in a Ring; but in Several Parcels; some parcels in the figure of little specks; others in little arched lines, almost like an V
Consonant. And being viewed in a good Glass, there appears to be within the com∣pass of every larger speck, about 20 or 30 Air-vessels; and within the smallest about 8 or 10. The Pith, in a well grown stalk, is al∣ways hollow. But originally it is entire. It is wholly made up of a great number of Vesiculae; being pentangular, sexangular, and septangular. And most of them larg∣er than those of the Bark; so as to be plainly visible to a naked eye. LET the next be Taraxacum, or Dan∣delyon. In a slice whereof cut alike trans∣versly, is seen, first a skin, then a simple, white, and close Parenchyma; made up like∣wise of Vesiculae; but those exceeding small. Within this white and thick parenchy∣mous Ring, stand the Milk-vessels, in seve∣ral distinct Columns, of different size; each Column being made up of 7. or 8. ar∣ched lines. Betwixt these Columns, run as many Diametral Portions, derived from the said white and thick Parenchyma, into or towards the Pith. Next within these, stand the Air-vessels. Which are likewise divided, by the said Diametral Portions, into divers arched lines. The size of these Vessels, as well as their number is less than in Borage.
Within these stands the Pith, consisting of very small Bubles or Vesicles, as the Bark. 'Tis very small, the Diameter hereof, be∣ing scarce one fifth of that of the Pith of Borage. But the Bark of Borage is not half so thick as this of Dandelyon. A THIRD Trunk, shall be that of Cole∣wort. Wherein cut in like manner as be∣fore, may be observed, first a skin. Next to which, a very close and darkish Paren∣chyma. Wherewith are mixed some few Sap-vessels, which give it that hew. Within this stands a scalloped parenchy∣mous Ring, or a Ring of many short and slender white Arches. Which every where meeting together, run in so many white Diametral Portions into the Pith. Next to the said white Arches, and be∣twixt the said Diametral portions stands as many small parcels of Sap-vessels, like so many little half-ovals. Within each of which, is included a white Parenchyma. On the inner verge of the Bark stands a∣nother sort of Sap-vessels, in one slender and entire Ring. And so far goes the Bark. Next within this Ring stand the Air-vessels, in several parcels, diametrically opposite to the said parenchymous parcels next without the Sap-Ring.
Last of all, and more within the Pith, stand the same kind of Sap-vessels, as those of the Half-ovals. Both these, by small lines, run one into another; thus on both sides, hemming in the Air-vessels, and so ma∣king altogether, so many little Pyramids. LET a fourth be Holyoak. Wherein, be∣ing cut as before, next to the skin stands the Parenchyma, somewhat close; and, in proportion thick. Towards the inner verge hereof, stand one sort of Sap-vessels, postur'd in short Rays. These Vessels yield a Mucilage. And on the inner verge of the Bark, stands a thin Ring of other Sap-vessels. Next within the Bark stand the Air-vessels, postur'd likewise in short Rays, di∣ametrically opposite to those in the Bark. In every Ray, there are about 12. or 16. Vessels. Lastly, and more within the Pith, there stand other Sap-vessels, all in very thin or slender Chords; thus hemming in the several parcels of Air-vessels. For a fifth, I will take that of wild Cu∣cumer. Wherein first of all next to the skin, there is a Ring of Sap-vessels. Which Ring is also made up of rays, all poynting to, and most of them terminating on the skin.
Next of all there is a thick, and simple parenchymous Ring. On the inner verge whereof, there are other Sap-vessels standing in parcels, also in a Ring. So far goes the Bark. Next within stand the Air-vessels, in as many parcels contiguous to those of the Sap-vessels aforesaid To which likewise are adjnd as many more parcels of Sap∣vessel wiin the Pith, opposite to the said Sap-vessels within the Bark. LET the sixth be the Trunk of Endive. In which, next to the skin, there is, first a thick and simple Parenchyma. Then there is a kind of undulated Ring of Milk-vessels. Within which stand a sort of Lymphaeducts, in several parcels, some in arched half-ovals, others in short slender rays. Betwixt these parcels, many of the Milk-vessels likewise stand. Next there is an undulated Ring of other Lymphaeducts, parting, as in most Trunks, betwixt the Bark and the pith. Within which are the Air-vessels. And within these more Sap-vessels. Both of them in small specks, answerable, or opposite to the rays in the Bark. All the parts of these six Trunks, may as I have now described them, be obser∣ved, without a Microscope: excepting only the number of the Air vessels. Yet three
things are necessary; viz. a good eye a clear sight, and a Rasor wherewith to cut. CHAP. II. I NOW proceed to a more particular De∣scription of several Trunks and Bran∣ches, as they appear through the best Mi∣croscopes. Now the Trunk, or Branch of every Tree hath three general parts to be descri∣bed; sc. the Bark, the Wood, and the Pith. That likewise of every Herhaceous Vegetable, hath either the same three parts; or els three parts analogous; sc. the Cor∣tical, the Lignous, and the Pithy parts. The Bark consisteth of two parts, sc. the outmost skin, and the main Body. The skin is generally composed of very small Vesicles or Bladders, cluster'd together. That is, originally; but as the Plant grows, the the skin dries, & the said Bladders do very much shrink up and disappear. Amongst these Bladders of the skin, there are usually intermixed a sort of Lignous Fibers, or Vessels, which run through the length of the skin; as in Mallow, Nettle,
Borage, Thistle, and most Plants. Which is not only argued from the toughness of the skin by means of the said Vessels; but in some Plants may be plainly seen, as in Teasle. Whether they are Air-vessels, or Sap∣vessels, is dubious. For on the one hand, because they emitt no Sap, or bleed not, 'tis propable that they are Air-vessels. On the other hand, they may be Sap-vessels, notwithstanding. Because the non-emissi∣on of Sap is not an infallible and conclud∣ing argument of an Air-vessel. For there are some Plants which bleed not. Which yet are furnished with Sap∣vessels, as certainly as any others which bleed. The skin of the Trunk is sometimes visi∣bly porous. But no where more, than in the better sort of walking Canes; where the pores are so big, as to be visible even to the naked eye; like to those upon the ends of our fingers. See Fig. 7. The main Body of the Bark consisteth likewise of two parts, sc. Parenchyma, and Vessels. The Parenchyma is made up of an innumerable company of small Bladders clu∣stered together. Differing in nothing from those aforesaid in the skin; saving that they are much larger; and generally roun∣der.
This Parenchyma of the Bark is the same as to its substance, both in the Root and Trunk. Yet as to the Texture of its parts, in the one, and in the other, there is this observeable difference, viz. That in the Bark of the Root cut transversly, the said Parenchyma is usually more or less, di∣sposed into Diametral rays; running through the Bark, after the same manner, as do the hour lines through the margin of the Dial-plat of a Clock or Watch. Whereas here in the Bark of the Trunk, the said Pa∣renchyma is rarely thus disposed into Dia∣metral Rays: nor when it is, are those rays continued to the circumference of the Bark; as in the Bark of the Root they frequently are. What is further observeable in the Texture of the Parenchyma, I shall shew in the description of the Pith. The Vessels of the Bark, are as I shall al∣so shew, diversifyed many ways. But there are some things, wherein in all sorts of Plants, they agree. First, in standing, most numerously, or near, the inner Margin of the Bark. Secondly, in being always, and only Sap-vessels. I have viewed so many, that at least, I can securely affirm thus much, that if there be any heteroclital Plants, wherein they are found otherwise, there is not one in five hundred. Thirdly,
in being always conjugated or braced toge∣ther in the form of Net-work: although the number and distances of the braces, are very different: as I have already shewed by divers Figures in my Anatomy of Roots. The Properties, whereby the said Ves∣sels of the Bark are specificated and distin∣guished one from an other, both in the same Plant, and in the several species of Plants are very many. Which properties are not accidental, but such as shew the constant and universal design of nature. All which shall be demonstrated by several Figures, representing so many quarters of the slices of so many kinds of Branches cut transversly. FIRST then, for the eight first quar∣ters, the Vessels of the Bark are only of two kinds. And those likewise only Lym∣phaeducts. Yet in all the eight, they are in respect both of their proportion, and po∣sition, very different. So in Hazel and Ash they are but few. In Holly and Barberry more. In Apple, Pear, Plum, Elm, still more numerous. And of those three Fruits, in an Apple, or Plum, more than in a Pear. Again, as their proportion, so likewise their position is divers. For in Holly, the inner Vessels next to the wood stand in rays,
Yet so thick together, as to make one en∣tire Ring. In Hazel, they stand more in oblong parcels. In Barberry they stand like∣wise in parcels, but they are so many half∣ovals. The utmost Lymphaeducts of all three, make three rings. Again, in Apple, Pear, and Plum, the inmost Lymphaeducts are radiated. The ut∣most are neither radiated, nor make an en∣tire ring; but stand in peripherial parcels. Much after the same manner they also stand in Elm. In Ash, the said Vessels make two rings, but neither of them radiated: the inmost ring consisting of arched parcels, and the utmost of round ones. And where∣as in all the foregoing, the inmost are still contiguous to the wood; and the utmost more or less, distant from the cuts: here, on the contrary, the inmost are distant from the wood, and the utmost contigu∣ous to the cutis. All the said Vessels in the Barks of the said eight Branches, though I call them Lymphaeducts; because I observe not any of them to emitt any liquour, but what is clear, & less oyly: Yet are they not one, but two distinct kinds of Lymphaeducts. Which is evident, as from some other rea∣sons, so from hence; In that their positions are altogether heterogeneous: Yet in both
constant, regular and uniform. I say, there can be no reason given, why the self same kind or species of Vessels, should have a different, yea a contrary position, and that contrariety not accidental, but regular and constant. OF the three next quarters sc. the ninth, tenth, and eleventh, the Vessels of the Bark are different in number, position, size, and kind. In Pine, which is the eleventh, they are fewer. In Wallnut, the ninth, more. In Fig, the tenth, most numerous. So for their position. In pine, the inmost make a radiated ring. The utmost stand stragling up and down, without any cer∣tain order. In Wallnut the inmost make also a radiated ring; The utmost make a doudle ring; not radiated, but of round parcels. In Fig, the inmost make also a ra∣diated ring. But the utmost make a dou∣ble and sometimes treble ring, not of radi∣ated, nor round, but arched parcels. Thirdly, they are also different in kind. Those I think, of the two former, Wallnut and Fig, are thus different: those certain∣ly, of the Fig, are so; being Lymphaeducts and Lacteals. The Lymphaeducts make the inmost radiated ring. The utmost, which make the other rings in arched parcels, are the Lactifers.
That they are distinct kinds of Vessels, is evident from two reasons. First, from their position in the Bark, which is altoge∣ther unlike, as hath been said. Secondly, from the most apparent diversity of the Liquours or Saps which they contain, and which upon cutting the Branch transversly, do distinctly bleed from them. Which is one way, whereby we do distinguish the Vessels of Animals themselves. As in the Liver, it were hard to say, which is a Blood-vessels, and which is a Bile-vessel, where they are very small, if it were not for the contents of both. Those in the Bark of Pine, are likewise of two kinds. The inmost are Lymphae∣ducts, as in the two former. The utmost are not Milk-vessels, but Gum-vessels, or Resiniferous. Out of these Vessels, all the clear Turpentine, that drops from the Tree, doth issue. Besides the difference of their position, and of the liquor which they contain, and bleed; there is yet a third, and that is, their size. Most of them being of so wide a bore, as to be apparent to a naked eye. Whereas that of the Lymphaeducts, can hardly be discovered by the best Micro∣scope. The same Resiniferous vessels of Pine, are
likewise, by their size, remarkably diffe∣rent from the Milk vessels of Fig. For those of Fig, are, in comparison, exceeding small; every Arch, not beeing a single vessel, but a parcel or cluster of vessels; whereof an hundred or two hundred may make up one arched parcel. Whereas one single Gum vessel in Pine, is sometimes as big as two whole Arched clusters, that is, as two or three hundred of the Milk vessels in a Fig tree. And the said Gum-vessels, or Turpentine-vessels of Pine, being compared with the Lymphaeducts of the same Tree, one Gum-vessel, by a moderate estimate, may be reckoned three or four hundred times wider than a Lymphaeduct. The like prodigious difference in the size of the se∣veral kinds of Vessels of many other Vege∣tables may be observed. THE three next quarters of Branches, are of Oak, common Sumack, and com∣mon Wormwood. In the Bark-vessels where∣of, there is yet a farther variety observe∣able. For in all or in most of the above named, there are only two kinds of Vessels in the Bark. But in each of these, there are three kinds. And first, in that of Oak there are two kinds of Lymphaeducts, and one of a sort of Resiniserous. The inmost Lymphaeducts make
a radiated ring, contiguous to the Wood. The utmost Lymphaeducts make also a ring, but not radiated. Those which are a sort of Rosin-vessels, stand in round parcels; the greater parcels betwixt the two rings of Lymphaeducts, and the lesser betwixt the utmost ring and the skin. That these are different Vessels from both the other, is evident from the diffe∣rence of their position, as aforesaid. And that they are a sort of Resinous, is argued hence; In that, not only Galls are very full of Rosin, but that the Bark of Oak it self is also resinous. For the conveyance of whose resinous parts, it is most unlike∣ly that any other Vessels should subserve, but a peculiar kind; which are therefore properly called Resiniferous. The next is a Branch of common Sumach. In the Bark whereof, there are likewise three kinds of vessels. First of all, there is a thick radiated ring of Lymphaeducts; standing on the inner margin of the Bark, contiguous with the Wood. These Vessels exhibit their Lympha very apparently. A second kind of Lymphaeducts are situate to∣wards the outer margin of the Bark, and are composed into distinct Arched parcels, all running in a ring. Betwixt the two kinds of Lymphaeducts
stand the Milk-vessels. Every single Milk∣vessel being empaled or hemmed in with an arch of Lymphaeducts. These Milk-vessels are extraordinary large, almost as the Gum∣vessels of Pine; so as easily to be observed without a Microscope; and without difficulty to admit a Virginal wyer; being two or three hundred times as big as a Lymphaeduct. The last, is a Branch of common Worm∣wood. In the Bark whereof, there are likewise three kinds of vessels. First of all, there is a thin radiated ring of Lymphaeducts contiguous with the Wood or on the inner margin of the Bark. But the ring is not en∣tire, but made up of several parcels; which are intercepted by as many parenchymous Insertions. A second sort of Lymphaeducts, or some other Sap-vessels, are situate about the mid∣dle of the Bark: and are composed into arched parcels, which likewise stand all e∣ven in a ring. Beyond these Arches, and towards the outer Margin of the Bark, stand a third sort of Vessels, somewhat analagous to the Milk∣vessels in Sumach. Yet different from them, in some part, both as to their situation size and Content. For in Sumach, the Milk-vessels stand within the Arched Lymphaeducts: whereas these in Wormwod, stand without them. Like∣wise
being the Vessels of an Herb, they are far less▪ sc. about the compass or width of a spangle. Their content, is not a Milk, but a perfect Turpentine, or a liquid and most oleous gum. Or which, for its pleasant aro∣matickness, may be called a Balsom. For it perfecty giveth whatever is in the smell and taste of Wormwood: being the Essence of the whole Plant, which nature treasur∣eth up in these Vessels. There are divers other, both Herbs and Trees, that in the like Vessels, contain a Turpentine or aroma∣tical Balsom; as Angelica, Enula campanae, and others: the Vessels being so very large, that they may be easily traced with a knife. Whether in some Plants, there are not more, I cannot say; though we may not have much reason to doubt of it. Because we see, there is so great a variety in the Viscera of Animals. For what the Viscera are in Animals; the Vessels themselves are in Plants. CONCERNING the Sap-vessels, I have one observation further to subjoyn, sc as to the Texture or Formation of the said Vessels. I have already said, and shewed, in my former Books of Plants, that the Lignous parts of all Vessels are Tubulary. That is, that the Sap is conveyed, by the
length of a Plant, through an innumera∣ble company of small Tubes, Pipes, or Ves∣sels. The Question may be yet further put. If the stringy parts of the Bark are made of Tubes, what are these Tubes themselves made up of? I answer, that not only these Tubes or Sap-vessels, are Organical them∣selves, but their very sides also, are com∣posed of other Parts, which are Organical, sc. of Lignous Fibers: which Fibers stand∣ing close or contiguous in a round, make one Tubulary Body, which I call the Sap∣vessel of a Plant. And it is most probable, that these Fibers themselves, are also Tu∣bulary. That is, that a Sap-vessel is a small Tube, made up or composed of other yet much smaller Tubes, set round together in a Cylindrical Figure. As if we should ima∣gine a company of straws, which are so many small Pipes, to be joined and set round together, so as to make another greater Pipe, answerable to a hollow Cane. The Cane, I say, is as the Sap-vessels; and the straws, as the Fibers whereof it is compo∣sed. By which also appears, the prodigi∣ous smallness of these Fibers. For a small Sap vessel may, by an indifferent account, be reckoned fifty times smaller than a Horse hair. Allowing therefore but twenty of the
aforesaid Fibers to one Vessel; that is to say, ten to compose its sides, and ten more to fill its concave; then one of the said Fi∣bers, must be a thousand times smaller than a Horse hair. Whether the Fibers are not made up of other Fibers, He only, that made them knows. The first notice I took of these Fibers, and of the Sap-vessels their being compo∣sed hereof, was in a very white and clear peice of Ash, torn, with some care, by the length of the Tree, and objected to a pro∣per Light. They are also sometimes discern∣able in some other clear Woods, as in very white Fir, &c. Divers considerations have confirmed me in the truth hereof. Whereof, at pre∣sent, I will mention these two. First, that herein the Analogy betwixt the Vessels of an Animal and a Plant, is very clear and proper. For as the sanguineous vessels in an Animal are composed of a number of Fibers, set round in a Tubulary Figure together: so are these Sap vessels of a Plant. Secondly, in that herein, there is a more genuine re∣spondence betwixt these, and the other Ves∣sels of a Plant it self; sc. the Air-vessels; which are made up of a certain number of round Fibers, standing collaterally, or side to side, as I have also observed in my Anato∣my
of Roots. So that it is the less strange, that the Sap vessels should be made up of Fibers, since the Air-vessels are so likewise. Only with this difference, that whereas in the Air vessels, the Fibers are postured spirally, and so more horizontally or by the bredth of the Trunk: here in the Sap∣vessels, they stand and are continued in strait lines, by the length. And thus far of the Bark. CHAP. III. THE next general Part of a Branch is the Wood; which lyeth betwixt the Bark and Pith. And this likewise ever∣more consisteth of two general Parts, sc. of a Parenchymous part, and of Vessels. The Parenchymous part of the Wood though much diversifyed, yet in the Trunks of all Trees whatsoever hath this property, to be disposed into many Diametral rays, or Insertions, running betwixt so many por∣tions of Vessels, from the Bark to the Pith: as in any of the Quarters here before us may appear. But these Insertions are much diversi∣fied according to the several species of
Plants. So in Barberry, Ash, Pine, Worm∣wood, they are less numerous. In Elm, Wallnut, Fig, Sumach, they are more. And in Holly, Pear, Plum, Apple, Oak, Hazel, are most numerous. The same Insertions, in Barberry, Worm∣wood, and in Oak many of them are very thick. In Pine, Fig, Ash, of a middle size. In Pear, Holly, and most of them in Oak, are exceeding small. Again, in Barberry, Elm, Ash, Sumach, Fig, they are of an equal size. In Holly, Hazel, Pear, Plum, Oak, they are very unequal: some of those in Holly being four or five times thicker than the rest; in Plum six or seven times; and in Oak ten times at least. They have yet one more diversity, which is, that in divers of the said Bran∣ches, they run not only through the Wood; but also shoot out beyond it, into some part of the Bark, as in Elm, Sumach, Worm∣wood, &c. Whereas in Pine, and some of the rest they either keep not distinct from the o∣ther parts of the Parenchyma of the Bark; or are so small, as not to be distinguished there from. The Texture likewise of these Insertions is somewhat various. For in Wormwood, and most Plants they are manifestly com∣posed of small Bubles or Bladders: differing
in nothing from those of the Bark or Pith, saving in their being much less; especially in the Branches of Trees. But in Herbs they are much larger which leads to the better observation of them in Trees likewise. But in many Trees, as Apple, Pear, Plum, Pine, &c. they are either quite lost, or so squeezed and pressed together by the hard Wood standing on both sides, as to be undiscern∣able. So that the difference betwixt a Blad∣der in the Pith, and one of these in the In∣sertions, is only this, that the one is as a purse expanded, and the other as the same purse contracted, and drawn up together with the srings. T Vessels of the Wood, have likewise much . Yet in the Branches of all Tree▪ they agree thus far; viz. To be of two general kinds; that is to say, Sap∣vessels and Air-vessels: whereas it is pro∣per to the Bark to have only Sap-vessels. Likewise betwixt the Sap-vessels, or Lignous Vessels of the Bark and of the Wood, there is this difference; That those of the Bark, upon cutting the Branch transversly, do all of them immediately visibly Bleed. But these of the Wood do not, many of them, sometimes; and most of them never. These Sap-vessels of the Wood have like∣wise some visible variety. Those much
less than have the Air-vessels, as shall be shewed. As for the reason why I call them Sap-vessels, it is to be understood; That every year there grows a new Ring of Sap∣vessels on the inner margin of the Bark. Which Ring hardening by degrees, at the latter end of the year, is turned into a dry and hard Ring of perfect Wood. So that e∣very year, the Bark of the Tree is divided into two parts, and distributed two con∣trary ways. The outer part falleth off to∣wards the skin; and at length becomes the skin it self. In like manner, as the Cu∣ticula in Animals, is but the efflorescence of the Cutis. I say, that the elder skin of a Tree, is is not originally made a skin; but was once, some of the midle part of the Bark it self, which is annually cast off, and dryed into a skin: even as the very skin of an Adder, doth upon the gradual gene∣ration of a new one underneath, in time, become a Slough. The inmost portion of the Bark, is annually distributed and ad∣ded to the Wood: the Parenchymous part thereof making a new addition to the In∣sertions within the Wood; and the Vessels, a new addition to the Lignous pieces betwixt which the Insertions stand. So that a Ring of Sap-vessels in the Bark this year, will be a Ring of Wood the next: and so another
Ring of Sap-vessels and or Wood successively from year to year. So the quarter for an Apple branch, sheweth one of three years growth; that of Barbery, of two; that of Sumach, of one only; that of Elm, of five. Whereby two things may be the better no∣ted. First the difference betwixt the degrees of the annual growths of several Trees: three years growth in an Oak, being as thick as five in an Elm; as, by comparing the se∣venth and twelfth quarters together, is seen. Secondly, the difference betwixt the An∣nual growths of the same Tree; being not of a constant proportion, but varying in thickness, as it should seem, according to the season of the year: whereby it may ap∣pear, what season, or kind of year, doth most of all favour, the latitudinal growth, or the thickening of any Tree. There is likewise some further variety in these old Sap-vessels, whereof the true Wood consists; represented in Wallnut, Fig, and Oak. Wherein, a certain smaller num∣ber of them stand in a contrary position, to that of the rest; viz. either in small and white Rings, as in Oak; or else in divers white and crooked parcels, as in Wallnut and Fig. For it seemeth, that, at least, in many Trees, some portion of all the kinds of Vessels in the Bark, are not only annu∣ally
distributed to the Wood, but do like∣wise therein retain the same, or very like position, which they originally had in the Bark. So that as all those bigger and dark∣er portions of the Wood, were originally, nothing else but the radiated Lymphaeducts of the Bark: so the little white circles, or parcels of circles, in the same Wood▪ were originally another sort o Sap-vessels in the Bark; sc. those which have a circular posi∣tion therein. Lastly, as the said older Sap-vessels, are varied by their quantity and position; so likewise by their size▪ For n Oak, and most hard Woods, they are extraordinary small, just discoverable by a good Micro∣scope. In Wallnut, Fig, Hazel, they are somewhat more patent. But in Fir, and some other Woods of that kind, they are remarkably wider, than in most other Woods. I have seen them in Pine and Fir, ten or fifteen times as big as they are in Oak, and are in some sort represented by the smaller black spots which stand in rays in the eleventh quarter. So that a piece of Fir-wood, especially the whiter sort, looks through a Microscope, just like the Lattice of a Window; or like the perforated Wood, out of which Button▪moulds have been cut.
Of the Branches of Fir, Pine, and o∣thers of the same kindred, it is also to be noted; That, amongst the said Lymphae∣ducts, whereof chiefly the Wood consists; there are scattered up and down some few Gum, or Turpentine-vessels; represented by the larger black spots in the eleventh quarter. Which Vessels are eadem numero, the self same, which did once appertain to the Bark; and do even here also in the Wood, contain and yield a liquid Turpen∣tine. Only being pinched up by the Wood, they are become much smaller Pipes. THE Air-vessels, with the older Sap∣vessels, and Parenchymous Insertions, al∣together make up that, which is common∣ly called the Wood of a Tree. The Air∣vessels I so call, not in that they never con∣tain any liquor; but, because all the principal time of the growth of a Plant, when the Vessels of the Bark are filled with liquor, these are filled only with a Vapour or vege∣table Air. In almost all Vegetables, not one in di∣vers hundreds excepted, this is proper to these Air-vessels; To have a much more ample bore or cavity, than any of the Sap∣vessels in the Wood. In the Wood, I say; for in the Bark, there are many Sap ves∣sels bigger than the bigest Air-vessels that are.
The varieties hereof are very many; in respect both of their number, size, and po∣sition; being the same, in no two species's of Plants whatsoever. Frst in respect of their number. So in Hazle, Apple, Pear, they are very numerous; but in different degrees: and are represented in the same Figures, by all the black spots in the Wood. In Holly, Plum, Barberry somewhat nume∣rous. In Oak, Ash, Wallnut fewer. In Pine, and others of that kindred, very few; sc. fewer than in any other kind whatso∣ever. Secondly, in respect of their size; which from the first or greatest, to the least, may be computed easily to about twenty Degrees. Thus many of those in Elm, Ash, Wallnut, Fig, Oak, are very large. In Barberry and Plum, not so large. In Hazle, Sumach, smaller. In Holly, Pear of a still smaller size. So that many of those in Elm, or Oak, are twenty times bigger, than those in Holly or Pear. And as they have a different size in di∣vers kinds of Plants; so likewise, accord∣ing to the place where they stand, in the self same. So in Holly, Hazle, Apple, their size is equaller throughout the bredth of the Tree. But in Barberry, Elm, Oak, Ash, their size in each is very different; not fortuit∣ously
alwys much after the same manner. For in all the named Branches, the Air∣vessels that stand in the inner margin of each annual Ring, are all vastly bigger, than any of those that stand in the outer part of the Ring. Thirdly these Air-vessels are also diffe∣rent in their situation. So in Apple, Wallnut, Fig, they are spread all abroad, in every annual Ring; not being posited in any one  line. In others, they keep more wthin the compass of some line or lines;  Diametral, or Peripherial. So in Holly they are radiated, or run in even Diame∣tral lines betwixt the Pith and the Bark. So also are some of them in Hazle; and some few in Wallnut. Whether they stand irregularly, or are radiated, it is to be noted, that Nature for the most part, so disposeth of them, that many of them may still stand very near the Insertions. So in Apple, she will rather decline making an even line; or in Holly, will rather break that line into parcels, than that the Air-vessels shall stand remote from the Insertions. To what end she doth this, shall be said hereafter. Again, in Ash, the Air-vessels are none of them radiated, but most of them stand in Circles on the inner Margin of every an∣nual
Ring. Which Circle is sometimes very thick, as in Ash and Barberry. In others but thin, the Vessels standing for the most part single throughout the Circles; as in Elm. Sometimes again, they both make a Circle, and are spread abroad; as in Pear and Plum. Those likewise which are spread abroad, are sometimes regularly posited. So in Bar∣berry, besides those larger, that make the Circle, there are other smaller ones, that stand, in oblique lines, athwart one ano∣ther; almost like the Bend in an Escut∣cheon. In Oak, they make rather certain Columns, in the posture of the Bar. And in Elm, they make, as it were, many cross Bars, in the posture of the Fess. This great difference in the size and po∣sition of the Air-vessels, in the same indi∣vidual Plant, is one ground, for which I think it probable, that there are divers kinds of Air-vessels, as well as of Sap-ves∣sels. Even as in Animals there are divers kinds of Organs for spiration, and the separa∣tion of Air: Fishes having their Bronchiae; land Animals their Lungs; and those in Frogs, &c. of a somewhat peculiar kind. The Texture of these Vessels, and the va∣rious ways whereby they may best be ob∣served I have already shewed, in my Ana∣tomy
of Roots. Yet for our clearer under∣standing the Texture of the said Vessels, I will a little further illustrate the same by this similitude. I would resemble it thus, As if a Ribband should be wound spirally, and edg, to edg, round about a stick; and so the stick being drawn out, the Ribband should be left, in the Figure of a Tube, an∣swerable to an Air-vessel. A Ribband, I say; for that which upon the unroveing of the Vessel, seems to be a Plate; is really Natural Ribband: being not one intire piece, (nor therefore always of the same bredth) but consisting of a certain number of round Fi∣bers, standing collaterally, as the threds do in an Artificial Ribband. And are also, much after the same manner, by other cross and smaller Fibers, stitched close up together; as is most apparent in the large and elder Air-vessels of Pine, Oak, and ma∣ny other Plants. What these cross Fibers are, will better be understood when we come to the Texture of the Pith.
CHAP. IV. THE third general Part of a Branch, is the Pith. Which though it have a different name from the Parenchyma in the Bark, and the Insertions in the Wood; yet as to its substance, it is the very same with them both. Whereof there is a double evidence, sc. the sameness of their Texture, and their Continity. Their Texture shall be shewed presently. As to their Conti∣nuity, it is to be noted, that as the skin is continuous with the Parenchyma of the Bark; and this Parenchyma likewise, with the Insertions in the Wood; so these Inserti∣ons again, running through the Wood, are also continuous with the Pith. So that the skin, Parenchyma, Insertions, and Pith, are all one entire piece of work; being only filled up diversly, with the Vessels. The size of the Pith is various, being not the same in any two Branches here repre∣sented. In Wormwood, Sumach, Fig, Bar∣berry, 'tis very large; sc. betwixt 5, and 7. Inches Diameter, as it appears through the Microscope. In Pine, Ash, Holly, Wallnut, not so large; from 3. Inches Diameter to 4. In Oak, Apple, Pear, Hazel, lesser, scarce from 2. to 3. In Damascene, not above an
Inch and half. And in Elm▪ scarce an Inch Diameter. Note also, that of all Plants, Herbs, and Shrubs, have generally the largest Piths, in proportion with the other parts of the same Branch, as in Sumach, Fig, Barberry is manifest. The Pith for the most part, if not al∣ways, in the Branch, as well as Root, is compounded of two parts, sc. a Parenchy∣ma, and Sap-vessels. The Vessels are here usually postured so, as to make a Ring on the Margin of the Pith. Where they are more numerous, or large, they are more e∣vident; as in Wallnut, Fig Pine, and others. They are also of divers kinds answerable to those in the Bark; as in Wallnut Lym∣phaeducts, in Fig Lactents, in Pine Rosi∣nous. The Parenchyma of the Pith is compo∣sed of Bladders. Which are the very same with those in the Bark, and in the Inser∣tions within the Wood. Only these in the Pith, are of the largest size; those in the Bark, of a lesser; and those of the Inser∣tions least of all: for which reason they are less obvious than in the Pith. The Bladders of the Pith, though always comparatively great, yet are of very dif∣ferent sizes. Being easily distinguished, e∣ven as to their horizontal Area, to twenty
degrees. Those of Fig, Barberry, and some others, are large. And of many Plants, as of Thistle, Borage, and others, three times as big again; appearing in the Microscope, like to the largest Cells of an Honey-comb. These of Plum, Wormwood, Sumach, less. Of Elm, Apple, Pear, lesser, Of Holly and Oak, still less. So that the Bladders of the Pith in Borage or common Thistle, are of that size, as to contain, within the compass only of their Horizontal Area, about twenty Bladders of the Pith of Oak. Wherefore one whole Bladder in Thistle, is, at least an hundred times bigger, then another in Oak. Of the size of these Bladders of the Pith, 'tis also to be noted, that it doth not at all follow the size of the Pith it self; but is still varyed, according as nature designeth the Pith for various use. Thus whereas the Pith of Sumach is larger than that of Barberry; it might be thought, that the Bladders, whereof it is composed, should be likewise larger; yet are they three times as small again. So the Pith of Plum, is far less than that of Pear; yet the Bladders 4. or 5. times as big. So the Pith of Hazel is almost three times as little again, as that of Holly; yet the Bladders in Hazel, are ten times bigger, than in Holly.
The shape of the Bladders hath also some variety. For although, for the most part, they are more round; yet oftentimes they are angular: as in Reed-grass, a Water∣plant; where they are Cubical; and in Bo∣rage, Thistle, and many others, where they are pentangular, sexangular and septangu∣lar. Of the Texture of the Bladders, 'tis also to be noted, that many times, the sides of the greater Bladders are composed of lesser; as is often seen in those of Borage and some other Plants. In the same man∣ner, as the Sap-vessels, are but greater Fi∣bers made up of lesser. The Pith, though always originally com∣posed of Bladders, and so one entire piece; yet in process, as the Plant grows up, it hath divers openings or Ruptures made in it: oftentimes very regularly, and always for good use, and with constancy observed in the same Species of Plants. In Wallnut it shrinketh up into transverse films or Membranes; as likewise in Spanish-broom. Sometimes the Membranes reach not from side to side, but about half way, running one against another by a reciprocal In∣denture: somewhat after the manner of the Valvulae Conniventes in the smaller Gutts. Sometimes bored with divers Caverns by
the length: sometimes with one great one throughout the stalk; and sometimes reach∣ing from knot to knot; by which it is di∣vided into several stories: and divers o∣ther ways. I SHALL conclude this discourse with a further illustration of the Texture of the Pith, and of the whole Plant, as conse∣quent thereupon. I say therefore, (and have given some account hereof in my Anatomy of Roots) that as the Vessels of a Plant, sc. the Air-vessels and Sap-vessels, are made up of Fibers; according to what I have in this discourse above said; so the Parenchyma of a Plant, or the Bladders whereof the Parenchyma consists, are like∣wise made up of Fibers. Which is true also of the Parenchyma of the Bark. And also of the Insertions in the Wood. Yea, and of the Fruit, and all other Parenchy∣mous parts of a Plant. I say, that the very pulp of an Apple, Pear, Cucumber, Plum, or any other Fruit, is nothing els but a Ball of small transparent threds or Fibers, all wrapped and wreathed up (though in a di∣vers manner) close together. And even all those parts of a Vegetable, which are nei∣ther formed into visible Tubes, nor into Bladders, are yet made up of Fibers. Which though it be difficult to observe in any of
those parts which are closer wrought; yet in the Pith, especially of some Plants, which consisteth of more open work, it is more visible; and so introduceth the observa∣tion hereof, in all other Parenchymous parts. Whence it follows, that the whole sub∣stance, or all the parts of a Vegetable, so far as organical, they are also Fibrous. Of all which Fibers, those of the Vessels, run up by the length of the Plant: these of the Pith, and other Parenchymous parts, run cross by the bredth or horizontally. BY WHICH means, the said Paren∣chymous Fibers, in fetching their horizon∣tal circles, they first of all weave, and make up the Bladders of the Pith in open-work. And the same Fibers being continued; they next weave and make up the Insertions in close work. Amongst which Insertions the Vessels standing, many of the said Fibers wrap themselves also about them; thus ty∣ing many of them together; and making those several Conjugations and Braces, of the Vessels which I have formerly described. And as some of these Parenchymous Fibers wrap about the Vessels; so also about the very Fibers, whereof the Vessels are, as is above said, composed. By which means it is, that all the said Fibers of the Vessels are
tacked or stitched up close together into one coherent piece. Much after the same manner, as the perpendicular splinters or Twigs of a Basket, are, by those that run in and out horizontally. And the same Pa∣renchymous Fibers, being still further pro∣duced into the Bark; they there compose the same work over again: only not so open as in the Pith. SO THAT the most unfeigned and proper resemblance we can make of the whole Body of a Plant, is, to a piece of fine Bone-lace, at such time, as the women are working it upon the Cushion. For all the Parenchymous parts, as the Pith, Insertions, and Parenchyma of the Bark, are nothing els but Lace-work; the Fibers of the Pith running Horizontally as do the threds in the Lace: and bounding the several Bladders of the Pith and Bark; as the threds do the several holes of the Lace: and making up the Insertions without Bladders, or ve∣ry small ones, as the same threds likewise do the close parts of the Lace; which they call the cloath-work. And lastly, the Vessels, standing perpendicularly, run cross to the Horizontal Fibers; even as in the Lace, the Pins do to the threds. And this is the true Texture of a Plant: and the general compo∣sure, not only of a Branch, but of all the
other parts, from the seed to the seed. See the Figure representing the stalk of Thistle.
An Account of the VEGETATION OF TRUNKS Grounded upon the foregoing ANATOMY. HAVING already given the Ana∣tomy of Trunks, I shall next pro∣ceed to see, what use may be made thereof; and principally, to explicate the manner of their Vegeta∣tion. In doing which, that former Method, which I used in shewing the manner of the growth of Roots, I shall not exactly follow. For so, the general parts of the Root and Trunk being the same, and consequently the Nutrition and Confirmation of the Or∣ganical
parts of both, being effected in the same way; I should hereby be obliged to the repetition of many things already said: which would be nauseous and unprofita∣ble unto those, who have been pleased to peruse them. The explication therefore of all those things that more especially be∣long to the Trunk, or are more apparent therein, and not spoken of, or not so fully in my former Books, will be my present task. The chief Heads whereof, shall be these se∣ven following. viz. FIRST, the Motion and course of the Sap. SECONDLY, The Motion and course of the Air. THIRDLY, The Structure of the parts. FOURTHLY, The Generation of Li∣quours. FIFTHLY, The Figuration of Trunks. SIXTHLY, The Motion of Trunks. SEVENTHLY, And lastly the Nare of Trunks as variously fitted for Mechani∣cal use.
CHAP. I. FIRST, as to the course of the Sap, there are three parts by which it moveth; sc. the Pith, the Wood, and the Bark. First the Pith; by which the Sap moveth the first year, and only the first year. Or, it is Proprium quarto modo, to the Pith of e∣very Annual growth, and to the Pith of such a growth only, to be succulent. That is, whether of a sprout from a seed, or of a sucker from a Root, or of a Cyon from a Branch; The Pith is always found the first year full of Sap. But the second year, the same individual Pith, always becomes dry, and so it continues ever after. One cause whereof is, that the Sap-ves∣sels in the Bark, being the first year adja∣cent to the Pith, they do all that time trans∣fuse part of their Sap into it, and so keep it always succulent. But the same Sap ves∣sels the year following, are turned into Wood; and the Vessels which now carry the Sap stand beyond them, in the Bark. So that the Sap being now more remote from the Pith, and intercepted by the new wood, it cannot be transfused with that sufficient force and plenty as before into the Pith; which therefore from the first year always continues dry.
THE SECOND part by which the Sap moves sub forma liquoris, is the Wood. Which yet is not in all Plants, but only in some, and visibly in few; as in the Vine: in which, I say, the Sap doth visibly ascend by the Wood. And this it doth not only the first year, but every year, so long as the Vine continues to grow. But although this ascent by the Wood be every year, yet is it only in the spring, for about the space of a month; sc. in March, and April. There are many other Trees, besides the Vine, wherein at the same time of the year, (and perhaps in all the other Trees a little before or after) wherein, I say, the Sap ascendeth, though not so copiously, yet chiefly, by the Wood. For taking a Branch of two or three years old, suppose of Sallow, and having first cut it trans∣versly, if the Bark be then in the same man∣ner crushed somewhat hard with the back of the knife, near the newly cut end; the Sap will very plainly rise up out of the ut∣most Ring of Wood. And if it be crushed in the same manner, about an inch lower it will ascend out of every Ring of Wood to the center. Yet at the same time, which is to be noted, there ariseth no Sap at all out of the Bark. Which sheweth the error of that so common opinion, that the Sap
always riseth betwixt the Wood and the Bark. For in the beginning of spring, it riseth, neither betwixt the Wood and Bark, nor in the Bark; but only in the Wood. THE THIRD part by which the Sap ascends is the Bark, as may be observed in almost any Branch, cut cross in the late Spring and Summer; either as the Sap is∣sueth spontaneously, or upon crushing as a∣foresaid. So that when the Sap ceaseth to ascend, sub forma liquoris, by the Wood, then it begins to ascend by the Bark. Besides the difference of time, the Organi∣cal parts likewise, by which these two Saps ascend, are divers. For in the Bark, it ascend∣eth visibly only by the Sap-vessels. Whereas in the Wood, it ascendeth only by the Air-vessels. That is to say those Vessels in the Wood, which in the beginning of Spring do often times carry Liquor: when the Tree begins to thrive, and many new parts to be formed and fed, are filled only with Air; sc. a Vegetable Air. The said Vessels in the Wood have likewise a quite different Structure; being composed of spiral, but those in the Bark of rectile∣near Fibers; as we have lately shewed. In which Vessels of the Bark all the specifical liquors of every Tree are chiefly contained. FROM what hath been said, we may understand, what is meant by Bleeding of
Plants. If we take it generally, it properly enough expresses the eruption of the Sap out of any Vessels; and so, almost all Plants in Summer time, do Bleed: that is, from Ves∣sels either in the Bark or verge of the Pith: the Saps they Bleed, having either a sower, sweet, hot, bitter, or other tast. At which time, the Vessels also, in the Bark of a Vine Branch, do bleed a sower sap. But that which is vulgarly called bleeding, as in a Vine, is quite another thing; both as to the liquor which issueth, and the place where it issues: that is to say, it is neither a sweet nor sower, but tastless Sap; issuing not from the Air-vessels in the Bark. So that there is as much difference betwixt Bleeding in a Vine, or the Rising of the Sap in any other Tree, in March, and in July; as there is betwixt salivation and an Hae∣morrhage; or betwixt the course of the Chyle in the Lactiferous Vessels, and the Circula∣tion of the Blood in the Arteries and Veins. NOW the cause whence it comes to pass, that the early spring Sap of a Vine, and other Trees, ascendeth by the Wood, is in that the young Sap-vessels of the Bark, by which the Sap ascendeth all the Summer, are as yet but begun to be formed. So that the Sap having not yet these Vessels to re∣ceive
it, it therefore runs up the Air-vessels in the Wood. But so soon as the said Vessels in the Bark begin considerably to encrease, the Sap quitting the Air-vessels, betakes it self to these, as its most proper Recepta∣cles. The cause else, why the Vessels of almost all Plants, upon cutting, do yield Sap, or Bleed; is the pression which the Parenchy∣ma makes upon them. For the Pith and other Parenchymous parts of a Plant, have upon the reception of liquor, a Conatus to dilate themselves: as is manifest from spon∣ges, which are a substance of the same na∣ture, and have a somewhat like structure: as also from Cork, which is but the paren∣chyma of a Plant. I say therefore, that the parenchyma being fill'd and swell'd with Sap hath thereby a continual Conatus to dilate it self; and in the same degree, to crush together or contract the Vessels which it surroundeth. And the said Vessels being cut, their actual contraction, and the erup∣tion of the Sap, do both immediately fol∣low. It may also be noted, that the Trunk or Branch of any Plant being cut, it always bleeds at both ends, upward and down∣wards, alike freely. Which, as well as divers other experiments, plainly shews,
that in the Sap-vessels of a Plant there are no Valves. FROM what we have now above, and elsewhere formerly said, we may also understand the manner of the ascent of the Sap. As to which I say first, that consider∣ing to what height and plenty, the Sap sometimes ascends; it is not intelligible, how it should thus ascend, by virtue of any one part of a Plant alone; that is nei∣ther by virtue of the parenchyma, nor by virtue of the Vessels alone. Nor by the pa∣renchyma alone. For this, as it hath the nature of a Sponge or Filtre, to suck up the Sap; so likewise, to suck it up but to such an height, as perhaps about an inch, or two and no more. Nor by the Vessels, alone for the same reason. For although we see, that small glass pipes immersed in water, will give it an ascent for some inches; yet there is a certain period, according to the bore of the Pipe, beyond which it will not rise. We must therefore join both the Vessels and the parenchyma together in the service; which we may conceive performed by them in this manner following. Let AB be the Vessel of a Plant. Let GH be the Fibers whereof it is composed. Let CEDF be a number of Vesiculae of
the parenchyma, wherewith it is surround∣ed. I say then, that the Sap, in the pipe BA would of it self rise but a few inches, as suppose from D to L. But being sur∣rounded by the Vesiculae DP the said Vesi∣culae being swelled with Sap, press upon the said pipe BA. Which being pervious by its Fibers GH the Vesiculae at the same time filtre or transfuse part of their Sap thereinto; which will therefore be forced to rise higher therein. And the said pipe or Vessel being all along surrounded by the like Vesiculae, the Sap therein is still forced higher and higher. Wherefore the Vesiculae of the parenchyma, are as so many Cisterns of liquor, which being, throughout the length of the pipe, contiguous to it, afford it every where a continual supply of Sap. So that by the supply and pressure of the Cisterns or Vesiculae FD the Sap riseth to L; by those at QL it rises to M; by those at NM, it rises to I; by those at OI, it rises to K; by those at PK, it rises to E; and so to the top of the Tree. And thus far of the motion of the Sap.
CHAP. II. THE NEXT enquiry to be made, is into the motion and course of the Air. Where this question will first of all be asked; sc. which way the Air first en∣ters the Plant; whether at the Trunk, Leaves, and other parts above ground; or at the Root? I answer, that it enters in part at them all. For the inception, as well as extramission whereof, the pores are so very large, in the Trunks of some Plants, as in the better sort of thick walking Canes, that they are visible, to a good eye, with∣out a glass, but with a glass the Cane seems, as if it were stuck top full of holes with great pins: being so large, as very well to resemble these pores of the skin in the ends of the fingers and ball of the hand. In the leaves of Pine, they are likewise, through a glass, a very elegant show; standing all, most exactly, in rank and file, throughout the length of the leaves. The figure whereof shall be given hereafter, when I come to the Anatomy of the Leaf. But although the Air enters, in part, at the Trunk and other parts, especially in some Plants; yet its chief entrance, is at the Root. Even as some parts of Air, may
continually pass into the Body and Blood, by the habit, or pores of the skin; but chiefly, at the mouth. And what the mouth is, to an Animal; that the Root is to a Plant. Again, if the chief entrance of the Air, was at the Trunk; then, before it could be mixed with the Sap in the Root, it must de∣scend; and so move in a contrary course to the Sap throughout the Plant. As by its reception at the Root, and so its ascent from thence, it hath a more natural and easy motion of ascent: for that the Sap of the same Plant should continually ascend, and the Air descend, would be somewhat strange. The same is further argued from the few∣ness and smallness of diametral Portions in the Trunk, in comparison with those in the Root: which nature hath plainly there designed, for the separation of the Air from the Sap, as they are both together re∣ceived into the Root. So that the reception and course of the Air, is made on this man∣ner following. The Air being a springy body, it insinu∣ates into all the Pores and cranies of the earth; and so is perfectly mixed with the soyl. Whereupon, as the Sap enters the Root, more or less Air still intrudes it self
together with it. The liquid portion of the Sap swells and fills up the succulent parts of the Bark. The Airy part is, as was said, separated from the liquid into the Diame∣tral portions. By which it is conveyed from the Bark, and so into the Air-vessels; be∣twixt which Vessels, the said Diametral portions run from the Bark towards the center of the Root. The Air thus received into the Air-vessels, and the reception thereof, by the same means, continued; it is by them advanced into the Trunk. In which advance, it is again, more or less, disbursed into all the parts of the Trunk, as it goes. Partly inwards to the Pith. From whence the Pith is always at length filled with Air. Partly into the Insertions; by which it is conveyed outward into the Bark. Wherein, it is in part transfused through the Sap; and so the rest, with part of the Sap, remitted in perspirations back again into the Air. So that, whereas the Diame∣tral portions in the Root, do serve to con∣vey the Air from the Sap into the Air-vessels: on the contrary the Insertions here in the Trunk serve to convey the Air from the Air-vessels into the Sap. Wherefore, as the Air-vessels advance the Air; or the Airy part of the Sap, and so convey it by the length of the Trunk; so the Insertions filter
it, and convey it by the bredth. AND that the Insertions have this office of subservience to both kinds of Vessels; doth yet further appear, if we consider, that the Air-vessels are always so postured, as to touch upon the said Insertions, or at least to stand very near them. For either they are large, and so do frequently touch upon them on both sides; as in Elm, Ash, Wallnut &c. Or if they are small; then they either run along in even lines colla∣teral with the said Insertions, as in Holly: or at least, are reciprocally, some on one side, and some on another, inclined to them; as in Apple. By all which means, the Air is more readily conveyed from the Vessels into the Insertions. Again, a further evidence hereof is that generally, the bigger and the more nu∣merous the Air-vessels are; the bigger, or at least, the more numerous also are the Insertions: especially if the comparison be made (as in all other cases it ought to be, as well as here) betwixt the several species of the same kind. So Corin, which hath small Air-vessels, hath also very small In∣sertions. But the Vine hath both very large: and so for others. Wherefore, the Insertions minister be∣twixt the Air-vessels and the succiferous; in
the same manner, as the Vesiculae of the Lungs, do betwixt the Bronchiae and the Arteries. That is to say, as in an Animal, the Bronchiae deposite the Air into the Ve∣siculae of the lungs; which administer it to the Arteries: so in a Plant, the Air-vessels deposit the Air into the Insertions, that is into the Vesiculae of the Insertions; by which it is gradually filtred off into the Bark and Sap-vessels. CHAP. III. A THIRD enquiry, is into the Gene∣ration and Structure of parts. The man∣ner whereof I have already endeavoured to explicate from the Anatomy of the Root, throughout all particulars. Some whereof I shall yet further clear. As first the Union of the Bark to the Body of the Tree. Contrary to the common opinion, That they are not continuous; but that the Bark only surrounds the Body, as a scabbard doth the sword, or a glove the hand. As also seemeth to be proved, by the easy sliping of the Bark of Willow, and most other Trees, when full of Sap, from the Wood.
But notwithstanding, this, they are as truly continuous, as the skin of the Body is with the flesh: sc. by means of the Pa∣renchyma, which is one entire Body, run∣ning from the Bark into the Wood, and so uniting both together. Now the reason why the Bark neverthe∣less slips so easily from the Wood, is plain, viz. Because most of the young Vessels and Parenchymous parts, are there every year successively formed; that is, betwixt the Wood and Bark: where the said parts new∣ly formed, are as tender, as the tenderest Vessels in Animals. And we may imagine, how easy it were at once to tear or break a thousand Vessels or Fibers of an Embrio, of a Womb or Egg. THE same Vessels of the Bark are al∣ways braced, and gradually fall off toge∣ther with the Parenchyma into the utmost Rind. Hence it is, that the Barks of many Trees are as it were, latticed with several cracks or fissures, of divers sizes, in the fi∣gure of Rhombs: the said fissures repre∣senting the Position and Tract of the Vessels in their Braces. Hence also it is, that the Bark of some Trees, as of Corin, Cherry, &c. falleth off in Rings, sc. because the Sap-vessels are posited in the same manner in the Bark.
The Sap vessels, as they are generated at the inner verge of the Bark: solikewise, in a small quantity, at the utmost verge of the Pith. Hence it is, that is, by the annual accretion of these Vessels, that the Pith is sometimes less in the Trunk, than in the Branches; and less in the elder Branches, than in the younger; and sometimes 'tis al∣most wholly filled up. SOMETIMES also it breaks and shrinks up, thus making the Trunk a Pipe. The cause whereof, is either the Largness of its Pores, or the Thinness of the sides of the said Pores; upon both which accounts, the Pith doth more easily tear, and upon tearing shrink up, and so become hollow: as in Cichory, Lampsana, Sonchus, Tea∣sel, Brownwort, and others; wherein the Pores of the Pith are large, and the sides of the Pores thin. Whereas, upon contra∣ry accounts the Piths of most Trees, re∣main perpetually entire. THE Reason why Plants are made thus to become hollow, is partly, for the ripening of the Fruit or Seed; which is the better effected by a more plentiful supply of Air tinually received into their hol∣low Trunks. By means of which Air, part of the Sap, is dryed up, and the remain∣ing part of it made warmer, and so sooner matured.
Partly, for the better determining the due Age of the Plant. Hence it is, that the greater part of Annual Trunks, are hol∣low: the Air contained in that hollow, drying up the Sap, and shrinking up the Sap-vessels so far, as to hinder the free mo∣tion of the Sap therein; from whence the Plant must needs perish. So that as the Content of the Air-vessels, is a kind of Ve∣getable Air, whose office is to Attenuate, and Ferment rhe Juyces of Plants: so the Con∣tent of these cavities, is a more natural Air, designed chiefly, so soon as it is con∣venient, to dry them up. Sometimes, though the Pith break, yet not into one pipe, but many cross Mem∣branes, as in Wallnut and Spanish-broom. Because here the dilatation of the Branch, and of the Pith therein, being much less, in proportion, than its growth in length; the Pith therefore, being stretched most by its length, will soonest tear the same way and consequently shrink up into so many Membranes by the bredth of the Trunk. AGAIN, as to the Air-vessels divers questions may be asked. As how it comes to pass, that they are generally less in the Trunk of the same Plant, than in the Root? The cause whereof is, that here in the
Trunk, they are more under the power of the Air; both that which entereth in at the Trunk, and that which of its own na∣ture ascendeth up into it from the Root. For the Air, as we have elsewhere said, is the mould of the Air-vessels, to the crooked particles whereof the Saline, and other principles concurring to their gene∣ration, do conform. To which they do best, the smaller they are: the Fibers of the larger Air-vessels making greater cir∣cles, and so coming nearer to a right line, answerable to the figure of the Particles; not of the Aerial but of the saline prin∣ciple. Wherefore as the Air-vessels may be ob∣served still to be dilated or widened to∣wards the lower parts of the Root; the Aerial principle being there less predomi∣nant, and the Saline more: So towards the upper part of the Trunck, to be contracted or grow smaller; the Aerial prniciple be∣ing here more predominant, and the Saline less. FOR the same cause, it may be obser∣ved, that the Air-vessels of the several years succeeding the second year, are near of one size: but those of the second year, are usually much larger than those of the first, viz. as being under a less power of
the Air. For the first year, the Pith being full of liquor, the Air-vessels themselves, are the only Repositories of the Air. Where∣as after the first year, the Pith becoming dry, or another great Repository for the Air; the Air-vessels, are henceforth filled with a moisture and more vapourous and saline Air, and so made to grow wider. For the same cause it is, that the dispa∣rity betwixt the Air-vessels of the first and succeeding years, is not, where the Pith is small, so visible. Because being never capable of containing many airy parts of the Sap, the Air-vessels themselves conti∣nue still the chief Receptacles of the Air, and so to be still more equally sized: as in Hazel, Elm, &c. is seen. Hence the very size of the Pith, hath much influence upon the Air-vessels, and the manner of nutrition, and the Generati∣on of liquors in Plants. LASTLY, for the above said cause, the time when the Vessels begin every year to be formed or to appear, is always la∣ter; at least, with respect to the season of the Tree. So that whereas the Sap-vessels begin to be formed in spring: these, not till the latter end of Summer, or there a∣bout; at least not till about that time to appear. That is, when the Sap begins to
decrease, and to grow more airy; and so more fit matter for the generation of the said Air-vessels. CHAP. IV. UPON the Structure and Formation of the parts, dependeth the genera∣tion of liquors, as was lately intimated. The manner whereof I have formerly shewed, in discoursing of the Root. Yet some things I shall here further explicate. And first, what we have formerly asserted sc. That the concurrence of two specifi∣cally distinct liquors, is as necessary to nu∣trition in Plants, as in Animals. Which appears, as from divers other considerati∣ons, so from the very Structure of a Plant: where in all the organical parts, that is the parenchyma and the Vessels, are every where mixed together per minima, that is, per minimas partes Organicas, or Fiber with Fiber of several kinds. So that every small part of a Tree or of the Bark of a Tree, is as I may say, a sort of Linsy Woolsey. So that there is not the least part of the Sap, which is not impregnate with divers essen∣tial tinctures, as it is continually filtred
from the Fibers of one kind, to those of an∣other; standing every where twisted and stitched up together for the same pur∣pose. FROM the special nature and structure of the parts, the liquors of Plants are like∣wise specified. The Vessels being the chief Viscera of a Plant. For all liquors in a Plant, are certainly made by that Plant. And since the Plant hath no Viscera (so called) I would then know, what its several liquors are made by? If in the parenchyma, sure∣ly by that parenchyma. If in the Vessels, by the Vessels. And if of divers kinds, by divers kinds of Vessels. So that what the Viscera are in Animals, the Vessels them∣selves are in Plants. That is to say, as the Viscera of an Animal, are but Vessels conglomerated: so the Vessels of a Plant, are Viscera drawn out at length. AGAIN, as the specifying of the Sap dependeth chiefly on the special nature of the parts: so partly upon the structure of the whole. Whereby every part is still better accommodated with its own Juyce. Thus the Air-vessels are necessary, not only and barely for a supply of Air; but also by their number, size, and position to adjust the quantity of that Air, to the govern∣ment of nutrition, and the generation of
the specificall liquors of every Plant. Which is evident from hence, in that they do not follow the size of the Plant; but are great and many, in some small Plants; and small and few, in some others that are large. So Vines, and Corn, as we have formerly ob∣served, have proportionably a great num∣ber of Air-vessels, and those very large. By which means the Sap is attenuated and less oylie and more copiously impregnated with a subtle, volatile and winy spirit. For the same reason Canes, which yield that sweet juyce, whereof Sugar is made, and which also aboundeth with a volatile and inflameable spirit: these, I say, ob∣tain the like over proportion of Air-vessels, to what we see in most Plants. Hence also it is, that none of the said Plants have a∣ny considerable Bark; that so the attenu∣ating and subtilizing Air, may have a more easy and plentiful admission at the Trunk also. For which reason likewise the pores of the skin of some Canes are, as hath been observed, remarkably wide. Hence also it is observable, that of the same species or kindred, those Plants which have the most, and especially the largest Air-vessels; have also the greatest abund∣ance either of a sweet, or of a winy liquor. So in Apple, they are larger than in Crab;
In Warden, larger than in Quince; and in Pear tre, larger than in Warden. So also in Corin, larger then in Goosbery; and in Vine, larger than in Corin: and so in o∣thers. AND as the Air-vessels, by their Mul∣titude and Largeness, are accommodated to the better making of a winy sap: so by their fewness and smallness, of an oylie. As is remarkably seen in Fir, and other Resi∣niferous Trees: these having, if not the smallest, yet the fewest Air-vessels of all o∣ther Trees. IF it be asked, how a Plant comes to have any Oyl at all in any part? Since we see, that the Sap by which the Root is fed, seemeth to be nothing else but water: and that many Plants which yield a great deal of stillatitious Oyl, as Mint, Rue, and o∣thers, will yet grow in Water: I say, if it be enquired how this Water, is made Wine, or Oyl? I answer, that there is no such matter. But that the Oyl, and all o∣ther Vegetable principles are actually exi∣stent in, and mixed per minima, though in an extraordinary small proportion with the water. Even as we see the distilled Waters of Anise seeds, Penyroyal, and the like, to be impregnated with their own Oyls, which give the tast and smell to such Waters.
Wherefore as a certain quantity of any salt may be dissolved in Water; beyond which, it will not mix therewith, but re∣mains under its own form: So is there a certain proportion of Oyl, though far less, which may also be perfectly mixed with Water; and is certainly so, more or less, with all the Water in the world. But if that proportion, or degree of impregnati∣on be once exceeded; the particles of Oyl do then, and not till then, gather into a body, and appear under their own form. I say therefore, that all kinds of vege∣table Principles, are either in or together with the Water, with less difference first re∣ceived into a Plant. But when they are once therein; they are then separated, that is to say, filtred, some from others, in very different proportions and conjunctions by the several parts; the Watery by one part, the Airy by another, the Oily by ano∣ther, and so the rest: and so every Part is the Receptacle of a liquor, become peculiar, not by any Transformation, but only the percolation of parts out of the common Mass or stock of Sap. And so all those parts of the Sap. which are superfluous to any kind of Plant, are at the same time, discharged back by perspirations, into the Air. And hence, that nature, in the various
percolations and separations of the Sap, may still the better answer her end; hence, I say it is, that she carefully seeth, not only to the special nature of the Organs, by which she doth her work; but likewise to their very position. Thus it is observable, that whereas the Lymphaeducts, which carry a more watery liquor, are still placed on the inner verge of the Bark, next to the Air∣vEssels: the Lactiferous and Resiniferous vessels of Plants, to whose Oylie liquor a mix∣ture of much Air is incongruous; do usu∣ally stand, neither on the inner, nor the outer verge of the Bark; but in the midle. By which means, they are at the greatest distance, and so most secure from the Air; either that which enters the Bark, at the circumference; or from the Wood and Pith. AND because the Resinous liquors of Plants are more Oylie than their Milky; their security therefore, from the approach of the Air, is yet further contrived. In that in Pine, and other Resinous Trees, the Di∣ametral portions are never found; at least not visible: which yet in other Trees, are conspicuous; being those parts, whose office it is, to introduce the Air from the Wood into the Bark. AGAIN, the Milky liquors of Plants
being thinner than the Resinous, and having a considerable quantity of water mixed with their oyl; hence it is, that in Milky plants, as in Rhus, there are a greater number of Lymphaeducts; and those stand∣ing nearer to the Milky vessels, than they do in Pine, and the like, to the Resinous. By which means they are better fitted to affuse their aqueous parts more plentifully to the said Milky liquor. FROM the mixture of watery parts with the Oylie, it comes to pass, that where∣as all Lympha's, Mucilages, and Rosins are transparent; the Aquae-oleous liquors of Plants are milky or white, or otherwise opacous. For the same thing is the cause of the whiteness of Vegetable, as of Animal∣milk: that is to say, a more copious mix∣ture of watery and Oylie parts per minima, or into one body. For even the serous and Oylie parts of Animal milk, when through∣ly separated one from the other, they both become very transparent. So the stillatiti∣ous oyl of anise seeds, is most transparent and limpid, even as water it self: yet there is a known sort of White anise-seed water, as it is commonly called: that is to say, wherein the Oyl, in distillation, ari∣seth and is mixed more plentifully with the water. And the water, wherein the
stillatitious oyl of any Vegetable is dissolved becomes a perfect white Milk; as in this Honourable and Learned Presence, I have formerly had occasion to Demonstrate. AND that the Milky liquors of all Ve∣tables whatsoever, are likewise more Oylie than their Lympha's, is most certain. For all those Gums, which dissolve in Oyl or water as Galbanum, and the like, are ori∣ginally the Milky Juyces of Plants. And if you take the Milk of any Plant, as for in∣stance, the Milk of common Sumach, or of any tast, bitter, astringent, hot, cold, or a∣ny other whatsoever; and having well dryed it, and then fired it at a candle; it will thereupon burn with a very bright and durable flame, even like that of Tar or Turpentine it self. FROM what hath been said, we may likewise gather the most genuine import of the word Gum, and the distinction thereof both from a Rosin and a Mucilage. First a Rosin, is originally a Turpentine, or Acido∣oleous liquor, having an exceeding small quantity of watery parts mixed therewith; and which, for that reason, will not be dis∣solved therein, but only in Oyl. Of this kind are Mastick, Benzoine, Taccamahac∣ca, and divers others, commonly, in our Bills to Apothecaries, called Gums. Yet,
in strict speaking they are all so many Ro∣sins. Secondly a Gum, and every oylie Gum, is originally a milky liquor, having a great∣er quantity of water mixed with its oylie parts; and which, for that reason, will be made to dissolve either in Water or Oyl. Of this kind are Sagapen, Opopanax, Ammo∣niac, and others. The third sort of Gum, is that which is unoylie, and which therefore dissolveth only in water, as Gum-arabick, the Gum of Cherry∣tree, and others such like. This Gum, though commonly so called, yet is properly but a dryed Mucilage: being originally nothing else but the Mucilaginous Lympha issuing from the Vessels of the Tree. In like man∣ner, as it doth from Cumfry, Mallow, and divers other Plants: and even from the common Cucumer. The Vessels whereof, upon cutting cross, yield a Lympha, which is plainly Mucilaginous, and which being well dryed, at length becomes a kind of Gum, or rather a hardened Mucilage. In like manner, the Gums of Plum-tree, Cher∣ry-tree, and the like, are nothing else but dryed Mucilages. Or, if we will take the word in its widest sense, then all Gums are originally, either a Turpentine, or a Milk, or a Mucilage.
I HAUE made many other Observa∣tions of the tasts, smells, and colours of Plants, and of their contents, since those I last published: and that both for the finding out the true causes of their genera∣tion, and also the applying of them unto Medical use. As also to Mechanical; and particularly the making all sorts of Paints, or Tinctures out of the several parts of Plants, for drawing in Water-colours. In the choice whereof there is much difference to be made. For there are many Plants whose Colours are very clear and radiant, in the Plants themselves; yet when they come to be used, will not hold, but change and and grow foul. But these things, because they belong more properly to the Flower, and other parts of Plants, I therefore o∣mit, till if God give me life and health, I come hereafter to speak of those parts. And that I might the more fully inform my self and others in these matters; it may be thought requisite, that all kind of exo∣tick parts of Plants, as well as those grow∣ing amongst us, should likewise be exa∣mined. For the procuring whereof, both from the East and West Indies, I have al∣ready bespoke the care of some Persons. To whom I have likewise given direction, how to preserve them in such sort, as that
I may have them fresh, as if they were newly taken from the Plant or Tree. And thus far of the Generation of Liquors. CHAP. V. THE Fifth Head, shall be, of the fi∣guration of Trunks. Which also, as well as the making of liquors dependeth upon the Structure of the Parts. As first, al∣most all shrubs (caeteris paribus) have a greater number of Air-vessels; and those of a smaller size; and consequently much spread abroad, as most easily yielding to the magnetick power of the air, accord∣ing as we have more fully demonstrated, in speaking of the Vegetation of Roots: as in Elder, Hazel, Fig, Sumach, and the like. By which spreading, the said Air∣vessels do sooner, and more easily strike into the Bark, and so produce collateral Buds and Branches, and that upon the first rising of the Body from the Root: that is, the Plant becomes a shrub. BUT if the said Air-vessels are very large, they will not yield so easily to shoot out collaterally; and so the Trunk grows up taller and more entire: as in Oak,
Wallnut, Elm, &c. wherein they are ex∣ceeding large, is seen. Hence also the Vine, if it be but supported, will grow to a prodigious height. And Hops and Bryony, are some of the tallest, amongst all Annu∣al growths: the Air-vessels of all which are very large. Whereas Borage, and other like Plants, although the pores of their pa∣renchyma, are vastly wide, and filled with Sap; yet because their Air-vessels are small, they are therefore but dwarf plants. Wherefore the tallness or advancement of a Plant or Tree, dependeth not upon the plenty of Sap, how great soever, but on the largness of the Air-vessels. Again, as a Plant or Tree grows either shruby, or Tall, according to the size of the said Vessels: so from their position, doth it grow slender or thick. So where they keep more within the compass of a Ring, as in Elm, and Ash, the Tree in proportion, usu∣ally grows taller and less thick. But where the said Vessels are spread more abroad, and especially are postured in Rays, as they are in Oak the Tree grows very thick. Because the said Vessels thus standing all along nearer to the Insertions, there is a more ready and copious passage of the Air out of the one into the other; and so the Diametral growth of the wood is more pro∣moted.
Lastly, from the same general cause it is, That the Trunks of Vegetables are either Round or Angular. Those of all Trees are round. Because the Bark, being here thick∣er, and the Air-vessels bound up with a greater quantity of Wood; the Air hath not sufficient power to move them, and the Bark with them, into those various positions or figurations, as the Trunks of Plants yield to. Yet the cause of the various shapes of the Trunks is not the Air alone; but partly the principles of the Plants themselves, in conjunction therewith: according to the predominion whereof, as chiefly of some certain kind of Salt (as I may possibly here∣after more particularly explicate) the Trunk is square, triangular, pentangular, or otherwise figured. And thus much in gene∣rall of the figuration of Trunks. CHAP. VI. THE Motions also of Trunks are va∣rious. Principally four; sc. Ascen∣ding, Descending, Horizontal, and Spiral. The cause of the ascent of a Plant, is a cer∣tain Magnetick correspondence betwixt the
air and the Air-vessels of a Plant, the motion and tendency whereof the whole Plant fol∣lows. This I have asserted, and I think, clearly demonstrated in my first and second Books of the Anatomy of Plants. I will here add this plain experiment. Take a Box of Moulds, with a hole bo∣red in the bottom, wide enough to admit the stalk of a Plant, and set it upon stilts half a yard or more above ground. Then lodge in the mould some Plant, for exam∣ple a Bean, in such sort, that the Root of the Bean standing in the moulds may point upwards, the stalk towards the ground. As the Plant grows, it will follow, that at length the stalk will rise upward, and the Root on the contrary arch it self downward. Which evidently shews, that it is not suf∣ficient that the Root hath Earth to shoot into, or that its motion was only an appe∣tite of being therein lodged, which way soever that be: but that its nature is, though within the Earth already, yet to change its position, and to move down∣wards. And so likewise of the Trunk, though already in the free air above ground, yet now to make a new Motion upwards. BUT although the natural motion of the Trunk be to ascend; yet is it forced
oftentimes to descend. For the Trunk-Roots growing out of some Plants near the ground, and striking thereinto, do like so many Ropes, pluck the Trunk annually lower and lower into the ground toge∣ther with them; as may be seen in Scro∣phularia, Jacobaea, and many other Plants. IF these Trunk-roots break out only a∣bout the bottom of the Trunk, as in the a∣foresaid Plants, then the Trunk gradually descends into the earth, and is turned into a Root. But if it be very slender, and the Trunk-roots break forth all along it, then it creeps horizontally; the said Roots tether∣ing it, as it trails along, to the ground; as in Strawberry, Cinquefoyl, Mint, Scor∣dium, &c. AS to their Spiral motion, it is to be noted; That the Wood of all Convoivula's or Winders, standing more close and round together in or near the center, thereby making a round, and slender Trunk. To the end, it may be more tractable, to the power of the external Motor, what ever that be: and also more secure from break∣ing by its winding motion. Wherefore, Convovula's do not wind by any peculiar nature or Genius, which o∣ther Trunks have not; but because their parts are disposed so, as to render them
sequaceous to the external Motor. Even as the Claspers of a Vine, having the like Stru∣cture, have also a motion of Convolution: whereas the Branches themselves upon a contrary account, move in a strait line. The Convolution of Trunks, is made not one, but divers ways; some moving by South from East to West; and others from West to East. Wherefore it seemeth, that as the efficient cause of Convolution, is not within the Plant, but external: so also, that it is not one, but that there are two great efficients of this Motion; s. the Sun and the Moon. Some winding together with the Sun, in its Diurnal motion, by South from East to West. And others winding with the Moon, in its Monthly motion, from West to East. This possibly, may also be one sensible way of distinguishing betwixt Solar, and Lunar Plants. Thus far, in general, of the motions of Trunks. CHAP. VII. THE last thing I purposed to speak of, is those several Qualities of Trunks, or of Timber, by which they are fitted for
Mechanical use. As hardness, softness, fast∣ness, clevesomeness, toughness, brittleness, durableness; of any of the same qualities compounded. The visible causes whereof are observable partly in the structure of the several parts; sc. the Insertions, Sap∣vessels, and Air-vessels; as to the number, size, or position of any of them. And partly in the nature of the parts; I mean such as is manifest to sense. According to our clear and distinct observing of all which causes, we may understand, wherefore any Wood is made use of for this or that purpose. And also, wherein fitly to apply it to further use. In order to which, a compleat History of the Mechanical uses of Vegetables would very much conduce. I shall for the present give some Instances. AS first, some Woods are soft, as Deal and Sallow. Yet from different causes. Deal, from the great porosity of the Wood it self, or the large Pores amongst the Sap∣vessels. But Sallow, not from the porosity of the true Wood, but the great number of Air-vessels spread all over it. For the same cause, though they are both soft, yet will not serve for the same purposes; Sal∣low being well wrought upon, which way soever you cut it: but Deal, especially the white Deal, if it be cut cross, it tears, and
will never polish or work smooth. Again, in Sallow, by the equall spread∣ing of the Air-vessels, the softness is equal or alike in all parts. For which cause it maketh an excellent coal for Painters Scri∣bets. Because it doth not only make a light, but every where a certain stroak, and so doth not disturb the even motion of the hand. For the same cause, Shoo∣makers also make use of it for their Carving-boards. Because being every where equally soft, it turns not the edg of their Knives. Which Deal would presently do; because though very soft in some places, yet in others 'tis hard; that is to say, on the inner verge of every annual Ring of Wood, where the old Sap-vessels grow much more compact and close toge∣ther. AGAIN, some Woods are soft, but not fast; others are both, as Linn: its softness, depending on the numerousness and equal spreading of the Air-vessels: its fastness, on the closeness of the true Wood, and the shortness, smallness and frequency of the Insertions. For which cause, it is of excellent use for many purposes; and par∣ticularly, for small sculpture: such as may sometimes be seen for the Frames of Look∣ing Glasses, or of smaller Pictures in Water∣colours.
SOME Woods, again, are fast and hard, as Elm. Its hardness depending upon the closeness of the true Wood. Its fastness part∣ly upon the same cause, partly on the small∣ness of the Insertions, partly on the few∣ness of the Air-vessels in proportion with the Wood, and partly the thwart and cross position of many of them. Hence it is, that Elm, of all others, is the most cross-grain'd Timber; that is, cleaveth so unevenly, to and fro, according to the cross position of the said Vessels. Hence also it cleaveth the most diffi∣cultly. Even then, when it is without a∣ny knots. For which reason it is always used, as best, for the Hub of a great Wheel. As also for Water-pipes, and for Pumps. Not because it is the most durable wood; but because it will not splitt or crack ei∣ther in the working, or afterwards. For the very same reason, it is used for Coffins; that is, because it will not splitt in work∣ing: not because it will endure longest under ground; for Pales are always made of Oak. So also the Ladles and Soles of a Mill∣wheel are made of Elm; as also the Keel of a Boat, sc. least they should splitt: but the other parts are made of Oak. ON THE contrary as Elm, of all woods, is one of the fastest; So of all hard woods,
Oak is the most Cleavesome, or splitteth the most easily. The cause whereof is, partly the largeness of the Insertions, and partly the diametral or radiated position of most of the Air-vessels: upon both which ac∣counts, whereever a crack is begun 'tis easily continued throughout the Diameter of the Trunk. AGAIN, some Woods are hard, fast, and tough. So is Ash, and especially Beech-Hard and fast, from some of the same cau∣ses, as Elm. Tough not from the structure, but from the nature of the parts; viz as being a less oylie Wood, and so not Brittle. Wherefore London-Cars have the Rings of their Wheels of Beech; because it tears more difficultly than even Ash it self. Whence also for large screws, there is no Wood like it. But for small screws, of about an Inch diameter, Birch is the best; as being, though not so hard, yet more tough. THE more Brittle a Wood is, 'tis like∣wise usually the most durable. So Oak, which is not a tough, but very brittle wood, is almost as durable as any. Whereas Beech, Birch, and the like, although very tough; yet for duration, are of no service; for there are no Woods will rot sooner: and therefore, though strong enough, yet unfit to make any standing parts of Building or of Furni∣ture;
especially in wet and moist places. Because, being as is said, unoylie woods, they are apter to imbibe the moisture even of a dank Air; by which moisture, they either rot or breed worms, which destroy them. HENCE it is, that what we call the Heart of Timber, as it is more brittle, so also more durable; sc. Because more oylie. So that which is called the Sap of Oak, is much more tough than the Heart; although the Heart be more durable. That is to say, the older the Wood is, the watery parts are the more evaporated, the oylie still re∣maining, as a kind of Tincture in the Wood. Even as we see, that the older Seeds of the same kind, are more oylie than those that are green and young. So that the oylie or rosinous parts of the Sap, are a kind of Em∣balming to the Heart, or older part of a Tree, securing it from the destructive im∣pressions of the Air. For the same cause it is, that Oak, Yew, Cocus, Guajacum, &c. Which are oylie woods, have always much Heart: whereas Birch, Alder, Beech, Ma∣ple, which are very unoylie, have never a∣ny Heart. FROM hence likewise we may under∣stand the cause of the toughness of Flax: what we call Flax, being only the Sap-vessels
of the Bark. And generally, the Bark of any Tree, as of Willow (whereof are usu∣ally made a sort of Ropes) is very tough. The Vessels being here younger, and less oylie than in the Wood. So likewise Hemp, is nothing else but the Sap-vessels of the Bark of the Plant so called. And Scotch∣cloath, is only the Housewifry of the same parts of the Bark of Nettle. WHENCE it is very probable, that there are many other Plants, as well as the above named, whereof might be made good Toe. And of some, especially in some respects, better than of Flax it self. Be∣cause that even Hemp, although it will not make so fine a Staple, as Flax (for all our fine Hollands are made of Flax) yet Flax, which is but of the same fineness as Hemp, will never, by all the art yet known, be made so white as Hemp is made. The qualities therefore of the best Toe, that can be in na∣ture, are that the Staple be long, small, tough, and white. So that if in the Bark of any Plant, we can find these qualities to excell, we may be sure it will be of bet∣ter use, in some respects, for the making of Cloath than Flax it self. I WILL conclude with one Instance more, & that is as to Grafting. The good and happy success whereof, doth certainly
depend upon the suitableness or respon∣dence betwixt the several parts of the stock and Cyon; as the Bark, Wood, and Pith: and that both as to the number, size, and position of the said parts, and of their several Pores or Vessels: according to the degrees whereof, the Conjunction (caeteris paribus) will be more or less prosperous. So that of all such Conjunctions as are found to be apt and taking, and which some have learned not without long pra∣ctice and experience; another, only by comparing the Branches of Trees together, may with little trouble, and in much less time, inform himself. By the same means, some Conjunctions which seem to be strange, as Quince and Pear, White-thorn and Med∣lar, &c. do yet, by the respondence of their parts, as well as by experience, ap∣pear to be good. And there is no doubt, but that many Conjunctions not yet tryed, or not known to have been so, may upon the same ground, be tryed with good success. The chief use of Grafting and Inoculati∣on, is that they accelerate the growth of good fruit. The cause whereof, is the knot, which is always made in the Conjunction. By means whereof all the Sap is strained, and so ascendeth up into the Graff or Bud,
purer and in less quantity; and is therefore better and sooner concocted. Hence, the smaller the Fruit of any Tree, though it be not the best, yet the Sap being there in less quantity, is the sooner ripe. On the contrary, where the Sap ascendeth too freely, it doth not only retard the growth of the Fruit, but produceth Barrenness; as is seen in those luxuriant Branches, where it runs all up to Leaves. Hence also Vines, by Bleeding, become more fruitful: that is, by the effusion of part of the Sap, there is a more easy melioration of that which re∣mains. Even as Phlebotomy doth oftentimes produce a more healthful and better habit of our own Bodies. To conclude, the les∣sening the quantity, and thereby the meli∣oration of the ascending Sap, by knots, is Natures own contrivance; as is seen in Sugar cane, Corn, and other Plants.
THE EXPLICATION OF THE FIGURES. THE Trunks of several Plants, as they appear to the naked eye, upon a transverse Section, represented by the Six first Figures. Fig. 1. Representeth the Trunk of Borage. aaa. The Skin. ccc. The Bark. The black line betwixt ccc. ooo. represent∣eth a Ring of Sap-Vessels on the inner verge of the Bark. ce. One of the larger Parcels of Air-Vessels, adjacent to the said Ring of Sap-Vessels. co. Some of the lesser Parcels.
oeo. The Pith wherein the Visiculae are vesi∣ble to a naked eye. t. The hollow of the Pith. Fig. 2. Representeth the Trunk of Taraxacum, or Dandelyon. aaa. The Skin. ccc. The outer part of the Bark, without any Vessels. In the inner part of the Bark, stand the Sap-Vessels, in several small Rings from eee. to the thick Ring next to u▪ The thick Ring consisteth of Air-Vessels. u. The Pith. eucu. The Diametral Portions of the Bark, running betwixt all the Vessels into the Pith. Fig. 3. Representeth the Trunk of Colewort. aaa. The Skin. ccc. The outer part of the Bark, having on∣ly a very few Sap-Vessels. The white arched or escalloped Ring, is simply Parenchymous: from whence many small Diametral portions run into the Pith. The black Ring betwixt cecece. consisteth of Sap-Vessels, and is the true inner edge of the Bark. All the little black half Ovals without the said Ring, and their to contiguous, are ano∣ther kind of Sap-Vessels.
All the half Ovals and wedged Parcels with∣in the said Ring, and thereto contiguous, are more Sap-Vessels of the same kind. The white spots within the several Parcels of Sap-Vessels in the Bark are Parenchymous. The other white spots within the black Ring of Sap-Vessels, and thereto adjacent, are Air-Vessels. eee. The Pith. Fig. 4. Representeth the Trunk of Holy-oak. aaa. The Skin. ccc. The outer and larger part of the Bark, without any Vessels. The Ring betwixt cecece. consisteth of Sap-Vessels, and maketh the inner verge of the Bark. The short Rays without the said Ring, and thereto adjacent, but not contiguous, are other Sap-Vessels, containing a Mucilage. The short Rays within the said Ring, and in like manner adjacent thereto, are the Air-Vessels. The crooked lines or chords e. hemming in the said Air-Vessels are more Sap-Vessel▪ eee. The Pith. t. The hollow of the Pith. Fig. 5. Representeth the Trunk of wild Cucu∣mer.
aaa. The Skin. acacac. A Radiated Ring of Sap-Vessels ad∣jacent to the skin. ccc. The middle part of the Bark without any Vessels. The Ring of black spots betwixt cecece. are other Sap-Vessels standing in the inner verge of the Bark. The Ring of white spots betwixt cecece. are the Air Vessels. The black spots within the Pith, and conti∣guous to the Air Vessels are other Sap-Ves∣sels, answerable to those in the inner verge of the Bark. eee. The Pith. Fig. 6. Representeth the Trunk of Endive. aaa. The Skin. ccc. The outer part of the Bark without any Vessels, or simply parenchymous. cecece. A thick, black, and undulated Ring of Lymphaeducts standing in the in∣ner verge of the Bark. The black Rays and half Ovals without the said Ring, are other Lymphaeducts. The white Rays, and the white undulated Ring adjacent to ccc. consist of Milk-Vessels. The short Rays within the black undulated Ring and thereto adjacent, are Air-ves∣sels.
The black specks adjacent to eee. are more Sap-Vessels. eee. The Pith. t. The hollow of the Pith. All the Figures following are Microscopi∣cal. Fig. 7. A small part of the Skin of the bet∣ter sort of walking Cane, as it appears through a good Microscope; the black spots representing the ample Pores therein. Fig. 8. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Holly of three years growth, cut transversly. ABCD. The Bark. AB. The Skin of the Bark. QQQ. The outer Parenchyma of the Bark; wherein the Vesiculae are extraordinary small. DOPC. A Ring of Sap-Vessels in the inner verge of the Bark. HI. Divers round parcels of Sap Vessels of another kind. DCFE. The Wood. DK, KM, ME. The several annu  or Growths of Wood. SSSS. The true Wood; being originally the Sap-Vessels of the Bark. XXXX. The Air-Vessels, postur'd some in
entire, others in broken Rays. Oo. The larger Insertions running through the several annual Rings from the Pith in∣to the Bark. OP. The smaller Insertions. EFG. The Pith wherein the Vesiculae are ex∣ceeding small. Fig. 9. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Hazel of 3 years growth, cut transversly. ABCD. The Bark. QQ. The Parenchyma: wherein the Vesiculae are larger than those in the Bark of Holly. HI. A Ring of Sap-Vessels. DQC. Divers Parcels of Sap-Vessels of a∣nother kind. DCFE. The Wood. DL, KN, MF. The several annual growths or Rings of Wood. SSS. The true Wood. XXX. The Air-vessels, being most of them very small, and postured in Columns and Rays. Oo. The larger Insertions running through the several Annual Rings from the Pith in∣to the Bark. OP. The smaller Insertions. EFG. The Pith: wherein the Vesiculae are much larger, than in the Pith of Holly.
Fig. 10. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Barbery Tree of 2 years growth, cut transversly. ABCD. The Bark. AB. The Skin. NMNM. The Parenchyma of the Bark. DC. A Ring of Sap-Vessels, consisting of large half Oval Parcels. MO. One of the said Parcels. HI. An entire Ring of Sap-Vessels of another kind. DCFE. The Wood. DL, KF. The several Rings or annual growths of Wood. SSS. The true Wood. OPOP. One kind of Air-Vessels, small, and of various position. PQPQ. The other kind of Air-Vessels, larger and postured in clusters more even within a Ring. MTMTMT. Large Insertions running through the 2 annual Rings from the Pith into the Bark. EFG. The Pith which is very large. TTT. A Ring of Sap-Vessels, in the utmost verge of the Pith. Fig. 11. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Apple Tree of 3 years growth, cut transversly.
ABCD. The Bark. PP. The Parenchyma. HI. One kind of Sap-Vessels, standing as it were in a Ring, the utmost in larger oblong parcels, and more distant; the inmost in lesser Parcels, almost half oval, and closer together. DOC. A thick radiated Ring of Sap-Vessels of another kind. DCFE. The Wood. DL, KN, MF. The several annual Rings of Wood. SSS. The true Wood. XT, TV, VW. The Air-Vessels, being small, numerous, and spread abroad through∣out the Wood, without any certain po∣sture. Oo. Many small Insertions running through the several annual Rings from the Pith in∣to the Bark. EFG. The Pith. WYZ. The several Insertions arched toge∣ther in the utmost verge of the Pith, in the like manner as in Barberry, &c. Fig. 12. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Pear tree of 3 years growth, cut transversly. ABCD. The Bark. RQ. The outer and more simple Parenchyma,
composed of very small Vesiculae. HI. One sort of Sap vessels distributed through the said Parenchyma in divers oblong par∣cels. Whereof, those toward the inner verge of the Bark are rounder and more nume∣rous. DOPC. A Ring of Sap-vessels of another, viz. the general kind. DCFE. The Wood. DL, KN, MF. The several annual rings of Wood. TTTT. The true Wood. STSTST. The Air-vessels standing partly irregularly, and partly in rays. KL. A ring of Air-vessels a little larger than the rest. Ooo. The larger Insertions running through the several annual rings from the Pith into the Bark. OPP. The smaller Insertions. EFG. The Pith. Fig. 13. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Plum-tree of 5 years growth, cut transversly. ABCD. The Bark. VW. The outer and more laxe and simple Parenchyma. HI. One sort of Sap-vessels, postured in small oblong parcels.
SSS. The same Vessels more numerous, and in smaller parcels, making a kind of ring. DTC. A ring of Sap-vessels of another, viz. the more general kind. DCFE. The Wood. DL, LN, &c. The several annual rings of Wood. XXX. The true Wood. XYXY. The Air-vessels. KL, MN, OP, &c. So many rings of Air-vessels, (on the inner edge of every ring of wood) much larger than the rest. SSS. The great Insertions running through the several rings of wood from the Pith into the Bark. STT. The small Insertions. EFG. The Pith. Fig. 14. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Elme of 4 years growth and half cut transversly. AADD. The Bark. AA. The Skin of the Bark. TTTT. The Parenchyma of the Bark. Wherein the Vesiculae are so exceeding small, as difficultly to be discerned by the Micro∣scope. The black parcels are one kind of Sap-vessels. SSD. A ring of Sap-vessels of another kind.
The white Diametral lines, are parenchymous parts continuous with the Insertions SG DG. DDGE. The Wood. DK, KM, MO, &c. The several annual rings of Wood. SSSS. The true wood, being originally the Sap-vessels of the Bark. KK, MM, &c. The great Air-vessels postured chiefly in rings, on the inner verge of every annual growth of wood. KM, MO, &c. The small Air-vessels po∣stured chiefly in cross-barrs. SGDG. Or the small white lines are the In∣sertions running through the several annual rings from the Pith into the Bark. EGS. The Pith. Fig. 15. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Ash of 3 years growth, cut trans∣versly. ABCD. The Bark. AB. The Skin. AHB. A ring of Sap-Vessels consisting of ma∣ny round parcels, contiguous to the skin. HI. The simple Parenchyma. HOC. A ring of another sort of Sap-vessels, consisting of many arched parcels, all stand∣ing off from the Woo. DCFE. The Wood.
DL, KN, MF. The 3 annual rings of Wood. SSS. The true Wood. STST. The Air-vessels. KL, MN, EF. The large Air-vessels on the inner verge of every annual ring. PQ. The small Air-vessels spread abroad each ring. Ooo. The Insertions running through the se∣veral rings from the Pith into the Bark. EFG. The Pith. eee. The Vesicles whereof the Pith consists. Fig. 16. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Wallnut-tree of 4 years growth, cut transversly. ABCD. The Bark. RR. The Parenchyma. QQ. The Common Sap-vessels making a ring on the inner verge of the Bark. HI. Other Sap-vessels peculiar to the species, postured in rings, made up of round par∣cels. DCFE. The Wood. DL, KN, &c. The several annual rings of Wood. ddd. The true wood; or the old Sap vessels, originally on the inner verge of the Bark. QcQd. Other old Sap-vessels which seem to be originally those in the middle of the Bark.
DCLK. The Air vessels spread all abroad the whole ring of wood. ec. A Conjugation of several Air-vessels, standing in an even line close together. QQQ. The Insertions, running through the several rings of wood, from the Pith into the Bark. EFG. The Pith. EF. A ring of Sap-vessels on the verge of the Pith. Fig. 17. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Fig-tree of the second years growth, cut transversly. ABCD. The Bark. LM. The outer laxer and more simple paren∣chyma; wherein the Vesiculae are somewhat large, yet much lesser than in the pith. DKC. One sort (viz. the common sort) of Sap vessels, being Lymphaeducts. HI. Another sort of Vessels, viz. the lacti∣ferous, postured in several arched parcels. NT. The Insertions running in Diametral portions, near halfway through the Bark. DCFE. The Wood. TTT. The true wood. TVTV. The Air-vessels. STSTS. viz. The whiter parts, which were originally the Milk vessels in the Bark. KKK. The Insertions running through the
wood from the Pith, as far as the Milk-vessels in the Bark. EFG. The Pith: wherein the Vesiculae are large. EF. A ring of Sap-vessels chiefly lactiferous, postured in round parcels on the edge of the pith. Fig. 18. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Pine-tree of the second years growth, cut transversly. ABCD. The Bark. AB. The skin; which is very thick. MN. The outer and laxer Parenchyma; wherein the Vesiculae are of a mean size. DLC. The inner part of the Parenchyma filled up with a thick ring of Sap-vessels, sc. Lymphaeducts. HI. The ample resiniferous or Turpentine∣vessels, spread abroad the middle of the Bark. DCFE. The Wood. XX. The ample pores of the true wood. SS. Some small Gum-vessels. The Air-vessels are scarcely visible. LL. The Insertions. EFG. The Pith; wherein the vesicles are somewhat large. VV. Some Gum-vessels on the edge thereof.
Fig. 19. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of Oak of 3 years growth, cut transversly. ABCD. The Bark. AB. The skin. XYXY. The Parenchyma. DQRC. The common Lymphaeducts. HI. A ring of another sort of Lymphaeducts. KLAI. A third sort of vessels, sc. resinife∣rous, postured in several round parcels. DCFE. The Wood. DN, MP, OF. The several annual rings of Wood. ZZZZ. The true Wood. ST, VW. Some of the Vessels originally of the Bark, postured in undulated rings. MN, OP, EF. The larger Air vessels, on the inner verge of every annual ring. RzRz. The small Air-vessels postured in co∣lumns. QQQ. The great Insertions running through the several annual rings of wood, from the Pith into the Bark. QRR. The small Insertions. EFG. The Pith: wherein the Vesiculae are exceeding small. Fig. 20. Representeth a quarter of a slice of common Sumach of the first years growth, cut transversly.
ABCD. The Bark. AB. The Skin. aa. The Hairs; some whereof are sharp, others knobbed at their ends. KLCD. A very thick radiated ring of Lym∣phaeducts. KL. A ring of ample Milk-vessels. v. One of the said Milk-vessels. tr. A close Parenchyma encompassing every Milk-vessel. HI. A ring of a third sort of Sap-Vessels, con∣sisting of arched parcels hemming in the Lacteals. tt. One of the said parcels, consisting of some hundreds of Vessels. tw. A laxer Parenchyma. XX. Another ring of Sap-vessels, which seem to be of a fourth kind. DCFE. The Wood. xx. The true Wood. xy. The Air-vessels. MMM. The Insertions. Most whereof run through the Wood, and halfway through the Bark, viz. as far as the Lacteals. EFG. The Pith. yy. A ring of Sap-vessels on the edge of the Pith. Fig. 21. Representeth a quarter of a slice of a Branch of common Wormwood, cut trans∣versly.
ABCD. The Bark. MN. The Parenchyma. DC. The common Lymphaeducts, consisting of several large parcels, standing in a ring. V. One of the said parcels. KL. Another sort of Lymphaeducts, standing in as many parcels as the former, all of them arched. r. One of the said arched parcels. HI. The Resiniferous, or Gum vessels. t. One of the said Vessels. DCFE. The Wood. x. The true Wood. xy. The Air-vessels. ym Mm. The Insertions running through the Wood, and half through the Bark. Where, as well as in the Pith, they are enarched; thus hemming in both the kinds of Lym∣phaeducts. EFG. The Pith. zz. Some few Gum-vessels on the edge of the Pith. Fig. 22. Representeth part of the Bark of a Lactiferous Plant, pared by the length, and therein the Milk-vessels laid bare. AA. The outer surface of the Bark. bbbb. The Parenchyma. cc. A Milk-vessel cloven down the middle. dd. Another, with a small part thereof clo∣ven off.
ee. Another, which is entire. ff. The places where the said Milk-vessels are braced together. gg. The terms of 2 other Milk-vessels, where, by reason of their more oblique process, they are cut off. Fig. 23. Representeth a piece of Wood, con∣sisting of Vessels, which were originally the Lymphaeducts of the Bark. ccc. Some of the said Lymphaeducts, compo∣sed of many small lignous Fibers (that is to say of other exquisitely small Vessels) stand∣ing together so, as to make a hollow Cylin∣der; that is, a Lymphaeduct. eee. Other of the same Lymphaeducts, where∣in is shewed the knitting of the said lig∣nous Fibers together by Parenchymous Fi∣bers▪ which run horizontally. aa. One of the same Vessels shewed torn off to∣wards the end from e to a, whereby the se∣veral Fibers, and their connexion, do better appear. NB. That for your more distinct and perspi∣cuous engravement, the said Vessels are here represented more ample than they shew even through the Microscope. Which is done in no other Figure besides. Fig. 24. Representeth a parcel of Air-vessels.
aa. A Conjugation of two Air-vessels. cc. A Conjugation of three Air-vessels, of se∣veral sizes. bbb. The places where the said Vessels are braced. tt. The spiral, and almost horizontal continu∣ation of the Fibers whereof the said Vessels do chiefly, but not wholly consist. tb. The perpendicular continuation of exceed∣ing small parenchymous Fibers, by which the aforesaid spiral ones are mutually knit together, into a firm and coherent Vessel. ee. The said spiral Fibers unroaved or drawn out in a couple of Vessels. Fig. 25. Representeth the Westage of the Pa∣renchyma (or of the Insertions) and Ves∣sels. aa. Several portions of the true Wood, consi∣sting of lignous Fibers, running perpendi∣cularly or by the length of the Tree. bb. The Insertions; consisting of parenchy∣mous Fibers, running horizontally, or by the diameter of the Tree. cece. Other portions of the true wood; where∣in is shewed the intermixture of the lignous and parenchymous parts; not only porti∣on with portion, as in a b; but even Fiber with Fiber. ce. The process of the lignous Fibers.
cc. The process of the parenchymous. Fig. 26. Representeth a quarter of a slice of the stalk of the lesser common Thistle cut transversly. ABCD The Bark. AB The Skin. HI. The Parenchyma. AHB. A sort of Lymphaeducts contiguous to the skin. ee. One parcel of the said Lymphaeducts. DC. A ring of other Lymphaeducts, consi∣sting likewise of several parcels, standing on the inner verge of the Bark. aa. One of the said parcels. HC. A ring of Milk-vessels, consisting of se∣veral arched parcels, adjacent to the fore∣said Lymphaeducts. cc. One of the said parcels. DCFE. The wood, divided into several portions. aatt. One of the said portions. vvv. The true Wood; throughout which the Air-vessels, represented by the larger white rings, are distributed. EFG. The Pith, consisting of very large, and angular bladders: the sides whereof are composed of Fibers stitched together, and running chiefly horizontally; winding in a circular manner, out of one bladder
into another; and so mutually inter∣secting the several arches of their whole circumference. TT. One of the said bladders, or rather one half, the other being cut off. The horizon∣tal Fibers whereof, not being single, but so many threds; there being several Fibers in one Thred. SS. One single Fiber. EF. Other Vessels, both Lymphaeducts, and lactiferous, within the wood, or on the verge of the Pith. tt. The Lymphaeducts. ss. The lactiferous Vessels. stac. The Insertions running betwixt the seve∣ral portions of wood, from the Pith into the Bark. FINIS.
Fig. Boruge 1 Dandelyon 2 Colewrt 3 Holycak 4 Wild Cuumer 5 Endive 6 7
Fig. 8. Holly. Branch.
Fig. 9. Hazel. Branch.
ig▪ 10▪ Barberry. Branch.
Fig. 11. Apple. Tree▪ Branch.
Fig. 12. Pear. Tree. Branch.
Fig. 13. Plum. Tree Branch.
Fig. 14. Elm Branch.
Fig. 15. Ash. Tree Branch.
Fig▪ 16 Wallnut. Tree. Branch.
Fig. 17. Figg Tree. Branch.
Fig. 18. Pine Tree. Branch.
Fig. 19 Oak Tree Branch.
Fig. 20. Sumach.
Fig. 21. The Stalk of ye Comon Wormwood.
Fig. 22 The. Milk. Vessils.
Fig. 23. The. Lymphaeducts.
Fig. 22 The. Milk. Vessils.
Fig. 23. The. Lymphaeducts.
Fig. 24. The Aer Vessels.
Fig 25 The Wefage of ye Parenchyma (or of ye In Sections) & Vessels.
Fig: 27
Fig. 20. Sumach.
Fig. 21. The Stalk of ye Comōn Wormwood.
Fig 22 The. Milk. Vessils. Fig.  The. Lymphaedu.
Fig. 24 The Aer Vessels. Fig 25 The Wefage of ye Parenchyma (or of ye In Sections) & Vessels.
Fig: 27.
