H3282a R213493 99825863 30254
A HUE and CRYE AFTER Passive-Obedience, AND None-Resistance. Being a True CHARACTER of a De-Facto-Man. Licensed according to Order. August 15th. 1690. OUT of Compassion to a Giddy-brained Faction, and for fear of laying them under too great an Odium, I shall curb my Pen, and keep as streight a Rein as possible upon it all the way. Otherwise perhaps 'twere possible to tell an odd story of our Gentleman's Birth and Parentage, and manner of Education; who gave him his Name, and what his Godfathers and Godmothers did for him in Baptism, what Paul planted in him, and Apollos watered with Wine, and other good Lickquors, even the Dull Dry Doctrine of Non-Resi∣stance. Let these be left to the Conjecturals of the Ingenous Reader, because tis almost impossible to trace our Spark through these Particulars, without falling foul upon some of the shining, burning, fiery flaming Lights of the Age. The next thing, in order, that offers it self to Consideration, is his Li∣brary, a New Liturgy, some Play-Books, and some Romances; to which
add the History of Passive-Obedience, and the late Observator Bound in Calves Leather, and Guilt on the back: He had a great hand in the late Revo∣lution, but now he begins to blow his Fingers as if he had burnt them, and speaks of his Old Abdicated Master with Eyes Brim full of Tears, so tender and relenting is his heart. If you observe him at his Devotions in the Church, you'l find him change Colour at the approach of the Prayers for King William and Queen Mary; but at the close of all, by the help of what distinction we can't tell, he mutters out his Amen; Dogg him from the Church to the Tavern, the next Stage of his Devo∣tion, there you will find him allen on his knees, and with a Rummer in his hand, a time when he prays with the warmest and heartiest zeal, pouring forth his Wishes for King James his Restoration. When others are solemnly Fasting and Praying for the Success of our Heroes Arms in Ireland, you'l find him Revelling and Carousing over roast Beaf and Clarret, partly out of factious singularity and disaf∣fection to the Government, and partly out of pure love to the Premises: but however he'l Swear Allegiance, tho' not till after he hath sawcily reproacht our Grave Senators to their Beards, and put the most disho∣nourable Interpretation upon their words. What need was there of a Parliament to make him De-facto King? His Arms, together with his Fast, and Faithful Friends, could have done so much for him, in spight of those that are so backward to Swear to Him now, had they opposed Him then: He'l Swear, but, for Gods sake, what will he Swear? He'l Swear that the King hath the longest Sword, that He was Solemnl In∣augurated at Westminster; that they will obey him as long as they dare do no other: In short, they will Worship him as the Indians do the Devil, not out of Love, but lest he should do them any harm. We must have stronger Ties than Oaths taken in such a lax sence, to hold such a slippery Gentleman in; 'twould be well if the Government would keep a strict eye over them, and since they resolve to do no good, take special care they do no Mischief. Our Duty is to Pitty, Compassionate them, and Pray for them. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. The Secret History of the Dutchess of Portsmouth, in which, an account is given of the Intreagues of the Court, during her Ministry; and of the Death of King Charles the Second: Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old-Bailey.
