H3332 R16182 12159581 55262
The American Physitian; OR, A TREATISE OF THE ROOTS, PLANTS, TREES, SHRUBS, FRUIT, HERBS, &c. Growing in the ENGLISH PLANTATIONS IN AMERICA. Describing the Place, Time, Names, Kindes, Temperature, Vertues and Uses of them, either for Diet, Physick, &c. Whereunto is added A DISCOURSE OF THE CACAO-NƲT-TREE, And the use of its Fruit; with all the ways of making of CHOCOLATE. The like never extant before. By W. Hughes. London, Printed by J. C. for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple-Bar, 1672.
To the Reader. I Have read that there were once a certain Sect of Athenians, or Peripateticks, who were of O∣pinion that Man was made on∣ly for Honour, Pleasure and Ri∣ches: But if we consider what others since their time more seri∣ous have written hereof, we shall finde their Opinion absurd and erroneous; Honour being as vari∣ous as a Princes eye: and there was never any pleasure in this world so durable, but that it was mixt with some pain, discontent or trouble: And as for Riches, no Philosopher ever yet, either Anti∣ent or Modern, could give a suf∣ficient or satisfactory definition of it; there being no bounds to
be set to a covetous mans desire: and therefore doubtless Man was made for some more notable end then these, if we consider his most wonderful frame; not only his external shape and comeliness of body, far surpassing all other living Creatures; but also by the inward gifts and endowments of his Minde, Nature having be∣stowed on him a Sense far tran∣scending the sense of other Ani∣mals; having endued him with Discourse, Reason and Know∣ledge, to discern what, and what is not most proper for himself: although since our Fore father A∣dam's time, by that great Trans∣gression of his, he is always sub∣ject to errour: by which act, and the daily decay of Nature, we his Posterity are become much shorter-sighted then before that time we were; as is plainly manifest, if
we do but consider that Adam, even at the first view, was able to give Names to all Creatures ac∣cording to their kindes: and from thence we have great reason to think, that his Disobedience was the occasion of almost eclipsing our Ʋnderstanding. And as the Sun ever shineth, and seeth all things, unless its Beams be stopped by an interposition or opaque Body, as a Cloud, or some such thick mat∣ter; even so the minde of man doubtless in its purity, and consi∣dered alone by it self, did know all things: but now it bing more intangled in the body, and darkned by its cloudiness and infirmities, can see nothing with∣out the leave and help of the bo∣dy. The minde then being thus intangled, must of necessity steer some other course, being she can∣not range abroad to see the shape
of things as they are in them∣selves, but is forced to take the demonstration of them as she can receive them from the body, though poor and contemptible; and this cannot be done neither without imploying the Five Senses, which must operate too with their proper instruments in the same parts of the body, to bring in shapes or Idea's to the minde: and when all this is done, the minde yet un∣derstands not, without an Inter∣preter; the three inward Senses which lodge in the brain, the minde then laying all together, and comparing one with another, judges of them accordingly. Now if these Messengers of the Minde, or the places of the body where they lodge, be foul, gross, cloudy, thick, over-cold or hot, they give either a dull or false information to the Minde; so that man can∣not
do what he ought, nor possibly what he would, nor at all times what he should; neither that at one time which at another time he is able to do. Yet notwithstand∣ing this, he is doubtless at all times, and in all places, chiefly to contemplate his Maker, and that Oeconomy he hath placed in the larger Ʋniverse: In all which, we finde not the least grass but hath something of his Power stamped thereon: a true defini∣tion of which we cannot now at∣tain unto; guess we may (al∣though but darkly) at the life and death of a Vegetable, and how it may come to continue the same Individuation, and be again the same Identical Body, after so many strange changes, and after so many different shapes as may be seen in the course of Na∣ture.
Seeing the Minde then is so in∣tangled, it will not be amiss to proportion the end we propose to our selves in any thing to be within our power or short sight; for if otherwise it be impossible to obtain our desires, it may instead of affording us content and good, become our affliction and ruine. And seeing that all things in the world tend to some end, even things insensible seem to advance to some proper use, as if they did apprehend a perfection of their being; I say, much more requisite and necessary is it there∣fore that Man, whose minde and thoughts are continually acting▪ should always be honestly imploy∣ed; it being the ready High-wa to conduct us, and will at las bring us to that perfection an happiness which all Pious Soul hope for. Let us press on there¦fore
whilst we are here, and be no more idle: for a standing Puddle is more subject to corruption, then the running Stream: Steel, the less used, is the sooner eaten with Rust: the Atoms, in infectious times, by little and little, work on hot and moist bodies, most subject to putrefaction, until they have corrupted the whole mass. Even so Man, letting the Reins of his Will run at random, not im∣ploying his time in some honest Exercise, by the allurements of the world, having much converse therein, is in great danger, by little and little, of being wholly corrupted, daily walking amongst our Enemies who seek to devur us; and being once taken and intangled in their Net, it will be hard for us to get free from it again, until we sink down, and are drowned.
I remember that in a place call∣ed the Camanas, which lyeth to the Lew-ward of Jamaica, the Sea-Tortoise (of which there are five sorts) or Turtles, as some call them, those triple-hearted Amphibious Creatures (for they have each of them three distinct Hearts) being intangled in a Sain or Net which was usually set for the taking of them, or else being turned on their backs on Land (for then they cannot turn themselves on their feet a∣gain) did always sigh, sob, shed tears, and mightily seem to la∣ment, as being most sensible of their destruction, and that they were in their Enemies hands. So should all good Christians do that are taken in the Evil Net of the Sensualities of this World, until they get out, lest they perish ever∣lastingly.
But we have already exceeded the bounds of an Epistle; and therefore will conclude with speak∣ing something of that followeth in the ensuing Treatise. Which Discourse, if you ex∣pect to finde deckt up with fine Metaphysical Notions and Ex∣pressions, or stuft with hard or strange words (with which the Indies do abound) or if you think to finde it in a Court-like stile, or adorned with Poetical Fancies; you are likely to be mistaken, and quite beside the Cushion, for you will finde it only in plain and easie Terms, such as I my self best understand: Nor was this written in a Closet or Study, in the corner of a house, amongst many Books; but the most of it, some time since, was taken, with many other Observations, rather in travelling the Woods, and
other parts, (when I had leisure at odd times to go on shore, be∣ing then belonging to one of his Majesties Ships of War) espe∣cially in that praise worthy Island of Jamaica, which lieth between the Tropicks within the limits of the Torrid Zone, in seventeen and eighteen degrees of Nor∣thern Latitude; the place, as well as the very name, being to our Ancestors so terrible and frightful, that they concluded it (as well as the Frigid Zone) not to be inhabited: but they were guided only by the Dictates of their own Reason▪ which Expe∣rience hath since sufficiently con∣futed, and doth now proclaim it to be as temperate, healthful and beneficial, as most places are in the Temperate Zone, as well for us English men, as others, by reason of the breezes or gales of
Winde that do there continually blow and qualifie the sulphurous Air. Neither is it the near ap∣proach of the Sun that is altoge∣ther the cause of heat, or its di∣stance of cold; but we may at∣tribute much to the Conjunction of the Sun with other luminous Bodies, the Aspects with other Planets, their Configurations with other Stars: as we see in the Dog-daies, that it is often much hotter then before, although at that time the daies are much short∣ned, and the Sun at a greater di∣stance from us. But of this else∣where. 'Tis likely some may say, What need we trouble our selves with those things we cannot reach? To such I answer, That the most part of them here mentioned which grow not in England al∣ready, are brought over daily and
made use of, either for Meat, Medicine, or imployed in several sorts of Trades, and the like: Besides, this may be necessary to all which first travel to those parts; for I have wanted such Directions, and so I doubt not but some others do: However, I suppose there are few but would gladly know, that there are such things in the world, although scarcely any which care or desire to go to see them; and large Vo∣lumes have been written of bare report only, of Countries, Places, and their Productions; and there∣fore I hope this Description (which is as nigh to truth as I could possibly draw it, if my eye-sight failed me not) may be acceptable, although it be far short of what I intended; it be∣ing my desire to have made it more compleat by one more Voy∣age
into those parts of the World, in which my endeavours should not have been wanting for the bringing and fitting of Roots, Seeds, and other Vegetables, to our Climate, for to increase the number of Rarities which we have here in our Gardens alrea∣dy; in the which I perceive much may be done, if further industry were used: but I have yet met with no opportunity to accomplish the same; and therefore hope that some others who have convenien∣cy will do something herein, for the promotion of further know∣ledge in these and many other excellent things which those parts afford, and we are yet unac∣quainted with. And whosoever is offended at this that I have here written, may let it alone; it forceth none to meddle with it: I know the best things dis∣please
some; neither was there ever any man yet that could please all people: but in hurting none, possily I may please some, for whom only it is intended. William Hughes.
ON Mr. Hughes's TREATISE OF American PLANTS. THe world of Treatises hath had great store, But such an one was never seen before: What here's disclos'd, Columbus did not see In his American Discoverie. He to find out the Land did boldly ven∣ture; But Hughes i'th' bowels of the Land did enter, To finde the Roots of Plants, and rarer things, To profit Subjects, and to please their Kings. Our Lovel, Gerrard, Johnson, and learn'd Ray, Did travel far in the Botanick way:
But this our Author hath out-went them clear, As by the following lines it doth ap∣pear: In which the Plants of India may be found, And their Vertues, to keep our Bodies sound. H. E.
The Table. A ALigator Page 4 B Bonivis Page 19 Bonana-Tree Page 71 C Cabbage-Tree Page 78 Cacao-Tree Page 102 Cacao-Kernels, or Nuts Page 107 Cacao-Kernels simple Page 124 Calavances Page 17 Calabash-Tree Page 65 Casawder, or Casava Page 91 Chocolate, how to make it Page 116 Chocolate-Drink Page 127 Chocolate-Drink another way Page 132 Chocolate-Drink, the Vertues Page 139 Cocus-Nut-Tree Page 60 Cotton-Tree Page 68 Cotton-Bushes, or Shrubs Page 70 Coral-White Page 2 Coral-Rocks Page 5, 10, 11 Curing-House Page 33 D Dildo-Tree Page 42
F Fruit of the Cacao-Tree Page 102 Of the external part thereof Page 105 G Goavo-Tree Page 44 Gourds Page 22 I Jessamin-Tree, or Bush Page 100 Indian Cabbage-Tree Page 78 L Lemmon-Tree Page 47 Lignum Vitae Page 93 Lime-Tree Page 48 M Maiz Page 42 Mamin-Tree Page 57 Manchinelo-Tree Page 86 Manyoc-Tree Page 90 Mangrove-Tree Page 95 Maucaw-Tree Page 55 Mchoacan Page 94 Musk-Melon Page 22 Melon ibid. O Orange-Tree Page 46 P Pepper-Tree red Page 50 Pepper-Bush ibid.
Pepper-Tree or Bush, small Page 52 Pepper sweet-scented Page 53 Physick-Nut-Tree Page 81 Physick-Nuts Page 82 Pine-Tree Page 59 Plantane-Tree Page 76 Plum-Trees of America Page 88 Pock-wood ibid. Potatoes Page 12 Prickle-Pear-Bush Page 36 S Sea-Eggs Page 6 Sea-Feather Page 8 Sea-Fan ibid. Sea-Star, or Sea-Star-Fish Page 9 Seven-years-Pease Page 20 Semper vivens Page 98 Spanish Pears Page 40 Sugar-Canes Page 27 Sugar-House Page 31 Sugar-Mill, how made ibid. T Toddie-Tree Page 57 W Wheat Page 24 Water-Melon Page 22 Y Yams, or Yarnes Page 15
A TREATISE OF THE ROOTS, PLANTS, TREES, SHRUBS, FRUIT, HERBS, &c. Growing in the ENGLISH PLANTATIONS IN AMERICA. THough my designe in this en∣suing Treatise, is chiefly to dis∣course of certain Trees, Fruits, Herbs, Roots, &c. which I of∣ten made use of, either for Meat or Me∣dicine, whilst I abode in the Wst-Indies, and especially in the Island of Jamaica;
yet shall I offer to the perusal of the Rea∣der two or three remarkable things which were exposed to my considerati∣on when I first visited the shore; which indeed, although they grow, yet cannot properly be called Herbs, Roots, &c. The first of which to be described is, White Coral. OF White Coral Rocks there are great abundance in America, and also up∣on the Coast of Jamaica, especially in the Shallows and Harbours: It groweth and brancheth up in the Sea, from the main bulk, into round pieces of different proportions, some bigger, and some less then a mans finger; one joyned to the other with curious branches, being all over rough, and beset with small bun∣ches, after so delicate a fashion, as will undoubtedly raise admiring thoughts in the serious beholder of so wonderful a Rarity. These Rocks are exceedingly dan∣gerous, not only to great Ships, but also to lesser Vessels, as Boats, whose lightness might seem to exempt them from dan∣ger, which have been often hazarded by
their approaching too near them. Not long after, we came to an Anchor in that stately Harbour at Point Cagaway in Ja∣maica: Some of our Ships Company be∣ing sent forth in a new Shallop, with an intent to make a Voyage to the Camanas for Tortoise (or Turtles, as they call them there) and being not well fitted (as it fell out) to stay, ran the Vessel with such violence upon one of these Co∣ral-Rocks, that it sunk her down so deep, that the men stood in the water, sur∣rounded with fears, lest the merciless Waves should wash them away, they be∣ing some leagues distant from any Land or shore: But keeping their Powder, and some Guns above water, and with great frequency firing them, the Winde being favourable, the report was carried to shore; which causing there in the hearers a suspition of some extraordinary disa∣ster, (such Signals being the usual Pub∣lishers of more then a common calami∣ty) they thereupon, with all possible speed, putting off some Boats to Sea to discover the real cause, in ten or twelve hours space afforded them a seasonable relief, and preserved the men from
an almost remediless destruction. Another time we were crossing the be∣fore-mentioned Harbour from Liganee to the Point, (the principal Sea-port so called in Jamaica) and espying a Croco∣dile (or Allegator, as they there name them) we then dispatcht it with our Oars: But first, in the pursuit there∣of, we ran our Long-Boat on a Coral-Rock, whence with much danger and difficulty we got her off. And seeing I have mentioned a Crocodile, give me leave to add something, as it were, in a Parenthesis, concerning that kinde of A∣nimal: They are at first but little, being inclosed in an Egg-shell, out of which I have taken them my self: the old one, at the accustomed season of the year, ma∣king a hole in the Sand, lays her Eggs thre; and covering or concealing them, leaves them to the influence of the Sun for their more effectual production; where, by the continuance of a moderate heat, they are in a short time quickned, and gain such strength, as to make a beach in the shell; and thence they are no sooner freed, but they betake them∣slves to the Water, and then again to
Land; and by frequenting both, they are ranked in the number of Amphibious Creatures. They do very quickly en∣crease in bulk, multiply exceedingly, and live to a great Age. Some of these Crea∣tures (as I have been there informed) are 28 foot in length: I have seen one 20 foot long; and that we killed was 14, which was accounted short, in com∣parison of those that the Country pro∣duceth: They have Musk-bags (or Musk∣cods, as they there call them) under their Jaws, whence there issues a scent swee∣er then out of a Perfumers Shop; by which, when we travelled into the Coun∣try, or went a Fishing up the fresh-wa∣ter-Rivers, we could easily discover them, and thereby avoid the danger, which o∣therwise we might have been liable to. But here I shall put a period to this, which is only thus accidentally menti∣on'd, in giving an account of that dan∣ger we escapd, when in the pursuance of one of those Crocodiles, we fell foul upon a Coral-Rock. Indeed, I have great reason to be ever mindful of this, and many other extra∣ordinary deliverances, which were often
vouchsafed me, by the stretched-out Arm of an over-ruling Providence: But such preservations deserving more apparent testimonies of my gratitude, then a bare acknowledgment here; I shall therefore manifest the greatness of my Obligations to the Almighty Deliverer in a more proper place, and no longer detain my Reader from what I have proposed to my self to be the Subject of the follow∣ing Pages. Of Sea-Eggs. NOt long after we had moar'd our Ship in Cagaway-Harbour in Ja∣maica, my self, with others, going into the water to wash and solace our selves in that hot Climate (at that time) being altogether unacquainted with these kinde of Eggs (as they are called) hapned to tread on them, there being very many in the shallows, near unto the shore, in those parts; the prickles of which, on a sudden, made such an entrance into my bare feet, that startled me, fearing a worse event might follow thereupon; but the present smart was all, and I
was quickly after better acquainted with them. Description. These Sea-Eggs (if they may properly be so called) are in shape round, almost like unto some of our Turneps, beset all over with small sharp prickles, thick as the prickles of an Hedge-Hog, and more numerous then those on a Sculpin Fish, which is called by us in those parts, the Sea Hedge-Hog, by reason of the many prickles it hath all over its body. Place. They grow on the Coral-Rocks, and near unto the shores, in the most still wa∣ters, and are of a greenish colour all over: Therein is bred an Animal which tum∣bles them about in the water, sucking in its nourishment at a hole in the center of the same: and when these Creatures die, or leave these their Habitations, and sometimes before, by reason of Windes, and the violence of the Waves, there are many of them driven on the Sands; and then all the prickles and green sub∣stance, which invirons them round a∣bout for their safeguard, peeleth off, lea∣ving a milk-white crust, or kinde of shell,
which hath a hole through the middle thereof, and all over externally it is cu∣riously beset with milk-white knobs or bunches, that it is impossible for Art to imitate the same. Ʋse. They are very pretty Rarities for young Ladies Closets, and cannot but please the Eye and Fancy very much in behold∣ing them. Of the Sea-Fan, or Sea-Feather. THe Sea-Fan groweth on the Rocks, it being firmly rooted and close fix'd thereto; and at the first is of a greenish colour, but afterward it chan∣geth; some of them becoming brown, some blackish, some blackish and white, and others milk-white: And they also differ much in bigness, some of them be∣ing narrower, and some broader. I have seen one two foot long, and a foot and a half in breadth; yet there are of almost all sizes: They are of a sinewy substance, knit together all over with a curious
contexture, with little spaces or holes; which in process of time, when the wa∣ter hath wasted the Rock whereon they grow, or by reason of a Storm, or Hur∣ricana, they are loosed, and float on the Waves, until the Winde lodge them on the Sands, where they dry, and become more tough and stiff. Place. There is great store of them in Ame∣rica, in many places. Ʋse. They are made use of by the servants of the richer sort of people, to fan the Air, to keep them cool whilst they eat or sleep; as also to keep away those trouble∣some Flies, called My wings, much like unto Gnats here; but especially, to drive away that very small black and poysonous Fly, called a Muscato, the torment of the place, especially to strangers. Of the Sea-Star-Fish, or by some called the Sea-Star. TO give such a Description of the house or habitation of this Animal,
as to bring the perfect Idea into the minde, is a thing impossible; only so much as may be contained in a few words shall be presented. This Rarity hath five corners, stretching themselves equally forth five several ways, each about five inches from the center; all of them be∣ing Taper, from the middle or body of the main substance: on the upper side, both the middle part, and also the cor∣ners, are somewhat smooth; but on the edges most curiously nickt, or denticula∣ted: on the lower side, both in the mid∣dle part, and every corner, it is a little open, as it were so many Chanels meet∣ing all in one center. Now on the sides of all these open places, and also on the bottom of the same, it is so curiously nickt and wrought, that I think the mos exquisite Artist can hardly imitate the same. Place. They grow at first on the Rocks, as the Coral-Rocks, &c. and are then of a greenish colour; wherein, in a reasonable time, is bred a living Creature, which when it is come to maturity, getteth thi kinde of softish shell loose from the Roc
(whereunto the lower side of it clingeth close) and so marcheth away at his own pleasure, increasing in bigness as it in∣creaseth in Age: and always in boystrous weather, when Mariners most fear the Rocks, then do they contrarily cast An∣chor thereon, taking hold on the bran∣ches of the Coral, lest by the violence of the Waves they should be cast on shore, and lost, as it were, by shipwrack, in a contrary Element. Now after this Rarity is once loosened from the Rock, it is of a kinde of yellow∣ish colour; and wandring abroad from their Harbour or hold, or else by reason of death (when rough weather cometh) they are often cast on the Sands in many places in Jamaica; and I have taken them out of the water near the shore, as also in a Net: when they come first out of the water, they are softish; but being dried, they become very hard. Ʋse. I know not the use of this kinde of Fish; but doubtless it is good for some∣thing, there being nothing made in vain: as for the shell, it is a very pretty Toy. I hope I need make no Apology for my
beginning this Discourse of those things first represented to my consideration at my arrival in those parts, or for my ma∣king a stay, and hovering a little about the banks of that Sea-shore, before I ad∣ventured further on Land. However, there are very many more strange Rari∣ties on the sands of those Sea-shores, a description whereof would be too long to trouble you with here, and altoge∣ther improper; so that I will leave that Station, and step a little further on Land, even into their Plantations, and consi∣der next what Roots we made use of in those parts. Of Potatoes. AS for Potatoes, we here only in∣tend to speak of the Root; and for a description of the Leaves and Bran∣ches, be pleased to see Ger. Herb. or some other who hath written of Virginia-Pota∣toes, which do very much resemble them in likeness; and therefore may save me the labour of troubling my self or you further therewith. This Root is thick, fat and tuberous;
some of them yellowish, or of a Gold-colour within; some are whitish, others very white, most of them are in form oval, or round; some bigger, some less, as Spanish Potatoes are; but commonly somewhat bigger at their full growth. Place. They grow in many places in Ame∣rica, as in all the Caribbee Islands that I have been in; namely, Barbados, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, S. Christophers; as also Hispaniola, Jamaica, &c. where they are planted in most Plantations for daily food; the small ones, or pieces, being reserv'd in digging them up, and replant∣ed for encrease. Time. The Leaves are green, and the Roots fit to be eaten all times in the year, ac∣cording as they are planted; there being properly but one season in the whole year, that is Summer, for it is there al∣ways very hot, so that Ice, in those Countries, would seem a great Miracle to them. Indeed, the Spring and Autumn may be said to be all the year too, for they sow and plant at any time, and it comes to maturity; there being no fall
of the leaf, but as one driveth off ano∣ther, when they become aged, that a younger may take place. Name. The Indians, as also some of the Blacks and Spaniards, do call them Papus; but we English call them Potatoes. Vertues. They are common and ordinary meat, used for daily food amongst all Planters; neither are they the worse for being com∣mon: for I suppose it to be one of the best, most wholesome, and delicious Roots in the world, especially in those parts, which do much exceed Spanish Potatoes that we have brought into England: they are easie of digestion, agreeing well with all bodies, especially with our hot sto∣macks when we come there, who may at first eat of them moderately, four or five times a day, without hurt, (as also of some kinde of meat or flesh:) they breed very good nourishment; they corroborate or strengthen exceedingly; they chear the heart, and are provocative of bodily lust. They are used several ways, as I have often eaten them; either roasted under the ashes, and then peeled, pulp't
and buttred, or boiled and buttred, or eaten alone, or with Girk't Beef and Pork instead of bread: the driest of them they bake either in Pots or Pies, hardly any way comes amiss; for they are excel∣lent food, as by experience I have often found, especially in that their Native Climate, by reason that they are easie of digestion, and the bodies of the Inhabi∣tants are much weakned by heat. Of Yams, or Yammes. AS for the leaves, branches and ten∣drels of these, they are much like the Potatoes; and therefore I need not spend time in describing them: These Roots are, for the most part, rounder, bigger, and more solid or compact then Potatoes are; and being cut, they are much whiter within: They will keep, being carefully taken up without brui∣sing, and put into some of the same earth in a Tub, or the like, to England, as I have made tryal. Place. They grow in Jamaica, and most o∣ther Islands thereabouts; they are nou∣rished
in Plantations for daily food, as Potatoes are. Time. They are planted at any time of the year, and do prosper very well. Name. I never heard them call'd amongst ei∣ther Spaniards, Blacks, or English there inhabiting, by any other name then Yams, Yammes, or Yarnes. Vertues. These are very good Roots, and are common ordinary food amongst Plan∣ters, and do nourish very well, but not so much as the Potatoes do; neither are they so delightful in taste, but agree very well with the Inhabitants: for it hath pleased Almighty God to order all things so by his Providence, that every place is provided with food most convenient for it: these Roots are ordered and dressed as Potatoes are: And amongst the many delicious Roots in those parts, these two are most made use of by the Inhabitants, either for meat or drink; for indeed they make a drink of these and Potatoes, ve∣ry good. Next, we come to treat of the several
sorts of Grain in America, most used there for food. Of Calavanc, or Calavances. THese Pease have long and small stalks, of a brownish green colour, branched and spread upon the ground (unless they be supported by Props) much after the same manner of our Field-pease: the leaves shoot forth at several places, set one against another, of a more yel∣lowish green colour then ours in England are; They have also towards the top, clasping Tendrils, as ours have: The Cods are pretty long, wherein are small Pease of the bigness of our Vetches, but long; or of the fashion of a Kidney-bean, and very smooth; outwardly, of a dark red colour; neither are they uneven when they be dry. Place. They grow in many places in America, as in Jamaica, in several places; namely, at Colonel Barington's Plantations, at Li∣ganee, at Portamorant, &c. Time. They are planted at any time, and
flourish all the year; of which the Hus∣bandmen, or Planters there, have five Crops in two years. Name. Some call them the Indian Vetches, some the Indian Pease; but those that are Inhabitants there, call them Calavan∣ces, or Calievancie. Ʋse. They are very good food, much easier of digestion then ours are, as being more fitting and more natural for that hot Cli∣mate, because the stomack is not very strong, by reason of the external circum∣ambient heat which doth much debili∣tate and weaken Nature. I have often found by experience (the best Judge) that eating the same quantity of our Pease as of them, I should be much more opprest in my stomack, then when I eat of those, and more troubled with winde; and so likewise for the Beef or Pork, they are much more nourishing then ours, are somewhat flatulent, and provoke bodi∣ly lust: when they are green, they boil and butter them, and so they do some∣times when they are dry; or else they boil and eat them with Pork, or wild Hog, as we do ours in Lent.
Of Bonniviss. THese Pease grow very tall, being supported, almost in every respect, as our Rouncifals are in England, and are commonly planted in Rows, and run up as they do; but as for the Pease them∣selves, they are very white (as the other before spoken of were red) and some∣what bigger then them, almost of the shape of the small Kidney-bean, but only shorter and thinner. Place. They grow in most Plantations in Ja∣maica, as also in most other adjacent I∣slands. Time. They flourish all the year, having Blows, Kids, green Pease and Ripe, growing on them at one and the same time. I never heard it called by any other name then Pisum Indicum, or by the In∣habitants there Bonnivisse, or Bonneviss. Vertues. These Pease are, as to their vertue, much like those that are here fore-menti∣oned,
but are somewhat harder of dige∣stion, yet are very good food, and more pleasant then ours are; they are a little windy, which is the reason, that being eaten too freely, they oppress the head: they are used, in all respects, as the others before-mentioned are; and to expel the Winde, they eat them with red Pep∣per. Of the seven years Pease. THis sort of Pease is planted but once in seven years, and continueth bear∣ing and fruitful for that space: it grow∣eth up with whitish green stalks, from which many branches spread forth in the form of a Bush, some four or five foot high, or more, whose leaves are small, of a green colour; and it is all bespangled o∣ver with Cods, much like our Pease: The Pease themselves are much about the big∣ness of a Vetch, or Lupine; and when they are dri'd, they are of a greyish co∣lour, speckled outwardly. Some of these, and others, I brought home; but they came to no perfection in our Climate, by reason of taking wet (as I conceive) in bringing them.
Place. They are planted in many Plantations n Jamaica, especially near their houses, and serving for bounds and fences for heir principal Gardens, and for hanging Cloaths, and other uses. Time. They flourish most part of the year, and have Blows, and both green and ripe Pease on them at one and the same time. Name. It is called by the English which there inhabits, Seven years Pease, or seven years Vetches; I suppose, because it continueth seven years with once planting. They are very good food, and well ta∣sted; but they must be moderately eaten, otherwise they oppress the stomack and head, by reason of their windy quality; yet I found bur little difference btween these and the former. They are planted near unto houses, that so they may have always a Dish of Pease in readiness for themselves, or for a Friend, if need be.
Of Gourds both great and small. TO give a particular description of them, would be altogether need∣less, it being better done already by se∣veral others that have written of them, which these do very much resemble. Place. They grow naturally wilde in Ameri∣ca: in many Plantations they are also planted, and so they are sometimes here. As for Cowcumbers, Pumpions, Musk-Melons, &c. I will forbear to treat of them, because there is already, in several Herbals, such a description given, as may very well serve to demonstrate what they are; only these are more delicious in taste, and are not so cold, because the Sun doth better concoct them. Of the Water-Melon. A Water-Melon is a very excellent fruit, some of them in shape like unto our middle-siz'd Pumpions, and as
big; the substance within them spungy, ender, and well tasted; and being cut, s something mixed with white and red: t is very moist and waterish, and the seeds re like them of the Italian Musk-Me∣on. Place. They delight most in hot Regions, as n the Caribbee-Islands they grow plenti∣ully, and in Jamaica I have often eat of them, but they are altogether No∣elties in these Northern parts; yet I have heard that in France there are ome, but very rarely: And here they will also grow, being raised as other Me∣ons are; but they seldom come to per∣fection. Time. In those hotter Countries they may be ndifferently planted at any time; and there are some of them to be had all the year, as of most other fruit naturally growing there. Ʋse. This fruit is naturally very cold and moist; and therefore it must be very mo∣derately eaten, otherwise it is very apt to cause a Fever, by cooling the stomack too
much, and spoiling digestion; it quench∣eth thirst, as I have often made tryal, and hath sometimes caused me to faint, as the drinking cold water hath done, by too much chilling or condensing the Spi∣rits on a sudden. I might now mention divers sorts of Herbs which we made use of, as Sam∣pier, Purslane, &c. but they are so like in resemblance to those we have here, which almost every Herbal treats of, that it may very well save me that labour; on∣ly the vertues and operation of them upon bodies there differ very much, every place being provided with things most suitable for it. Of the Wheat of America, or Maiz. OF this Wheat there are divers sorts, notwithstanding all of one stock or kindred, consisting of divers coloured grains, as white, blew, yellow, or Gold-colour; some of a Straw-colour, some red, &c. The stalks are much like that of the
Reed, but bigger and stronger, full of spungy pith, set with many joynts, five or ix foot high, big downwards, and so becoming small upwards: the leaves are not very broad, but long; some of the Ears on the tops of the stalks are a span-long, and almost as much about, inclosed in a film or sheath, as it were, from which there groweth a thing much like the Feather-top on the common Reed, divi∣ded into many plumes, hanging down∣wards, blooming, but without seed: The Flower is white, red, yellow or purple, &c. as the Corn is like to be: this Wheat is contained in very big Ears, which grow out at the joynts of the stalks, two, three or four from one stalk, orderly pla∣ced one above another, covered with coats or films, as it were a sheath, out of which doth stand a Beard like that which grows upon Savoury, but greater and lon∣ger: The seeds are great, of the bigness of common Pease; on the outer part round, on the other flat, very evenly and closely beset in eight or ten rows, from the bottom to the top of the Ear, some of a yellow or gold-colour, some white, red, blewish, purple, straw-colour, &c.
Place. It groweth in many places in Asia, as I have heard, and in Virginia, as also in America in most of the Caribbee-Islands, in Jamaica in almost all Plantations: it delighteth in hot Regions most: they sow or set it twice a year, (viz.) March and June, and reap in the third Moneths after. Time. It is set or sown in very hot Countries at any time; but more to the North it is planted in March or April, and the fruit is ripe about September. I have seen some eared here, but no good seed therein. Name. In America it is called by some Mai∣zium or Mais, or by others Virginia-Wheat, but we call it Indian Corn: It is also called by some Frumentum Turcicum, and Milium Indicum: here in England it is, for the most part, called Turkey or Virginia-Wheat. Vertues. It is naturally very dry, and nourish∣eth very little; and the bread that is made thereof is meanly white, but very dry and hard; by which means it is ard
of digestion, affording little nourishment to the body, and it also bindeth; and yet notwithstanding this, some make bread thereof, but especially a sort of Puddings they make of the Flour of this Corn, which is excellent good: But the most common use they make of this kinde of Grain, is to feed their Cattle; as Hogs, Turkeys, Hens, Ducks, &c. as we feed ours with Pease: their most u∣sual bread is Casava: (If I should tell how big some of their Turkeys are there, I think I should hardly be believ'd:) they use of the Flour hereof in Chocolate. The Parots, and Paraketoes, are great devourers of this Corn; so that the Plan∣ters, a good while before it be ripe, are forced to set one to keep them away, or otherwise they will eat it all up. Of the Sugar-Cane, or Reed. THe Sugar-Cane is a kinde of Reed both pleasant and profitable, ha∣ving long stalks, some six or seven foot high, (if you reckon the top-leaves, or branches and all) joynted or knotted much like unto the great Cane: the leaves
come forth of every joynt on each side of the stalk, long, narrow, and sharp∣pointed, much like unto some Flags, or Flower-de-luces, but not so broad; and seem, at a distance, like those Sag-beds which grow many together in some ex∣traordinary Moorish or boggy places in England; but of a more blewish green colour, much like the colour called a Willow-green. These Canes are not hollow; but the stalk, or body it self, is stuffed with a porous substance, moist and sweet in taste: from the root spring young Suckers (as they are called) which are cut away, and serve to plant else∣where for increase; as also other shread∣ings, the ground being dig'd and ordered accordingly. Place. They grow in many places, as Spain, Portugal, Albia, Barbary, &c. in the Me∣deras, Bra, &c. as also in America, in most of the Caribbee-Islands, as Barbados, Ne∣vs, Jamaica, &c. of which, I think Ja∣maica will produce the best Sugar in time, and the most. Time. These Sugar-Canes are planted at all
times of the year; for the most part in the Caribbee-Islands, by reason that they fear not the cold coming there to hurt them. Name. We in English call it the Sugar-Cane, or, as some call it, the sweet Cane; but it is called by others, Arundo Saccharina Indica, or Calamus Saccharatus, &c. Vertues. The Sugar, or Juyce of this Cane, is of a temperate quality; it drieth and clean∣seth the Stomack, and smootheth the roughness of the Breast, Lungs and Ar∣teries; cleareth the Voice, and takes a∣way Hoarsness, the Cough, and all sow∣erness and bitterness. Ʋse. Of the Juyce of this Reed or Cane is made Sugar, of which Confections, Comfeits, Syrrups, Preserves, Conserves of sundry Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, &c. are prepar'd; but how that is done, I do not here intend to mention: Not∣withstanding, I think it not impertinent to acquaint you, how these Canes are or∣dred after they be cut, for the producing and making of Sugar; and this only af∣ter
the same manner as I saw it in the Sugar-works in Jamaica. When they come to maturity (which the Planters know by several signes, as well as we know when our Harvst is ready) they do cut them down at or above the first joynt from the ground, (for there is little moisture in them close to the ground) with a strong Instru∣ment for the same purpose, laying them even in heaps, as we usually lay our Corn here in Harvest-time: then they shread off all the branches, and binde the stalks in bundles, ready for their servants to carry away; or else they lay them toge∣ther here and there, till they can carry them away with their Horses to the Mill, Machine or Ingenio, where they squeeze them: which must be as fast as they can after they are cut; for if they lye long after they are cut before they use them, then they come by much damage; so that whilst they are cutting in the Plan∣tations, the Mill is usually going, and the Coppers are boiling. They carry them on their horses, being loose, or bound up in bundles, after this wise: they have a kinde of Pad made as some of our horses
have that carry burdens; and on each side of that are two crooks standing up even, or higher then the horses back; (when the Saddle or Pad is put thereon) into which crooks the Canes are laid on each side of the horse, and then they car∣ry them up to the Sugar-Mill, which is made after this manner following. They have an open house built on some pretty high ground or Hill, where∣by they may have as much Air as they can, square, or at least pretty wide; in the middle of which they set up two great Posts, of very hard and solid tim∣ber, made exactly round and straight, with irons at each end fitted for them to turn, the lower end of which turn∣eth in brasses fast fixt in a great and soli piece of wood: Now in one of these Cy∣linders, or Rowlers, which are to turn upright, is a Set of Coggs set round a∣bout, which taketh always hold of the other Rowler, and causeth it to turn; so that both of them turn together: there being fastned to one of the Cylinders a piece of wood, or rather a frame of wood, whereunto is fastned a horse or two, to go round and draw it about, in
such a manner as most Brewers in Eng∣land grinde their Mault. Now the Mill being prepared, and the Canes laid by it, and all things ready to set them to work; there is one that doth always pt the Canes between these Row∣lers, as they turn, which draw th m through, by turning very nigh one a∣gainst another; so that it squeezeth all the juyce or moisture out of them: and then there is another always to take the crusht Canes away; unless one sometimes make shift to do both, which commonly is too hard a task. Now under these Rowlers is set a Re∣ceiver, as a Trough, Cistern, or the like convenient thing, to receive the juyce or liquor that is squeezed out of the Canes: and from this Trough or Cistern, is a Spout or Conduct to convey this juyce in∣to the Furnaces or Coppers, where it is to be boiled to Sugar; whereas, in some Sugar-houses, there are five or six Cop∣pers for that purpose, which are com∣monly set in a house built only for the same use, at a distance from the Mill; and also somewhat lower then the Mill, be∣cause the liquor is always running down
into the Coppers: All which passages and Vessels must be kept very clean; for o∣therwise, they are by reason of the great heat apt to sower, and so spoil the juyce: neither must the juyce be long kept after it is pressed out; for if it once grow sow∣er, it is not then fit to make Sugar. These Coppers are set all one by ano∣ther athwart the end of the Sugar-house, or Curing-house (as they term it) so that the upper edges of each Copper do al∣most touch each other, bing fast fixed in Brick-work, and cemented round the edges, that no fire can get up, or be seen in the Sugar-house: But the mouth of the Furnaces where the fire is put, is so contrived, that they are made and appear on the outside the house; where before them is always ready cut great store of wood to cast in, to maintain the fire so long as they boil. Now, if there be six Coppers, the first two are thinnest and biggest, in which the juyce is first boiled; but not by a very strong fire, for that will make the Scum to rise, by casting in Temper, as they call it: the first of which that ariseth is little worth; but afterwards, what is scum'd
off, they make a very good drink of, call∣ed Locus-Ale, much used by the servants; or else they convy it into a Copper-Still (as they do all their other setlings and dregs of Sugar) to be distill'd, and make a sort of Strong-water thy call Rum, or Rum-bullion, stronger then Spirit of Wine, and not vry pleasant, until a man is used so it. This strong liquor is ordi∣narily drank amongst the Planters, as well alone, as made into Punch. Furthermore, when this juyce hath so boiled into the two first Coppers, then is it strained into the third and fourth Fur∣naces, which are less and thicker, and there it is boiled by somewhat a greater fire; and as it bgins to grow pretty thick, then is it put into the fifth and sixth Coppers, and there boiled by a greater and very strong fire, to a just con∣sistence: These Coppers are lesser and thicker then the other, which the Master-Workman doth always tend, with a great deal of care, till it be boiled enough; then they put it into wooden Boxes, made broad at the top, and narrow at the bot∣tom, with a hole almost like a Mill-Hop∣per: then they set it in the Curing-house,
which is a place made to set them all in rows; under the bottom of which, Gut∣ters or Troughs are placed to receive the Malassus, and convey it into a Vessel. They cover the tops of these Boxes, or Earthen Vessels, with a temper'd white Earth: and indeed there is great art in whitening and making of good Sugar. Those who work much in the Sugar-houses are very subject to the Scurvie, by reason of excss in the use thereof: not that Sugar is apt to breed the Scurvie, (for Salt will do the same, being immo∣derately used, as we see among Sea-men) but rather the contrary in both; for they are both Preservatives to the body, as well as to fruit or flesh, being used ac∣cordingly. In Jamaica they have a very pretty and easie way for the producing of good Salt, thus: near the Sea-side they dig a low place, as it were a Laugh or Pond, and pave it very even, and with a Sluce let in some of the Sea-water, an inch, two inches, or three inches deep, or more; and there let it remain, and the Sun in a short time turneth it into Salt: and if they have occasion to use it quickly, they
let in the less; but if they have a good stock, that they can stay longr, then they let in the more; for the more is let in, the longer will it be ere it be∣come salt: which being done, they sweep it up, and keep it for use, and so let in more. And thus are they well provided with Salt to their Beef, Pork, &c. which will not keep sweet otherwise many hours after it is killed. But this only by digression: I think it needless here to say any thing more of the Vertues of Sugar, it being so fully done by others already. Of the Prickle Pear-Bush. THis strange and admirable Tree, or Bush, is as it were a multiplicity of leaves, with scarcely either Body or Bough, which may properly be so called; but rather a company of leaves, joyning and growing one after another, and spreading long and largely round about, some low, and some to the height of five or six foot. These leaves are pretty long and broad, not at all dentilated, but very thick in substance: some of them are al∣most an inch thick, eing cut through the
middle; much of a Sea-green colour, be∣set full of sharp and whitish prickles. From amongst these leaves comes forth a palish yellow, or rather a whitish Crim∣son-coloured Flower, set in a round Tuft; after which comes the Fruit, at first of the colour of the leaves, and almost re∣sembling a Fig; in form narrow below, and bigger above; and the upper end or top being ripe, is of a clear Purple-colour, tending to a Carnation; the very top of which is almost like unto the top of a Medlar; nd being cut, is full of a red, or rather Purple-coloured juyce, staining the fingers, and also the lips, being eaten: It is full of small stones, or seeds, on the top; and also just within the top, or rough place, like a Medlar, there is a prickly thing, which we call the Spur, from the resemblance it hath with the rowl of a Spur, which hath four or five sharp points standing out: The outer skin of these Pears (as well as the leaves and stems) are all over beset with small whitish sharp Prickles, that are apt, at the least touch, to stick in ones fingers, unless you gather them with Gloves, and wipe them off before you handle thm with your fingers.
Place. They grow in most of the Western Islands, in Jamaica very plentifully, in all low places by the Sea-side. Time. They grow green all the year, and have Blows, green Fruit, and also ripe Fruit on them at any time. Nam▪ Some call it the Prickle Fig-tree, for the resemblance the fruit hath with a Fig: but most call it the Prickle Pear-Bush, and the fruit the Prickle-Pear. Vertues. This Fruit is very pleasant in taste, e∣specially the juyce thereof, which hath a fine picquancy that extremely gratifies the palate: It is in quality cold and moist, very good to qualifie thirst, as I have ex∣perimented by eating them when I could not come at fresh water; but if you suck large quantities of it, it coloureth the Urine of a purple-colour. There may be many good Medicines prepared of this Tree, that may be as well internally as externally applied. Now by reason of Sea-mens gulosity, when they come to fresh diet, Tumors
or Aposthemes are there very frequent; and for want of due provision at the first, or by the decay of Medicines and Simples in carriage, or else by the Chi∣rurgions lucre, selling too much for his own private interest, or by some other accident, the Ships are often unprovided of necessaries for this purpose; so that many are driven to make use of what they can meet with: The bst, I suppose, for such swellings, are these leaves; for they are attractive, mollifying, digestive, &c. I have taken these leaves and wrap∣pd them up in wet paper, or in some broad thin leaf, and roasted them under the hot Embers or ashes, till they became soft, and applied them to the place grie∣ved, in form of a Cataplasme; and they have wrought effectually, beyond my ex∣pectation; yea, better then any prepara∣tion that could have been made from a well-furnished Chest. And it seems very apparent to me, Providence hath so ordered the matter, that every Country is better provided with Medicines, and other materials at home (were they but known) then is pos∣sible to be brought from other far distant
Regions: for half the usual Dose of some Medicines given to a seemingly strong body, would work too strongly, that twice the quantity or usual Dose given at some times, would not work at all; which indeed may happen many ways, i. e. either by the Medicines being ill pre∣pared at first, or by decay in carriage, by the difference of Climates or Constituti∣ons, &c. So that all Chirurgions of Ships, and Mates, ought to consider with great circumspection, how they give Physick in hot Regions, which they fit ad prpare for a cold one. There is a Syrup made of the juyce of this Fruit, which hath often been given with good success in Fevers and hot Di∣stempers, being also used in Juleps, &c. Of the Spanish Pear. THis is a reasonable high and well-spread Tree, whose leaves are smooth, and of a pale green colour: the Fruit is of the fashion of a Fig, but very smooth on the out-side, and as big in bulk as a Slipper-Pear; of a brown co∣lour, having a stone in the middle as big
as an Apricock, but round, hard and smooth: the outer paring or rinde is, as it were, a kinde of a shell, almost like an Acorn-shell, but not altogether so tough; yet the middle substance (I mean be∣tween the stone and the paring, or outer crusty rinde) is very soft and tender, al∣most as soft as the pulp of a Pippin not over-roasted. Place. It groweth in divers places in Jamai∣ca; and the truth is, I never saw it else∣where: but it is possible it may be in o∣ther Islands adjacent, which are not much different in Latitude. Name. I never heard it called by any other name then the Spanish Pear, or by some the Shell-Pear; and I suppose it is so called only by the English (knowing no other name for it) because it was there planted by Spaniards before our Coun∣trymen had any being there; or else be∣cause it hath a knde of shell or crusty out-side. Ʋse. I think it to be one of the most rare and most pleasant Fruits in that Island:
it nourisheth and strengtheneth the body▪ corroborating the vital spirits, and procu∣ring lust exceedingly: the Pulp being taken out and macerated in some conve∣nient thing, and eaten with a little Vine∣ger and Pepper, or several other ways, is very delicious meat. Of the Dildoe-Tree. I Thought this at the first sight to be a very strange admirable Tree, and in∣deed so it is. This Plant or Tree grow∣eth up to the height of 12 or 14 foot, and some less, with many stems together in one place, being straight; and without leaves; but having surrows and ridges round the stems, drawn as it were exact∣ly by a straight line from one end to the other, with here and there an Elbow, or short stem of the same substance, growing out of them, some a foot, or some two foot long; of a Willow-green colour, beset all over with whitish and very sharp prickles, almost like those of the leaves of the Prickle-Pear-Bush: the trunk or body of these stems (of the largest) are almost as big as a mans thigh; of a
softish juycie substance, easily cut down. The Flower is of a whitish colour, af∣ter which comes the Fruit, beset here and there on a very short stem, close to the main body, especially towards the tp: this fruit is as round as a ball, of a whitish colour, but no bigger then a Crab of a midling size: it hath exter∣nally a thin skin; but the meat within is clear, white, soft, and full of black specks or seeds. Place. They grow very plentifully in low sandy places, especially in the plains near the Sea; in Jamaica, and divers other Neighbouring Countries. Time. They have flowers and fruit; some green, and some ripe, growing on them all the year. Name. This Tree was long since called by the Spaniards, and by the Negroes that lived there, the Dildoe-Tree; and the English retain the same name still, for the most part, although some there be that call it Ʋragua, and think it to be the Euphor∣bium; but I suppose it to be of another kinde.
Vertues. Being eaten, they are of a sweet and luscious taste, quickly cloying the ap∣petite; and may safely be eaten, for that the birds feed thereon: which was always an observation amongst us, when we tra∣velled the Wilderness and Woods, where we found no provision otherwise, to eat of those fruits which the birds and fowls of the Air eat of, and also of the roots that the wilde Hogs eat; which might be done without danger, they being in∣dued with a more natural knowledge then man to chuse the best for food; and therefore we always esteemed them true Tasters: for indeed there are very many Dormitive stupifying roots, fruits, &c. burthensome to nature; by which natu∣ral knowledge or antipathy, the Beast will not so much as touch them, and the birds and fowls will very rarely light upon those Trees. Of the Goavo-Tree. THis Tree hath several small Bodies or Stems growing near together, or from one root, seven or eight foot
high; from which spring forth, in seve∣ral places, small branches, whose leaves re of a yellowish green colour, amongst which cometh the fruit, which is as round as a Gall (of which Ink is usually made) but somewhat bigger: at the first green∣sh; but when they are ripe, they become of a brownish colour. Place. They grow upon most Upland grounds in Jamaica, and most of the Caribbee-Islands. Time. It flowreth, and the Fruit ripeneth af∣ter the same manner as most other Fruits before spoken of. Name. It was called by the Spaniards, Goavo, Gavah, or Guavor; and also by the Ne∣groes, which were then their Slaves, and being lft upon the Island of Jamaica, have since made their compsition with the English, and have Governours, and live peaceably under the English Laws; and have also the freedom of the place to Plant, Hunt, and Trade with us; shew∣ing to any English man great respect, e∣specially strangers, as I very well know,
who have been amongst them for a sort-night together, with all the civil enter∣tainment they could afford, and not cost me one groat; but rather taking it as an affront to proffer them money, coming but as a stranger to see them. Vertues. It is, being fully ripe, by reason of a pretty picquancy it hath, very grateful in taste; cooling and refreshing, and may safely be eaten, as other fruit, with moderation. Of the Orange-Trees. THere are in America, in most of the Caribbee-Islands, many Orange-Trees naturally growing in the Woods and Deserts, where are as yet no Inha∣bitants nigh them; as upon Hispanio∣la and Cuba; but especially upon Ja∣maica, where are the most that ever I saw, at a place called Orange-Bay, where they grow so plentifully, that they are the only Trees of that place, almost touching one another for the compass of many miles, unless it be here and there a Savana, or very low place: they
are very tall and well-spread Trees; of a dark green colour, which have always Blows, green Oranges, half ripe, and quite ripe fruit on them at all times in he year. Also under them lye such an nnumerable number both of rotten and sound ones, that it is at the first a very strange sight to behold: So that were it worth ones while, many Ships might be aden with those that are sound and good from that place. They are of two sorts; one sharp or sowrish, used for Sau∣ces, and in drinks; the other sweet, yea, for the most part, sweeter then those we call China-Oranges, and are made but little use of there. To write more, either of the descrip∣tion of the Tree, or vertues of the fruit, were needless; it being better done by many already, then is likely to be per∣formed by my unworthy pen; to whom I refer you for further satisfaction. Of the Lemmon-Tree. TO write any thing of the descrip∣tion, use or vertues of this Tree or Fruit, were but lost labour, and to no
purpose; it being so well done by o∣thers already, which doth correspond, in all respects, with those in America: neither is this kinde of fruit very plenti∣ful in these Western Islands. Of the Lime-Tree. THis groweth up to a reasonable tall and well-spread Tree, almost like unto the Orange-Tree, saving that the leaves are somewhat smaller, and of a more palish green colour: and also, be∣sides the main body of this Tree, there is often several other smaller stems that grow up from, or near to the same root: and likewise many branches spring forth of the body, not much distant from the ground; all which branches or boughs of this Tree, as well as the trunk of it, are beset with whitish prickles, almost like the Barbary-Bush, but not so full: the blos∣soms are much like those of the Lem∣mon-Tree, after which cometh the fruit; at first, very green, smooth and oval, like that of the Lemmon, but generally much smaller then Lemmons are; and when they be ripe, they are of a yellowish
green colour, as some Lemmons are also. Place. They grow naturally, in many places n the Woods, in most of the Caribbee-slands; especially in Jamaica I have often gathered them. Time. They have very young, green and ripe ruit on them, if they are not otherwise revented by gathering, &c. at all times. Name. The name I have mentioned before: or the truth is, I know not by what o∣her name this Tree is called, then the ime-Tree; and the fruit is called Limes. Vertues. The juyce of the fruit of this Tree is arper then the juyce of Lemmons, and  excellent good against the Scurvie, be∣g frequently used, as I have often made yal: it quencheth thirst, and is very ood in sawces for Feverish distempers. n a word, it performeth all things that e juyce of Lemmons doth, but more fectually. Also the juyce of Limes is xceedingly much in esteem in America r the making of Punch; a drink which ost there use, to be merry withal;
and the chiefest liquor they make use of to entertain strangers and friends. It is made of Spirit of Wine (or else with Rum) Water and Sugar, with as much of the juyce of Limes as will give it a fine picquancie or sharpness. Of the Red Pepper-Tree or Bush. THis Tree (or rather Bush) groweth up almost like unto our Curran-Bushes, to the height of about four foot; but the leaves are smaller and narrower, and tending to a Grass-green colour, as the fruit at the first also is; but after∣wards, when it is ripe, it becometh as red as blood: it is set here and there, all over the Tree, upon little short stems; on the end of which, at the first, there cometh a little Button, growing bigger by degrees, until it be of the largeness and proportion almost of a Sheeps Heart: towards the Stem or Basis big, and end∣ing like a Pyramid. This Fruit, (or Pep∣per-cods, as they are called) are external∣ly smooth, and a little thicker then brown
paper, but not very tough; which in time becometh here and there impressed, and full of yellowish seeds, when they are full ripe. Place. They grow in many Plantations in Jamaica, especially at Port-Morant, and er at Liganee, at a place which is call∣ by the name of Major Harington's Plantation, as having the first possessi∣on of them after the English came there. They are, for the most part, planted in Gardens near unto their houses; the fruit eing of daily use for Pease, Chocolate, &c. Time. They have great store of these Heads growing on them of all sorts, i. e. young mall ones: when large, they are green; when largest, very red; which are then ipe, and fit to be made use of. Name. I know no other name it hath then Chilli, red Pepper, or Bastard-Pepper; so alled by the English Planters, I suppose, ecause the external part is red and bi∣ing, like as East-India Pepper is; and so re the Seeds.
Vertues. It is in temperature and vertue hot and dry, as white and black Pepper is, and as biting in taste: the rinde or outer part of these red heads being cut small, may be used with the seeds for all such purpo∣ses as other Pepper is; and for that rea∣son it is planted near unto their houses, to be ready, upon all occasions, to eat with Pease, and the like, to expel the windiness thereof, and is used in Cho∣colate. Of the small Red Peppr-Tree or Bush. THis groweth up almost after the same manner as the Barbery-Bush doth, but hath not so many stems toge∣ther, nor is it usually so high as some Barbery-Trees are; and besides, it is without prickles; otherwise, both for stock, branch and leaf, it is much like un∣to it; and the fruit is of a more bright red colour, whose form is somewhat like the Barbery (when both are ripe) but big∣ger; at first of a green colour, and after∣wards
red: and they are also full of yellowish seeds, and grow but one in a place, being set all singly upon little stems. Place. It groweth in Jamaica frequently in the Plantations, as the other before-men∣tioned doth. Time. There is green and ripe fruit upon these Bushes at all times. Name. I know no other name it hath but the small red Pepper; I suppose so called, because it is smaller then that before spe∣cified. Vertues. It is in nature hot and dry, biting; and sed to all intents and purposes as other epper is. Of the Sweet-scented Pepper. THis Pepper is not very plentiful, for I never saw it but in Jamaica: it roweth much after the same manner as he East-India Pepper doth; a description f which several have written, which may
very well save me the labour at this time of further troubling my self in that re∣spect. Place. It groweth naturally in some places in Jamaica. Time. It keepeth course with all other Trees and fruit of the Island; that is, for the most part, all times alike. Name. It is called by the Planters Sweet-scent∣ed Pepper, because it hath a very sweet smell; and Pepper, because it is much like ordinary white Pepper, both for co∣lour and smoothness; but the Corns are bigger, and more brittle. Vertues. It is hot, and a little biting on the tongue, but not comparable to the other sorts before-mentioned: it is often used in Chocolate; not so much for the whole∣somness of it, but for the pleasant per∣fume it sendeth forth whilst the Choco∣late is hot; it being beaten, and having a small quantity put therein; but if you put in much, it is apt to cause the Head∣ach. I brought a good quantity of this Pepper into England.
Of the Maucaw-Tree. I Do not mention this Tree so much for the use that I have ever made of it, but for that it was shewed me particularly by the Chief Governour of the Blacks (be∣fore-mentioned) at his house at S. Jgo∣de-la-vega, the principal Town in Ja∣maica: whilst the Spaniards had possessi∣on there, so called; but now it is called S. Deaugo; the streets of which were kept as even as a Bowling-Green. This groweth to the height of a Lime-Tree; the leaves have three corners, as it were, in the form of a Heart: its flowers or blossoms are of a pretty big tuft, of a white and reddish colour; and after them come little husks or thin shells, in which are seeds almost as big as a Vetch; and being full ripe, are of a pure Crimson or reddish colour, apt to dye the skin so with a touch, that it cannot quickly be washed off: So that were some Ladies acquainted with this Rarity, doubtless they would give much for it. Place. It groweth in Jamaica, and in other
of the Caribbee-Islands; being planted by the Caribbeans in their Gardens, as a very choice Tree. Time. It is planted at any time, in the Spring, Summer, or Autumn; being there all the year in season. Name. It is called by several names: the English Planters call it the Maucaw-Tree, from a curious-coloured Wilde-Fowl, in those parts (much bigger then a Parrot) called a Maucaw: some call it the Rocow or Roucou-Tree; others, Lig∣num Asbestinum, or Lignum Indicum, or Achiote. Ʋse. It is in much esteem with some curious Painters, Limners and Dyers that are ac∣quainted with it; and also it is in much request with the Native Indians; for therewith they colour their bodies red, thinking thereby to appear more terrible to their Enemies when they go to fight in War: it is used much in Florida, (a place near the Gulf so called) as I was told when I was in sight of it. If you take two pieces of this Wood,
and strike or rub them hard together, they will sparkle as a Cane, or Flint and Steel; so as that it will light Punck or Tinder. Of the Bark of this Tree is said to be made Lines which will last very long; so that some call them Linum Vivum. The Root is of a grateful taste, used by some instead of Saffron: the Wood of it is good for firing: some prepare it, and put it in Chocolate. Of the Momin-Tree, or Toddie-Tree. SOme of these Trees grow up till they are twelve or fourteen foot high, streight in the body or stem, and ave few branches till within a yard of he top, where they spread forth very rderly round about it; the leaves being ong and green, growing all along on each de of the Boughs, as the leaves on the Willow-twigs are set. Neither the B dy  Boughs of this Tree are very solid, e∣pecially the Boughs, but tender, spngy, nd easily cut: and out of the Boughs
of this Tree (being cut) will issue a tran∣sparent liquor. The body or stem of this Tree being not very big, but rough, the people will climb up to the boughs there∣of, cutting them in such a manner, as they can shut them again as they please; under which hole or cut they usually hang a Gourd or Calabesh, to preserve and take the juyce that issueth out of the branches very plentifully, especially in the night, tying or stopping the place again in the day; or else by the powerfulness of the Sun it flows so freely, that it en∣dangers the loss of the Tree: besides, that which flows in the day is not so good or wholesome as the other, it be∣ing much more crude or raw. This Tree beareth close to the head of it a fruit, al∣most like in form to a Cucumber; and when it is ripe, there are in the middle seeds inwrapped in a white substance: These seeds, after they are taken forth, are of a sparkling yellowish colour. Place. This Tree groweth naturally in the Woods in several places in Jamaica. In the Plantations at Liganee, I have been invited to drink my mornings draught of this pleasant Wine.
Name. It is called by some the Mamin-Tree, or the Mamee-Tree; by others of the Plan∣ters Toddie-Tree: and the liquor or Wine that runneth out is called Toddie-Wine, or Mamee-Wine. This Wine ought to be drunk very moderately, or rather Physically; that is, one glass in a morning, and no more: it is of a penetrating quality; and therefore an excellent Diuretick: it is also most effectual for the preventing and curing the Stone, Collick and Stran∣gury, being applied with judgment, or else it may offend the head; and doubt∣less it may have many other vertues which I am unacquainted with. Of the Pine-Tree. THere are many sorts of Pines, some higher, and some lower; and a∣mongst them all, this may very well be called the Low-Pine, by reason it at∣tains not the height of many we have in England; yet the Tree and Branches do much resemble other Pines; also the fruit is scaly all over, and larger then
the more common Pine-Apples are. It groweth in Jamaica, and other Neighbouring Countries thereabouts. It is called the Pine-Tree, and the fruit thereof Pine-Apples, from the resem∣blance they have with Pines in other parts. The fruit is exceeding pleasant when it is ripe, a better is scarce to be found; very nourishing, and of many uses both in Diet and Medicine: but this rare fruit is altogether a stranger in this Northern part of the World; yet I was told at Barbados, that once a Merchant ordered the matter so, as he brought one perfect∣ly good into England. There is another very remarkable fruit, called a Sowr-sop, which I can give no good account of, because I never saw it grow, yet have eaten of the fruit it self. Of the Cocus, or Coco-nut-tree. THis Tree is, when young, very ten∣der; but as it becomes more lofty, so it grows more solid and strong: the body is straight and smooth, and in cir∣cumference
equals the waste of a man at the full growth: in height, twelve or fourteen foot: round about the top (and so a yard or two down) spring forth many boughs or branches, but without any ork in them, beset very thick with long and slender leaves, almost of a Sea-green colour. At the roots of these boughs, as low as they grow round, about the head of the Tree, grow the fruits or Cocus-nuts. This Nut is at first, whilst it is young, of a green colour; but when they are ripe, they appear outwardly of a brown or whitish brown colour: they are of several sizes, some bigger, and some less: the largest of them are (husk and rinde) two foot in circumference: they are almost o∣val, and their outer rinde is very tough and thready; so fast fixed to the shell, that it is hard to be gotten off: This rinde is nigh an inch thick, under which is a rough strong hard shell, some of them black, and some brown or yellowish. In the top of each of these shells there is three holes, by which the inner cavity receiveth a continual supply of nourish∣ment: Just within this shell, sticking
close thereto, is a milk-white kernel, a∣bout half an inch thick; and the hollow cavity within the kernel is full of a thin, clear, sweet water or juyce, which is as a viand to them. Place. They grow in Jamaica, and in most of the Caribbee-Islands: and in a small I∣sland, called one of the Keys of Cuba, they grow so plentifully, that they have supplyed the wants of at least sixty men for four or five daies time: For I re∣member, a Dutch-man having over-shot his Port, and being in great scarcity of provisions, by reason of contrary Winds at Sea, put some of his men on shore in this Island, where they found plentiful supply of these Nuts for all their Ships Company, who afterwards put into Creen at Jamaica. These Trees are commonly planted on each side of the Walks in their Plantations, and nigh to their dwel∣lings. Time. It groweth green all the year; and as you gather the Nuts, there still grow more, every moneth producing its fruit: and some Trees have fifty or sixty
Nuts at a time growing on them. Name. This Tree is called the Cocus-nut-tree; and after the same name is the fruit call∣ed, i. e. Cocus or Coco-nuts; or else by some Nux-Indica, from the nearness of taste the kernel hath to our Small-nuts. Ʋse. This Tree is of a softish substance, full of moisture; which if you cut, there floweth forth a thin juyce or liquor, such as cometh from our Birch-trees, but much more pleasant; and is ordinarily drunk, and Medicinally used: The Tree being cut down, (which is easily done) and split out into boards, and laid in the Sun to dry, they become very tough; and are durable, to make both the walls or roofs of their houses. I have been told by the Negroes, that in Guinee they take the outer rinde of these Nuts (they being of a fibrous substance) and tease it, and card it out into a kinde of Okam; and then make Ropes and Cordage thereof, and also Sails for their Boats, and such other uses: but in Jamaica they esteem it not, being better furnished with other mate∣rials for that purpose. Of the hard shells
(polished) are made very handsom drink∣ing Cups; for which purpose some use them in England. The kernel is very good Aliment, being moderately eaten; (for else it is apt to oppress the stomack, being somewhat hard of digestion) it is as pleasant in taste as our Small-nut-ker∣nels are: This kernel being stamped, and the milky juyce being first gently squee∣zed forth, and then more hardly pres∣sed, it yieldeth a precious Oyl, both for meat or medicine; good to asswage pains, and to anoint wearied limbs after tra∣vel: the Wine, or liquor within, quench∣eth thirst, refrigerateth the spirits: Also, take the kernel and beat it a little, and put thereto the liquor that came forth of the Nut, and then strain it forth, and it maketh a perfect and pleasant Milk, both in colour and taste; so that it is scarce to be discern'd by them that are not well acquainted with it, but that it is the milk of some Animal. This is fre∣quently used in Jamaica, and is nourish∣ing and corroborating; by which the u∣sual Proverb is made good, that this Nut affordeth both meat, drink and cloth.
Of the Calabass-Tree. THis Tree groweth up almost to the height of our Apple-Trees, but the boughs and branches are more slender and weak: the leaves are smooth, and of a darkish green colour: the fruit groweth scattering all over the Tree, as Apples do, beset with short stems: at the first they are green and soft; but when they are full grown, their outer part or shell hard∣neth almost as a Gourd doth: the exter∣nal green rinde being scraped off, the shell appeareth white: So that if you grave any curious work through the ex∣ceeding thin outer green rinde, and then let it remain till it be dry, it will be ve∣ry neat and handsome; but the green be∣ing dry, becometh of a brown colour. Within this shell are many white seeds, set in a Phlegmatick white substance, much like the pith of a Wall-nut, long before they are ripe; in which there is a liquor that smelleth much like Wine, which I have been told the Indians drink of; but for my own part I like it not. This fruit (for so I think it may proper∣ly
be called, because the Tree bears no o∣ther) is of different sizes; from very small proportion, to the bigness of the greatest Musk-Melon: for shape, some long, some round, some oval: Some of them, when the pith is picked out at a hole in the end, will hold two or three quarts of liquor. Place. They grow plentifully, wilde in the Woods, amongst other Trees, in most places in America. Time. There is of this kinde of crusty fruit growing on the Trees all the year, of all ages; i. e. some in its infancy, some in its youth, some middle aged, and some old and decrepit. Name. They are called Calabash, or Calabaza-Trees, and the fruit is called after the same name: Some call this the Gourd-Tree. Ʋse. There is in these Calabashes a kinde of liquor which smelleth more pleasant then it tasteth, yet some drink thereof. There is made of this fruit all such uses as there
is of the Gourd; i. e. Tobacco-boxes; the pith and seeds being picked out at a little hole: and they being cut in the middle, the Inhabitants make necessary furniture for their houses therewith; as dishes of several sorts, carved, graven and plain; the smaller of them being used to drink their breakfast of Chocolate in the morning, and also as necessary Vessels to drink such other drinks in as the Island affords, as Mobby, Rapp, Per∣rino, Locus-Ale, Rum, &c. which drinks are made of Roots, Fruit, Sugar, &c. some being brewed or prepared every day, (being apt to sower) others for a longer time, as Rum, Locus-Ale, &c. These Boxes are much used to carry some kinde of strong liquor in (as Rum, or Brandy, or the like) in a mans pock∣et, to take now and then a dram to sup∣port the Spirits in walking far, or tra∣velling the Country; it being very ill and dangerous to drink water at such times, as Experience hath taught me, by fainting thereby, in drinking freely there∣of when I was hot with walking.
Of the Cotton-Tree. THis Tree usually groweth up to a reasonable good height, handsome∣ly spreading it self forth on all sides, and is tending towards a brownish green colour: the leaves are small, and point∣ed: it beareth a flower, almost in form like unto the Sweet-Bryer-Rose, but the colour thereof is yellowish; and after the blossoms are fallen, there followeth a kinde of greenish Button, or round Knob, almost as big as a Tennis-ball, having a thin crusty shell; and when it is full ripe, becometh of a blackish colour. Now in these round Buttons is fast shut up the Cotton, which buttons in process of time naturally open themselves in several pla∣ces, out of which the Cotton falleth, if it be not timely gathered; it being full of black seeds that grow inclosed in the same shell, which before it be made use of, are picked forth. Place. It groweth in Jamaica, Barbados, and most other Neighbouring places therea∣bouts.
Time. It flourisheth all the year, as other Trees. Name. It is called by some Algodon, by o∣thers Gossipium; but by us, it is called Cotton. Vertues and Ʋse. The seed of Cotton is said to be good against a Cough, and for such as are short-winded: it stirreth up lust; and the Oyl pressed out, taketh away freckles, pots, and other blemishes of the skin: he ashes of the wood burned, stop the leeding of wounds: the powder there∣of is restringent, and may be used as Bole; as also the Cotton may be apply∣d. Also of this Wooll is made most of he beds they lye in, called Hammacks, or Hammakers, which are tyed up at both nds athwart a room, so that ten men ay very well lodge in one room, and resently in the morning lay by their eds, and have the convenient use of he same until night again; in those parts here being rarely any other used: for uch Beds as we lye in here, do too much eat the body, and weaken Nature there∣by.
Besides this, we see here the daily use of this Wooll in making Fustians, Bumbast, Stockings, Gloves, &c. Of Cotton-bushes, or Shrubs. OF Cotton-bushes there are two sorts; the one sort growing up like small Rose-bushes, the other more like unto a Vine that is not supported, whose leaves are almost like them of the Parsley, Grape-Vine, or of the Herb Vervaine, but smoother: it hath many yellow Flowers; those being fallen off, there remain ma∣ny little Cods, bigger and rounder then a Bean-Cod, of which the substance with∣in at first is yellowish; but when they are ripe, the outer crusty covering breaks, and in a short time that within becomes Wooll as white as milk, which the peo∣ple gather for uses; amongst which is a blackish seed, which they keep together to sow again, as they have occasion. Place. It groweth in many places in America in their Plantations; and as I have heard, is much like that which groweth nigh unto the Mediterranean-Sea, in Arabia,
Egypt, Cicilia, &c. as also that in East-India. Time. This Seed is sown, in some Countries, n the plowed Fields in the Spring, and t down at Harvest, as our Corn is; nd the ground stercorized, tilled, and well ordered again for the next year: or in some places one sort of these Shrubs is a Plant but of one years conti∣uance; but in the Indies, that I chiefly peak of, bears Wooll three or four years efore it is supplanted, as I was inform∣d. Ʋse. The use of this is the same with the ormer, for all intents and purposes; and f the best of this Cotton-wooll is made he very finest Calicoes that are. Of the Bonana-Tree. THis Tree doth very much resemble an Herby substance; and some of hem attain to the height of five or six ards (if we consider the leaves and all) nd some are lower, according to the ood or bad quality of the ground they
are planted in: The bodies (of the largest siz'd of them) attain to the circumfe∣rence of a mans middle, at the lower end thereof; growing taper or smaller up∣wards, as other Trees do: yet these Trees, when they come to their full growth, even then they are of so soft and spungy a nature, that a man may with three or four stroaks with an Axe fell them down to the ground; nay, you may with a good strong knife quickly cut them off a yard from the ground. When they are a yard, or four or five foot high, the leaves spring out of the top, and begin to spread themselves; and as those flourish, and the Tree increaseth in height, so there is more and more leaves spring forth; some of which the Plan∣ters break off, that they may not become too burthensome to the Tree. These leaves are some of them a yard and half long, and half an Ell, or more, in breadth, as I have measured them in the Plantations in Jamaica: they are of a dark green colour, and on the upper side very smooth; on the lower side, they have a big sinew or rib, running a∣long the middle thereof, like unto a Col∣wort-leaf;
on each side of which (as from the Spinal) smaller ribs extend themselves: and among the leaves, to∣wards the bottom of them, about the head of the body of the Tree, comes forth the fruit, beset round about the stem a foot, or a foot and a half in length, big∣ger then a mans thumb; all growing close to one another on their stalk, or soft stem, so that they touch each o∣ther; and to the number of twenty, thir∣y, or forty on a stem: at first green; but when it is ripe, tending to a yellow∣sh colour; a bunch of which being cut off (if they are of the biggest) is as much s a man can well lift with one hand; ike the bunch of Grapes mentioned in Holy Writ. The outer part of this fruit s to be peeled off, which is in substance lmost like unto a Green-Bean-shell, but ofter: under which shell the meat ap∣eareth softer then the most mellow Pear; n form almost round; about three or our inches in circumference, and in ength about five or six inches, being ipe: which outer rinde doth then very sily peel off from the mat; but until t be full ripe, it is very hardly separated:
The meat thereof is of a very mellowish tate and substance, without either seeds, stones, or kernels in it. Place. These Trees grow in many places in America, as in most of the Caribbee-I∣slands. In Jamaica they plant them n their houses, especially on each side their Walks, for shade and ornamen Also they plant them by the Cacao Trees whilst they are young, to shade the from the excessive heat of the Sun: th prosper best in low and fat ground. once walking under the pleasant shad of these Trees with some of my Nati Countrymen, who at that time had Plan¦tations in Jamaica, and there inhabit amongst other discourses (I being th but a meer stranger) told me how wo¦derful fast this Tree did grow, wh words then I could scarcely credit: b to y the truth thereof, one of th with his knife cut off a young Plant Tree in the middle, and so we left it dinner-time, which was about the spa of two hours; and then returning ag t view it, we found the middle pa t te stock we had before cut off, gro
forth more then a compleat inch: and many other things as strange and won∣derful, as that I could hardly credit or believe from bare report, till mine eyes had seen them. Time. From or near the Roots of the larger Trees, shoot forth young Sprigs or Suck∣ers, which are usually taken up for in∣crease, at any time whatsoever; for they flourish and bear fruit the whole year round. Name. These Trees are called Bonano, or Bo∣nana-Trees; and the fruit thereon are called Bonanas, both by Spanish, Negroes, and English Planters; although some say they are called Palan, or Pican; but I doubt they mistake the fruit. Vertues. This fruit is excellent good both for meat and medicine; good for the Reins, Kidneys, and to provoke Urine, and it s said to nourish the Childe in the Womb: but being immoderately eaten, t oppresseth the stomack, especially of the Inhabitants; for our hot stomacks carry off a greater quantity without any of∣fence,
as I have many times made tryal: It is excellent good food in time of scar∣city, very nourishing, exhilerating, and provoking to Venery; and although they are said to be purging to some if they are freely eaten, yet they are also good a∣gainst a Flux, and that a Dysenteria, as my self have made tryal. When they are full ripe, the Planters peel them, and ma∣cerate the meat, either alone, or with boiled Potatoes and water, &c. and make very good drink thereof. These, and ma∣ny other uses are made of this fruit; which if they are not full ripe when they are first gathered, the bunches hang'd up in their houses soon come to maturity. Of the Plantan-Tree. THis Tree is in all respects so n like unto the Bonano-Tree befor-mentioned, that if you see not the fruit it is hard to distinguish them; only there be any difference, it is, that thi Tree is rather the bigger in body, lo∣tier, and the leaves rather longer an broader: the fruit groweth in great bun∣ches as the other doth, but bigger an
heavier: at first green, there being many together upon one stalk; but when they are ripe, both the rinde and meat within becometh more yellow then the Bonana: they are in form like the Bonana, that is, almost round, but somewhat bigger in circumference, and longer; and are also crooked, or a little incurvated. Place. It groweth as plentifully in Jamaica, and other adjacent places, as the Bonana-Tree doth; and is planted for all such purposes as that is, and esteemed the principal of the two. Time. It is planted at any time, and groweth up very speedily, as the before-specified Tree doth. Name. The Negroes, which were heretofore the Spaniards Slaves, call it the Plantan-Tree, and the fruit Plantans; and so do we call it after the same name: yet some call it by the name of Palan, which I think is more properly attributed to this then the other: this is the Male, and the other the Female, as some think.
Vertues. This fruit hath all the vertues that the Bonana hath, but more powerfully; it is soft, mellow, the outer peling being taken off, and rather pleasanter in tast: they are of excellent use both in Mat and Medicine. Of the Indian Cabbage-Tree. TO tell some people that there is such a Tree in the world (as I here men∣tion) will I know seem ridiculous, and a meer fable: but I shall endeavour here to let fall nothing from my pen but the truth. This Tree groweth to a great height, the Body or Trunk thereof being straight, smooth and herby, or not very solid, and few boughs or branches on the lower part; but towards the top, there spring forth many small twigs or branches, with∣out any fork at all, beset on each sid with small and long leaves, almost like unto the Date-Tree: Some of thse Tree grow to the height of twenty, thirty o forty foot; which may seem incredibe but it is not so strange as true. This Tr
is not hard and solid, but may easily be cut down; and that part which is called te Cabbage, is a yard or two, or less or more off of the top, according as the Tree is in age and height: it is external∣ly green; but the outr-side being taken away, within there appeareth a more white substance then our Cabbages have, and more close and firm, one fold incom∣passing close upon another, which may easily be separated. Place. This Tree groweth (as I have been told) in several of the Caribbees; but for my own part, I never saw it, or eat of it, in any other place thu Jamai∣ca. They grow near unto the fresh-w∣ter river, as you go from Cagaway to the Pssage-fort, far within Ln, where thy usually fetch Chalk or Lm for buiding; bt it groweth naturally in o∣ther places of that Island. Tim. It flourisheth all th year; for the last time  eat of it there, was in Chritmass, in the yea —60. Nam. I never heard by what name either the
Spaniards or Negroes called this Tree, but our English Planters call it the Cabbage-Tree; and very fitly they may, from the resemblance or similitude it hath with our Cabbages here. Ʋse. The lower part of this Tree being cut out into boards (which is easily done) and set up in the Sun for a time to dry, are very good to make up the walls of houses, to bound Gardens and Plantati∣ons, &c. for which purpose they are very durable. So much of the top as is white and pretty soft, which is the Cabbage it self, being cut, and one fold taken from another, and well boiled, is very good A∣liment, eaten with Butter and Vinegar, and doth very well agree with our hot stomacks, while we are in health, being eaten moderately; which otherwise is windy, apt to oppress the stomack, and offend the head; especially in those that have lived any long time there, by reason of the weakness and decay of natural heat.
Of the American Physick-nut: THis Tree groweth up to no great height, and in the Stem it grow∣eth to no great bigness, but many toge∣ther confusedly, as our Privet doth, but is not at all like it in resemblance or shew, but doth more represent the Fig-tree; yet the leaves of this Tree are not nigh so broad, but longer and softer, end∣ing in two or three points; which being wet, are very apt to stain. This Tree beareth several yellowish flowers, which in due time fall away; and after them there succeeds a Nut or Button, as big as a reasonable Wall-nut, but round; which at the first is green and soft, after∣wards it is harder and yllowish; but be∣ng quite ripe, it becometh more hard, and of a brown or black colour: but his outer shell being thin, is easily bro∣ken; or if it be let grow long, they will naturally open of themselves in three se∣eral places: for there are three distinct artitions in this outer shell (being open∣d) divided by a skin or pellicle, like that which divideth the kernel in a Wall-nut:
in every one of these three partitions there is a Nut (for I never saw more in one outer shell) of the bigness of a Horse-bean, or a little bigger then Pish∣tatoe-Nuts are; but these are oval in form, except the inner side of them, which is naturally a little flttish, for th btter growing of them close toether. The shell of these inclosed Nuts is not much thiker or harder then a dy Acorn∣shell is, being as smooh as thy are, b of colour very black, all vr inlaid w small mlk-white veins, or streaks, an on the top of each a very white spc which in my opinion adds more com∣ness to them, then Black-Spots do to L∣dies and Gentlewomen. Place. These Trees grow very frquently many pars of America, in most of t Caribbee Islands: in Jamaica I had them; but the most tha I ever saw w in Barbados. These Trees are o planted, and are fit boundaries to the Gardes and Plantations, serving to h Cloaths thereon whilst they are dry for bing wet, they are very apt to st Linen.
Time. The time for them is always: for as the common course of Nature is, as one goeth, so another comes. Name. These Nuts are most famiiarly called with us Physick-nuts, or th American Physick-nuts, as growing most frquent∣ly in those parts: but by some it is called Nux-Indica, and Nuces Purgantes and Vo∣micae; or the Nuts that do purge upwards and downwards at one and the same time. It is only the kernel of this inner Nut that is made use of in Physik; and of that too, only the thin film or skin that nwrappth them, which doth work the effect: for if this outer thin skin be peeld off, which is just under the shell when they are cracked, you may safely eat many kernels together without any disturbance at all, as I have for tryal of∣tn done; and for the pleasantnss there∣of, being not much differnt from the taste of our Wall-nut krnes when they are so peeled, I have eaten to the number of twenty or thirty at a time, or more; and that newly taken from the Trees,
which are then more operative then afterwards, when they are dryer; for three of them newly gathered, and taken skin and all, (especially those three that grow together, for there is a great mat∣ter in that) will sufficiently work in a young weak body, especially such as are Naturaliz'd to that Air, three being the ordinary Dose; (given in order, as pur∣ging Physick ought to be given:) but for stronger bodies, five, seven or nine are sometimes given; for they always ob∣serve to give an odd one; but for my part, I sound that six or eight wrought as well: the number increased with dis∣cretion, will work with any Constituti∣on; and they work Sursum & Deorsum, upwards and downwards; and that mo∣derately, and with far more safety upon those bodies, then any Chymical prepa∣ration whatsoever: the certainty of which, either by preparation or transportation, being nothing but uncertainty. These Nuts being administred Secundum Artem, work very notable effects on the body of man, even beyond expectation; although that cannot be expcted here, because thy grow dry by Transportation, how
carefully soever they be kept, and loose much of their Natural Vertue. These are necessary for such Chirurgions of Ships as go not well fitted into those parts, to preserve their Chests and store of Phy∣sick to make use of at Sea, when no o∣ther is to be had. Thy purge out all togh, viscous and naughty humours that clog and disturb the body: it is not at all burthensome to Nature, as I have seen by more then ordinary tryal: for one of our Ships Company hapning amongst them, did crack and eat the kernels, film and all, (for they have a very good re∣lish) before he knew what they were, thirty or forty at the least; yet he came off very well, and thought himself the healthier the whole Voyage after there∣by: and I think no Chymical Physick that worketh after that manner, exceed∣ing so much in quantity, but would have destroyed a man as strong as Goliah. Much more might be said in the praise of these Nuts, but I leave it to the Learn∣ed to make a more diligent search into the secret nature thereof; only I think I may fitly say, Non datur majus Secretum, f it were truly tryed.
Of the Manchinelo-Tree. I Here mention this Tree, rather for the strangeness of the fruit, then for any use I have ever made of it; and to let some know that there is such a Tree in America, that whosoever shall travel there as I have done, may have timely notice of the same, if he first happen to read this. It attaineth to a reasonable height, and spreadeth much like unto the Wilding r Crab-tree that is of an ordinary size or bigness; but the boughs are somewhat slenderer and weaker, and the leav thereof not much different, but only a little longer and sharper-pointed: the blossoms are somewhat like those of the Apple-tree: the fruit at first is green; and when it is ripe, of a fair yellowih colour, as round as a Ball, and about the bigness of a midling Crab. These Trees are commonly very full of fruit, o∣verspread as many of our Crab-Trees are; so alluring and inviting in shew that thinking upon the Apples and Crab in England, I could (as I have walkd a∣mongst them) hardly forbear tasting
thereof, being sometimes very dry; not but that there is store of excellent wa∣ter, but in the Woods it is not easily found, unless you happen upon the track or some wilde beasts to direct you there∣unto. Place. These Trees grow frequently in the Woods at Jamaica wilde. Time. They flourish all the year, and have blossoms, green fruit, and ripe on them, which fall down; so that there is some∣times several bushels at a time lying un∣der a Tree, some sound, and some rot∣ten. Name. I never heard it called by any other name then the Manchinelo-Tree, or the Manchinil-Apple-Tree. Vertues. Although these Apples be so poyson∣ous, as it is said that one of them as big as a Tennis-ball being eaten, may poyson two men; yet I believe there may (with serious consideration and diligent inqui∣ry into those secrets in Nature) be very good opiative Medicines prepared there∣of;
for the Supreme Orderer of all things hath made nothing in vain: and there∣fore I commend it to the Learned and Curious Searchers hereafter more cir∣cumspectly to pry into. There are other opiative or poysonous Fruits, Roots, &c. but the danger of them is easily avoid∣ed, if we consider, that the Fowls of the Air have such a natural knowldge, that they will not light on these Trees, much less eat of the fruit: neither will the wilde-swine meddle with any hurtful root, or fruit that falleth from the Trees: so much is man (by our first Parents trans∣gression) become inferiour in natural knowledge to a beast: And it is an ob∣servation with those that come into strange Regions, that they may freely eat of those fruits and roots that the Fowls and Hogs eat of, without danger, as be∣fore is hinted. Of the American Plum-trees. THere are in the Island of Jamaica many and different sorts of Plum-Trees; to give a description of all which, were too tedious for my intended brevi∣ty.
The fruit of these Trees, in external appearance, resembles some Plums we have here in England, from which si∣militude they take their names: 'Tis ve∣ry sweet in taste; the stone within is big and porous, like a Pumice-stone. Place. They grow naturally wilde in the Woods, and are also planted near unto their houses in the Islands, where there is store of Inhabitants. Time. They flourish all the year, the Sun and Earth affording them that benefit beyond what they do in England; which doth a∣dorn them with goodly colours, and a∣non disrobe them again. Name. They are called the Indian-Plum-Trees, from the resemblance the fruit hath with some Plums in England: by some they are called Icaco, &c. Ʋse. They are much sweeter in taste then any of our Plums are, and do soon cloy the appetite of those that eat them.
Of the Tree called Manyoe; of the Root of which the Indian Bread is made, which they call Casava. THis Plant or low Tree groweth up to the height of a man, or higher, if we consider the branches and all: the body is not very big, from which several slender boughs grow: the leaves are narrow and pointed; smooth, and of a whitish, or tending to a willow-green-co∣lour: I never observed what flower o fruit it beareth; the roots thereof be∣come very big and white, of several shapes; for the use of which it is much planted, much after the same manner as Sugar-Canes are. Place. It groweth in Jamaica, Barbads, M∣vis, and most of the other Caribbe-I∣slands; and is no great stranger in m parts of America. Time. They plant it at any time, according to their greatest conveniency.
Name. The Tree is called Manyoc, or Man∣yoth; but the bread that is made of the roots thereof, is generally known by the name of Casava, or Casader, or as some call it, Cassawder. Vertues. As for the leaves and plant it self, I know not the vertues of it; only the use of the Root is familiarly known to most Planters, who at times convenient, when they have occasion, dig it up, and make it very clean; and then they have a wooden wheel made to turn, as our Grinding-stones are: this wheel is a∣thwart the circumference, about a foot broad, upon which is made fast a piece of Tyn or Iron, full of holes, as our Gratrs are; upon which one holding the Root, and another turning the Wheel, they grate it small, there being a Trough put under the wheel whereinto it falleth; then they take this grated substance, and lay it on a plain thing they have for the same purpose, as broad as the bottom of a Bushel or Sive; and then press forth the juyce or moisture thereof very clean and dry: (this moisture or juyce is poy∣sonous)
then do they take these Cakes, being thus prest, which are about half an inch thick, and lay them on an Iron Pan of a suitable circumference, being placed on Bricks; so that a fire may be made un∣der it, as Castr-makers do where they Block their Castors, to bring them into a handsome shape. Upon this Iron they lay these flat Cakes, as they take them out of the Press, making a moderate fire under, and turning them, and baking them leisurely, till they are very hard and dry; and then they lay them up in their houses for daily bread. These Cakes will last good a quarter or half a year. This Casava will dissolve in cold water, but in any thing that is hot it dissolveth not so soon; but rather mollifies, and remains in a lump. Some use it to thicken Cho∣colate: it is not very clammy; and there∣fore nourisheth not very much, neither hath it a very grateful taste alone. Of the Indian Pock-wood. THis Tree groweth up to a stately height and bigness, the Body straight and upright, and hath a smoo
and whitish Bark, much like unto that of the Birch-Tree: Some of them I sup∣pose in the biggest part, may carry a foot or sixteen inches square, and twenty foot in length: the leaves, as also the twiggy boughs and branches, are not much un∣like those of the Birch-Tree, which spread forth pretty largely, especially towards the top. The fruit groweth close to the boughs: at first green; but when it is ripe, it is blackish, and sweet in taste. Place. It groweth plentifully in Jamaica; e∣specially in the Woods at Liganee, and thereabout. Time. The Sun and Earth are so bountiful to this and other Trees in Jamaica, that they put not off their beautiful every-daies Robes, the whole year round. Name. It is called by some Pock-wood, because it is often used for that Distemper; by others; Lignum Vitae, or Guaiacum Pata∣tinum. Vertues. This Tree beareth a Gum which is of excellent use in Chirurgery: the wood
hereof is Diaphoretick, and of great va∣lue, and may be effectually used for that Disease, from whence it hath its name of Pock-wood: and I think it is deservedly called Wood of Life, being rightly consi∣dered; but it looseth much of its worth by Emperical Pretenders; for which cause I shall forbear to speak more of the pro∣per use thereof, according to true Art and Judgment. Of the Mechoacan. THis Mechoacan groweth up with ma∣ny long trailing flexible branchs, interlacd with divers Viny Tendrls, which take hold, clasp and climb, almst like black Briony, or Wilde-Vine; whr∣unto it is very like, almost in all respects, saving that his mossie flowers do smell very sweet. This is much like the Briony of Mexico. Place. It groweth in the Caribbee-Islands, Mexico, &c. Time. It flowreth as other Trees and Herbs.
Name. It is called Mechoacan, or Indian-Bri∣ony, or Briony, or Scamony of America. Vertues. It purgeth both phlegme and watrish humours, and may be given from one to two drams in Wine, distilled Water or Broth; or in case of necessity, some other Vehicle: it is given with good success in all such distempers as proceed from phleg∣matick and cold humours: it is good a∣gainst the Head-ach that hath continued long, old Coughs, straightness of brea∣thing, the Cholick, pain of the kidneys and joynts, and the diseases of the Reins and Blly, as the Iliaca-passio, &c. It may be prepared and used with good success many ways, by an able-hand. Of the Mangrove-Tree. I Am now almost come to the Bank∣side, (where at first I set my foot on shore) ready to take shipping for England again; but before I leave the Land, I care not if I take a more strict view of this Tree; more for the rarity of the fruit it beareth, thn for the strangeness of the Tree it self.
This Tree never groweth to be very high, neither doth the body of it come to be very big in bulk; nor do they grow single by themselves, but many spring up from one root, spreading themselves al∣most like our Oller-Trees here, which commonly grow by fresh-water-rivers: the leaves are smaller then Apple-tree-leaves, smooth, and of a dark green co∣lour: the roots grow together strangely confused all along on the banks by the Sea side, joyning in a wonderful contex∣ture, without any intermission, for a mile or two; or for any thing I know, it might continue so five, tn miles, or more together; which in some sense may make good the saying related by Travel∣lers of a Tree-twenty miles long: and the greatest rarity is, that quite contrary to other Trees, all the fruit that I ever saw it bear (if it may be called fruit) groweth on the roots: for the Sea ha∣ving washed off the Earth clean from some of the roots of these Trees which grow along by the banks side, and hang down into the water; there cling to it, and grow an infinite sight of Oysters, like unto our Oysters brought to Billings∣gate:
And here is made good the say∣ing which seemeth so incredible to some, who write thus: Beyond the Seas, I know not where, Are Trees, men say, which Oysters bear: That Oysters should be bred so high, Methinks it soundeth like a lye. But I can verifie this to be true, that Oysters grow when they are upon the Trees, although they are not the off∣spring and natural productions of the same. Place. It groweth in many places by the Sea∣side in Jamaica: on the shore by Caga∣ay-Harbour, over by Liganee-side, on he Star-board side, as we pass from the oint to the Passage-Fort, they grow plen∣ifully, where I have with good com∣any often eat of them. Time. Here they may be had at any time of he year, where the Islanders often car∣ their friends to be merry, and eat ysters, and that they may gather them ff the Trees themselves; and if they re∣lish
not so well as those at Fishstreet-Hi it may be with good reason allowed; f the sawce to these is seldom so charge¦able. Name. This Tree is most familiarly called t Mangrove-Tree, or by some the Oys-Tree, because they hang so fast upon roots that grow under the water. Ʋse. The wood of this Tree cut dow splitteth exceeding easily; and being a while in the Sun to dry, is excell firing, and good to store ships with so good, that there is no better to found. The Oysters that grow there are good aliment, nourishing, and ring up bodily lust; but they are s thing more loathsome and sweet th our Oysters are; so that very many once are seldom eaten, by which S fits are avoided. Of Semper-Vivens. THis Herb, or Plant, hath  growing immediately from on¦ly without stalks, almost like the
Aloes, or Sea-Onion; but these are broad∣er and thicker in substance, and sharper pointed. The leaves are smoothe all o∣ver, except on the edges of each leaf, which are finely nickt or dentilated: they are at least a foot, or a foot and half in length, and are full of a clammy juyce, like the leaves of House-leek: these leaves grow and spread round about the head of one stalk, which is three or four inches about; all which are of a bright green colour: this Stem is a foot or a foot and half in length, the leaves turn∣ing a little down again; the root is made up of many small and fibrous branches. Place. It groweth in divers places in Ameri∣ca, i. e. Jamaica, S. Christophers, Nevis, Barbados, &c. Time. This Herb is always green, from whence it hath its name: it being taken up by the root, and a cloth dipped in Oyl of Olives, and tyed about the stem there∣of, it may be brought into England, and hang'd up in some Room where it may be safe from frost: it lasteth very long in its natural form.
Name. It is called by some Semper-Vivum, or Semper-Vivum Marinum, because it last∣eth long, after the manner of House-leek: but others call it Semper-Vivens, alway living, for that it is always green. Vertues. This Herb hath many vertues in Phy∣sick; it purgeth very effectually; it pre∣serveth from putrefaction; it is effectual∣ly good against all hot Aposthemes an Inflammations, if it be rightly applied; and is excellent against Burning and Scalding, by hot Water, Gunpowder &c. I might here speak of many Ever-greens and also of some Flowers, Shrubs, &c raised by Seeds; but not meeting wit an opportunity for a second Voyage in¦to those parts of the World, I canno now speak of them as I would, especiall of such as are of chief note, as are no yet reconciled to our cold Country. Of a Jessamin-Tree or Bush. THis Tree or Shrub called a Jessamin is much like, in all respects, to th
Spanish Jessamin; which several have written of already, and therefore I need not describe it here. Some say, that the Spanish Jessamin came at first from Spain nto America; and others think, that in Spain came first from America: How∣ver, I suppose it is the same in both pla∣es: it beareth a white and exceeding ragrant Flower, of which there is more r less growing thereon all the year. These Flowers the Inhabitants gather, nd by infusion and expression make a wonderful sweet Oyl, very thick, almost ke unto Jessamin-Butter: then do they with a sweet Gum, and odoriferous Pow∣ers, temper it, until it become like unto oft Wax, or Paste of several colours; nd every colour of different scent, made p by it self, and all exceeding sweet: his Oyl being the Basis or chief ingre∣ent, they put it into Silver or Tortoise∣ell Boxes, wherein are several Partiti∣s, which will there keep good for some ears; and these Perfumes are of great va∣e: and when they make use of them, ey take a little of any one of them, nd rub it between their hands, and it ill presently perfume a whole Room. I
once met with a German aboard a Dutch∣man of War, that had the like Perfume of six sorts, who told me, that it came from the East-Indies; and he was per∣swaded that this Oyl (before it was made up into Paste) was such as that precious Oyntment or Spikenard so much used a∣mongst the Jews, especially at the Buri∣al of their Dead. Of the Cacao-Tree and Fruit. SO wonderfully numerous are those works of the Creator which are dai∣ly exposed to our view, that did we af∣ford but part of them our serious regard, the common age of man would be too short a space to admire them sufficient∣ly. Should we then employ our selves in a curious observance of the varieties o objects, whether of animated or inani∣mated Bodies, and take exact notice o the various distinctions in things of th same Species; what time would be re∣quisite to discover the particular diffe∣rences, and to express the greatness o our admiration! The forms of things are so exceeding¦ly
varied, that even those bodies which re nearest in resemblance, appear to the yes of an accurate observer, not to be asily distinguisht by some of their re∣markable qualities, as in figure, colour, or the like. Faces of the greatest likeness ave constantly some characteristical dif∣erence, to keep them from an exact simi∣itude. Such also are the diversities of Countries, which if compared in their uperficies, how great is the disagree∣ment! Should I attempt to particularize he productions thereof, or endeavour to give an account wherein each Individual (though of the same kinde) is diversified,  should enter upon an endless task: But my designe in the following part is to single out one Forreign Plant or Tree more, not mentioned until even now, and o to discours thereof; that by comparing t with som Trees known to us hre, I may give the Readr something a more prfect dscription of its first growth, to the time of its imparting that Fruit, which is the chiefest ingredient of the de∣servedly-esteemed Drink called Choco∣late.
Description. Of these Trees, there are several sorts which grow to a reasonable height: the bodies of the largest do usually arrive in bulk (although not in talness) to the largeness of our English Plum-Trees: they are in every part smoothe; and the boughs and branches thereof extend themselves on every side, to the propor∣tion of a well-spread Tree, much re∣sembling our Heart-Cherry-Tree (so de∣nominated from the similitude the fruit hath with a Heart) but at its full growth 'tis dilated to a greater breadth in com∣pass, and is something loftier: There's little difference in the leaves, these being pointed, but smoother on the edges, and in colour of a darker green, more like the leaves of an Orange-Tree; the flow∣ers thereof are almost of a Saffron-co∣lour: Immediately after the appearance of these, the fruit proceeds from the boughs and branches, not admitting of any intermedium, or stem, as Apples do. These Trees commonly bear fruit within seven years space, or less, after their first Plantation; though in the interim they are sometimes twice or thrice removed,
and great care taken to secure them with shades of Plantane and Bonana-Trees, that they may not be injured by the o∣ver-powerful heat of the scorching Sun, of which they are not in danger, when they once become great, being then ena∣bled to shelter and defend each other. Of the External or Putami∣nous part of the Fruit. BEfore we come to the sight of the Cacao's themselves, 'tis necessary we take a view of the rinde or crusty sub∣stance, wherein they are inclosed as ker∣nels. This at first is green; and as it increa∣seth in bigness, so it changeth in shape and colour, until they are throughly ripe: Some of them are shaped like those Ap∣ples here which are almost round: some n shape resemble Cucumbers; but most of them are oval, not much unlike Me∣ons: They are of all sizes, from the big∣ness of a Wilding or Crab, to that of our greatest Pears, or rather to the mid∣le sort of Musk-Melons, and have such
a kinde of external crusty substance, but not so thick; and being cut but a little, the kernels do forthwith appear: Besides, the outward part of this fruit, (other∣wise then in the Melon) in most of them, is set off (as if it were for ornament) with smooth bunches or knobs, even as some Watches are beset with Pearls; which protuberances do equal in bigness the end of a finger, but extend not far out, much resembling those bunches that are sometimes seen on the sides of an Apple. The nearer they approach to maturity, their greenish colour becomes also mor and more striped, with reddish or rath Pink-coloured veins, especially on tha side towards the Sun: as may be percei¦ved by the growing more or less rd some Apples in England: (yet all on th same Tree, accordingly as they are mor or less in the Sun or shade) by which co¦lour, and the usual time of the year fo such Harvest (which is about January an May) the Planters very well know the ripeness.
Of the Kernels of this Fruit, or the Cacao's themselves. THe external husk or rinde being broken or cut in the middle-part of the fruit, there appear the Kernels, which are the Cacao's themselves, inclosd in a film, and a white phlegmatick substance of a pleasant sweet relishing taste, in which these Cacao's have their beginning, as Animals in the Colliquamentum. This is like unto a milk-white jelly, which will dissolve or melt in the mouth: In some of these fruits there is more, in some fewer of these Kernels or Cacao's, according to the bulk and bigness of the fruit: In some are a dozen, in some twen∣ty, in others thirty or mor. These Cacao's are in bigness about the size of some Almonds, but not altogethr so flat, environed with a very thin film or cuticle, and are (before they are ripe) whitish; but when they be full ripe, of a darkish red colour; and when cured, they then become more blackish, or more tending to the colour of a Bullocks Kid∣ney;
and when they are broken, have such parts and partitions in them as a Bullocks Kidney hath: In all which cran∣nies or crevices thre remaineth an oyly moisture. When this fruit is ripe, as is well known by the outward appearance thereof, and by the usual moneths of gathering them, which is twice in t year (viz. about January and May) af∣ter they are gathered, then they cut the outward rinde or substance, (which is af∣terwards of little or no use) taking out all the kernels; and claning them from that sliminess wherein they wre invol∣ved, they do lay them on Sheets and Mats, which they have for the same pur∣pose, in the Sun, and so carefully dry and cure thm: and these Kernels, or Ca∣cao's, is the principal ingredient in Choco∣late; of which Cacao's there are several sorts, differing in quality very much, ac∣cording to the difference of the Tree whereon they grow (whose fruit in seve∣ral Countries is much different in big¦ness) and especially according to the pla¦ces from whence they come; as thos which grow in Mexico, are not in all re¦spects (how wel soever cared) like unt
them in Jamaica: and so for those in Nicaragua, Soconusca, Guatimala, &c. by reason these places are in somewhat dif∣ferent Climates and Degrees; but we shall speak for the most part of those in Jamaica. These Cacao's, when they be well cu∣red, are bitterish in taste, and are also fat or oyly; and in quality, moderatly cold and dry, as some think; because, say they, the Indian women and others com∣ing thither, and eating them dry, without either grinding or beating, or any other alteration, they then prove to be of an astringent nature, causing obstructions; and thereby those women (say they) be∣come Leucophlegmatical, and look of a whitish colour. But in this I conceive there is a great mistake; for it is natu∣ral to those Regions (by reason of heat) for all women (how ruddy soever they are when they first come there) to alter their complexions, and in short time become pale or yellowish: and doubtless women in England might eat a long time of these Cacao's, before they would finde any al∣teration or change thereby in themselves: And I have my self eaten in Jamaica,
and at Sea, great quantities of them; neither did I finde any sensible difference at all thereby: Indeed, there is great care to be taken in the choice of them, espe∣cially of such as are brought into Eng∣land, that you chuse them that are well cured, well tasted, not musty, mouldy, or much venny within when they are broken; and such as seem fat and oyly are best: Also pick forth all those which are corrupt, before you make use of the rest. The truth is, how well soever they may seem to be cured when they are in the place where they grow, and how carefully soever stowed in the Ship; yet by transportation, the Air of different places hath such an operation upon them, that many are corrupted and spoiled be∣fore they arrive here; and so they are often, by reason of moisture, soon after∣wards, if they are not carefully look'd unto, dryed, and used in time. And be∣sides this, the Cacao's, how well soever cured at first, have yet remaining in them a certain oyliness, or thin moisture, which is apt to tend to corruption, in all the chinks and little crevices all over them, which seem whitish when broken; and
therefore must the use of them, in that respect only, be somewhat different from what they are in their Native Climate, fresh and new; and the more decayed they are, the greater the difference is: So that I am perswaded there is no better Chocolate to be had in England, then that which Mariners and Sea-men bring; which is made up in the Country where the Cacao's naturally grow. In Jamaica there is a sort of Choco∣late made up of only the Paste of the Cacao it self, in rowls or lumps of a pound or two, or three pound together, the better for keeping good; which the peo∣ple there account most ordinary, by rea∣son they bestow not so much pains as to grinde it into the smallest particles; and being but grosly made up, they grate it very fine, immediately before they use it for drinks: And this is one of the best masses of Chocolate-Paste that is; and it may be had often here in England, neat and good, of Merchants and Sea-men that travel to those parts, and bring it over: nor is it at all material or conveni∣ent that it be always beaten into such ve∣ry small parts, the different Airs it will
meet with before it come here, being thereby the more apt to work upon it: Besides, it doth dissipate the spirits, which are naturally volatile, and soon vanish a∣way, leaving the rest much more insipid; and therefore an indifferent respect must be used in the beating or grinding of it. Place. These Trees grow in America in di∣vers places, especially in the Spanish Do∣minions; as in Nicaragua, New Spain, Mexico, Cuba, Hispaniola, &c. and in Ja∣maica they grow plentifully at a place called by the name of Colonel Barring∣ton's Quarters or Plantations▪ (so called, by reason he had the first possession and command of them after the English came thither:) and in the Long-Walk there grow very many; as also in divers other places of that Island, in less numbers. They prosper best in low ground, and in fat and rank earth, which must al∣ways, before they are planted, be laid in good order, and cleared from all kinde of rubbish and incumbrances; and then they are planted, it may be many hun∣dreds together, sufficiently furnishing ten or twelve Acres of ground, or more or
less, according as the Planters interest extends, or as the place happeneth to lye convenient for that purpose. These Trees are for the most part squarely and orderly set, about six, seven or eight foot distance from each other, as the Cherry-Trees in Kent or Worcester∣shire are planted; all the insterstices or spaces between them being kept clean from long grass, and all other such of∣fensiveness as might be any way likely to hinder the force of the ground, or them from their increase in growth. And under these Trees (especially those which are nigh their houses) they keep the grass between the rows evenly cut, and the ground rowled, so that the Greens are pleasant to walk in at any time of the day, the Trees covering and shading all the ground. These Trees were long since planted in Jamaica by the Spaniards, and were of great esteem and much benefit; and so they are now with the English Planters; and with great reason indeed, for they deserve no less, if we seriously consider the benefit they afford to all, as well Strangers as Natives, or those that are Naturaliz'd.
Time. These Trees remain green all the year, the Earth and Sun especially being so favourable to them, as not to disrobe them of their Forrest-Livery: They have blows, and more or less fruit always on them; although for conveniency the Planters gather the most of the fruit as nigh one time as they can; i. e. one crop about the latter end of January, or in February; and the other in the moneth of May, or first part of June; which are, for the most part, the principal times of Harvest for this fruit. Name. This Tree hath received many names, and also the fruit: in Jamaica it is ge∣nerally known by the name of the Cacao-Tree, and the fruit thereof Cacao's. In New Spain, Guatimala, Mexico, &c. this Tree is called by some Carava, Quavitl or Cacavatl; by others Caca∣tl, or Cacaoatl; and the fruit hath been so called: but now the fruit thereof is most generally known by the name of Cacao's, and the Trees are known by their fruit. I see no reason why they should be
called Cacao-Nuts, and not rather Ker∣nels; sor they are the kernels of a fruit, and therefore I think they ought more properly to be called Cacao-Kernels then Cacao-Nuts: neither have they any shell at all, from whence a Nut hath its name. These are the Kernels of which the so∣much-fam'd Chocolate is made; a Drink in great request, and well known to most parts of Christendome. This drink called Chocolate, taketh its name, as some think, from the sound which is made by stirring it in the Pot with the Molinet or Chocolate-stick in making of it. And whether it were the several sorts of this drink heretofore made, or whe∣ther it were the difference of spelling and pronouncing in several Countries, I know not; but it hath been called by ma∣ny names, as Chocolatl, Chocolath, Cho∣colet, Chocolate, Chocolat, and Chocolata: Nay, it hath been called by some hereto∣fore Succulata; and all these do now sig∣nifie one and the same thing; i. e. a drink usually made, whereof the Cacao is the principal ingredient in it, approved of by Learned Physitians, and sufficiently re∣commended to the world.
Of the Composition and ma∣king up of Chocolate. IN speaking of the making up of Cho∣colate into Balls, Rowls, Lumps, Cakes, Tablets, &c. I can give no true account how it is made up here, for I never saw it done; but I conceive it to be none of the best, because, for the most part, I finde the Spirits much dissipate, the Oyl much wasted, and the Rowl left a meer insipid lump, scarce worth the u∣sing: So that being made into such drink as I meet with in some houses where it is sold, it hath only the name of Chocolate, and no more. I intend now to speak only what I have seen in some parts of America, and then something briefly what others have said of it, who have written long since; and most of all, recommend it to them that shall happen to travel into those, or any other parts that I have done. The first way then of making it up is this: They take the Cacao's, when they are well cured and dried in the Sun,
(which is sometimes sufficient in those parts) or by some other modrate arti∣ficial heat, in a convenient Vessel, placed over a gentle fire; and peel off the film or crusty skins of them, and then beat them in a Stone-Mortar to very small particles [which is the way some that make but little use] into a kinde of Paste, which will be almost like unto Almond-Paste by its natural oyliness, and may be made up alone (or at least by adding there∣to an Egg, and a little Flower of Maiz) into Lumps, Rowls, Cakes, Balls, Lozan∣ges, &c. or put into Boxes of what big∣ness the makers up of it please, and then set or layd in the shade (for in the Sun it melteth) upon clean and smooth boards, with a leaf or some white paper under it, and in a short time it becometh hard; which may be kept a fortnight, a moneth, a quarter, or half a year: nay, it may be indifferently kept a whole year, if need so require, for daily use. Take here one Receipt, especially for them who make up but a small quantity for their own private use. Take as many of such Cacao's (as I have before directed) as you have a de∣sire
to make up at one time, and put as many of them at once into a Frying-Pan, (being very clean scoured) as will cove the bottom thereof; and hold them ove a moderate fire, shaking them so, tha they may not burn (for you must have very great care of that) until they are dry enough to peel off the outward crust skin; and after they are dried and peeled then beat them in an Iron Mortar, unt it will rowl up into great Balls or Rowls and be sure you beat it not over-muc neither, for then it will become to much oyly. You must make up your Balls, Lump or Rowls, close and smooth, without e¦ther cracks, crannies, or great bunches i them; because then they will not kee so well, nor so long. Another way to make it up is this much used by those who make a Trad thereof themselves; as also for Me¦chants and Planters that have great quan¦tities made up for Transportation an daily use in their Families. For this purpose they have a bro smooth stone, well polished or glaze very hard; and being made fit in all r¦spects
for their use, they grinde the Ca∣cao's thereon very small; and when they have so done, they have another broad stone or Iron ready, under which they keep a gentle fire, only just to hinder the mass from clinging, whilst they work it up into what form they please; especially being made up alone, or with only a lit∣tle Notty added thereto, to colour it: This is the best way of doing it, although the labour be more herein then some o∣ther wayes which are used. This is the first sort which was made heretofore, and by many is much used at this day, being without mixture; on∣ly there is put into it a little Notty, which is also a Cordial: and this is certainly the chiefest and very best sort that is made. The Native Indians seldom or never use any Compounds; desiring rather to preserve their healths, then to gratifie and please their Palats, until the Spani∣ards coming amongst them, made several mixtures and Compounds; which in∣stead of making the former better (as they supposed) have made it much worse: And many of the English (espe∣cialy those that know not the nature of
the Cacao) do now imitate them: for in Jamaica, as well as other places, in making it into Lumps, Balls, Cakes, &c. they add to the Cacao-Paste, Chille, or red Pepper; Achiote, sweet Pepper, common∣ly known by the name of Jamaica-Pep∣per, or some or one of them; as also such other ingredients as the place afford∣eth, or as most pleaseth the makers thereof; or else as the more skilful per∣sons may think it to agree with this or that individual person; adding thereto as much Sugar only as will sweeten it first of all drying and beating every In∣gredient apart; and then at the last of all mixing them together, as it is wrought up into a mass. We may well take notice what Physi∣tians, as well as others (who have written long since of the making up of Choco∣late) tell us; That in many places of America they have great store of Cacao's, of which they make much Chocolate; not only for their own use, but also send great quantities from thence as good Merchandise in other parts of the world. First of all then for them that have but a small quantity, and make it up for
their own private use, they have a Stone-Table made fit for that purpose, broad and even, whereon they break the Ca∣cao's with a Rowler very small; and af∣ter work it up in a Mortar, or on a Table, as they please. Others have an Iron Table, and a weighty Rowler, to bruise and break the Cacao's; still sifting forth the small∣est with a Sieve, and grinding the big∣gest over again, until it become very small; and then with a gentle fire the Paste or mass may be wrought up into almost any form: yet in the doing of this, great care ought to be taken that the fire be very gentle, only what of ne∣cessity is required to make it work; for overmuch fire wasteth the Spirits, and drieth up the oyliness thereof, so that the mass or whole lump may thereby be spoiled: neither must there be put in any ingredients which happen to be burnt in drying, for such may make the whole quantity little worth. A more speedy way for the making up f the Cacao's into Chocolate is this, hich some use: They have a Mill made in the form of some kinde of
Mault-Mills, whose stones are black, firm and hard, which work by turning: and upon this Mill are ground the Ca∣cao's grosly, and then between other Stones, they work that which is so ground yet smaller; or else by beating it up in a Mortar, bring it into the u∣sual form; and add thereto such ingre∣dients as they think most necessary: All which are first beaten apart, before they are put into the whole Compound. And indeed many Simples are added, more out of curiosity, then real know∣ledge of the benefit received thereby; some putting in one thing, and some a∣nother; making, as it were, a hodge∣podge of it, rather thn what it shoud be: Some of the ingredients put in, are Chile, or red Pepper, Achiote, sweet-scent∣ed Pepper, Orejuelas, Banilas, Pocolt or Pa∣niso, Atolle or Maiz-Flower, Sugar, &c. more or less of these, or any one of them are put in, as the Makers thereof s good, or as Physitians order the same t be done. But if there be any addition made t the Cacao and Notty; these, I suppose are much more properly used then oth
Spices, which in lieu thereof, in Spain, and other Countries, are often put in: such are Aniseeds, Fennel-seeds, Sweet-Almonds, Nutmegs, Cloves, black, white, and long Pepper, Cinamon, Saffron, Musk, Amber-greece, Orange-Flower-water, Lemmon and Citron-pill, Cardamome, Oyl of Nutmegs, Cinamon, and many other ingredients are usually put in, as is thought fit by the Physitians or others; either when it is made up in the mass, or else more or less be added when the drink s made; especially if the Cacao's be bea∣en simply. Mr. Gage directs it to be made up thus: After the Cacao's are carefully dried and peeled, or blanched (saith he) they must be beaten in a Stone-Mortar, or else ground on a broad stone very small. All the rest of the ingredients must be carefully dried, so that they are not burnt; (for if they are, they be∣come bitter) and every one beaten or ground to powder apart, and, if you please, searced by themselves: and all being put together, there must be a lit∣tle fire used to warm it; so as you may incorporate it, and make it up into
what form you fancy best; laying it on papers in the shade to dry, that it may be hard. This way was long since much used, but it is now made up according to eve∣ry Distemper, as is thought convenient by the Learned Physitian. To strengthen the Stomack much de∣bilitated, there is put in Achiote, or ra∣ther Saffron: in Fluxes, Cinamon, Nut∣megs, or a little Steel-powder: for Coughs, Almonds, and the Oyl of Al∣monds, Sugar, or Sugar candied: for a Phlegmatick Stomack, they put in Pep∣per, Cloves, &c. And thus the Spanish Physitians especially endeavour to make a Composition, or alter their Chocolate according to every distemper, making i both the Physick and Vehicle for all sorts which ought rather but to be used as Ail∣ment. Of the simple Cacao-Kernels THese Kernels are one of the chiefe Commodities of the West-Indies They are in operation, as some think, col and dry, and seem to be astringent: b¦ing
eaten freely alone, they are apt to cause obstructions, as many do conje∣cture, and have written; but no other∣wise, as I conceive, then raw Oatmeal or Wheat doth: nor certainly so much nei∣ther; for I have eaten many of them, (as I shall mention more largely anon:) and they may be made into Comfits, and ea∣ten more safely then Almonds; although some are doubtful of the temperament of them, by reason of the different ef∣fects they work. There may be an Oyl drawn from these Kernels, by compression, as Oyl of Almonds is drawn; very good for all such uses as the Oyl of Almonds is good for, and work more efficaciously. Ʋse. Being internally administred, it is good against all Coughs, shortness of breath, opening, and making the roughness of the Artery smooth, palliating all sharp Rheums, and contributing very much to the Radical Moisture, being very nou∣rishing, and excellent against Consump∣tions. Also the fat Butter or Oyl drawn or extracted from the Cacao's, is said to be
very effectual, being externally applied, against all Inflammations, i. e. Phleg∣mons, Erisipela's, S. Anthony's-Fire, Small-Pox, Tumors, Scaldings and Burnings, the place being anointed therewith. It is a cooler, and doth asswage and qualifie all pains proceeding from heat; as the cru∣stiness or Scars on Sores, Pimples, chop∣ped Lips and Hands: it is an Anodyne, and exceeding good to mitigate the pain of the Gout, as also Aches by reason of old Age: it wonderfully refresheth wea∣ried limbs, being anointed therewith; and it maketh the skin smooth. In Carthagena, New Spain, and other adjacent places, they do not only entail their Cacao Walks or Orchards on their Eldest Sons, as their Right of Inheri∣tance, (as Lands here in England are setled on the next Heir) but these Cacao-Kernels have been, and are in so great esteem with them, that they pass between man and man for any Merchandise, in buying and selling in the Markets, as the most currant silver Coyn; as I have been told, and as some credible Writers do asfirm.
Of the making of Chocolate into Drink. IN the making of that so-much-fam'd or Renowned Drink, (which may be called the American Nectar) at this day well known in most parts of Christen∣dom by the name of Chocolate, there are many and various ways used, as well in India as Europe: The later of which I shall speak nothing at all to; but to the former, I will relate what I have acci∣dentally seen and made use of in those parts; as also what some have written of it long since, who approved and recom∣mended the same to others. This Drink is often made several ways; some using one way, and some another, as seemeth best and most familiar to them: and therefore we will begin with that which is most generally known, and that which all common people, and ser∣vants also, before they go forth to work in the Plantations in a morning, take a draught or two of, for the better support of Nature in their hard labour.
For this, they take of the Balls or Lumps made up only of the Cacao, when they are thorough dry and hard (for they ought to be at least nine daies or a fort-night old fermenting, before they be made use of) and grate it very small on a Tin-Grater, such as Cooks use to grate their bread on, or the like; but it ought to be finer, I mean, the holes thereof made smaller, holding the piece of Cho∣colate lightly on it, that it may be gra∣ted very fine into some dish, or the like convenient thing, as may be fit to re∣ceive it. The quantity to be grated is as much as shall be thought fit for present use at that time, more or less, according to the number of the company to drink thereof, according to the greater or smaller proportion as every ones appe∣tite requires; or as is desired to be made thicker or thinner, and the like; order∣ing all things for the making thereof with∣out exact limitation. Then they take as much fair water out of the Spring or Jar (for some have Jars for the keeping fresh water cool) as they think will be suffici∣ently answerable to their ingredients;
and in that water, they put about as much, or else somewhat less Casava-bread, as the quantity of the grated Chocolate. This bread being a while in the cold water, although it be not gra∣ted, but only broken into bits or small pieces, and put therein, will dissolve in a little time; which in hot water it is not so apt to do: (yet it may be grated and put in with the Chocolate.) When it is dissolved, they set that water on the fire in the Chocolate-Pot, Kettle, or what o∣ther Vessel they see good; and when it boils, they put in the grated Chocolate, and make it boil again a quarter of an hour, or less, stirring it a little in the in∣terim: and then taking it off the fire, they pour it out of the Pot, or what else it was boiled in, into some handsome large Dish or Bason: and after they have sweetned it a little with Sugar, being all together, and sitting down round a∣bout it like good Fellows, every one dips in his Calabash, or some other Dish, sup∣ping it off very hot. And this is their usual Breakfast; without which, servants or others are not well able to perform their most la∣borious
employments in the Plantations, or work with any great courage until eleven a Clock, their usual time of going to Dinner. Neither were any of our Ships-Com∣pany well able to perform violent exer∣cise or business, or to walk so far, or with that activity without it, notwith∣standing we did eat a sufficient quantity of other food, as experience quickly taught us. Another sort of Chocolate is made af∣ter the same manner as we have even now mentioned, but that they make thr a more Compound, by putting in red Pepper, Vaynillas, sweet Pepper or An∣chiote, or some or one of these; or els some other Productions of the Country for variety: and being naturally a littl bitterish in taste, they sweeten it with Su∣gar, according to their own palats. Some there are that take Milk and Water; and when it boileth, they pu in grated Chocolate and Casawder t thicken it, of what consistence bs pleaseth them; and being sweetned a lit∣tle, they drink it very hot. Others make it with Milk, a little Wa¦ter,
Eggs well beaten, and Chocolate in a Pot, and very well frothing it up when they drink it: but this is too stopping for some persons, pestering them with Flegm; yet to others it is very nourish∣ing, being taken with good advice. There is yet another way, and that is especially used by Maroonoes, Hunters, and such as have occasion to travel the Country, to be ready at all times, which is Balls or Lozanges finely made up with Cacao, and some of the fore-mentioned ingredients besides, and as much Sugar as will sufficiently sweeten it: and when they have an inclination to make use of those Tablets or Lozanges, they only dissolve them in water, froth it, or stir it well, and so drink it off: And this exceeds a Scotch-mans provision of Oat∣meal and Water, as much (in my Opi∣nion) as the best Ox-Beef for strong sto∣macks exceeds the meanest food.
Another way of making Cho∣colate. SOme of the best Chocolate, in my judg∣ment, (which I confess is but slen∣der) is made after this manner. Take of a Ball or Rowl of that Cho∣colate which is made up of only the Ca∣cao and Notty: This Notty is the fruit o a Tree or Bush; it is much of the natur of Saffron, is cordial, and of a pleasan colour: there is not much of it to b had, for it is dearer in America the silver. Some think this to be Achiote, be∣cause it is like it; but they are much mi∣staken, Achiote being of a dangerou quality. I say, take of that Lump o Ball, and grate as much as you thin good very thin, (the more, the mor corroborating) and put thereto as mu Ship-Bisket, either brown or white (a for our parts we had no other Englis bread there) being finely beaten or gra∣ted: then take half Milk, and half Wa∣ter, as much in quantity as you suppos your ingredients will thicken reasonably
thick, and then make it boil; and when it boileth, put in your Chocolate and bread together, and let it boil a little after∣wards; and then sweeten it with Sugar, and sup it very hot, without frothing. If you please, or if you will, you may froth it in your Chocolate-Pot with a Molinet, as they do here, and then presently drink it: But if you desire to have it froth ve∣ry much, and that the froth may conti∣nue some time for shew on the top of the Dish, then you may put in some of the finest Flour of Indian-Wheat, (or the Flour of our English Wheat, if you have it) and the white of an Egg or two very well beaten: but this makes the Chocolate drink never the better; and without such addition, it is excel∣lent good, and very agreeable, streng∣thening Nature exceedingly. Some, for this purpose, put in a glass or two of Sack: which may also be more proper∣ly taken alone; for I do not believe, that the addition of many ingredients doth any way at all advantage the wholesom∣ness of this Drink; only something may be used for variety. The Spanish Physitians have nomina∣ted
and appointed many Ingredients or Simples to make this Drink a Com∣pound, but very insignificantly, and to little or no purpose, it being much wholesomer of it self. And truly, what we now use in England, is but a com∣pound of Spices, Milk, Eggs, Sugar, &c. and perhaps there is in it a fourth or sixth part of the chiefest ingredient, the Ca∣cao; whereby the intention of what it should be, and the property thereof from what it naturally is in it self, is quite changed. So that it is no wonder if this Drink be not found of that vertue and efficacy as hath been noised abroad, or as many expect: But doubtless if Physitians did but narrowly pry into the secrets of the nature of it, they would quickly finde (the right use thereof being made) that it can scarcely be too much commend∣ed. It is the adulteration of this Nectar which undeservedly makes it ill thought of, and causlesly that which hath been (and deserves now to be) most famous, to become in the esteem of some in∣famous, by the mixing of things impro∣per
therewith; endeavouring in sicknes∣ses to order this as fitting Physick for all kinde of distempers, let the constitution be what it will; and to administer it in any Climate or Air, is the common pra∣ctise of many at this day, whereby the excellency thereof is abated; neither ought it to be taken any otherwise then (as indeed it is in it self) a most proper Aliment. And therefore let all such who desire to drink it for their health, see the ma∣king of it themselves, I mean, as well the Lump as the Drink, unless they can have such from Jamaica, or any other place, as is good and simply made up, as I have before-mentioned. That which I shall further mention of this Drink before I conclude, will be most of it concerning what others have long since written of it. This Chocolate (say they) is made into drink several ways; sometimes dissol∣ving what quantity is thought fitting in hot water, sometimes in cold; some∣times making an addition of other in∣gredients, and sometimes not. When it is put into hot water and boiled, and ve∣ry
well stirred, they do afterwards drink it as hot as it can well be endured; not using any exercise for half an hour, or an hour after: half an hour in a morning before work, is enough; but if it be ta∣ken at noon for dinner, to rest an hour af∣ter it is but sufficient, not only for this, but for any other nourishment in so hot a Climate as the Indies (especially within the Torrid Zone) before much exercise is used: and it is the custom among most of the Planters, to leave work at eleven of the Clock, eating their dinner by twelve at the farthest, and so rest themselves un∣til one, before they go to work again. This Drink ought to be prepared only for present use, which is sometimes done by making the water boil, or ready to boil; and then put forth some of that water, and put therein the Chocolate; and when it is dissolved, mill it well, and add thereto as much water more as will make it hot; and so drink it presently after milling the second time. Ths Drink is very easily made at any time, having always by you the Rowls or Cakes ready made up; and it is best being made indifferently thick, although some make
it so thin, that the Chocolate can scarcely be seen in it; which is not so good. I remember at Mevis I drank of a mess of Chocolate made by a Planter, after this manner. First, He took some water and made it ready to boil; and in the interim, he grated as much Chocolate as he thought fit, according to the company, to drink thereof at that time. Also he beat three Eggs very well; then he put in the Cho∣colate, and a little Casava beaten small, and some Maiz-Flour: All which made it indifferently thick; and when it was just boiled up, he put in the Eggs, and sweetned it a little with Sugar; and when it had boiled less then a quarter of an hour after, he frothed it, and poured it forth into a Dish. This seemed very handsom to the eye, and I am sure it ta∣sted much better, being drunk not only very hot, but also very merrily. And this way of making it is almost the same, as not long afterwards I eat of some which was made at a place call∣ed Liganee in Jamaica; and truly I think this to be none of the worst way of ma∣king it; for I observed, that it had very
much of the Oyl or Vegetative fat swim∣ming on the top of it. There is yet another sort of this Drink often made use of, especially by Hunters, Travellers, &c. who have seldom any Vessels or conveniency of boiling it; and therefore to supply the want of all such, it may easily be made ready upon any present occasion; as thus: They have Chocolate which is very finely beaten, and made up into little Cakes, with a sufficient quantity of Sugar to sweeten them: Of these Cakes, those that tra∣vel always carry with them; and also a Calabash, or some other small Vessel; and when they meet with good water, (of which there is great store) they take thereof, and put into it some of their Chocolate, and (if they have it) Casava-bread, as much as will make it indiffe∣rently thick: and when it is almost dis∣solved, they stir it together, or else mill it, and so drink it cold; or else some put in a spoonful or two of Rum or Brandy into every dish, if they have it: and this kinde of food agreeth very well with them that are accustomed to it, and sup∣plieth the want of all other Aliment.
Of the vertues of the Drink called Chocolate. THis most Excellent Nectar hath been for a long time, and also is now a ve∣ry familiar Drink; and in most places that are considerable, throughout the greatest part of America, they make thereof; and all of them unanimously, of what rank or quality soever, take a mornings drink of it; yea, even the meanest servants, before they go forth to work, do take a draught thereof, or else they are hardly able to hold out and per∣form their tasks until eleven a Clock, their usual time of going to dinner; not so much by reason of any extraordinary heat that would offend them more there then in many places of Europe, were it not for the multitude of wood (for want of Inhabitants) which is not yet cut down and destroyed, which very much hinders the free passage of the Air; as by experi∣ence we finde in England, the heat in the midst of Summer much greater in Woods and Lanes, then in the more open Fields,
where the Air hath more free motion and passage: And this is the greatest reason why it is thought to be hotter at Jamai∣ca, that lieth in seventeen degrees, then at Barbados in thirteen; because the Wood is, for the most part, destroyed in Barba∣dos; but in Jamaica, as yet, but little of it is cut down or rooted up, although no doubt, in short time, it will be otherwise, more people coming daily thither; and then certainly it will be as temperate a Climate as can be desired, because there always blows a strong Sea-breeze (as they call it) or gale of winde from the Sea all day, that doth much fan and cool the Air until night; the Sun drawing on ano∣ther Point, it then doth blow more gent∣ly from the Land, returning again to∣wards the Sea in the morning. And thus varying once in twelve hours, doth for the most part keep its course, both to the great benefit of the Inhabitants, and o∣thers who travel thither. Those Woods are the Harbour and Nurseries of a small and very trouble∣some Fly, called a Musqueto; and another like unto that Fly we call a Gnat here in England, which they call Merry-wings,
because they hum and make a noyse: These are both venomous, and so great a torment (to strangers especially) as they can hardly sleep, unless they are provi∣ded with Gloves and Leather-Stockings to keep them from stinging; for Worsted or Linnen Stockings will not defend them: but near unto the Sea-side, where the winde hath more freedom, they scarce trouble or molest at all: however, amongst many conveniencies, we may al∣low some inconveniencies; for the worst wood there is as useful for the making of Sugar, as any here is for the making of Iron, the best not at all inferiour to any wood in the world. But to break off from this digression which fell in by acci∣dent, let us speak what we intended of the vertues of this Nectar, Chocolate. It is not convenient, as experience hath sufficiently taught us, to eat or drink any thing else quickly after the drinking of it; or presently to use any immode∣rate exercise; but rather to rest a while, whether it be taken hot or cold: bcause it is apt to open the Pores, and thereby it causeth the greater expence of Spirits by transpiration, and so consequently nou∣risheth the less.
And certainly all kinde of Drinks, ei∣ther naturally hot, or artificially made so, especially in hot Countries, are most wholesome; and therefore doubtless Cho∣colate is most properly drunk here in Sum∣mer: And I think all rational persons, who have ever been in the Indies, will conceive it so to be, by the frequent drinking of Rum, Brandy, and other strong and hot Spirits; which doth suffi∣ciently prove, that if such strong liquors are good at any time, (as doubtless they are) they are best in Summer, when the weather is most hot: for should we here drink much of it in Winter, it must of necessity be our ruine; because, by so do∣ing, we put flame to fire our natural parts, being more hot to withstand the coldness of the Climate, the pores less, and the skin more compact; and by rea∣son of the external circumambient Air, a greater fixation of Spirits is cased thereby, then in those hotter Regions, as may be apparently perceived in Summer; out of which more open pores, the blood and radical moisture doth by exhalation more freely transpire; and therefore of necessity Nature doth require a better sup∣ply
to maintain the internal heat. And it is well observed by some, that most of those who travel from the more Norther∣ly parts of the world into the Indies, before they are Naturalized there, do, as it were, Serpent or Adder-like, change their skin; that is, the external thin skin, or scarf-skin, called the Cuticula, doth peel off, there coming in the place there∣of another, yet more thin and lank then that was: And such persons as lose not their skin after this manner, do for the most part become desperately ill, and perhaps not escape death, because the fu∣liginous vapours want a more free tran∣piration; to procure which, Chocolate is most excellent, it nourishing and preser∣ving health entire, purging by Expecto∣rations, and especially by the sweat-vents of the body, preventing unnatural fumes ascending to the head, yet causing a plea∣sant and natural slep and rest; preser∣ving the person vigorous and active, sending forth all vicious humours to the Emunctories, and driving from the cen∣tre to the circumference, or external parts of the body, all that is obnoxious, or may turn to putrefaction; and being
eaten twice a day, a man may very well subsist therewith, not taking any thing else at all; and if need so require, many daies together. The hardy Sea-men having been long kept from fresh diet, do often, when they come on shore amongst the Rarities of those Countries, too freely eat of them, more then Nature is able to turn into act, or dispence with, by which means many vicious humours are ingendred; or else (by reason of them which were before lodged in the body) it so falleth out, that many of them are quickly af∣ter their arrival there much troubled with Pustules, Tumours or Swellings, &c. for which Chocolate supped scalding hot, (for so it is usually drunk) is excellent to drive forth such offensive humours, o∣pening the pores, and causing moderate sweats, and may be taken without ob∣serving an exact quantity; only all ought to consider their own strength; and that one that is very aged, or a Childe, cannot (neither ought they if they could) take so great a quantity at a time, as those in full strength; but every one may take it according to his appetite and digestive fa∣culty;
but not so much at once, as to be y whit troublesome, or in the least to ver-burthen or oppress the Stomack; or thereby the best things may become, ot only loathsome, but also hurtful. It is an exceeding nourishing to all ch as require a speedy refreshment after avel, hard labour, or violent exercise, xhilerating and corroborating all parts nd faculties of the body: And doubt∣ss there is no laborious man here in per∣ct health and strength, that hath taken uch pains, and fasted long, but findeth imself much refreshed, and also more ctive and lively after a good dinner re∣eived; and certainly so it is with those hat drink this liquor, for much more vi∣our is obtained thereby: And to speak uly of it, it cannot be too much ex∣ll'd, considering the benefit received by  in its natural Climate: 'Tis agreeable here with all bodies as excellent food, nd the greatest Cordial and most inno∣ent support to Nature that I know, to ll such especially who are once Natura∣z'd to those parts, whose stomacks are ore lank and weak, by reason of the ex∣ernal ambient heat; and therefore re∣quire
such aliment as this, which is m easily digested. But for this reason I not think it so convenient to be too f¦quently drunk here in England by th who are in health and full strength,¦cause our hotter stomacks require not fo of so easie a digestion, being natura strong enough to dispence with th which is more solid, here in this o more Northern Hemisphere: Besides, too familiar use of this delicate Nec to healthy and young people, may deb¦tate the stomack, by making Nature id not caring for taking the pains to co¦coct stronger food: but all such who of weak Constitutions, and have thin a attenuate bodies, or are troubled w sharp Rheums, Catarrhs, and such as fe a Consumption, or if they are already a Consumption; (the difference of t distemper considered) and all aged pe¦ple may safely take it, especially in t heat of Summer, when the skin and po are relaxed by great expence of Spiri causing a faintness; which in Winter not so, by reason that the colder exter air doth more condense and fix them. say, all such even now mentioned, m
take a pint, or more, or less, for a morn∣ngs draught; and the like also at other times, as need requires. I have, by rea∣son of the scarcity of provision at Sea, for the space of two or three moneths to∣gether, had little other sustenance then his Drink made with simple Chocolate grated small, a Bisket-cake or two bea∣ten, and such water as the Ship did hen afford, which I am sure was none of the best; and the greatest proportion llowable was once a day, yet was I not much abated either in flesh or strength: nd therefore I think certainly, that good Chocolate is the only drink in the Indies, nd I am fully perswaded is instrumental o the preservation and prolonging of any an Europeans life that travels there, ho will be soon acquainted with it; for here is no Ship that comes into those Harbours where it may be had, but the en quickly get it aboard them; and ma∣y of those which remain in health, part∣y by the use thereof, do become fat and lump. For my own part, I think I was ever fatter in all my life, then when I as in that praise-worthy Island of Ja∣aiea, partly by the frequent use there∣of;
neither had I one sick day during the time I was there, which was more the half a year. For this mercy, and infinit other received, I render, as is most due all praise and thanks to the Supreme Pow¦er and Majesty of Heaven and Earth who hath of his infinite goodness con¦ducted me through many troubles, an delivered me out of almost infinite dan¦gers, sparing me even to this presen moment. But what shall I say more o this excellent Nectar? It is very good a¦liment, a clear Pabulum multi nutrimenti that it doth fatten, if it be rightly exh¦bited, is undeniable; and that it nourish¦eth super omne alimentum, is without d¦spute, especially within the limits of th Torrid Zone: It revives the droopin spirits, and chears those that are rea to faint; expelling sorrow, trouble, ca and all perturbations of the minde: is an Ambrosia: And finally, in a wor it cannot be too much praised. But a f lines of what others have long since wr¦ten of it, and approved, and then shall conclude. This Drink is recommended to us many learned Physitians, and is gen¦rally
used by the Nobility, Gentry, and most observing persons of several Nati∣ons; by people of all Ranks and Quali∣ties, young and old, of both Sexes, espe∣ially amongst the Spaniards, Natives, and other Inhabitants there, who esteem t their chiefest aliment, and take it for sustenance at any time, without limitati∣on, especially after travel, or being ti∣red with much exercise or business, Na∣ture requiring then more refreshment then ordinary. It is also frequently made use of in extraordinary Entertainments or Treats amongst the highest persons, as Mr. Gage saith. Bernaldus saith, l. 2. That in Mexi∣co they take Cacao-Nuts, and some Sugar, and make them into a Paste, and afterwards dissolve this Paste in water (for if these kernels are full ripe, well cured, and well made up in∣to Paste, it will dissolve) and being well agitated, they drink often thereof, a little at a time. Also at great Enter∣tainments they make several sorts of this Drink to be the chiefest of their Feast, because it procureth a desire of Venery.
Hernandez saith, l. 3. c. 40. That the Cacao-Nuts are given, being made up into small Cakes or Lozanges, and only dissolved in water, to allay heat in Fevers, and also hot distempers of the Liver, being taken warm. Benzonus saith, l. 2. That the simple Cacao is made into Paste; and when they use it, put it in a cup with water, and a little Pepper sometimes, and so make it their ordinary drink, giving it for refreshment to wearied strangers. Acosta saith, l. 4. ch. 22. That the Indians make great account of a drink called Chocolet, made of Cacao's, which saith he is not at all pleasant in taste to them who are not much used to it; notwithstanding many drink freely thereof, either hot or cold, it being froth'd up with a stick or instrument for that purpose; or else pouring it out of one thing into another, at a distance, to raise a froth on the top of it: This they drink, not so much for the plea∣sant relish it hath, but for the whole∣somness and great benefit to Nature tha redounds thereby. Juanes and Hernandez furthermore
tell us, That the plainest and most sim∣ple Chocolate is very nourishing, by which only the Americans do subfist all day in great heat and labour: And ma∣ny Europeans, as well English-men as others, can now sufficiently evidence the same by their own experience, that they have with only the Paste of the Cacao, and a little Sugar dissolved in water, sustained themselves a long time both by Sea and Land: And this is their only preparation in the Indies, either for a long Journey, or a short Voyage. Dr. Juanes and Clusius furthermore say in another place, of this Drink, That it is cold and drying, astringent, and bit∣terish in taste; it allayeth thirst, cooling the liver, and all inflammations there∣of: it is of a lenifying nature, multi∣plying good blood, and store of vital spirits it breedeth also, thereby ena∣bling men to labour and perform much business: it wonderfully provoketh sweat and monethly evacuations, keep∣ing the body in good temper, especi∣ally being taken with consideration of the individual Person, Constitution, Time
and Clime, and also used with mode∣ration; for we see the best things abu∣sed turn to corruption, and thereby become the worst: So Wine, or any o∣ther aliment, being recived more in quantity then Nature is able to turn in∣to act, becometh destructive in time to the whole body: and though much of this being taken may opprss the sto∣mack, yet it disturbs not the had at all as Wine doth. Neither is this Drink too frequently to be used; because the greatest Cordi∣als, how advantagious soever they are to them in distress and sickness, yet are they absolutely hurtful to those that shall use them as constant food: Nor do I think this Drink to be a fitting Vehicle to convey such Physical matter as is some∣times put into it, especially Laxatives, as Rubarb, Sena, &c. but rather the most simple is to be chosen, and princi∣pally to be made use of as wholesome aliment; or if there be any addition, let it be of such ingredients as are most tem∣perate, and cause the least alteration; as Maiz, Flour, Notty, Saffron, Ani∣seeds, &c. with as much Sugar as will
make it pleasant; or without it, if you please. Dr. Juanes and Ferdinandez say more∣over of Chocolate, That it is the most wholesome and most excellent Drink that is yet found out, provided no hurtful ingredient be put therein; but being made up with the Cacao, a little Notty, Saffron, or prepared Anchiote on∣ly to colour it, a few Aniseeds, and a little Sugar, in so much water as it may be indifferently thick, and drink it whilst it is very hot sup by sup: it is good alone to make up a breakfast, needing no other food, either bread or drink; and this only being taken, is beneficial to the body, and without exception, may be drunk by people of all Ages, young as well as old, of what Sex or what Constitution soever; and is very good for women with-childe, nourishing the Embryo, and preventing fainting Fits, which some breeding women are subject unto: It helpeth Nature to concoct Phlegme and superfluous moisture in the stomack; it voideth the Excrements by Urine and Sweat abundantly, and breedeth store
of very good blood, thereby supplying the expence of spirits; it expels Gra∣vel, and keepeth the body fat and plump; and also preserveth the coun∣tenance fresh and fair: It strengthens the vitals, and is good against Fevers, Catarrhs, Asthmaes, and Consumptions of all sorts: And is now much used in many cold Regions with great bene∣fit and success, agreeing very well with their bodies: And certain it is, that a man may live longer with it, then with any kinde of Wine whatsoever. This drink alone supplies the want of all o∣ther aliment, as before is specified. Mr. Gage, Ch. 15. and 16. speaking further of this Nectar, saith, That it is a great Cordial, adding much by its unctuousness to the vital Balsam; free∣ing the body of bad spirits, (if there be any bad spirits) and furnishing it with better in the room thereof; strengthen∣ing the natural heat in all parts, and thereby prolonging life; for it is by an easie transmutation converted into blood▪ It preserveth in vigour the principal fa∣culties, enabling men to prosecute their Studies and tedious exercises, expelling
winde, opening obstructions, evacuating per poros cutis, keeping the body soluble, and is most excellent against Hypochondri∣ack melancholy. I might now speak of the several Di∣stillations, Extracts, Oyls, Fat or Butter of the Cacao's; as also of several Con∣fects and Sweet-Meats made of these Kernels, and Chocolate: But at present I will only explain some words before made use of, and so conclude.
THE EXPLANATION. A Achiote, or Achiotl. A Fruit, or rather the Seed, growing in a shell on a Tree in the Indies, which they use to colour their Bodies with when they go to war, thereby to seem the more terrible to the Enemy: And also when it is prepared, they sometimes use it to colour Chocolate withal. Agies; see Chile. Atatexi. A certain drink much used in Ameri∣ca heretofore, made of Cacao-Nuts, Maiz, &c. Atolle. Flour of Indian Wheat, and water mixed together, to put into Chocolate.
B Banillas. This is a Seed which groweth in a Cod, almost like unto a Kidney-Bean, on Trees in the Indies, much used by some in Chocolate. C Cacaua-Quahvil Is the Cacao-Tree, that beareth the fruit of which Chocolate is made. Cacaos, Cacaotl, Cacautl, Cacahuatl. All these names do signifie the fruit of a Tree, (or rather the kernel of that fruit) which groweth in many places in America; and of the Kernels is made the Chocolate. Cacao. One single Kernel, or Nut. Chile, Chille, or Chili. A sort of red Pepper, of which there is great store in Jamaica. Chocolata, Chocolat, Chocolatl, Choco∣late, Chocolatte, or Chocolet. All these names signifie one and the same thing; i. e. a Drink much used in the West-Indies, and now very familiar∣ly known in Europe: chiefly made of Ca∣cao-Paste and Water; whereunto is some∣times
added Sugar, Milk, Eggs, Pepper, &c. Chalcacaos, or Clalcacautl. A certain sort of Cacaos, so called, which denotes them to be the very best. G Garyophyllon; see Pimienta. H Haitini; see Chile. M Maiz. Indian Wheat, or Indian Corn. Mecacuce, Mechasuchil, Mecsacuchil, Me∣sacuchil, Mecaxochel, Manoijtos. All these names signifie a kinde of Pep∣per growing in Mexico, and other places thereabouts; which heretofore was often put into Chocolate. Molinet, or Molinillo, Is a Chocolate-stick, to mill it with in a Pot to make it froth. O Orejuelas, or Orichelas. A Tree in America, whose flowers here∣tofore were often put into Chocolate. P Pimienta, or Pimenta. Sweet-scented Pepper, called by some Jamaica-Pepper.
Paniso, or Pocholt. A sort of Grain in the Indies, which is sometimes put into Chocolate. Pistachia-Nuts Are certain Nuts which come from Smyrna, Tripoli, and other places in Tur∣key; the Kernels of which are sometimes beaten up with Cacaos in the making of Chocolate. Pumagua; see Achiote. T Tlixochitl, or Tlixochil; See Banillas. V Vaynillas; see Banillas. Ʋchu; see Chille. Ʋrucu; see Anchiote. X Xochinacaztli, or Xochinacatlis See Orejuelas. FINIS.
Books printed for, and are to be sold by Wil∣liam Crook at the Green Dragon without Tem∣ple-Bar, 1672. REynolds of Murther, Fol. Bacon's Natural History, Fol. Jesuite's Morals, Fol. Ross his View of all Religions, Octavo. His Mystagogus Poeticus, Octavo. Thomas of Kempis Christians Pattern, twenty four. Drexelius of Eternity, 12. Grotius Catechisme, with a Praxis, Greek, Latine and English, Octavo. Clark's Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis, Octavo. Hales of Schisme, Quarto. Hammond's Compleat Measurer, O∣ctavo.
The life of Des Cartes, Octavo. Mr. Hobb's De Principiis & Ratioci∣natione Geometricum. Printed 1666 in Quarto, price 3 s. His Rosetum Geometricum, Quarto. Printed 1671. His three Papers to the Royal Society against Dr. Wallis. Printed 1671. Dr. Maynwaring of Health, Octavo. His Compleat Physician qualified and dignified, shewing the rise and progress of Physick, Octavo. Fleckno's Epigrams, Octavo. His Characters, Octavo. Sir Henry Blount's Voyage into the Le∣vant; being a brief Relation of a Jour∣ney lately performed from England, by the way of Venice, into Dalmatia, Sclavo∣nia, Bosna, Hungary, Macedonia, Thessa∣ly, Thrace, Rhodes, and Egypt, unto Gran-Cairo; with particular Observations con∣cerning the Modern Condition of the Turks, and other People under that Em∣pire. The Eighth Edition. Printed 1671. price bound 1 s. The Court of Curiosity; wherein by the Lot, the most intricate Questions are Re∣solved, and Nocturnal Dreams and Visi∣ons
explain'd according to the Doctrine of the Antients: To which is added a Treatise of Physiognomy. Published in French, and translated (into Dutch, Spa∣nish, and Italian, and now) into English, Octavo, price 2 s. Articles of Visitation for Norwich and Norfolk. Printed 1671. The Compleat Vineyard: Or an excel∣lent way for the planting of Vines, ac∣cording to the German and French man∣ner, and long practised in England; wherein is set forth the ways and all the circumstances necessary for the Planting a Vineyard, with the election of the soyl, &c. Also the fashion of Wine-presses, the manner of bruising and pressing of Grapes, and how to advance our English Wines; enlarged by the Author William Hughes. Printed in Octavo, 1670. price 1 s. 6 d. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a Religious man, found drowned in a Pit; wherein Sudden Death is considered, and more excellently handled than ever yet extant. Printed 1670. price bound 1 s. The Deaf and Dumb-Mans Discourse, or a Treatise concerning those that are born Deaf and Dumb, containing a dis∣covery
of their knowledge or understand∣ing; as also the Method they use, to manifest the sentiments of their minds: Together with an additional Tract of the Reason and Speech of Inanimate Crea∣tures, by George Sibscota. Printed 1670. price 1 s. Vittoria Corombona, or the White De∣vil: A Tragedy, as it is acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Ser∣vants. Printed 1672. price 1 s. The Flower-Gan: Shewing briefly how most Flowers are to be ordered; the time of flowring, taking of them up, and of planting them again; and how they are increased by Layers of Sets, Slips, Cuttings, Seeds, &c. with other necessa∣ry observations relating to a Flower-Gar∣den: Whereunto is added the Gardiners or Planters Dialling; viz. How to make a Horizontal Dial on a Grass-plat, the Knot of a Garden, or elsewhere; the like before not extant. By William Hughes. Printed 1672. price 1 s. A Dscription of Candia, in its An∣tient and Modern State; with an Ac∣count of the Siege begun by the Ottoman Emperour, 1666. continued 1667, 1668,
and surrendred 1669. Printed 1670. price 1 s. The Memoires of the Life and rare Adventures of Henrietta Silvia Moliere, a great Lady in France, now living; as they were published in French by her self: translated into English, with Remarks. Printed 1672. price 2 s. Poems written by the Right Reverend Dr. Richard Corbet, late Lord Bishop of Norwich: The Third Edition, corrected and inlarged. Printed 1672. price 1 s.
