h876 14444122 102349 SEVERALL SERMONS OF ROBERT HARRIS once of HANWELL, Now President of Trinity College in Oxon, and Doctor of DIVINITY. BEING A supplement to his works formerly Printed in Folio; intended for their supply, who have the other already. CONTAINING I A brief Treatise of the threefold state of man never before extant. II A Sermon preached to the Honorable House of Commons. III A Sermon touching prayer and mercy; preached at the Spittle. IV Abners Funerall, preached at the Funerall of Sir Thomas Lucie Knight. V Concio ad Clerum. Preached to the University of Oxford. Which were not in the former Edition in Folio. BY ROBERT HARRIS, D.D. Oxon. LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for John Bartlet the elder, and Jonh Bartlet the younger, and are to be sold at the Gilt Cup, on the South side of Pauls neer Austins Gate in the new Buildings. 1654.
TO Sir ANTHONY COPE Knight and Baroner. SIR, YOu are called to a place which I cannot but love, Hanwell, you are yet but young, and youth (God saith) is vanity, and vanity feeds upon it self,Eccles. 11.1 Job 11.12. being empty and im∣patient of Counsell; we were wont to say of you in your Childhood, that you were a man, we now upon better grounds expect it from you; and do pray you seriously to minde your self: First, whither you are called: Se∣condly, and by whom. 'Tis true, you are called to a great estate, but that is made up of such materials as do stand upon two lame feet: the first is Uncertainty; first out∣ward things are uncertain; 1. to us, they have wings,1 Time. 6.17. Prov. 23.5. and are now upon the wing, flying from house to house, and (as I may say to my cost) from nation to nation; on the other side, 2. we are uncertain to them, sometimes we play with them as children with birds and send them
flying by unthrifty and ungodly meanes, at other times death seises us and sequesters them on the sudden. You need not go from home to learn this, my dayes are not ma∣ny, yet in them, I have buried three of your Fathers, with their respective wives, besides branches, more then I can name; you are (within few years) the fourth heir of that ancient house; such is our life, and so uncertain the supports thereof. But admit a certainty, yet halt  these outwards, on another lame legge, and that's Un∣sufficiency, they will not secure us from any evill, they will not procure us any good, at least they will not give us any full satisfaction: we read of some who had more Kingdomes then you have Mannors; who enlarged their desires like hell, and yet were as unsatisfied as bell it self: so true is Solomon (to saynothing of heathens) the eye is not satisfied with seeing,cles. 5., &c. &c. and when all is done, all is but vanity, and the vanity of vanities: this (I confesse) is not easily beleived, till experience hath confuted us. I remember what your Father told me, upon his death bed, "I have often heard you (said he; speak) of creatures "vanity, but I could never beleeve it till I had tryed, upon triall, be found me true. O that Sir Anthony in his youth, would appeal to Sir Anthony in his age, "be∣leeve "it (said be to his heir, your Grand-father) all
is vanity, meer vanity, so have I, so will you in time find it; but so much of that. In the next place, be pleased to  consider, 2. who hath brought you hither; surely pre∣ferment comes not by chance, it is the Lord that sets up,Pf. 75.6, 7. and puls down, now in mercy, now in wrath; the world may seem to run on wheeles, but those wheeles are full of eyes,Ezck. 1. and an eye of providence is most visible in these re∣volutions which relate to you. When I first knew Han∣well, I sound Sir Anthony Cope there, and there I leave him again, whilest I leave the world, the wheel with eyes is come about, and ends where it began for my time; and truly it will be no smalk comfort to me dying, may I leave the same Sir Anthony in the same place; the Sir Anthony that I found there, was not onely morally good, temperate, sober, continent, &c. but spiritually good, a man truly zealous for God in his day, worships, truths, a man who did much countenance all honest Preachers, and (which is not ordinary) his own most, a man terrible to the wicked, comfortable to the Godly, a lover of his Country, and with Uzziah a lover of husbandry in that his Town, who made it his study (as he would say) to imploy the poor there, and to keep thence, such as would either burden or ble∣mish the place; This was the Sir Anthony that I
found there, and my prayer unto heaven is, that the same name and man, may still and still there live, and be ever like self, that his house may be farre from the curse, Nah. 1.14. and be filled with the presence of the God, who is both his own, and our blessednesse; and here I must now end, having exceeded my purpose, I say but thus much more, and I have done. The longer I lived in those parts, the more need I found of laying principles well, these few are some of those many deli∣vered in a shorter and plainer way, these thus preserv'd and enlarged, I tender to you as an expression of my true observance of that Honourable house, and honest Town, where I spent most of my strength, and which I commend to the word of grace to be further built up in the faith of Christ, in whom I would be whilest I am, Sir, Your ready servant and faithfull remembrancer, Robert Harris. Trinity College Oxf. Octob. 13. 1653.
A Table of the severall Sermons, Texts of Scripture, and points of Doctrine, con∣tained in the following work. A brief discourse of the threefold state of man. Page 1. Eccles. 7.29. Loe this onely have I found, that God hath made man upright: but they have sought out many in∣ventions. Doct. 1. MAn at first was a very excellent and de∣sirable creature. p. 2. 2 Man is not what he was, hee was not what he is, but now there is a vast distance between himself and himself, betwixt this and that estate. p. 13. 3 Mans sin is from mans self. p. 26. 4 Mans undoing, is from his non-dependence on God. p. 39. 5 When a man is once loose from God, and left to himself, he becomes restlesse and endlesse in his wayes. p. 49. Rom. 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ lesus, &c. p. 58. Doct. Saints in Christ, are in a very happy estate and condition. p. 118.
A Sermon preached to the Honorable house of Commons. p. Luk. 18.6, 7, 8. And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust Judge saith, And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily; Neverthelesse when the Son of man cometh shall he find faith on the earth? Doct. 1. In point of prayer we must gather all Arguments of encouragement, and never yeeld till we have the day. page. 2. The Lord will certainly avenge his own. p. 3 God beares long with adversaries; with worst men. p. 4 God is swift in his help as well as sure. p. A Sermon touching prayer and mercy. p. 1. Act. 10.31. And he said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine Alms are had in remembrance before God. Doct. 1. God is unspeakably good and gracious toward poor suppliants in point of prayer. p. 4. 2 God does observe and book every act and work of mercy, that is done by his Servants. p. 19. 3 No outward disadvantage can excuse us from Gods service, or exempt us from his acceptance. p. 33. Abners Funerall. p. 1. 2 Sam. 3.38, 39. And the King said unto his servants, Know you not that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day in Israel? 39 And I am this day weak though anointed King; And these men the sons of Zerviah be to hard for me. The Lord shall re∣ward the doer of evill according to his wickednesse.
Doct. 1. No greatnesse will keep from any death. p. 3. 2 When great men are taken from us, we must be affected with it. p. 18. 3 The highest estate may be overtopt. p. 30. Concio ad Clerum. Johan. 21. v. 17.18.—Pasce oves meas. Amen Amen di∣co tibi, cùm esses junior cingebas te, & ibas quò volebas; quum autem senueris, extendes manus tuas, & alius te cin∣get, & transferet quò noles. —Pasce oves meas. Docum. Omnium est ea eniti, quae communis salutis maxi∣mè intersint, Spartámque quam nacti sunt ador∣nare. p. 8.
A Table of such Scriptures, as are cleered in the ensuing work. Gen 1.26. LEt us make man in our image. page. 3.5. You shall be like God. p. Job. 9.16. Yet would I not beleeve, that he had heark∣ned unto my voice. p. Job. 21.23, 24. One dieth in his full strength. p. Job. 35.10. Where is God my maker. p. Prov. 19.17. He that hath pity upon the poor, lend∣eth to the Lord. Prov. 27.8. As a Bird that wandreth from her nest, so is a man that wandreth from his place. Eccles. 1. Cast thy bread up∣on the waters, for thou shalt finde it after many dayes. p. Esa. 30.18. The Lord waits that he may be gracious. pag. 58.6.7. Is not this the fast that I have cho∣sen, &c. p. Jer. 22.14. And cutteth him out windows. p. Dan. 9.20. Whiles I was speaking and pray∣ing, &c. p. Job. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine. p. 16.24. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name. p. Rom. 7.20. It is no more I that do it. but sin. p. 2 Tim. 4.2. Praedica sermo∣nem, insta, tempestivè, im∣tempestivè. p. Jam. 4.9. Be afflicted. p. 1 Joh. 3.9. He that is born of God doth not commit sin. p.
An Alphabeticall Table of the chief matters contained in the foregoing WORK. A. DAvid free from Abners blood. p. 2. Abners Funerall. No outward disadvantages hinder Gods acceptance. p. 33. Of prayer and mercy Those that have all advan∣tages should hasten to Gods service. p. 34 God will certainly avenge his people. p. Academici cavendum ne in∣dignos ad S. Ministerium promoveant. p. 18. ipsi se∣duli sint. p. 19 B. BEllarmine confuted. p. 58 C. A Sinfull change in fallen man. p. 13 The nature of this change. p. 15 Extent and causes of it. p. 16 Comfort amidst our great fol∣ly. p. 37 Condemnation what it im∣ports. p. 59 To be in Christ, what? p. 60 Saints in Christ, are in a hap∣py estate. p. 61 Wherein this consists, p. ib. & seqq. Come to Christ motives, p. 65 Objections against it answered. p. 67 What we must do to come to Christ. p. 68 Keep close to Christ. p. 69
Get your children into Christ. p. 71 How this may be done. p. 72 Slight none that are in Christ. Comfort to those that are in Christ. How to know whether we be in Christ. Objections against it answered. p. Cornelius formerly beleeved in Christ. p. 3 Comfort for the persecuted Church. p. Take courage in prayer. p. What is won or lost by cou∣rage, or fainting in prayer. p. See Prayer. D. MAns undoing from his non-dependence on God. 5. Reas. p. 39 Three sorts of men not de∣pending on God. p. 44 When a man depends on God. p. 47 Observe the difference of mans estates. p. 18 The steps of mans downfall, p. 41 The great evill of it. p. 43 Enquire the cause of Gods de∣layes both publick and private. How to remedy it. p. Be not discouraged, because of delayes. p. Objections answered p. Two doubts resolved. p. 1 Relig. old way. Doubts should send us to God in prayer. ib. & p. 13 No greatness can keep from death. p. 3. See Greatness Abn. fun. Be patient at the death of friends. p. 32 Desire not wordly greatneses. p. 8. Abn. Fun. Men apt to beleeve the Devil rather then God. p. E. OF Election. Observe the difference of mans Estates. p. 18. See first estate. F. BE humbled to consider, from whence we are fal∣len. p. 10 Why God did not put us past danger of falling. p. 12 Time of mans fall. p. 14 A sinfull change in man fal∣len, p. 13 Be humbled for our fall into sin. p. 20. & seq. How to recover our fall. p. 24. The power of faith. Aright fast. We should have respect to the meanest in our family. p. 34. Relig.
Fear not worldly greatness. p. 7. Abn. Fun. We must not basely fear death. p. 14. How that may be cured. p. 15 Be well grounded in the know∣ledge of our first estate p. 6. Principles to be known con∣cernig it. p. 67. Answer to Socinian, and Popish cavils about it. ibid. To the cavils of carnall p. 9. Great men apt to be flatter'd. p. 11. Abn. Fun. G. RƲles to be observed in giving. p. 32. Ad Relig. God not the Author of sin. p. 31, 32 How greatly God is provoked p We must not controll or confine God. p. No greatness can keep from a∣ny death. p. 3. Moderate your affections to earthly great∣ness. p. 7. Feares, hopes, de∣sires. p. 7 8 Great ones should make account of and prepare for death. p. 11 Abn. Fun. Great men subject to be flat∣ter'd. ibid. When great men are taken a∣way, we must be affected with it. p. 18. Reas. p. 19. Great men should study to be usefully great, how? p. 20 Joyfully entertain great men. p. 24. Feel the losse of them. p. 25 H. HAbitual corruption, the second part of the first sin. p. 22 Saints in Christ happy. p. 66 comparatively with other estates. 62. positively where∣in the happinesse of it con∣sists. ibid. Reas. 65 To be happy come to Christ. p. ib. Make sure of heaven. p. 33 how that may be done. p. 34 The highest estate may be over∣topt. p. 30. Abn. Fun. Be humbled to consider, whence we are fallen. p. 10. Humiliation wherein it con∣sists. p. 23 Carry our selves humbly. p 37 I. BE humbled for our impati∣ence p. Inventions diversly translated. p. 49 Inventions to be avoided. p. 55 A mercy to have Judges. p. Justifie God in all his wayes. p. 8 K. BE well grounded in the knowledge of our first
estate. p. 6. Principles to be known concer∣ning it. p. 6.7. L. VErbum legere non est praedicare. p. 20. Cler. Gods long-suffering towards his adversaries. p. M. MAgistrates must concur with God the Aven∣ger. p. Confide in God to bear them out. p. Man at first an excellent crea∣ture. p. 2 Mans several causes. p. 3 Man loose from God restlesse in his wayes. p. 50 The matter whereof man was made derogates not from his excellency. p. 5 Gods mercy to be admired, who is yet ready to receive us. p. 35 Gods mercy to man, who de∣parted from him. p. 4 God takes notice of works of merey. p. 19. Ad Relig. Be humbled for our back ward∣ness to works of mercy. p. 22 Exhortations to mercy; mo∣tives. p. 24 How we may be able to do works of mercy. p. 26 How willing. p. 27. Objecti∣ons answered. p. 29. rules to be observed therein. p. 32 Omnibus incumbit munera sua diligenter obire & quare, p. 8 O. QUinam Ovium nomine, veniunt. p. 6. Cler. P. PArables, their nature and parts. p. Quàm dissimilis Petro Papa Romanus. p. 13 Pastoris officium duplex, pa∣scere & pati. p. 2. Cler. Pasce oves meas, non ad so∣lum Petrum pertinet. p. 3 Nihil hoc ad Pontificem Ro∣manum. p. 4 Munus pastorale duabus per∣tibus absolvitur, praedicatio∣ne & precatione. p. 17 Pascere per alium non suffi∣cit. p. 14. Excitantur Pastores ad sedu∣litatem in officio faciendo. p. 20. Incitamenta. p. 23 Non tantùm verbo sed vita pascendum. p. 22 Nature of Gods patience, grounds of it. p. Presume not on Gods patience. p. give god the glory of his patience both evill men and good. p. It should lead us to repen∣tance.
p. Be humbled that we have provoked a patient God. p. Gods patience gives hope of further grace. p. Be, patient at the death of friends. p. 32. Abn. Fun. Pity our children. p. 53 quid significat. p. 5 We must take courage in pray∣er, and never give over till we speed. Reas. p. Be hum∣bled for discouragements in prayer. p. How provoking this is to God. p. Exhorta∣tion to perseverance in prayer. p. How needfull to be pressed. p. Motives to it. p. Meanes to hold out in prayer. p. Power of joynt∣prayer. p. How to set faith on work in prayer. p. Ob∣jections against courage in prayer answered. p. Prayer how Gods, how mans. p. 3. old Relig. Gods graciousness in time and case of prayer. 4 Ad Relig. Reas. p. 6. Be humbled for our backward∣ness to pray. p. 9. Praise God for his graciousness in point of prayer. p. 10. Make use of it. p. 13. In distres∣ses personall or publick. ibid. & p. 14. Obstructi∣ons of the successe of prayer. p. 15 Verbum legere no est praedi∣care. p. 20. p. 3 R. REpent, and let God be all again. p. 53 Man once loose from God rest∣lesse in his wayes. p. 49. Reas. p. 51. Bewaile this restlesnesse, which discovers it self in all passages of life. p. 54. pity it in our chil∣dren. p. 53. Be resolute in the cause of God. duplex residentia, loci & of officii. p. 15. Utraque Pa∣stori necessaria. p. 16 What returns we should make to God. p. 36 Forbear private Revenge. p. Right such of Gods people, as we have wronged. p. S. CHarge sin on our selves not others. p. 30 To remove sin, begin at our selves. p. 33. what unre∣generate men are to doe. ibid. What regenerate. ibid. Against Separation. p. 74 No outward disadvantage can excuse from Gods service. p. 33. use. Those that have all advantages should hasten to it. p. 34. dying speeches. p. 28. Abn. Fun.
Be humbled chiefly for the first sin, and why. p. 20, 21 The second part of the first sin. p. 22 Mans sin from himself, p. 26 proved, and objections an∣swered. p. 27, 28, 29 God not the Author of sin. p. 31, 32 Studiosis sedulò discendum. p. 10. Cler. Praesertim Theo∣logiae. p. 12. Excitantur omnes ad sedulitatem. p. 16 Answer to Socinian cavils. p. 6.7. God swift in his help, as well as sure. p. How. p. Why. p. Objections answered. p. The cause of Gods slowness in our selves. T. OFficium studiosorum Theologiae. p. 10 Time of mans fall. p. 14 Tutores diligenter instituere debent Adolescentes curae suae commissos. p. 11 V. MIsery of unmercifull men. p. 21 W. GOds way plain and casie. p. 54 Gods mercy to stop our wan∣drings. p. 55 Follow Gods Word, not our own inventions. p. 53 The vanity of worldly things. p. 31 Expect not great matters from the world. p. 31
A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF Mans first estate in the First and Second ADAM. SECTION I. Excellency of Mans estate, as created. ECCLES. 7.29. Loe this onely have I found, that God hath made man upright: but they have sought out many inventions. [God hath made man UPRIGHT] WEE are now come (according to our Method) to the Threefold estate of Man. I am not igno∣rant of those difficulties and disputes which occur in this Subject: Expect not from me in this place, an answer to all Objections, nor from any man satisfaction to each mans curiosity. Salomon himself could not satisfie himself in all particulars: Onely in the main of man he is very positive, and leaves us here two main
Principles, whereof the first respects mans innocent and pri∣mitive estate; The second, his lapsed and forlorn condition, together with the cause of both. His order is open and obvi∣ous; he had said before, That man is wholly corrupt; and now he delivers the originall hereof; Negatively, it is not God; Positively, it is man. We go on in our intended way of delivering Principles. And first, survey we mans first estate, and there look upon him as he stands in Gods hand, and is of his making til he mar'd himself. Here we find his beginning very good by creation. An excellent, a lovely, plain, even, uniforme piece, smooth without knots and flawes, straight without hook or crook;  So much Salomons comprehensive word imports; The result of all is this: Man at first avery excel∣lent and desi∣table creature. Man at first was a very excellent and desirable Creature. This the Point; and this is no more then Scripture reports of him. Where mention is made of his first estate, David brings him in with a crown upon his head, and that crown is a crown of glory and honour. Thou hast crowned him with glory and honour, Psal. 8.5. His place was little lower then Angells, but far above all other Creatures: As Job affirmes, Job. 35. v. 11. God made him wiser then the beasts of the earth, then the fowles of heaven. Yea, the Prophet assures us that the worst piece of him, the very case and outside, was most cu∣riously wrought and richly embroydered, Psal. 139.15. Moses goes yet higher, and carryes us above creatures to Gods blessed self, Let us make man, faith God, This Crea∣ture, in our image and after our likenesse, Gen. 1.26. Thus in Generalls we have him set forth to us. For Particulars, I shall not trouble you with any large discourse touching his excellencies, either of soul, or body, or estate: Neither can we in this our decayed condition reach them. We see, we feel what he is; but what he either was or shall be, we can rather guess then judge, as blind men do of colours; onely this we are sure of, within there was nothing but what was desira∣ble; without, nothing but what was amiable; about him, no∣thing but what was serviceable and comfortable: his under∣standing was as full of light as it was free from darknesse;
his judgement, sound; his conscience, clear; his will, con∣formable to Gods will; his affections, regular; nothing on that side wanting to his present happinesse. Or if we look without him, 1. His body had nothing of blemish or blush∣ing, or distemper; but rather cloathed with all requisite beauties and abilityes, which might render him lovely, and commend him to every eye. 2. For his estate, what it was before his fall we may guesse by that which is since restored by Christ, whereof we have a touch in that 8th Psalme: to wit; God gave him a Soverainty over all the creatures, and stampt such a majesty upon him, that they did all acknowledge him, and received their severall names, as so many acknow∣ledgements from him. As for his possessions, we need not stand to enlarge upon one Parcell of his Desmeans, which they call Paradise, sith the whole, both of sea and land, and all the creatures in both, were then his possession, his Para∣dise. Thus the case stood with man at first, the creatures were as observant of him as he of his Creator. More then this I shall not speak in these particulars. This being a Theam so much treated of by Schoolmen and others, who write of this first estate.Cleared in his severall causes. The whole matter will be further cleared if welook upon man in his causes. If we consider the Efficient cause, or the Author of man,  it's God himself: Adam, saith Luke, was the son of God, thence he derives his Pedegree. Now from the excellency of the cause, it is not hard to infer the excellency of the effect, especially since efficients work by way of assimilation; Naturall efficients. necessarily; voluntary causes, freely: both strive to accomplish their own works to their own ends and incli∣nations; now God (a voluntary agent) is all light, and works like himself, so that from him can come no darknesse; he is all goodnesse, all perfection, and can do nothing but what is in its kind good and perfect: nay further, God is not sim∣ply to be considered in this work, but with relation to per∣sonality. The three glorious Persons concur in this exter∣nall work: whence that expression Job 35.10.Es. 54.5. Ps. 149.2. God my ma∣kers. This is the joynt work of Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
the issue of that power, wisdome, goodnesse which is com∣mon to them all, so that the glory of Father, Son, and Ho∣ly Ghost is in its measure put upon this noble creature. Consider the Formall cause of man created. I mean, the manner in which God made him; and that is, 1. In the per∣fection of wisdome and deepest counsell, as being the Master∣piece of his visible works: hence for our better understand∣ing Moses brings in God consulting with himself, Let us, saith he, make Man. 2. In perfection of skill and workman∣ship, as in that 139th Psalm, who hath made him a curi∣ous piece, and bestowed so much art and cost upon him, as that the Master of Physick, Galen, was enforced to frame a song of praise to that Deity that framed mans body. 3. In perfection of power: he created him, without the contribu∣tion of either matter or instrument, and so became the sole and whole cause of man. The exemplary cause. And here we passe by that private o∣pinion of Zanchy's and others, who conceive that Christ as∣sumed mans nature for a pattern whereby Adam should bee made. The text sufficeth us: God made man in his own image, according to his own likenesse: which passage, having an in∣fluence into much which shall be hereafter said, must a little be opened. See then what is meant by those words; And the answer is, that image and likenesse in this case, * speak one and the same thing;Conser Ps. 58.4. cum Gen. 1.26. but in an high and strong way: Not as Bellarmine and others; who, for ends, make the one substantiall, the other, not. In our Image, most like our selves, that is, As near as the matter will suffer; There can be no proportion between the infinite God, and finite man; some kind of resemblance in some degree there may be: In every Beast there are some footsteps (as they are tearmed) of a deity, but more in man: some in every man, but more in some now. At first, of all visible creatures man came nearest to God. But wherein? not onely in re∣gard of his nature; because he had an understanding, a rea∣sonable will, a working immortall spirit in him, as Papists, and others speak; nor yet onely in order to his estate, be∣cause
hee was made Lord over all creatures, as Socinians would have it; But also and specially in regard of his Graces and endowments seated in his soul: God made him wise, holy, just, upright, wherein the Apostle chiefly placeth Gods Image; and that most justly, Eph. 4.24. That being the chiefe of Gods image in the first Adam, which Christ, the second Adam, doth mostly repair and restore. When then it is said, that God made man like himself, the meaning is, he made him holy, righteous, spirituall, according to the sampler, Gods blessed self. Consider the Finall cause; God made man for most ex∣cellent  ends and uses; he made him to be a King of creatures, to be near to his most glorious Majesty, to be that great piece which should crown the rest of his works, and speak out all his perfections: he made him capable of an immortall estate of true holinesse, and happinesse; and designed him for a marriage with the heir, Christ, and for nearest alliance with himself: and in order to these ends, he put so much honour upon him at the first. Nor can any man strange at this, sith it is the practise of all wise agents: Every skilfull workman (you know) layes out most of his skill and cost upon that piece which he intends for highest use and credit, as every builder is more exact in setting out a chimney piece, then in making a gutter. Now if it be objected,  that mans make is but of base materials, as dust, &c. It's answered, that the matter contributes least of all causes unto the excellency of the work. And as much might be said touching the meannesse of it; The truth is: The poorness and meanness of the matter, doth oftentimes most advance and commend the skill of the workman. That God out of nothing should draw something, out of dead, blind, dumb Clay should draw light, life, and speech, and out of such deformity should extract such beauty, strength, and excellency: this commends the workman, but doth not at all disparage the work. Be the stuffe what it will, God hath made a rich Arras of it; and the work is now honourable, through Gods power, though the
materials seem contemptible. So much for that objection. Other questions of like nature, we willingly passe over, and come to apply this. Information concerning primitive estate. Let me call upon you all to be well grounded and Gram∣mar'd in this truth, touching mans primitive estate. The not heeding hereof hath let in those inundations of errours, which now over-spread the Christian World. You are not to look upon man as now he is, but as first he was, exi∣sting out of his causes. And here I shall commend unto you these principles. Man had a beginning. Though now he be Immortall à parte post, yet once he was not; This is clear by the word, and by his continued dependence. His founder and maker was one; and that was God. It was a wilde and mad blasphemy to dream of Two beginners of the whole, as some did; or at least of Man, as did others. This God made him in his own likenesse, stamping upon him an Impression of Holinesse,Against Soci∣zus. and as Peter cals it, the divine nature. These Principles, (as others in other cases, have done) commend I unto you, nor would I have you once troubled with Socinus his cavils against the same; being such which scarce deserve an answer. First, saith hee,  If man had born upon him Gods Image, in∣trinsecally,  then man had been Immortall. Sol. So he had,Sol. if he had not killed himself, and cast a∣way his life. And though for the present he had nothing of death in him, yet was he mutable, and so might contract death. Secondly,  again he objects, If man were like God in holiness,  then was he free from sin. Sol. 1.Sol. From the Act of sin hee was free in his first con∣stitution,  though not from the power of sinning, being a voluntary agent. Secondly, he was like God, but not a God, that is, equall to God, and equally uncapable of sin. Thirdly,  again hee objects, If mans Image had consisted  in holinesse, then upon his fall, the whole Image of God had been lost.
Sol. 1. So it was de jure,Sol. if God would have taken the forfeiture. Yet, secondly, the argument holds not, unlesse we did place  the whole of Gods Image onely in holinesse. There indeed we lay it chiefly, but not onely. We say that Gods Image is com∣municated to the whole compositum or Man. We put a dif∣ference between the body of a man, and the body of a beast, whether living or dying: wee yeeld that a dead man hath more of God in his body, then a dead beast. Thirdly, and in short, to cut off these disputes, wee say  two things; first that there be degrees of holinesse in this Image of God; and next, that it is not necessary that man should partake with God in all his attributes, whereof some are in∣communicable; much lesse that hee should equalize God, though in some measure he be a representative of God. To the former I adde this fourth principle. The distance  is very great between man now, and man at the first, as Sa∣lomon here puts it: as man was changeable then, so now he is changed very much; though some ruines and remnants of that which they call the substantiall Image abide upon him. This you must the rather be setled in, because Hereticks labour tooth and nayle, to confound these different states. Thus Papists sweat to prove that man in his pure naturals is as good now as then:Against Pa∣pists. and the same then that he is now, dif∣fering no more, at least for intrinsccals, then a man cloathed, and uncloathed differs from himself; or, then a horse bridled and unbridled. The case was this, God put a bridle of superve∣nient righteousnesse upon him to rein him in; other wise hee had the same seeds and principles of corruption, conflict, con∣cupiscence then, that he hath now. This they tell you,  and Socinus brings his prop to uphold their rotten building; If, saith hee, there had not been a con∣flict betwixt reason and affection, how could man have sinned? Sol. He should have said,Sol. If man could not have wrong'd himself, silenced reason, yeelded to appetite, how should he sin? But the matter is, man had power to be naught, (if wee may call that power) though for the present he was actually good.
But what strange men are these, who will fetch in God as an accessary to mans sin at least; in truth, as aprincipall? For if God, who solely and wholly made man, so made him, as that he needed a patch, and an adventitious plaister so soon as ever hee was made, doth it not reflect upon Gods perfe∣ction? but if hee were so made as that there was a propension against reason, and a rebellion in his members from the first; and if that Rebellion be bad, at least not good; is not God the author of it? Call they this Gods Image?  Or could God then see all that he made to be good? Bellarmines answer in this case gives me no satisfaction at all,Bellar. God, saith he, intended the man: The corruption is but ac∣cidentall, as when the Cutler makes a sword, he mindes the sword, not the rust of it. For (to omit other differences) the Cutler undertakes not to make the matter,Sol. to wit, the Iron or Steel, but onely to give that matter a form. And the rust doth follow the mat∣ter, not the form. The sword rusts not because a sword, but because Iron. But now God gives man both; indeed all; nothing else contributes; and the saying is true, that who gives matter and form, gives the necessary consequents of both. But wretched men care not how much they depresse God, so they may exalt flesh. Let them go. And hold we this distance still: man is not so bad now, but once he was as good. Originall righte∣ousnesse was once as naturall as sin is now, if not more. And this truth carries more in it, then as yet happily you are aware of. Learn hence that which Salomon here presseth,  Justifie God in all his ways: against cavils of flesh and blood. namely, to justifie God in all his wayes as holy in all his works. It is a fearfull thing to see what proud man renders to God for all his kindnesse. God made him a most glorious, hap∣py, sufficient creature: his own folly hath perverted his wayes, and now his heart frets, and his mouth chats a∣gainst the Lord: I beseech you, understand your Origi∣nall, and preserve your selves from the Pestilent errours
of this age, and know how to plead for God, and to emplead sin. For example. You shall hear men cry out of Bloudy doctrine touching Gods Decreeing men to fall;  nay, necessitating them to damna∣tion, &c. Now here learn an answer of Salomon,Sol. God made man good, made him for happinesse, put him into possession of it, gave him power to hold it, but he sought out many inventions, he, he sought out &c. it was an act of mans counsell and choice; hold we to this, though we cannot so well conceive the con∣currence of causes now, as Adam did then, or as we shall hereafter at the day of the revelation of the righteous Judge∣ment of God.Rom. 2.5. Again, you hear men say, that we make God the greatest tyrant living, one who gives impossible lawes, requiring im∣possibilities under the penalty of damnation, unless we will yeeld that man can fulfill the law. Now to this Answer. Then was then: Now is now.Sol. When God transacted with man he required no more then man could do, now why must the rule be bended to man? or the debt drawn to his ability, especially sith the bond stands but for evidence and mans good? God commits him,Gal. 3.23.24. shuts him up onely to humble him, and to drive him to seek a surety of his own providing. It's replyed, that this salves not the businesse, since,  in our do∣ctrine, more is required of man lapsed, then of man in Innocency; for God requires that faith now, which he did not then, and exacts what he never gave, gathering wherehe never strawed. Thus they. Wretched men!Sol. Doth God require any thing in the Go∣spel but upon Gospel tearms? that is, that he will work the  thing required when sought unto. Again, what though Adam had not the exercise of faith in  Christ, as neither of patience or some other graces, yet he had all in the roote, seed, and power? The want was not in Adam, the subject: but the stay was the absence of occasion, and an object. He had power to do, and to beleeve any thing
that then did or after should concern him, and his place, and condition; and no more is required of us now. I never saw an Elephant in my life, why? not for want of a principle in the subject; the same eye that can see an Horse, could an Elephant too, were it presented to my sight. I cannot be said not to see it, but it is not to be seen. Lastly,  you heare men thus reasoning. Why! I am as God made me, I am cholerick, I confesse it, but 'tis my nature: I am sleepy; Can I help it? &c. Answer.Sol. There are Defects which follow particular tem∣pers, and natures, Purely-naturall; others which are sinfull flowing from the principles of Poyso ned nature: sinfull distem∣pers, are yours, not Gods; you might once have prevented them, you must now have them healed. It is an aggravation to lay our faults upon our natures, yea hereby we accuse the Creator. Therefore in stead of excusing our selves or accusing our maker (as Adam and Eve did) let us lay load on our selves; and that's the next use. Where see for humbling,  Be humbled, that thou art fallen as thou art. whence we are fallen, what we were, what we are. Men love to talke of their Ancestours, there by to pride themselves, and can hardly descend in them∣selves, though tumbled down by Gods hand. Let us, on the contrary, abase our selves to our estate, and befool our selves, as we see the Bankrupt doth, Once, quoth he, was I well, could I have kept me well; I had mony, land, stock, friends and what not? but now I lye under poverty, scorn, and con∣tempt. Ah unwise man I! In like manner let each of us say, Once I was light, now darknesse; Once rich in grace, now empty; Once Gods favorite, now an enemy; Once beau∣tifull. now ugly, a very Ichabod, my glory is departed, Ah soolish man; how was I bewitched! Thus let us rate and chide our selves into a low conceit of our selves. Howbeit, all this signifies nothing, unlesse we see this our misery in the cause thereof. Therefore look upon sin as a thing most perni∣cious and destructive. It is sin, (say) that hath undone me, that hath ruined mine estate; cast me into debt; 'tis sin that hath slain my Cattell, deprived me of my Crop; 'tis sin, ray
sin in Adam that hath forfeited mine honour, undermined my Authority over creatures. Time was when every beast, every bird, every fish, would have owned me, would have done me homage: Now my very servants trample upon me, my once subjects rise against me, as I have against God. Lyons are ready to devoure me, Bears to worry me, horses to brain me, yea, every Caterpillar, worme, flea, makes a prey of me. 'Tis sin, that hath marr'd my body. Once I had a body perfect, active, sound, glorious, the more naked the more shining: now in stead of those beauties behold a stench, sicknesse, shame and whatsoever else is blushfull. It is sin that hath spoiled my soul: at first I had near Communion with God, close correspondency with his will and Image. The peace of God, the joyes of God, the strength and life of God were upon me. Now hell is in my soul, darknesse and con∣fusion fills every room; I bear in stead of Gods glorious Image, the ugly Image of the devill himself, and come as near un∣to him as my nature is capable. Oh curse this accursed thing, Sin, which hath so undermined thee, and resolve against it for the future, as we do against lesser evills, we decline such meats as threaten partiall misery. This rots my teeth, that hurts my eyes, this distempers my liver, that my stomach, therefore I must forbear. Oh fear that sin that destroys eye, and hand, and head, the whole body, the whole soul, the whole man. And now bethink thy self of a recovery as decay'd men do; lye not whining under losses, as Jacobs sons in their wants, much lesse run to base, sharking courses, as broken chapmen do; But bustle and bestir thy self, bethink thy self, Is there no help? is it not possible to raise my self a∣gain? yes, there is hope and help, the Lord Christ, the second Adam comes with the Image of God upon him, as a restorer of the breach, he is come to recover what was lost, to pay what was owing, to repaire our ruines, to recruit us again, he is able, he is willing to undertake us. Nay, the thing is done al∣ready, therefore I'le to him, as once the bankrupts to David, I will confesse with the prodigall, I will beg for life, I will cast my self upon him, and close with him being offered as an
husband, as the only way for decay'd fortunes, so shall I be restored in blond and repaired in mine estate. Thus resolve, thus do, and cease not doing till thou find his mark upon thee, his fruit and life in thee: so shalt thou find more life and happinesse in him, then there was death and misery in the old Adam. Blesse God for the first estate: and that little which is lest to this day. Lastly, learn to be thankfull for this first estate: close with all the Saints in that Song of theirs, Rev. 4. ult. Thou are worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, &c. It is not little that we owe to God, for this poor estate which yet is left us; for these poor eyes, these lame limbes, these frail bodyes, these sick souls, which we labour with every day; We are much bound to him, for the meanest fare, for the least bit of coursest bread, the least sip of thinnest drink, and must coufesse with Jacob that we are lesse then the least of all his now fied mercies; what thanks then can we render for our first estate, which was every way full, free, glorious, whether we look upon soul or body, or place or state, or any thing appertaining thereto; nor is Gods goodnesse and bounty the lesse, because we have foolishly squandered it away. That greatens our folly and wickedness, yet no way lessens Gods largesse and kind∣nesse. Object. But why did not God put us past danger and losse, but left it in our hands to lose? Sol. An ungracious question: so the unthrift talks when he hath outed himself of his patrimony, Why did my Father trust me? why did he not entayle his land? There is no rea∣soning with such froward children, neither content full, nor fasting. A gracious heart must and will be thankfull, as for kindnesses intended, so much more bestowed, most of all for mercies restored in Christ, who hath mended that first estate.
SECTION II. Sinfull estate of man, as fallen. ECCL. 7. ult. [But they have sought out many inventions.] HItherto we have seen that man was first good, and well stated; But doth he continue so? No, he was made good, but mutably good, and so of himself, he fell from God and himself; and so we passe to mans next estate, where we find the case is much altered with him. He is not what he was,  A sinfull change in nun as now fallen. 1 Time of this change. he was not what he is: but now there is a vast distance between himself and himself, betwixt this and that state. This the Point, and this the word plainly proves, Rom. 3.10. &c. here are layd down two received truths. 1. There's no goodnesse in any. 2. They are altogether naught; But was it ever thus? No, they have gone out of the way, saith the Apostle, they have corrupted themselves, and that from their youth, Gen. 8.21. They erre, and that from the wombe, Psal. 58.3. Yea, from their conception, Psal. 51.5. This better appears, if we may compare estates past and present: 1. Man was good, Gen. 1. ult. now bad, Gen. 6.5. & 12. first he was straight as 'tis here, now perverse, Gen. 17.9. first he bare Gods Image, now mans, Gen. 5.3. first he was glorious, now filthy, Job 15.16. abominably filthy. And at this we can the lesse marvell, since his beginning, he comes under different hands; At first he was onely Gods workmanship, and then there was nothing in him but what was Gods, all was right as God is altogether pure: but since, he hath deserted God and betaken himself to those Inventi∣ons which himself hath hatch'd and Satan fomented, and hereby wrought two mischiefs at once. First, he hath made
an hand of all his holinesse. Secondly, he hath made way to all evill, sin, horrour, shame, confusion, have seised upon all and rendered him most woefull, most hatefull; we need not more words to prove a change in him. Their dreams of old who fancied him to be bad from the beginning, either in whole or part, are not worth confutation, we have learned that the devils themselves were once good, but they kept not their station. Time will be better spent in searching into the Particulars of this change, as into the time when it was, the nature of it, the subject and extent of it, the cause of it, &c. 1. Time of this change. And first for the time; we conclude all in two propositi∣ons. 1. The first act of mans will after his creation, was not the first sin and cause of this his change; we find Adam a while well employed, in receiving laws from his maker, in marking as it were, his cattle, in acting his calling, in accepting his Fathers choice of a wife, and thus far he was right. Nor are arguments of some Thomists against this, so cogent, that they need to stay us. 2. It's most reasonable to think that he quickly fell, (though not so soon) from his happy estate, because Satan was very subtill to take him at the advantage, before he was well setled, and experienced; and secondly, very active, fired with rage and envy. Because he is said to be a murderer from the beginning; or very near to it; which beginning must commence from man, not from himself. Adde hereunto, that he had not so easily prevailed, if man had been long rooted, and so better enabled to have made stronger resistance; (for I make no doubt but Adam should have growen and emproved himself by experience, as some wayes the second Adam did) but he took his time, whilest yet they were unexperienced, as is seen chiefly in Eve, who as yet knew not, as it seems, the nature of the Serpent: whereto we may adde this, that she, the same Eve, had conceived her first born without sin, had any considerable time been 'twixt their creation and fall. But I will not be too peremptory in things more disputable and lesse im∣portant.
For the second,2. Nature of this change. 1. Negatively. the nature of this change. Thus we state it. First, the change was not in Essentials, for such cannot be separated from the thing, without its dissolution: but man was for substance, the same man before and after his change: Christ was essentially man, though far from sin. So shall we be in heaven. Therefore if this were the errour of Illyricus, it were an errour sufficiently gross. We read, that God made substances, he made no sins. Secondly, it was not in Supernaturals onely, for naturals also are abated and eclipsed in him, neither was his Originall righteousness altogether su∣pernaturall at that time; we may call that (properly enough) naturall which is common to the whole species, to all man∣kind, and passeth along in a way of generation, though we cannot expresse how. But then the objection is, If righteousnesse be any way naturall,  then that ceasing, man should also cease to be man. Sol. The argument will not follow,Sol. because naturals do admit of degrees: sight is naturall, speech naturall, &c. yet a blind or dumbe man, is yet a man; we may safely say, that righteousnesse was as naturall, as sin is preternaturall: and we mean no more but that Justice was then as naturall, as now sin is. Sin is either naturall or preternaturall, (if you will so call it:) we speak of man in this case Morally not Physically con∣sidered, and heed not what Aristotle will call him, but what God saith of him. This for the negative. Now positively,2. Positively. we say that this change is properly an al∣teration, consisting in Qualities and cetain respects. Whereas man held a double correspondency with God, one Relative, as he stood in subjection to him, and a dependence upon him, as his maker, master, father, &c. Another Repre∣sentative, as he bare Gods Image, which he could not proper∣ly beare in a relation of Inferiority: he is now much varied and changed, in both these. First, of a subject, he is be∣come a rebell, of a son a traytour, of a friend an enemy, and stands now at defiance with God. Secondly, whereas he earst much favoured and resembled God, now he is most removed from him, and opposite to him,
of light he is become darknesse, as Paul expresseth it in the abstract: Semblably, we may say of wisdome he is become folly, of goodnesse, in a sense, sin it self, as the very Heathens use to expresse him. And here is the change, in a mans estate both personall and locall. Subjection is turned into Rebelli∣on, Conformity into Difformity, and so into Deformity, and consequently, his happinesse into unhappinesse it self. Thus for the second Question. Followes the third touching the Subject and Extent of this change: and this we dispatch in three words. First,3. Extent of this change. all mankind is changed for the worse, and is warped aside. Secondly, all of man, every particular both power and part, is now degenerated; The whole frame of his heart is corrupted. Gen. 6. And lastly, all men, all alike, all involved, and suffer this unhappy change. The cause of this change.4. The cause of it. First, we exclude not God from any act, though from all sin. Secondly, we excuse not Satan from the sin, though from some acts in it. Thirdly, we lay the blame where the fault is, upon mans self. To inlarge these a little. First, we exclude nor a divine concurrence; Gods decree, permissive (as some speak) went upon it; and this, to say the least, we must needs say, unlesse we will say that God stood Neutrall in one of the highest works of providence, neither willing nor nilling it. Secondly, Satan did so far concur as to bring a guilt upon himself, by tempting man. But the Word chargeth the sin upon mans self, they have sought out, so saith Salomon, so must we say. Though man would shift it from himself, and divide it betwixt God and Satan. But 'tis found upon him, and there we must leave it. But how could this be (will some say) how could man so accomplish it,  admit of sin? Sol.Sol. The Text tells us, he sought out many inventions: and we must consider;
First, that man was made out of Nothing, and therefore  apt enough to return into his first principles, and more prone to privations, such as sin is, then to positive goods, when he is left to himself. Secondly, he is a compounded creature, and therefore in and  of himself mutable. Thirdly, he is a finite creature, and borrows all from with∣out,  and of himself is subject to deficiencies, and so may sin. Fourthly, he is a creature so bounded that he cannot see  and do, and consider all things at once, and so may fall into diversions and excogitancies. I, and Fiftly, he is a free creature, and therefore may act or  suspend, use or not use, his abilities at pleasure. But, it were better happily, leaving these disputes, to look up to God and admire with Austin, that things should be against his will, and yet not altogether besides it; and to bethink our selves how we may rise, rather then how we did fall. It sufficeth for the present, that we clear God as much as Papists or any others: at least we desire to do it; and if they can teach us how to speak better, and more for the vindication of Gods holinesse, we shall thank them, mean while we mean as well as they, and speak as much for the vindication of Gods holinesse as any Bellarmine, or Arminius of them all; we say, that God is no morall cause of sin, and Physical cause he can∣not be: sin having only a cause deficient, but none efficient; we do not say that any precedent decree doth force the will or compell the man. Nor on the other side, do we say that the whole work of sin is only from man, nothing of it from Satan (as he reports, who usually is more modest): but this we do,Estius lib. 2. distinct. 21. Sect. 11. & distinct. 3. we set the saddle on the right horse, and say as Salomon guides us, Man hath sought out many inventions. Do you understand what I have said, or shall I speak it yet more plain∣ly? we yeeld a concurrence of many agents in mans change, but with a wide difference, as to the manner of their working. First, for God; we must not conceive him to be only a spectator, in this high work of providence, we must acknow∣ledge his disposing hand, his ordering hand, his decreeing hand,
in leaving man to his own choice: but still without the least shadow of sin. Secondly, for Satan; we must not excuse him whom God curseth, he was certainly a morall cause of mans sin, and did his utmost to perswade. Thirdly, for Mans self; we must speak Salomons language, who lays not the fault upon the devill, as no reason he should: for a moral cause hath no influence, at least no inforcing power upon the subject. Much lesse doth he lay it upon God, who always seriously disswades from sin, Physically infuseth no ill, nor withholds requisite strength. 'Tis true, flesh and blond will cavill and find this bastard sinne many fathers: but man is father and mother both, himself: so the Word speaks it, and Adam with all his skill could not shift it off from him∣self, though never so willing. I say in this case, as one said in another; In one and the same thing many causes may concurre, but not to the same end, nor in the same thing. Now this makes first for our information.  Ever observe this distincti∣on of a good and bad estate. God, you see here, teacheth us a double estate; learn we both: God sets a bound and distinction: thus farre goes his work; here begins ours: Now we must keep asunder what he so distinctly se∣vered, the rather because a confusion here is in it self most hurtfull, and by many most industriously endevoured: Oh how do wits sweat to trouble these waters! to this end, that we should not see our own faces, nor discern which is which. Hence those uncouth conclusions in both estates. In the first, There is no such thing as Original Righteousnes, no such Image of God as we fancy, say the Socinians; Next, there is such a thing, say Papists, but it was not natural; it was to man but as cloathes and trappings to the body, as if man should not have been born in this spirituall armour, as some spake of Giants for other armour; but come into the world as naked of Grace, as a horse doth of a Saddle, &c. till God from without do furnish him. And in the second estate, how infinitly do men fumble? First, Originall sin that's, to many, a very dream; There is no such thing: Secondly, yes, say others, there is such a thing, but it is onely imputed: Nay, saith a third, it's more then imputed, but yet without the accesse of any positive
malignity, 'tis a meer privation. Fourthly, that privation is rather penall then sinfull; Fifthly, if sinfull, yet not in all. Sixthly, if in all, yet is it the least sin, deserving privation of joy and blisse onely. Seventhly, in Saints it is gone, and so gone that we need not repent of it, nay, we ought not. In short, set aside some outward privileges and accoutrements, man is where he was, changed onely in externals. Now what stronger proof of our declension? what a miserable thing is man become! who rather then he will be beholding to God for his first setting up, or to Christ for his supplyed repaires and recruits; rather then he will acknowledge himself such a fool, such a beast to part with so faire an estate, cares not what he saith, or reports, as to Gods work or his own in either estate. Oh madness! were it not fit for us to say with Salomon, God made man upright, but man hath undone himself? Surely this were fit: but then thinks proud flesh, what will become of free will? what of merit? what of fulfilling the Law? what of all fleshly boasting and excellency? were this granted, then must God be justified; then must man be abased. But rather then God shall goe away with all the credit, and man with all the shame, he will mingle heaven and earth, light and darknesse, and come to this, either hee was never good, and that reflects upon God; or else is good still, and then mought Christ have saved a labour; at least, much of his blond, if the Frier be right, who saith,Fevardent. that one scar of Christ could have redeemed all. Good my brethren, admit of light, of truths so fundamentall; know a change, acknowledge what it is, whence it is: It is from light to darknesse, from life to death, from wisdome to folly, from heaven to hell, from God to Satan. It is an universall apostasie, and it is from your selves, you were Adam, as the Text here tels you, legally, natural∣ly considered, you can blame none but your selves, and none could change you, til your wils or minds did change. If as yet, you know not these things sufficiently, suffer the word of in∣struction, submit to Catechising, conferre with your teach∣ers, peruse the principles of your faith and religion, or, if al∣ready you doe know these things, freely acknowledge them,
justifie wisdome and truth to the face of errour, and to the teeth of pride. In the second place,  Be humbled mightily for this tall into sin. let us set upon that hard (but season∣able) work of humiliation. The poyson of Adams first pride, nay of Satans, sticks yet in our soules; and the truth is, had man the devils capacities, he would be as proud as the devill himself; and the least cause, and the more sin there is, the more proud still. Sin is a leaven that heaves and swels him, and when hee is most sinfull, then least humble. And as it puts out his eyes, and hurts his understanding: so it corrupts his will. Of all things in this world, sinfull man loves not to come down; he would still be in credit with himself, however the world goes.Foure great causes tor deep humiliation. This being our nature, we must set more reso∣lutely against it; and know that no one work better becomes our condition then the work of humiliation; and therefore we must break through all impediments, and see what reason we have to pull down our selves. First, we, (onely under painfull evills) we ought to stoop; but sin is The evill, even the evill of all evils; that which doth hurt every creature, and would, if it could, the Creator. Now this sin is found upon us, and should shame us as the thief, when taken in the manner. Secondly, these sins are many and mighty, we have done as wickedly as we could, Jer. 3. had we had more room for more sin, we would have bid it welcome; mean while we are as full as we can hold, there's not one spare room, Rom. 3. Thirdly, had we but once offended, one treason were un∣sufferable; one sin would make a breach into all order, beau∣ty, peace, reason, religion; and the whole creation. One sinne had let in a legion of devils, a deluge of all miseries: But now we have exceeded all bounds and dimensions; there's nei∣ther number nor measure of our wickednesse. Fourthly, all this springs from our selves; we spin all our poyson out of our own bowels, Es. 59.4. We may pretend occasions, inticements, enforcements: but when all's done, all these excuses will prove but so many accusations and ag∣gravations: and therefore let us look homeward, and strike
the right veine, begin where our sin began, at and in our selves, at the heart, at the spirit. More cause to be humbled for the first sin, then all that follow. This must bee our course in all our actings and failings; chiefly for the first sin; till a man comes to that, hee is never truly humbled. Other sins are more private, partiall, and seem more pardonable, as issuing out of weaknesse, or ig∣norance or (at the most) of a will surprized and captivated; Oh but the first sinne which is known by the name of Origi∣nall sin, was a strange sinne, whether the Subject, or Object, or Ingredients, or Consequents be considered. First, for the Subject, it is the sin of mankind,Why? 1. never did all Subjects so conspire in a rebellion; secondly, of all the man, nothing is exempt. Secondly, for the Object, it is the breach of the whole Law,  whether ingraven or imposed, and of the whole Covenant, as Hosea expresseth it. Thirdly, for the Ingredients, it's every sin virtually, and  the death of every grace meritoriously. Fourthly, for the Consequences; it forfeits all goodnesse, life,  creation; and is an in-let to all misery and confusion. We have read of some who in their vast luxuriousnesse have cast away whole Lordships,Cleopatra. Kingdomes at one throw, have drunk up thousands at one draught:Nero. but these were toyes to Adams fact. His bloudinesse was horrid, who wish'd all Rome one head, that so he might dispatch it at one blow; But Adam passeth, who at one time and blow, beheaded all mankind, and slew at once all the soules and bodies that ever did, or ever shall descend of him. Object. But you'l say,  What's this to us? Sol. Wee are Adam. The sin in speech,Sol. is if a man may so speak, specificall. And 'tis but an idle question amongst some wanton School-men. Who sinned most, Adam or Eve; and whether if Eve onely had sinned, we had been guilty and obnoxious. The whole kind, (saith good Austin) is obnoxious, and in this account Adam is Eve, and Eve is Adam, and every man is both. I mean it thus: That they must not here be per∣sonally considered, but as parts and representatives of man∣kind.
kind. God contracted with mankind, and mankind with God. Mankind made; mankind brake the Covenant. There's no precedency of sexes and persons in it, only in the manner and order of conveyance there is some. And so we fall upon the second thing in this sin,Habituall cor∣ruption, the second part of the first sin. viz. Habituall corruption, which fol∣lows upon this unhappy act, and this is a Gulf fadomlesse, the dimensions whereof none can take but God, who is the just measure of himself, and of all things else. Men can take the altitude and latitude of vastest bodies; but the way of this sin, is like the Eagles in the aire, the ships in the Sea, its height is above all heights; its depth, breadth, and length beyond all our comprehension. You shall be like God, saith Satan; there is the snare, there is the design. Like him? not in nature, but in state and condition; Absolute, Independent: his will a law, his judgement a rule: and this poyson is in him still; every man hath a heart of a God in him, and is his own God, whil'st he is in this estate, and at this passe he is, whilst he is but na∣turall. But this was but a Gull. What is the event? man is like not God but Satan, he is all flesh, all brutish, nay, devilish, saith the Apostle, he is a devill in and to himself; a devill to his brother, with that villain in Bodin, hee would kill both soul and body, and send all the world to hell. He is a devill towards God, and hates him infinitely. The difference be∣tween the devill and him, lies onely in degrees and capacities; else there is nothing in us, in a morall sense, but what the devill likes, nothing in the devill but what we do or would like, if God did not bound us, and tye us up. Men have laboured, and that to good purpose, to set forth the particulars of this sin, but shall I tell you? man is so bred in it, and maimed by it, that he cannot well tell what to make of it, where it ends, what a man would be, or what he would think, say, or do, or wish, if he were left to himself: we finde enough for our humbling up∣on record, I, and in the best Saints. A man would have been bound for Davids good behaviour, but Jeremiah hath told us, that The heart of man is desperately wicked. It is not indeed beyond uncreated mercy, and infinite power and wisdome: but it is beyond all things else. Truths and virtues have their li∣mits,
may be defined, discerned, confined; whether an angell can say, how farre orginall sin may bee extended in parti∣culars, is more then I can tell. This I can tell, that we have cause to be humbled for this sin whilest we breath. Quest. But wherein stands this work of humiliation?place "marg" Quest. Sol. Sol. I will tell you in few. First, in Conviction. Labour to be convinced, both by Law, and Gospell, of these things. First, that thy sin and corruption is unspeakable, (as else∣where  I have shewed more largely) against all right and reason, all light and instruction; whereby at once thou hast made an hand of all grace, and hast given life to all sinne. Secondly, that this was Thine own sin, as hereafter I must  speak. Thou must own it, and acknowledge an hand in all sin, as to the seeds of them; and in all miseries, as to the desert of them. Secondly, to Conviction adde Contrition: be ashamed of thy  self, tremble, blush, mourn, and as James phraseth it, . be mi∣serable. Wee grieve, and afflict our selves for other mens un∣kindnesses, and unreasonable behaviours: bleed under thine own sins and follies, and understand that none have done thee so much wrong, prejudice and disgrace, as thou hast done thy self, whil'st thou hast thus ungraciously risen against thy God. Thirdly, to Contrition adde Confession. Clear God, clear  his Law, clear all the Jury, that hath been empanelled a∣gainst thee. Yea, clear both men and devils in comparison of thy self. Say, I am The devill to my self, mine is the sin, and the shame. Fourthly, to all the rest adde Submission. Accept of the  chastisement of God, Lev. 26. Yeeld to his rebukes outward∣ly, to the lashes of conscience inwardly: tell conscience that he doth but his office; sit down by its checks, by the re∣proaches of enemies, by the reproofs of friends, and preachers, by all thy losses and crosses. Say, All is just, all is little. If the Lord throw me into hell it's just, if he spare me 'tis grace: I will beare the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, Mic. 7.9.
Since we have made a foolish bargain,  How we may undo this bad bargain. and changed for the worse, what shall we do next? is there no way to undo this bargain? That's the first question usually in such cases: and blessed be our God we may as yet go back. Object. Oh!  That I doubt is too goodto be true. I had rather then all the world it were to do again. Sol. That indeed is impossible,Sol. it is too late to call back yesterday; but not too late to improve our losses, and to salve all. Quest. Why,  what must I do? Sol. I. Make thy self sensible whence thou art fallen,Sol. and fare as the man doth, who hath undone himself, and beggard his by foolish bargaines: he lookes upon his wife, and then sighs, lookes upon his boy and shakes his head, looks upon his Girle, the water stands in his eyes; in short he is ready to tear him∣self for∣his former folly. Do thou the same, do as the wife doth, who hath wilfully cast away her self, and lost her friends for an unthrift, that useth her like a beast, she could bite off her very fingers if that would untie the knot: mean while, she repents with all the veines in her heart, so do thou. Thou hast undone thy self, thy wife, thy childe: matcht thy self to a de∣vill, without thy Fathers consent, who wil use thee worse then a drudge, then a dogge: mourn for this. Secondly, make to thy father as the childe doth when hee knowes not what to do. Truth it is, thou hast unchilded thy self, but thou hast not unfathered him, he hath the Bowels of a father still, and may help thee, with honour enough. Our children may do an act, which we neither can or may reverse or repair, not so Gods children: he may lawfully dis∣solve our covenants, which wee have no authority to make without his consent: hee may lawfully forbid the banes, and sue out our divorce betwixt us and Satan, annull that con∣tract. Object. But will he? Sol. I tell thee a father will do much in such a case, for a pe∣nitent childe, especially when he finds fraud and malice both in the cheater. Therefore cry with David, Lord seek thy
lest sheep; Lord dissolve my Covenants with death: mind him of a former covenant and precontract, as the Church doth; Lord, we are thine, other Lords have no portion in us, no right over us. Thirdly, and above all, Fly to Christ, and so to God through him. Saints and Angels are but of the Presence chamber. The great Favourite, the Kings Son, who hath his heart and ear, he must speak for thee; I mean, Christ, whose errand it was to dissolve the works of Satan, and all contracts with him, to bring in a New Covenant, to save what was lost. It is his place and office, he is the Goel, the next kins∣man, he is the second Adam, and came purposely to reduce us to our primitive Image, state and liberties: and he can do it, Rom. 5. there is more grace and life in him,Rom. 5.10. then there can be losse and sin in Adam: Hold that firmly: nay, hold three things, which I will speak in as few words, and so end this point. First, that none other can help thee. None else can make  that straight which is crooked, can speak or work life, but this quickning Spirit. Secondly, He can help thee; he is able to save to the ut∣termost  those that come to him. Thirdly, He will help thee: he never yet put back any that  came in truth to him; he will never undergo that reproach in Israel, This is the man whose shooe was pluckt off: he will never lose such an opportunity of evidencing his grace and power: for here is a work fit onely for a God; namely, to make the world to go backward; to undo that which was so long since done; to enforce Satan to throw in thy bonds; to translate thee from a state of death and bondage, to a state of life and advantage: rest upon him, who was made for this work, and will settle thee, (if thou wilt beleeve him, and be ruled by him) in a better state and tenure, then ever thou hadst in Adam; or couldst have, if an Angel were thy Father, or bound for thee. Christ alone is all-sufficient; there is not a second Adam besides him, neither needs there:John 8.36. If he the Son make thee free, thou are free indeed; If he the Son become
thy surety. The first Adam, was not more able to destroy thee, then he is to restore and secure. There stay thy self. And there's an end of this point. SCTION III. Mans sin was caused by himself. ECCLES. 7. ult. [But THEY have sought out, &c.] YOU hear how strangely man is altered. We proceed to the cause of this his change. Who is in fault? not God; he made man upright: But man himself. They have sought out, &c. The point is open. That mans sin is from mans self.  Mans sin is from mans self. Man is the cause of his own naughtinesse; the Author of his own sin and undoing, although not of every particular in it. Salomon is positive, and makes a just distribution: Mans sin is either from God, or from himself; not from the former, God: Therefore from the latter, himself; nay, himself is a free cause of his own change: it is an act of his own choyce. Whose? Mans, and that at large: not this, or that man, but man, all men sought out sin, all sin,Cleared by his threefold estate. all inventions and wayes of sinning. Summe up all, and the result will be, that all the sins of man issue from mans self. This will appear, if you consider him in his threefold estate. First, look upon him at First. God put no ill principle into him; no creature had any compulsive power over him; he had a true (though not Independent) Soveraignty over his own actions. He mought have stood, but he chose otherwise. No man can speak it more plainly then Salomon doth; which shall
save us the labour of further proof, though further testi∣mony of God, and conscience might be added, attesting this truth. Secondly, look upon man in his sinfull estate. And so sin  flowes from him as naturally as waters from a fountain,V. Prov. 10.3. Gen. 8. Jer. 6. 7. as sparkles from a furnace, Job 5.7. Mar. 7.21. From within,Jude 13. out of the heart of men proceed evill thoughts, Mark 7.2.Jer. 7. And these evill thoughts bedded there, beget adulteries,Job 5.7. fornication, murders, &c. what not? he is a sink, a very Sepulchre, an open Sepulchre, and what can you ex∣pect thence but stenches?Rom. 3.13. Rom. 3.13. Thirdly,Rom. 7.24. Col. 3.5. in his repaired estate;  Man hath still a body of sin, Rom. 7. consisting of many rotten members, Col. 3. From within he sends forth evill,Jam. 1.14. and 4.1. so saith James more then once, cap. 1.14. cap. 4.1. So that as sin is In him, so still, you see, sin is resolved Into him; it issues from principles of his own; from his own darkned mind, defiled conscience, poyson∣ed heart, and erroneous imagination. And as Divinity doth find him guilty,  and a Felo de se; so doth Reason too. For every free Agent is Lord of his own a∣ctions, and did he not work freely, he were not a voluntary workman. As things be in nature, so in operation. Did not man work freely, there were no place for choyce and option. Naturall agents are determined to One, as a stone descends onely: But Voluntary, such as man is, have a freedome of choyce. Were not man master of his own actions he were not ca∣pable of a law.  'Tis absurd to lay lawes upon things which work by instinct; To restrain or command by law fire to heat, or not, is absurd. Nay, more; He would be uncapable of good or bad; as a stone is; and consequently uncapable of reward or punishment; nay, uncapable of Christ, and an Holy Ghost; which dwels not in stocks. In short: Deny this, and you must deny man to be capable of law, of deliberation, of sin, of punish∣ment. A thousand such absurdities would follow, if man should not be the actor of morall things, yet objections are raised a∣gainst all that is said.
First against Salomons distribution.  Datur tertium; videli∣cet,  the Devill. Though the devill be a physical and working agent in his own sphear:Sol. yet to man he can be no immediate physicall agent, but onely morall: He works not immediately upon the under∣standing, nor so as God doth; but upon the passions of the body, and images of the phantasie: All that he can do is, to perswade, incite, suggest; He cannot, without man, have any Reall influence, unlesse man concur, not onely passively but actively too. True, he can bring poyson, as a theef stollen goods, and leave it with you, if you will receive it: he can∣not force you to take it: for none hath any Soveraignty over man but God and himself. The devill may co-work immedi∣ately and physically by the mediations of our passions and dis∣tempers: but not so, as to excuse, or exempt us. There∣fore Salomon distribution is sufficient. It is further objected against the threefold estate of man.Objections aised from mans first estate. Against the first thus. 1. It is inconceiveable how man should sin of himself; Either God left him so, as that he was necessitated to the fall; and then God is involved, man cleared: Or else which way should sin come in? The devill could not compell him, you say; neither had he any evill matter in himself: he could not desire his own unhappinesse, and undoing, nor his own error &c. God did not so leave him but that it was possible for him to  stand:Sol. God gave him power and intrusted him with it, but God was not bound to act that power for him; That privilege we have now in the second Adam; where God works both the will and deed. Secondly, Satan though he could not compell, yet might he further mans sin and guilt by representing objects. Thirdly, for himself, though he had nothing actually ill in him, yet was he mutable, finite; and therefore must view things successively: he mought suspend his actions, as we said before. The first sinne imaginable is Independence upon God and cessation from goodnesse; which was then in his power.
Object. But the Serpent beguiled them so,  that our first pa∣rents sinned ignorantly. Sol. He beguiled their expectations more then their judge∣ment:Sol. there was error in their being beguiled, as in every sin: but that error was a consequent or sadjunct, not the cause of the sin; Alind est peccare ignoranter; & ex ignorantiâ. But the silencing answer must be, That Adam then saw his guilt, bet∣ter then we can now. And the last day will clear it,Rom. 2.5. Rom. 2. Till then we must say as Salomon here, and stop the mouth of ini∣quity with this; God made man upright, but they have &c. For the second estate it is objected.  Man is not now to be charged with sin, for first, he is hold to do Satans will,From mans second estate. 2 Tim. 2. Sol. True, but willingly: he sings in that cage. Object. That dyscrasie now in him is penall,2 Tim. 2.26. and he is passive in it.Sol. Sol. Not so onely, it is not meerly penall,  but vitious and voluntary: and he is active: sin is his food, his sleep, his life,Pro. 15. v. 14. & 4.16. as Salomon speaks. Object. He cannot but sin,Rom. 8.7.2 Pet. 2.14. Rom. 8.7. and Peter speaks of such, who cannot but sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. Sol. This necessity comes not from any outward cause,Sol. but from an inward principle: 'tis voluntary, 'tis not imposed, but contracted. Against the third estate it is objected;  That a sanctified man cannot sin,From mans third estate. 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God sinneth not. Sol. That is not simply said:Joh. 3.9. for the same Apostle assures us, cap. 1. v. 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,Sol. &c. There is both actuall and habituall sin in all men:1 Joh. 1.8. but the words are to be restrained to matter and manner of sin∣ning; he cannot sin some sins: To death, in that degree. And he cannot sin with the whole man. There is a seed and a princi∣ple in him that resists, he cannot sin, that is, live in a trade of sin, as one inslaved to it. Object. But Paul saith Rom. 7. Not I,Rom. 7.20. but sin &c. Sol. Paul speaks not de principio Quod but Quo:Sol. not of the Person but Principle. Secondly, it is not he, because the sin doth not Redundare
in personam, ingage that, God not imputing it: else he de∣nyes not sin to be in him, and sin to flow from that body of sin in him; onely it is not his in regard of his affection, and Gods interpretation. The point then stands good; Man is the Author of his own sin. Be informed, that is,  Charge thy self with sin, not o∣thers. get a judgement rightly sanctified, and informed touching this truth; man unsanctified, is all self: sin admits of no search or reflexion: the proper effect of it, is either senslesness, hypocrisie, or impudency: The sinner yeelds not the fact, till found upon him, yea even then he will not yeeld himself (with Saul) to be in fault,1. Sam. 15. he looks to earth, to hell, to heaven, and will charge all sooner then himself. First, for Earth; that is nearest hand. Chide men for de∣fects, it is long of wife, minister, the word is hard, &c. Charge them with actuall sin, it is long of others, they would anger a Saint, make stones fall out, flesh and blood cannot bear it; as times and men be, none can do otherwise. Thus sin pleads: but what saith truth?Prov. 25.26. Prov. 25.26. The righteous before the wicked is a troubled spring: Though he be a spring, yet when trouble,Jam. 4.1. it is from his own mud: Whence are brawles, saith James,1 Sam, 24.13. but from your own lusts? Surely wickednesse proceeds 06 from the wicked: The Saints of old lived in as bad times, and had as bad neighbours; yet never brake out into our passions: Christ, Paul, others were as badly entertained; yet never swore, raged, &c. Again, for naturall corruption. How do men shift it off? It is long of Adam. What can they help it? Thus hypocrisie speaks: but what is the truth? Adam is every man: the whole species mankind was in that pair; and their act specificall: so Salomon here: They sought &c. How can this be? naturally they and we are one; legally we had one covenant, in the propagation there is a priority, in the contraction of cor∣ruption none. So then: other men must not own our faults: they may tempt, help forward sin: but till we concur, we are but objects, not subjects. So say for Satan: As he is the great Accuser, so most ac∣cused.
The devill owed me a shame,  and now he hath paid me. Ans. It is a sin to belye the devill;Sol. indeed he is stark naught in himself, and towards all: but his sin, temptations, suggesti∣ons, cannot hurt thee without thy self.Joh. 14. Unlesse thou be tin∣der, he cannot strike fire in thee: thy sin is not the lesse for his: therefore David though moved by Satan to number the people, takes it upon himself. Rebellion is thy witchcraft; in witchcraft there is a confederacy; in this contract, the witch is not excused in consenting; though Satan be subtle, and malicious in propounding: so here, the truth is, if there were neither man on earth, nor devill in hell, thou wouldst be poy∣sonfull and naught now: Therefore know thy self, Satan may hurt himself by tempting, thee he cannot, without thee. And if the devill must not own our faults, must God?  here mans sin is truly devilish, when it flyes upon God. I am as God made me, and I do my kind, it is my nature, I am ordained to it &c. O blasphemy I can any evill come out of heaven? darknesse from the Sunne? death from life? God is neither morall, nor physicall cause of the evill of sin: Not the for∣mer: he perswades, commands, allows none: but contrarily diffwades, forbids, disclaimes it. Not the latter, he infuseth none: things work as they be: a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit. Object. Blasphemy objects. God is a physicall cause of sin,  as appears by his acts of Counsell: of Creation: and Providence. First, for acts of Counsell. God decrees all, and that's in∣fallibly. Sol. What then? first, decrees do not necessitate:Sol. they have no violent operation;1 King. 12.15.24. there is a decree upon things con∣tingent, and most there. Secondly, Infallibility and Compulsion are two things:  There is an infallible decree passeth upon all we do: yet we do a thousand things freely. Thirdly, decrees do not over-bear or exclude the will: but conclude it. If we see it not, let us say, I am blind, not God is  bad. Ob. Yea,  but I am as God made me.
Answ. No saith our text,Sol. God made man upright, &c. Object. But he could have prevented sin. Answ. But he was not bound to it.Sol. Was it sutable to our natures? A Prince can bind subjects hand and foot, and keep them from rising. Are these fit cords for reasonable creatures? the Question is not, whether God could have made man better, but whether he did make him bad: Salomon answer∣eth, no. Ob. Yea, but God presents objects,  and occasions of sin; yea he hardens the heart,Exo. 9.14. and blindes the mind, gives up to lusts; and in our doctrine, smites sin with sin. Answ. True,Sol. and in Pauls doctrine too: we fear not to say, what God reports of himself. But how doth God all this? not by putting in badnesse,Subtrahendo, disponendo, at most, not evo∣cando. but by withholding goodnesse undue, by leaving man to himself, who would be left. Darknesse follows upon the Sunnes absence; but 'tis from Sublunaries, not the Sunne: God is so far from bearing all mans blame, that he hath no finger in it; Indeed omne malum est in bono; there is a mixture; and what good is, is Gods: what bad, ours. And what ever malice may say touching our Atheisme, making God worse then the Devill; I know that we mean as well in this as any, and speak as modestly, as any that quarrell us, touching this point. God then is no physicall cause of sin: he must therefore be either a morall cause or none: but that he is not. Ob. He commanded the prophet to be smitten:  Abraham to sacrifice Isaac.1 King. 20. Gen. 22. Sol. Hence it appears that God cannot sin because the for∣male of sin ceaseth upon his command:Sol. The prophet owed him his bloud; Isaac his life: if he call for what he gave, it is no injustice, in Arminius his School. Ob. But these things were against the law of nature. Sol. Particular nature must yeeld to universall.Sol. It is not a∣gainst  nature to cut off an hand, when the whole requireth it. Secondly, God is above all law: therefore it is no fault in him to command. Thirdly, Gods will, and supreme prerogative is above our
nature, and the lesse law must yeeld to the greater. Suppose a Justice sends a warrant for me, and at the same instant the King sends a Pursevant: It is no disobedience to the inferiour magistrate, to prefer the superiour, &c. Let God then be ju∣stified, and every man a lyar. 'Tis an horrible sin to father bastards upon the innocent: 'tis the highest blasphemy to charge God with the least sin: and therefore find out the right father. Next when we are once humbled for what is past,  let us now look forward, and see what is to be done; Surely if men will have sin prevented, and all well, they must begin where the disorder began, at Themselves: study themselves, and all is learned; keep themselves, and all is kept; conquer themselves, and all is won; blame themselves, and all is right. This con∣cerns men in both estates: but till God convince men of sin, there is no dealing with unregenerate men: all that we can say to them, is this. First, that they will awake, suffer themselves to be startled  by the Law and Gospell, out of their dreames;Instruction t unregenerate. and to have its perfect work upon them. Till when, they will not fall out with themselves, or own their own lusts. Secondly, that they will stand up from the dead, save them∣selves  from a dead Generation; beginning with themselves,Eph. 5.4. as he said, Lord deliver me from that wicked man, my self. Thirdly, that they will suffer themselves to be brought bed  and all, to Christ, to the pool of Bethesda, till God shall en∣liven the means, and heale the spring, and so give life: this is all I can stay to speak to these. But for others,Instruction to the Saints. we have more to say. Are things amisse with thee? Physitian heale thy self, and see thou be a true Phy∣sitian to thy self. Begin where he doth. The Physitian runs to the cause of sicknesse. First, is it from an Inward cause? or Outward: in the nonaturalia? aire? dyet? &c. Next if In∣ward, is it Ʋniversall? or Locall? Again: is it from the head, or liver, or whence? is it a Plethora? or quite contrary, an Atrophia? And when he hath found the grounds, then he works. First, Purgeth, and there begins with Catholicks,
before Topicals; then applies to the most affected parts; after strengthens nature, &c. so here. Sick we be: what is the cause? Outward? as place, times, men, Satan? these indeed may forward the disease: but the core and root is within:. 7.21. from within, saith Christ, Mar. 7.21. True, Satan injects? Nay, saith Christ, from within; from mans heart and spirit, proceed evill thoughts &c. So then: have we any bad thoughts? have we unclean lusts? have we any rising revenge∣full, any in jurious, any malicious crafty projects? any envi∣ous, proud, foolish, idle, unsetled, nay, hellish, blasphemous thoughts? These, all these come; from whom? not from one man, but men. So then, there being such a plethora, and redundancy, and superfluity of naughtinesse in the heart, here we must begin; purge the heart, wash the heart, the whole soul, (for poyson is in every part) with Catholick medicines; go to the sap,sal. 51. as Psal. 51. David observes his naturall Cor∣ruption as well as particular distempers of murder, and uncleannesse: This first done, then as any one part is more weakned, and affected, so accordingly applications must be made of Topicals. But first, the main frame and constitution must be amended before we meddle with Symptomaticals; this the first. For 'tis not the strength of Outwards that spoyles us, but our own weaknesse: therefore the Saints begin here, Job indents with himself; Agur prayes, that vanity and lies may be removed from him, not from the things: men bring the vanity to the creatures,Rom. 8.20. Rom. 8. and put lies upon them; They tell none. The world hath no power, but from us: the corruption is in our lusts, Pet. 1.4. as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.4. We make them tempting, and Satan strong; whose strength is from our darknesse.Eph. 6.12. Col. 1. Outward infection, must close with inward corruption, before it can distemper us: Therefore purge well, and that done fortifie grace, as Christ saith, Hold possession of your soules by patience, by grace. Thus David dealt with himself, and kept in his passions, and kept up his hope.Eph. 3.16. Thus must we strengthen the inward man, Eph. 3. Victuall well before a Fight, as the souldier doth: We have also our warface, and must get our weapons, and armour
ready: The world hath strong allurements and stratagems; but they are laid in our lusts: strong discouragements, perse∣cutions, and such like; but their strength is from our basenesse. Why do you fear, (saith our Saviour) Oh ye of little faith? The fear is not from the greatnesse of the danger, but from the smalnesse of our faith. Were faith strengthned, it would over∣come the world, and be victorious. Think the same of the Prince of the world, Satan himself. 'Tis true; he is mighty, but mighty through us: were we strong in Christ, we were stronger then that strong one. It cannot be denyed, but that the skirmish is for the time sharp, nay, sometimes there is a long siege, and we beleaguered: then we must do as souldi∣ers do; repair breaches, and secure all passages, and stand up∣on our guard, more then at other times. If within there be any combustible matter, away with it, out with it; if any false, or suspected party, out with him; and that done, victuall, for∣tifie, barracado, make our selves as impregnable as we can: for that is most certain, which before was hinted, viz. It is our weaknesse, not the enemies strength and power, that spoyles us. We might prosecute the comparison further, and call up∣on you to make sure the gates, and outworkes, to keep sen∣tinell: but the main of all is, Take in Christ the Captain of the Lords Hosts; fight with his weapons, fight in his strength, swear fidelity to him, and ingage him in the fight, and victo∣ry is ever on his side. To speak all in few; see whence all our misery came; namely, from our selves. Had we been true, hell it self could not have scal'd us; and there the cure must begin: Purge self, fear self, guard self, fortifie self, gage self. For the truth is; we are though not all, yet the worst tem∣pters and devils to our selves. Ingage we our selves to Christ, and Christ to us, and there lies our safety; unlesse this be done, were we in Paradise with Adam, or in heaven with Satan, there were no more safety to us, then there was to them. See here the infinite mercy of heaven towards us;  Gods mercy be admired. Jer. 3.1. God in Christ is that husband that will receive a wilfull wife, Jer. 3.1. That shepheard, who gathers the straying sheep; not onely, when she is driven away, but runs away from him, Ezek. 34.Ezek. 34.11.1.
That|father, who when his prodigall runs from him, runs to meet him with a pardon. Loe! we gave up God in the plain field, preferr'd his enemy, gave him more credit then God; we chose sin, death, misery; it was matter of choyce; yea, our seeking; yea, we could not satisfie our selves with variety of wandrings. And when we had done God all the dishonour we could, we shewed not the least sorrow: rather flew out more against him, and all his; taking no course to do him right. In short; we could do nothing, we would do no∣thing, for Gods glory, and our own soules. Now what did God the while for us? he look'd after us, he pityed us, he took our parts against the enemy, he censured all that had any hand in our hurt whether principall or accessary; and bought us again with dearest bloud, and hath now given us a better estate, then ever we had, put us into a better Adam, set over us a better Guardian, given us better promises, bet∣ter covenant, better security then before. Oh that we had hearts to see the height and depth of this love, the freenesse and fulnesse of this gift I how shall we do to love God enough? to prize Christ enough? where be our capacities? our expressions? All that you can do is this. First, Give your selves to God, sith you have nothing better. And secondly, Do somewhat for his friends, for Christs members, since you can reach no higher: do not say, when they need thy help, They may thank themselves; They threw themselves into wants, and could not tell when they were well; let them for me drink as they have brewed. Oh! Remember that thou hadst a better answer from God, follow his steps. Labour to humble them, and then shew them that mercy, which thy self hast received. Thou undidst thy self, and wouldst not take thy fathers counsell: yet God pityed thee. Oh: but these will never have done, they will be ever needy, ever craving, 'tis in vain to help, they cannot keep ought. Think the case thine own, prevent them as God hath thee: Give them by the week, lay it out thy self, be thou their purse-bearer, as Christ is thine. As for the rest, who see their folly, and are now willing to work, to submit, to amend;
let the same bowels be in thee, which were in Christ, and so clear thine interest in him: And then, Lastly, here is a word of comfort. Be it that my own fol∣ly,  sin, pride, unbelief, hath cast me into straights:Comfort in the midst of our great folly. yet in that case, God helps Fooles, as David speakes, Psal. 107. and therefore I will to him with David,Psal. 107.17. and acknowledge my fol∣ly and brutishnesse,Psal. 3. ult. and give unto him the glory of his Good∣nesse. Salvation is of him; We have destroyed our selves,Hos 13.9 saith Hosea; but who saves? God in Christ; Death is ours,Hos 13.9. life is his: make him our All, and answer all with Him; mine is shame, and confusion of face, but all righteousnesse belongs to him; Own thine own, and let God have his own; Thine own is sin and misery, own that: And yet here own but thine own; nothing is ours, but what is from us, OF accepted by us; Satan may lay his brats at our doores, but we need not open the doores for them; he may inject, and cast in sin: but if we re∣ject it, 'tis his, not ours. Consent may make anothers sin mine, dissent may make mine, none of mine. And let this stay us; There may be use, I confesse, in some cases of distinguishing betwixt Inbred corruption, and forein suggestions: but or∣dinarity it is sufficient to mark how sin is entertained, rather then whence it ariseth. Thou wilt say happily, that Satan makes a very through-fair of thy heart, and will not be hedged out; but be thou still repairing the mounds, and call in Christ, to be thy surety; and he that prevented thee with mercy at the first unsought to, unthought of on thy part, will keep thee to the last and crown his own graces, in his own time, with victory. Mean while never stick with Christ for any thing, to whom thou owest all, but sin and folly, which thou must call thine own onely. Quantum mu∣tatus ab ille! Conclude with a Caveat for humble walking with God con∣tinually. Sith the case is altered with us to our losse, let us bear our selves accordingly: 'tis hard to fall, and to bring down the heart to the estate: a man of noble birth can hard∣ly forget his beginnings, and sit lower, but he must, he must cut his coat according to his cloth, and conform: somust we. It is with us as with Samson: now (said he) I'le shake my
self as in former times: but poor Samson is not now the man, his wings are clipt, his hair cut, his strength lost, till God re∣repair him;1 Sam. 2.3. he must be now a captive, a bondslave. Oh talk not presumptuously, as he said: leave that to others, to dream of their innate principles, of their semina and igniculi virtutis, of the rectitude of their reason, virginity and freedome of their will, of their native good, of their hearts and meanings, of I know not what power, more then a passive capacity of good: let us know the case is altered with us: not presume as some, who will not be old, but think to do now as they could in youth;Milo Croton. but rather, with the Heathens Samson, have a fear of our selves and say, At hi lacerti jam mortui sunt, and keep a straighter watch: say, I have not the understanding that once I had, Prov. 30. and therefore must beg eye-salve, and be con∣tent with teaching: I have not the memory that I had, and therefore must be content with line upon line: and my conscience is not as it was, and therefore I must not build onely upon my self: mine eyes be not as they were, I must set a guard; my strength as it was, I must not hazzard my self to temptation. Once ('tis true) I could have gone along with God, done all commanded, beleeved all propounded, performed duty without wearinesse, resisted temptation, &c. And therefore as an aged weakened body concludes, I must not go as I did, nor fare as I did, nor look upon my self as a young man, but be more sober and watchfull then heretofore; so here. I know now there dwels no good in me, neither can I do as I could have done: and therefore my rule and wisdome is; First, to humble and abase my self before God, and to be∣waile my losses. Secondly, to deny my self, and fear my self, in all. Thirdly, to make out for a repair: here is some dif∣ference, An old decayed body can have no hope of a reco∣very here, his hope is in the resurrection, but yet there's hope for us, this hope: First, go to our Father, and desire him to disanull our covenants with death. Secondly, to our Advo∣cate to plead our cause, nay our Surety, nay our God, who was sent to repair us, to dissolve Satans workes, and by him we may be restored in bloud, renewed in part now, at pre∣sent
have a surer title and tenure then in Adam, and hereaf∣ter a more glorious estate then Adams was, and shall finde our unhappy fall to prove our highest preferment. SECTION IV. Mans undoing is from his non∣dependence on God. ECCLES. 7. ult. But they have sought out many inventions. WE have seen the cause of mans fall, now more parti∣cularly, let us inquire into the steps thereof. How came man thus to ingulfe himself? First, he goes off from God; leaves his hold there, and betakes himself to himself. Secondly, being once off, he never comes on again, but rangeth infinitely. These two. Particulars comprise the whole story, and state of man fallen, from the first to the last, and conclude all the in∣terpretations made of the words. He had sought before, and now what finds he? I was casting up my reckoning, saith Sa∣lomon, but I finde the reckoning past my skill. Numbers may be still multiplyed, and there's no end of mans devices; he still, still busily and vigorously (as the word in that Conjuga∣tion imports) projects more. The Points might be many. We first pitch upon this. Mans undoing is from his non-dependence on God;  Mans undoing it from his non-depen∣dence on God. trace him, and you will finde that his ruin first and last is from his Independence upon God. This first caused; secondly, con∣tinues; thirdly, consummates all his misery. Salomon implies all this. First, man of good is become bad, what's the cause? he  gave up God, and fell to his own wits. Secondly, man is now desperately wicked; there is no
sounding of him; what's the reason? he still continues and inlargeth his estrangement from God. Thirdly, man is now the vainest of vanities: the very source and seat both, of all vexations. The reason. He keeps off from God, and beats our himself, with his own inventions. So then view him either in the entrance of his unhappinesse, or in the progresse, or in the close of it. All is hence, that he goes out from God, and stands out to the last. His turning from God began his misery, his not returning to God perpe∣tuates it. No wonder, if it be mans case now; it is the con∣dition of all creatures, they all stand by a manutention. The strongest fall, if left to themselves; as wee see not onely in Adam, but in the Devils themselves. Nay, we find it in man now somewhat healed and regenerated. Though he hath an immortall principle in him, and a better guard about him, then ever he had, yet stands he no longer, then he holds de∣pendence upon God: let him once step out from him, and stand High-lone; down he comes, and falls as soon into a Guz∣zel, as into another place. We see it, in blessed Abraham, David, Job; In all, at their best, and in their best. We might be infinite in proofes, but we wave them sith the thing is clear to Reason: for, First,  what is God whom man leaves, in this case? he is all goodnesse, all wisdome, strength, holinesse, comfort, life; not onely in himself,Psal. 43.4. but to the creature. The joy of our joy, Psal. 43.4. the life of our life,Psal. 36.9. the strength of our strength; lose him, and all is lost: Take away the sun, and where is light? the fountaine, and where is the stream? the root, and where's the tree? The head and heart, as it were, then what's any member? Obstruct his influence for a time, what's an An∣gell? What is man? he lives not in himself; the procreant cause of his being is also the conservant, his Esse & porrò esse is from God; his being, a meer dependency. Take him alone, and he hath no bottome of his own; but look how Christ humane nature had its subsistence from the Godhead, by personall uni∣on: so hath man, by a spirituall union and dependence.
Col. 1.17. Join him with all the creatures,Col. 1.17. and take in them to his succour, and they without God, are but so many no∣things and cyphers; now put a thousand ciphers together, and adde nothing to nothing, what's the product but nothing? They must all say, Strength is not in me, help in me. Unlesse God hear the heavens, the heavens hear not us; and there's the same reason of all the rest. Nay, thirdly, we say more. When man is once off from God, , power, justice, all perfection in God is not onely removed from us, but is made against us; yea, all in our selves is then against us; wit, memory, strength, or whatsoever may promise most; yea, all in every creature is against us. Every thing becomes not onely vanity, but vexation: not  wind alone, but the East wind; a piercing, a wounding reed, as well as a broken reed. Adde to this, that Satan by Gods just hand for this Apo∣stasie seiseth as it were upon all strayes, and empty houses, as it is in the Parable. If he can but a while part Adam and Eve, hee makes sad work, but much more, when he can sever God from man, because man would be of himself, and not lean upon God. First, see the steps of mans downfall:  No e the step of mans down∣fall. he would needs be absolute the first day, a free-holder, and acknowledge no Supreme, at least would mend his tenure, and be free from all wardship, and homage, and so quickly outed himself of all. See secondly, our strange folly, whom long experience hath not yet made wise. Oh how impatient are we still of any yoke! no bird so weary of his cage, no slave so weary of his bon∣dage: no sooner bound Apprentices, but we must be made free, like the Prodigal, in the Parable, weary of his father, and must bee presently at his own finding, till he had fooled him∣self out of all. We may see our selves in Israel; they could not abide within Gods mounds. They would not trust to an Ʋn∣certain Moses, or Ʋnseen God: they would have one in sight, in hand; they would not go to God for every penny, and live from hand to mouth every meale, they would be at their own finding and carving, have wells of their own flesh of their own,
bread of their own, they would not depend upon Gods Pro∣vision, of a Judge or Generall: they would have a King of their own. Just so it is with us in all passages of reliance and dependence. Men will not rest in Gods Authority and directi∣on. They will superadde inventions of their own. They will have more words, then written words, Traditions, more Go∣spels then one, more Articles then twelve, more Precepts then ten, more Mediators; more Gods then one. They will not rest in Gods truth and promises; take his securities and seales; but adde more. They will not rest in Gods Wisdome for time and particulars. They are all for the bird in hand, all for sense, nothing for faith. Thus they say in plain English, they will trust to themselves, not to God. So for the Providence, and point of protection. They dare not put themselves upon God: he is not strong enough, wise enough: they must shift for themselves, as sometimes Abraham and David did. And in point of Provision and maintenance, they say as the childe doth: Mother let me have all, be it meat, money, and what else you can name, in mine own hand, and in mine own keep∣ing. Hence in Matter of fact, such schambling; men strain wits, conscience, all, to get all out of Gods hands into their own. Faith then no faith, If wit, if flattery, if back-biting, if lying, if hell it self will do it, they will have it, and say it was a good providence too,Zac. 11.5. as Zac. 11.5. Hence in matter of faith, God would be alone in the throne, one God; we upon that account, refuse him, as the Senate did Christ, because he would be All or None: we must have (would you thinke it?) thou∣sands of Gods, as Israel; in every City, at least one; God would be acknowledged the fountain of all grace,1 Pet. 5.10. 1 Pet. 5.10. Men will divide. Nature shall do some what: Freewill some∣what Some hard, or voyce, they will have in Election, Vocati∣on, Justification, Sanctification, Salvation. They will be partners. As they can do nothing without God, so God little without them. God would have us own all to him, depend upon him for the first, second, third, fourth, every grace; yeeld him the author and finisher, the Alpha and Omega of all. We trust to our own provisions, habits, gifts, and
would prevaile by our own strength: In short; we would not be confined to his wisdom as onely wise, to his care, his meanes, his houres, and times; but will shark, anticipate, and either con∣tribute, or controll his proceedings, and call this our wisdome. This the practise; now consider, First, what a sin it is, thus to depose God: for deny Provi∣dence  and deny All: and thus to deify our selves. For to be independent, is to be God. This is to be like Antichrist, law∣lesse; like Satan, a Belialist, that is, yoke-less. Consider next, what a folly it is: we commit two absurdi∣ties  at once, we forsake the fountain, for a broken tisterne; we forsake the best comforts, and as Jonah saith,Jona. 2.8. our own mer∣cies; we leave Gods fire of direction, protection, and conso∣lation, and walk by a worse light, our own sparks,Isa. 50. ult. Jet. 2.12. & 19 as Isaiah speaks, and so at last lye down in sorrow. 'Tis a thing, both base, Jer. 2.12. and bitter, v. 19. a certain forerunner of all mi∣sery and confusion. Alas! if we will be thus alone, we must bear our own sorrows, care our own cares, lye under our own burdens, as Rebells must, when they withdraw allegiance, and cease to be under protection. Whilest we go along with God we live upon him, and lye under his protection: but if we will be alone, God leaves us to our selves, or sends us to our Idolls, as Judges 10.13, 14.Jud. 10.13, 14 Think not this a small matter to go a whoring thus from God: 'twill cost a Saint dear, God will break his carnall confidences,Jer. 2. ult. Jer. 2. ult. he will make our Gods, our own rods; punish us and our Gods together, as once he did in Aegypt; see this and be wise. Repent we of this our sacrilege,  Repent, and let God be all again. restore God to his Crown, give him the intire glory of his absolute power, wisdome, truth, all. Let him alone be wise, independent, and himself. All the strugling betwixt God and man, ever was about this point; namely, which should rule, and which obey; which direct, and which submit. Now do him and thy self right, give all to him, leave nothing to thy self, but obedience, which is the portion of Inferiours. Applyed to three sorts of men. This is applicable to three sorts of men. To those who went off with Adam,Sort. but are not yet come on
again. Let these understand themselves: they stand guilty of an horrible treason till they return: they are outlawed and left naked of protection, of direction, of life, of safety, of all; where they left God, they left all their happinesse, and their way is back again. Their ruine came by deserting God, and 'tis continued whil'st a distance continues. Their work there∣fore is to return; First, for Gods sake, who is their Lord and rightfull King, and whom they have infinitely offended. Were it but a brother that had ought against them, they should make to him,uk. 15. much more to God, as Luke 15. Father I have sinned against heaven &c. Secondly, for their own sakes; whil'st they run from God, they run from their own mercies and comforts, into a miserable maze; there's no end of erring, the heart is restlesse. They are sure of nothing, but fear upon fear, till they come home to him. Being thus in hucksters hands, they still be cheated and vexed, and at the last, as they have lived without God, so they will dye without God, which is the height of misery; for to be without him, is to be worse then nothing. Ob. Oh!  but we have God in his Ordinances, Word, Sa∣craments, &c. Sol. 'Tis true,Sol. God offers him there: but we have him not till we accept him. I,  but we do that, we put all our trust in God, and expect all from him. So we say,Sol. but if we do wholly depend, what means then so many inventions? what the use of ill means? what such adoring of Creatures? so high thoughts when they smile, so base, when they frown? so much fear when man, so little when God is offended? 'Tis certain; a naturall man is his own God; he depends upon himself, his own wit, grace, friends, means, not upon God at all: and the Saints them∣selves depend but little; did they wholly rest upon God, they would be glad to please, they would not sleep, till recon∣ciled, as Josiphs brethren; They would be even and setled in their way. That indeed is Repentance, namely, the change of your dependence, when you abhor all that is your own,
and put all upon God, do all to him, from him, and his principles: Here then is the first work, To give up creatures; say: My bow, my horse, my money, nay, my prayers shall not save me. Salvation is of the Lord, not from the crea∣tures; these you may use as sevants, but not as Lords; amongst them you may trust some men, with a moral trust, but it must not amount to a Divine, for fear of that curse, Jer. 17.Jer. 17. Iron heates not but from an heate put to it, the pen speaks no comfort, unlesse some hand guide it, some head prompt it: so think of all creatures; they cannot so much as think of us, un∣lesse God mind them, much lesse pity, and help us, unlesse God give pity and help. He is the God of all comfort;2 Cor. 1.2. there we must have it, or no where; unite to him, and close with him, and then thou art restored. Oh! but I doubt he will not receive me. That's answered, in the Parable, Luke 15.Sol. Oh! but I have stood out long, after Covenants,  Sacra∣ments &c. That's answered, Jer. 3.1, 2. &c.Jer. 3.1, 2. Object no more: suspend thy comfort no longer by ad∣journing repentance; thou makest thy return here by the har∣der; every step out of the way must be unstepp'd again. To such who are gone out from God the second time,2 Sort. at least in part, these revolts prove most dangerous and least par∣donable. Thou hast bin once, as it were, burnt in the hand al∣ready; fear the second time: thou hast tryed both estates, now tell me, which is the better? the snow of Lebanon; or dirty ditches? the waters of Siloah; or trouble some seas? Tell me whether all the worlds injoyments be worth one hours communion with heaven: and when thou hast made use of thine own experience, lay down creatures; above all, lay down thy self: For there is nothing in us that can help us; in truth, nothing but what will hurt us, without God. We cannot so much as receive and enjoy comfort, so much as apprehend it, unlesse God give an apprehension; therefore deny self, and mortifie self. Say, I took my self for a God, but I am a devill: I thought my self wife, but I am a foole;
I conceived my self safe when I had a little grace in my own keeping; but I find that I can keep nothing; therefore hence∣forward I will despaire of my self, know no man after the flesh, have no confidence in flesh, but bid adieu to all fleshly hopes: and then plant thy self upon God, there is no other bound or bottome;Jam. 1.17. Every gift, faith James 1.17. Every giving of that gift; The use, continuacce, apprehension, is all of him, he is that principle which communicates all. See nothing but em∣ptinesse out of him, and fulnesse in him: therefore close with him by knowledge, by faith, by love: do nothing without him, trust not thy self in the least: take notice what a trea∣cherous nature thou hast,Hos. 11.7. how bent to backsliding, Hos. 11.7. How far thou art sunk into it, and gone from thy self; how sweet God was once, and the creature now; how humble thou once wast, how disdain full now; how once troubled upon the least estrangement, and how now thou canst live without God, for a long time. And again take notice of thy speed: what thy then happinesse was, what thy now deadnesse. And so con∣clude with the Church,Hos. 2. ult. Hos. 2. I will return to my husband again, for then was it best with me. Oh!  but I am ashamed and afraid. Answer;Sol. be neither ashamed or afraid of doing justice, of glorifying God.1 Sam. 12. Jer. 4. Think what Samuel said to revolting Israel, 1 Sam. 12. Think what God faith to backsliding Judah, Jer. 4. Think of Christs errand, who came to recover straies, and to save what was lost. Think of the Prodigalls entertainment, of our for giving seventy times seven times in a day. Think of Gods practise with other backsliders, and beleeve the prophets, whose work it is to bring thee back to God, as the exprestion is 2 Chron. 24. And which is also the main of our repentance; and that is usually expressed by our returning to God, and it stands much what in the change of principles and depen∣dence, as before was noted: Therefore here sit down, make God thy All, and depend upon him for first, second, third, every grace. So much to the second sort,3 Sort. now to the third; and they are such as stand in tearmes of dependency, but too loosely. I have two words to say to these.
First, let them hold that dependency they have arrived at, as their life. Let not wit put them off from depending upon Gods directions; nor pride, from submitting to his Soveraign∣ty; nor unbelief, from closing with his promises; nor any change of times, from their constant adherence. 'Tis, I confesse, a very hard thing to hold close to God, in extremities; when the affliction and the triall is great, then to clasp about God is difficult, as David and Abraham witnesse: and no whit easier in much peace and prosperity, as we see in the same David, He∣zekiah and others. In great divisions, it is a hard thing not to trample and to warp aside, as we see in Peter Gal. 2. We are cast upon Trying times, times of Antichrists rage: and then depending graces, as Faith, Patience, and the like, are most seasonable. Rev. 14.12.Rev. 14.12. Our care therefore must be to put off all self conceits, and hopes, and dependencies. We have in this case, but too much wit, strength, confidence of our own. But all our own must down: for so much as there is of our own in us, so much there is of misery and deceit. Therefore be nothing in thy self, nothing in any creature, nothing in any Ordinance abstracted from Christ: hang the whole soul upon him; be no wiser then Christ, no holier, no stronger: then Christ. Make an entire resignation, and let thy depen∣dence be absolute and universall for all grace, all counsell, all comfort. There is no other bottome or subsistence. But when doth a man Depend upon God?  or what is it to Depend upon Christ? First,Sol. to rest upon his word through out in the precepts and promises. Secondly, to draw and derive all our strength from him. Thirdly, to expect all in his way; and that is, in a subor∣dination  to his meanes, and in a community with his Church:  for so he conveyes himself to each member. Cut the branch from the tree, or the member from the body, there's no life, no growth, Ephes. 4. Fourthly, in all the meanes, use them, but trust him:  take up the care of duty, leave to him the care of successe. Secondly, let them strain towards a further communion;
for the best of our hearts hang too loose from God as yet; We are apt, with David, to look to the right hand, and to the left, and to be catching at every sprig We look upon the world, as if it were as full of Gods, as the Roman Senate was said to be of Kings. We deisie every creature. Nay, the truth is, every man would be his own God, his own Christ, his own holy Ghost, and rather trust himself, then look out to God. This wickednesse must be resisted,3. Psal. ult. and this must be our study, To remove the creature further from us, and to say still with Da∣vid, It's good for me to draw near to God; and conclude, that if it be best, to come nearer to him, it's best also to keep out selves with him, to do nothing without him: nay, if it were possible, not to breathe without him, as Ignatius some where. Lastly,  see for thankfulnesse Gods unspeakable mercy to us, and that in many respects. First, in that he would not lose us when we were loose from him, as men use to do; Let him goe, say they, when a man will not trust them. If he would have put himself upon me, I would have stuck to him, and provided for him, but sith he will be of himself, let him shist for himself. Thus men; but not so, God: though we would part with him, he will not lose us; but seeks us out, and takes us off, from our own bottomes: and this, (were it but onely thus much) it were a great mercy, though it cost us some trouble. When a bone is out of place, it is a favour to set it, though it cannot be done without pain. Though God stop our way with thornes, yet if there by he brings us home to himself, the mercy is great. And therefore look upon this as such, when God, as a father, takes home his bankrupts, takes all out of our hands, more then the duty of dependence, and will trust us neither with soul, nor body, nor estate, nor any thing else. This is one mercy. But secondly, there is more in it then so. God provides a new bottom; creates, as it were, a new Tenure. Commits us to Christ, and Christ commends us back again to the Fa∣ther, and both to the Holy Ghost sealing us; and all make it their joint work to secure soul, body, estate, all, here and here after. This is glorious mercy, here's a blessed change,
a secure estate. God ingageth for thy self, for thy seed, to all eternity: Interest thy self in him, and there's an end of all thy cares, feares, doubts, perplextiies, Psal. 94.18, 19. SECTION V. Man loose from God is restlesse in his wayes. ECCLES. 7. ult. But they have sought out [MANY INVEN∣TIONS.] WE come now to the last point. They have sought out many, &c. [inventions] say we: and the inven∣tions are not few, which are discovered in the rendring of the words,Ratiocinia, saith Jun. Quastiones insinitas, saith the Vulg. cogitationes vanas. Vatab. computationes. Pagn. Cogitationes. Montan. Cogitationes. magnatum, saith Lodo. de Dicu. . Sept. . Symmac. Cogitationes alienas à recto. saith Merc. &c. . Our own translation, being full enough, and sutable to the scope, we shall rest in that, and for the matter, take notice of mans pro∣gress in evill, when once he is off from God; he works himself out of all, he hath his devices, hee hath ma∣ny of them; hee seeks, and seeks again, and yet again even unto infinitness. Whence we observe, Doct. 5 Man once loose from God, restlesse in his wayes. That when a a man is once loose from God, and left to himself, he becomes restlesse and endlesse in his own wayes. It fares with him, as with the Sea man, or way faring man; when once he hath lost his rule and directions, and is out of his own knowledge, he is, as it were, in a mist or maze, walks the round, now backward, now forward, now on this hand, now on that, still in motion, and that swift; but all to no purpose. It will not offend you, I hope, if I compare him to the Poor Spaniell, which hath lost his Master: he cries, and
stands, he runs and stops, he smels and searcheth, now on this, now on that side the way; but knowes not where he is, nor when to make end. It's much-what so with man, Trace him from the first to the last, so soon as ever he went off from God, he began to rove into a world of devices: and Herein worse then the spaniell, which runs to find his master, but man runs from him, as we see Adam hides himself, palliates and transferres his fault, patcheth up a poor cove∣ring and is as busie, to no purpose, as his then parts and time would give. Passe from him to Cain his son; so soon as he went our from God, he became a Rover, and both himself, and his children fell to inventions, some whereof God hath turned to mans good. After that, Ambition came in, and then Oppression,Srotius, de Jure belli & pacis. And all along, as the world was peopled, so shops and forges were increased. In the end mans self was multiplyed within himself,V. Varro in Aug. de civit. dej. in one you had a thousand. Gods were multiplyed, for one there were thousands. Religi∣ons and worships were multiplyed, for one Temple, they built many, as Hosea notes; for one Jehovah, Idols innumerable in every City, in every furrow, in every house, river, wood, place, Gods without number. And for practicals, it were infinite to particularize; Men were as wicked, as they could tell how to be, as God com∣plaines of his once people,Jer. 2. Jer. 2. Come down to the time of Christs Incarnation; how ma∣ny religions were then in the world? how many inventions in the Church, brought in by Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, and I know not whom? since that, how many amongst Jewish Rabbines? how many amongst Heathenish Gentiles? still, still still, as men declined from the truths of God, they added of their own; see it in the books of Scripture, in the Sacra∣ments, in severall confessions and models of religion, in worships, in Liturgies; How did they, who would be thought the chiefest Church-men, beat their braines about new ceremonies and formes? one Pope addes this, another that, and every one something, till the Church was surcharged.
What should we speak of Heresies, and uncouth opinions? how have the Catalogues swell'd in our hands? Epiphanius mentions some, Austin more, and after him, more and more in every Age. Nay, the Apostle in his time, speakes of end∣lesse strifes and disputes, of many spirits, of different doctrines, which since have swarm'd beyond all account. There is in∣vention upon invention: inventions new to confirm the old: new Additions, and new Editions, and what not? Now the Reasons of these endlesse Mazes and pursuits, are many. God is the Boundary of all things; in him,  and no where else, the soul finds rest. There's light enough in him to fill the understanding: Goodnesse enough to satisfie the soul: Authority sufficient to command the conscience and the whole man. And, secondly, man hath no consistence of his own: that  which is said of fluid things, That they cannot bound them∣selves, is true of Man. Again, he is too unruly to be held in by any but God; no  mounds but Gods mounds will hold them in. Adde to this, that he is now made up of Ignorances, errors,  lusts; and though truths and virtues have their bounds, yet these have none. Again, he is restlesse, as the needle jogg'd aside, till he  faceth God: he finds all imperfect, that he deales in; and so must piece and patch up things as he can. He is made up of Busie principles, and the more busie because now distempered, and as it were feverish, and hence he runs like a Clock out of order; he is unwearyed in his own way and inventions, and is still adding, as in Mic. 6. Wherewithall shall we come before God? will rivers? will thousands serve the turn? Yet further, he is unsatisfied in all that he can do, like the  swift dromedary, still traversing her wayes, fer. 2.23. hurried up and down with guilt Cain-like, in the Land of Nod. Besides all this, when he is empty of God, Satan seiseth  on him; acts him beyond himself; fils him with a spirit of fury, of giddinesse, and all hellish lusts, feares, objections,
scruples, and such like trash, which multiply like so much vermine. For Information;  Admire and bewaile this restlesnesse. To what a passe man is now brought? he is blind, yet busie like the Phrantick; then wisest, when he is worst of all: he must now be no lesse then a God: he is able to make a God of his own, a worship of his own, a conscience of his own, a Bible of his own; weary of no∣thing but of dependence and confinement. Never was bird wearier of a Cage then he of Gods mounds; then most im∣patient, when he is not left to himself. See it in all the passages of his life. First,1. In civill af∣faires. In civill affaires; he must have no superiour: A servant in one year grows weary of that yoke; Marry he must, he must be of himself, else no bargain. The little apprentice before he hath worn out half his time, must buy his time, set up of himself: and thus it is, for the most part, with all in∣feriours; they are weary of all Government, like Israel of old; God himself could not please them; they must have another King. Secondly,1. In spirituall. in the spirituall regiment; where shall you find a man almost that will submit to any spirituall government? What should I speak of mens carriage towards their Pastors in that relation? they wil not yeeld to God himself. For the purpose. God would stand Alone, and be sole Commander, Saviour: Man would share with him. God would be the Only Law-giver: Men would put in somewhat into his Lawes. God would be Onely worshipped: Men will not sit down by this; but they will have some hand in all his dispensations. We see this every day both in Doctrinals and Practicals. In the first; How do men sweat to divide with God? If he bring Grace, they'l bring Will. If he offer a match with his Son, they'll bring some portion. Whither tend all the points of Popery, Arminians, Socinians, Anabaptists, but to this, To take us off (in part at least) from a dependency? So in practi∣cals, whether work or wages be considered, God would have us live by faith, that emptying grace; we are all for sense. He would have us be beholding to Christ for all; we will warm
our selves with our own sparks. He would have us stand to his allowance and maintenance, we will shark, and shift for our selves, and fear that God will be to seek, if we did not help him out with our supplies. All this while, see what becomes of our wit, and how ill we provide for our selves. First, we forsake the fountain, and our own mercies. Secondly, we imbrace lyng vanities. Thirdly, we throw our selves into a world of perplexities: and lastly, pull upon our selves that curse of curses, to be left to our own counsels and inventions.  Double instru∣ction. Of Instruction. Is man thus endlesse in his wandrings, when he is once left to himself? Then first, pity your children.  They go astray from the wombe,To Parents for their chil∣dren. and the longer they go in their own wayes, the more work, and misery do they create to themselves. You may think perhaps that wedlock will tame them, time and experience will teach them: but that's your errour. The longer they live, the more inventive they will be, and ful of crotchets. Stop them betimes, and be as mercifull to their soules, as you be to their bodies. If a limb be crooked, you will seek to straighten it, whil'st it is tender. If a bone be broken, you will not say, Time will work it out: You'll rather say; Alas! the childe will be a cripple all his dayes, if he be not timely look'd to: Think the same for their soules; They are quite disjoynted, and their faces look the wrong way, do your best to set them right: at least bring them to Gods bone-setters, who may restore them.Gal. 6. 1. Secondly, your selves; and the greatest mercy you can shew  to your selves is, To go from your selves to God again.To Parents for themselves. If a man will be ruled by his own reason, by his own conscience, or rather fancy, he shall never have done; he will work him∣self out of his own Geares, run himself quite off his own legges. Therefore say with David, I hate all vain inventions.Psal. 119.113 They are all vain, and I have chosen thy statutes, O Lord. The way is plain, simple, even, if we would follow it, as God chalkes it out; To us, (saith the Apostle,Jud. 3. in matters of faith) there is but One God, one Lord, one Master, one Law-giver, one faith, Once given to the Saints, once for all delivered in clearest Scriptures: Here stick, upon these plain principles,
and decline inferences too farre fetcht in point of practise, the directions are very clear. I write unto you, saith John, that you sin not; we must plant that resolution in our hearts against all purposed sins; next, if we do sin besides purpose, make up the breach quickly. We have, saith he, an advocate with the Father. Go to him, follow his counsell, in recruiting our selves: give glory to God in a way of Confession; give right to man in a way of Satisfaction; and then for the future, If yee know, saith he, that God is righteous, then know too, that every one that doth righteousnesse, and none other, is born of him, 1 John 2. ult. Here's a plain way; now make no bouts, nor strain wit to find evasions. In matters of Doctrine; strive not to bring opinions to our lusts; and make the Word speak what sin would have it: make not Scriptures servants to our interests. So in matters of life and conversation; hold to the rule, Sin not, faith John. Spare inventions, True:  sin not, unlesse necessity dispenseth; but God will have mercy, not sacrifice; I must not sterve my self and my children. Sin not, tru: if it be simply and intrinsecally evill; but this that I do, is not sin in me, sin in this case. So in the case of repentance; nothing more plain. Repent, say the Pro∣phets; Repent, saith Christ; Repent, say the Apostles. I ac∣knowledge it, but what is it to repent? a man may be too legall and slavish. I'll to Christ, and what needs more? Say, I have offended my neighbour. If Christ forgive me, he must for∣give me. No,Sol. saith Christ, you must, to your offended brother too, else approach not my Altar.Mat. 5.23, 24 Here stay, hear Christ, not wit; that will have twenty Pleas, It was no wrong, It was but just, It is not against charity, Who can tel whether he be a Bro∣ther or no? or, whether indiscretion this be the best way, all circumstances considered? So again: We must be righteous as he is righteous; We must do as we would be done by; that's the Royall Law: yeeld to this rule, which very Heathens have yeelded to; and cast not a mist before thine own eyes; make not thy self beleeve, that thou would'st be so used thy self, onely because thou would'st have a license to abuse another.
It were infinite to prosecute all particulars. Beleeve it; there will be no end of wandrings, of fears, doubts, thoughts, till we come in to God. If a man will beleeve himself and give way to his own guides and principles, he will never be quiet: therefore give a flat deniall to them all; by name, First, to self-reasonings. A man would run himself quite  out of breath and become mad with reason, if he will exalt reason above God. Secondly, to unmortified lusts. They will hurry a man into  all precipices. Thirdly, to a scrupulous conscience, which knowes to end  or mean, till it hath wrought out it self, and wearyed the soul, as it befell a poor soul, whose name I conceale, who first made conscience (and that justly) of blessing food before received, and then yeelding to some scruples came to this. If I must blesse God for every meale, why not then for every second course or dish coming to the Table: and if so; why not then for every bit eaten, and every drop let down: and if I must do so in case of meats and drinkes, why not in all other things whatsoever? and thus that poor soul made life it self a burden. Fourthly, to mans example or authority, especially when  it is countenanced with seeming sanctity. If a man make man his guide and his rule, where shall he stay? or which man shall he follow? Rather follow true Guides: that is to say, Give up thy self to Christ with true light, 1 Pet. 2.25. next, make use of thy present light, whether of nature, or of Grace: and next, shut not out any light offered, but receive all thank∣fully and humbly. Yet further: hold to the sure Rule of Scriptures, and there, first to the Fundamentals, to plain places, to the literall sense, where no incongruity will fol∣low upon it: and for principles; make neither more nor fewer then the Word makes; onely be true to such: and for infe∣rences and deductions, though they cannot be simply ejected, yet take heed they be not too farre fetch'd,  Blesse God who gives a stop to our wan∣drings. or too much strained. Lastly, if the case be so with us, that the further we depart from God the worse we be, and the more we divide like a
river, when further from the fountain, or like hayle shot, the further it goeth, the more it scattereth: Then blesse we God for calling us in, and giving a stop to these our wandrings. Herein hee seales up a world of love; for first, when would we ever come in again of our selves? verily, as a rebell once gone out, is so farre from returning, unlesse pardon and grace fetch him in, as that he runs further and further, strengthens himself in his wickednesse, studies arguments to palliate his sin, and to maintain his cause against his Soveraign: so it is here; when would Adam, either father or son, have retur∣ned, unlesse God had laid hand on him? when would the lost groate or the lost sheep have found themselves, if God had not first found them? men may talk of works preparatory, of, I know not what, congruities, improvements of naturals, and such like wonders; but till God put forth his creating power, and hold forth his Golden Scepter, a wolf will as soon turn sheep; a Blackmore, faire; a devill, a Saint; as sinfull A∣dam a convert. And therefore for this mercy, blesse God. Yet this is not all. What a mercy is this that God takes us off from our minting and coyning new, that is, false money every day? our forge is ever going, and going the wrong way. We do not study to finde out new truths, new duties for practise, nor new faults, hypocrisies, backslidings, errours, for humiliation; but new opinions, forms, questions, wayes tending to strife and contention, to profanenesse, and loos∣nesse, so that Africa it self did not more abound with mon∣sters, then we naturally do. Now herein Gods goodnesse is to be admired, that whil'st we are hatching one unhappy brood or other, he is contriving our return and safety, and in his time takes us off by de∣grees from these principles of ours, wit, fancy, deluded con∣science, lust, sense, and the like; which are sufficient to trou∣ble our selves and all the world. And in the third place, What a mercy is this that he meets with this our wildenesse and mounds us in? how many banks, and railes hath he set about us? Magistrates, and heires of restraint, (as they are tearmed) in the State. Pastours and
Teachers in the Church. Parents and Masters in the family. Brethren and helpers in a community. And above all, setled us upon two never fayling foundations; Doctrinall, the Word truly translated, and soundly expounded to us; and Personall, the Lord Christ, who is made our Guardian, our Guide, our Prophet, our surety; who is so faithfull, that he will never faile us; so full, that in him our soules shall find ease and rest, and be secured from starting, if we will put our selves under his yoke, Mat. 11. And now we are fallen upon the next estate of man, viz. his Restauration in the second Adam: and of this we shall say more, if God shall please to give health and opportu∣nity. In the mean, we shall (if God inable) speak some∣thing in the generall, leaving the particulars touching Christs person, natures, offices to some other time, as we shall see cause and finde leasure. An end of this Text in Eccles. 7. ult.
SECTION VI. Saints by Christare in a very happy estate. ROM. VIII. I. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, &c.— WE have look'd upon man in a double estate: we have seen what he was in Gods hand, what in his own. Now we are to enquire what he is in Christs: These words will give us a generall hint thereof. Where Three things must be done, (if we do well.) First, the order; Secondly, the meaning; Thirdly, the use of the words must be found out. For the first, they come in by way of Inference, that's confessd. But whence they are inferr'd, is the question. Bellarmine,Order of the words. I remember, knits them to the 7th Chapter, especially to those words. [Not I, but sin, &c.] And his conceit is this. There the Apostle had proved lust, i. e. re∣sidencies and dregges of Originall sin, to be no sin, and here he concludes, Therefore there is no matter of condemnation in Saints. But this cannot stand. For, first, the conclusion is too wide for the premises, if they were true; since other sins may damne, though Originall sin did not. Secondly, the Premises and ground are not true. Paul doth not say, That concupiscence and the reliques of originall corruption are no sins; he saith the contrary, over and over in that Chapter, in so much as Arminius cannot beleeve, that what he saith, can
agree with a sanctified estate. As for that verse, [not I, &c.] the Apostle doth not dispute, whether there be sin or no in him, that he yeeldeth, but from what principle that sin comes; from a principle of flesh, not of grace. Let's set by this then. Ames knits these words to the fifth Chapter. Others to the seventh. Others, best of all, as I conceive, to the whole dis∣course foregoing. The Apostle having proved our Justificati∣on by grace, or faith, or Christ, which upon the matter come all to one, and taken off some objections, and absurdities in the 6th and 7th Chapters, which might at first sight seem thence to flow, be now like a good Artist sums up and infers the main conclusion; as if he had said. Now then since 'tis cleared that Christ is a root as well as Adam, and as full of life as he was of death, and puts forth this life effectually to free us from all manner of deaths, it hence followes, There∣fore there is no condemnation to them that be in Christ. This the order and cohaerence. Now for the words; what's meant, in the first place,Meaning of the words. by Condemnation? Here we divide again. The Popish sense is this, There is no matter condemnable, nothing worthy con∣demnation in Saints. This sense we cannot receive, for then it will follow that there is nothing worthy absolution and pardon in them: Then were they free from all sin, for sin, as sin, is deadly, c. 6, at least free from all mortall sin, which the state and story of David, Salomon, Peter, and thou∣sands more do sufficiently confute. This therefore must not be it, What then? The word imports a condemnatory sentence, as Mark 10.33. and elsewhere. There is none such abides the Saints, the law is discharged, and disarmed of its con∣demning power, as to Saints, they are removed from under it; the law borrowes its condemning strength from sin, and that's taken off as to the guilt and power of it; as the Apostle after speaks. It is Christ, saith he, that justifies, who shall con∣demne? so then the beleeving Saints are passed from death, they come not into condemnation. Some objections are made by the Jesuits against this interpretation. But 'tis not worth while to dwell long upon them.
First,  This were to make the Apostle to speak absurdly. There is no condemnation, no hell to living Saints; who knowes not this? whil'st I see them upon earth, I am sure they are not actually condemned in hell. Answer,Sol. the Saints, (notwithstanding this Jeer,) find it, work enough to beleeve that they are not under the condem∣natory sentence of the Law: and he mought, if he had pleased, see a wide difference betwixt Sentence and Exe∣cution. I but,  If Saints have sin, they must needs have guilt, and that merits damnation. It doth so;Sol. therefore are they freed in Christ, and of grace not of merit. I,  but sin, and guilt, and punishment cannot be severed. True,Sol. not for merit, yet they may in the execution; and if they be inseparable, why do they in their doctrine of hu∣mane satisfaction sever them? I,  but shall we impute falshood to God? will he say there is no sin in Saints, when there is? God doth not say there is no sin in them,Sol. no desert of death, that's their saying, God onely faith, that for Christs sake there is no execution or actuall condemnation of them. Why but then,  what's the ground and reason that no con∣demnation passeth upon such, and of what extent and lati∣tude is this proposition? reacheth it to all under the Gospell, since the covenant of Grace? To all in Christ,Sol. to all as are in him, as once they were in Adam; that is to say, to all that are branches of him, and members of that body whereof Christ is head, and a princi∣ple of life: For to be in Christ, (to touch that by the way) is not onely to be united to Christ by knowledge, so that we be in the faith, and Christian Religion: but that we be incorpo∣rated into him, by faith and the spirit, united to him in love and life, so that we have our subsistence and dwelling in him, 1. John 3. ult. He that is thus in Christ is passed from death to life, he comes not under a sentence condemnatory, Joh 3.18. and 5.24. he shall sit on the bench in the day of Judgement,
not stand at the barre, there to be arraigned; but why all this, because they walk after the spirit? So indeed our Coun∣trey-man Stapleton would have it, but that's against the whole discourse of the Apostle in the foregoing Chapters, and that were to confound Law, and Gospell. The Text doth not say, there is no condemnation, because they walk after the spirit; he meddles not now in the conclusion with the causes of Justification, those he handles elsewhere, some before, some after, but now he is upon the subjects, and persons ju∣stified, and tells us in this place, not why they are justified, but who they be, and how qualified; or if you will, the cause or ground of their freedome is upon this account, because they are one with Christ: the evidence and proof of this be∣cause they live under a new guide or Law, walking not after the flesh, but the spirit. And thus for the words. Now the result hence is this. Saints in Christ are in a very happy estate and condition.  That's our Point, Our renewed estate is as good in Christ,Saints by Christ, are in a very happy estate. as it was bad in Adam. It is not for nothing, that Saint Paul makes this his highest ambition to be all in Christ, and no∣thing out of him, Phil. 3.9, 10. or this to be the highest honour and commendation to be styled Saints in Christ, Phil. 1.1. Brethren in Christ, Col. 1. Churches in Christ, in his first and second Epistle to the Thessalonians. This the highest dignity, the best seniority; They were, faith Paul, before me in Christ, Rom. 16.7. and 11. Our Saviour himself makes this the main of his Ministry. First, to call men to him; then, to perswade an abidance in him: and to this ve∣ry end hath established an everlasting Ministry, that thereby men might be called into the fellowship of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. Nay, and into the Glory of Christ, and his most glorious priviledges, 2 Thess. 2.14. Now that our condition is not more desperate out of Christ, then blessed in him, will fur∣ther appear, if we consider this estate, either singly, or in way of comparison. To begin with the latter.1. In compari∣son of others. First, Adams estate in innocency was (as we have heard) a  very rich and glorious estate; he was heir of all the world, held
all of God immediately, he was in the actuall possession of all required Graces, and had in himself a power of perpetu-ating his estate in Fee simple upon himself and his for ever: a faire estate, but short of ours now. Adam had not the heir himself as we have, had not so near an union with God as we by Christ; he had a good Land-lord, but not a Father by marriage; nor had he that security and warran∣tise, against all pretenders and claimers that we have: he held God by the hand, but God holds us. To say nothing of ano∣ther life in heaven, which whether Adam heard of, is more then we can tell. Secondly, the holy Angels in heaven, are doubtlesse in a very good condition, their estate is free, glorious, sure, yet ours in Christ our head, exceeds theirs. They are servants, we are members; they are the friends of the bride-groome, we the bride; they have their personall glory and life, but we the same for substance with Christs; Joh. 57. They are near to Christ in place and employment, but not so near as we, who are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. Thirdly, the Saints now in heaven, are in a blessed state, and for time, have gotten the start of us, yet for the sub∣stance of the matter, we have as good, as sure an estate as themselves; the difference lies in this, they are seised of it in person and in part,Eph. 2.6. we in our proxy and head Christ, there we also sit, Eph. 2. neither shall they be perfected, till we come to them; now then to close this comparative consi∣deration, if our estate in many things exceeds Adams, in some things the Angels, if for the main, we hold pace with the soules now in blisse, having the same both heire and inheri∣tance, our estate is certainly good; Adams was good, the Angels better, the Saints best, and the Saints is ours for the substance of it. 2. In a single consideration. Secondly, This futther appears if we survey the thing in it self, and look upon it in the causes of it. Secondly, in the subjects, or possessors of it. Thirdly, in the privileges, and  benefits of it. For the causes of it. For the first, it is an estate of Gods own making. We are,
saith the Apostle, of God in Christ, I Cor. 1.30. and for us is Christ, of God, made wisdome, righteousnesse, redemption, all. It pleased God out of the riches of Grace to take counsell with himself alone, how to make man, as happy, as man nee∣ded to be. And whereas before, though he had a vast estate, yet was he wider then his estate, and thereupon step'd over his bounds; he was pleased to resolve upon an estate larger then man, even his own estate, Glory, Joy so farre as communi∣cable, and enters him upon that, even upon his Masters Joy, as it is in the Gospell; and Glory, as it is, 2 Thess. 2.2 Thess, 2. 14. And whereas man was not at first himself, but as they were once used to speak of such as were under Covert without head, God resolves now upon a head and Guardian, Christ, and the conclusion is, Christ should pay all and have all. Hereupon the Father gives the Son, the Son gives himself to pur∣chase an estate, and to instate us in it. Now consider what price the Father set upon that his Son, the Son of his love, and thence inferres the greatnesse of the estate; for what loving Father will part, with the life shall I say? nay, with one limb of his childe for a whole world? why, Saints in Christ have such an estate as God was content to redeem with the bloud of his Son; a precious purchase, and therefore a pre∣cious state. Consider also Christ and his worth. He lookes upon the estate, when it was to be purchased; and when the matter was propounded to him, and surveyed by him, he was willing to sell himself to his skin, to his soul to compasse it: now certainly, that state must be very glorious that hath God for its founder, God for its purchaser, God for its price. For the subjects and heires of this estate, to speak them  all in one, it is Christ mysticall. First, Christ,For the posses∣sors of it. the heir apparent of all, the Kings eldest, the Kings onely son. Second∣ly, Christians, that is, the Church in one body, the Kings onely Daughter, upon whom this state is settled, by way of Joynture shall I say? or rather, Dowry: now when the King of Kings shall drive a match between his onely son, who is heire of all, and his onely daughter by adoption, (as the
son by nature) as once he did between Adam and Eve, and settle both worlds upon them, as he did the first upon Adam, how can it be but that the estate will be very rich, and eve∣ry way full? And that will appear yet further to you, if you consider the last things, viz. The privileges and pro∣perties thereof. First, it is a spirituall estate, it lies not here in the dirt,For the privi∣leges. as Adams first estate did, it lies in light, Acts 26. it is undefiled, as Peter speakes. And upon that account the more  excellent, because it is so spirituall; for, of things, spirituals in their natures,Acts 26.23.1 Pet. 1.4. are best, as most nearly approaching the best of all. It is a free estate, a created tenure whereto none can pre∣tend, free from all incumbrances, all forfeitures, decayes, impositions, endowed with all immunities: here is freedome from the Law, in its rigour, curse, irritation, sting; though it remain in its directive, and detective, and corrective use, yet its destructive power is taken away; there is no condemnation, saith the Text. Freedome from wrath, Satan, sting of con∣science; in a word, from all bondage. We were indeed for∣merly in a state of vassallage, but the Son makes us free,Joh. 8.36. John 8. Thirdly, it is a full estate; in Christ we are compleat, Col. 2.Col. 2.10. Yea, with the Son God gives us all, Rom. 8. all things are ours,Rom. 8.32. all persons ours, because Christ is ours, and Christ is Gods, 2 Cor. 3. ult. It is a firm estate. All is everlasting, unchangeable, un∣movable, unfading: all heires, Joint heires, with Christ. If the state stand good to him, it will to us: We shall speed as he and the Father speed, Joh. 17. Now the Son abides for ever, and the Daughter abides for ever, the estate dies to nei∣ther, and neither to other. We are heires as of the things promised, so of the promises themselves, Gal. 3. ult. estate, and writings are all made over to us: by Christ we have right to all; in and with Christ, we are in the possession of all, in his right, and in our name, livery and seisin are given and taken. Thus you see the state.
Now if you ask me a reason,  why God hath settled such an estate upon us, us beggers, us bankrupts, us traytours? I can give you none other then what the Apostle hath given me, 2 Thess. 1. the motive is, meer grace in God through Christ;2 Thess. 1.12. the end, that Christ may be glorified in us his body, and the fulnesse of him, who is the fulnesse of all, Eph. 1. ult.Luke 12.32 and to be admired by us to all eternity. Or, if you will have it in Christs own words; It is the Fathers pleasure to give this estate, which is somtimes called an Inheritance, sometimes a Kingdome, a glorious kingdome, an heavenly kingdome; Gods kingdome; Christs kingdome; The Saints kingdome. We will say no more at present, though much more might be said touching the excellency of this estate in the immu∣nities and prerogatives thereof. We come to Applicati∣on. For those who never yet closed with Christ these must be exhorted, as they love themselves, to come to him.  To be happy, come to Christ. For Motives. Consider, First, the necessity of so doing. Not onely in regard of his precept, Come to me, all ye that are heavy laden, &c. but in order to themselves; for, no Christ,  no inheritance, Gal. 4.28. Without Christ no life. They dye in their sins: he that hath, saith John, the Son, he hath life onely, hee that hath not the Son, hath no life, 1 Joh. 5.12. He is the Ark, without which there is nothing but death; he is the City of refuge; you dye, if you fly not thither. Adam leaves you under sin, sin cals for Justice, and Justice will persue you to the Gates of that City. Other re∣medy there is none, the second Adam was onely able to re∣move the hurtfulnesse of the first. There must be Adam for Adam, as there was serpent for serpent in the wildernesse, covenant for covenant, grace for grace. I know some men talk of another passage discovered, and opened to heaven: But as Paul said in another case, though there be Gods ma∣ny, and Lords many, yet to us there is but one: to us in the word; to us in this Hemisphere of the Gospel there is but one way made known, one Lord, one Jesus, one living way;
and in this sense also living as well as in other, that it never dyeth or changeth. What secret wayes the Lord is plea∣sed to betake himself unto, we are not to inquire into; our rule of faith is not Gods prerogative, but his will revealed in the word. Let us submit to this rule, and suffer our selves to be convinced by the Gospel, that there is nothing but sin, and guilt, and death, and slavery, and hell, out of Christ, but he alone is our life, our way, our truth. If we come to him, he casts out no man; if we come not, we cast away our selves. Consider the possibility of recovering our selves, and our estate, if we come to him. Herein man in his lost estate is beyond Devils. Christ hath made him capable of Salvation. He came on pur pose to recover him lost, to redeem him sold, and forfeited; and by the Gospell to bring again to light, what was banished and buryed, to wit, life and immortality. That's his businesse, and hereunto he is all sufficient, per∣fectly able,Heb. 7.25. as the Apostle saith, to save to the worlds end, all that come to him. There is no stay on his part, if any thing hinder,  it is from us. Oh,Sol. but we cannot come to him. When didst thou try? what means hast thou used? what prayers? or what paines hast thou been at? It is not want of Can, but want of Will, at least it is a wilfull impotency, as Christ layes the charge, You will not come to me, that you might have life, Joh. 5.40. You will not saith he, there's the misery; you will not come that you may have life, I offer life to your dead soules, you will not receive it. I,  but I have not the power of willing. Come to him that thou maist receive this power,Sol. he is a quickning spirit to soules, as well as bodies; and if thou unite to him, he will as easily raise thy soul out of the grave of sin, Joh. 5.25. as he did the dead body, by the touch of the Prophets bones. But how can I come to him? Come to his ordinances,  attend his mouth, yeeld to convi∣ctions
of the word, and in private propose good questions. This the woman of Samaria did, and this maist thou too. And if thou wilt suffer thy self to be drawn thus by these cords of love, Christ will in no wise cast thee off. For all that the Father giveth me, shall come to me, saith Christ, Joh. 6.37. And for my part, I came to do my Fathers will, v. 38. And my Fathers will is this, that I should lose none, v. 39. but give life to all that so come, v. 40. Consider the certainty of speeding if we do come; the  estate is already purchased and settled, writings sealed,Es. 55.1. and proclamation made to all; Ho!Rev. 22.17. every one that thirsteth come and drink freely. It was Christs very errand to bring us in a∣gain; he still employes his messengers, and invites us saying, Come, all things are prepared. He offers marriage with us upon easie tearmes; your foreskins will be dowry enough, as Saul said to his Son in law; therefore come and make no more doubts; I say to thee, as they said to the blind man, Be of good comfort, arise, he calleth thee. Cast away thy ragges as he did, and speed as he did, who immediately received sight, Mark. 10.49. &c. Oh, but I fear he will not accept me.  It is no small thing to be such a Kings Son in law. Well, try as David did in his case,Sol. do as Abigail did with David himself, David wooes her, she is sensible of her distance, and acknowledgeth her unworthynesse, but yet she followed the call, accepted the motion, and it proved a match. I, but there is one thing sticks with me,  had I like interest in Christ, as I had in Adam, I could promise to my self as much good from this Adam, as I have received hurt from the other. But now there lye shrewd blocks in my way, first, this doctrin of particular election doth much discourage me. And why so, I pray? Is it not more comfortable to hear,Sol. that some shall certainly be saved, then that it is uncertain, whether any at all shall be saved? for thus runnes the do∣ctrine,
touching generall redemption, and generall (if you will speak contradiction) election, viz. Notwithstanding Christs death and price paid, salvation is suspended upon mans choice, and it is uncertain what choice he will make. Object.  Yea, but if we descend to particulars there is no particular word given out to me. Sol.Sol. Neither is there any particular barre or caveat put in against thee, be thou Jew or Gentile, Bond or Free, Traytour or Felon, all is one in this case. There is no exception lies against thy nation, thy condition, thy person in particular. And as to that particular of Election, thou maist have far better assurance, that thou art elected, then that thou art not. What's to be done then? First,  be sure of this, that there is nothing but sin and death, nothing at all of life, or righteousnesse out of Christ. None in thy good meanings, none in thy good nature, none in the meanes and ordinances of Christ abstracted from his Spirit, therefore lay down all thine own, all naturall righteous∣nesse, all legall, all personall, with all unrighteousnesse; so farre make use of the Law as to fire thee out of thy self, and all self-confidences, and that done look up to Christ, In the second place, and close with his person, for so it must be in this marriage.Encourage∣ment to match with Christ. There must be person to person, not person onely to the estate; and for thy further incourage∣ment, take notice what the Gospell offers. First, for the person saving, It is the Lord our righteous∣nesse. The great redeemer, the mighty deliverer, who comes Authorized out of Zion to turn away ungodlinesse from Ja∣cob, Rom. 11.26. Secondly, for the parties delivered, (for we say no more as yet of the deliverer) Jesus Christ his Message is to the poor, to the broken hearted, to the captives, to the blind, to the bruised, to the most lost men, and to the greatest of sinners, Luk. 4.18. So that if thou be lost enough, poor enough bad enough deep enough in hell, the Saviour is sent to thee.
Thirdly, for the meanes, where Christ offers himself, hee  comes cloathed in an or dinance, in a promise, every promise is full of Christ, whole Christ, who is tendered to us in each Article, and Seal of the Covenant, and is indeed before-hand with us in Baptisme, which at least is as much as Judah's Ring and Staffe, though no arguments of Thamars goodnesse, yet evidences good against Judah. Fourthly, for the Tearmes, they are very free and gracious.  First, let fall all other hopes, and cry with some Martyrs,J. Lambert. None but Christ, no husband but Christ, no portion but Christ, none other Law-giver, Prophet, King, but Christ alone. Se∣condly, receive as sole, so whole Christ, to all intents, and purposes of Salvation. Make him thy ruling Christ, as well as thy redeeming Christ; he becomes author of Salvation to them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. Give up thy self wholly to be ruled by him, take him for better and for worse, and the bargain is made. The estate passeth with the person, our bro∣ken estate fals to Christ, he stands ingaged to all our debts, and his full estate becomes ours, all his privileges are made o∣ver to us, as were Adams incumbrances. Now then sith you are all for good estates, good tenures, clear titles, labour to be thus instated in Christs estate, and say as she, Give me chil∣dren or else I dye, so Lord give me Christ or else I dye: and as Abraham once, What doth all this availe me, if I have no heir of mine own? so think thou, what will all the riches, and titles, and accommodations in the world availe me, if I have never a Christ? and this the first use. For such as are already come home to Christ;  Beleevers should keep close to Christ. Keep you well whil'st you are well, we smart yet for our first fall, though through grace there is some remedy provided against that; but take heed of a second, if wee fall from the second Adam, there's no more sacrifice, nor sacrificer, no new word of Salvation, no new Christ; God hath said, and done all that he meanes to do in order to Salvation by his Son, Heb. 1.1. Hereupon it is, that our Saviour in the Gospel, and his Apostles in their Doctrines and Epistles, drive mainly at
perseverance in the faith once given, and call thick upon us, for persisting therein, for standing fast, for standing out, for overcoming and continuing to the end, in this blessed estate of grace, wherein now we stand; and labour nothing more then to take us off, from all other Christs, Gospels, Do∣ctrines, wayes, estates; it is the main drift of all or most of the Epistles. For well did they see that a continuance was as ne∣cessary as an entrance; they well knew our unsteadinesse and ficklenesse, and how licorish our nature is after novelties; nor were they ignorant of Satans wiles, of perilous times to come, and therefore have they given us so frequent, and so loud warnings. Now beloved seeing you know these things before-hand, beware that you be not drawn away from your own stedfastness, 2 Pet. ult. Rather grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ, and herein be so much the more seri∣ous, by how much the more busie the tempter and his a∣gents be. Let me tell you, all the Doctrines of later Editions drive mostly at this, to wrest you from this estate in Christ, and to create and establish another title and tenure. Hence those new wayes of happinesse without Christ. Hence the re∣vivall of our crackt title in Adam, hence the deniall of Christs purchase, hence the addition of joynt purchasers with him, hence the adding of more strings to our bow, and the super∣adding of our righteousnesse to Christs ad corroborandum, yea and the depositing of all the evidences and assurances with our selves. Look to your standing and be true to your colours, Christ hath bought you to himself, and hath listed you into his service, betray not his right, who will never, never, never, as he saith Heb. 13. desert you, if you flinch not from him: you know in whom you have beleeved, continue in the faith of Jesus, as you have been taught the truth in him. Abide in the communion of Christ, in the grace of Christ, in the power of Christ, find all your hopes, joyes, life, safety, and subsistence in him alone, fetch all your strength and life from him, nothing from any other, hold all of him, flye to no other title, ascribe all to him, and, in a word, owe to him,
and to him onely, all wisdome, righteousnesse, sanctification, redemption, salvation: whole Christ, or no Christ. Get children into this good eslate. Having secured our own estate in Christ, let's cast (in the next place) for our friends, especially children. Worldly men, who see no higher then the earth, will travell with their chil∣dren, whil'st they labour under an evill estate world-ward. If a childe be in depth or in prison, they wil put under some ragges, to pull out their Jeremy where he sticks. This is no more then they will do, nay, then we should all do, for an enemy; nay, for an enemies beast, Exod. 23.5.Exod. 23.5. Therefore as Saul bestirred himself for his countreymen, Moses for his, nay, David for his sheep, when invaded; so must we much more for children thus ingulphed, and the rather, because we have been instrumentall in their misery. In the Law, the slave was to have his liberty for his eye spoyled: We have put out the eyes of children, and must indevour in way of recompense their liberty; and as in case of Justice, there was heretofore allotted eye for eye, tooth for tooth, &c. So now in mercy and justice both, we must labour to restore to our undone children eye for eye, hand for hand, soul and body, for bo∣dy and soul. But how can this be done? however it speed, this must be our endevour, and rest we must not, till we have done our utmost to repair their estates. This is the common and constant care of all Parents, to see their children set∣led somewhere in some estate, and the quieter, and fuller it is, the more the heart of Parents is satisfied: now 'tis certain, that there is no comfortable, no secure estate, till they come to be stated in Christ. But they are so already,  Christians they are so soon as Bap∣tized. Sol. Sacramentally they are so,Sol. and that should encourage us the more, because God is so farre before-hand with us and them: but we must not rest here; Outward Baptisme, is no more then was outward Circumcision, which was no thing without the new creature; when Christ is formed in thy chil∣dren, when thou seest in them, the eye of Christ, the mouth,
and heart of Christ, Christs Image drawn quite over them, then are they safe and thou happy; till then thy feares and cares, (if thou hast either, for their soules) are endlesse, and all thy paines and cost,And how this may be done. are lost upon them, if they be lost. But still the question is, what can I do to bring in chil∣dren: I cannot give grace? Sol. Do?Sol. do what is incumbent upon thee to do. First, bring them to Christ in the Ordinance of Baptisme, there mourn for that cursed condition, which thou hast brought upon them: pray that God would baptize them with water and the Holy Ghost. Next, as they grow up, so teach them the use of Bap∣tisme, and the nature of that Covenant, whereof that is a seale. At all times set them good copies and examples, and let instruction and correction be duly applyed; If thou place them abroad, have a care of setling them in good families, and under a good Ministry. This gives thee best hopes of Religions continuing in the family; And though possibly there may be an Esau amongst them, yet ordinarily some either in the first or next generation, prove good: however, this is the best service thou canst do to God, the best thanks thou canst return to Christ, the best work thou cast perform to the Church and Ministry, the greatest mercy thou canst shew to thy posterity, the wisest way thou canst take for thy self: so shalt thou engage their hearts more to thee, Mal: ult. so thou shalt more comfortably dye, when thou seest them thus placed with, and matched to, Christ. A poor man may possibly preferre his childe by a good match, none like to this of marrying them to Christ. Sith then a way not one∣ly of recovery but of preferment is found out, be not wan∣ting to God, to Christ, to the Publick, to your selves here to your posterity hereafter; if they may be happy, leave them not miserable; if they may be found in Christ, leave them not in Satan, in hell.
If this state in Christ be so happy,  Double instru∣ction. when we are thus u∣nited to him by vocation, and hold communion with him through justification and sanctification, and receive perpe∣tuall influence and supportance from him, then inferre hence two things. Beware how we slight so great a privilege in others; Is any  a Saint and member in Christ? acknowledge Christ in him,Slight not so great a privi∣lege in others. receive him though in some things differing from us, and in many things inferiour to us: have not the glorious faith of Christ in respect of persons. If Christ be not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2. If God be not ashamed to call them children, Heb. 11.16. why should we bee coy of their acquaintance? Think the same of every faithfull Preacher. If Christ own him as his Embassadour, and gives him the title of the Glory of Christ, why should we slight any such, because of some differences or infirmities? I go further, If any Church or society of Christians be in Christ, why should not we look upon them as Paul did? Grace and peace, saith he, be unto the Churches at Thessalonica and elsewhere, which are in God the Father and in Christ the Saviour. Doubtlesse the Church of Thessalonica, and at Corinth had their blemishes, errours in some doctrinals, failings not a few in practicals, yet because they were Churches in Christ, the Apostle ownes and honours them. The Churches of Galatia were much declined, yet Paul and the Brethren with him, look upon them as Churches of Christ. The seven Churches of Asia wanted no faults, and those of no ordinary alloy, yet are they Golden Candlesticks in Christs eye, and such as he conversed withall. And if so, why should we separate from them; or bring up an ill report of any of them? You will say happily that you meddle not with particular persons,  you conceive hopefully of many that live amongst us: but the thing questioned is, about the state and constitu∣tion of our Churches, if that be Antichristian, what commu∣nion then with Christ? Brethren, if there be any amongst you,Sol. who are indeed
tender, and fearfull in this case, I beseech you with all the mercy, mildenesse, and earnestnesse that I can, to lay a∣side all prejudice, and seriously to consider these things. First, what a grievous thing it is to misname, or misvalue a∣ny estate in Christ. Secondly, whether you dare say, that none of our Churches, or of like community be in Christ. Study I beseech you, what states a Saint or Church in Christ, and what nullifies or forfeits that state. Try whether you cannot find some footsteps of Christ, some Seales of his Ministry amongst us, and if so, why may not that house and habitation please us that pleaseth him? why may not we dwell, where Christ is pleased to dwell? Object not, thousands of failings; the question is, whether we have a true being in Christ, and if he be amongst us as head, and root, why should not his be acknowledged members, and branches? But how can we partake with such,  but we shall be partakers of their sins? How did Christ?Sol. he was daily in the Temple, and at Tem∣ple Services, amidst the Pharisees, and other Doctors, yet no way partaker of their errours and abuses: he inwardly distasted them, and outwardly discountenanced them; do thou the like, and then thy presence (being onely Locall, not Morall) doth not fetch thee within a guilt. Object.  Oh but we have no power to censure and whip out offenders as Christ did. Sol. Consider first,Sol. whether any such power be due to us. Secondly, whether we may take it up of our selves. Third∣ly, whether the abuses are such, and so malignant, as that they will warrant a forsaking of the assemblies. So long as Christ is there, what fear of being member of that body, which hath Christ for its head? But the abuses are of so high a nature,  as that there is no tolerating of them. Answ.Sol. That's an high charge: be sure of thy grounds, before thou layest such an aspersion upon a society which beares the face of Church: in judging rashly thou maist
possibly sin against the generation of the righteous, therefore consult, and consider, and then give sentence; for clear it is, that as we must not partake in sin, nor joyn our selves to Har∣lots, so neither must we be more strict, and severe then Christ himself: therefore drive things to an issue, this or that Church so called, either is, or is not in Christ. If not in Christ, we have nothing to say for it, out of Christ, there is nothing but death and darknesse; If in Christ, 'tis true it may be, there may be just cause of mourning, great need of reforming, but when we have done all that lies within our power and calling to do, whether then there be ground for a divorce and desertion, think thou of that: and think advi∣sedly, lest thou condemne where Christ saith, there is no con∣demnation. Secondly, let not this consolation seem small to us, that  we are taken into such an estate. Say,Comfort to them that are in Christ. though poor as to the world, say, a scorn of men, a slave to men, be thy estate as bad as Malice can make it, or Phansie conceive it, yet if thou be in Christ, thou art in a blessed condition. Time will not now give, to spread before thee the particulars of this estate; how unworthy thou wast of it, how freely, and yet how dearly it cost thy Redeemer, what an infinite gulph and distance there is betwixt thy former, and this renewed estate; work these things upon thine own heart in private: say, once I was a slave, now free; once Satans, now Gods; once an enemy, now a childe; once a limbe of Adam, worthy to be hanged up as a traytours quarters, now a piece of Christ; once cursed, now under blessing; once for hell, now an heire of heaven; once a damned creature, now there is no condemnation; once death was terrible, the grave dreadfull, but now in Christ, I am more then a Conqueror. To be under Christ, is a great pri∣vilege, he is the Tabernacle of many coverings to shelter us, and our hiding place; but to be in him, to be made one spirit with him, is to be as high, and as safe as; we can be,And how this may be known. and there∣fore enjoy that privilege. I, but how shall I know, that I am in Christ? The Word tells thee, He that is in Christ is a new creature,Sol. 1. old
things are pass'd,2 Cor. 5.17. Rom. 7. ad prin∣cip. the old man crucified, 2 Cor. 5. the old hus∣band buryed, Rom. 7. old lusts mortified, the old world dead to us and we to it, Gal. 2. and 5. Chapters, and we redeemed from our old conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. Our old guides and leaders cashiered, 1 Pet. 4.2. Eph. 2.2.—Secondly, All things are become new, a new mind, a new understanding, a new heart, a new nature throughout, a new creation to all good workes, Eph. 2.10. The Holy Ghost formes whole Christ in us, the minde of Christ, the heart of Christ, the tongue of Christ, whole Christ we are under a new guide, the Spirit of God, (here Rom. 8.2.) gives Lawes, we are led by the Spirit,Gal. 5.25. and walk in that Spirit, Gal. 5. 'Tis true, the flesh sometimes transports, and commits a rape upon us, but the Spirit is the guide and guardian of choice.—Thirdly, a new aime, and end in all, as Christ did, not please himself, Rom. 15.3. but sought the publick good, so is it with his members in their measure. Briefly, all is made new, new hopes, new joyes, new feares, new delights, new desires, all new, all eyeing Christ. He that is in Christ, is a fruitfull branch, Joh. 15. Christ hath no uselesse member,Joh. 15.5. every one doth its office, bears fruit, its own fruit, in its own season, and bears all to Christ; find thy self thus renewed, thus pruned and made fruitfull to an in∣crease of fruitfulnesse, then we can tell thee that to thee there is no condemnation, no bondage, no curse, no hurt, no hell: nay, we can say more then so, then all persons are thine, all things thine, all times thine, all estates thine, be∣cause Christ is thine, 1 Cor. 3.22. Object.  But I have many objections against all this. Sol.Sol. Like enough so; the Apostle foresaw that, and hath prevented thee in this, and the foregoing Chapters: for in∣stance; I am a childe, say'st thou, of Adams. Sol. Thou art so by nature, but by the grace of Adoption in Christ thou art a childe of God. Object.  But I am a captive to sin. Sol.Sol. A captive of sin rather then to it: sin surpriseth thee,
but sore against thy will: Thou cryest for help, Oh wretched man! who will rescue me? Oh! but I have a world of sin. I, but there is no condemnation; that sin, saith Paul,Sol. is not thine, though in thee. Oh! but I am compassed with mighty temptations,  asflicti∣ons and the like. Yea, but all shall work for thy good in the close,Sol. and thou shalt find it so. Oh! but I can do nothing well, not so much as pray,  or begge for my self. I, but the Spirit of Christ, helps our infirmities,Sol. and utters it self, when we cannot utter our selves. Oh!  but I tremble at the accusations of Satan and consci∣ence; at the thoughts of those terrible things to come, Death, Judgement, &c. 'Tis God, saith the Apostle, that justifieth,Sol. and who then shall condemne? it is Christ that appears for us, who dares appear against us? it is Christ that hath killed death, buryed the grave, cowed Satan, overcome all, and who then shall stand up against us? But how shall I be able to hold out,  when the assaylants are so fierce, the defendant so weak, when there are such variety of changes to passe through? The Apostle hath said all, neither life, nor death,Sol. nor An∣gels, nor devils, nor persons, nor things present, or to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any creature one or other shall be ever able to separate us from Gods love, which is in our Christ and Lord. FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED TO THE HONOVRABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT; At a Publike Fast, May 25. 1642. BY ROBERT HARRIS late Pastor of Hanwell, Doctor of DIVINITY, and President of Trinity Colledge in Oxon. Published by Order of that House. PSAL. 10 14, Thou hast seene: for thou beholdest mischiefe, and spite to requite it with thy hand. The poore leaveth himselfe to thee. Thou art the help of the fatherlesse. 17. Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the humble: Thou wilt prepare thy heart: thou wilt cause thy ear to hear, &c. LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet, dwelling at the Signe of the gilt Cup neer St. Austins Gate, 1653.
TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, Now assembled in PARLIAMENT. I Now tender what you are plea∣sed to owne: sooner I could not, because wanting time & health, I had onely broken notes. I am now come as neere my selfe, as my notes will helpe me. It was my resolution from the first, to hold me to the worke in hand, the work of the day, the work of my calling; accordingly I made, and pursued my choice, waving all disputes Sacred, or Civil. Things ever move best in their owne Sphere: And O that all things might ever runne in their right channell! My worke was to Mourne, to Preach; not to Parliament-it: and I never brought a sadder heart to a businesse. Nay, The divisions of Reuben still sticke, and have lest those impressions, which will not off.Judg. 5.15. I bleed still
in the breaches of Dying Ireland, and in our Home-Jealousies. Alas! That Brethren who promise and purpose so well, work and sweat so hard, should so hardly understand each other. There is, I feare, a Divine displeasure in it. Where Unity is,Psal. 133.3. the blessing is. The spirit of Iealousy & division is a Messenger of wrath.Judg. 9. &c. And then most, when All complaine of it, and No one will owne it. For this My soule shall weep in secret; and in Rebaccahs case, I will take up her complaint; Why is it thus! As for you Noble gentlemen, What can I say now? It is wisdome (you know) to know ones owne Compasse, and you are far above me. Your Place is high, your Task great; and yet your strength not infinite. By Place,Psal. 82. you are Gods: and yet Men; you must Fall (and may faile) like others.Queid est Ec∣clesia? Viri & mulieris. Ohey in Eph. 5. Gods own Synod (the Church) is made up of men: and men be Men, in the Greatest Councels. Compare them to the Highest God, their greatest agitations, are but as the busie sweatings of so many Ants in a Molehill. Your work is also great. As your Place, so your Work is Gods. Your businesse lies about Laws, and Orders. Order is a Sacred thing, Law, the work of a God. No man can see,
or say All in his Law; Sin will evade; witnesse our good Laws touching the Lords day, Swear∣ing, and Drinking. Now (for sooth) you must tell us what Prophanesse is, what Swearing you meane, and when a man is Drunken. Nay, when a Law is with some difficulty conceived and with more brought forth, it is not an easie thing to teach it to Speak plainly: nor are men so happy in their expressions as was S. Paul, who wrote,2. Cor. 1. nor more, nor lesse then we Read. I speak not this in a Discouraging way.Et nescit reme are leo Crand.  &c. Eurip. Noble Spirits know not what that meanes. Only they know from the Poet, That it makes a man lesse then nothing. Laws therefore must be; else all goes to losse. Leave men to themselves, each mans lust will be a Law; each mans Opinion, a Bible. My speech onely tends to this, to provoke you and my self to pray∣er and dependence. He that will undertake the work of God, with the wit and strength of a man, will but shame the worke, and break him∣self. My hope is, That you will begin and end with God: that you will doe all in his strength, and doe his best work first. Mens Consciences are miserably perpelxed between Command and Command. Our Congregations are as much divi∣ded,
betweene Teacher, and Teacher. The con∣clusion in time will be,1 Cor. 1 12. We are of Christ, We will believe none of them all. Let me assure you, The case betwixt Pastor and Flock will be very sad, if there be not a timely settlement. But things of this nature I had rather speak in Pri∣vate, then in Presse, or Pulpit; And there rather to God, then to Man. I therefore reine in and be∣take my selfe with aged Jerome to my Tuguri∣olum, and there blesse God, that I dare sleep, and can say, that ought is my owne, and there deplore my barren ministery for almost twice twenty yeares, and implore the blessing of heaven upon my Deare Soveraigne, & his Great Councel. Now the Great Counsellor give you a right understanding,Esay 9.2 Tim. 2. in all things: And the God of Peace himselfe (he alone can do it) give you peace,2 Thes. 3.16. in al things, by al meanes. So wil pray From my poore Study Iune 13.164. The unworthiest of those that serve you in the faith ROBERT HARRIS.
A SERMON PREACHED TO THE Honourable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, At a Publike FAST, May 25.1642. LUKE 18.6, 7, 8. 6. And the Lord said; Heare what the unjust Judge saith. 7. And shall not God avenge his owne Elect, which cry day and night unto him; though he beare long with them? 8. I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily: nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth? WEE are in a Parable. A Parable delivers some excellent truth under a comparison. That truth is now Prefixed, now Affixed; It is here prefixed, and it is this. In prayer we must not faint, nor flagge. This the point. And this is pressed from the successe, and that is argued ab Impari, thus. If constant and faithful prayer carry it with the worst, much more with the best: If with a bad man, then with our gracious God. This is the Sum.
The parts of the Parable are ordinary. 1. A Proposition. 2. A Reddition. In both we have 1. Persons represented, 2. The successe mentioned. In the first part, the persons on the one side are, 1. Praying; a poore, shiftlesse, friendlesse widow, who had no advocate but misery and importunity. 2. Prayed to; a sowre, sullen, froward peece, a man without sense of Piety, or Humanity, one who presents as ill as may be, whether Place or Person be considered. Yet see, this woman prevailes with this man. In the second part you have, for one woman, many men; for one stranger, many children: for occasionall petitions, uncessant suit: and for a bad Judge, a good Father, who can no more de∣ny his owne, then himselfe. If then she, a woman so weak, over∣came a man so harsh: what may not children so many, do with a Father so good? 1. You have the Parable. Our worke lies in the Reddition, where 1. Our blessed Saviour prefaces and premises, (Heare what the un∣righteous Judge saith) Heare it to your comfort; He speaks some comfort, and (in him) God speaks more. 2. He assumes, and that most strongly, as the question shews; Shall not God avenge, &c. as if he had said, It is out of question, he will. 3. He concludes God will heare, will certainly hear, nay, will seasonably hear, with a non obstante; notwithstanding he is see∣mingly slow in his answers, and we certainly weak in our faith and dependance. I will say no more, as yet, to the words. Something I have to say to you, from them; and I hold it my happinesse, that I, who have no breath to spare, shall speake to those who will conceive faster, and see farther, then I can speak. For my Errands; the first and maine results from the whole, and this it is; In point of Praver,  we must gather all arguments of encouragement,
and never yeild, till we have the day. Prayer is a mastery,  Col 4.12. Rom. 15 30. and that mastery is a wrastling, and wrastle we must, whiles we can stand. When we are once drawne forth upon this service, where we pitch, there we must make good our ground, without flight, Militaria ver∣ba, ut vult Eust at aliique. or fainting; as one word in the first verse here, and another in the last verse, Heb. 10. is conceived to imply. This the Les∣son our Master is now teaching, and he charges it upon us as a duty in the first verse. And for farther proof and incourage∣ment, I present you onely with three Arguments. 1. The first is drawn from God; where he gives we may, we must take all encouragements: Here God gives all, as 1. He offers himselfe to us as a Father;Psal. 66.2. Can. 2.14. Psal. 141.2. Ephes. 3.20. as a Father hearing Prayer, as a Father begging Prayer, as a Father loving Prayer, as a Father able to exceed all prayers, needs, thoughts. 2. He binds himselfe as much by promise, as us by precept. Those promises of his are full, are free;Rom. 10.12. Deut 4.7. Luke 11.10. He is rich to all that call upon him: Every one that seeketh, findeth, and such like: And those promises are made to Christ, founded on Christ, sealed in blood, backt with an Oath. 3. He commands us to beg, and that without wavering;Jam. 1.6. Hob. 4 16. & 10.22. Ephes. 5.12. Luke 11. nay with all boldnesse, with all confidence of boldnesse, and ful∣nesse of assurance. 4. He armes us with Parables, experiments, and all argu∣ments of comfort; Indeed such Topicks, as that it is impossible for God to recede, if we stand our ground: And thus from God. 2. Next to God, I present you with a cloud of Petitioners, who have stirred up themselves to take hold of God, and it hath taken well. 1. I begin with Moses. If a man would have been discouraged,Exod. 32.10. Moses had been the man. 1. The people were stark naught, and passing froward. 2. God seems to take him off, and to give him a discharge, Let me alone, saith he. 3. He seems to take off all objections, I will make of thee (saith he) in stead of them, a great people. 4. He suspends his answer, day after day, as if he were un∣willing
to condescend. Yet Moses stands to it: God cannot get him gone; away he will not without his errand, his er∣rand he hath. To him I adde Jacob our Father,Hos. 12.4. Gen. 32.24. who concludes Ʋs, as Hosea saith; In him God spake with, us. This Jacob knows not what dis∣couragement meanes: God seemed to give him his answer, in Esau's expedition against him; but he will not take it: God was willing to put him off; but he will not admit of any Put∣iffs: he seems to take his leave: but Jacob, by his leave, will not part so: he seems angry, and willing to shake him off; but Jacob holds his hold: nay, he seems to crush him, to maime him,Cynegirus in Iustin. to begin Esau's quarrell against him; but he, like him in story, when he was maim'd on one hand, holds the Ship with the other, and when he was handlesse, held with his teeth, whilst breath held: So our Champion: Froun God, smite hee, wound hee; Jacob is at a point. A Blessing he came for, and a Blessing he will have. I will not let thee goe, (saith he) unlesse thou blesse me. His limbs, his life might goe: but there is no going for Christ without a pawn, without a blessing. This is the man: Now what is his speed? The Lord admires him, and honors him to all generations? What is thy name; (saith he) q.d. I never met with such a fellow. Titles of honour are not worthy of thee: Thou shalt bee called, not Jacob, a shepherd with men: but Jacob, a Prince with God. Nay not Jacob, a wrastler with man: but Israel, a prevailer with God. To these men, I adde one Woman, March. 15. who, like ano∣ther Gorgonia,Nazianz. threatens heaven, and is (as her brother said of her) modestly impudent, and invincible. Nothing can discourage her: Not her Sexe, not her Nation, not her Misery, not her De∣layes, but she gathers strength by her wounds, and comfort out of discouragements. Will Christ give no answer? Good, thinks shee: this is no denyall yet. Gives he a discouraging answer? That's well, saith she: I have obtained words, expect deeds too: he that opens his mouth, will open his hand also. Cals he her dogge? all the better. Dogs some way belong to the fa∣mily, some interest and right they have to some crumbs, to some scraps; and something she makes of it. You hear the Con∣clusion.
O Woman! Great is thy faith: Be it unto ther, as thou wilt. I never met with such a Woman: have it she will, and have it she shall, and that instantly, (this very houre;) and that fully, shee's her owne carver. And this is our second Argument. A third this parable furnishes me withall: Courage in pray∣er drawes on importunity. Both carry it with man; much more with God: Marke the Widow: Shee stood in no relation to the Judge; Shee had no promise from him; his place and per∣son promised little: There was little honesty in him, and as little hope, either from or for her: yet she scraes him up, and makes him weary of denials. What! a Woman in these cir∣cumstances Mascutine! and We Womanish! Consider, I beseech you, how much is won, or lost, by holding up, or letting fall our spirits in prayer. Are we Confident? Then consider, that prayer is the strength of the Creature, (for it engages Gods strength) and confi∣dence is the strength of our prayer, and of our selves: It doubles our strength; It contributes to the Publike: It sets God on his throne, nay, us in a sort: for so (with Jacob) we reign with God: That made Jacob, Israel. Other wayes and things might make him Jacob: but Prayer denominates him Israel. By this, he, and we, reigne over heaven, and earth, and carry the world in our hand; As the Boy at Athens sometimes said (I bring it onely for illustration) Hee could command all Athens. His reason: Hee could doe any thing with his Mother; his Mother with his Father;Plut. his Father with that State: So here, Faith can doe any thing with Prayer; Prayer with Christ; Christ with his Father; his Father with All. But now, on the other side, Faint-heartednes in prayer 1. Hurts us. 2. Robs the Publike. 3. Wrongs God. 1. For God. It is a true Maxime, True defects in the Creature come from falsly. conceited defects in the Creator. Thence our faith failes, because we have so low, so narrow, and so poore con∣ceits of Almighty God, whose glory is so much eclipsed, as we bate any thing of his Al-sufficiencie, and prayers Omnipotency.
2. For our selves.Heb. 12 13. Discouragement robs us of our strength: A discouraged man is but halfe a man. Hee lies open, to every temptation, is soon beaten down, and from halting soon turns aside. Either he prayes not at all, or not constantly: at best, his prayers are fearefull, soon receive a check, and take their answer. And as it makes God but halfe a God, and Mans selfe but halfe a Man, so 3. For others,Qui timidè regat, doset ne∣gave. Son: Deut. 20.8. It is not onely wanting to the Publike: but it hath an ill influence upon all. The truth is (if I may speak it all at once) It teaches God to Deny: our fellow-souldiers to Fly: (as the fearfull did in Israel) andour selves onely to Object and to make difficulties, and in the end to Die for fear of Dying, Nabal-like. 1. Before I Exhort, I cannot bat blush at this basenesse of spirit, in my selfe, in our nature. You are as willing as I to take shame to your selves this day, and to sit before God (as Ezra did) confounded. Tell me, (I beseech you) for the furthering of our humiliation, Tell me, Is not Cowardise blushfull? Will not men rather Die, then hear Cowards? and what is that but fear and Boldnesse misplaced? And what is this but our Temper? who are Daring, where we should Feare; and there only Fear, where we should be Valiant. I instance in the present work. We have Gods Passe, and Patent for Prayer, and dare not plead it: and yet elsewhere presume without Licence. For I demand, Have not we as good warrant to pray, as to curse? to blesse, as to blaspheme? yet here we feare not, we doubt not: there we doe nothing els. I bring the case neerer to our purpose. What think you? Have not we as good warrant to beg of Gd, as Rogues and Vagrants of us? They are strangers; They have no promise from us; none the least invitation: Nay, they trouble us, they charge us, they are in a disobedience, there is Law against them Asking, and us Giving: yet say, doe, what you please, they will not off. Send to them; they will sooner make your Child or Servant their spokesman, then make away. Threaten them with Stocks, on Officer, or what you please, it is all one. And shall these put forth in such a tempest, in a contrary wind, when all makes against them? and we sit still, when wind, and tyde, and all is for us?
when we have Law on our sides, and Gospell on our sides, and all the world on out sides? For Prayer ingrosses all the World, Hea∣ven, Earth, All. I put it yet a little farther. Have not we as many encouragements from Heaven as from Earth? Is not God as rich as Man? as able, as willing, as Free? yet see our practise. We have suits; these to God, those to Men. What's our deportment? With men it is our work to strength∣en the heart; our labour to gather encouragements. Is it a man we Never troubled? That is made an argument of encourage∣ment, I never troubled him yet, and for Once hee'll never deny me. Have we tryed, him Often? That is an argument of encou∣ragement, Such an one is my Old friend, my tryed friend; he Never failed me, and therefore I'le to him. Is he a Kinsman? That encourages; For shame he will not deny his Owne flesh and bone. Is he a Stranger? why then he'll take it well, that I conceive better of him, then of my own kindred. Is he, Poore? He'll the better feele me, and the sooner pitty me. Is he Rich? He may the better spare it. Thus with men, we have still some-what to say for the support of hope, though they be poor, hard, strangers, men no way engaged by Covenant, or the like. But now when we deale with God (How can we speake of it without blushing!) we can doe little else then Feare, Object, Despair. " Sure be doth not love me; He will doe nothing for me; well "may I goe, and try; but it will be to no purpose. I shall get no pardon, "no power, no comfort, no acceptation! O cursed Vnbeliefe! Can we conceive hope without promi∣ses? None with them? Can we find Plea's for Men? None for God? Can Poverty help us, and not Wealth? Weaknesse, and not Strength? Will cruelty pitty us and not mercy? not Grace? Be abashed thus to set Earth above Heaven; men above God. Yet I have not done. I cannot without horror and trembling. Put the case as the case is; What thinke you? Have we not rea∣son to believe the God of Truth rather then the Father of Lyes. Let the Divell promise safety, secrecy any profit or content in a sinfull way; we rest in his word we make no doubt of the fac∣cesse: All the threats and curses in the booke of God cannot dismay us. On the other side: Suppose God promises, and the
Devil in the meane time threaten us: which is beleeved? All the Promises, Sacraments, Oaths, Performances of God cannot establish us. There is nothing but Presuming, when Satan pro∣mises; nothing but Objecting, when God promises. O blasphe∣phemous Unbeliese! How doth this sin debase God! bely God! as the word saith, provoke Ged beyond all provocations! How angry was his Majesty with Israel, for this sinne? How angry with Moses? How angry with Zachary? for this one particu∣lar, and in a lower degree. O, how low must we cast our selves before our God this day, for this capitall sin! which is so much the worse, by how much the more Spiritual it is, and Ani.E∣vangelical. Seemes it a small thing to us, to make God worse then man? but we must make him worse then the worst in Hell? What!Tertul. Shall our unbelieving hearts not onely impute Lying to him, but put Perjury upon him also? Hath not he sworne, that We shall not seek him in vain? And shall we begin and concludein unbelief? is it not enough before prayer to say He will not hear; but after prayer to saywhen he ha's heard, Ha's not heard? as Jobs words sound, to some mens sense. Job 9.16. But here let us sit down in our confusion a while; And then let us advance, and think it long before we have wip'd off this disgrace, and approv'd our valour. 2. And here, what shall I entreat; but the perusall of the Text? You hear the Lesson, We must hold, out in Prayer. You hear The Teacher, the onely Master upon earth. I looke upon you, as upon S. Lukes Theophilus, as men grounded in the truth; and therefore willingly decline the Common Place of prayer, and wave old errors happily buried, with the unhappy disputes of this age.Aug. haeres. 57 & epist. 121. &c. How, and in what forme the widow petitioned I dis∣pute not. Written or not written, a petition, is a petition, still. The thing I am to presse, is a resolute perseverance in prayer. And this will need some pressing. For, 1. We have a dull, base, feeble spirit, ready to receive all impressions of discouragement. 2. Next, from without we shall not want discouragements, if we will listen to them. First, our owne guilty and unworthy hearts (as before I in∣timated) will cast a thousand perils.
Secondly,Vid. Erz. & Nehem. prophane spirits will entertaine us, as the ene∣mies did the Church, with a thousand, scornes. Thirdly, Friends (carnall and spirituall) will tell us, that it is all in vaine, too late, and impossible to prevaile. Fourthly, Satan will roare upon us. Thou pray, O Hypo∣crite! Thy person is unwelcome, thy prayers abominable, thy heart, mouth, and hands loathsome; the pure eyes of the most holy God cannot but loath thee, his glorious Majesty will confound thee. Lastly, The Lord himselfe will sometimes seeme an adver∣sary: he will hide himselfe, when thou seekest him: run from thee as fast as thou runnest after him: now he will chide, now frown, now delay, now seeme to reject thee, and to scorne thy services: in a word, quite to shake thee off, as Naomi seemed to beat off Ruth, when yet he desires thy company, as she Ruths. In this case thou must not shew thy selfe a dastard, but gather spirit from the opposition. Next the, Times call upon us. The Children are come to the birth,Ier. 30.7. and there is no strength to bring forth. It is the time of Incohs trouble, and therefore we must not, with Iacobs children,Gen 42. sit as men a∣mazed, but make out, as the old man advised them; the rather because there are so few, that either will, or dare, or can lift up one faithfull prayer. In the third place consider the thing it selfe, I meane Prayer. It is our life, our strength. All the world is a dead body, till God act it: and all (within and without us) lies dead till we act God by prayer: all the comfort in the creature sleeps, till we extract it with this Limbeok: all our graces,Dormit sides, dormit Chris∣t us &c. Aug. in Psal. 25. nay all the per∣fections of God, till weawaken him and them. You sinde it, we seele it: you have tried what Wit can doe, what Eloquence, what Policy, what Resolution and Endeavor; yet we stick. Now try a∣nother way; Set Heaven on work; till that move, the earth stirs not. Set God on work; till he act, nothing is done: and when you have won him, you have won all. Whilest there is but crea∣ture to creature; wit to wit; created strength to strength crea∣ted, the war is doubtfull, the issue unoertaine: But, when by prayer the great God is made, and so there is the Creator to the
creature, and strength to weaknesse; then the victory is in sight. My meaning is not to take yoa off, from other meanes; onely this I say, that a good Engineere is not the worst Souldier; nor a good prayer the worst Parliament-man. Faith can doe more then wit:Numa apud Plut. This brings men into the Field; but that God; and he onely secures the heart. , said the Heathen, in his greatest extremity; and there is our best Anchor-hold. Go on in this your strength, and your spirituall enemies shal melt before you, as once the Canaanites before Israel, and the Gaul, before the Germans face. What more shall I say to you, in a way of perswasion?Nec vultum, nec oculorum aciem ferre, &c. Shall I minde you of Chrysostoms argu∣ment? It is your honour, your happinesse, that yoa may thus dwell in Gods presence, and expresse yoar desires. Do but thinke what it is to deale with great Personages,Chrys. de oran∣do Deum l 1. in way of pe∣tition. 01 I. There is time spent in going to them: Then more in waiting on them: After sundry dayes waiting, we may haply receive that proud Prelats answer, We are not yet at lecsure: When we have accesse,Hildebr. to Henry 4. we must be briefe, we may offend: The answer is doubtfull; sometimes instead of Bread, men either give, or speak Stones; however, no man can give all to all Pe∣titioners. But now when we deale with the high God, we need not travell far, every place is a Sanctuary; nor need we abridge our selves, come when we will, in the day, in the night: speak whilest we wil, so long as we speak his language, he will heare us at large, yea he wil help us out, & make English of that which to our seeming wants sense. And should not this encourage us? Were they blessed that stood continually before Solomon? And is it not our happiness that we may have Gods eare, Gods heart, hand, face, help, all?Chrys. lib. 2. de Orat. Or, shal I tel you, that Prayer is to us, what the wate 01 to the Fish, the onely Element of safety, and our utmost refuge? Truly the Lord hath reserved divers things to this ordinance of prayer; some devils will not out, some temptations will not off, some obstructions will not be removed, some difficul∣ties will not be conquered, some mercies will not be obtain∣ed, bat by prayer. What other key will unlocke the clouds in this drought? or turn about the hearts of men, in this distracti∣on, bat onely prayer? And who knows but that therefore God
hath futured other hopes, and frustrated other meanes, to the intent that he might honor this ordinance? For Motives I will say no more. Onely give leave to tell you in few, how you shall hold up the heart, from fainting in the work: The way is this. 1. Come well appointed into the field. Assure the main point: That your persons are accepted, and that you are Gods owne, as it is in the Parable; for, till this be resolved, that God is yours, and you his, all particular doubts will resolve themselves into this. "It is true (will you heart say) God is good to his: But am I "his? His promises are gracious; but doe they belong to me? And therefore lay that as a foundation, I am thine;Psal. 119 94. and then it will follow, as David infers, therefore save me. 2. Assure your Prayers, that they be acceptable. 1. For the Root; They must be issues of Grace; not of wit or nature. 2. For the Rule; They must 1. For matter; bear the stamp of God, his precept or pro∣mise. 2. For Order; they must be tendred in the hand of a Medi∣ator, the Lord Christ, and 3. For end; The object of prayer Gods selfe must be the end thereof. And the more we secure both Person, and Prayer, the more courage we shall have to stand it out. 3. Come well appointed: both for 1. Weapons, and 2. Company. For company; The more the better; whereas in other fights and fields sometimes multitude mars all. There is a spe∣cial promise upon joynt prayers, Mat. 18. And could we second one another, as Bathsheba and her friends did, in her address to the King, I Kin. 1. I should not doubt of as good an issue of our Petitions as she found of hers. O that we could meet! if not alwayes in the same place, at the same time, yet in the same requests. If one widow can doe so much alone; what might not an army of Children doe,Text. if they would close?
2. As for weapons; The Lords owne are most approved, and will be onely available. He is a mighty Prince, who will be served onely with his owne. Look how it was in the Law: All must be Gods owne: The Priest his, the Sacrifice his, the Altar his, the Place his, All his; to the very knife, and meanest tooles: so is it still. The Person praying must be his owne, the Praver his, the Mediator his, the Petitions his, the Reasons his, All his. And when you presse him with his owne, and say (as she to Judah) Whose are these? he cannot deny himselfe. Being thus armed,Gen. 38. and entred the lists, play themen, and be victorious. There is but one thing more to be done. Set Faith on worke, and that will be your victory. If you ask me, How? The answer is, Pitch faith upon God. Consider 1. What he is. Why, he is a God, saith christ. That is all that can be said. Not an Idol, that hath a dead eare, and a dry hand: Not a man, that hath but little, and can doe little, and will doe lesse: But he is 1. A God, that is, Power it selfe, Wisedome, Mercy, Goodnesse it selfe. View him well: for all in God makes forencourage∣ment, when once we are his. 2. He is not a God simply, but a God in covenant; and that Covenant is made with christ; and by vertue of the same cove∣nant Christ and wee are both heard. 3. By vertue of this Covenant he is a Father; and what will not a Father doe, an heavenly Father for so many children, when all pray, and all in each childe prayes? for we make to him, as the childe to the breast; all speakes, and works at once, hands, feet, mouth, all, there and here. 2. What his promises be. How free, how fit, how attempered to our exigencies, and needs. 1. They are made to the lowest degree of grace, Math. 5. 2. They are made to grace mingled with many wants and corruptions, to bruised Reeds. 3. What he is in his deeds.Esa.65.24. Dan 9. 1. He gives us two Mediators; His Some, his Spirit. 2. He gives more then is asked, never lesse. 3. He gives cheerfully. Before we end, he begins. 4. He gives
to many for our sakes; maintaines a world of men and crea∣tures for our use. And so long as we see one of them alive, we cannot justly doubt of his faithfulnesse to us. 4. Lastly, consider what he is in his Parables. Here he shews us what Prayer can doe with a Judge. Luke 11. He tels us what Prayer can do with a Neighbour, what with a Father; and infers encou∣ragement from all. Is be a Judge? A Judge may be overcome with importuni∣ty. Is be a friend? A Friend may be raised out of his bed with intreaties. Is be a Father? And are we Fathers, and doe not we feele the force of that argument? If ye that are but sorry Fathers, will give good things to a child: will not your heavenly Father much more? Now having by an eye of Faith thus looked upon God, in his Perfections, Relations, Promises, Performances, Parables: Ga∣ther upon God, and hold him to it, as Jacob did. Didst not thou command mee? Saidst thou not thus unto me? &c. Presse him with his Precept, whith his Promise, which his Hand, with his Seale, with his Oath, till we doe , as some Greeke Fathers doe boldly speak: that is (If I may speak it reverently enough after them) Put the Lord out of countenance; Put him (as you would say) to the blush, unlesse we be Masters of our requests. O,  But is not this too great an impudence? There is a lawfull impudence,  as there is an hurtfull bash∣fulnesse: witnesse our Saviour his phrase, Luke 11.8. . O, but God is a great God. Yea, But he will pity, and hear like a man,  and in that re∣spect compares himselfe to man, in these Parables. O, But he is a Glorious Majesty. Yea, But he is a Father.  And a Kings son may goe as freely to his Father, as a Beggers. O, But is it too late. Come in the Night, if the Day be lost.  At midnight the neighbour heard his neighbour, Luke 11. O, But my prayers be simple. And here is a simple suitor in the Parable. Art thou a Child?
A Father accepts of small, broken and imperfect speeches from a child. O,  But I apprehend God as a Judge. The woman had to doe with a Judge in the Text.  Thou hast a Madiator, and he is a Son, a Son that never sinned, never displeased. Plead him, and make supplication to thy Judge, as Job did. O,  But? No more O Buts.  Silence unbeliefe. Turne faith loose. Our work should be to strengthen, not to weaken our hearts: to greaten our Faith, not oar Feares. And there is no temptation so strong, but faith will conquer it: no affection so great, but faith will supple it: no prison so strait, but faith will open it: no objection so forked, but faith will dissolve it: no danger so eminent, but faith will out-face it. Helpe this and Helpe all: Awaken this, and Awaken all. Remember the Story of another Widow, 2 King. 4. She had little: She needed much. Borrow (saith the Prophet) of all thy neighbours: But shut the doores upon thee. It was time to shut the doores, when many greater vessels must be supplied from one little one. I say the like to you. Shut the Doores: Shut out sense, shut out all discouragements, which would put faith out of countenance: And if God fill not every vessell,Psal. 81.10. challenge him upon that his word, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. And take this with you, The Cruse never ceased running, till there was no more room. As elsewhere God never ceased bating, till Abraham left begging. I have spoken to the Point. Now the Lord enlarge you in pri∣vate. I am sensible of your occasions. I am unwilling to abridg my Worthy Brother. And therefore I will say as much as I can at Once, to the particular following, and contract my selfe. The Judge in the Prothesis we passe. The comparison E Medio imitates a mercy in Having Judges.Ci. pro. Milone. I adde onely the Orators qua∣lification, Movo audeant quae sentiunt. The Assumption comes on with great strength, and holds out this to us. The Lord will certainly avenge his owne.
For the Termes this may suffice. His owne by Election, as it is added. Election is either to Glory, or Office. We exclude neither: we prefer the former, God hath a Pecu∣liar (not a Puccian) choice. The Number, whether Materially, or Formally considered, is to him Certaine. The Persons known. And them hee'l Avenge. (Avenge,) that is, 1. Vindicate them, and 2. Retaliate their enemies. For proofe thus. 1. Gods title is, The Avenger. Psal. 94.1.So the vulgar and the 70. often in the Psalmes read , Protecter, &c. As elsewhere, The Protector, The Second, or Champion of his people. 2. 'Tis his Place, as Judge. Gen. 15.14. 3. 'Tis his Preregative, as Supreme. A Regality invested in the Deity, Vengeance is mine. Unlesse God issue out a Commission, and give power, none must revenge. 4. 'Tis his Glory. Hee's knowne by it. Psal. 9.16. He shines in it, and is lifted up into the throne. Psal. 94.1. Here all his Perfections, Wisedome, Power. Justice, Truth, are Concentrate. That's from Gods selfe. Next, From his People. God is most concern'd in all their suffe∣rings. 1. The Cause is his: and he's struck at in it. The thing parsu∣ed in a Saint, is, not sinne, nor the Mans selfe: but God in his Truth and Graces. Hereupon the Church intitles him to her quar∣rels, Psal. 74.22. 2. Next, The Persons be his, his Children. And the Father seeles what the Child suffers: and whither else should Children flye, but to their Father? Nay, in a sort, by Acceptation, and In∣terpretation, they are God himselfe. He, that toucheth them, touch∣eth him in his tendrest part. Zach. 2.8. 3. From their Enemies. They have no aime in their hand. They strike at All, with Haman. Yea they triumph over God him∣selfe, when they trample upon his: as a King is said to be con∣quer'd, when his subjects be subdued. Hence in Scripture,A Vel. learned Mde in 1 Tim. 4 1. Nation and their God stand and fall together. 2 King. 28.33. Jer. 48.7. and 50.2.
This point (applyed) is 1. Of Private concernment, and 2. Of Publike use. In Private, it hath a Threefold prospect. 1. It looks backward, and bids us reflect upon our selves. And in case we have been wrongfull to the Name, Person, State of any of Gods, set all to Rights this day. 'Tis the worke of this day. 'Tis The Fast, Is. 51. There God shewes What is, What is not a Fast to him. To hang the head for some houres, that's not The Fast. The Fast is, To loose the bands of wickednesse, to undoe the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed goe free, and that ye breake every yoke. Is it not? &c. v. 6.7. Lets come home therefore to our businesse. Is any servant defeated? Any Tenani by us oppressed? Any Credi∣tor defrauded? Any poor Christian any way wronged? Let my counsell be accepted.—Break off your sinnes by righteousnesse, and your iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor, &c. Dan. 4. Pay for the cure; Make satisfaction for the wrong; Compound with the Plaintiffs; Let them stay the suit, become Mediators for you. This is Gods way, in the Case of Abraham with Abimelech, Gen. 20. of Job with his Friends, Job ult. Give (saith God) the man his wife, he is a Prophet, my Prophet: He will pray for thee: so thou shalt live: else thou art a dead man. And for Job; He is my Servant (saith God) you have done him wrong: Right him againe: And Let him sacrifice: Him will I accept: you without him I accept not. You see the Course; If you tread it, your fast takes, your pray∣ers passe: If not, The Judge is on the Bench; He will have Eye for Eye: Tooth for Tooth. My meaning is, He will returne you your owne Coine; and the more silent the Patient is, the more shrill the Wrong will be, as in the case of Moses, Numb. 12.2. whilst he is dumb, God speaks; whilst he is deafe, God hears and stirs. And surely Fast we must from all Vnjustice, or Fast from nothing. Better eat bread, then drinke blood, and devoure mans flesh. I refer you, in this haste, to Job 31.21. to Exod. 23. v. 23.24. & 27. I must away.
2. This respects the time present. Will God avenge? Hold ye your hands. Let wickednesse proceed from the wicked. Let not your hand be upon him. Yea hold your Tongues, your Hearts,I Sam 24.13. and be not so impotent as to returne wrath for wrath: much lesse to band jests and girds. 'Tis for children to spit at one another. Be ye so Manlike, so Kinglike, as to doe Best,Regium est, &c. when ye hear Worst: so Christlike, as to overcome all evil with all goodnesse. And in case you be at any time either plai'd upon, with David, or trod upon with that Great Prince, say, Non tibi, sed christo: say,Barbarossa, Non tibi, sed Petro. V. 10. Vrsin. 'Tis before the Lord. And, if no law will relieve you, know that you shall doe your selves no disservice, in making God your chancellor. 3. For the future; This must fix us on our duty, what ever the case be. The matter is not what the Worke, but what our Warrant is. 'Tis certain, we shall meet with opposition in the pursuance and performance of our Callings; Especially You that are more publike persons, and have more earnest contesta∣tion with open delinquents. Lug but one swine, and there will be a great outcry. But here's the Point; Are ye Gods in the cause? Is the worke his? The designe his? your weapons his? your method his? Have you to shew a warrant and commission from him? Fear no colours: Though every bricke were a Divell; goe on with Luther. Yor Names, Lives, Posterity, are in his hands. He speaks to you, as Absalom to his, Fe are not; have not I commanded you? 2 Sam. 13.28. And when you can justify your proceed∣ings to him, reply upon your owne fears, in Nehemiah's words; Should such a man as I flee? I! who pretend to God! I! a Pub∣like person! Should I flye with a whole corporation, nay county on my back! Hath my Country intrusted me, given me her selfe? Et Turnum fugientem baec terra videbit! Farre be this from Noble spirits. Assure the Cause, Calling, Conscience: and that done, Fix your visible eye upon the invisible God, as Moses and Micaiah did before you: and all the Glory and Majesty in the World will seeme no more to you, then it did to them; or then a poore Candle is to the brightest Sunne. So the first Use. The second is more Publike, and it is Double. You of Publike ranke must.
1. Concurre with God the Avenger. 2. Confide in him. For the first. The Lord hath taken you into Commission with himselfe; put his Name, his Power upon you. What it is I can∣not determine, nor do I meddle with your priviledges. What ever 'tis, 'tis Gods; 'tis of him and for him, and must be ma∣naged accordingly. It shall be your safety to frequent your commission. Tis Derived, 'Tis Limited, yea and 'Tis Pub∣like too; and must be managed with a Publike spirit. Private revenge is not within your Commission. That leaves a staine upon a man some wayes innocent; witnesse Iehu: And puts an innocency upon the greatest offender; witnesse Abner. Here then all selfish affections, and private respects must be 1. strained out, and Iustice Iustice, as Moses speaks, that is, Pure Iustice without mudde, must run down. Deut. 16.20. And 2. restrained in all others. And be assured that you have done, and shall doe your selves greatest right, in Disadopting, and Disavowing all illegall, tumultuary, selfe-revenging, and libel∣lous wayes. Gods cause needs not mans ly, mans froth, spleen malice. And it shall be your happinesse to put a wide distance betweene Iustum and Iustè betweene the courage of the Sonne, and the disorder of the Souldier, with that Old Generall.Manlius. Plus est in imerio quam in victo∣ria. Florus l. 1. c. 14. Your revenge must be publike then, yea all publike in it. Person, Cause, Rule, End, All; and then it will be a Sanctuary to the innocent, a Sacrifice to the Lord. What Iehoshapbat once said to his Iudges, I say to you, Let the feare of God fall upon you. Take heed; The Iudgement is Gods, not mans. 2 Chron. 19. Nothing of man must be seene, heard, felt in this. All must be Gods. God must be read in your Lawes, heard in your Threats, felt and seene in your Executions: And then things come upon the Conscience with power, when onely God is represented. Up then, Ye visible Gods, and remember that God avenges by you. 1. In Civill causes, Say, what God would say; doe, what he would doe: you are his mouth, his hand. Avenge the Wi∣dow, Relieve the Oppressed. And if your leisure will not ad∣mit
of Iohs search: yet do you admit of Iethro's counsell. Dis∣misse them timely, when you cannot presently dispatch,Iob 29 16. Exod. 18. lest you tire them, and waste your selves. 2. In matters of higher Alloy: Avenge God, as he shall a∣venge you. Make lawes to fence his lawes. Plead his right. Vin∣dicate his truths, his name, his day. And that done, in a con∣formity to God, then in the next place, 2. Confide in him. Beleeve your Saviour. God will certainly avenge his owne; his owne servants, his owne delegates, and sub∣stitutes. 1. He will vindicate their name, their cause, their truth. He will be jealous over them, when they are truly zealous for him. Rest in this. 2. Nay further know, God will avenge, not Members onely, but Whole Churches, and Societies, that are his: His owne, all his owne, whether Private, or Publike, he will de∣fend. And, if it shall please him to make us yet more his own, and to draw us neerer to himselfe in a Closer Covenant, so that we be his Iesurum, he will be to us, as once to Iaceb, The shield of our defence, the sword of our excellency: He will beare us in his e∣verlasting armes, as it is Deut. 33. more at large. Yea he will looke upon all the Blasphemies, Insolencies, Outranges, and Conspiracies against this our Church, and State, and at once retaliate our Adversaries, and justify our cause. The Conclusion is that of the Kings, Deale couragiously: the Lord shall be with the good. When the Cause is good, and the Heart good, and Warrant good; God will be with you, in his Counsell to Direct, in his Power to Protect, in his Goodness. to A∣venge. So saith The Amen, and faithfull witnesse. 3. Nay yet farther, As this must comfort us for our owne particular, in this our Little Moat: So for the publike, and the Church in generall. The cause of Religion is, you know, Gods cause. The cry of Blood belongs to his Recognizance.Psal. 9. He makes inquisition for blood. The blood of his cryes loud, and hath cry∣ed long against That man of Sinne, and Man of blood. Under the Fifth Seale the blood of the Then Saints cryed apace, How long! &c. That cry open'd a Sixt Seale; and then the Bloody Dragon cry'd as fast, O ye bills, and Mountaines cover us! &c. Since that, ther's an Inundation of blood, that cryes from all Coasts, and
cryes more then ever. Even thy blood O Germany, and thine, O France, and thine, O Ireland. God hath said, that He that kills shall be killed, and that blood shall answer blood, Revel. 13.10. The time drawes on, and Cry on ye bleeding churches: Cry on ye Prophets, and Apostles, in your Sackcloth, in your blood. And thou, O England, with thy Cranmers, Ridlies, Bradfords, Cry on, and give the Lord no rest, O ye his Saints, whose blood is shed, till he That's holy and true avenge your Blood. And Ye,Florus lib. 2. c. 15. O NOBLES, and much honoured GENTLEMEN: do ye set your hands to this Carthage, that busles most; and this Bloody-beast, which bites worst in her last conflict. And, when ye haue done all, Stand by the Glassy Sea, with your harpes ready, till the Lord shall be pleas'd to empty the Fifth Viall upon the throne of the Beast, and cast the great mil stone into that Sea of blood, Amen. Even so come LORD IESUS; Take to thy selfe thy great power, & let the blood-sheds of the Great Whore come in remem∣brance before thee. Amen. Followes the Third, which delivers the manner how God delivers his. 1. Hee's long ere he begins; 2. He goes through-stitch, when he sets in. For words; I am loth to entertaine time with Criticism's; we have a greater work in hand. If we follow Chrysostom's sense with the Vulgars, and her Sworr.-men, and read the words Que∣stion-wise, Will he suffer long? we shall 1. Impute to S. Luke worse language then he speaks, who of the Evangelists is most Attick: And 2.So Homer uses  in Vul∣cans speech to Iuno. I had a &c & alibi passins. Crosse the maine scope, which drives at perseverance upon delaies. If we follow his follower Theophylact, and mo∣derne writers, and render , by , sampling it with the He∣brew, we have our warrant. Yet [here's a difficulty. For, How sorts this Slownesse, with that [speedily] following? But this is no hard knor. 1. God may seeme to us, but is not in himselfe Slow. For to be Slow. is to be too late; and God is never so. 2. Againe, he beares at first, yet smites home at last. I take no pride in varying from advised translations, and therefore pitch there.
God gives proofe of his patience, before he proceeds to ex∣ecution. He suffers long, before the Creature suffers. This is generally true. But I must draw down the point to the present instance. He suffers long (With Them) With Whom? With Ad∣versaries, as the woman phrased it; or With them, whom venge∣ance abides; as the Hebrews often couch the Object in the Action. Our Point then must run thus. God beares long with his adversaries; with worst men. He dis∣penseth not his favours equall to all: yet to al some. All taste of his goodnesse, but with a difference: Though he bear not E∣ver, yet he beares Long with his enemies. His Everlasting name is  opposed to  Prov. 14.29. say the LXX. speaks it roundly, Rom. 9. He suffers with much Long suffering the vessels of wrath. The truth of this we finde in Persons, Cities Kingdomes, and those none of the best. But we touch onely upon these par∣ticulars. 1. Look upon the Persons in their distance, 1. The provokers are his owne creatures, who live upon him. 2. The provoked, the Highest Majesty. This were enough to tempt created pati∣ence, as he said; Shall this dead dog raile upon my Lord the King!2 Sam. 16.9 What! A Dog upon a King! This requires infinite patience. 2. Look upon their Actions, in their difference. And there it is hard to say whether bee greater, patience or provocation. 1. The wicked hate His, for His sake, with a Satanicall hatred, (as Davids words is, Psal. 38.20.) and would destroy Soule and Body all at once, as that Villain in Bodin attempted upon ano∣ther. 2. They cannot be satisfied with One Mordecai's flesh: They wish all but One head, that they might dispatch all at one stroke. 3. No time is long enough, no helpe great enough.Mr. Boltons Sermon on 1 Cor. 1.26. They call in help; they beg and borrow Curses and Blasphemies, to their last breath, as I reade of one. 4. They never relent, but write all to their merits, and wish they could doe more: Thus they provoke.
Now what is Gods Patience? Though his soule abhor sin infinitely; Though he cannot goe out of hearing, and shus his eyes, as we may, but must see and heare all; Though his name, Law and Children be more to him then all the world; Though heaven and earth sweat under these provocations, and Gods owne (struck downe at his foot) cry for help:Rom! 2. there's  Yet God Beares and Beares long; Nay doth them positive good; Treats with them; Fees them to be quiet, and his owne to be patient; and when he must needs smite, gives them space, takes time himselfe, is Long in bending his how, and drawing forth his weapons. And after all this, if then an Ahab will suba it, he is ready to reprieve. But this is a Fathomlesse-depth. Were I in another place, I should hold it needfull to say something, by way of explication. But here it's sufficient to minde you, That Gods patience is no way passive: Nay his Longest suffering is his Greatest Acting, or enjoy∣ing of himselfe, in all Serenity and Perfection, and is onely grounded upon his most perfect nature. 1. God is Power it selfe; and therefore can beare long. 2. God is Wisedome it selfe; and therefore forbearant. 3. Goodnesse it selfe; and therefore so long-suffering. And the longer he suffers the more he exerciseth and evi∣denceth these his perfections. That is the maine ground of the point; where to you may adde, if you please, these ensuing Par∣ticulars. 1. The Wicked, Cods adversaries are some way his own; and that Ownenesse works Patience. The Lord is a piece of a Father to them also. For he is A Common-Father, by office to all; A Speciall-Father, by Adoption to Saints; A Singular-Father, by Nature to Christ. A Prince, besides his particular relation to his Children, is Pater-Patriae, Pater familias, and is good to all; though with a difference: So here. 2. Though Christ hath purchased a peculiar people to him∣selfe, to the purpose of salvation: yet others taste of this his goodnesse. The world, you know, was lost in merit, and ipso facto forfeited, with all its comforts, and appurtenances. The
Lord Christ hath restored it, and doth keep it standing; and in the Interim, the worst enjoy it in common with the best, and so far, fare the better for Christ. 3. God in his most wise dispensation, sees use of patience towards such: So, he works out his owne praise, and designe upon his Church. In short, At present there may be some use of them; and so he reprieves them, as we doe some notorious Felon: and here∣after there may be some fruit come from them, and the Ill Mo∣ther is a while sorborne for her Fruit, and Venter sake. This is all I can stay to speak to the point. Now were I my selfe, I would commend this to two sorts. 1. The worst must take heed of Two Extremities. 1. Not to Vye with Children, and bear themselves too high up∣on Gods love, because he beares himselfe so patiently, and graciously towards them. No, there is difference: Isaac is the Son of the Promise, though all the Abramites have somthing.Gen. 25.5, 6. Onely Jehoram the firstborne must have the Crowne, and Kingdome: Smaller matters must content the rest. All Josephs brethren taste of his bounties; but none to Benjamin.2 Chron 21.3. As in the things there is a wide difference: (not now to be enlarged) so special∣ly in the Issue, and event: the wickeds happinesse will take end, his lease will run out, Eccl. 8.13. That end when it comes, comes Swifith, as Ezekiel in his 7. chap. tels them upon another occasion.—The End (saith he) is Come, is Come, is Come; and so some ten or twelve times minds them of this. And when that Time is come, the Lord sets on, How Long, and How Often he hath forborne.Psal. 95.—Forty years long I have horne with this generation. And—These ten times have they provoked me. Numb. 14.22 2. Not to charge God to be an hard Master: But to give him the glory, not onely of his Justice, but of his Patience, and Good∣nesse: For even in his Executions he is still beneath their de∣merit, beyond their desert; and that one day they will know, though now they will not acknowledge it. But the maine is to the Saints. 2. If the worst must say, God is patient; must not the Saint?
If Sodom, If Bab. l, If India, must acknowledge his Long-suffe∣ring: must not England? must not This? must not every Towne and City? O survey your lives, compare Gods patience with our frowardnesse; Gods forbearence with your stubbornnesse. Call to mind your follies, passions, infirmities, presumptions. What answers you have returned upon reproofe; how many cals you have slighted; how many means you have scorned. In few; how many, how great, how lasting your provocations have beene. And, If Cain, and Judas must yeeld God patient: Doe you say, Who is a God like unto thee that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He re∣retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighieth in mercy, Mica. 7.18. And, if the Divels themselves thinke it worthy a suit, that their torment may be deferred; must not we thinke it thankworthy, that weare thus long forborne? O, let every Towne ye looke upon, every Church ye come into, every field you walke in, every Creature you see living, draw from you thanks.—Let the house of Aaron say, His mercy endureth for ever; Else had we no Church.—Let the house of Israel say, His mercy en∣dureth for ever; Else had we no State,—Let every man breathing say, His mercy endureth for ever; Else our Atheismes, Oaths, Cur∣ses, Idols, Murders, Whoredomes, and other Abominations had long since sunk us, and swallowed us up. But what are Words, if but Words? Let the Meditation of this point be improved unto Humiliation, Repentance, Consolation. 1. For the first. Is God so forbearant? 1. What are we, that we should be so hasty? What? Is he wounded in his Name, in his Law, and in his Sons? And must not we be touched in our Dog? Who are we, that we cannot bear (As God, (shall I say?) nay with God himselfe! He must smite, when we would have him; elsewe question, sometimes his Truth, most times his care. Nay farther. Is God so forbearant? What have we done? Or what did we meane to provoke so Patient a Father? How
great is the provocation of his sons and daughters! It is not, It is not (beleeve it) a Small thing that will Anger this Father. It is not a little Cloud, that will hide this Sun. In his anger therefore read our sins, and in his expressions his wrath. His Face, his Words, his Actions speak him angry. And patience will not be angry for Triftes. What? David hide himselfe from his Absalom? doth not so great a wrath argue greatest provocation? And is not Our Father, thinke you, Angry, when he sends a Spirit of division amongst us? when he Dashes Child against Child? makes a Rod, of a Sword? drawes Blood, and bathes his Sword therein? Turnes his Children a begging, and outs them of all? Is not here wrath? And is it not time now, to fall before him, with Miriam, whilst he thus spits in our face? To Run with Aaron, when the fire is began? To cry with David,Num. 12. Num. 16 46.1 Chion. 21. when the Sword is drawn? O Lord, spore Jerusalem, spare our Cities, our peo∣ple: And to lament after our Father; as the Child doth after his lost Mother. My Father, my Father is lost, What shall I do! 2. In the next place, Let us quicken our repentance: Kindnesse will melt a Soul; Should it not a Son? The proper issue of patience and kindnesse should be to repentance: of long patience speedy repentance. You are Noble; I report my selfe to your Judgements. What think you? Are not a thousand of Oaths, and millions of Lies (to omit other provocations) enow? Is not forty years provo∣cations? nay sixty? nay eighty sufficient? Hath not God wai∣ted long, and long enough? Is it fit thinke you, to make him wait longer? Is there any hope that ought else will worke, if patience work not? Or is there any thing left after patience abused? Will not Nineveh rise up in Judgement against us, and say, We had but forty dayes patience afforded us: And shall these abuse Twice forty yeares? Will not the damned in Hell arise and say, We were born withall, some but thirty, some but twenty yeares, and they have abused a far longer patience? Nay, will not the Devils themselves come in and say, We had not the patience of one hour afforded us; and shall these ever be spared? I beseech you by all the mercies of God; by an age of patience; by A world of blessings; by that your Candor, and In∣gennity;
and by all the Endearments, that ever past betwixt Christ and your sonles; pity your selves; pity your Country; pity your posterity; and be content to be happy. Fall downe in private before the Lord, and say, O Lord, I am ashamed of my Ʋnmannerlinesse. Thou hast long knocked, and I have made thee stand out of doores. I can stand out no longer. It is infinite pati∣ence, if as yet I may live. O turne me, and I will now turne. I Come, I Come with all the strength I have: O draw me! Melt me! receive me! 3. Lastly, Let this give us an hopefull expectation of further grace. True it is, Our sinnes are hideous. God was never more put to it by a Nation. Notwithstanding, could we put our selves into a posture for mercy, There were yet hope in Israel. For I demand, Is God patient toward Enemies? toward Rebels? when there's no fasting, no praying, no reforming thought upon? And will he Not meet us in the way of his judgements?Vid. Mic. 6.3. Hos. 6.4. & 11.8. What? is he so long-suffering toward sinfull Ephraim? so loth to thinke of a divorce? How shall I give thee up Ephraim! How shall I entreat thee! And so ready to receive Ephraim, upon submission? Is Ephraim my dear son? &c.Jer. 31.20. And will he not be gracious to this Our Ephraim, in case we come in? What! will he plead for Israel, for Nineveh against his Prophets? and of a Judge become an Advocate? As we see in the case of Elijah, and Jonah. Why E∣lijah (saith he) Thou art not alone: There be Thousands with thee, and for me: Why Jonah, dost thou well to be so hasty? would'st thou have meslay the Child upon the Mother? so young, so many? Will God, I say, thus plead for a people, when his Prophets cry against them? And will he not be intreated for us, when of all Ranks some, and the Prophets cheifly importune him? Bear up, Brethren, and know with whom ye have to doe. You deal with a Father, The Father, and The God of patience. 'Tis true,Esa. 54.7. He can be angry. That's his justice: That's his goodnesse to you: But he cannot be long angry with his owne. 'Tis but for a Moment. It redounds not to the Person. 'Tis not Pe∣nal but Medicinal. Sinke not under it. Onely prize patience, and abuse it not. Hold this Patient God amongst you, as Moses did. Chaine him up with your prayers and teares, and say, If we have
found grace in thy sight, Go not from us: Abide with us. And then know, There is patience enough in God for a Thousand Englands. And, if we doe miscarry, it is not from want of Goodnesse in God, but from want of Grace in us, who have a price in our hands and dee not know it. But I must away. The last thing followes. God is swift in his helpe as well as sure. When his be once read for help, help is at hand. So Nahum pleads, cap 1.2, 3. God suffers, and God is swift. I am in haste, and cannot open the words. S. Peter saith the same, 2 Pet. 3.9. where two things are spoken. 1. What God is in our conceit; Slack. 2. What God is indeed; Seasonable, when we are fitted. But is not God slow? It is not slownesse,  or slacknesse: For that is to Omit an opportunity. He is ever opportune, and frames his pace, as there is cause. When we be ripe, he is ready, he is speedy. Speedy, 1. In opposition to the Judge here, who is too late; and to mens opinions, who being too short, thinke God too long. Speedy, 2. In reference to our fitnesse, and fitnesse of time. He is neither too early, nor too late; but observes the very height, strength, joynt, article of time. We know not how to expresse Moses his  of time. But at present we are upon his speedy helpe.Ex. 12 41. & alibi in Gen. For this; doe observe how he represents himselfe. 1. In his gectures, and postures. He's said, when he is upon his peoples deliverance, to stand up, or rise, to run,Vid Hab. 3. & passim apud Prophetas. In the Canti∣cles, he comes leaping, &c. Es. 31.5. slying, &c. to fly. 2. In his Expressins. He that comes, will come, and will make haste, with ut tarriance, Heb. 10.37. 3. In his Performances Ever at, or before his day, never one hour too late. The Reason whereof is manifold. 1. If we respect Gods selfe. 1. He cannot mistake time: For he is Wisdome it selte, and the just measure of time. That is Esay's reason, He is a God of Judgement. 2. He cannot fail of his aime, and end;Esa. 30. For he is power it selfe. There is nothing in his way; He is in Heaven (saith David) and doth whatsoever he will. Others must work what, and when they can: God works when it pleaseth him, and can do a great deal in a little space. He can cause to conceive, and to bring forth the same day, Esa. 66.8. 3. He is goodness it self. Goodness is his nature: and nature delights in its own operations: it is it's life. The Sun
runs rather then stand still; delights more inshining, then in being overshadowed. 4. He is Truth, and it is his Word, He will be found in due time; and his time is the Due time, with respect to our Fitness. Read Psal. 46.1, 5. 2. Adde in the second place, Gods Relation. He is a Father. Re∣lations, you know, are very active. Saul would rise early to help his subjects. 1 Sam. 11. Fathers be rather too hasty, then too slow. They are ready before their Sons. The child indeed thinks himselfe fit for Horsmanship, for the Ʋniversity, Marriage, or the like; and conceives his father too slow. But the truth is, The Father stays upon his Child, and is ready before he is ready; Especially in cases of danger. A Father runs without legs, when the Child is hazarded: Nor is there any Beast, which will not fly upon death, when his young is en∣dangered. Now the Lord hath not put this inclination into Crea∣tures, and deprived himselfe thereof, the while; His be His, and He will be Theirs, if it be not long of them. Let the prodigal creep, and the Father will run. Luke 15. 3. His Children will mind him of the time how it passes. Their Cry is still, How long, Make haste. Their Remembrancers joyne with them. Esa. 62. and Christ with them. Zach. 1. How long, O Lord of Hosts, wilt thou not have mercy upon Jerusalem? &c. 12. These, All these sue God upon his Band, and presse the fitnesse of the time. Dan 9.2. Psal. 102.13. To make an end. If meer selfe-love will force this Judg out of his pace: will not love of Justice, Mercy, Truth? Love of Christians, of Christ, of Gods-self quicken him? Doth not he know how soon their spirits will faint? how soon they will step forth of the way? and after halting, turne aside, upon two long delayes? Yea,  but we see Gods people long deferr'd. It seemes long,  because we are short. A short walke is a long journy to feeble knees. Times are above our reach: the knots, and periods of them are in the hands of the God of Judgment. When help is seasonable his fingers itch, as the Mothers brest akes, when it is time the child had suck. There is no more now to be done,Ʋses. but to make this point usefull to us, and then I have done. 1. Blush we at our boldnesse, who take upon us 1. To Controll. 2. To confine the All wise God.
1. For the first, Who are we, that we should sit upon our Maker? and say, in effect, Her? God is out. Here he mistakes his time? What is this but to Charge God foolishly, as Job did not? What is this, but to set the Sun by our dyall? This Caesar termes saucinesse in his Souldiers. This our Saviour disliked in his dearest friends.Ich 2 4. & 7 6 & 11 39.40. This the Physitian blames in his Patient: Parents in their Children: you in Vs, if so be that we, (at so great a distance, who know so little of your obstructions) shall charge you, here with too much haste, there with too much slownesse. 2. As great a saucinesse it is To confine the Almighty, Now he must help or never, this way, or no way. By this Parliament, or by no Parliament. Stop, for shame. And if you will wisely enquire into a reason of Gods proceedings, reflect upon your selves, and charge the flownesse upon your own soules. It is a truth, God will be ever himself; and hath many ends in One Worke. But, in passages twixt him and us, the fault is ours, not his, if we be not seasonably holpen. Thence that in Isay 30 18. God waits, that he may have mercy. Gods Heart, Gods hands are full of mercy: he waits, being A God of Judge∣ment. (i) one that dispences mercy in Judgement. Thence his plea Isay 58.1. &c. The people wondred they heard not from God. Why (say they) have we fasted? &c. And God wonders, that he hears not from them. And more fully (Isa. 59.1.) he resolves the Case. Gods hand is not shortned: His eare is not deafned. He is able, he is willing to doe them help. Where is the hinderance then? He tels them, Your sinnes keep good things from you. Thence also it is, That God so expostulates with Joshua. cap. 7.10. Vp, (saith hee) Why lieft thou thus, and cryest to mee? As if it were long of me that the warre succeeds not. Go, deale with thy people. There is an accursed thing in Israel. Thus God points us to our duty, and we must Act accordingly. Judges 20. when the warres of the Chureh miscarried, the Church enquires of God, with Prayers, and Teares, and Fastings. In the like case we must do the same thing: We are here upon Gods work Things stick. Comfort comes on slowly. Let us Cast Lots with Joshua; and finde out The Achan. Let every man lay his hand upon his heart, and say, Can God certainly help? Will he speedily heare? What is then the reason of this delay? This is a fit question for publike, for private, for All Persons.
In Publike. Your affections (Honoured & Beloved) we question not. Sure your endeauours are good, your labours great. Yet must we say with the Prophet, The harvest is past, Summer is ended, and we are not yet saved. Jer. 8.20. Where is the Let? Let's put it to the Lot. 1. Lot upon your selves, and let each Parliament-man say. Am I rea∣dy? Am I fit for mercy? for honor? I pretend to hamiliation. I represent such a people, such a place (in their sins) this day. Doe I humble my self? Do I gage my heart, pray, weep, mournalone? I pretend Reformation. Am I my selfe reformed? Do not I, who say others must not sweare, swear my selfe? Do not I give Liber∣tie my selfe, where I make Lawes for others? If so, God will never accept of a good motion from a bod mouth: as that State in story would not. 2. Lot upon your families. I come hither to reforme others: But what are my owne Children? my Owne Servants? What should Philip doe abroad, till he hath composed disorders at home? 3. Lot upon your Company, and Associates. Say, Is there never an Esau amongst us? Never an Achan in our Tent? Never a Jonah in our Ship who troubles all? 4. Lot upon your Courses. Aske: Whose work am I upon? Gods? or my Owne? Aske farther. (If the work be Gods, and the Publike) in what Order do I proceed; Vzziah may disturbe the whole busi∣nesse, for want of Order. Aske farther: In what Manner doe I go on? If I presume upon the goodnesse of the Cause, or greatnesse of my strength, I may be crost, as Israel was in that 20. of Judges. You are now before the Lord. Weep with Israel upon these de∣layes, and strike the right Vein: Say, The Lord is not flow to help: but we are slow to search, slow to reforme, slow to put our selves in a hopefull way of mercy. This is a fit Question for us also in Private. We (my Brethren) run out upon God, He forgets, He will not be entreated. We fly upon men, They make no Haste, They Spin out Time, with long orati∣ons. Were We in place, Ireland should not be thus deserted; Execu∣tion thus fatur'd. But who is in fault? What disorder! What disorder! saith Nabuchadnezzar, when the Disorder was from him: So we. What delayes! What delayes! No help comes! O, but what saith God? Vp Ioshua. Israel hath sinned. There is an Accursed thing among you. There is cursed Pride, Unbeliefe, Covetousnesse, Coldnesse, Neutrality, in
the Camp: What can be done, till this be removed? There are Vnblest Divisions, preposterous courses. We Rangle our own work, and are much wanting to the publik, in our prayers, and amend∣ments. And this is that, that scoat's the businesse in publike. Nay, shall I tell you? There is that, that hinders all in publike and in private: and in short it is this. We be not this day Humbled for Our Own, and Our-Other-mens sins; we be not broken; we be not ripe for mercy. And can we think that God will lay Cordials upon Full and Foul stomachs? That he will skarf our bones, before they be set? And lap up our sores, before they be searcht? O it is in vain, (as I hope my Brother will anon tell you, now my strength is spent.) It is in vain, I say, for us to dream of Comfort, til we are better emp∣tied and broken. Let us, I beseech you, when we have done in Pub∣like, goto it in private, and labour to see The Plague in our own heart. We speak much of A malignant party. But shall I tell you? Our sins be the Malignant Party: Yours, and those whom we represent this day. These tye the hands of God, and man. These stop the ears of God, and the King against us. Clear the Lord, and shame your selves, saying, I have mistake my selfe all this while. I have ac∣cused God. I accused men. I have now accuse my self my backward∣ness' to turn to God is it that fore-slows my comfort. This done, 3. Be we next entreated to Coast upon a Cure, You are tyred with working, We with waiting. Come we briefly to the Point. Es. 21.12. If you will enquire, enquire ye; Return, Come. The Prophet speaks as if he were in haste: and two things are presently expected. 1. We must be humbled. That's once. Pride stands in Gods way. And, if we will make Davids prayer, we must make his plea. We are poore and needy: make no tarriance. Psal. 40. ult And this work of self-humbling is a greater work, then I can quickly deliver. But I presum you have been already pressed or will be anon, to this work. 2. We must be Reformed. Sin hangs in our light. That pats back things that are comming on. Let Aaron and Moses be never so wil∣ling. Let Israel be never so near the Promised land: Sin (comming between) will turn them round, and put them back. That hinders good from comming on. Let Iehoshaphat be never so forward in a Reformation, The High places will not drown, if the Peoples hearts be not prepared, 2 Chr. 20.33. I have cut yon out your Work. Now upon it. 1 Look Backward, and say with David, O Lord pardon my sin:Psal 25. it is very great. Pardon my house, It is I and my house, that have sinned. Par∣don
my people, the Town and Countie, from whom I come, for whom I appeare this day,As Luke 4 23. to cure his Country is to cure himself. and which is my Secondself. Weep over them as David over Ierusalem. Yea over the many many sins, that swarm in this Land; and there stand betwixt wrath and the Peo∣ple: and then 2. Look forward, with respect to all your relations. As Men, Re∣solve with Naaman; I will worship none but the God of Israel. As Masters, with Ioshua; I and my house will serve the Lord. As Publike Persons, with David; Betimes I will cut off the evill doers. At least plead with Ioshua 22.20. Did not Achan thus, and God was angry with all Israel? For the Lords sake, Forme your selves into a happy body and order; and having so done, Do but what you can to put us all in∣to a Posture of mercy and safety. Let me tell you, that the publike pulse beats very ill. Though many particulars give much encourage∣ment: yet the generality is bad enough. I will not meddle with any thing this day. I leave your businesses to another day and place. Give me leave to say thus much; 1. In point of Religion;Credenda. If we speak of faith: How many be there, who have (as that Father said) Fidem menstruam? I may adde, Neutram,Hilary. Oculus in utrā partem fluat judicari non potest, probably Sone. Caes de Bello Gall. l. 1. Alcibiades. Nullam? 2. If we speak of particulars: Most men move like the river Arar: backward or forward, who can tell? 3. In point of subjection, in this Iubile, & Intervall, (as the Vul∣gar reckon it) no Magistrate, no Minister, no Officer, no Age is re∣spected. It is with us in the Country, as it was in his Army, All are Leaders, none Souldiers; All Teachers, none Scholars. 4. And for Laws. Whilst you make New, we break the Old: and whilst you are in the Mount, we are Dancing about a Maypole, or Calfe. I may not dwell longer. Give me leave to deliver my owne & the Common suit of the honest minded, to you: and I will deliver it to you in his words, Marke 9.22. Masler, if thou canst doe any thing (saith he) have compassi∣on on us, end help us. My Lords, & Masters, If you can do any thing, Help us with your power (we will Help you with our prayers.) Help us what you can (and what you can by Law,Chrys.  &c. hinc &  apud Veteres. that you Can.) Help us to honest Mi∣nisters: help them to Bread, & Books too. Help them against the Migh∣ty, that they be not forced to Feast at that Dreadful table, as it was once called, they know not whom themselves. O! If we could be once formed into a good people by a happy concurrence of Our
Soveraigne, & both your Houses, we could not be long in dust and ashes. The Lord would soone (as he saith) subdue our unemies under us,Ps. 81.14. Mal. 4.2. and come flying with healing under his wings. Onely, if welook for speedy help, we must speed our Repentance, and Reformation; and so meet him, who hath promised to meet us. Now let the Patience of God move you, the distresses of our Brethren (who have no∣thing left, Praeter agri solum, if so much) move you. Let the sad di∣stractions & Icalousies at home move you. And, sith God is rea∣dy, why should we deferre? Yet we live: Yet he offers himselfe as a Father to us. Here he is this day: O let us not lose this day: but to day, whilst it is to day, before the other halfe of it be spent, Come in, accept of mercy. And, for your encouragement, let me conclude with a word of Comfort. What? Doth God wait, to do us a kindnesse? Means he good to us at last, though (for ends) he for beares a while? Be not discou∣raged upon these delayes (if they be delayes.) Say with the Church, Micah 7. I will beare the wrach of the Lord, I will wait, &c. O,  But what hope's left? There is hope, There is hope. Were there not: yet order it,  that there may be hope, Lam. 3. And then Hearken what God will speak;Psal. 85.8. for his heart and mouth will speak peace to his Broken, people. Provided ever that you leave him to his own both Times, and Means. O,  But is not the time past? Why then hath he called us hither?  Pat it into the hearts of his Majesty, and this Representative Kingdome, to appoint this mee∣ting? Would be have accepted an offering at our hands, and sent us a word of encouragement, if he had parposed our destruction? O, But (for the meanes; ) things are worse and worse. No matter,  if we be better and better. O, But we are very weak! low! poore! I wish we were worse, in our owne sense; we are, I feare, too, good,  too strong, too many. God is sometimes troubled with too much help,  but never with too little. We are sometimes too soon;  but he is never too late. O, but we are put off still, from day to day. You are deceived. We are not put off: we put off God. It sticks there. Nay, God is already Come, we are holpen, and do live; and should live more, If we could live apace to him; and live his life, the life of faith. Now is Faiths turne and time. Now let The lust live by his faith. Now with Daniel, let us Cast up times and meet the Sun∣rising;
at least before the day shut in. Grow to his earnestnesse: O Lord heare; O Lord forgive; O Lord deferre not. And then expect some flying messenger, or other, with a message of comfort. Only remem∣ber how it stands betwixt mother & child. Whiles the child doth but whimper in the cradle, the mother stirs not: But, when he takes up a note, and cryes every whit of him; hands, feete, face, all cry: then the mother flings by all; then she flies and outruns, her self. I come, I come, I come my child. I can say no more. My drist in all, is, To beat you off (not from the Vse of Gods meanes, but) from Trusting in them. We have too long Idolized Parliaments, creatures, and created abilities. And the Lord hath purposely blockt us up, because our eyes should be onely to him. And in him Alone you have encou∣ragement enough. He hath holpen already: He waits still: He is more then a Iudge; He is a Father: He can help, He will help. His word is for us, precept, promise, parable: His servants are for us: His Son is for us; He is One-of-us, which is beyond all encouragements yet menti∣oned: He is termed, in the words following, The Son of man,Cum patre dator, inter nos petitu. Aug. a man of Prayer, a man of Grace, the high Favourite, a man amids us, who gives with the Father, who prayes with the Suitor. And shal we yet faint! What I cannot now do in publike, do ye sipply in private. Christ is fresh, his Blood fresh. Put your petitions into his hand, and this day beg your Lives, your Land, your King, with your Omnipotent Prayers.August. If you cannot Speake, Weep. Fletu agitur, non, affain. Teares pray. If you cannot Weep, Sigh. God heares Sighs. If you cannot Sigh, Breath. God feeles Breath. Lam 3.56. At least, let your Acti∣ons pray, your Presence pray, your Submission pray, your Afflicti∣ons pray. God heares Afflictions. Gen. 16.11. He heares our stretch∣ed out hands. Do not we so? Do not we give to many a one, that faith nothing but onely holds out a hand to receive? O think as ill as you will of your selves: but think well of God. Pray as you can Pray: and he is a Father, who will make English of broken prayers. Pray, I say. I say againe Pray. And who knowes but prayer will lengthen our day, as once it did Ioshuahs? I can now say but little in publike. The Lord enlarge us, (you, and me) in private, and my learned Brother in publike. Had God vouchsafed me more leisure, health, enlargements, I had dealt better with and for you, but at present, this is all that I can do; I shall be short in prayer, and will not abridge my successor. FINIS.
TRUE RELIGION IN THE OLD WAY OF Piety and Charity. DELIVERED In a SERMON to the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen of this City of London, at their Anniversary Meeting on Munday (commonly called Easter-Munday) at the Spittle, 1645. By ROBERT HARRIS B D. Pastor of Hanwell, Oxon. and a Member of the Assembly of Divines. JAM. 1.26, 27. If any man among you seeme to be religious, and bridleth not his Tongue,—this mans Religion is vaine. Pure Religion—is this, to visit the Fatherlesse and widowes in their afflistion, and to keep himselfe unspotted from the world. LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop in Pauls Church-yard, at the Signe of the Gilt Cup under Saint Austins Gate, 1645.
To the Reader. UPon the survey of this Epistle to the Right Honourable Thomas Atkins, the now Lord Major, &c. I conceived it not amisse to adde something more by way of caution; which howsoever it needed not to those that know me, yet being now cast upon strange men, and strange times, I cannot speak too plainly; be pleased then to know, that the men of whom I speak, are not such as are truly (that is, universally, charitably and peaceably) conscionable, nor such as I there∣fore distaste, because they be of a different opinion in some things from my selfe: No, the Lord keep me from quarrelling men, be∣cause their light is more or lesse then mine, if that be all their crime, and from judging their conscience; whilest ther's no more in it but conscience, reaching after further infor∣mation, these be not the men I meane, but men of another spirit, who condemne the things they doe not understand, and goe up∣on
principles, and in wayes that will mar all if they be not timely lookt to: What their cour∣ses and tenents be, I am loth to make too pub∣like, & therfore rather intimated then expres∣sed them before, & now do much rather desire their buriall then their life; to that end, I said something to the honourable Governours and godly Citizens of this place; and doe further implore and beseech all others who desire the peace of the Church, the prosperity of the City, the advancement of Christs Kingdome, to bring some Buckets towards the quenching of these wild and unnaturall fires amongst us; yea and above the rest, I humbly pray those of my Brethren to lend herein their hand & help, who are more (as they conceive) indulgent towards them, at least (as others think) most prevailing with them. This is all, and this I hope is enough, being added to that which al∣ready hath passed the Presse. Robert Harris.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAJOR and Court of Aldermen, with other Citizens of the renowned City of LONDON. THE Accompt that Imake of my selfe and service is this: For my selfe, the reason of my slow∣nesse in this work grew not from any undervaluing of your so ho∣nourable invitation, but from mine owne distemper of body, which at the same time forced me to deprecate a greater service to a greater Assembly, and to lay aside this till it was too late to put it off. 2. For the Works selfe, 1. in my choyce, I had respect to custome and entreaty, and in the pursuance of that choyce I lookt upon
the season and Auditory: You have now by your motion (that is) command,Jubet qui ïo∣gat, &c. Obligant qui impetrans, &c. made it publique, and it being your owne, it is in your power to make it good: That is a good Sermon which doth good, as that's good soyle which mends the ground: that good food or Physick that helps the body: Some worth you have put upon it in your calling for it, and sending it ready written to my band; if now you please to translate it into Practice, the work is done. And surely there lyes before you the fairest of opportunities; never was there a sitter seeds-time for Prayer and Almes; in the one the poorest may concurre, in the other they cannot; that's your happinesse that you can give, and will be more yours if you doe the thing. It was some comfort to me to heare (so soone after my service) of a designe for the poor, that newes was to me what Jonahs Gourd was to him; and my prayer is, that this may be more lasting then that: The poore are exceeding many, and their wants exceeding great, and it is not the least of our griefes, that many of us in the Ministery can doe no more; we meet them hourly, and part but sadly; they sighing because they cannot receive, and we because we cannot give; and give we can∣not
til we receive better answers then we do from more then enow: We know you not, we can∣not, we will not, we may not support such a —I am not (I confesse) well read in your Char∣ter, I know not your bounds; this I know, that this famous City hath been heretofore much ho∣noured and blessed both by and for their Mini∣sters; this I know, that Magistrates by calling are Heirs of restraint,Judg. 18.9. Nch. 13.17. Rev 1.20.41. Prov. 29.18. Jumad lieum, & Shindler. Pentag.  (sc. , & quae sequamu. apud Soph. and that sinne uncontrold and unpunished by them, will be set upon their heads, and beaten upon their backs; Yea, and this I have read, that where vision (preach∣ing) failes, the people are naked, or (say some) idle and uselesse; that where men grow high in sin and scorne, the City is ensnared or fired, Pro. 29.8. that where any City is divided, it cannot stand, Mat. 12.25. This I am sure of; and there∣fore my humble suit unto you is, that as you ten∣der your selves, your safety, your City, your Posterity, your Religion, your Christ, your All, doe your utmost to restraine all destructive ways of sinne, errour, faction, &c. and to establish a setled Government, and sincere Religion among you: Oh! let it not be free for any men at plea∣sure to proclaime their Jubilees, to assert, to
preach, to print, what seems good to themselves; & under colour of Christian liberty & free grace, or I know not what new light, to cry downe Ma∣gistracy, Ministery, Repentance, Obedience, say I? nay Scripture it selfe, Christ himselfe in his Nature and Offices. My Lord, and worthy Sena∣tors, I'le trouble you no longer, the rest you shall read in silence; I commend your Persons, your Imployments, your honourable City, and all your publique Concernments to the grace of our Lord Jesus, beseeching him to raise up still amongst you Magistrates of Jethro's marke, Im∣portes all men of might for wisdome, wealth, courage, men of truth (whether for Theorie or Practice) but no men for selfe either ends or turnes: So prayes Your humble Suppliant and obliged! Servant in our common Lord, Robert Harris.
A SERMON TOUCHING PRAYER and MERCY. ACTS 10. 31. And he said, Cornelius, thy Prayer is heard, and thy Alms are in remembrance before God. WE have in this Chapter two great doubts resolved: the one a Souldiers, the other a Preachers; both consult God, and he resolves both. The Souldier was one Cor∣nelius, and his scruple was about our blessed Saviour, not touching his offices or his nature, (he knew that there was no other name under heaven whereby he could be saved) but the doubt was touching his person, whe∣ther this particular man, which the Apostles cryed up, and the Pharisees cryed downe, whether he were that Christ, that Saviour, yea or no: This was the doubt, and this doubt sends him unto God in a way of prayer, and God sends him unto Peter the Apostle for information: Peter (the second person) is not without his scruple also; his doubt was, with what war∣rant he might go to the Gentiles (such Cornelius was) & preach
Christ unto them; he also receives satisfaction from the same gracious hand, & now these parties met together, for their fur∣ther confirmation peruse and read their Commission. First, Cornelius begins (at Peters motion) and shewes upon what wa∣rant he sent for Peter, & gives a very good account of himself, and does very punctually relate the businesse, not by way of ostentation, to boast of himselfe, but by way of satisfaction to give content unto Peter; he gives him to know how that he had certaine intelligence from heaven about this whole busi∣nesse of sending for him: for 1. he did use none but Gods meanes to be directed, that is, Fasting and Prayer; and then next, he received a direct answer from God, and there could not possibly be any place for mistake in the same; he well re∣members how long agoe it was that he received his instructi∣on, (four dayes since) sayes he, no longer. 2. Then he remem∣bers where he was (in his house.) 3. he remembers what he was then doing, he was then (praying.) 4. he remembers what time of the day it was (the ninth houre of the day.) 5. he remembers the Messenger that was sent, he came in the shape of a man, though he were an Angel, and (in bright shining apparell) 6. he remembers the message what it was, and what the direction: 1. he calls him by name, and next he wishes him to go to such a place (Joppa) there to enquire for one cal∣led (Simon) this Simon lay at another (Simon's house) that Si∣mon was (a Tanner) he lived by the (Sea-side;) all these circum∣stances were delivered to Cornelius; so that as certainly as Pe∣ter was Peter, and he Cornelius, so sure it is that there could be no collusion or mistake in this businesse, and there∣upon he concludes, that Peter had a warrant to come, and he a warrant to send, and therefore now nothing hindred, but that they might fall on to their work; this is Cornelius his account of himselfe; we will stay at this time in this account of his, and in this verse which we have propounded to you, where we have these particulars observable. First, a double Act reported, he prayed, he gave Almes. And then secondly, this double Act is set forth from a dou∣ble Argument. 1. From the cause of this, Cornelius.
2. From the consequence of these, his Prayer was heard, his Almes were observed, both were accepted and (recorded) by God: these be the parts of the Text. As for the simple tearmes, we shall not trouble you with many words, they are plaine enough, we will not stand here to discourse of the severall acceptations of the first word, , it is taken sometimes for the service, and some∣times for the place where the service was performed;Sane. in Act. Apost. Grot. in Evange. alios∣que passim. vise Turneb. l. 1. adversa. c. 19. especi∣ally in Ecclesiasticall Authors, and in after times: we under∣stand what is meant by Prayer in this place; this Prayer, it is called Cornelius his Prayer, (thy prayer) sayes the Text. It is true, that all good things, and especially prayer is causally Gods, and it is objectively Gods; it begins from him, it ends in him; but it is subjectively and interpretatively Cornelius'es too; it is true, it is God that gives us the grace of prayer, as the grace of faith, of repentance, of every good thing; but then the acting and the exercising of this, that by interpretation and accep∣tation is ours, whiles we doe act the same; so that God is not said to beleeve, or to repent, or to pray, but man by Gods assistance, as Austen well:De grat. & lib: arb. c. 16. & alibi passim, &c. This is all we will say for the first word, the rest we will speak of in order as we shall come to them, if need shall so require: in the meane time we addresse our selves to some instructions which the words offer to us; we will not trouble you with the wild conceits of some men, who talk of certaine preparations to grace before grace it selfeContra Aug. de praedest. concil. Arausi∣canum, alios{que}. instancing Cornelius: nor yet of others, who doe speak of heathens and infidels, their acceptance with God, and their salvation by God, though, they have no knowledge at allId quod per somnium viderunt è veteribus, è scholasticis, è remonstranti∣bus, familistis, aliisque secta∣riis non it ae pauci. of Christ: it is sufficient for us to know, that Cor∣nelius was acquainted with Christ, and that Cornelius did expect salvation onely by Christ; the onely doubt that he sticks at was this; whether this individuall person, this man now in question, that was lately crucified, now was raised up, whether this were that Christ, that Messias that he had beleeved in before: These things thus premised, we will now proceed. And here it is not my meaning to enter into those vast common places of Prayer, and of Almes-deeds; we have had occasion even in this City to speak, divers yeers since, in
another place to these heads; we are now to speak another way, and to consider these things as they lye here in the Re∣lation made by Cornelius, and as they carry with them Gods answer to the one, Gods respect to the other. 1. We will begin with his Prayer, next we will speak of his Almes, rather of the successe of both; and then in the third place, we will say somewh at of his person, when we have spoken of his actions, if time and strength will give. 1. We beseech you to take notice of the unspeakable good∣nesse & gractousnesse of God towards poore suppliants in point of prayer,Dost. I. for that is the thing we must grow to; and for this, consider the grounds in the Text, consider the person now in question, Cornelius, a poore man, was in a very great streight, faine he would please God, faine he would save his soule; nei∣ther of these could be done without a Christ, and Christ must now be beleeved in, in a higher and closer way then before; it is not enough for him to beleeve, Christum, or in Christe, but he must beleeve that this is the very Christ, that this is the man and none else. Now here sticks the doubt; the Do∣ctors were mightily divided about this point; the Pharisees and those happily that had been meanes of his conversion from heathenisme to Judaisme, they were altogether against Christ, and looked upon him, and reported him as a seducer. On the other side, a few unlearned men they stood for him, and they preached that there was no other way to salvation but in and through this crucified person; in this case, what should poore Cornelius doe more then what he did? namely, to betake himselfe to God in way of prayer, and to desire di∣rection from him in this his doubt; and thus he does, and you see with what successe he does it, how graciously the Lord does condescend and answer him. 1. The Lord does heare him, nay, he does heare him effe∣ctually, for that is the force of the word here used in the com∣pound in our Text,Heb. 5.7. . God did heare him to purpose, I say, heard him graciously; and not onely so, 2. but he does send him word that he heard him, and sent him word too 3. by an Angel, and gives him 4. to understand, how that his prayer and all his services
are accepted of God. Oh! what a comfort was this to a poor di∣stressed soul, to have so punctuall, so direct an answer sent him from heaven unto his prayer, and unto his scruples! but thus deales God with his Childeen, never more kind unto his, then when they come unto him begging; then when men be∣gin to be shye and strange, and to stand off, and to hold off at a distance, tken is God most free, most open, most gracious unto his people; this we see in this Cornelous here; goe (sayes God) when he had prayed; goe, sayes God unto an Angel, commend me to Cornelius, tell him from me, that he is more in my bookes then he is aware of; I take notice of his name, I take notice of his prayer, I take notice of every Almes deed that he does bestow upon my people, I observe all these things, yea, I record them, and they ever live and stand good before me: what could be said more to the encouragement of a poore suppliant? thus God deales with Cornelius: And thus, you know, he dealt with Daniel; the case is much what alike, in the 9. of Dan. 20. and so forward; you shall read Daniels successe upon his prayer, he prayed for the people of God; and how speeds he? very well: Observe the circumstances in the Text, the time  when God does answer him, even whilst he was praying, sayes the Text; nay (sayes the holy Ghost there) even at the begin∣ning, at the first setting out of his petition, the answer, the grant was sealed, and his petition accepted, God did yeeld unto the same at the very entrance; he could no sooner be∣gin to speak, but God resolves of a word of comfort and grace to him. Consider another circumstance, and that is, the Messenger that God sends to him, he dispatches an Angel  Gabriel, that earst had been with him (it seems) upon other occasions, he comes to him with a Message, and he tels him  that he is accepted of God; the greeting is this; O Da∣niel, greatly beloved; O Daniel the great favourite of heaven, understand that the great God takes notice of thee, and he writes thy petitions, and hath sent me to returne his answer unto thy suite; and the answer is very full and very  satisfying; he grants him what he did desire, he tels him of more then Daniel did put into his petition; so gracious is
God unto his people when they sue unto him in this way of prayer: What should I instance Abraham now? what should I speak of Jacob, of David, of Hannah, of Jonah, of other particulars in this case? I'le conclude with one, Paul, and I'le but touch upon it: in the Chapter before my Text at the 11. verse, you shall read bow God deales with this same Paul; Paul (alias Saul) was sometime very rough and boistrous, breathed out nothing but blood and threats; then God deals with him in a rougher way: but now Paul is on his knees, and mark what followes, presently the Lord dispatches one Ananias unto him; Ananias (sayes he) goe to Paul, thou shalt find him in such a place, thou shalt have him there at his prayers, goe to him, tell him from me, that he is a choyce, a precious Vessell in my eyes, and in my esteem, let him un∣derstand so much from me; Ananias, he begins to startle; Oh Lord! (sayes he) this man hath been a persecutor, and he came hither for to doe mischiefe, I am afraid to come at him: tush (sayes God) be not so shye of him now; be not so shye, deliver to him from me a message, and a word of grace and comfort; and why? for (sayes God) he prayes, he prayes (sayes God) that is the reason of it; now Paul is a praying Paul; the case is altered; it is a time of his praying, and therefore it is a time of my pittying, and of my mercy; now he prayes, I accept of him, doe thou accept of him; and so Ananias does, for he goes to him, and presently salutes him; Brother Saul (sayes he;) when he is Gods child, he is his Bro∣ther streight, all quarrels are laid downe assoon as ever Saul fals to praying; he prayes (sayes God,) that is suflicient. Yon see how graciously God deales with his when they fall a praying once. Now if you would know a reason of this, why God shewes himselfe so gracious to us in the time and case of prayer; the reason is not from any worth of our persons,  or of our prayers, in themselves considered for alas! what are they in the sight of God? or what need hath he of any service from us at all? you know in the law the burning and broyling of so many beasts, especially with hides and all (as sometime it fell out) was a thing that yeelded no savour of rest at all in it selfe:
what could come from this, but a filthy smoak, a filchy srench? but then there was added thereto wine & oyle, and incense of Gods appointment, and so it was Gods Ordinance, and then there was a savour of rest in it: Think the same for our prayers too, as they come from us, and are onely ours; there's nothing in them of worth or acceptance: But when Gods Spirit is in it, when Gods incense, Gods perfume is put to it, with his blessing upon his owne way and Ordi∣nance, then they come to be accepted, not (I say) simply, be∣cause they are ours, but because they are Gods;2 Affirma∣tion. God goes up∣on his owne motives, he graces and respects our prayers; but why? because he loves prayers as his owne; and the party pray∣ing as his owne; and because he delights in mercy prayed for, and for other reasons that we shall give you by and by. First of all, God, he does love prayer, Pro. 15.8. They pray∣er of the righteous is his delight; it is Gods musick, it is re∣creation; it is called incense, in this respect it is pleasing and acceptable unto God, prayer is his delight, because that it is his own appointment and Ordinance, and that Ordinance that sets God in the Throne(if I may so speak)I meane that repre∣sents him as God unto his people; for we never give unto God the glory of himselfe untill such time as we fall a pray∣ing; but prayer gives away all from the creature, it carries all to God; and so sets up God, and therefore God is pleased with prayer, and delights in the same. And then againe, God loves the party praying (we speak of Gods children that doe pray) I say, he loves the party praying too; and when the person is accepted, then you know any thing, passes very well; let that Damosell, in Mark. 6.22. please Herod, though in a toy, you know what Herod sayes to her straight, aske what thou wilt (sayes he) it shall be given unto thee; let Esther please Ahasuerus, and then shee need not wooe him, he will wooe her; speak (sayes he) O Queen Esther, what is thy petition, and what is thy request? and it shall be granted unto thee. God delights in the per∣sons of his children, he loves them dearly; and because they are so precious in his eyes, their prayers and their entreaties are very welcome to him, John 16.25.
Thirdly, God is a God that delights in merey, as the Scrip∣ture tels us; he delights in meroy, sayes Jeremy; and,Jer. 9.24. Mieah 7.18. sayes Micah, morcy pleases him: God is very well pleased when he hath an opportunity to shew his bounty, and to exercise his mercy, and his graciousnesse towards his people (and when he finds them on their knees, then they are in a capacity of mercy:) God is pleased with this, even to scatter mercy, and to snew himselfe a bountifull God, he delights herein, therefore does even heap mercy upon his people when they are capable of the same: Hitherto, sayes Christ in the 16. of John 24. hi∣therto you have asked nothing in my name, aske and you shall receive. Nothing, that is, nothing to speak of, as if he would say, nothing that I value at any thing, I doe not satisfie my selfe in that which I have done for you hitherto, you have hitherto asked nothing to speak of, aske more, I am ready to give you more; so large are his bowels and his favours to∣wards his people; God stands disposed to his when they come asking, as Naaman sometimes did, 2 King. 5. toward Gehezi; Gehezi comes to aske one talent, and one suit of raiment for each Levite (that he suggests and sues for;) but what sayes Naaman to him? nay, take two; one is too little, take two, and the Text tels us that he did presse him, and heaps them upon him: So deales God with his people when they come to him for mercy and for kindnesse; nay (sayes God) take more, or at least, I would you were capable of more, I could as willingly give it, as you are willing to re∣ceive it, if the stay were not on your owne part: God loves mercy, and therefore is ready to entertaine the prayers of his children when they come for mercy. As there are these rea∣sons taken from Gods gracious and blessed nature, so others may be added from other occasions. Fourthly, from the engagements that lye upon God, in re∣gard of his free and gracious promises; promises very free and very large, both for the matter that we shall ask; ask what∣soever you will,John 14.13. Psal. 81.10. ask in my name (sayes Christ) you shall re∣ceive it: as also for the measure, open thy mouth wide (sayes God) and I will fill it: as also for the time when God will doe it, before you speak I will heare, and while you are speaking
I will answer, in the 65. of Isatab. I forbeare to name other places, because they are familiarly knowne to you, so that God having engaged himself by promise to doe great things,Isa. 30.19. and (as he sayes in the Prophet) to be very gracious unto his people in point of prayer, therefore certainly he will be as good as his word. And last of all, (which is the maine reason of all in truth) the reason is from Christ, and from that Covenant and tran∣saction that passes between: brest and his Father: Christ, he presents our prayers, nay, we present Christ unto his Father; God looks upon a Christian as a piece and a member of Christ, he looks upon his prayer, as the fruit of Christs in∣rercession and Priestdome; our prayers (being Saints) are in∣dited by Christs Spirit, and are presented by Christs hand un∣to his Father; they are perfumed with his intercession, and with his incense,Revel. 3.4. and therefore it is certaine they be very pleasing to God: God for Christs sake will deny none that come in the name and in the Spirit of the Lord Christ; nay, God hath left the whole dispensation of this businesse unto the Lord Christ, and hath referred all to him, even to doe what he will with the Saints in the Church, as sometimes Ahasuerus did with Esther, left it to her what she would have done for her people and against her enemies; and as some∣times Pharach said to Joseph, Joseph (sayes he) thy brethren are come into AEgypt unto thee, bid them welcome, take the Land at thy command, place them where thou thinkest good; so unto the same effect does God say unto the Lord Christ, here be friends of thine, members of thine, that are bone of thy bone, flesh of thy flesh, they come to me for some reliefe and succour in thy name, here they be, receive them, take them, doe for them what thou seest good, I will ratifle it, I will make it good; this is the maine reason: And these are the reasons which I shall give you of the point, why the Lord is so gracious unto his poore servants, when they come a begging and a suing unto him. Now give me leave in a few words to bring home this point, and to apply it, and then we will passe to another. First of all, this must instruct us in regard of time past,  For time 1. past.
must be matter of humbling and of blushing unto us, that we have not answered the Lord, and returned according to the kindnesse that we have received, we doe not give unto God they glory of his goodnesse and of his graciousnesse in answering prayer, but come many times with a great deale of feare, appeare before him with many doubts, and returne from him with a great deale of sadnesse and heavinesse: Oh! how does this offend and displease God? The Emperour was sor∣ry that any man should come to offer a Petition to him,Flavint. Titus, &c. as if he were to offer meat to an Elephant (as he said) with a trembling hand: Another, he was sorry to see any man goe sadly out of his presence; and can the Lord doe otherwise,, but take it unkindly (as it were) at his peoples hands, who are so deare unto him, when as they are so jealous, so doubtfull, so fearfull how they shall be accepted, and speed, when they come in point of prayer to him? Well, that is a thing we are to blame our selves for first. And then in the second place,2. Present. this teaches us for the pre∣sent to take notice of Gods goodnesse this way, and to blesse and praise him for this his free grace, in hearing poore sinners, and poore Petitions put up unto him from time to time: This David took notice of, he would love the Lord, because God heard his prayer in one Psalme:Psal. 116.1. Psal. 6.9. In another he blesses God, Blessed be God (sayes he) that thou hast not reje∣cted my prayer, nor turned thy mercy from me, Psal. 66.3. Blessed be God, why? that God did not scorne his prayer, that God did not fling it away from him with indignation; thus David: And truly, if we did truly understand the infi∣nite distance that is between God and us, and those many, many flawes and defects that be in our prayers and services; did we understand these things aright (his Excellency, and our owne lesse then nothingnesse) certainly we could not but stand in admiration at his goodnesse) certainly we could not but stand in admiration at his goodnesse this way: Let me expresse my selfe unto you in a comparison, thus: Suppose that we must alwayes in all our suits apply our selves unto the King, and goe to him with our Petitions, what a busi∣nesse would this be? Consider of it I beseech you, 1. What a long journey we must take; and then, how long we must
wait: and then, how uncertaine we should be of any successe or gracious answer at all: Weigh these things with your selves, and then reflect upon Gods goodnesse, and admire him for the same: I inlarge it a little further: A man hath a suit un∣to an earthly King or Prince, and what must he do? First of all he must take a long journey to the Kings Court; and then when he is there, he must find out some Courtiers, some friends to speak for him, and to make way for him, that he may have accesse; when that is done, he must wait the Kings leisure, early and late he must be ready to wait, and so stay his lei∣sure, and his pleasure: When this is done, that he hath got accesse once, and is brought into the Kings presence, how then? he is not permitted to speak his heart unto the King, and to say at large what his griefe and his affliction is; nay, he must not speak at all, onely deliver his Petition, and that he must have ready drawne, and fairly drawne, there must be no blurre in it, very briefe it must be, and very succinct, he must not speak any thing in the world that is impertinent, or that would be displeasing, but carry it so, as that he may give full content: And when all this is done, and his Petition is received, he hath not presently an answer, but he must wait and wait againe, he must follow the Court into this place, and that place; and when answer does come, it may be it is but halfe an answer and a grant, perhaps the answer is none other but a bare deniall, at least a man cannot build upon it, because he hath no promise before-hand that he shall be accepted, and that his petition shall be granted: Thus it is when we deale with an earthly Prince, when we come but upon one Petition: But now put the case that this Peti∣tion be granted, what is it? it is but for some partiall or some particular thing; 'tis not a grant that will make me happy, and that will doe my soule any good at all, I shall need more things; and what if I need againe, must I to the Court again? must I wait againe? must I run the same round I ran before? Oh how troublesome, how costly, how tedious would this be unto me? And if this be so (my brethren) as you know it is, then I beseech you doe but consider how infinitely we stand bound to Almighty God for his goodnesse and his gra∣ciousnesse
towards us this way: Alas! we need him every houre, and when we need him we may goe to him when we will, he is alwayes at lessure; come in the night and wel∣come, come in the day and welcome; and when we come, he is ready to receive us: his doors (as the doors of the Tri∣banes once in Rome) are never shut, they alwayes stand open for petitioners that shall come unto him; and thou mayest there speak thy mind, and speak they heart; all thy feares, all thy griefes, all thy wants thou mayest tell him at large, how the case stands with thee, and speak it in thy owne language, in such English and such termes as thou art able for to utter and to speak; and if thy Petition be not right, he will cor∣rect it and make it good for thee, he will alter it, he will mend it for thy advantage, and for thy benefit; and if it be too short, he will supply it, and bid thee put in more; and when he hath laded thee with mercy from his presence, as sometimes Boaz did Ruth, then he will give in charge that thou shouldest come agame to morrow, and that thou shouldst not be too long from him; he layes it as a charge upon thee, that thou shouldst not be a stranger to him, but that thou shouldst make use from time to time of his kindnesse, and the oftener the better welcome still: This, this is the graci∣ousnesse of our God unto his poore people; we need not goe farre, but step into our closets, there unbowell our selves, and unbosome our soules, and acquaint him with our sorrowes and griefes, and he is ready to heare us, and willing to passe by infirmities, and to accept of our weak (very weak) prayers, when they are put up in truth and in humility: Oh consider of this, and let the meditation of this now stirre you up unto thankfulnesse to God; his grace, his goodnesse is so great: this way, as that I am swallowed up in the meditation of it, and I have not words to expresse what his tendernesse and his graciousnesse is unto us in every one petition that we put up unto him; you doe not know what a friend you have of God, and how many, many favours and kindnesses he shewes you in any one Petition that he hearkens unto, and grants to you at any time.
In the last place, this looks forward too,3. Future. and it teaches us a third thing, and then we have done with the first part: The thing is this: Sith God is so gracious towards his people in point of prayer, therefore we should be invited now, and encouraged to make use of this his kindnesse, and to goe to him upon this errand of prayer, as need shall require: Let us, I beseech you, think as meanly of our selves, and of our services as you will; but let us alwayes have high thoughts of God, and when we come to him in his owne way, then promise great things to our selves: And know, that he is able and ready to doe abundantly above that we can speak or think (as the Apostle tels us;) thus we should goe to God,Ephes. 3. and of his goodnesse herein we have a great deale of experience; if we will not beleeve the promises that are very gracious, yet let us beleeve our owne experience this way to trust in him: hath not God been gracious to us in particular, hath not God been gracious to us in common, for the publike, when we have sought unto him in this way of prayer? If so, then let us conclude, that God is a constant God, his power as great as loves prayer as well as ever he did; he loves Christ as well as ever he did, who is our Mediator; and he loves the persons of the Elect as much as ever he did; he delights in mercy as much as ever; therefore let this encourage us to goe to God in all our afflictions and distresses, whether they are personall, or whether they are publike. 1. For our personall defects, and our personall distresses, let us goe to God as Cornelius, here does; Cornelius, he is in a streight, and it was in a point of great concernment, he must resolve one way or other, off or on; either be for this Christ, or against him; Cornelius knew not which way to resolve, he prayes therefore, he desires God that he would enlighten him, that he would direct him: Oh! let us doe the like in these distressed times, when there be such divisions and distractions in the Church of God, and amongst the people of God, that a poore simple body knowes not what is right, and what is
truth, and what is not; knowes not which side to adhere un∣to: Some call him this way, and some call him that way; and another sayes this is right, and you must goe this way if ever you will be saved; and another speaks quite to the con∣trary: What now should a poore man doe? Doe as Cornelius did, goe unto God alone, pray, fast, importune him, desire him that he will teach thee, that he will resolve thee, desire him that he would send some Peter to thee, some Preacher, some Divine or other, that may settle thee and confirme thee in the way that thou shouldst goe: Thus if we doe, God will be the same to us that he was unto Cornelius, God heard him, and God will heare us too, though he doe not send an Angel from Heaven as he did to him, yet he will send some Peter, he will send some direction whereby we shall receive some satis∣faction, at least for those things that are simply necessary and fundamentall; he will discover so much unto us, as shall be accepted, and as shall guide us unto his Heavens: This is his promise, Psal. 25. he will guide the meek in his way, and he will teach sinners the way, and he will shew unto them his sal∣vation; and in John 7.17. sayes our Saviour, He that will doe the will of God, he shall know the doctrine whether it be of God or no: If a man in humility of spirit, and in sincerity and truth of heart will goe to God for direction, as Cornelius did, resolving with him, I and mine are here before God, and whatsoever God shall speak unto us in his ministery, we are rea∣dy to doe it, and to follow it: If any man will doe thus, it is certaine that God will give him a resolution and a settle∣ment, and such a settlement as shall be acceptable (as we said before) and shall give satisfaction to his soule. What I speak of this particular (because the very case leads me to it, in my Text) that'we may say of all other things too: Carry all thy feares to God, and all thy sorrowes to God, and all thy scruples to God, acquaint him with thy case, and beg help and strength from him, he is able, he is ready to heare. Yea but will he heare (me?) Yea thee, he will heare thee. Oh! but my prayers are weak, and poore: He is a gracious God, he passes by infirmities, doe what thou art able to doe, and
he is as ready to help thee as Cornelius. 2. What we say for private men, that we may say much more now, in the publike Case, when it comes to publike prayer, and to matter of a publike concernment, here we should be encouraged to goe to God: Is God so ready to heare prayer? does he so graciously answer and accept of poore and weak prayer? Then, I beseech you, why should not we goe to God in respect of the King∣dome, in respect of the Church, and in respect of the present condition that we lye under now? Oh! let us all set a praying; pray home the King, pray downe Antichrist, pray up the Lord Christ into his Throne, pray against the sinnes of the Land, that they may be removed, and all those obstructions that doe hinder the successe of our prayers from day to day; for cer∣tainly there are very strange and great obstructions that lye in the way, otherwise it were not possible for our gra∣cious God that is so ready to heare the Petitions of one poore man, to stand out so long against the suits and pe∣titions of all the people in a whole Nation; the obstructi∣ons are great, pray all these out of the way. Of these I will instance one or two. I will leave the rest in regard of my haste. One maine thing which probably hinders our successes in prayer is the blood that lyes upon the Land,Obstructions in prayer, and its successe. that is a heavy thing, that lyes heavy upon the heart of the Land. 'Tis said, 2 King. 24.4. that God would not pardon the blood that Manasses shed in Jerusalem; he filled Jerusalem and the Land from corner to corner with innocent blood; God (sayes the Text there) would not pardon this sinne: Nay, this sinne lived some successions, after that Manasses was dead. Oh! this sinne, this sinne threatens this Land of ours! this blood that lyes upon the Land, the blood that was shed heretofore in the dayes of Queen Mary, that innocent blood that hath been shed since by this unhappy difference that is amongst us: Oh! the Sea of blood that runs through this Land; who must be responsall, who must be answerable for this? this is a great sinne that obstructs our prayers much. It behooves us, Beloved, to doe as God ordered them in Deut. 21.8. when
there was innocent blood shed, and the murderer could not be found out, then the neighbouring Townes they must goe forth, they must slay a Beast, offer a Sacrifice, wash their hands, pray to God; Oh Lord! be mercifull unto the Land, and un∣to our Cities, lay not to our charge this blood: So must we doe in this case; Oh Lord, be mercifull unto this poore Land almost drowned in blood, doe not charge upon us this blood, lay not to our charge this innocent blood, but accept of a Sacrifice, and an atonement: That is one thing we must pray against, as a maine obstruction. And another is this, non-execution of Justice; let David in 2 Sam. 21. let David (I say) wait, and stay, and pray from yeer to yeer for the removall of the stroke that was then up∣on the Land, untill such time as execution be done upon the bloody house of Saul, there will be no cessation of that stroke and of the famine that was then upon them; but assoone as ever that was done, and justice executed, presently the face of the State was changed, and the Lord shewed himselfe a recon∣ciled God: Oh! let us pray here againe, that God would stirre up many a Phinehas in this age, and that he would give the spirit of Phinehas to those that be in authority,Psal. 106.30 that they may doe execution, and so the plague may cease: Now it is said of Phinehas, he did an execution, so the plague ceased: Let us pray, that there may be found in this City, and in other parts of the Kingdome, such a man as Jeremy describes, chap. 5.1. A man that does judgement, a man that seeks for truth (he is a man) a publike man that stands in the gap: pray, that we may have such to stand in the breach. And then thirdly; there is a third obstruction, and that is the fearfull indisposition to peace that is amongst us, and an aptnesse to quarrell and fall out within our selves; I speak not onely of that outward warre that is abroad, but I speak of another businesse within our selves; if God would put up his sword, it is a question whether we would put up ours, yea or no: I am afraid of a sacred warre, if the civill warre were once ended and determined; many spirits are so imbittered one against another, men are so inchanted with their owne
conceits and opinions, that they will put all into a combusti∣on, rather than they will lay downe any one conceit, or any one quarrell or contention that they have engaged themselves in; this is a fearfull thing; how can we look that God should put an end to our warres, when we are so willing to be at warre one with another, brother against brother, and friend against friend, without any difference almost? But last of all, there is another, and that summes up all;  and that is our unworthy carriage towards God in the midst of so many meanes and mercies: He hath given us his Word, we sleight that; he hath made a Covenant with us, and we have renewed the Seale thereof, many of us (I doubt not) of late: this Covenant we falsifie, we prophane and abuse; the Lord hath executed some judgements amongst us, and what use doe we make of them? where is the man (almost) that is one whit reformed, or much the better for all these miseries and ca∣lamities that have come upon the State, and upon the Land? this, this is the sinne, the provoking sinne, that we are too∣to incorrigible this way, and tooto backward to improve those meanes and those judgements which are amongst us: For this God might justly have a controversie with the Land; Oh! let us pray, let us pray, that we may be of one mind, and of one judgement, that so there may be peace in our Land, peace in our Churches, peace in our worships, that we doe not fight against our selves in our prayers: And let us pray in the next place, that we may make better use of the Word, and of the ministery thereof; that we may make better use of former corrections, and former judgements then we have done, that so the Lord at length may look upon us, and when we are humbled and doe accept of his punishment, may then remember the Land, our distressed Land, our reeling Land, our dying Land, that God in mercy may then think upon it, and heale it: Thus we should labour, even to pray unto God for the publike, that all hinderances may be removed, and all furtherances expedited, whereby our happinesse may be recovered and resetled: And why should we not set upon this work now? what reason have we to be dismaid?  Happily some
will suggest, we see our prayers doe not take, and that we doe not succeed as we would; nay, the Lord frownes upon us,Sol. and hides his face from us. Yea, but hang upon him still, pray still, follow him still; doe as Cornelius did, think of a Reformation; lay not all upon praying, and all upon fasting, but doe more, as he does; Cornelius prayes, but he feares God too; Cornelius prayes, but he reformes his Family too, (he had Servants, yea, Souldiers too, that feared God in his Family;) Cornelius prayes, but he hath respect to all Gods Commande∣ments, to both Tables as well as unto one: Cornelius prayes, but he is faithfull in the particular place and calling wherein God had set him; he was a good Souldier, he was a faithfull Officer and Centurion in the place that he did sustaine; and when as we are thus universally good, sutable unto our selves, that we are good Christians, and that we are good Masters, and that we are good Commanders, and that we are good Souldiers, (good and faithfull in the particular places wherein God hath set us) then our prayers will passe, and then God will be so gracious to us, as he was unto Cornelius: And so we leave that poynt with you. The next thing Cornelius does, is a work of mercy; he gives Almes; he was not onely a just man, but he was a mercifull man, & was mercifull throughout; he had a mercifull hand, and he had a mercifull heart: The word here used , with words of that forme & termination, as , and the like, is very comprehensive; it implyes and concludes both, affectum & effectum, so that he does exercise mercy with a very merci∣full and a gracious heart and affection: The thing here direct∣ly spoken of is the fruits of his mercy, the effects thereof, as the plurall does shew us; and these are said for to be before God; they are before God, as they are acted by Cornelius; he did them in sincerity; and they are before God, as they are recor∣ded by God too, God sets them upon record, would keep them in memory, they are remembred of God, as the Text here tels us. I shall not need to tell you how that memory is too low a thing for to be properly ascribed unto God, he is one that sees and knowes all things at once, sub uno codemque
intuitu, so that he hath no use of memory at all, but the Lord is pleased to apply himselfe to our capacity, and to con∣descend to us; and the plaine meaning is this, that God does observe and book (there is a condescention in that expression too;) God observes, and God does book (I say) every act,  and every work of mercy that is done by his Servants, and by his People; God takes notice of them all, and notes them, in their circumstances, and with the particularities of the same; he observeth 1. who it is that does a work of mercy,  Cornelius: he observeth 2. what's the thing that he does, he  does (many Acts) of mercy, and that mercy properly, which hath respect unto mans present life and livelyhood, that is the mercy here spoken of: 3. He takes notice how much mercy  a man shewes; he gave much Almes, as 'tis said in this Chap∣ter; and Dorc as made many Coates for many poore persons:Acts 9. God takes notice of 4. the Time when a man shewes mercy;  Obadiah in a hard time, he hid a hundred Prophets, and shew∣ed them mercy then, 1 King. 18.5. God takes 5. notice how  a man does mercy, with what heart, and with what inlarge∣ment of affection, as he does those Macedoniaus, 2 Cor. 8. that they in their extreame poverty, did shew mercy to their power, and beyond their power: 6. Yea, God takes  notice of the least degree of mercy that is shewed by his Ser∣vants to any of his people, even to a little cake of bread, as he does in the Book of Kings in the Widow;1 Kin. 17.30. Matth. 10.42. and to one cup of cold water, as he does in the Gospell; verily, if a man give but a cup of water; (water) that is a cheap thing; cold water, no matter either of cost or paines; sayes he, if he gives such a cup of water to the least of mine, it shall not be forgot∣ten, it shall be rewarded: So that God, you see, takes parti∣cular notice, writes downe,Grot. ad locum. books downe every act and work of mercy that is done by his people. I could be large in proving of this now, but I shall not need to say more to such an understandng auditory; I must hasten, in regard of the time and my owne strength. What may be the grounds and reasons of this,  that God does thus book and write downe every work of mercy?Negativè. The
is not from the worth (as we said before, of prayer:) So here, not from the worth of our works, and of those Almes that we are able to give; as the Farmers of merit in another world and in another Church use for to speak, who are very high in their expressions this way, touching their Mercy, their Alms, their good Deeds, for which they expect a great deale of thanks, and respect from God, but without reason; for cer∣tainly (as one hath well observed) it is very true that many of those things which they called works of mercy,Carow. on the Rhèm. Test. were in∣deed the works of penance, and were but mulcts, fines & amerce∣ments, laid upon them by their Confessors for faults that they had committed; and certaine it is, that many of those that they did so bragge and boast of, are more ours a great deale then theirs: However the Doners were tainted and sun∣burnt with some particulars of Popery; yet in the maine, many of them were more ours, then theirs: So that they have no reason to bragge that way. In truth, what is a mans mercy to God? our goodnesse reacheth not to him; what can we give him, but what is his owne already, and what he hath given us first? So that that cannot be the reason why God respects our mercy, for any worth or dignity that is in our Almes: But the reason is this; God is pleased in Christ to look upon our persons, and then next to accept of our services for Christs sake;Reasons. 2. Affirmat. and so in particular of our Almes: God is pleased to respect them, because they are expressions of Christs Spirit, and the fruits of his owne Spirit, and because they are Seales of our obedience, and of our thankfulnesse unto him; and because that they are meanes of refreshing the bowels of his poore Servants. For these causes, and under these names and notions it is, that God takes notice of our Almes and Works of mercy, and daignes to regard and write them: Write them, how? not to help his owne memory (that needs not) but to help our Faith, and to help our Love, that we should be encouraged in this way to doe works of mercy. I have spoken as briefly as I can unto the point, and yet, I think, sufficient for so plaine a point as this is. All the bu∣sinesse here lyes in the Application and the Use of this.
And the Uses (Honoured and Beloved) are these. If this be so, that God takes particular notice, and writes downe every work of mercy that is done; then this speakes but sad newes unto divers sorts of people. The first are such men as are meere strangers unto mercy,  and the fruits thereof; they were never guilty of such a thing as Mercy and Almes-deeds: If you compare the Books (Gods and theirs) together, you shall find the Books much what alike unto some Almanacks, that are full of letters, both red and black & bloody on one side, but on the other side there is fair paper, a waste empty blank, that is all that is to be found there: Even so it is with many a mans books, if he be a true recorder of his works of mercy: On the one side, you shall find, Item, so much spent upon Pride, and so much spent up∣on Lust, and so much spent upon Revenge, and so much spent at Dice, and so much spent in Playes, and so much spent up∣on sinne and Wickednesse; this side is full of what hath been laid out touching themselves, and for themselves in pursu∣suance of their lusts: But now when it comes to a work of mercy, what have you done for God? what for Christ? what for the members of Christ? what for the advancement of Re∣ligion? or any pious work or service? what shall you find there? Even a blank, meere cyphers, nothing else. Oh mi∣serable men! how will these fare when they shall be called to an accompt for their Stewardship? when they have laid out all for themselves, and upon themselves and their lusts, and laid out nothing at all for God, and for the love of God. This is one sort. But then there is another sort worse then these, and they are  such as are not onely strangers unto mercy, but are Opposites, Enemies, (as it were) to mercy; at loast they walk in a quite opposite way unto the way of mercy: These, why these do not feed the poor, but they flay them; they do not cloath them, but they strip them; they make not any provision for them, but cast how utterly to ruine and to undoe them: In stead of hea∣ling them they wound them; in stead of relieving them, they oppresse them, and in stead of being to them any ease and
comfort, they lay upon them heavy burdens, heavy pressures: This is a black crying sinne, and will prove so at the last day; what? if they in Matth. 25. (as Austin well inferres thence) if they shall be shut out of Heaven, and seat from the presence of God with a curse, who have not fed the hungry, nor cloathed the naked, nor visited the imprisoned? &c. Oh then: where shall they appeare? and what shall become of them that are so farre from this, that they have done what they could to ssuck out the very blood of the poor members of Jesus Christ! This is a second sort. Nay, in the third place, let this be a matter of humbling to the best of us, for certainly we are all short in this busi∣nesse, and have cause even to blush and hang downe our heads, betwixt man and man when it comes to a contri∣bution, and we see other men underwrite, it may be, so many crownes, or so many pounds, we are ashamed to appeare in the same Roll, and to have our names listed where farthings and half-pence are set upon our heads; much more should we blush when we bring our selves into the presence of God, and there consider that God sees all we doe, all that others have done; he writes downe every mans name, every mans worke, every mans Almes, and they are bookt, and this book will be read and produced at the last day: This, this should put us to the blush, especially when we consider two things yet found up∣on  us: That is, our backwardnesse unto works of mercy; and  our barrennesse in works of mercy. First, for our backwardnesse; how heavily doe we come off (for the most part) in works of this kind? Mercy is by our Saviour preferred before kindnesse:Luke 14.13. Sayes he, when thou makest a Feast, bid the poore, &c. doe not bid the rich; a man may bid his rich friends in a way of kindnesse, but (sayes Christ) preferre the other before that, mercy before kindnesse, mercy is better then kindnesse. But now (my Brethren) is it so with us? doe we set mercy above kindnesse? in way of kindnesse and neighbourhood, you know what men will doe; a friend desires you to goe a journey with him, you will goe; you will say, what though it cost me five pound? what
if it be ten pound? what a matter is that betwixt friend and friend, neighbour and neighbour? When you meet together (sometimes) in a Taverne, or at an Inne upon some occasions in way of kindnesse, to drink or feast together, then happy is that man that can be rid of his money first; I'le pay sayes one; I'le pay sayes the other; you shall not pay a penny sayes the third, I'le beare all, &c. and now happy is the man that can be rid of his money quickly; it growes sometimes very neer to a quarrell, because we cannot be suffered to spend our money: Thus in works of kindnesse. But now come to a work of Mercy, how is it then? is the money then upon the Table? is every man ready to throw downe then, and to lead the way unto other men in this case? Nay then, alas! I am in debt; then, my purse is not about me; or else, when it comes to the opening of the purse, every finger is a thumb, and it is such a while before any thing will be got out, that it is very tedious and irksome to a man to behold it: Then the questi∣on is not, who shall be first? but, who shall be last? I'le see what my betters doe first, there are such and such, they are a great deale richer and better then my selfe, I will see what they doe; happy is the man here that can be hindmost: Oh! my Brethren, is not this a thing, think you, that should hum∣ble us, that should shame us? that we in way of courtesie to man should be thus free, but when it comes to works of mer∣cy for God, we should be so bound up, that we cannot cheer∣fully, almost, part with any thing? this is one of the things we fault in our selves, this same backwardnesse to workes of this kind. But secondly, there is another thing, and that is barrennesse  in works of mercy: If a man will but compare what is ex∣pended on selfe, and on the publike; what a vast difference will there appeare upon the very first view? If a man read his books, he shall find, Item so much bestowed upon Apparrell, and so much bestowed upon a Feast, and so much for my selfe, my self credit, and my self delight and content, my selfe I know not what, so much for selfe; there it amounts to scores, to hundreds, it may be, to thousands: But then come on the other
side; how much for Gods House? how much for Gods worship? how much for charitable and for mercifull uses? and then there come two-pences and three-pences, and poore short reckonings, not worthy to be accounted and summed up almost: Is it not thus (I beseech you) with many of us? are we not thus barren in works of mercy? and should not this shame us now? I hope, my Brethren, I hope, that there are none of you but will beare me company in this work, even this night before you sleep, betwixt God and your selves to confesse this your sinne, your nigardize towards God, your pinching when it comes to a work of mercy and charity; whereas you can be profuse and prodigall when it is to serve your selves, and your owne ends. But this is not all;  we must not onely be sorry for our fail∣ing this way, but we must labour to reforms and amend this now, to put on to this great work of charity and mercy that is underhand: I beseech you, consider, that we are bound to it as well as Cornelius;Motives. and that we are as able many of us to doe it, as that poore Captaine was: Consider, how that we have as faire promises as ever he had, and that we have as faire opportunities: Opportunities, said I? Nay, never more opportunities then in this day in which we live; I need not tell you; you cannot be strangers to the miseries of the Land, and of this City; I am but a stranger here my selfe, yet not∣withstanding, I see and know so much, that if you would be pleased, you (I meane) of the richer sort, to descend and to goe into the houses of many poore men (hundreds in some severall Parishes) and there see how they fare, and how they lodge, I am perswaded, you would be sorry, that your horse, that your dog should feed and lye no better then some of them doe: And if you would yet goe farther, and look upon many men that labour, and labour diligently, early up, and late downe, that take excessive paines for to get their bread, you should find that they be not able to afford so much money as would buy a little fresh water to make their children drink; yea, that they are so called upon by Wife and Children with∣in, that they cannot endure the house almost; bread sayes one,
drink, sayes the other; Father, where shal's have victuals, oh! I am ready to sinke, I am ready to faint: It is the case of many modest men, labouring men, that toyle and take a great deale of paines, and are not able to maintaine them∣selves and their Families with their labours, you would find it so upon search made. Shall I adde a third Instance? there are come to the City (certainly it is the honour of this City, and God will blesse the City for it, and you will all speed the better for your re∣ceiving of them;) there are come to the City, I say, a com∣pany of poore people that are driven out of the Country; they lived, some of them, in good fashion in their Country, able to relieve many poor (some of them able men that did bear office in the place where they lived;) men that stand so disposed, that they had rather halfe starve, then they would be burthen-some to you; such there are about this Towne: Touching these I may say, that unlesse God be mercifull to them, and the times doe mend and settle, and some course be taken, many of them will be more then halfe starved. You, my Brethren, you here sit warme, you here live in plenty, live in abundance, but my heart bleeds and dyes within me, to think of the misery and desolation that I have in part seen in some parts of the Coun∣try: I must tell you, that if so be the Lord be not pleased to find out some way of reliefe for many poore people in the Country, they will be utterly starved and undone; they can∣not expect many more Harvests and crops of Corne: Well may they come up hither and eat up your plenty, but they will not be able to bring in any supplies to you, as formerly they have done: Oh! consider, and say not now, men groane without a cause, and there is not such need as men will pre∣tend: No, certainly, certainly there is great need; for many men, they have lived as long, and shifted as long as they know how to live in an honest way; the Lord pitty them, and give you hearts to tender them to your power. Well, but things so standing, what shall I perswade you to? two things, my Brethren. The first is this; that you would labour to make your selves
able to doe somewhat: And then secondly, that you will travell with your selves, that you may be willing to doe for those that be necessitous, in misery and want. For the first;1. Now able to doe works of mercy. some man will say, Alas, how can we help it now? how (can) we help it? trade failes us; our burthens, they are heavy, and payments, they are multiplyed upon us more and more; it is not with us as it hath been, we are not able to doe what we are willing to doe. Well, I heare your answer, I beleeve it to be true in some part: But now I beseech you, good my brethren, let us cast about a little, and see whether we may not be in some mea∣sure enabled to doe for those that be in greater want then our selves. 1. Use your hands, you that are able to labour, la∣bour and take paines,Ephes. 4.28. as Paul would have you, Ephes. 4. that so you may have somewhat to spare for those that are not able to labour or to take paines. 2. And use your heads too, set your wits awork this way, cast about and contrive as well as you can how the necessities of people may be supplied in some measure: Cast about, I say; is there no way to prevent these idle vagrants, and these persons that eat up the bread of the honest poore? Is there no way for to pull downe more of these Play-houses, I meane, Tipling-houses, Ale-houses, and the like; and to set up Working-houses that people may have la∣bour, and that they may be set upon somewhat? is there no way for us to cast and contrive how people may be kept alive? I beseech you that are men of wisdome and understanding, that you will imploy your thoughts this way. 3, And then next; doe something by way of abatement, abate something, and abridge your selves a little, that you may be helpfull to others: Abate something from your backs, and something from your bellies, and something from your de∣lights and recreations; be content a litile to deny your selves, (to deny your selves a little, I say) for the supply of others. I tell you, I am verely perswaded that there would be enough saved and spared from needlesse drinking, I meane, from Wine, and Tobacco, and Strong-waters, and the like; and from trim∣mings, & laces and dresses, and such like things as are more then
necessary; enough spared, I say, to supply the necessities of ma∣ny men that doe now stand in great need of very necessaries: Oh! let your Bread be a little browner, let your Tables be a little shorter, let your Coats be a little plainer, a little course; a little condescend to the wants of your poore brethren, and impart something unto them that are distressed and naked. You will say happily,  that you must maintaine not onely Nature, but you must maintaine the honour, the port, and the credit of your places too. I answer, it is true, you must,  (I'le not presse you now with that which some Casuists say touching this point in case of extremity, and of meere necessity, how farre forth a man must deny himselfe that way; we will not stand upon that now) we will yeeld you that; and there will be a competency, I hope, without any such extremity: We doe not presse you that you should any way deny your selves any thing that is fit for na∣ture, that is fit for your places, and for your relations: onely I propound and offer this, whether when these are answered and satisfied competently, whether then there will not be some overplus? and if so, then I presse the point: Will you not deny your selves in a superfluity? abate a little for Christ? a lit∣tle finishnesse, and a little excesse and superfluity? What? not abate a little from a dog, from a bird, from a beast? Will you not doe thus much for Christ? Christ bated of Heaven (as it were) for the time, he was content to lay aside his glorious Robes in our misery, and in our beggery: Oh! let Christ be so much beholding to you, that you lay something out of the overplus for him and for his sake: And when you doe what you are able to doe, it is accepted; as the Apostle saith, It is accepted according to that that a man hath, and not according to what which he hath not, 2 Cor. 8.12. Thus you must labour to be able to doe works of mercy. But then there is a second thing; and that is,2. How willing to doe them. when you are able, you must be willing and ready to doe it too; you must be willing to it, I say; and here God beares us downe with a world of Arguments. 1. If we look to God, he is our friend, nay
our Father; you know, for a friend you will doe somewhat; if a friend come to you, and say, here is such a poore friend and Kinsman of mine in want, for my sake doe somewhat, I'le doe as much for a friend of yours; will you not do it? and will you  doe it for a friend? and will you not doe it for a God? Con∣sider Christ; Christ comes in his flesh to you, when poore Christians come to you; he presents a pale face, a thin cheeke, he presents a bare arme or leg (it may be) to you; will you not doe somewhat for to support Christ, and to cloath Christ in his members, & in his servants? shall the bones of Christ stare and stand out? shall the naked flesh and skin of Christ pine away for want of succour? 3. Adde to this: Christians them∣selves that come unto you; alas! they are your flesh, as the Prophet sayes, Isa. 58. they are your owne flesh: What? shall the head doe nothing for the foot? and shall the hand and the eyes do nothing for the legs? what? not for its owne flesh, and for those that be of the same body? 4. But lastly, consi∣der your selves, and have respect to your selves (if you regard none of the former,) and provide for your selves, labour to place your wealth safely, to secure it first, and then to im∣prove it next. For the securing of it, put it into a sure hand; you know, men in these doubtfull and dangerous times cast about where they may safely place their Treasure and their Goods; some send it to a Garrison, and some (happily) passe it over the Seas into another Country. But tell me now, I beseech you, is there any place so safe as Heaven, where no thiefe comes, where no plunderer comes, where no rust comes? is there any place like that? or can you put it into a better and safer hand then into the hand of God himselfe? labour to lay it where you may be sure to have it forth-comming, put it into Gods hand. Nay, improve your estates this way: you are willing to doe that, I hope, sow, that you may reap, so the Apostle cals works of mercy:2 Cor. 9. It is a sowing; it good husbandry for a man to sow, it payes him for his paines to sow; what you give in works of mercy, you shall reap for the same a greater Crop, and a
greater harvest. Nay, what sayes Solomon? Prov. 19.17. he that gives to the poore, lends to the Lord, and the Lord will repay him againe. I beseech you, mark that place: You give to a man, but God takes it not as a gift, he takes it as a debt; 'tis your gift, 'tis Gods debt; and he becomes the debtor and the surety for the poore man; you give to man, but you lend it to God, and God is at least debtor to himselfe and his owne truth. Yea, but when shall I have it againe? sayes he there, God will (certainly) repay it, God will (fully and abundantly) repay it, In Piel. no man shall lose by God. My Brethren, take Gods word once, take him for your surety, and lend to him; he hath pawned his Honour and his Credit upon it, that you shall be repaid, first or last. Labour to improve your estates this way; yea, labour to settle something upon Posterity, put it into Gods hand: We will put (sometimes) a Portion into a friends hand for a child; trust God with it, he never dyes, he never breaks, he ever lives; make him your Executor, God will then provide for yours: The righteous, he gives, and he di∣stributes, and his seed enjoyes the blessing: Oh! lay up your estates with God, lend unto God, lend it upon this Publike Faith, as it were, upon Gods Faith, and God will not faile you, he will certainly repay you againe. Thus you should labour to be willing unto this good work of mercy: Many reasons more we might presse you withall: I'le onely mind you of that of our blessed Saviour, in Acts 20. where it is said (it was a Proverb of his) that it is a more blessed thing for to give, then it is to receive: Doe not you think so? doe not you think your case better to be able to relieve others, rather then to be relieved by others? is it not in your eyes better and happier for you to have somewhat to give, then that you should be beholding to other men? sith it is a more blessed thing to give then to receive, be you more forward to give then modest men will be to receive gifts: Give cheerfully, blesle God that you have ability to give, and blesse God that you have opportunity to give, and a heart to give, and an affe∣ction to give, and make God a sharer in your wealth, and in
your plenty, and your selves sharers in this blessednesse, blesse your selves, blesse your houses, blesse your estates. Yea but,  will some man say, a man may give indeed, give a∣way all, if he will, that he hath; and then what shall become of himselfe and his? The holy Ghost answers this;  I referre you at your leisure to one Scripture,Eccles. 11. opened, see in Part. Tirin. ad locum. in Eceles. 11.1. and so forward; where the Wise man doth prevent all the Cavils and Objections that flesh and blood is ready for to make against this work of mercy. 1. Whereas a man would say, it is but cast away all that is given, it is lost and drowned (as it were) I shall never see it againe. No, sayes Solomon, though it may seem to be a throw∣ing downe the streame; yet (sayes he) cast thy bread upon the waters, and thou shalt find it many dayes after; first or last it will returne, it is gone but a voyage, it will come back with a great returne, thou shalt find it againe many dayes after: And whereas a man would say,  alas! there is no end of giving; there be so many poore that now want, that a man may exhaust himselfe sooner then repaire and satisfie them: Solomon an∣swers him;  give (sayes he) to seven, and give a portion also to eight; though they be many, proportion it accordingly; give to this man a little, and to that a little, that every body may have something of a little.  Yea, but l know not what times may come,  and what I my selfe may be put to: Solomon an∣swers him, Give (sayes he) for thou knowest not what evill may be upon the earth, therefore give while thou hast some∣what to give, because thou knowest not how long thou shalt have it; therefore give, because thou knowest not what thy selfe mayest come unto: Thou mayest need mercy, therefore sow mercy,  that in time of need thou mayest reap. Yea, but, will some man say; it is true, I should pitty people, and so I doe with all my heart, I pitty them with my soule, but I am not able to help them, and to relieve them; I hope, the heart wlil be accepted: Solomon answers, If the Clouds be full of water they will drop down raine,  that is certaine; if there be abun∣dance of raine there, the Cloud will not keep it all to it selfe, it will impart it to the thirsty and hungry ground: So
must we doe: thou hast mercy and charity in thy heart, and it pitties thy heart to see men in this misery: Oh! remember, if there be water in the Clouds some of it will drop downe; if there be mercy in thy heart, there will be some in thy hand too. Yea, but will some men say yet further;  if I were well seated & accommodated, then I could spare somewhat; but alas! I live in a corner, I live out of the way, I have no great trading, and it is not with me as it is with many others, I cannot give:  So∣lomon answers you; whether the Tree (sayes he) stands south, or whether it stands north; in a more fruitfull, or in a more barren place, yet it is the Lord's Tree still, cadit Domino, it fals to him, and it beares fruit to him, and so it will be with us too: If we be good Trees, let us live in the north or in the south, in a better place, or in a worse habitation, if so be we be good, somewhat will be comming, and we will yeeld some fruit; so Solomon tels us. Yea, this is true,  if so be a man did know how it would be accepted; I could find in my heart (in∣deed) to give, but I know not how it will be taken; poore men are captious, and they will not take a little; and rich men will take exceptions; some will say, I doe it out of pride and ambition, and raise me (it may be) higher in the Subsidic book, because I am so forward and free of my purse, so that I know not what to doe: Solomon answers you;  he that ob∣serves the wind and the raine shall never plow, never sow; if a man will be still objecting, he shall never goe on with any work or service whatsoever. Yea,  but I know not the parties to whom I give; there are many hypocrites and dissemblers, that pretend a great deale of want when there is no such matter: if I did know the men, it were another matter: Solomon an∣swers;  Neither doest thou know how the child growes in the womb of her that is with child, but for all that thou must not starve the child; we must labour to doe that which is fit for us to doe, to follow our light, and our best wisdome and discretion, and when we have so done, leave the rest to God,  whose providence works (as it were) under the ground for us, as for the child. Yea, but I find in experience that I have been cheated and abused by fellowes heretofore, and that puts me
off now,  and discourages me: Solomon answers thee; in the morning sow thy seed (sayes he) and in the night let not thy hand slack; thou knowest not which shall prosper, this or that; or whether both shall be alike; therefore cast not perils, but venture it (as it were) venture it sometimes, when thou hast nothing to the contrary, thou knowest not but it may succeed very well; howsoever, what thou doest in uprightnesse, and with thy best discretion, that God will accept, and that God will take in good part: Thus Solomon, you see, does wipe off those Objections that flesh, and blood, and unbeliefe is apt to make. I could (if it were needfull now) adde more which are answered sufficiently by many, specially by two of the Fathers, which professedly writ upon this Argument; the one is Cyprian, and the other is Bafil, and I must referre Schol∣lers unto them: I should now adde some rules for your better working,Rules in gi∣ving. as touching the ground and order of your giving; you must 1. give your selves to God, as Paul saith; 2. for matter,2 Cor. 8.5. give your owne, whence Almes tearmed often righ∣teousnesse by the Hebrewes and the 70.3. for time, doe it quickly whilst you live,See their Maz∣kir, remem∣brance of souls, &c. and men live, and not (as later Jewes doe) give for the dead, But of these and other rules I have spoken elsewhere, and you may read every where: and therefore I here conclude this Point. And now we have done with the two Acts of Cornelius; we heare what he was in point of Prayer, we heare what he was in point of Almes too: I perceive the time hath deceived me, and there∣fore I will but touch upon the third point: I crave your pati∣ence so long. We have spoken of the things selves; here is yet something that would be said of the Person, that is, Cornelius; he was a Gentile, and (as it should seem) none of the best of the Gen∣tiles neither, an Italian, his Name, his Band, and Host speak that way somewhat. This Cornelius was also a Souldier, and amongst Souldiers an Officer; and yet notwithstanding, you see, that he was a praying man, a very godly, a very devout, a very mercifull man.
The thing that hence we had thought to have observed, is this: That there is no outward disadvantages that can excuse us from Gods service, or exempt us from Gods acceptance;  wo will put in both: He served God, and he is accepted of God, notwithstanding his Country and his disadvantages; so that let a mans Country be what it will, let his calling be what it will, let his condition be what it will, if he serves God, God will accept of him, and of his services. We note this the ra∣ther, because that Peter gives us the note in the 34. verse of this Chapter; I perceive indeed (sayes he) that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that feares God, and works righteousnesse, is accepted of God, let him be what he will: but I dare not stand to prosecute this point. All that we will now say for the Application of it,  is thus much: First, it takes off that lazy excuse that is made by many  men; they would serve God, and they would pray, and they would doe much, that they would, but they are not accom∣modated accordingly: there be lets and hinderances in the way; the Time serves not, and the Place serves not, and their Calling serves not; thus many exceptions they have against the service and the worship of God. All these may be answered with one Cornelius, besides others, if time would have given leave. We see that Noah and some others, in the worst times, could find time to serve God: We see that some in Nere's house, and so in the worst places, have found place for to serve God: We see that some of those cal∣lings that seeme to be farthest from Heaven and God, some of those Callings have served God: Gajus, it seems, was an Inne∣keeper, yet a faithfull man; Cornelius a Souldier and a Com∣mander, and yet a godly and a religious man: So that there is no place, no time no calling that can exempt us this way. But then secondly, we had thought to have said something  of those that pretend they would serve God, but they feare it would not be accepted: and why not accepted? Oh! their per∣sons are so meane and poore, and their services are so weake
and so contemptible, and their sinnes so great and so enormi∣ous, that sure God will not accept of them. It is answered, God is no respecter of persons, in every Nation he is ready to heare every poore soule that seekes unto him, and calls upon him. We should (in the nexe place) have called upon you all, to doe what you can in your families, sith that there is no man excluded from Gods acceptance, or Gods service; therefore have respect to your servants, even to the very, Kichin-boy; have respect to all that are within your compasse, and with∣in your selves, doe what you can to reclaime them from sin, to bring them up in the knowledge and information of God: What knowest thou (sayes the Apostle) beleeving man, but thou mayst convert thy unbeleeving wife? So say I to you, what know you but that God may have pitty upon thy poore slave, thy poore apprentice, as well as upon thy selfe? Yea, what know you, but if you make a good choyce, and take a good course, and carry a good hand over them, but that Souldiers and those that lye in Garrisons, and repaire to your Ports, may be godly men, religious men, as Cornelius was? And for your selves, let me call upon every man this day, to hasten to Gods service: You have all the advantages that may be; you live in a Land of uprightnesse, in a Goshen of light; you are under a Constellation (as it were) of ablest Ma∣gistrates, and of ablest Minssters; who shall serve God, if you will not, that have all these helps, and these advantages? Therefore, art thou called to repentance? Never say, I can∣not, I have no leisure, and the like; thou mayst have leisure and grace, God is able to break the hardest heart, he is able to melt the frozenest heart, and to subdue the sturdiest spirit; and therefore say not, thou canst not: Are you called to duty and service? Say not, I would pray, and I would heare, and I would doe many duties to God, but I cannot, I have not leisure, I have no time, my place will not beare it, my occasions will not suffer it: Thou mightst if thou hadst a heart; other men in the same circumstances, in as great difficulties, have
served God, and waited upon him: Daniel was a man full of State-businesse, yet he finds his time for praying every day to God more then once or twice: Here is a Souldier in the Text, he can feare God, he can look after his Family, and he can restraine his Souldiers from pilsering, and plundering, and drinking, and swearing, he can doe it by Gods blessing upon his endeavours; and if he, why not others too? therefore doe not make any such lazy plea: Much lesse say, Oh, it will not be accepted! it will be accepted: Give but what thou canst give, God will accept it; pray but as thou canst pray, God will accept it; repent as thou art able to repent, and call in Gods help and assistance, God will accept it: What shall I say more to you? I am cut off, I am afraid to be too-to tedi∣ous to you: And therefore I conclude abruptly; onely I have propounded unto you one Example and Patterne of mercy, presented unto you many Objects of mercy, and of compassi∣on; now let me present unto you some more, and these are knowne well to your selves: Here is a true report, &c. Here, according to the custome, a Catalogue was read of sundry Benefactors to the severall Hospitals, and such like Houses for charitable uses; and that done, the conclusion was as followes: Thus you see (Beloved) here is work enough for your cha∣rity to be imployed about; here are many Objects of mercy, many Arguments of mercy; here are Objects of all sorts: Old men and Babes, Widowes and Orphans, many poore persons that want stocks to set them on work, that would faine be im∣ployed if they knew how: Here are also divers others that cry to you, that call upon you for mercy, and for re∣liefe: The Arguments you have heard; Arguments from God; Arguments from Christ; Arguments from your selves; Arguments from the times; Arguments from your Brethren; Let me say all at once, God requires it, God cals for it, God commands it: God commanded once the Clouds, and they gave bread; God once commanded the Rocks, and they gave wa∣ter;
God once commanded a Raven for to carry meat to a Prophet, and the Raven did it: Oh! for Christs sake, let us not shew our selves more ravenous then the Raven, more rockie then Rocks themselves; and thus we leave our errand with you; another Theme I confesse would better have liked me, and perhaps more reached you; but I have answered your de∣sure in my choyce, and, I confesse, the Subject is not unseasona∣ble; the Lord goe with it. FINIS. June 10.1645. Imprimatur JOSEPH CARYL.
Abners Funerall, OR, A SERMON Preached at the Funerall Of that Learned and Noble Knight, SIR THOMAS LVCIE. By ROBERT HARRIS, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at HANWELL, OXON. Graves are for me. JOB 171. Qui pronobis mortem semel vicit, semper vincit in nobis. Cyprian. Epist. Secundum Pamelium. 9. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Bartlet, and are to be sould at the signe of the Gilt Cup by Saint Austins Gate, 1641.
TO THE HONOVRABLE AND VERTUOUS, The Ladie LUCIE OF CHARLCOT, Grace and Peace. Madam, STrange not my slownesse. I never penn'd and printed more unchearefully, more sadly. Sorrow moves slowly. And what is this your Ladiship hath now woone from me! alas! I cannot print your Lord alive againe: nor did I intend any pourtraiture of him. What I spake was meant to the Living. The Dead
needed not my attestation. Indeed I loved Him more (as another once said) than to say much of Him. All that I can wish, is, that all, who pretend to Him, and his Religion, would expresse him in these particulars. 1 That they would See with their Owne Eyes, and satisfie themselves in their Owne Grounds. 2 That they would be True to their Owne Principles; that so a man might know where to have them, and see, that they did Believe themselves. Cic. de sinbus lib. 2. Epicurei mihi videntur meli∣us sacore, quan dicere. 3 That they would Say lesse and Doe more, and so difference themselves from other men, as once some Philoso∣phers did. 4. That they would give leave to Dissent, where Assent cannot be with∣out Dissembling. It is confessed, Madam, That
Sir Thomas and I were not alwaies of one minde. Dissent we did, in some things: But this I shall ever honour in Him, That He was Himselfe, and his Friends too. Neither prostitu∣ting his owne, nor ravishing another mans judgement; Herein we concur'd, and for this I honoured him, and he was pleased to owne me. He was as A∣vistotle saies of the magnani∣mous  The world conceives my losse to be exceeding great. And it is a truth. For I have lost the Freest Repro∣ver that ever I met withall. But why should wereckon our friends Gaines to our Losses! I have done, Madam, with him. And now let us (I beseech you) get off from our selves. At least, Let's im∣prove our sorrows to spirituall purposes. Mourne for this Kil-friend, Sin. Mourne for the losse of our time, and
our not inhansing opportunities and societies. And henceforward set our faces Homeward, Heaven-ward. Study Heaven; Secure Heaven; Trade and dwell in Heaven. There looke our selves; thence expect our Sa∣viour. Meane while consider, Noble Lady, your great trust. A Great E∣state, A great Family. You have ma∣ny Servants to order; Children to edu∣cate; Neighbours to relieve. Here seale up your Thankfulnesse to God; your Faithfulnesse to your Dearest Husband. And the God of Heaven help you. Thus at last I returne you your own. What to call these Funerall Dispatches, I wot not. Yours (such as it is) it is, you will owne it with∣all its imperfections, and stand betwixt blame and me.
I could not come home to your De∣sires fully. Some things I forgat in the Delivery; and some I then abridged for haste, and now make short breathd enough. But I am come as neare to my meaning, and my own Copie, as I can. The Lord go with it, and ever be with you, and all yours. So will Pray Your Ladiships constant servant in the Faith, ROBERT HARRIS.
Abners Funerall, OR, A SERMON Preached at the Funerall of that Learned and Noble Knight, Sir THOMAS LUCY. 2 SAM. 3.38, 39. 38. And the King said unto his servants, know you not, that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day in Israel? 39. And I am this day weake, though annointed King, and these men the sons of Zerviah be too hard for me: the LORD shall reward the doer of evill according to his wickednesse. Tis an hard thing to Funer all it well. Mo∣ses pray'd GODS helpe in the case, and GOD (in part) helps us here by David.Psal. 90.12. He had the art of mourning. His heart was exercised, his hand in. Earst he mourned for King Saul, Prince Ionathan,2 Sam. 1.17.
and other his Allies; Now for Generall Abner. This Abner fell very unseasonably, for Himself, for David, for all Israel. The King is sensible of it, solemnizes his Funerall, becomes the chiefe Mourner, and makes his Panegyricke. And, ha∣ving passed through his other parts, is now upon his Peroration, where his Master-peece is, To wash his hands of Abner's blood; and his plea (stript out of its Rhetoricke) is this. He that is truly sorry for the dead, and would (if he could) revenge his death, cannot reasona∣bly be charged with the murder. But this (saith David) is my case. I am sorry for Abners death; I am sorry for my self, that I can∣not revenge his death. And therefore no way chargeable with it. The Conclusion is open; The first Proposition evident; The Assumption is made good by his practice. 1 He did not only mourne, but justifie it from reason. A man, A great man, A leading man was Slaine, Slaine in Israel. This was knowne, (if men would own their owne knowledge) and therefore they could not strange at his practice, in Forbear∣ing Meat,Vers. 35.3. in Feeding upon Teares. 2 And for the Second; Whereas it might be said,  Many like the Treason, though they cry out of the Traitor; and contrive the slaughter, though they weepe over the slaine: If Davids heart went not with the murder, why is not his hand upon the Murderer? Davids Answer is,Sol. He was willing (but not a∣ble)
to doe Abner right, his estate being yet unset∣led, and the concurrents (The sons of Zerviah) po∣tent in Court, and. Camp: and therefore execution is perforce futured. So then, David here reconciles things (seem∣ingly) incompatible, and gives an accompt of himselfe. I. Why he did mourne. II. Why he did no more. Mourne he could, More he could not: and that's the very Truth. Let us now survey Davids practice, and trace his steps. First, you see him refusing comfort, and inviting sorrow. Next you finde him so imbroild, that he knowes not well which way to turne him. 1 In the first we will take notice of his grief, and 2 Of his ground; whence he infers it. A man (saith he) is slaine: A Considerable man of place and worth is slaine, and that in Israel. This is the ground of his sorrow; and these his terms and expressions are no way inconsistent. The man may be great, a Great Prince, of great authoritie, and yet Die: For, Greatnesse will not keepe from Death: Nay let's give this Propositi∣on its full extent. No Greatnesse will keepe from any Death.  No Greatnesse, none. 1 Not of Strength. There be that Die (saith Iob  Chap. 21.23, 24.) in the strength of their perfection, or in their most perfect strength, when there is not the least decay in Nature.
2. Not of Birth. The high (saith Iob, nay the Princes, Iob 34 19.) fall, and that like others, Psal. 82.7.  as well as Psal. 49. 3 Not of Parts, Ver. 10. As dies the foole so the wise. 4 Not of Place, Ver. 12. 5 Not of Meanes and Friends, Ver 7: 6 In One,Psal. 89.48. No Earthly Greatnesse will deliver. No  (let his Strength lye where it will the word is large) shall deliver himselfe from the Grave. Death he must See, that is, Feele, as all senses be a kinde of Feeling. II. No Greatnesse will free from any Death. No not from any. 1 Not from a Bloody Death. Witnesse great Sa∣neherib. 2. King. 19. ult. 2 Not from a Base Death. Witnesse Queen Ie∣zabel. 2. Kings 9. ult. 3 Not from an Vnnaturall Death. Witnesse that great Statist, and President of Counsellors, Achito∣phel, 2 Sam. 17.23. 4 Not from the most Contemptible Death. Wit∣nesse King Herod, at his highest. Act. 12.23. But why doe I insist, where every Schoole-boy can inlarge upon the same Theame? One Abner is an instance of all, being every way great; Great in Strength, able to lead the bravest Armie then in being: Great in Spirit, who would not give his Head for washing, not take his advantage of Asahel the Assailant: Great in Place, Captaine of the Guard, and that to Three Princes in succession: To warlike Saul: To Prince Isbosheth: and now
consigned by valiant David: Great in Power and Authority, able to contest with his Master, and able to sway all Israel at his pleasure. This mighty Ab∣ner lyes Dead before you, and fals from Greatest Greatnesse, into the Lowest Pit suddenly. Shall I give you one Reason for all? Greatnesse will not keepe from any one Cause:  therefore not from any one Kinde of Death. 1 The Causes of Death, (if we speake of Death at  large) are, 1 Morall, or Legall. Sin and Guilt. 2 Naturall, or Physicall. Dyscrasy, Disproporti∣on, &c. Earthly Greatnesse can free from none of these, (as experience hath taught us.) Indeed if this Greatnesse could take off Adams Guilt, free from all Sinne, deliver from all Distemper, Morall or Natu∣rall: Then might it give a Supersedeas from Death. But the first is not possible: Therefore the second is no way feasable. 2 If wee speake of this Death, Violent Death;  (so to call it) this, you know, growes from Innate Impotency, and Deficiency, and Forraine, either Sus∣pension of Influence, Ayds and Supplies:Iertul. Vide de Anima. cap. 52.53. &c. or forcible Impressions, and Incursions made beyond all power of Resistance: Now here Greatnesse, is also at a stand: Great men be as tender, as passive as others; Depend as much as others, and Stand by a Manutention; Lye as open, as others, to Invasions and Assaults. Nay Greatnesse is sometimes Vnweldy of it selfe, Et mole suâ ruit: Sometimes it sets a man more in the Eye of Envie, and face of Danger; and in
stead of sheltring him, makes him a fairer marke. At all times 'tis Finite, and may be matcht. There is an Higher than the Highest, that will make but Morter of those under foot, as 'tis, Esay 41.25. At least,Esay 41.25. what's wanting in Power, may be made up in Number, which is all one. Many Shoales of small Fish may encounter the greatest Whale. Many Swarmes of Flies and Frogs may invade King Pha∣raoh, and his Kingdome. Cave multos, si singulos non times:Maximinus. said one to that great Tyrant. Leo fortis est & occiditur. Elephas grandis est, & occiditur, &c. The stoutest Lion, the greatest Elephant, the fiercest Tygre may be violently slain: a Sword will pierce, a Gun will shoot, Fire will burne, Water will drowne, nay a Raisin-stone, a Fly, an haire will choak the greatest Monarch living. We have said enough to so ordinarie a point.Vide instances in some Popes and Princes. Only we are to make our use of it, before I dismisse it; and that I shall (instantly) doe, if first I shall be bold to tell you what you are to trust to. You see how it fares with Funerall Sermons. They are (mostly) made but matters of forme, and men come to them as to great Feasts. The first Course, wherein GOD is most concern'd, is lightly passed over: The se∣cond, wherein Man is represented, is most expe∣cted, and stood upon. For the preventing of this, I pray you understand, That you are not to expect any Second course at all: But such provision as I could make, in this my indisposednesse, you shall have served in altogether. This said, I have now a double addresse.Ʋses. 1 The first to, us little ones.
2 The other, to you of greater marke and place. First,  we of lower ranck must learne to reine in our strong affections to an earthly greatnesse: For why should we be so licorish after that, which is of so little availe? Moderate therefore (as all, so chiefly) these affections. 1 Great Feares. 2 Great Hopes. 3 Great Desires after great things here. For Feares, It is the Prophets Inference, Psal.  48.5. Why should I feare, when I am threatned; and another inriched? Nay, 'tis GODs owne use. Esay 51.12, and 7.8. verses. Who art thou, that fearest a dying man, fading grasie, a little Wormes∣meate, Mothes-meat? O, but, he is a great man,  and may doe me a shrewd turne. Feare him, as Great, with a Feare of Reverence,  as a larger Picture of Almighty GOD, whose is Greatnesse, and all great things.As great Ce∣dars are Ce∣dars of God, &c, great Ci∣ties, Moun∣taines, &c. are Gods. But feare him not with a Feare of Basinesse (feare him not so, as out of Cowardise to decline station, balk duty, swallow sin, dissemble truth) Why? He is a dying man, saith GOD, and his greatnesse will be devoured of Mothes. So basely to feare a dying man begins in weaknesse, and ends in a snare, Prov. 29.25. Therefore qualifie those Feares. 2 For Hopes, Heare Esay, Chap. 2. last. Cease  from Man, whose breath is in his nostrils:Esay 2, ult. wherein is he to be valued? O! he is a Great, a promising man: Yea, But is not his breath in his nostrils, rea∣dy to be let out? If so, Cease from hoping in, or
trusting on him.Psal. 146. Heare David, Trust not in the Son of man. What if he be a Prince? Trust not in Prin∣ces. Psal. 146.3. Oh, but they have noble thoughts. Yea, but those dye with, or before them. Why should I be infinite?Ver. 4. Is he a Man, Man at his best, Every man, (every whit of him) is not only vaine,Psal.36.5. & 62.9. but vanitie. Nor so only, He is upon the Ba∣lance and Triall, lighter than vanitie it selfe. There∣fore cast not thy Anchor of Hope there. Hope (if thou see cause) with an Humane Hope of Charitie and possibilitie: Beware of any higher Hope of Cer∣rainty, of Infallibilitie. No doubt but many Ca∣ptaines, their Hopes rose and fell with rising and fal∣ling Abner. 3 But the third Affection, Desire, is that I most insift upon. Great Desires to earthly things, disco∣ver little Judgement. These are, 1 Founded in Weaknesse. 2 Fed with Wind. 3 End in Smoke. For the first. Their Rise is weaknesse, as experi∣ence (after Reason) shewes.Foundation. Who so longing as the languishing person? Who so climbing as the veriest childe? So ambitious as the basest Bram∣ble? What so aspiring as Winde and emptinesse? So ravening as the emptiest stomack? A massy man, of true worth indeed, brings worth to things, borrows none from them. For the Second.Food. What is the food and fuell of these desires? Truly Wind. We may say of all these Sublunaries, what Salomon saith of one particular; They are not.Prov. 23.5. And shall our desires and eyes fly up∣on
Nothing. They are Nothing in realitie, and ver∣tue. What they be, they be (as Tertullian some∣where) in Phantasie. Absolute greatnesse (out of GOD) is not. There's no such thing among Crea∣tures. The most is,Arist. (as the Philosopher notes) but a Comparative Greatnesse. Thus we call somethings great, compared to 1. Little things: As Ten shillings is a great deale  of monie to a Farthing token, and yet what's ten shillings? 2. To little persons and Capacities. So to a  low apprehension a little thing is great. Thus to a Child, every Puddle is a Poole; every Poole a Sea: every Reed a Speare; every Hollow Stick a Gun: Not because these are great, but because he is little; as Rome was once formidable, because the neighbours were contemptible.Florus. But lay the compa∣rison right, and bring these poore things to the Standard, and what are they? Alas! compared to the Great GOD they are lesse than Littlenesse.Isa. 40.15, 17. All persons and things cast in the Balance beare not proportion with one drop of the Bucket, beare not the weight of one dust in the Balance. What's one dust to the whole Balance? What's that to the Earth? What's one drop to the full Bucket? And what's the Bucket to the Well? The Well to the Sea? And what are all these laid in one to the Mighty GOD? Nothing, and lesse than nothing, saith that high Prophet. Nay what is all here be∣low to those vast bodies above?Ver. 17. And then what is such an Iland as this compared to some other Kingdomes and Continents? What? But a lit∣tle
Moat, and Swans-nest? So true is that, which out Masters have taught us of old: Nothing is sim∣ply great, but in reference to what is lesse. 3. But let them be as big as phantafie can make them:End. Prov. 23.5. they have (as Salomon adds) Wings, but no hands under those wings. Wings to fly from us: no Hands to doe ought for us. Load us they can with great feares, cares, envies, jealousies, distractions: but helpe us they cannot in the day of sicknesle; much lesse in the houre of death. Ask the grea∣test, what Death, what Hell, shall I say? Nay, what sorrow, what sicknesse, what ach, what pain, can these, All these great nothings either prevent, or remove, or asswage? Ah Smoke! meer Smoke! which carry with them some trouble, but little or no warmth or comfort. All which being (confessedly) so, let me say to you what our LORD said to his Disciples: Are these the things you looke upon?Mat. 24.2. And what GOD said to Baruch, Seekest thou great things for thy selfe? seeke them not. 45 ult. Enjoy them you may, if cast upon you: But earnestly seeke them not: Leave these to that poore fellow in Seneca, who was all for this Poore Greatnesse,S. in. Suasoria. 2. Sencio. who in all haste must be a Grandee, and thereupon lookt big, spake big, and bomba∣sted himselfe out with big cloathes, and so became a great Foole. Leave these to those dark men, who never came where greatnesse grew, whose highest ambition was to heare (Great) Alexander the great; Mahomet the great: Pompey the Great; the great Cham; the Grand, Signior; the great Mogor; the King of Kings; the Cali Fillus; the Mundi-Dominus,
&c. Let us, who have as many Eyes as the Chinois boast of, learne of Christian men,Vid. Bot. re∣lati. l. 5; of the Chinois. Salvia. de pre∣vid. l. 5. ad cal∣cem. what greatnesse is. If thou wilt be Great, saith Salvian, be great in vertue, outstrip men that way. If thou wilt out-shine others, get goodnesse, get Wisedome, saith Salomon. If thou wilt get above all, be most usefull, and servicable, saith our Saviour. This the way. The greatest greatnesse, is goodnesse: for that sets us nearest to the greatest GOD, and good.Eccl. 8.1. Zep. 2.3. Therefore let goe those things which will never satisfie, never set us above a Pagan: and seek high, great things indeed. Seeke righteousnesse, seek meek∣nesse, seeke faith; nay, greaten these, abound in these, and other graces:Psal. 46.15. then shall ye be Princes in all the Earth: you shall raigne with GOD, and, Iacob-like, Prince. it with him. This greatnesse Spirituall is feisable: this will set you above all these Mole∣hils below,Hos. 11.12. & 12.3. and will at last free you (though not from the stroke and sense of sicknesse and death: yet) from the sting, venome, curse, bondage, and hurt of all. Here stop: here sit we downe. My second addresse is to you great Ones.  My humble suite to you is this, That you will bee true to your selves; and know, that in despite of all greatnesse,Reade Ezekiel 32. where 5. or 6. instances are given. ver. 17.18. ad finem usque. you must die. The truth is, greatnesse flatters men, and men flatter it. If great Ones will not deale tru∣ly with themselves, they must not expect it from others. Herein Povertie hath an advantage above Greatnesse, that it meetes with plaine dealing; so doth not this. We dare tell a poore man, that he is not like to last, and bid him Set his house in or∣der: But what servant, what friend, (nay al∣most
I had said) what Physitian, what Esaiah will say so to an Hezekiah? We dare call a poore mans sin, Sin, and tell him, that his ignorance is dange∣rous, his pride damnable, his formalities foppe∣ries; and bid him sit sure. But for the rich and mighty,Cajetan we say in the words of the Cardinall in an∣other case—Si vult decipi, Decipiatur. If a poore Curre runne away with ftolne goods, wee pursue him, and rate him, till he resigne: but who dares take the Beare by the tooth? the Lion by the Beard, and say Restore? Sith then few, or none will bee faithfull to you, be ye good to your selves: And, if you will hold a distance from your teachers, and not (with some great ones) admit of other Mo∣nitors, be your owne,Memento Mori, Philip. &c. and tell your selves, that you also are Mortall: els wee shall Immortalize you, as some would Alexander. Call your selves Sinners;Ʋid. Hist of Lewes the 11. els we, (with that Chartrous Monk in story) Saint all who will fee and supple us. Con∣sult your owne bodies, and senses, and see a decay there. Or, if you will abroad, improve this dou∣ble instance. See here a Noble Paire, and establish your selves in this truth, by the testimonie of two mouths, two bodies; both not long before their ends valiant, both vigorous, both presenting as well, and promising as much as we can, and now both lie Dead before you. Nay, seeing Examples knowne and at hand worke best, and the Eye (of senses) most affects the heart; See here under view a Man accomplished, and made up of all the Contributions of Art and Nature;Pythagoras. a Man, in whom concurred all those things, which the Philosopher
could thinke to beg of his God: to wit, Beautie,D. navec. Riches, firme Constitution of body and mind: Such a Braine, such an Heart, as the most learned Phy∣sitian never saw. And thence inferre: that, There is no Redemption from the Grave. For certainely, if greatnesse of wit, of learning, of spirit, of riches, of friends, of allies: if greatnesle of care in servants, of atendance in Yokefellow, of skill in Physitians, of affection in all, could have kept off Death; wee had not been thus overcast, and clouded this day.Mors sceptrali∣gonibus aequat. aquo pode pul∣sat. &c. & que sequm∣tui pasoim. But no outward greatnesse will doe it; Death knowes no measures, no distances, no degrees, no differences, but sweepes away all, and either finds, or makes them Matches. To you then; O yee sons of the mighty, is my mes∣sage. Set your houses in order: for you must dye. You are left behinde to make ready: Oh prepare for death, for any death, nay for sudden death: for why may not you fall in your strength, in your Journie, aswell as Abner? Say then, Are ye ready, now ready? is your Will made? your Pardon sealed? could you dye this houre? in this place? If so, happy yee, in case you Stay for death, not death for you. But if as yet you bee not Shot-free, and Death-proofe, what doe yee meane? why doe ye defer? What? Doe yee thinke that death feares greatnesse? or will bee answered with Complements? Or doe yee thinke that greatnesse of spirit, of meanes, of chearfullnesse, of Titles can beare you out? Or that it is all one to die in a Bra∣vado, and in cold blood? Or that death is the same in the hand of a man, and of GOD? Or that a:
Lord have mercy, or two, an houre or two before you are all dead, will serve the turne? No, no, it's a worke of works to Die. that is, Actively and Cheerfully to resigne life. The best, who have been about it, all their life, finde all provisions little e∣nough. And therefore doe not thinke to slight and to outlooke that King of Feares, that top-gal∣lant: but feare before hand, that you neede not feare at any hand. And yet let me advertise you of another extre∣mity, and that is base-feare: for that will barre up the doores against all thought of death,Vitellius trepi∣dus, dein'temu∣lentus, Tac. and set you, either on Drinking with him in the storie; or on some other Diversion, therby to drowne, or to forget your feares. There is (as elsewhere I have discoursed) 1 A Spirituall Feare of death. There is, 2 A naturall. Neither of which may bee disswaded. The Feare, I give warning of, is, 3 A Base, Cold, Carnall Feare, which will make a man creepe into an Augre-hole, swallow any sin, admit of any slaverie; which will kill one dai∣ly, because he must once die,Heb. 2. and keepe him a per∣petuall slave, and prisoner. This the feare I would not have you Cowed by: and this feare you may competently overcome, if you will set right the 1 Judgement, 2 Conscience. 3 Heart; The Inward man: Things, (upon another occasion) lately spoken to, not here to be rehearsed.
At present, this is all. Mistake not Death, 1 It is not, in it selfe, the greatest of evils. As  there be better things than this poore life; GODS favour, GODS image, the Life of CHRIST, Eternitie, &c.Vid. Animad∣versions of Bish. of Sa∣num on Gods Love to Man∣kind. So are there worse things than this death; Hell is worse, Sin is worse, GODS Curse is worse, Corruption worse; Morall, Sinfull Evils worse than this, which is painefull, and evill only to Nature. And reason we have to grieve more for being in a possibilitie, and proximitie of sinning, than of dying. 2 This Death is not so simply, and intrinsecally  evill, as that no good can be made of it. Nay, this may be improved, and death may bee the death of all our deaths; of deadly diseases, corruptions, temptations, of all. Thus simply considered it is not so formidable, as that we must fling away our weapons, desert our station, and fly,Excessum dix. Tert. contra Ʋa∣lent. & Cypria. Ep. 3. Luk. 2. 29., Phil. 1 23. Iob 14. 14 Ioh. 11. 11. & Passim. Aliud demuta∣tio, aliud perdi∣tio. Tert. de re∣sur. c. 55. Plin. Nat bist. lib. 7 & 55. Hic rogo: non furor est ne mo∣riare mori. Mart. lib. 2. E∣pigram. (as once Israel) at the voice of this Goliah. But now Death to a Christian becomes ano∣ther thing. It hath lost its name: and hears a De∣parture, a Dissolution, a Change, a Sleepe, &c. and we should take up GODS language. It hath lost its Nature and Relation: tis not to such an one Penall, but Medicinall: destructive, but (fetching its denomination from its terme) per∣fective. Looke upon it under a new Notion; and then you will not be of poore Plinies minde, That It doubles ones paine, and death, to Forethinke the issues of it. No, it doubles your strength, and makes your courage redoubted: therefore view it, and spare not: but view it thus.
1 Look upon it, not as destructive, tending to ru∣ine: but as a meane and way to life. Looke be∣yond it; See what stands behinde it; A Crowne of Glory, of Life, of Blisse. And this end will sweeten and smooth the way: it will dare amica∣bilitatem mediis. 2 Looke upon it, as a Rod in GODs hand. This (as other strokes) is moderated by him, and hee can make a Rod a Staffe, Psal. 23. yea turne Mo∣ses serpent into a Rod, and worke with that Rod Won∣ders. Death is a cup in our Fathers hand, as well as sicknesse, and workes wonders. 3 Looke upon Death in CHRIST. Hee hath conquered it in his Person, and will in his Members. See how unable death was to separate him from the Godhead, and shall be us from GOD, Rom. 8.38.Rom. 8.38. See how hee hath intercepted and cut off Deaths succours. Whereas death borrowed its Sting from sinne, and Strength from the Law and Curse:1 Cor. 15.56. CHRIST hath disarmed them all of all their destroying, killing power; and cald us, with S. Paul, to set our foot upon their neckes, and to sing: O Death! O Sinne! O Curse! O Hell! where's your power? &c. Yea see him, having kild Death, and buried the Grave, fetching Honey and sweet out of the strong, turning Death into a Li∣ving Friend,1 Cor. 3 ult. and most usefull servant, 1 Cor. 3. ult. subdued to us Death, and so made it Ours. O view death in the face of CHRIST, make him your Second in this Duell; and then you are freed from the feare, and so from the bondage of death: then you are Menindeed, Freemen. A
Man is not himselfe, but a Slave, till hee can either Live, or Die (as this noble Gentleman and I were wont to discourse.) The only he is free, when (with S. Paul) he can abound and want, bee sicke and well; can live, or die. Nay then you shall be brave accomplisht men indeed; some of GODs Rab∣bins, as Daniel cals them.Vid. cap. 9.27. Ʋt & Job 32.9 A man is not to be held a man, because he dares meet a man, and can look any man in the face. (A great matter to looke a Worme in the face!) But then you shall be men; when you can looke any paine in the face, any fit in the face, any danger, any death in the face: when you can looke Judgement, and the unpartiall Judge in the face. This is to bee a Man. 1 Cor. 16.13. Thus Man-it. And, sith your greatnesse cannot keepe you from Dying, let your Goodnesse keepe you from sink∣ing, perishing, and losing by Death. Thus for Davids ground of sorrow, as that must be Rationall, and stand upon ground. Now followes his inference and practice. A man great and considerable fals: Therefore David fals upon mourning, and pleads for it. 1 A man is slaine: and upon grounds of huma∣nitie  David would mourne. 2 Next, a publike man, now upon a publike  service and errand, is slaine: and upon reasons of State, David would appeare a Mourner. 3 A man so usefull was slaine in Israel; and in  point of Religion, David is to lament, and seemes to Wonder at his Servants Wondring at his practice. Know yee not (saith he, &c.) q. d. If you owne your
owne eyes and knowledge, you cannot but know, that I have reason to be sensible of this stroke. Hence our second Inference. When great men are taken from us,  we must be affected with it. When Abners fall (men great of place, and use both) we must have a sense of it, and observe it for use.Zach 4.7. Dan. 4.10. Ezck. 31 8.14. When Mountaines are shaken, and Ceders shattered. When pillars are Pulled downe, and Stars of greatest magnitude hide their heads, we must resent this with David, and improve it unto forrow. Shall I need to prove these ordinary and confes∣sed truths? Salomon tels us, that A wise man layes any mans death to heart.Eccl 7.2. And Isaiah chides us, if we let an usefull man (though private) passe out 01 of the world,Esay 57.1. without observation. What would hee say in case we should burie a man of publike use and spirit, without an Ah his glory! what in this case hath beene done, it is needlesse to report. I will not lead the simplest out of his owne know∣ledge. Who knowes not what lamentations were taken up for Patriarch Iacob,Gen. 50.10. 2 Chro. 32 33 2 Chro. 35.24 25. great Hezekiah, good Iosiah? who hath not heard of Elisha's Epitaph, The Horsemen,2 King. 13.14. and Chariots of Israel: and that from a man not of best note? And lest you should im∣pute all this to the greatnesse only of mens place, without respect had to mens use and worth, the Holy Ghost is pleased to set a marke upon the Coffin of persons lesse publike, and more obscure when they were use full. Thus Nurse Deborah a profitable member, leaves a marke upon the
place of her buriall, The Oke of Weeping, more fa∣mous than the Oke of Reformation, in our Storie:Gen. 35.8. Thus mercifull Dorcas (rather Tabitha) was cove∣red with teares, as she covered others with cloaths, Act. 9.39. Nor was this solemne mourning only for men and persons eminent for pietie: but for others, who in Morall and Politicall considerations were, in their way, usefull. Thus holy David weepes over Captaine Abner, of whose pietie wee heare not much: All that his friend and Countrey-man saith of him; is, That he was a Prudent man,Iosephus. well qualifi∣ed for naturall parts. Thus he much bewails the death of Abners master King Saul, and lets not to tell the State,2 Sam. 1.17. that their losse in him is great; not because his forwardnes in Religion was much: only he was a good Hus∣band for the Publike,Vers. 24. and a brave Commander; no lesse active and valiant, than he was comely and proper.Ratio res Dei. Tert. But Reason is GODs, as well as Scri∣pture:Reasons.  we bind up the Point with Three Reasons. 1 If we looke upon such men, as they are mem∣bers of a Body-Politique, the losse is great. If the Body cannot say of the Foot (nay of one Toe of the foot, nay of one joynt or naile of the toe) I have no need of thee:1 Cor. 12.27. much lesse can it say so of a more no∣ble part. There is a losse, a maime in the least, and the body is sensible of it: much more when an eye, or hand, or arme is taken off: And Great Persona∣ges are Eyes, Hands,Dan. 11.15.22.31. nay Armes. 2 If wee consider such as Heads over charges,  who knows not what an influence they have upon
Inferiours? and what a dependence there is upon them? They? Why they are as Pinnes, whereon many Vessels hang, Isaiah 22. As great Okes, which yeeld life to many Sprigs; shade and shelter to more. One such a Sunne is more than a Thou∣sand Candles: with one so pregnant and big-belli∣ed, hundreds live and die. 3 If we view them as they relate to GOD,  and are subjects wrought upon by him, The stroke is the greater: Because it is a Messenger of some Wrath. When GOD thus Beheads a Family, or Towne, or Countrey, there's a great breach made with such a blow: when he, who should stand in the gap, is taken away, Ier. 5.1. 'Tis farther an ill presagement, as Isaiah foretels, cap. 3. The Pilot lost, the whole Ship is hazarded: The Captaine (as the Seventie here read it) may be more than all his Companie,. and weigh downe Thousands, as Davids Souldiers once said.2 Sam. 18.3 In short, In one head is Vertually contained the whole body.Iudg. 9.53. Wound Abimeleck there, and where's Abimeleck? I apply now in some haste, and must divide my selfe againe betwixt Great,Ʋses. and Small. And first,  let me begin with you of the High∣er Ranke and Marke. And my suite to you is, That you will answer your places, and be Vsefully Great, which only Greatens you. The Great GOD doth not measure men by Inches,Men of Mea∣sures in Mose. as sometimes men doe: Nor by an outward Greatnesse: Here∣gards not the armes, or legs of a man: Hee respects the Rich no more than the poore:Psal. 147.10. Job 34.19. The thing hee
looks to, is Vertue, Serviceablenesse, that is the thing.Gen. 1.16. The Moone is a Great Light because of Great Use. A lew at Berea is more eminent, and Honourable than another elsewhere,Act. 17.11. because more Consciencious. There is, (you know) a Greatnes in Bulke, and in worth. A Larke may be more than a Kyte, though not in bulk, yet in worth.Molis & virtu∣tis. There is (they say) a Greatnesse Belluine, & Genuine. in that a beast may and doth exceed us: In this we exceed our selves, and others; and in this only. No man is the better simply for his Greatnesse, unlesse it bee attended with goodnesse. So much we may learne from wiser times: For, sithence men understand themselves, they let fall those Swelling and emptie Titles of Greatnesse; few re∣joyced in that name, unlesse great worth and at∣chievements put it upon them; As it fared with Constantine, and some few others. They were gladly heard, Wise, Learned, Pious, Philosopher, Philopater, and the like. And, when men would honour them with attributions of worth, they sti∣led them Nedibims , Optimates, and other like, sounding their true worth,Bountifull Be∣nefactors &c. and carrying meat in the mouth. Yea so much we may learne from Highest (that is Divine) Language. Wisedome it selfe, when it pleaseth to bestow honours upon men, cals them Fathers, Foster-fathers, Saviours; and the like. Which some also,1 King. 5.13. Exod. 20. Esay 49 23. Act. 7.35 Hb 4.8. Selcuhus Soter. without the pale of the Church, either affected or enjoyed. As An∣tiochus Soter: Antigonus in Suidas. &c. So then, in true judgement, the stile and thing, hat truly honours and enobles a man is Good∣nesse,
therein a man most neerely toucheth the Best and Highest Good,Psal. 119.68. our Ever-blessed GOD, whose highest title is that in the Psalme. He is good, and doth good. I cannot enlarge. I will lay before you one on∣ly instance, of Father and Sonne in the same fami∣ly, who ranne their severall waies with different successe. The Father was Iosiah;, Hee was all for Goodnesse. Good he was, and did Good to GODs house, and people. The Sonne was Shallum; (whe∣ther so term'd in scorne, and reference to another Shallum, I have not to say) He was all for an earth∣ly Greatnesse. Before he was well warme in his Fathers Throne, he had great thoughts, and would not take it as his Father did: Hee would build a stately Palace, much enlarge himselfe, and (as it seemeth by one affix in the Text, Ier. 22.14.) would take in a peece of GODs house too. Thus they steared their course.My Windows the Hebrew. Now what was the issue? 1 In Life, the one prospered: the other went backward. Did not thy father prosper? (saith GOD) to the Sonne. Ier. 22.15. 2 In Death, the one had a most honourable interment. All Israel mourned for him, mourned much, mourned long: the other (like the unhappy sonne of another good father) lived undesired,Lam. 4.20. died unlamented, and was buried with the buriall of an Asse,2 Chro. 21.20 Ier. 22.18, 19. no man weeping over him. Give me leave to use my ancient freedome. In these read your selves, and your owne Lot. If you (with Shallum, and his Brethren) make none other use of your Greatnesse, but to Roh GOD, Pride
your selves, and oppresse the poore; your Great∣nesse shall be your Shame, as 'twas Shebna's, and shall end in Basenesse and Contempt. Well may men blesse, and flatter you, whiles hore you mag∣nifie and adore your selves: But when you are Dead, they'll trample upon your faces, and curse you as fast. At your Grave none shall mourne:See some Em∣porous, Herod. &c. un∣lesse Fee'd, or Forced (as once it befell others) ra∣ther they will rejoyce at your fall (as once at ano∣thers in Esa. 14. and your names shal be written in the dust, and buried in oblivion: Or if they remain, they shall Lie as Carrion above ground, and become a Curse.Prov. 10.7. Esay 25.25. On the other side, If you shall improve your Greatnesse to GODs glory, and to the Countries good; to the Churches growth, and meas com∣fort; you shall not need with Absalom, Otho, Iuli∣an, or any other Publicola, to Hunt for applause: Honour will hunt out you, and you shall not avoid it. Whiles you live you shall live in the hearts and desires of men, they will pray for yours, and praise GOD for you: And when you die you shall not need a Trumpet or Herald to sound your worth: Every man will bee a Trumpet; every man will make an Oration; All Israel will mourn, in heart, and not in face, and forme. Oh, Chuse rather to bee buried with Prayers and Thankes, than with Curses and Complaints: Set your Servants, Tenants, Neighbours on weeping, rather than on laughing, at your Graves. So live, that there may be Vse of you, whilest you live, and Misse of you, when you are dead. That is; Bee humble, modest, godly, sober in your selves.
Bee helpfull, comfortable, profitable unto others. When you are gone, theres no more remaining of you, but your Goodnesse. The question will not bee, How Rich, How Great, How Gallant you were. The questions will bee, What did he? Who was the better for him? If none, What made he in the World? An unprofitable man, whilest living, is dead: A usefull member, when dead, yet lives. Live, Live, Live quickly, Live much, Live long. So you are welcome to the world: els, you are but Hissed and Kickt off this Stage of the World,Phocas by He∣raclius. as another was. Nay many (as Iob. 27.23 & V. 15.) who were buried before halfe dead. 2 For us of a Lower forme,  (nay lets take in all.) This I say. Either we yet have, or have not Lea∣ding  men among us. 1 If as yet wee see some Starres, in this great darknesse; lets joyfully en∣tertaine them, as Wisemen did once another, Mat. 2. Doe but thinke what an Army is, without a Captaine; a Ship, without a Pilot; and Head, with∣out a Body; what a misery it is, to live without order; to be where men Talke all at once, and none can lay his hand upon other, or command silence. Truly such a Paritie bordersneer upon an Anarchie, and confusion: and wee much forget our selves, if we neglect this mercy of having Usefull men. When Israel had a Salomon, they divided their time,Psal. 72.15. betweene Praying, and Praising GOD for him. Tis a misery never to see the Face, but the Back only of mercies. 'Tis a frowardnesse to see no∣thing but faults in men, whilest we have them:
and then nothing but whine, when we lose them. Take heed that you doe not Brawle Moses out of the world; and then Scratch him out of his Grave againe, unlesse GOD hide him from you. Crosses sting deeply, when Mercies Passe lightly, See what you have, before you cease to have it. Have wee lost any Abner from amongst us? David prompts us our lesson. We must feele our lesse. And here, What would become of mee, should I let out my selfe, and pursue my thoughts! How many brave Schollars, Souldiers, Statesmen have wee seene laid in the Dust! Nay, what Mighty Starrs have within our memorie, beene hidden from us! What should I bee medling with Crownes?Three mighty Princes and men in their severall wayes. Or speak what a blow England, France, Swedeland; &c. have received upon their very Head, in this our age. These bee Subjects of a Fairer Pen, and higher discourse. I have my hands and heart full with our present Instance. Our friend Lazarus sleepes, and we cannot wake him. In this one Bottome we have all our interests, and suffer a wrecke. A Noble Lady hath lost, not an Husband (as shee saith) but a Father. Many Children have lost, not a Father, but a Counsellour. An house-full of Servants have lost, not a Ma∣ster but a Phisitian; who made, (as I am informed) their sicknesse his, and his physick and cost theirs. Townes-full of Tenants have lost a land. Lord, that could both protect and direct them in their owne way.
The whole Neighbourhood have lost a Light. The Countie a Leader. The Countrey a Patriot; To whom he was not wanting, till he was wanting to himselfe, in his former vigor and health. What would David say in such a case? Truly, as he said,a Sam. 7. Weepe yee daughters of Ierusalem, for king Saul, &c. And what can I say lesse, than Weepe ye poore, within doores; yee poore, without: yee poore old people, whom he kept alive, by studying how to fit you with worke: Yee poore, in the bordering Townes, to whom hee sent, with David, A Peece of flesh with Bread,a Sam. 6.19. every yeare: Yea, Mourne, yee Gates, who were kept warme, with weekely provisions for the neighbouring poore. Yea Mourne, all Allies, and Aliens; Rich and Poore; Old and Young. For a Publike losse, let there be a Publike lamentation. Speake I these things after the manner of men? To Deifie the Dead; To Gratifie the Living? No, I speake of A Man,Iam. 5. A Man (with Great Elijah) sub∣ject to like passions with us: A Man, who cast himselfe lower than you, or I dare cast him. For in Saint Pauls words he said, That he was of sin∣ners the chiefe: Of such a Man I speake, and will say no more of him, than what hath a faire Prospect to your Profit. We must do himHine , et Iusta defuncte∣rum. Right; and it is one of the Rights, and Dues of the dead, To be La∣mented at their Funerals. We owe it, 1 To Him, 2 To Religion,Ʋid. Goul. in Cyprian. Ep. 3 3 To Humanitie, And we should not,
4 Please GOD, If we should let such members passe, without some sad remembrance. And yet there is more in it, than you are all a∣ware of. The Time of Abner's death was almost as much as the thing it selfe. Israels Abner was now Rightly set, (his Grounds I wave, but) over he was come to David's side: The Sinewes of that disjoynted State were now knitting: The sparkes of that unhappy warre now quenching. Abner had a Great Designe in hand, and things were likely to re∣ceive a faire end. In the midst of all Abner Dyes, The Businesse is scoated: Pendent opera interrupta: Hence these teares in part. It was the case of this our English Abner. Hee had Noble designes, and thoughts in his head. But Alas! How soone doe our thoughts fall with us! Psalme 146. Onely the thoughts, and Counsels of the only wise-GOD stand good for ever. He had another Designe upon this Our Abner: And, to fit him thereunto, hee set him to the Best Schoole, that ever he was in; where the Two Schoolemasters of Luther, and Calvin (Tem∣ptations and Afflictions) taught him more in one yeare, than all his Bookes, wherein hee was so much verst, could doe, in an age. Now Specula∣tion was translated into Experience. And now I wish, that all of his Ranke (and of mine too) had heard him Decrying the Vanitie of all Creatures, and Abasing sinfull flesh before the Great GOD. You can easily conceive how Full Expressions would bee from his owne Mouth, and how well it would become him, to Staine the pride of man.
But that is not all: Would, you had heard his judgement of Practicall Divinitie, and unaffected Preaching. His censure of mans slighting the wayes of Wisedome, and Sanctification. And lastly, (To say nothing of what was said under seale) I wish that all wee (Divines) had but heard his vehement expressions of the base; base, and more than slavish flatteries of some of us Church∣men, toward the living and dead. But why doe I flatter my selfe with a con∣ceit of Hearing and Having him, whilest I speak his words! Hee is gone from us, and hath left us no more of Himselfe than a Sad Representation: And it must grieve both you and mee, to have Such a Man, at Such a Time, taken from us; and to see so much reading, observation, know∣ledge, wisedome, (I could say, if yet I could speake it, so much ingenuitie, noblenesse, plain∣heartednesse to his Friend, when upon Try all hee could Trust him: But I onely say, before I get off this sad discourse) So much worth, and Sufficiency, qualifying him for the Service of any State, or Prince, so Suddenly snatch't from us. But O Sin! Sin! Sin! These be the bitter fruits of our Cursed Sinnes. But stay Brethren, Quiet your selvs, and heare King David a little further. Dyed Abner (saith hee) like a foole? No, not like a foole, nor yet so happily (All out) as this Abner of ours. Abner (for ought appeares) dyed Intestate; hap∣ly
Childlesse; certainly hee dyed very suddenly, and had not much time left him to resigne himself to GOD by prayer. And being dead, He borrowes his Bed in ano∣ther mans Ground. Not so this Noble Gentleman. 1 He made his  Will: and that in his health, and who so reades it will easily believe it, and I am not sorry that I min∣ded him thereof: (though ignorant therein) for that is the Worke of our greatest Strength. 2 He dyes not All at once: but hath left behind  a Faire, a Numerous Of spring, 3 He dyes not unexpectedly, nor was his Tongue∣tyed.  Hee abounded with petitions, and ejacu∣lations of his owne, (to say nothing of what was lent him by others,) whileft I was with him, and more afterward, as his dissolution drew nearer, as I am told. 4 And (being fallen asleepe) Hee is gathered to his Fathers in peace. Here he lyes in his owne Bed: Here he lives in his Posteritie. Charlcot is Charlcot still, not Hebren The greatest service wee can doe him (having mourned over him, and made this Funerall an  of all failings) Is to honour him in his Li∣ving pictures, (as once they did their good Rulers at Rome, in their Dead Statues.) Bee not you, who loved the Tree, wanting to his Fruit. Visit them; Advise them; Be faith∣full to them; Pray at least for them, for each of them; especially for the First Borne of his fa∣mily: what Hector (shall I say?) in Homer, did for
his Sonne?1 King. 1.47. Nay, what David's servants did for their Young Master. That his worth and honour may surmount his Fathers. Amen, said Father Da∣vid. Amen, said his Truest servants to that prayer then. Amen, say I to the like now. And so we have done with Abner. But all this while what becomes of the King? Abner is now quiet. But the King bemoanes him∣selfe. Heare him. I am weake: The sonnes of Zerviah are too strong for me. And why, the sons of Zerviah? Why not of Asar? (if that were (as Iosephus tels us) their fathers name.)Iojeph. Antiq. lib. 7. cap. 1. Was it, be∣cause hee was dead? Or was the Mother more Masculine and Active? Or was it, because the honour came in by the Mother, as nearest allied to the now King? However The Sonnes of Zervi∣ah they were; and some of them yet liv'd; and these were too big for David (as things stood) to buckle withall: and hence the complaint. But what! was not David a King? What! Did he Rule in Israel, and yet complaine? Was hee Annointed, and yet overmatch't? Why then see how it fares with us, whilest here The highest estate may be over-topt.  The best estate (here) is a maimed, and imperfect estate. The Best man, David. The Greatest man, King David hath here his Hands, and Heart, full. We must draw in. Note but the Particulars in the Text. 1 All is imperfect. Somewhat still wanting in the fullest estate. Abraham had Riches: but then
hee wants an Heire, and after that a Wife. Isaac hath Health: but then he wants Sight. Asa honour: but he wants Health. Vzziah Riches: but he wants Libertie. In One; David hath a Growne; but hee wants an Arme. 2 All somewhat galling and vexing. When we are  at the Highest, somewhat is too Hard for us. David, Ahab, Zedekiah, Darius, All kings:1 Kings 11. Ier. 38 5. Dan. 6. and yet all met with their Match, and were held to Hard meate. One sonne or other was too hard for them, as well as Zerviahs sons were for David. 3 And in a word, All unsatisfying; and not  fully to our minde. King David cannot have his will in all things. Somewhat goes against the Haire. Nay the Worlds Minions (Ahab and Haman) make their moane.1 King. 21.6. Esth. 5 13. But why doe I tire you! I'll quickly say all. 1 These earthly things are Lame and unsuffici∣ent,  partiall goods, which will not fill all chinks. 2 Wee are Needy, and shiftlesse both.  Wee want all things, and are patcht up with these poore Shreds. 3 We mingle all with Sinne;  and then GOD mingles all with Gall. 4 Briefly; We are here from Home,  and out of Place: And what Quiet, and Comfort, when theres such a Dis-location? I apply in three words.Ʋses. 1 Be not Surety for the world; Neither pro∣mise,  nor expect great matters thence, at First: (as men who have the world in Reversion usually doe)
Lest at Last you cry, O Solon, Solon! or O Seldius! as others have done before you.Craesus in He∣rodot. & Carol. 5. There is (saith David) An end of all (Created) perfection: and we either have, or quickly may see over it.Psal. 119.96. Indeed the most of us have already seene the best of this world: And we doe but Dreame, if we Dreame of better Dayes.Meliora tempo∣ra nolite sperare. Aug. in Psal. 96. Do not hope for that; (saith Austin) looke not for better times, for better successe, than others have sound. Greater wee cannot bee than King David: he wore a Crown: but he found (as another said) Cares under it. Wiser we cannot bee, than that Magazin of knowledge Salomon: yet all his Wit could not keep sorrow from his heartGreat Rodul∣phus Rufus. His experience told him, that All was vanity; yea ut∣most vanitie. And worse than so, Vexation, and that of Spirit too. And believe it; Hee that will build his hopes upon these Sands, well may he Die be∣fore his time, as Abner did: But withall hee will Die a foole, as Abner did not. Ieremy hath said it, and men shall finde it. Ier. 17.11. 2 Have patience, in case your Friends bee pre∣ferd hence to Heaven.  Suppose them Kings here. Alas! Kings have their Cares also: All things be not to their minde: They cannot save whom they would, as David found in Absolom: Nor can they Execute whom they would, as David felt in Ioab. Nay suppose them aswell as Earth can make them. What is Earth to Heaven! Gold to Glory! The whole Creation to the Creator! Earth! Why it will breake. Ones Head, to compasse it, Ones Backe, to keepe it,
Ones heart to lose it. Tis a misery to Need any of the Earths Crutches, and 'tis a Cumber to have them: But if once they get above us, and bee our Masters; they undoe us: and the more we expect from them, the lesse wee shall enjoy them. Then, of Leane Comforts, they become heavie Crosses. Our Great Conque∣rour could not conquer his delights, His Horse: hee is hurt thereby. And, if I bee not decei∣ved, This Worthy Gentleman,Polyd. Virgil. and brave Horse∣man met with his disease, in the same delight; and so both dyed Laesis Intestinis, as I conceive. 3 Shake hands with this world,  and assure Heaven. 1 There's a Full estate. Nothing is wanting  there; Nothing that Reason and Grace can desire. Heres a world of wants. The Soule, that wants Faith, Knowledge, all; as Peter implies. The Body,2 Pet. 1.5. that wants, first meat, and then cloth, and then fire, and then sleep, and then physick, and ever one slabber or other. Yea every sense wants, every member wants, every joynt must bee estsoones supplyed. 2 There (in Heaven) is a Free Estate. No sinne there, no sorrow, no temptation, no tem∣pter.  Here all is mingled and compounded. Our best comforts are Bitter-sweets: our nearest friends sometimes our greatest Griefes; as David found his Cosins here: His Father, his Brethren; his grea∣test Familiars, his Sons, his Wife elsewhere. Here nothing is fully to our minds: wee doe not please or satisfie our selves. We must Per∣force
beare, what we beare Sadly. In Heaven All goes Right. Every one will please us, and wee shall offend none. There all are of a minde, all as one in Christ, all one Christ, and Christ all in all. 3 There is a Firme estate. A City that hath foun∣dations;Heb. 11. a dwelling that is indeed a Mansion, a Crown unfading, a Kingdome unshaken. Here all things tot∣ter and tumble‖:MoVoa &c. Ioh. 14.2. heres nothing but Drooping, Drop∣ping, Dying Erewhile, David mourning for Saul, now for Abner, anon for his owne, and thus tis here. But in heaven there's no Sun-set, no Night, no Death. We shall never see Grave, but Ever bee with the Lord, and with our faithfull brethren. Oh! Assure this Blessed estate, that is thus Full, Free, Firme. Till you be sure of that you are sure of no∣thing. But how may this be done? I will speake it, but too briefly. 1 Cleare your title, that comes in by the Heire, the LORD CHRIST. You must claime by and under him.2 Cor. 3.18. Phil. 2.5. 2 Pet. 1.4. Gal. 5 28. 2 Cor. 5.17. Make it good, that he is yours, you his. That is, Produce his Image, his Mind, his Na∣ture, his Affections. Prove your selvs crucified to the World, and It to you. Prove that Old things are past, that al in you from top to toe is New. And the very Title to this estate Intitles you to a present blessing. 2 Get present possesion. That all your Coun∣sellours will advise you unto. Now every Saving∣grace is as Turfe and Twig:Eph. 1.14. 2 Cor. 5.5, 6 is as the first fruits in Israel: is an earnest of the purchase, and Inheritance, and gives you entrance, (Liverie and Seisin) 2 Peter 1.11. These (if well setled) will make
you Dye safely, and put you beyond all Danger. To these Two, if you will be perswaded to add Two things more: you will Die gladly, and bee free, not only from the Hurt, but from the slavish feare of death, and they are these. 1 Conformitie with heaven. 2 Conversation in it. 1 Conforme to it; and from that likenesse will  grow Love. Whereas in our sinfull estate, the ho∣linesse of GOD, and that companie is a terrour, and torment to us. Heaven would be an Hell to a sin∣full man. But fierie things Ascend as willingly, and naturally, as earthly things descend. And thinke the same of heavenly Spirits and affections. 2 Converse in heaven. Lodge your thoughts,  and hearts there. Look into that every day. Spend each day some thoughts upon GOD, upon Christ, upon heaven; make that your home. Looke upon it as your place, your Center; and then you will make to it, whatever it cost you. A Stone will through an Element of fire, a Sea of water, to come to its Center. So will yee, if your dwelling bee above. I have said how you must bee qualified. If now you come to learne and minde these things, and keepe the Soule in warmth, and upon the wing, you shall be able to beare up, in the approaches of death, and to thinke of Christs comming without sin, with comfort. Nay, you will love his appearance,2 Tim. 4.8. 1 Thes. 1.10. Phil. 3.20. & 1.23. Heb. 9.28, 2 Pet. 3.12. wait for it, looke for it, long for it, hasten to it, and ha∣sten him, in the words of the whole Church, and of this her Sonne, Come, Lord JESUS, come quickly.
So Shee to the last.Rev. 22.17. Rev. 22.17. So the Spirit. So this Noble Knight, who most (as I am told) in his last words breathed out this: Come Lord JE∣sUs, Come, Come quickly. O my Lord, quickly, Amen. Even so Come, Lord JEsUs; Come apace, come once for all, to make an end of all Sins, Sorrows, Fune∣rals, by ending the Last enemie, death, and by casting death and hell, and grave, and all that opposes life and glory, into the Fire. Amen. Even so come Lord JEsUs, Amen. FINIS.
CONCIO AD CLERVM. 1 Oxoniae jamdudum habita, 2 Dein posthabita, & repudiata, 3 Nune demùm in lucem edita. Authore ROBERTO HARRIS Hanwellensi. JEREM. 23.15. A Prophetis Jerusalem prodẏt contaminatio in univer sam terram. Ambitio & superbia valdè suaviter dormit in sina Sacerdotum. CYP. de jejun. & tentat. 2. TIM. 4.5. cum 17. At tu vigila in omnibus, perfer iniurias, opus perage Evange∣listae, ministerẏ tui plenam fiàem facito. Vel (ut alẏ) mini∣sterium tuum aà plenum probatum redàito. LONDINI, Excudebat G.M. pro Johanne Bartlet, ad insigne poculi Aurati in Caemiterio D. Pauli, M. DC. XLI.
ORNATIS∣SIMO DOMI∣NO DOCTORI 01 WILKINSON 10 AVLAE MAGDALANEN∣SIS PRINCIPALI DIGNISSIMO, Hanc qualem qualem lucubrati∣unculam observantiae & amoris ergô ROBERTVS HARRIS EJVSDEM AVLAE OLIM A∣LUMNUS DAT, DICAT, CONSECRATQUE.
Totius Concionis Thema ipsum 1. Proponitur. §. 1. 2. Exponi∣tur, & tra∣ctarur, § 2 1  § 3, 4, 5. 2.  id{que}. 1. Gene∣ratimubi omnium academi∣corum of∣ficium. 1 Astrui∣tur cum 1. Testimonio. § 6. 2. Ratione, §. 7. 2. Applica∣tur ad om∣nes five. 1. Discant. §. 8. 2. Doceant. §. 9. 2. Speciatim, Theologorum (sive sint tantùm candidati, §. 10. sive (quos vocant) Desig∣nati) §. 11. Offi∣cium 1. Arguitur 2. Appli∣catur; est autem i∣sta appli∣catio, Partim 1. E'.  ubi Ponti∣ficiorū & ali∣orum  de 1. Praedicatione 2. Per∣sona∣li, & Venti∣lantur. 3. Vi∣caria, §. 12. Venti∣lantur. 2. Residentia 1. Lo∣ci, §. 13. Venti∣lantur. 2. Of∣ficij, §. 14. Venti∣lantur. 2.  ad 1 Summos, qui do∣ctoratus titulo gau∣dent, §. 15. 2. Omnes, qui ani∣marum curam su∣sceperunt, §. 16. Qui omnes ad Pa∣scendi partes revo∣cantur omnes, cum 1. Verbo, ubi obiter de  legere 2. Vitâ, & exem∣plo. Sect. 17. Ubi Exhorta∣tionem excipit & con∣cludit Precatiuncula.
CONCIO AD CLERVM. Johannis vicesimo primo, ad finem versus decimi septimi, & deinceps, ita scriptum legitur. Vers.17.— Pasce oves meas. Vers. 18. Amen, Amen, dico tibi, quūm esses junior cingebas te & ibas quo volebas: quum autem senueris, extendes manus tuas, & alius te cinget, & transferet quō noles. —Pasce oves meas §. 1. QUae accepistis verba (Patres, Fratres dile∣ctissimi) proximum Petri responsum ex∣cipiunt. Tertium rogatus Petrus suum in Christum studium, animum{que}, Ter interloquitur, & nihil non amoris spi∣rat, spondetque: Tertio (causâ indè arreptâ) suadet ci Christus in pascendis ovibus assiduitatem. Suadet autem argumento vario: Primum à Personâ Petri, alterum verò Christi, Tertium demùm populi petitum legimus.
Petrus Christo plurimùm & semper debuit, & saepè  prae se tulerat: Petro Christus quicquid erat huma∣ni remiserat, postliminiò restitutum ad Ecclesiae gu∣bernacula  collocaverat: Oves deni{que} suas omnes & singulas in summis habuit Christus delicijs: Ergò Petro, siqua sui, si Christi, si Ecclesiae ratio fuerit, sum∣mum incumbit Pascendi onus & negotium. §. 2. Nec pascendi modò, sed & Patiendi. Pastoris e∣nim munus ist is ferè partibus absumitur; id quod Chri∣stus Petrum imprimis voluit admonitum, cùm à Pas∣cendi opere, ad Patiendi onus, sine ullis inducijs, re∣vocat. Fuit, ubi Petrus & sibi vixit, & ad arbitrium suum: Ibat paucis his diebus, redibat, libero frue∣batur Coelo: Ast communen tune temporis cole∣bat vitam. Piscator quidem, sed non hominum. A∣lios jam mores, alium animum provectior ista aetas dignitás{que} postular. Ad Clavum enim sedet, non Na∣viculae sed Ecclesiae, magni istius (ut loquitur Basilius) navigij. Cúmque ab omnise removisset negotio, Chri∣sto studeat; ejus{que} unius vestigia premat oportet, & se∣quatur, —Per mare, per terras. Et sequirur quidem licèt passibus minus aequis firmis∣què sequirur tamen; & (ut crevit animus) sanguinem suum omnen in ejus unius gratiam profundere non detrectat. Sed id aliàs. Nune quod instat. Quae om∣nia dicta sunt, eò redeunt, ut Petrus quis{que} & Pastor Christum Pastorem summum referat, & ad ejus similem, contendat vitam, qui patiendo Pavir, qui Pascendo pas∣sus est. Quae, enim dico Pastoris munus partés{que} attin∣gunt proximè, istic loci praecipit Salvator, & praedi∣cit,
& ea quidem duabus absolvuntur voculis: Pasce: Patere: Istud quid à mundo Petrus; Illud quid à Petro Christus expectaret, loquitur. Ac de Praecepto primùm. Deinceps erit Praedictio, si unum illud prius efflagitavero, ut in hac tantâ diffi∣cultate, me infantissimum, summás{que} angustias passum, studio, vultú{que} vestro sublevetis. §. 3. Atque in primo Tria sunt, de quibus omnibus litem nobis intendunt Pontificij. 1. Subjectum [Petrus] 2. Objectum [Oves] 3. Officium [Pas∣ce.] Bellarminus rem omnem Tribus (ut rem non perse∣quar infinitam) complexus est Propositionibus.De Romá. Pontif.l. 1. c 14. & inde. Primâ, Soli Petro à Christo dictum est, Pasce oves me as. Secundâ, Summa Potestas hisce verbis Petro tribuitur. Tertiâ, Per Oves intelligitur Ecclesia universa. Verbo perstrin∣gam omnia, nè longiùs ad istas ineptias abeam. 1. Soli Petro ista dixit Christus. Quid tum postea? Ergò Petri inanis larva (Pontifex Romanus) in summo rerum fastigio collocabitur: Quàm nullo modo istud sequitur? Soli Jehoschuae dixit Dominus; Te non deseram. Ergò de solo dixit? Contra quam sentit Apostolus ad Heb.Heb. 13.5. ult. Soli dixit, sed non de solo. Etenim (ut alia multa non Argumenter) si de solo Petro intelligantur verba; vel ejus Personam, vel ejus Officium spectant. Non pri∣mum: Quia ita excluduntur omnes. Romanus etiam,De Rom. Pont. l. 4. c. 23. nisi quis Vulcanus in unum ambos conflet & compingat. Si Officium; vel Pastoratus, vel Apostolatus. Non A∣postolatus; quià eo nomine omnes exaequat (post Chri∣stum) Bellarminus. Si Pastoratus dixerit (& certè dix∣it)
In istos se induit laqueos, quorum ex nullo se un∣quam expediet. Erit enim Petrus sub isto sensu, vel Ordinarius, vel extraordinarius pastor. Extraordinari∣um si dixerit, nihil sibi, nihil suis consentaneè dixerit, nihil non lethale Capiti Pontificio. Sîn Ordinarium; ergò extraordinarium ordinario, Coelum terris, Sol um bris cedit: ergò capite diminutus (non auctus) est Petrus: ergò suas, habet certas & definitas oves, con∣tra quàm statuerat de Pontif. lib. 1. cap. 16.1. Cor. 12.28. Eph. 4.11. Ergò erit aliquod in Ecclesiâ munus Apostolico majus; Contra Paulum contra Bellarminum, lib. 4. cap. 23. Sed detur (ut alia obliviscar, & authoritatibus non cer∣tem) Christum hoc ipso in loco, & ad solum Petrum, & de Pe∣tro solo verba habuisse, nihil est quod isti (quam damus) interpretationi vel tantillum incommodet, cùm idem sivè honos, sivè onus, adijs in locis (Math. 16. Johan. 18. & 20.) alijs accedat Apostolis: accedit autem (ut in∣finitam vim Patrum taceam) Bellarmino teste, qui instar multorum esse poterit, si sibi constabit. Si enim omnia, quae hoc capite in Petrum congessit Christus ornamenta, ex aequo omnibus distribuit, versâ paginâ, capite superi∣ore,— Sicut me misit Pater, &c. Non erit novi (nescio cujus) honoris accessio, sed veteris potiùs restitutio & confirmatio.De Pont. Rom. Distribuit autem si in mentis potestate fue∣rit Bellarminus. lib. 4. cap. 23. Sed vincat Antecedens; Quo tandem argumento illud sequetur? Ergo Papa re∣rum potietur Christianarum: Ergò Johanne Apostolo, qui Petro supererat, erit antiquior, sive Clemens, sive Cletus, five Linus, seu quis alius. Quàm lubrica sunthîc omnia! Quàm omni modo nutant! Si excutere vacaret. Pri∣mùm fueritne Petrus Episcopus singularis? Secundùm, fueritne Romae Episcopus? Tertiùm, habueritne Haeredem? Quartùm, sitne Papa iste Haeres, & ex asse Haeres, qui
tàm non Petrum, quàm nec Christum cognatione attin∣git? Scitè Ambrosius, Non habent hoereditatem Petri,Lib. 1. de paen. c. 6. qui fidem Petri non habent. Et suavissimè, ut pluri∣ma, Nazianzenus,Orat. in Athanas.. Certè non tantam apud veritatem. ejusque alumnos inibat ille gratiam, ut tanta & tàm multa preca∣rio referat: Maximècum exsuccessione nullo necessa∣rio argumento astruatur Ecclesia, ut in suis Ecclesiae no∣tis pa àm facit. Fuit prima Propositio, sequitur se∣cunda. §. 4. Tò Pascere Summam Potestatem denotat. Dixit, sed quo veteri exemplo? quo firmo argumento? Ad litem Gram∣maticalem resredijt.  altùm crepat. Bellarminus (silebitur enim de futili isto inter , &  dis∣crimine,Vide Col∣loq, Rayn. ad Har. quod mentis potiùs vitio quam animi (quo∣modo mihi persuadeo) posuit non nemo, silebitur de istâ rasi gregis Helenâ vulgatâ editione; cujus mendae vobis non sunt praestandae,  (inquit ille) est summâ authoritate regere. Esto. Ergò aut in vi solâ verbi res non vertitur, aut quivis  summo suo jure omnia aget, erit{que} Papaubi{que}, ita, ut nusquam sit. Sed non sunt omnia subtiliùs rimanda. Ista igitur, ne tem∣pus diutiùs fallam. Pono. Primum  apud Authores idoneos jus subalter∣num juxtà ac summum significar, quos apud Dux, Past∣orque omnium postremus audit. Secundum in Sacrâ Paginâ, ministerium aequè ac dig∣nitatem loquitur, Luc. 2. Eph. 4.1. Pet. 5. Ubi  cum  committit: Se ad Presbyterorum nume∣rum aggregat: Christum verò omnium pastorum princi∣pem statuit Apostolus.
Tertium, hoc in loco, rem negotiosam magis quàm gratiosam, vult : id quod oculis & manibus tene∣tur, non tenui aliquâ conjecturâ. Quò enìm aliò spe∣ctant Christi verba? quorsùm adeo obnixè a Petro con∣tenderet, ut regeret, regnaret, Principatum (nescio quem) susciperet. Cujus sempèr satis erant studiosi Discipuli? Quid? Nùm eò effrenatam dominandi libidinem non ità retuderit Christus, ut Semèl, Iterùm, Tertiùm jam acueret? Quid? Quod  idem quod  sonat? Imo potius Pastorun more, oviū curamage∣re, quàm simpliciter regere, at Jansenius in Ps. 2. Ʋt habet Montanus Insulsè igitur Bellarminus,  est quodam more re∣gere: ergò omnis  est omni modo rex: ergò Petrus est Monarcha Ecclesiae, Imperator (Vicatius tamèn Im∣perator (ut aliàs habet) Apostolorum. Turpiùs verò & in suos, & in Sanctam committit lin∣guam, dum  vel  cum  confundit. Pessimè verò omnium in Barclaium, dum ad Triaista , Tria adjecerit argumenta; quibus recensendis, (id est refellendis) immorari non licet brevitatem se∣ctantem. §. 5. Sequitur Tertia.—Oves dicuntur universè, aut Deter∣minantur pro modo enunciationis. Apostoli paverunt omnes (Sermone communitèr quà potuerunt, & Scrip∣to Vniversè) Ministri definitè, Omnes instrumentalitèr, Solus Christus efficaciter. Ita Nostri. Adeò succinctè, enucleatè{que} ut nihil suprà. Ast non arrident ista Pontificijs, qui nihil sapiunt praeter mundi strepitum. Ovium enìm nomine illis (si∣quid ego intelligo) veniunt & Oves, & omne genus Pastores, Reges, Imperatores omnes, & Angeli, & Lupi, & Diaboli. Istos enim omnes Petri subjiciunt
ferulae, quae hoc pascendi Diplomate ei conceditur. Et neminem (credo) praeterit, quid in istos omnes po∣testatis, aùt sibi asseruerit Petrus Redivivus, aùt ei affinx∣erint non parum multi ad rem Romanam facti: Verùm enim verò, habuerit Petrus in Oves nonnihil Authori∣tatis, in Pastores (Apostolos dico, nedùm Angelos) non habuit. Habuerit Ordinis Primatum, certè non Iurisdictionis, nèc Creandi, nèc Exauctorandi, nèc Ex∣communicandi, nèc aliud hujuscemodi quippiam; teste non semèl Paulo.—Nullâ in re inferior fui Summis Apo∣stolis; teste Bellarmino. Etenìm, si habuit;2. Cor. 12.11. Vid. Chry. Theophy. Occumen. adlocum. Ergò vel ut Apostolus, vèl ut Apostolo major. Neutro, inquit Bel∣larminus, modo. (cum summa sint omnia in Apostolo) ergò (inquam ego) Nullo. Miras hic cudunt Allegorias, & Monstra distinctio∣num:— Petrus consideratur, Vèl per se, Vel per alium: Vel ut Apostolus, vèl ut Pastor: Vèl ut Ordinarius, vèl ut Extraordinarius: Vel ut Cephas, vèl ut Petrus. Bel∣larminus veò in omnem se versat partem, tandem{que} (per summum nefas) ipsum fontem turbat & incestar, homo omnis memoriae audacissimus. Sed nolo plura; praesertìm ubi omnis potestas Pontificia ejuratur. Vereor enìm ne ista nimiùm multa videantur, & vestro tanto si∣lentio indigna. Quid vos imprimìs doctos voluit Petrus Succenturia∣tus accêpistis.—Oves Pascere, est, Honoribus inhiare: Imperatores in ordinem cogere: Reges solio, sedibus{que} avitis exturbare: Omnia deni{que} miscere, & pro libidine agere. E quibus omnibus, cùm tanquàm è scrupulosis Co∣tibus enavigavit oratio, sequar jam, (vobis fretus) mo∣rem meum, eòque propero, quò me vestra tacita ex∣pectatio jamdiù vocat.
§. 6. Pasce Oves, &c.] Verba quidèm ad Petrum sunt facta: at cùm quid commune habeant, ar{que} propriam magnam quidem partem tam sunt nostri, quàm ipsius Petri: Omnium enim est, aeqùe ac Petri, ea eniti, quae Commun is salutis maximè intersint, Spartamque, quam nacti sumus, adornare. Habet enìm unusquisquè ferè nostrûm suas partes, suas curas, quibus par est ut invigi∣let: Nec minùs universis, quàm, uni Petro, dicit Chri∣stus.— Amatis me! Pascite oves meas; illud agite, sata∣gite, quod ex officio vobis incumbit maximè. Sumus enìm, quamdiù in vivis sumus, tanquàm Pueri in ludo, aùt in Navi Nautae, aùt in corpore membra. Su∣mus, ut Domi servi. Bellivè milites: Certos nempèha∣bemus fines, Circumscriptos Cancellos, Designata mu∣nera, & officia; & ad ea omnia tenemur ad unum omnes, quae cum loci & officij nostri ratione sunt conjunctissima. Hìnc Christus Petro,—Pasce, Pasce. Pastores; in istud unum Pascendi opus omnes intende nervos, vires{que}. Hìnc ad Romanos Paulus. Cap. 12. ver. 6, 7.—Corpus, unum, Membra multa, multa officia. Prophetiam ha∣bemus? in Prophetando; Ministerium? in ministrando; Doctrinam? in docendo seduli versemur. Hinc ad Ju∣daeos Petrus.—Vt quis{que} accêpit donum, ità alius in alium subministrate: Si quis loquitur, loquatur; & quae se∣quuntur. 1. Petr. 4.10. Hìnc Paulus se in Exemplum dat, tùm Thessalonicensibus.—Non  nos gessimus, tanqùam milites inexercitati; tum Corinthijs,—Non gloriamur ultra mensuram, & Canonem nostram. Certè suos (quos attendebat) habuerunt Apostoli terminos; suos, (proùt visum fuit Spirirui Sancto;) Canonas. Pau∣lus inter Gentes imprimis versabatur, ut inter Iudaeos
Petrus: (adeoquè (ut hoc obiter dicam) Aut magis Petro fuit Paulus Romanus,Apostolo∣rum pre∣cipuae e∣rant par∣tes in ver∣bi praedica∣tione. 1. Cor. 1.17. aut minùs Paulo fuit Petrus Canonicus.) Hìnc & Paulus & reliqui, (quibus in vitio fuit. Et nihil, & Aliud agers) in verbi praedicatione potiùs quàm in, vèl mensarum, (Actor. 6.) vèl Bap∣tismi ministratione, suis utebantur horis. Hìnc demùm lege cavit Petrus, ne quis sit : & Praecep∣to Minas, Minis Poenas cumlavit IEHOVA, ut in VZ. Zah, & Vzziah est videre. Tanti scilicèt apud Deum est assiduitas, ut nemo vèl Socordiam, vèl ad multas res Alienas aggressionem (ut  reddit Gel∣lius) multam ferat.Lib. 11. c. 16. §. 7. Nec immeritò. Quae enim supplicia ijs satis digna dix∣eris, qui nullo, vel Dei, vel Rei, sivè Publicae, sivè suae, studio ducuntur? Quae tamèn omnia Ignavis, alia∣rumque Curiosis usu veniunt. Illisenìm, jux à ac istis, in nullam rationem venit Christi (ut indè exordiar)  gloria, Christi voluntas, qui isto examine suos spectan∣dos censuit, si eauna meditentur, quae ab officiy sui ratione quam proximè absunt. Quid?2, Cicer. Quod vitae societatem (ut loquitur ille) deserunt, qui nihil studij & facultatum  in eam conferunt, accêdit, quod nec sibi commodùm prospiciunt,—vir enim, qui errat à loco suo, est ut a∣vicula, quae errat à nido suo, Pro. 27. omni scilicèt (quà corporis, quà animae) miserijs opportunus. Vice autem versâ, qui nec sui negligens, nec aliorum satagens, sua  omnia ad officiy normam exigit, non solùm sui in Chri∣stum Jesum amoris certa dabit, & luculenta indicia, & Rem Christianam augebit; verùm & suis vel maximè in∣serviet commodis. Etenìm ad alias plurimas utilitates
adjungitur, quod istâ ratione, via tum ad corpor is sanita∣tem, tùm ad animi salutem munietur. Loci enim, (uti nostis) est conservare; ad istam qui convolarit aram, in tutissimum se recipit portum, ubi tutus delitescat, tan∣quàm in nido avis;Deut. 22.6, 7. Cui protrudenti, publico{que} labo∣ranti lege cavebatur. Deindè corpus vegetum, aut nullo, aut non admodùm dubio tentatur morbo. Labor autèm id est quod corpus firmat:Celsus. ignavia he∣betat. Illa (quod dixit ille) maturam senectutem, iste longam adolescentiam reddit. Deni{que} (ut alia vel pe∣riculis praesidia, vel honoribus adjumenta non memorem) cùm necesse habeat, qui aut nihil, aut nihil Suum, agit, ut malè agat, nemini (non Petro uni) erit integrum, vel in suâ oscitantèr, vel in alienâ petulantèr messe ver∣sari. §. 8. Quibus ita constitutis, Vos Primùm appello, juve∣nes, (date enim illud pudori meo, ut Ventres istos tace∣am, quibus una cura est Gulae & abdominis; una vita alienis se immiscere.) Christum amatis vos! Munera vestra, ad quae officio aut priuato, aut certè communi, tenemini, sedulò obite. Mutuum enim est Relatorum iter, (quod de Scholae rivulis delibastis) mutuum of∣ficium. Qui pastoribus docendi, is idem discendi par∣tes vobis imposuit. Habetis vos, quos audiatis  literatissimos, quos consulatis viros imprimis no∣biles, atque (ut reliquos taceam) Bibliothecas instru∣ctissimas; imo vivas habetis, & ambulatorias, (ut de Augusto olìm Eunapi us) in quorum consuetudinem vosmet immergatis. Nolite ististàm divinis bonis ad licentiam & impietatem abuti: Nolite committere, ut
humaniores istae literae contemptae jaceane.  Vah! quàm putidum, quam non dig∣num liberali ingenio! Excutite potiùs vobis omnem socordiam. Ponite ante oculos Pythagoras,Tuscul. q. l 4. Democri∣tos istos, qui ultimas lustrârunt terras, còque, ubi quicquid esset quod disci posset, veniendum judicà∣runt. Ponite Platones, qui vel vitae dispendio, Homeri alicujus famillaritatem redimerent. Ponite Salvatoris vestri immensam benignitatem, qui non de privatis tantum Pastoribus vobis prospexit, verum & Public is. Ad hunc saltèm (quoties commune sacrum peragitur) frequentes adeste locum; adeste animis.Amate, Audite nò illum, & illun: sed illumunum (qui unus pascit in omnibus) Christum. Indignum e∣nìm est, ut Rhetorculus quis{que} magno stipatus comitatu incêdat, & unus Christi Legatus publico nomine lo∣queretur, aut nullos, aut non ita multos habiturus au∣ditores. Longè verò indignissimum est, quòd tam nul∣lo in Pietatem flagret juventus studio, ut mera hìc ple∣runque sit solitudo, ad istam numerosam frequentiam, quae in omnium ore, per forum & scenam, volitar. Ita igitur adeste, ita audite, ita vosmet in Pastorum discplinam tradite, ut illi vobis ovibus saluti, vos illis Pastoribus honori aliquandò esse possitis. § 9. Ad vos deindè (Fratres) festinat oratio, Quibus Pa∣rentes filios suos (Chara certè Pignora) efformandos tradiderunt. Christum amatis! Pascite oves vestras, ve∣stros (quando corum suscepistis curam & tutelam) pu∣pillos puerosque; Aristotelem recognoscit vestrum.Polit. l. 8. cap. 1. Commune (inquit ille) Bonum reipublicae Adolescentes: Commune quidem vel bonum, vel malum, prout aut ad disciplinam, aut ad licentiam à vobis instituuntur. In
Bivio enim etiamnùm sunt, cum Hercule isto, vitae{que} instituendae ratio penes vos est. Vin' Puros? Puros. —Sedulos? Sedulos. Frugi? Frugi, modo tuo non defueris officio dicto audientes habes.—Et dubitant homines serere, & impendere curam! Ad severitatem à naturâ vos facti estis: non ad ludum, non ad jocum. Ingenijs excolendis vacatis; eò omnes conferte facul∣tates & cogitationes, ut quos petulantes accêpistis, cordatos cum Xenocrate remittatis. Cum{que} illud sit pubescentis aetatis ingenium (ficut post Salomonem, Aristoteles vester) ut voluptatibus veneneus nimis in∣dulgeat,Al Theo∣dret. l. 2. c. 12. societatem colat, maximam{que} partem in excessu peccet: Vestrum erit istis juventutis malis, primo quo{que} tempore obviare, amicitiarum, otiorum delectum ha∣bere, Ganeones, Popinas (addit & Aristoteles, cum Augustino) spectacula ab ijs removere, adeò{que} ani∣mum pijs imbuere praeceptis, ut libidinum non modò ramos amputetis, sed fibras etiam radicitùs extirpetis. permagna sunt, quae vestrae fidei commissa sunt. Ve∣ftrum implorat fidem Patria, Parentes, Academia, Ec∣clesia: fidem (per Christum Jesum) liberate, & ne patiamini, ut illud vobis in os, per summum dedecus, dicatur—En quibus liberos committ as! §. 10. Verùm ad eos venio (ad quos ijsta, non communi modo, sed omni ratione spectant) Theologiae Candida∣tos; quos omnes in Duplici genere constitutos esse in∣telligo. Sunt enim qui sacros nondùm attigêrunt ordi∣nes: In istam tamen collimant metam, & propen∣dent, eo{que} omnem intendunt animum. Redeat illis in memoriam quid sit negotij causam publicam susti∣nere,
Omnium simultates suscipere, emni{que} pericùlo caput objicere: at{que} in eorum animis penitùs inside∣at illud Pauli,—Siquis Episcopatum appetat, praecla∣rum opus desiderat.1. Tim. 3.1. Opus (ut habet Chrysostomus) ipsis Angelis formidandum. Opus, cui nemo homo fe∣rendo par est: Ad quod quisquè quantò sanctior, tantò tardior, (ut de Patribus legimus) accêdit. Il∣lud igitur & sibi & Ecclesiae (ne in praedâ & sangui∣ne omni in posterùm tempore versentur) consultissi∣mum ducant, si aut nulli, aut instructissimi huc appu∣lerint. §. 11. Sunt & alij, qui cum Petro in suam fidem, & tute∣lam oves Christi recepêrunt. Apud hos gravissima de∣bet esse Christi voluntas, & non uno loco authoritas. Deut. 33. Sacerdotum munus duabus absolvitur par∣tibus— Praedicatione, Precatione. Ita enim Moses—Do∣cent legem tuam Israëlem: Apponunt suffitum ad faci∣em tuam. Mosen excipiunt Prophetae, Prophetas Apostoli: Dum∣que hi in istos, isti verò in illum commentantur: Il∣lud unum quod uni Petro islìc loci Christus, uno ore clamant,—Pascite, Pascite. Ita enim Esaias, Ita Ezechieles, & quis non Prophetarum! Ita Petrus; Ita Paulus passim in suis ad Clerum Concionibus. §. 12. Quo magis stupenda est Petri Personati importuni∣tas, qui nec Pascit, nec Patitur: nec aliquid haber Pe∣tri simile: In rem tamèn suam omnia torquet.—Epis∣copi
(inquit Bellarminus dum praefatur ad librum de Clericis) veniunt in Partem Sollicitudinis, non in Ple∣nitudinem Potestatis: Contra (credo) Pontifici vulgò venit.Vid. Col. Rayn. cap. 7. divis. 6. Lib. de cler. c. 13. In Plenitudinem Potestatis venit ille, in partem Sollicitudinis non venit. Hujus tamèn sive ignorantiae, sive oscitantiae, pro suâ singulari modestia, lenocinatur Cardinalis.—Pascit (inquit ille) Papa (mitto enim quam otiandi copiam (Episcopo tacito) aliàs facit Presbyteris) licèt Praedicando non pascit: Neq, enim una est Pascendi ratio. At{que} illud quidem utrum{que} fa∣ciles damus:Ita Occum. Et Pontificum vix Centessimum quem∣que dari, qui populo verbum faciat: Et Dari varios Pascendi modos. Pascitur (inquiunt Scholae) Vitâ ex∣emplari, Subsidio corporali, Doctrinâ Salutari, Disci∣plinâ Regulari. Pascitur (quod videt Bernàrdus) Cibo, Exemplo, Verbo. Pascitur Mente, Opere, Ore. Sed quid indè? Nondum Elapsus est Crimine San∣ctus Pater, qui nec Mente, nec Opere, nec Ore, nec Doctrinâ, nec Disciplinâ, nec ullâ utili operâ pas∣cit. Ast quibus in rebus ipsi interesse non possumus,Pro Rosc. Amer. in his (dixit Orator) operae nostrae vicaria fides amicorum suppo∣nitur: alias in suum substituit locum nutrices, ut Me∣retricem (juxta illud Damasi) facile scias Purpuratam. Per alium Pascit. (inquit Bellarminus.) Quin igitur Christum per Alium amet. Qui enim Ama dixit, & Pasce dixit, eodem quidem spiritu, & sententiâ. Ac∣cêdit quod Pastoris nomen (si Antiquitatem non men∣tiantur Jesuitae) Actionem personalem significat, sicut nomen Medici.Aug. Hier. apud Mald. in summu la q. 10. et 3-6. Ita{que} sicut nemo potest per alium cu∣rare: Ità nemo potest suas oves per alium pascere. Caetera mitto apud Maldonatum: Nec non illud de Debitis (quae vocantur.) personalibus.
§. 13. Rem penitùs cernentibus duplex occurrit Residen∣tia, Loci & Officij; utram{que} mirum, quam nullo Papae, quam omni Patres prosequebantur studio. At{que} ut a primâ exaudiar. Quàm affixi & pertina∣ces adhaerebant isti Palinuri ad gubernacula sua, lo∣quuntur Tria.—Primùm, Consilia vetera. Quibus sanctiebatur, Nequis uno (ad summum) mense ampliùs à suis peregrè foret. Secundam, Epistolae, quibus suae ad tempus absentiae infamiam deprecabantur. Terti∣um, Sententiae eorum, vel in Pestis, & persecutionis ne∣gotio, ubi vix & ne vix quidem, nisi gregi aliundè prospectum fuit Rem tractat Auguslinus) absentiae parùm indulsêrunt. Fuerint isti (ut nostrates taceam) duriores. In cautiorem certè partem peccabant. At (Quae sunt hujus aevi deliciae) sunt non ita pauci è Pa∣pae Satellitio aequo longè remissiores. Non jam que∣ror inauditas illas ab ultimâ mundi origine nundina∣tiones in foro Romano, tum Animarum (ut loquitur johannes) tum beneficiorum, ut queruntur Germani,Centum gravam. non silvam istam in unum Cardinalem congestam benesi∣ciorum: non insignem illam supra omnem fidem con∣ductitiorum inscitiam; quibus omnibus Nobilitatur gens ista Romana, prae omnibus ahjs. Ea sola queror, quae humano more ab illis peccantur. Ur ur enim in∣tercidant nonnunquam peregrinandi causae, & eae sanè gravissimae: Absit tamen, ut quisquam hominum si∣bi in suo adblandiatur otio, dum animi tantùm causà (nequid dicam duriùs) liberè vagatur, &vix triduùm in loco suo consistit. Ovibus enim, cum publico ca∣rent, opus est in quotidianâ vitâ pastore, cujus non om∣ne munus publicis Ecclesiae adibus continetur. Habet
ille (ad Summi Pastoris instar) quos visat Aegrotos, quos erigat fractos, praefractos quos increpet, quos{que}, restitan∣tes portet: at{que} ita universo incumbendum est gregi, ut de singulis etiam confulatur.Ezek. 34. Quod non aliud sua∣dent & Apostolorum Praecepta—Exemplar esto &c. Et veterum Exempla; et Pastorum, Ducum, Medico∣rum, Speculatorum, Parentum, Nutricum nomina. Sed Loci Residentiam satis esto vel verbo attigisse; at{que} Papicolas ad suos remisisse, Innocentium, Dama∣sumque, magnos Residentiae vindices: Cajet anum in Thom. 22. q. 185. Artic. 5. Caranzam in suo de necessariâ Residentiâ personali tractatu; & Concilium ipsum Tridentinum. §. 14. Sequitur Officij Residentia. Est autem ea Duplex. Publica, Privata; Utra{que} pernecessaria, & Praecepti & Medij ratione; five Pastoris, five Ovium salus at∣tendatur. Quod Praeceptum, ubi non occurrit loci! Mirus necesse sit in sacrâ Paginâ hospes, quem late∣at istud per omnium ora pervagatum, Pasce. Videa∣tur Moses de officio maximè Aaronico verba faciens. Videatur Ezechieles, dum & gregis satagentes incitat & negligentes increpat. —Non observastis (inquit JEHOVAH, Cap. 44.8.) observationem meam, sed substituistis observatores vobis. Nec praecipit modò, sed sub dirissimis supplicijs le∣ges in Sacerdotes tulit: ut semper pro suorum salute ex∣cubarent. —Fili hominis, te constitui Speculatorem, (& quae sequuntur apud Prophetas gravissimè.) Quasi sci∣licet se in ruinam praecipites darent, gregem{que} perdi∣tum iren, & intereuntes & interimentes (ut loquitur
Bernardus) qui posthabitâ ovium ratione, ita agerent, ut, nullum quaestum sibi turpem esse arbitrarentur. Ne∣{que} id injuriâ: si enim tota de salute periclitetur navis, vix in vado fuerit, qui ad Clavum sederit. Quod si detur, Pastorem ipsum extra omnem aleam pofitum esse, Pastorne ille dicendus erit, quem nulla tangit o∣vilis cura? Pastorne ille, qui ingruente tempestate, grassante lupo, palante ove, se in fugam, otiumque dederit? Pastorne ille, qui nec loci longinquitate, nec gregis desiderio commovetur? Pastorne ille, qui pro nihilo res sanctas omnes prae praedâ ducit? Eu∣gè Papa Pater! Pastoris non est oves deglubere. —Pa∣storem, Tityre, Pingues pascere oportet Oves: Si vel i∣starum saluti, vel Christi voluntati consultum volue∣rit. Quorsùm enim istud toties repetitum, Pasce, si o∣ves nihil (feriante pastore) detrimenti caperent, dis∣criminis subirent? Quorsùm istud tàm importunum, Amas me, si perinde Christi amicitiam tueantur, qui pasti sunt ovibus, (ut loquitur quidam) atque qui oves pascunt?1. Cor. 16.22. Certè Christi non amantem Anathe∣mate ferit Apostolus. Non amat autem (Gregorio di∣cam? Imo) Christo Judice qui non pascit, modò Pastoris nomen induerit. Hinc Paulus —Vae mihi, si non Evangelizavero. Hinc Ezechieles—Vae Pastoribus, qui pascunt, sed non gregem. Hinc Bernardus —Quid ego infoelix?Ber. in Ser. de advent. Dom. 3. Vid. Rof∣fens. art. 33 quò me vertam, si tantum thesaurum, si preciosum depositum istud, quod sibi Christus sanguine proprio preciosius judica∣vit, contigerit negligentiùs custodire! Et Sexcenta a∣lia, ad quae minima trepidarent Romanistae, si cordi∣bus collum non obduxissent. Hinc insomnes illae no∣ctes, improbissimi Patrum labores. Hinc ingentes il∣li
sermones singulis Dominicis ad populum facti. Hinc Canones isti.Can. Apo. Can. 58. Vasens. Con. —Presbiter, qui negligentiùs circa popu∣lum agit, nec in pietate cos erudit, à Communione Segre∣gator. Si in socerdiâ ca perseveraverit, Deponitor. Hinc demùm moris etat, ut sanctorum Patrum Homilioe à Diaconis recitentur,Vid. Dom. Asoto de Iust. & Iur. l. 10. q. 3. art. 1, 2. Caron. Zam ubi supra. Fe∣rum in Mat. 16. alios{que}. cum Presbyter, quod valetudine minus foelici uteretur, per seipsum (ut loquitur Conci∣lium) non potuerit praedicare. Hinc denique (cum longum sit ad omnia iter) Pontificij ipsi, Circeis Me∣retricis poculis non prersus dementati, nullo non cla∣more & minis suorum in omni vitâ negligentias inse∣quebantur. Sed eat Filius iste Perditionis, Rex A∣baddon, cum ferali suâ locustarum turbâ: populos ca∣tervatim secum ducat ad gehennam, multis plagis aliquandò vapulaturus; licèt impraesentiarum à ne∣mine judicandus; uti habet Distinctio ista Grati∣ana.Distin 40. §. 15. Ad vos Academici, venio, at{que} in vobis terminabi∣tur Oratio. Quandoquidem quae dicta sunt, adeò a∣perta sunt, Solis{que} (ut Tertullianus) radijs exarata, ut ad tantam lucem nemo caecutire posset: Non dabitis mihi, (spero) temeritati, si duo verba, non ampliùs, addidero, de caeterò quieturus. At{que} duo sunt, quae exorandi vos estis (Gravissimi Patres,) per vestrum in Jesum Christum amorem, in Ecclesiam Zelum; per Nivem istam capitis, & Canitiem venerandam. Primùm, ut vos, qui omnium optimè nostis, quid sit oneris, Ecclesiae tantas, & tam varias res, voce, ser∣mone, consilio, ingenio sustinere; illis qui solo pretio apud Patronos idonei sunt, aditum ad Sacerdotium,
quantum in vobis est, intercludatis. Splendor vester facit, ut peccare sine summo Ecclesiae periculo non possitis. Illud igitur, quod ad famam vestram, salu∣tom{que} communem pertinet, prospicite: Alienis peccatis nolite vos communicare: Exuite potiùs ad tempus Hu∣manitatem vestram: Vestram in literis commendatitijs fidem potiorem hebere, quàm hominum voluntatem. Durescite (quod dixit iste Faber) Durescite. Utinam omnes hìc Durescant, quum Ovis Lupo,Apud O. l. ū; ll g. misellovè animalculo est committenda. Vni{que} Honorio illud ver∣tatur vitio, Quod literis vel non anteà Lectis (ut accêpimus) subscriberet. Alterum, ut vos, qui non modò Custodias, sed la∣terum oppositus Christo Polliciti estis, Opus ejus pro virili vestrâ urgeatis, & quantò authoritate, tantò & assiduitate alios omnes superatis. Nolite à me com∣moneri (Patres) Quàm vobis non dignum fuerit, ex∣tremum vitae actum negligere: Quam vestrâ nitatur Ecclesia & fide, & praesidio; Divinitùs docti, omni studio, fide, authoritate pugnate: Et Veritatis Propug∣natores & erroris Expugnatores, Laborantem Ecclesiam recreate: Tetrum spirantes halitum, alijs{que} virus pro∣pinantes eliminate. Proximè jam abest, cum ab om∣ni miseriâ liberandi sitis, & Rude Donandi. Quem incepistis cursum, si fieri potest, expedite: Iter acce∣lerate; Coronam (quae vos propediem manet) avi∣di arripite: Instate, increpate, vigilate,Juellus. (quod que in votis habuit Ille Summus) Inter Concionandum ani∣mam exbalate. O verè sapientem illum, qui animas lucratus fuerit! Prov. 11. Ter Beatos vos, quos ita fa∣cientes Dominus offenderit.
§. 16. Supersunt (Fratres mei) qui animarum curam unâ susceperunt. Liceat vos (Charissimi Symmystae) vel Domini affari verbis. —Christum Amatis vos! Pas∣cite Oves, Vestras dicam? Imo & Christi, & vestras. A vestro pendent ore: A vobis optima quae{que} sibi pollicentur: Vestrae Oves sunt, agni vestri, vestri Fi∣lioli. Vos quod bono & Pastore & Parente dignum est, facite: Hoc est, omni modo Pascite. Veniat vo∣bis in mentem Paulinum illud ad Timotheum.2. Tim. 4.2. &c. —Prae∣dica Sermonem: Jnsta tempestivè, intempestivè, ar∣gue, objurga, exhortare, cum omni lenitate & doctrinâ. Quam ponderosa sunt omnia? —(Praedica.) neque è scriptis modò Recita. (Frigidum enim est istorum commentum, quibus, ut ita omnem sibi fucum, in suo turpifsimo otio indulgeant) verbum legere perinde est, at{que} Praedicare. Quod si; Quid Vociferandi Prophe∣tis unquam causae fuerit, aut in Mutos Canes inve∣hendi? Ecquis enim, vel in Ecclesiae rebus afflictis∣simis, fuit Sacerdos, qui ad Loquendum mutus? Ad Legendum nullus fuit.Act. 15. Annòn Passim Synagogarum Mosen lectitabant? Lectitabant, dubio procul. Sed non explicabant. Hinc Muti audiunt Canes, stipites, Fungi. Et quid aliud (istorum conscientias Conve∣nio) vult illud Pauli  Quid ista ibi loci Ful∣mina? Quid illa inter verbi Lectionem, & Praedicati∣onem apud Paulum distinctio? Quid denique causae suberat, cur Patres vel suam ita causarentur ignoran∣tiam, vel publicum adeò reformidarent judicium, vel tantos exantlarent labores, si inter Hoc & Illud non ita multum interfuisset? Sed in re minùs obscurâ quid
pluribus? Est quidem Lectio quoddam praedicandi Genus: Sed non omne, sed non Summum, quod Pa∣stori incumbit, Hinc Pauli—Praedica. Et (Sermo∣nem) quidem Praedica:  Divinum illum Ser∣monem, Animae Pabulum, Dei Potentiam, Sanum il∣lum & salutarem Sermonem quovis gladio ancipiti pe∣netrantiorem: Illum, Illum Sermonem Praedicate: Ad Illius normam omnia exigite. Ludicra autem ista, quae in fumos abeunt, arvum{que} Domini tanquam Sa∣lis sementis emaciant mittire, ne claudicet auditorum cog∣nitio, ut Augustinus. Illud{que} vobis vertatur vitio, quod olim Arrianis. —Reliquerunt Apostolum; Se∣quuntur Aristotelem. Hinc Pauli—Praedica Sermonem Dei & Dei quidem tanquam Dei (ut loquitur Petrus) cum omni studio, Zelo, Pietate, Puritate:Vid. Amb. in Ps. 118. Sect. 22. Non ut populi gratiam aucupemur, sed ut plurimos pietatis cultores contrahamus: —Ovium Pastum potiùs, quàm hominum Fastum (ut scitè Bernardus) attendentes. Hinc Paulus—Jnsta tempestivè, intempestivè. Vo∣lentibus Tempestivè Nolentibus Intempestivè, dic importunus (inquit Augustinus) Tu vis errare,De Pastor. cap. 7. Tu vis perire, Ego nolo. Neque enim par est, ut in i∣stis frigidè versemur, Semelvè quotannis, cum sum∣mo Pontifice in Sanctuarium ingrediamur, ne non sine sanguine ingrediamur. In specula semper (quoad e∣jus fieri potest) commorandum est, ne hostis ad quamlibet opportunitatem paratus gregem ex insidijs adoriatur. Quòd si cum istis res nobis fuerit, quibus nihil me∣diocre objici poterit; istorum scelera gloriae nostrae se∣getem reputemus: quóque est eorum iniquitas armatior & testatior, eò alacriori animo, zelo{que} ardentiori vim ejus omnem impetum{que} retardemus. Et ut nihil fru∣ctus
indè imprasentiarum ceperimus, sed quod pijs sa∣luti, illud ijs irritationi verterit; maneamus tamèn nos in instituto: Arguamus, exhortemur; (ut suadit Paulus) Chrysostomi haùd immemores,Chrys. H∣de Laz. 1. Si Decimus quis{que}, Si Vnus persuas us fuerit, ad consolationem abundè sufficit. Imò etiamsì nullus fuerit; manent tamen sempèraqua∣rum venae, scaturiant fontes, fluant nihil seciùs amnes. Quod nostrum est agamus gnavitèr: Et Aethiopem qui lavat, Operam quidèm perdit: Mercedem autèm non perdit. Veniet aliquandò tempus, Illucescet ille dies, ubì fructum apud Dominum reopsitum laboris nostri uberrimum feremus. Istius diei nobis in memoriam veniat, at{que} ità in omnem parati simus fortunam, ut nòn modò dolor is stimulos, sed & fortunae fulmina (ut ha∣bet ille) perferamus. §. 17. Cùmque innocentiae leges sibi indicat, qui ab altero vitae rationem reposeit, melius{que} sit (Si Antiquitati fides adhibeatur) tacere, quàm non Docere vitâ & operibus: Et verbo, & Vitâ pascamus omnes: exempla (nostra maximè) non ibi consistunt (ut prudentèr ille) ubi caeperunt. Occidunt malè vivendo Pastores mali, (inquit Augustinus) quorum omnis vita ità in  consistit,Nazianz. ut ubi semèl a recto erratum est, in praeceps ruatur. Ità igitùr omnes vitae nostrae rationes instituamus, ut nihil non ab omni accusatione remotum, nihil non ex gravissimi viri disciplinâ unquàm moliamur. Summa sit illud Pauli (ne sim verbosior in istis.) —Esto (inquit ille) Exemplar fidelibus, in Sermone, & in Conversatione, & in Charitate, & in Fide, & in Puritate. Sedulus esto in Lectione, & in Oratione, & in Doctrinâ: Hoc est. Et
Verbo, & Exemplo Pasce. Ità suo Timotheo Paulus: Ità Petro Christus: Ità Ego Vobis. Magna res agitur: Dei Honos; Ecclesiae Salus; Aeternae vitae vèl Accessio, vèl Iactura. Quid possetis in Salute gregis potiùs, quàm in exitio, ostendite. Contemplamini animo, quod non po∣testis oculis, Ultrices illas Flammas, Horrendailla Judicia, ad quae desudant Coeli, & contremiscit Terra, quae omnia istos manent, qui nihil vèl de suâ, vèl de com∣muni salute cogitant. Cogitate quò tandèm miseriae perventurus sit ille, qui multa vi sanguinis foedatus, se in Dei conspectum sit aliquandò daturus. Miserum illum! Ubi enitetur! Quò confugiet! Quid illo futurum erit! Quod non ille malum leve (quandò serò erit) prae Ju∣dicis irâ, habebit! Qoem Mutum, exanimatum, & vìx vívum relictura sit Christi vox tremenda—Redde ra∣tionem Villicationis tuae: Supplicij magnitudo a tanto vos scelere summoveat; moveat vestra in Deum Pietas, in Greges Charitas: moveat ipsius rei aequitas, & necessitas. Subeat vobis subindè in mentem Singularis Christi Amor, qui omnia vestri causâ voluit. Nihil habuit ille vestrâ vestrum{que} salute antiquiùs, nihil priùs. Nihil ille laboris, sudoris, supplicij recusavit, quo vestram ve∣strum{que} salutem promoveret. Eundem quaeso induite animum: ijsdem insistire vestigijs: eosque omni colite curâ, quos suo dignatus est ille sanguine. Dominum vestrum non potestis, (Fratres,) vel studio vincere, vèl amore antevertere. Gregem Amatis? Amavit, ille. Sudatis? sudavit ille. Animam ponitis? Po∣suit ille. Nullam habuit ille sui rationem, prae vestri studio. Illum si amare pigebat, salt èm redamare non pigeat. Nimìs durus animus,Vid Aug. de Catechis. eudib. nec non in Ps. 8. qui dilectionem si nolebat impen∣dere, nolit & rependere. Venit ille (quod idem aliàs habet Augustinus) Pati; Venit ille Mori; Venit ille
sputis liniri; Venit ille spinis Coronari; venit oppro∣bria audire; venit ligno configi. Omnia ille pro vobis: vos nihil pro illo; Sed pro vobis: Cogitate qui sitis; quo loco; quid responsuri aliquandò sitis Gregibus ve∣stris, si nihil illis, praeter ultimam calamitatem, relia∣quatis. Quid judici vestro, qui fidos vos duxit, & in ministerio constituit; quid animabus vestris, quas tantae negligentiae conscientia olim fodicabit. Et per ve∣stram ipsorum salutem; per omnes & in Christum, & in Oves, Religiones & amicitias: Si quid vobis salus curae sit, si pax, si fides, si gloria; Gregi laboranti con∣sulite. Duces estis; Christo contra Satanam, ejus{que} Primogenitum Anti-Christum militate, Nutrices estis: Lac potum date, quae{que} sunt ad quotidianum demen∣sum minutatim promite. Angelorum deni{que} induistis vobis nomen: induite & naturam. Ne sit (quod dixit non nemo)Ex. 23.4, 5. —Nomen inane, Crimen immane. Audite oves vestras. Etiam Phocae praebent mammas; Etiam Osori debetur eibus; Etiam osoris jumento misericor∣dia: Et nos solae Oves Rationales, quae Domino tan∣to stitimus sanguine, dignae sumus habitae, quae fame pereamus!Veluriam habet Di∣onysius. Volumniā Plutar∣chus. Audite Matrem vestram, Christi spon∣sam, ad vestra genua provolutam, omni{que} splendore exutam, tanquamillam Coriolani: (sive Veturiam, si∣ve Volumniam)—En inter Belluas quaedam benefi∣ciorum reciprocatio: Et ego unailla mater, quae nihil apud meos vel Precio, vel Prece, vel Authoritate possim. Eóne ego Primogenitos meos Concêpi, conceptos fovi, fo∣tos peperi, partos enutrivi, enutritos instruxi, & instru∣ctos fratribus praefeci, ut mutuis ictibus aliquando oc∣cumberent? Audite Patrem vestrum —Ego vobis, vestris{que} filijs de victu & vestitu prospexi, corvis{que} priùs pascendi partes mandavi, quàm quae ad victum un∣quam
desiderarentur: Et vos filios meos (Sum∣mae mihi curae cordique) non Pascetis?1. Reg. 1. Ps.46. Audite Do∣minum vestrum —En ego vobis (aliquando Lupis) sanguinem non potui non impendere meum: Vos verò ovibus meis vestrisque debitam curam denega∣bitis? Quid praestolamur (Fratres?) Clamant Greges nostri —Si Amatis, Pascite. Clamat Sponsa Christi, —Si Amatis, Pascite. Clamat Aeternus Deus, Christus{que} noster—Si amatis Fratres vestros, si nomen meum, si animas vestras, Pascite. Nolite tantae & Gregis, & Matris, & Patris, & Salvatoris voluntari deesse: Sed omni fide, officio, misericordiâ adducti, ita Pascite, ita vivite (Academici) Ita agite, ut nullo vel malo vel modo contaminetur gaudium vestrum. Sed eò foeli∣citatis olim aspiretis, laboribus perfuncti, quae nullis communibus temporibus sit interpellanda. At{que} haec de Praecepto. Quae in alteram partem meditata & dicenda habui non ita pauca, perpetuo po∣tiùs involvam silentio, quàm vobis molestiam ulteriùs creavero. Faxit Deus, ut ità cum Petro Pascamus Patiamur{que} ut ita in nostra omnes incumbamus officia, ut cum Coelo terras aliquando commutemus, & tanquam stellae fulgeamus, per Christum Jesum Dominum no∣strum; Cui cum Patre benignissimo, Spiritu sanctis∣simo, Deo beatissimo sit omnis Honor, & Gloria in Secula. Amen. FINIS. Errata. Pag 2. lin. 30 lege duo. p. 5. l. 18. nobis, in mar. l 7 cum. P. 6. l. 19. sectanti. p 8. l. 2 proprium l. 17. Pastor es.l. 28. nostrum. l. 29. attendebant. p. 9. l. 12. inultam. p. 12. l. 11. venereis. l. 19. vestram. p. 14. l. 9. pascat. p. 19. l. 7. habete. l. 10. superis. p 22. l. 3. suadet. l. 11.1 epositum. in Epist. lege. ORNATISSIMO VIRO.
