I428 18367728 107371
A PRLAMATION OF THE General Convention of Ireland, For the Proclaiming his SACRED ROYAL MAJESTY King CHARLES the Second. WHereas by the death of Our late Soveraign Lord King CHARLES, of Blessed Memory, the Imperial Crowns of England, Scotland, France, and reland did then immediately, sole∣ly and rightfully by inherent Birth-right, and lawfull and undoubted Succession, descend and come to his Most Excel∣lent Majestie, Charles the Second, as being Lineally, Iust∣ly, and Lawfully next Heir of the Blood-Royal of these Realms; and although it can no way be doubted, but that his Majesties Right and Title to his Crowns and King∣doms, was, and is every way compleated by the Death of his most Royal Father of Glorious Memory, without the Ceremony of Solemnity of a Proclamation: Yet seeing Proclamations in such Cases have been alwayes used, to the end all good Subjects might upon such occasions testi∣fie their Duty and Respect; And considering that the armed Violence, and other Ca∣lamities of many Years last past, have hitherto deprived us of any such Opportunity, wherein We might Expresse Our Loyalty and Allegiance to his Majestie: We there∣fore the General Convention of Ireland, together with the Lords Commissioners for Government and Management of the affairs in Ireland, and the Commissioners for Government of the Army, and divers of the Nobility of this Kingdom now present, and the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs and Commons of the City of Dublin, and the Officers and Souldiers of the Army in and about the said City, and other Freemen of this Kingdom now present, do according unto our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully and unanimously acknowledge, publish, declare and Proclaim, That the said high and mighty Prince Charles the Second, immediately from and after the death of his said Royal Father of happy Memory, was and is become our only, Lawfull, Li∣neal, and Rightfull liege Lord, CHARLES by the Grace of God the most Potent, Mighty and Vndoubted King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To whom We do acknowledge all Faith and constant Obedience with all hearty and humble Affections, and to whom We do most faithfully and humbly Sub∣mit and Oblige Our selves, Our heirs and posterities for Ever: Beseeching God by whom Kings do reign to blesse his Royal Majesty with long and happy years to Reign over us. J. Barry Chairman. God Save the King. May the 14, 1660. ORdered by the General Convention of Ireland, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and Published. MA. BARRY Clerk of the General Convention of IRELAND. Dublin Printed by William Bladen, and Re-printed at London by Daniel Pakeman at the Rainbow
