i738 16140825 104819
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms BY THE Lord Lieutenant. AND COUNCIL. ORMONDE. WHereas by Our Proclamation, bearing date the Sixteenth day of October last, All Titu∣lar Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars General, Abbots, and other Dignitaries of the Church of Rome, and all others exerci∣sing Ecclesiastical Iurisdiction, or who have exercised any Ecclesiastical Iurisdi∣ction in this Kingdom by any Authority de∣rived from the Pope or See of Rome; and al∣so all Iesuits and other Regular Priests were required by or before the Twentieth day of November then next ensuing to depart out of this Kingdom of Ireland; And We did thereby also charge and command all Mayors, Soveraigns, Bayliffs, Portreeffs, and all o∣ther Chief Magistrates & Officers of the several and respective Coun∣ties and Towns Corporate of this Kingdom, and all and every the Iustices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Constables, and all others his Ma∣jesties good and loyal subjects, That they and every of them from & immediately after the said Twentieth day of November next, do make strict and diligent search and enquiry after all such Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, and other persons thereby required to depart out of this Realm, and to apprehend them and commit them and eve∣ry
of them into safe custody, and to certifie Vs thereof with all conve∣nient speed. And We being informed, That notwithstanding our said Procla∣mation, several of the said Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops. & other persons thereby required to depart out of this Realm, have in contempt of our said Proclamation, neglected to transport themselves beyond the Seas, and do still continue concealed in several parts of this Realm. We have thought fit hereby to publish and declare, That in case any person or persons shall at any time hereafter apprehend and bring before any Chief Magistrate of any City or Town Corporate, or be∣fore any Sheriff or Iustice of Peace of any County in this Realm, a∣ny such Titular Popish Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar General, Abbot, Dignitary, or other person exercising or who hath exercised Ecclesia∣stical Iurisdiction in this Kingdom by any Authority derived from the Pope or See of Rome, or any Iesuit or other Regular priest, upon producing a Certificate from the Chief Magistrate, Sheriff or Iu∣stice of peace before whom such person shall be brought, and put in safe custody, shall receive the Reward following (that is to say) For eve∣ry such Titular Archbishop or Bishop, and for every such Iesuit the sum of Ten pounds, & for every other such person as by the aforesaid Proclamation was commanded to depart out of this Kingdome, the sum of Five pounds, which said several sums upon sending up such Certificates to Vs, We shall take care shall be paid to the several per∣sons producing the same, by the Farmers of His Majesties Revenue, or their Officers in the several Counties of this Kingdom, where the said persons do respectively reside. Provided that nothing herein con∣tained, shall be construed to extend to any of the aforesaid persons, whose departure out of this Kingdom, by reason of their age or sick∣ness, or for other reasons hath been by any Order of this Board dis∣pensed with. Given at the Council-Chamberin Dublin the 26. day of March1679. Mich: Armach: C. Jo: Dublin. Arran, Blesinton. Granard. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. Ca. Dillon. Char: Meredith. Jo: Davys. Ol: St George. Geo: Rawdon. Ric: Gethin. Theo: Jones. Wm Flower. Will: Hill. GOD Save the KING. Dublin Printed by Benjamin Tooke, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majestie; And are to be sold by Mary Crook at his Majesties Printing-house in kinner-row. 1679.
