i743 16140933 104820
C DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL. OSSORY. WHEREAS by Proclamation, bearing date the Nineteenth day of June last, it was declared and appointed, That the First Payment of the Years Rent, payable by the Act of Explanati∣on, out of all the Lands in this Kingdom, which were returned by the Civil Survey to be∣ong to any Irish Papist, Popish Recusant, or Roman Catholick, and out of all other the Lands wherein any Adventurer or Souldier, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, hath any be∣nefit of Settlement or Confirmation by vertue of the said Act, should be made on or before the First day of August then next ensuing, according to the Valuation which is made of the several Lands liable to the said payment by His Majesties Commis∣sioners, appointed for ascertaining the said Years Rent, now remaining in the hands of Matthew Barry Esq Secretary to the said Commissioners. And whereas, notwithstanding the favour by the said Proclamation, extended to the several persons concerned in the payment of the said Years Rent (the first payment whereof, by the Act of Explanation, was appointed to have been made on the First day of February, in the Year, One thousand six hunded sixty five) yet divers persons liable to the payment of the said Years Rent, have failed in making their first payment thereof, according to the said Proclama∣tion. We therefore for the more speedy levying thereof, have thought fit here∣by to require His Majesties Commissioners, appointed for ascertaining the said Years Rent, to return a Duplicate of the Books of Valuation made by them, into His Majesties Court of Exchequer, on the tenth day of Novem∣ber next ensuing, there to remain on Record, to the end process may issue thereupon out of the said Court, according to the said Act, against such per∣sons as shall make default in their said First payment: And hereof we have thought fit by this Our Proclamation, to give publick notice, to the end that all persons concerned, who are desirous to be freed from the process of the said Court of Exchequer, may before the Return of the said Duplicates into the said Court, compleat the First payment of the said Years Rent due from them, and obtain Acquittances for the same, from the persons by the said Act appointed for the Receipt thereof. Given at the Council-Chamber in Dublin the 14th day of September. 1668. Mich. Dublin. Canc. Edw. Smythe. A. Ranelaugh. G. Carteret. Paul Davis. GOD Save the KING. DUBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie, and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castle-street. 1668.
