i976 16170121 104964
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL, ORMONDE. WHereas We are informed, That the num∣ber of Tories and Robbers in the Pro∣vince of Vlster, and some other Parts of this Kingdom is much increased, not∣withstanding many Proclamations from this Board for apprehending of divers Tories, and they are of late grown much more bloody than formerly they have been, so that several Robberies, Burglaries and Murthers are daily committed by them, to the great damage of many of his Majesties good Subjects, and terrour of others, and yet few of the said Offenders have been apprehended, or brought unto Iustice for their said offences, which hath been chiefly occasioned (as We are informed) by means of divers of the Inhabi∣tants of the Countrey who have complied with such malefactors, either by declining to resist, or pursue them, or by other of their Re∣lations and Kindred who have concealed, and secretly relieved and succoured them, or by some Popish Priests, who have wholly negle∣cted to make discoveries of them to the next Magistrates or Officers in the respective Counties, Garrisons, and Parishes whither they resorted, which (as we are credibly informed) the Popish pretended Parish-priests, where there are any, might very easily have done, if
they had minded, or intended the peace and quiet of the respective Pa∣rishes and places wherein they live, or yielded that due obedience un∣to his Majesties Laws which in duty they ought. Wherefore we concieve it necessary in a Case of so extraordinary a nature as this is, wherein the lives and fortunes of many his Maje∣sties good Subjects are so nearly concerned, and the peace and quiet of the Countrey so much disturbed, to make use of extraordinary means to prevent the further growth of so great a mischief. And therefore We do hereby think fit, and accordingly order, that the Kindred and nearest relations (that is to say) the wives, fathers, mothers, brothers, and sons of such persons as are known Tories, and are out upon their keeping, or shall at any time hereafter become Tories, and go out upon their keeping in any the Counties of this Kingdom be forthwith seized upon, and committed to close prison in the Common Goal of such County where they do reside, or shall be ap∣prehended, there to remain until such Tory or person, who is out up∣on his keeping, and to whom they are so related shall be either killed or taken so as to be brought to Iustice, and also that where there is any Popish pretended Parish-priest of any place wherein any Robbery, Burglary or murther shall be hereafter committed by any such To∣ries or persons who are out upon their keeping, such Popish-priest shall be also seized upon and committed to close prison in the common Goal of such County wherein such parish doth lye, and shall be from thence transported beyond the Seas, unless within Fourteen dayes after such Robbery, Burglary or murther, the persons who are guil∣ty thereof shall be either killed or taken, or such discovery made with∣in that time, as that such Offenders may be thereupon apprehended and brought unto Iustice. And We do hereby require the several Sheriffs and Iustices of Peace of the respective Counties in this Kingdom, to take care that these Our Commands be strictly and duly executed, and also that the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and the Proclamations for∣merly issued from this Board concerning the keeping of Watches, and raising the Hue and Cry be duly executed and performed. And all Of∣ficers and Souldiers of His Majesties Army, and of the Militia in this Kingdom, and all other His Majesties Officers, and other subjects whatsoever are hereby also required to use their utmost endeavours for the taking and apprehending all such Tories & Robbers, as they will answer the contrary at their utmost peril Given at the Council-Chamberin Dublin the 26. day of March1679. Mich: Armach: C. Jo: Dublin. Blesinton. Granard. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. Char. Meredith▪ Jo: Davys, Ol▪ St. George. Geo: Rawden. Ric: Gethin. Theo: Jones, Wm: Flower, Will: Hill. GOD Save the KING. Dublin Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to King's most Excellent Maje∣sty; And are to be sod by Mary Crook at his Majesties Printing-house in Skinner-row 1679.
