j1180 99825902 30293
The Judgment of God shewed upon one John Faustus Doctor in Divinity. Tune Fortune my Foe. ALL Christian men give ear a while to me; How I am plung'd in pain but cannot dye, I liv'd a life the like did none before, Forsaking Christ, and I am damn'd therefore. At Wittenburge a Town in Germany, There was I born and bred of good degrée, Of honest Stock which afterwards I shm'd, Accurst therefore for Faustus was I nam'd. In learning loe my Uncle brought up me, And made me Doctor in Divinity: And when he dy'd he left me all his wealth. Whose cursed Gold did hinder my Souls health. Then did I shun the holy Bible book, Nor on Gods word would ever after look, But studied accursed Conjuration, Which was the cause of my utter damnation. The Devil in Fryars wéeds appear'd to me, And streight to my request he did agrée, That I might have all things at my desire, I gave him soul and body for his hire. Twice did I make my tender flesh to bléed, Twice with my blood I wrote the Devil a deed, Twice wretchedly I Soul and Body sold, To live in peace and do what things I would. For four & twenty years this Bond was made, And at the length my soul was truly paid, Time ran away and yet I never thought, How dear my soul our Savour Christ had bought. Would I had first been made a beast by kind, Then had not I so vainly set up mind; Or would when reason first began to bloom, Some darksome Den had been my deadly tomb. Woe to the day of my Nativity, Give to the time that once did foster me, And woe unto the hand that seald the bill, Woe to my self the cause of all my ill. THe time I past away with much delight 'Mongst princes, peers, & many a worthy Kt. I wrought such wonders by my magick skill That all the world may talk of Faustus still. The Devil he carried me up into the Sky, Where I did see how all the world did lye I went about the world in eight days space, And then return'd unto my Native place. That pleasure I did with to please my mind, He did perform as Bond and Seel did binde The secrets of the stars and planets told, Of earth and sea, with wonders manifold. When four and twenty years was almost run, I thought of all things that was past and done, How that the Devil would come & claim his right And carry mé to everlasting night. They all to late I curst my Wicked Deed. The Deed whereof doth, make my heart to bleed, All days and hours I mourned wondrous sore, Renting me o all things done before, I then did wish both Sun and Moon to stay All times and s eve to decay Then had my time ne'r come to dated end, Nor soul and body down to Hell descend. At last when I had but one hour to come, I turn'd my glass for my last hour to run, And call'd in learned men to comfort me, But faith was gone and none could comfort me By twelve a Clock my glass was almost out My grieved conscience then began to doubt, I wisht the Students stay in chamber by, But as they staid they heard a deadful cry. Then presently they came into the Hall, Whereas my brains was cast against the wall, Both arms and legs in pieces torn they see, My bowels gone is was an end of me. You Coniurors and damnes VVitches all, Example take by my unhappy fall: Give not your Souls and Bodies unto Hell, See that the smallest hair you do not sell. But hope that Christ his Kingdom you may gain VVhere you shall never fear such mortal pain: Forsake the Devil and all his crafty ways, Imbrace true Faith that never more decays. Printed for A. M. W. O. and Tho. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-Lane,
