J358 99827821 32244
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT By the King, A PROCLAMATION For the Speedy Calling of a PARLIAMENT. JAMES R. WE have thought fit, as the Best and most Proper means to Establish a Lasting Peace in this Our Kingdom, to Call a Parliament, and have therefore Ordered Our Chan∣cellor to cause Writs to be Issued forth for Summoning a Parliament to Meet at Westminster, upon the Fifteenth Day of January next ensuing the Date of this Our Royal Proclamation. And that nothing may be wanting on Our part towards the Freedom of Elections, as We have already Restored all Cities, Towns-Corporate, and Boroughs throughout Our Kingdom, to their Ancient Charters, Rights and Priviledges; So We Command and Require all Persons whatsoever, That they pre∣sume not by Menace, or any other undue Means, to Influence Elections, or Procure the Vote of any Elector. And We do also strictly Require and Command all She∣riffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Officers to whom the Execution or Return of any Writ, Summons, Warrant or Precept for Members to the Ensuing Par∣liament shall belong, That they Cause such Writ, Summons, Warrant and Pre∣cept, to be duly Published and Executed, and Returns thereupon to be fairly made according to the true Merits of such Elections. And for the Security of all Per∣sons both in their Elections and Service in Parliament, We do hereby Publish and Declare, That all Our Subjects shall have free Liberty to Elect, and all Our Peers, and such as shall be Elected Members of Our House of Commons; shall have full Liberty and Freedom to Serve and Sit in Parliament, notwithstanding they have taken up Arms, or committed any Act of Hostility, or been any way Aiding or Assisting therein. And for the better Assurance hereof, We have Graciously Di∣rected a General Pardon to all Our Subjects to be forthwith prepared to Pass Our Great Seal. And for the Reconciling all Publick Breaches, and Obliterating the very Memory of all past Miscarriages, We do hereby Exhort, and kindly Admonish all Our Subjects, to dispose themselves to Elect such Persons for their Representatives in Parliament, as may not be Byassed by Prejudice or Passion, but Qualified with Parts, Experience and Prudence proper for this Conjuncture, and agreeable to the Ends and Purposes of this Our Gracious Proclamation. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirtieth day of November. 1688. In the Fourth Year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. 1688.
