J543 13301937 98937
Heaven won by Violence: OR, A TREATISE Upon MAT. 11.12. Compendiously containing very nigh The Whole BODY OF Practical DIVINITY; And shewing VVhat a Sacred Violence is, and how it must be used and offered in Believing, Repenting, and all the Duties of your High Calling. Together with A New and Living Way of Dying, upon Heb. 11.1. added thereunto. By Christopher Jelinger: And Published, with the Dedications thereof, by some Christian Friends. London, Printed in the Year, 1665.
To the Right Worshipful ANTHONY REEVE▪ The Mayor, And his Brethren The MAGISTRATES, And to all the Inhabitants of the populous Town of TOTNES; Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from our Lord & Saviour Jesus Christ. I Have been much sollicited, & ear∣nestly written to, to communicate these my Labours; because
when I preached them first at your Town, it pleased God of his infinite Mercy, thereby to convert a poor soul then present, and one more elsewhere, from Dark∣ness to Light, and from the power of Satan to God; which hath occasioned the com∣ing forth of this Treatise, unto the publick view of the VVorld, by a Friend, whose desire it was to publish the same: For who can tell whe∣ther it may not be the Bene∣placit, and will of God, that more souls be thereby won
to God? The subject mat∣ter thereof, you see, is as apt as any, by the good blessing of God, to subject souls to the mighty Power of that VVord which here I hold forth, and press, to make you press toward the Mark, for the Price of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus, to strive that you may enter in∣to the narrow Way, which leads to Life, to offer a Sa∣cred Violence to Heaven, to your selves, nay, to God himself, blessed for ever, to take, to win, to get that great,
that glorious, that spacious Kingdom of Heaven by Force; forcing your selves to leave the VVorld, to a∣bandon Sin, to fight against Satan, and to lay hold on eternal Life. O Sirs, here is work for all your Town, for all this Country, for all England, for all your dayes. The Ancient of dayes so diffuse his holy Spirit into your hearts, that you may all become men of another spirit, labouring for Heaven: Heaven is worth
the striving, the strugling, the pains-taking, which in this Treatise is required, that you may be saved. Towns∣men commonly are more at leisure to listen to such a dis∣course as this is, because they are not under such a pressure of worldly work, as those are which mansion in the Country; & therefore I hope you wil afford some of your spare hours, to read that Lecture, which here is read from so precious a Scripture; and that you will not put off
these tenders of my Love, and such a Theam as this is; like that unwise King of Macedon, who, when one tendred unto him, a Treatise tending to Immortality, said, , that is, I am not at leisure. I beseech you, Sirs, by the Mercies of God, in the Bow∣els of Christ Jesus, that you will be serious once, and set your selves in earnest to that great VVork which is here proposed, working out your Salvation with fear & trem∣bling;
for your time runs out apace in the Glass of time: and I have this confi∣dence in you all, (2 Cor. 2.3.) that you would not willing∣ly have the silver Cords of your lives broken, before your hearts, with sorrow for sin, be broken; nor would depart this evil world, before ye depart from sin, and have left the vanities of the world, and gotten a sound assurance of an other better world; nor yet cease to be retainers to the Sun created, before ye
be retainers to the Sun of Righteousness; nor take your farewel of the Elements, be∣fore you have bid farewel to this present life's Allure∣ments: And therefore why do ye linger? why do ye not break away from Satan by force? why do ye not once begin to have a low and ab∣ject esteem of this common way of existence, this retain∣ing to the Elements, and be∣come the Servants of Holi∣ness? why do ye not strive to be the Children of Light,
before ye cease to be main∣tained by the usury of light? Usura Lucis. why do ye not set all things apart, to have your part in that holy taking of that great & glori∣ous Kingdom of Heaven by Violence? I for my part, when I take a full veiw and circle of my self, do con∣ceive, that without this I am nothing, my life nothing, my performing of duties no∣thing. Do you conceive so too, and then be doing as wel as reading the things in this
Book contained. Nay, my Beloved, do this especially; before ever you take this Treatise in hand to peruse it, resolve to be Assaulters, ur∣gers, Pressers, Forcers of your selves, and of Heaven by it: but withal, beg and pray before you read one line, & that upon your ben∣ded knees, seriously and ar∣dently, that the great God of Heaven himself, will write these lines in your hearts, which I have written in this Book, that you may do them.
O that you would hear me in this! For how many Books have been read in vain with∣out this! This, this must make this my labour of love auspicious, your reading prosperous, and your lauda∣ble endeavours salutiferous. But I also my self will pray for you. O my God, bedew there∣sore these silent lines with thy Benediction, so as that this populous Town of T — may consider in this her day the things which belong to her
peace, and tend to immortali∣ty, as they are tendered to it in this Book for all eternity. So prayeth Your most humble Orator to the Throne of Grace, Christopher Jelinger.
ORATIO, SIVE POEMA Authoris , Ad Jesum Christum Regem Coeli ac Terrae Potentissimum, Do∣minum suum Clementissimum. MAgno Nate Deo, Magni Dominator Olympi, Verbum subsistens, et Patris ore potens, Summum Sanctorum, Caput, Illustrissime Re∣gum, Qui Mundum fulcis Numine perpetuo;
Irrecitabiliter manans de Corde Parentis, Quo Mundus sumpsit Principe Principium; Ut Philomela suis attemperat Organa Cannis, Fitque repercusso dulcior aura melo: Sic mea Musa cupit te decantare per Orbem Terrarum totum, Divitiasque tuas: Non me lin{que} ergo, Rex Prestantissime Regnam, Qui praesto es Sanctis, dasque Salutis opem: Sed me sustenta dextrae virtute potenti, Quae fulcit Sanctos angelicosque Viros: Et mihi Dux esto Cortus, Cursumque per auras Dirigito in Caelos, Christe beate, Tuos: Ut, ceu constructura favos apis, omnia linquens Floribus Instrepitans poplite mella rapit,
Sic rapere ipse queam Coelestia mella, beatis Promissa in Coelis, Optime Christe, tuis. Pierides, Christo nune vestras dicite laudes, Qui Sermo est Magni Progeniesque Dei: Christo, Cujus amor suavis mihi Crescit in horas, Dicite, sit semper Gratia Magnatibi; Sit lans excellens, celebris sit fama per Orbem, Atque in perpetuum Gloria summa tibi.
Aliud ejusdem Authoris POEMA Ad Lectores Benivolos Eruditosque. O Fratres Chari, Coelestia quaerite Regna, Sedes, Coelicolumque domos: Suffician Menses, atque irreparabile tempus, Quod male praeterit, sufficiant que dies: Tempus quod vestat Vrbis, vivatur in altis, Cum Christo Coelis, angolicisque locis:
Morbus ubi est nullus, nec egestas obsita pannis, Nec Mors Crudelis, nec violenta fames: Nec scelus infandum, aut languens maerens{que} Senectas, Aut Mars, aut ardens caedis amore furor: Nec tristis Metus, aut nummûm Vesana Cupi∣do, Nec gelido terram rore pruina tegens: Sed fons in Medio quem vinum nomine dicunt Perspicuus, lems, dulcibus uber aquis: Osratres Sancti, huc spectent sitientia Corda, Atque oculi vestri, nocte dieque simul: Huc tendant cunctae vires vestrae, at que labores Ut vobis dentur Gaudia magna Poli: Vi rapitur Coeli Regnum, vi vincimur ipsi, Vi magnâ ipse Deus Vincitur Omnipotens:
Propterea ingenti vi vim depellite, vestras Cogentes animas, ne pereant miserae, Sed potius penetrare que ant in Gaudia Coeli, Quoe Sanctis tribuet Filius ipse Dei.
Heaven won by a Sacred Violence. MAT. 11.12. And from the dayes of John the Baptist un∣til now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffereth Violence; and the Violent take it by force. THe Field which at present I desire to walk in, is this precious Scripture, chosen for the carrying on of the Work of the Lord among you. The Lord of Life put life into the hand∣ling of it, that we may all thrive by it abun∣dantly. So be it. The Coherence. In the words foregoing these, we may see what Care, what Diligence, what Means Divine Providence did adhibit and use, to notifie the Messias of the World, to the
World; by Prophets, first, in old time; and then by the Baptist in Christ's time, whose powerful & piercing Ministry, what effects it produced is here by my Text opened, and most clearly evinced. In a word, these words are a special Commendation, ushered in by a suspen∣sive Conjunction. And, which connects the words here used, with those which are premised, and adds Light to Light, Lustre to Lustre: for in the words preceding these, the Great∣ness of the Baptist is generally only asser∣ted, ver. 10. In these more especially, and that from the Power and Prevalency of his Minstry, which comes next to be view∣ed, in the special Commendation it self, comprized in the words following, From the dayes of John the Baptist, until now, &c. Where, 1. We have Circumstances of Time, and of a Person. 2. A Substance to be considered. First, Circumstances of Time; both from which, and to which. 1. A Circumstance of Time, from which. [From the Dayes] not Years; for it was
not long, nor many years, but some few only; and so but some dayes, as it were, rather than years, during which the Baptist preached; this wicked World not being worthy, nor willing of his Ministry. Brief∣ly thus. From the Beginning of his preaching. For from that time, there was more labouring for Heaven than ever Some did strive to enter Heaven before too, but not so generally, as you may see, Luk. 16.16. before. 2. The Time to which, [Until now]: Not for a little while only, but for some conti∣nuance; even till that very time wherein these words by Christ were spoken. Secondly, A Circumstance of a Person; of [John the Baptist.] 1. Of John, which signifieth Grace; and therefore a name well becoming him that bare it; his Person as well as Preach∣ing being so full of Grace, all favouring of Christ, savouring of Heaven. 2. The Baptist; so called because of his Baptista a , made, facere & lava∣re aqua. See Mark 7.4. dipping in, and baptizing with * water; water being the element, for which was destinated, and about which
was most imployed, this glorious Instru∣ment. Thirdly, A Substance, even the Substance, of the said Baptists great Commendation, which, as you see, is a most rare and singu∣lar setting forth of the most powerful ef∣fect of his Ministry, in these words, The Kingdom of Heaven suffereth Violence, &c. Where we have, 1. A Passion. 2. An Action. I. A Passion; The Kingdom of Heaven suffereth Violence. Where we have again, 1. A Patient. 2. The Passion it self, to consider. 1st. A Patient, The Kingdom of Heaven. 1. The Kingdom. A Kingdom proper∣ly is an Langius, in sua Polyanth. ampliated Com∣monwealth on Earth; but here no such thing is meant, as is earthy, but an heavenly; even a Kingdom, whose King is Verity, whose Law is Equity, whose Life is Felicity, whose Age is Eternity: for so it follows, 2 Of Heaven, or Heavens.
1. Heaven in the singu∣lar, because a Heaven Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 5 p. 157 Aug. Conf. l. 8. c. 1. Lyra in Loc. Musc. in Loc. Rich. Baxter in Saints Rest, p. 19. is meant, which indeed is sin∣gular, it being a body all made of Glory, Glory made of Brightness, Bright∣ness streaming from Hap∣piness, Happiness destina∣ted for Holiness; Holiness, I mean, eleva∣ted to that heighth of Splendor, which is over all the surface of that huge and shi∣ning place, which from every point doth pour forth whole Rivers of purest Light, for the Children of Light. Cyril, Alex. Thes. l. 2. c. 4. Cyril by Heaven, here un∣derstands Regeneration; But I do not see how he can make his Ex∣position hold. 2. Of the Heavens, in the plural, as it is in the . Origi∣nal; where note, that there are two sorts of Heavens, 1. Visible. 2. Invisible. First, Visible; as, 1. The airy Heaven, where the Fowles flee; which therefore are called, Mat.
6.26. . The Fowles of Hea∣ven. 2. The starry Heaven, where the Stars are, Gen. 15.5. a Body which is so clothed with shining Light, so beautified with a Canopy of gayest Colours, so embossed with glorious Jewels, so bespangled with sparkling Diamonds, the Stars I mean, whose Pulchritude is so admirable, Altitude so unmeasurable, Magnitude so unimagni∣ble; and which is properly called, , from , I see, because it is to be seen, and so eminently to be seen. Secondly, Invisible, namely, to us now; I mean that highest Empyraean Heaven, with all its glorious Mansions, and their Dimensions; which also may be called Hea∣vens, as part of the whole; by a Rule which we have in Keckerm. in suo Syst. Log. Lo∣gick, That which is compe∣tent to the Homogeneous whole, is also competent to the Homogeneous parts: So we call the parts of the great Sea, Seas; as the Balthick Sea, the British Sea: and so every arm of that Sea of Hap∣piness, every branch of that endless Bliss, every beam of that Lustre, which is in that
Mass of shining Light, every Mansion in that heavenly Fathers House, and every part of that infinite Glory, which is over all that Kingdom of Glory, is a Heaven: And so Heaven above (here Ut supra. meant or the Empyraean Heaven, is a Kingdom of Heavens. Secondly, The Passion it self, [suffereth Violence.] 1. Suffereth; Strange! can Heaven suffer? I answer, Not properly, but as it were, 2. Violence. And what is that? It is a motion Tho. Aqu. in 5 Met. l. 6. proceeding from an exterior agent, tending to that which by its own nature, it hath no aptitude unto: as here, what Aptitude hath any of us naturally, to win Heaven by force? II. An Action, [And the Violent take it by force.] Where we have, 1. Actors. 2. The Action it self to be viewed. 1. Actors; [And the Violent.] In the . Original, the Violent (so cal∣led in the English) are also inva∣ders, endeavourers, urgers, and such as press hard; as these do, who are bent for
Heaven, pressing and urging with the strongest arguments, and with all their might, and utmost endeavours, the God of Heaven. 2. The Action it self, [Take it by force.] 1. Take it.] The word in the Original properly is spoken of wild Beasts, which take their prey; which here is applyed to Men, who take Heaven as a prey, which they pursue till they have it. 2. By Force.] To take a thing by force properly, and commonly, is take it by wrong. Whence in the He∣brew, Force is called by a name, which also signifies wrong and injury; and yet here is no wrong done to any, when Heaven is taken by the Saints forcibly, for it is their proper portion by Adoption, that glorious Habitation; and therefore when they seize on it by might, they do what they do in it, in their own Understand a right derived from Jesus Christ, who hath a dou∣ble right to it. Author vit Bern. l. 1. cap. 12. right, 1 Pet. 1.3. But I desire now after all these Divisions,
and Subdivisions, to come to some Com∣positions, or Conclusions. And, 1. Let this be one. 1. Doct. A powerful right Teaching, and Christ-preaching-Ministry, doth very much advance the winning of Heaven by a sacred Violence. 2. Then take an other. Heaven must be taken by an holy Violence. For the first. I shall raise and resolve about it these two Queries. 1. What such a Ministry is? 2. Why such a Ministry doth so advance the winning of Heaven by an holy Violence? To the first I answer. It is a Ministry which poureth out it self in torrents of affection, lists up its voice like a trumpet, comes to the heart in the demonstration of▪ the Spirit; thunders out the Judgements of God against all that is called flesh, and not spirit, strikes at the very root of every tree which brings not forth fruit to God; labours mightily to desponsate souls to Christ, and there∣fore holds forth none, and nothing so much as Christ.
To the second Query I answer thus, in seven Grounds. 1. Such a Ministry will cry down sin. 2. Will cry up Heaven. 3. Will cry up Zeal. 4. Will take away the Vail which is over all mens faces. 5. Will take away all excuses and vain conceits. 6. Will acquaint men with the absolute necessity of believing. 7. Will inform them of that strictness of living which Christ requireth of all that will enter into Life everlasting. 1. Ground. It will cry down Sin, accor∣ding to that of Isa. 58.1. and Mat. 3.10. as thus; it will tell men, that they which do such things as they do, commit adulte∣ry and whoredom, and all manner of un∣cleanness, and lasciviousness, with greedi∣ness; do lie, steal, pour in strong drink, and will be drunk, and glut themselves with excessive eating, live in usury, in the sin of covetousness, of anger, of envy, of pride; without fear, without remorse, with∣out repentance; are worthy of death, wor∣thy of damnation, and shall never inherit
the Kingdom of God; according to that dreadful Scripture, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Thus such a Ministry cryeth out against all sorts of Sins and Sinners; who when they hear them cry out so, what sins will they not ra∣ther miss, that eternal Life they may not miss? And what evils will they not for∣sake, that Heaven they may take? When a man understands, that either he must lose his life, or his leg, or arm, or right hand, or right eye, though his leg be dear to him, his arm dear, his right hand dear, his right eye dear, yet will he lose any of these dear things, or all, rather than life; because his Chyrurgion tells him, that else he must die: So poor Sinners, when they are told by the Chyrurgions of their souls, that either they must lose their best be∣loved Sins, which are as dear to them as their legs, their arms, their right eyes, right hands, or lose Heaven if they will keep them; they will, with God's blessing, do any thing rather than die; forgoe any sin rather than go to Hell; lose any profit rather than Heaven; Heaven being infi∣nitely, absolutely, indisputably better than both their eyes, both hands, both legs, both
arms; in a word, than all that is near or dear to them in all this worlds circumfe∣rence. 2. Ground. It will cry up Heaven; as the Baptist came crying, and saying, Re∣pent; the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat. 3.2. and as Christ himself came preaching, and saying in my Text, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence; and Rev. 21.17. which when poor souls hear, how they will be startled with Gods Bles∣sing; how they will come, as those, Mat. 3.6. confessing their sins, and acknowledging their former of citances and neglectings of Life and Salvation, and being ready to do any thing to do well hereafter, and to be saved, as those, Luke 3.12. Beloved, if this were a Sea-town, and a Vessel should arrive here from beyond the Seas, and a Cryer should be sent up and down to cry, That if any will buy, & take estates worth thousands, in a goodly Coun∣try, for a small matter, yea for nothing up∣on the matter, he may now be carried over in that Vessel, and buy, and take as much Land as he will, and as cheap as he can de∣sire; O! how would those of your Town,
who have but little or no estates, and are in want, and have but little or no money, with both hands imbrace such an opportu∣nity, & take such a proffer and advantage, and embark themselves to be gone, and to take such estates in so goodly a Country, and to inhabit such stately Seats? This now is the case of poor souls, we Ministers ar∣rive with our Vessels, I should say our Gos∣pel-preaching, which we carry in earthen∣vessels, at your Towns, at your Parishes; at your Temples we turn Cryers, being for that end sent, Isa. 58.1. and bid to cry; and cry up and down in your Towns and solemn Assemblies, Isa. 55.1. Ho, if any man will buy cheap, and take Heaven cheap, or an estate in Heaven, worth not only thousands, but whole worlds, and desires to have a goodly seat indeed, let him come with us, and saile with us, and go, and take Heaven, and take it freely; or thus (as I alleadged the words above) Let him that is athirst, come; and whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely: and therefore how may we suppose that poor needy souls, and such as have no money, that is, nothing of their own to stand upon, Isa.
55.1, 2. and have any desires to be saved, and to be so well seated and provided for, will, by God's blessing, going with our preaching, strive and stir, and use all means possible, to purchase such an estate, and such a stately seat, at so cheap and easie a rate, going with us, and going away from all that they have, and from whatsoever is near and dear to them, to be so near to God. 3. Ground. It cries up Zeal; saying, as it is written, Enter ye at the strait Gate; for wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way that leads to Destruction; and many there be which go in thereat: because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads to Life; and few there be that find it, Mat. 7.13, 14. And, so run, that you may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. and, be zealous and repent, Rev. 3.19. which when it is earnestly & powerfully preached and pressed upon a people, and sounds into their ears, so awakeneth their slumbering Consciences, as that they cannot sleep, as they were wont in their Pues, nor be qui∣et, but must needs stir, and needs look about, and begin (with God's blessing) to take the same course that Saints take, that
they may take Heaven; it being with them then, as it was with those dead dry bones in Ezekiel, for as there, when the Prophet prophesied, There was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone, ver. 7. So here, when God's Mi∣nisters prophesie, and preach with power, there usually will be a noise; whereas be∣fore all was quiet, one crying one thing, another another, and behold a shaking; for such Ministers make Drunkards, and Usu∣rers, and unclean persons, and careless ones shake, in their seats; and then bone comes to his bone: my meaning is this, men come together, crying, and saying▪ What shall we do to be saved? as the Jaylor, Acts 16.30. Again, bone comes to his bone, in that those which are out of joynt, and out of order, and out of the Body of Christ, come to be restored, joyned, join∣ted, united with God, with Christ, with Christians, I mean good Christians, that they may be saved: or thus, as when there is a fire in a house, seen, and cryed by night, men will be startled at it, and roused, and raised; so when the Fire of Zeal is kind∣led in God's House, and cryed, and seen
by such as were asleep, it being night and dark with them, by reason of the darkness which is in them, they must needs be awakened, excited, troubled; like those in Acts 2.37. 4. Ground. It will take away the For all men be∣fore they come to Christ, are vailed; us Rebecca before she came to Isaac. Gen. 24.65. and like the Jews. See 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15, 16. Vail, which is over all mens faces, in that it will make men see what they never saw, by reason of that blindness and ignorance which was in them, opening their eyes through the Knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Je∣sus Christ, Acts 26.18. by the plain and light-bringing Manifestation of the everla∣sting Gospel, preached as it ought to be preached, that all men that hear it, may see clearly what they are, and how it is with them, and especially shewing them the Lord Christ, with these or the like words; Loc, the fairest of all men, Psal: 45.2. or, Be∣hold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29. which when poor sinners hear, and see, O how they are taken with it! O how it works upon their
spirits! O how they begin to long, to love, to desire to be with the Father of spirits! and how they be ravisht with the Beauties of Christ, seeing what had not been shewen and told them so before, and considering what they had not heard so before; as it is written, For that which had not been told them, shall they see; and that which they had not heard, shall they consider, Isa. 52.15. 5. Ground. It takes away all excuses, vain conceits and opinions, which hinder the coming of Christ into their hearts; for some will say, that they cannot yet come to Christ, to be saved by Christ, either by rea∣son of business, or because they are intang∣led with a wife, I mean Mistris Pleasure or Lust; like those, Luke 14.13, 19, 20. And besides these, there are many in ma∣ny places, who have a conceit and opinion, that they are come to Christ already, and do beleive in Christ when they do not, but are deceived by a mist, or black ibi oculus qui per nebulam, aut aquam inspicit, res metitur falso modo, sic animus qui per opinionis nu∣bem. Lips. de Const. l, 1. cap. 5. Cloud of confused knowledge, and mistaken grounds; now this is done away in Christ, by a Christ-Preaching-Ministry,
which brings them to, yea, into Christ, 2 Cor. 3.19. For this Ministry tells them, that no such excuses, pretences, lets, will serve to keep them from Jesus Christ; who is better than Ground, better than Cattel, better than all the profits of all the world, and is infinitely to be preferred before Wives, Sons and Daughters; for he can save us, but they cannot, so that he may better say the words of Elkanah, than any man breathing, or thing existing, Am not I better to thee than Ten Sons, and better than Ten Wives, and better than Ten Li∣vings, nay, better than Ten thousand Worlds, if there were so many. See 1 Sam. 1.8. Again, saith this Ministry, to take down their high Conceits and good Opinions of their present estates and conditions; You are meerly deceived, as those, 2 Tim. 3.13. for you As the Disciples took Christ to be a Spirit; so they con∣trariwise take that evil spirit, and his deceits, to be Christ, Mat. 14.26. take Satans delu∣sions to be Christ, and a temporary or dogmati∣cal faith for saving Faith, having your minds and consciences
defiled, and denying God in your deeds, though you be Professors, and because you are to every good work Reprobates, as those who want that true saving Faith, which is so far above your temporary and dogmatical Faith, as Heaven is above the Earth, Tit. 1.15, 16. Moreover, saith this Ministry to such as think that they are in the state of Salvati∣on, when they are all the while in the state of Hell and Damnation; Be not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adul∣terers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of them∣selves with mankind, nor Theeves, nor ¦tous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor ¦tortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. and such are some of you. And it come to pass, saith this Ministry further (if there be any Wine-bibber in the same place where it is exercised) When be bear∣eth the words of this Curse, that be blesseth himself, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the imagination of my heart; to add Drunkenness to Thirst; The Lord will not spare him, but then the Anger of the Lord, and his jealousie shall smoak against that man, and all the Curses that are written in this
Book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven, and the Lord shall separate him unto evil, Deut. 29.19, 2021. Now Drunkards, saith this Ministry, and all ye that live, and lie in any of the sins fore-mentioned, Can you say, & say it tru∣ly, that such as you are in the state of Life, when God, who is Truth it self, saith you are in the state of Death? will ye say that ye are blessed, when he saith, that ye are accursed? will you harbour a conceit that ye shall be saved, when he tells you, that ye shall be damed? will you entertain an opinion, that Heaven is, and will be yours without contradiction, when the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, that that glorious Place and Kingdom, which we call Hea∣ven, will be kept from you to an endless duration? O men befooled and unwise! You go to Heaven! saith this Ministry; if Toads, if Vipers, if Devils may go to Heaven, you may, continuing in your sins, wherein hitherto you lye wallowing, as so many Sowes wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22. which when it fills the ears of de∣luded souls, it also fills them with horror,
with anguish, with grief, with trouble of mind, and vexation of spirit, and makes them cry out as a woman in travel, desiring to be delivered, and that by Jesus Christ, that they may be saved; and so such a Christ-preaching-Ministry, doth mightily advance the winning of Heaven by a Sa∣cred Violence; Understand still, if God's Blessing go with it. 6. Ground. It acquaints men with the absolute necessity of believing, I mean of believing savingly; for saith this Ministry, as Christ said once, Except you eat the Hesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, name∣ly, spiritually, and by a lively Faith, ye have no life in you, John 6.53. And be that helieveth not (namely, savingly) shall be dam∣ned, Mark 16.16. whatsoever the man be, learned or unlearned, bond or free, rich or poor, young or old, professor or no professor, for there is no respect of persons with God; so that if a man, being a professor, should give all his goods to the poor, pray and prostrate himself at and before the Throne of Grace oftimes in a day, peruse those sacred leaves which are in the Book of God, beyond all his neighbours, soar up
by his strong elevations and high contem∣plations beyond the Moon, & beyond the Cassiopeia it self, into Heaven it self, as he supposeth, and talk like an Angel; yet if he want true saving Faith in Christ, he can never live, nor be, nor mansion hereafter with Christ, but must be without, where Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Lyars are, as being unworthy of Lise, unworthy of Salvation, Rev. 21.8. which when it drums in peoples ears, they are astonished at this Doctrine; as those, Mat. 7.28. and cry out, saying, O then, what will be come of us that believe not! O what shall our poor souls do! O that we had Faith! O that we could believe as these, and these, in the Son of God! O that God would look upon us, and deliver unto us such a Faith, as he hath to others! Jude 2. O that we could obtain like-precious Faith with others! 2 Pet. 1.1. O that God would help our unbelief! Mark 9.24. O that the time were come for us to come to the Faith of God's Elect, which they have in Jesus! Tit. 1.1. O that by Faith we could eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, that we also, as well as others who beleive
in Jesus, might be saved! Joh. 6.53. And so such a Christ-preaching Ministry mightily advanceth the winning of Heaven by a Sa∣cred Violence. 7. Ground. It will inform them of that strictest way of living which Christ requi∣reth of all that will enter into Life everla∣sting; For, saith this Ministry, as Christ said once, Except your Righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes & Pharisees, (who yet fasted twice a week, compassed Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, made long prayers, were no Extortioners, no A∣dulterers, no unrighteous persons, such as Theeves, and Defrauders in bargaining, and Usurers are; nay, as some write of them, lay upon boards, not beds, by night) ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of God: Mark; in no case, if you would give all your substance for it, would seek very much after it, would go so far to enter in∣to it, as that it might be said of you, as Christ said to that young man, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God, Mark 12.34. so you are not far from the Kingdom of God, yet shall ye in no wise enter, unless ye go farther, unless you go thorow, unless
ye do more than Hypocrites do, and be more holy, more humble, more just, more heavenly, more patient, more devout, more meek, more sober, and more truly pious than they are. Again, saith this Ministry with St. James, James 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. Observe; whosoever, without excepti∣on; whether he be a Jew or Christian, Minister or Hearer, a great man or a poor man, how big soever he look, how high so∣ever he esteem and think of himself, nay though he be a man that is well esteemed by all his neighbours in the place where he liveth, for his almes-deeds, for his kind carriage, for his peace-making among them, for his square dealings with every man, and especially for the good order he keeps in his own family, for praying much and often, in and with his family, and apart; for reading, for repeating of Ser∣mons, and for catechizing his Sons, and Servants; yet if he offend in one point, if he omit or neglect any one needful Duty, live but in any one known sin, that one but will spoile all, and he will be guilty of all,
and so die for it without mercy; As if a man should keep all the Laws of our Land, but kill one man, he dieth for it, if he had a thousand lives, by the Laws of the Land: So strict, saith this Ministry, is the Law of God; which when poor sinners are acquainted with, O what fears! O what doubts! O what stirrings! O what cares it raises and causes in mens and womens hearts! and O what sorce will not they use? and what pains, besides all them that they have taken, will they not take, that Hea∣ven by Violence they may take? Some have made themselves Eunuches for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, Mat. 19.12. And so I do verily beleive, that some ra∣ther than they will be cut off from their hopes of Heaven, they will after they have heard & imbibed all this into their hearts, and ears, cut off all their members which they have upon earth, Col. 3.5. I mean their dearest sins; as Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate affectiō, evil concupiscence and Covetousness, which is Idolatry; and that they will go as far as their legs, I mean the legs of Faith, will carry them, even so far as to the loving of their very enemies, the
giving of their bodies to be burnt, the losing of their estates, their ease, their sin∣ful and sensual delights, and the incurring of the hatred of all their friends, yea, of all the world, rather than go from Christ, and go from Life, and go from the World which is to come. The uses of the point will be these. 1. use, will be one of Information. Then how desirable must needs such a Ministry be? You do all desire, and covet to have such servants and workmen as do their work so faithfully, so painfully, and so well, as that you may perceive, and see your selves, how much they do advance your estates on Earth; and if so, how much to be desired then is that painful and pow∣erful Ministry, which doth so labour to advance your spiritual estates, and your soules, that they may win Heaven? We read, John 5.4. that An Angel went down at a certain time, into that Pool, and troub∣led the waters, and that whosoever then first after the troubling of the water, stepped in, was made whole of what disease soever he had; and how much longed for the comming down
of such an Angel was to the people then, especially to the lame, and to the blind, and to the impotent, and to the withered, ver. 3. I leave to you to judge. Now every powerful and Christ-preaching-Minister, is such an Angel: so he comes into the Pulpit; so he troubles the water, making the Word which he preacheth, to be trou∣blesome to obstinate and impenitent sin∣ners; and so he causes it, by God's bles∣sing, to become wholesome to many a poor creature, that is blind, or lame, or impotent, or withered, which then and thereupon can, and will, being made whole and sound, even offer a Sacred Violence to Heaven it self, and strive to take it by force; and therefore O how lovely! O how amiable! O how desirable! O how much to be loved and longed for, must needs be a powerful & Christ-preaching-Ministry, and those Gospel-Angels which come to us in the Name of the Lord! O how wel∣come must they needs be to sin-sick and sin-lame souls, though they trouble them a little first, because they come with hea∣ling in their preaching, and cure them at last, and make them to make out for Hea∣ven.
2. Use, is one of Exhortation. Is it so? Then, 1. Encourage such a Mi∣nistry. Quest. How? I answer: 1. Hear it carefully; as Mat. 3.5. they came from all parts to hear the Baptist preach, even from Jerusalem, and from Ju∣dea, and all the regton round about Jordan: So when such Johns teach, let all the peo∣ple that can, come and hear them, stirring up one another, as those in Isaiah, saying, Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his wayes; for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isa. 2.3. 2. Follow, and do what such a Ministry teacheth; according to that famous Scrip∣ture, Jam 1.22. But be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves: Mark; deceiving your own selves; so that you do but deceive your own souls, when you but come and sit before us, and do none of the things which are taught by us; when you say, What will this babler say? when having heard us press the forward∣ness
of the Saints, ye will not live as Saints; when having been told, how ye must force Heaven, ye mind nothing less than Hea∣ven; when after ye have drunk in our Ser∣mons tending to Life and Glory, ye will not so much as wag one foot, nor stir at all, that ye may drink in those ineffable Plea∣sures which flow and stream from Jehova's Face in the Kingdom of Glory. And be∣sides, what encouragement do ye give us, as long as ye regard our words no more than fables, after they have been with all seriousness and sadness, tenderness & true∣ness, earnestness and eagerness, powerful∣ness and piercingness, faithfulness and fer∣ventness, delivered, uttered, and preached by us. O it must needs be a deading of our affections, a cooling of our courage, a stu∣pifying of our spirits, when after all our Gospel-Reports made by us, we must take up that sad complaint of Isaiah the Pro∣phet, Who hath beleived our Report? Isa. 53.1. Wherefore as those Sorcerers which heard Paul preach, were so affected with, and wrought upon with his preaching, as that they kindled a fire, and burnt their books before all men, not at all regarding
the price thereof, which amounted to fifty thousand pieces of Silver, nor the loss which thereby they sustained, because they would rather lose their Books, and lose their Gain, and lose all their Silver, than lose their Souls, and lose Life, and lose Heaven; Heaven being far more valued, more esteemed, more prized of them, than all their books which were burned by them. So do ye now go, and do like∣wise; ye need not kindle a fire for it, for I have kindled a fire for you already by this my preaching; for, is not my Word like Fire, saith God? Jer. 23.29. Do ye only bring, I'l not say your books, but your sins, which I have preached against in this Sermon, and burn them before all men; that is, let the Word which I have taught you now, so burn them up, as that we may see them no more, hear of them no more, be troubled about them and with them no more; as when a thing is burnt, we are troubled with it no more: O Sirs, where are those your books, I should say yoursins, which must be burnt? bring them hither, and burn them here before me, in and by this Fire which I have made for you; bring hither your
Usury, your Pride, your Lusts, your Un∣cleanness, your Lasciviousness, your An∣ger, your onvious dispositions, your idle courses, your Drunkenness, your Gurman∣dizing, your Laziness, your Slothfulness, your Covetousness, which is Idolatry, and all the evils of your tongues, which, though little, are such unruly members; and let them all be eaten up by this Fire which I have now kindled, crying, and saying, Lord burn up these our Corruptions by this Sermon. O Sirs, do not your hearts already burn, as the Disciples hearts, when Christ opened the Scriptures to them? Luke 24.32. Do ye not feel this Fire? O that God would work now upon your souls! O that he would blow this Fire! O that he would cause his holy Spirit to blow upon your spirits! O that he would by his co-opera∣tion, make this Word of his, which I preach, and which is indeed like Fire, ef∣fectual to your salvation! O that he would make it burn up all your corruptions; and O that you would throw them all into the midst of this Fire, to be rid of them for ever, O for ever, and would never rake them up more! O happy day, that this day
would then be for, and to your souls! O souls, souls, now stir, now struggle, now strive to be saved, though it be with the loss of your dearest and best-beloved sins; bet∣ter, a thousand times better will it be, to suffer such a loss now, than to sustain a far greater, even the loss of your immortal souls▪ hereafter; and infinitely better it is, not to go home with your darling-Lusts, and bosome-Corruptions now, than to go to Hell for your sins hereafter for ever. But I must hasten to a second Exhorta∣tion. 2. Exhortation. Esteem powerful and Christ-preaching-Ministers very highly then, for their works sake, and love them dearly. We have a notable place for this, 1 Thes. 1.12. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. Catherina Senensis, did so prize, so estimate, and so affect such Ministers, as that she would kiss their very Vestigiaes, and the ground whereupon they did go, as they passed thorow the streets: I do not say that you must do so too, but only that
you may do well to afford them the em∣braces of your love, and the honour of your high esteem, according to the afore∣mentioned Apostolical Speech; which may command the obedience and submis∣sion of you all thereunto. 3. Exhortation. Let them do nothing else then, or but little else than preach, and do you free them from all worldly cares, and distractions, by a sufficient maintenance afforded unto them, and by taking care for them, that they may take the more care for you, and that without distraction; it is pitty, a thousand pitties, that that Pilot which hath carried many Ships to Sea, and over the Sea safely, se∣curely, successfully, should do any thing else, but carry Ships to and fro, from Port to Port, from Countrey to Country, from Land to Land; so it is great pitty that that Minister, which powerfully and suc∣cessfully preacheth Christ, and thereby ad∣vanceth much the taking of Heaven by a Sacred Violence, filling his Sails, I mean his Sermons, with the choicest Matter that he can possibly sind out by the reach of his invention, and bringing many souls to
Glory, should do any other thing than preach, and teach, that so doing, he may carry many a Vessel of Mercy, and many a Vassal of Sin and Misery, over those Seas of Duties, which they must sail over to that Haven of Happiness, which is called Heaven: Into which God of his infinite Mercy, bring us all. To himself alone be all Praise and Glory. The second Doctrine followeth. 2. Doct. Heaven must be won by an Ho∣ly Violence. For the illustration whereof, I shall pro∣pose, and resolve these two Problemes. 1. Prob. What an Holy Violence used for Heaven is? 2. Why Heaven must be won by an Holy Violence? To the first, I answer. That it is a forcing of Nature against Nature; a laying hold on God; a pressing into the Presence of God for God; it is praying with all our might; grapling with Satan to overthrow all his might; milita∣ting with Heaven for Heaven, that we may towre up into Heaven, and win Heaven,
there to sing, there to rejoyce, and there to triumph, for our there-enjoyed Felicity to all Eternity; we being taken up, when we have taken it, into that glorious KING∣DOM, which surpasseth all the Kingdoms of the world for its Puissance, Grandeur, Magnificence, Splendor and Glory, it be∣ing the very Kingdom of Glory. 2. Prob. To the second, I answer. That it must needs be so. 1. Answer or Reason. Because Heaven lyeth so far away from us, and the King thereof is as a Man of War; Exod. 15.3. The Lord is a Man of War. Now, were a little Army to march as far as China, which is Fifteen times as big as all France, and is part of the East-Indies (which is a great way off) and whose King never takes the field, as they Speed reports this of him. write of him, under Five hundred thou∣sand men at his heels, I say, were this little Army to take that great Kingdom, what need would there be of forcing the men of that little Army to make them go! scarce any would go, unless he be pressed, and forced to go: and again, how would those that go, be
forced to force themselves, and to force that King, and to force his Kingdom to win it. This is our case; Heaven is much like that Kingdom of China, for it is a great Kingdom also, nay far greater, it lyeth a great way from us; it hath a King which is called The Lord of Hosts, it is wholly at his command, and it cannot be overcome unless he be overcome; nor won, unless he be won; and we that are to take it, are but a little Army, called a . little, little Flock, Luke 12.32. and therefore you may well ima∣gine, what striving, what forcing, what urging, what presling, what contending there is required of all us that will be sa∣ved; and what a Violence we must offer to Heaven, before we can win Heaven; and how we must be forced to go, before we will go to Heaven: O Sirs, do not you find it so by your own experience? do ye not see how ye must constrain your selves to Duties, and in Duties many times? do not ye take notice of it, how you must even frequently, and most earnestly wrestle with the King of Heaven for Heaven? 2. Answer. By reason of the many E∣nemies
that lye betwixt us and it; as name∣ly, 1. High soaring and self-exalting ima∣gination are betwixt us and it, 2 Cor. 10.5. which will keep us low, unless we bring them low, and will not suffer us to ascend, unless we make them to deseend. 2. Powers and Principalities, Ephes. 6.12. Mark: Powers; not weak ones, but strong and mighty Adversaries; again, not petty ones, but Princely ones, and Proud ones, as standing upon their Great∣ness, even Principalities; which is more than if the Apostle had said, Princes; and those must be vanquished by such weak, silly simple creatures as we are; O the stri∣ving then! and O the stirring that will be required of us, if Heaven shall ever be taken and conquered by us! 3. Rulers of the Darkness of this World, in Ephes. 6.12. which will absolutely keep us out of that other World, unless we put and keep them down in this World, and will rule us, so as to mke us lose Heaven for ever, unless we over-rule them, and so take Heaven by force.
4. Ephes. 6.12. . Spiritual wicked∣ness in High places. The Original is, Wicked Spi∣rits in Heavenlies; which some understand of our Heavenlies; that is, in our heavenly Du∣ties of Prayer, of Fasting, of Meditating, and the like; for in and about these hea∣venly Performances, those wicked spirits are most busie with us, either to hinder us in them, or from them, or to make us proud upon them; all which Spiritual Wickednesses must go down, if we shall go up. The Uses of the Point will be these. Then, 1. Be informed. 2. Be convinced. 3. Be startled. 4. Be diswaded. 5. Be perswaded. I. Use. Be informed. And, 1. Of the Power of Religion; for one should think that the hearing of this should quench Religion, and put it down; as one would have thought, that the fire which fell from Heaven, would have been quench∣ed by the water which was in the trenches.
1 Kings 18.38. but as that Fire was not put out by all that abundance of water; so Religion will by no means be extinguish∣ed, or put out by all that abundance of dif∣ficulties, of oppositions, of powers, of e∣nemies, Superbia tu∣midis invidentia lividis, fallacia callidis à justitia penitus alienis. August. de Civ. Dei. l. 8. c. 22. proud and craf∣ty, and fraighted with en∣vy and malice, which it meets with, & must over∣come by force to win Hea∣ven; no, no, but it will bear up for all that, and stand to it, and even dare to look the proudest and the stoutest enemie it hath in the face, to encounter him, and to over∣power him; For it is of the same resolu∣tion, that famous Captain Paraenetical Treatise to the Princes of Eu∣rope, pag. 26. Ferras was of, alwayes bearing armes against the greatest Emperour of the world: O it is a strong, a stout, a mighty thing, this Religion! neither Men, nor Devils, nor Death, nor things present, nor things to come can over∣match it. 2. Of the strange Wisdom of God. A Father doth not count it wisdom to tell
his Daughter, whom he intends to prefer to a rich Man, that he is hardly to be pleased, and very strict, and one that looks narrow∣ly after every thing (and of the troubles of such a marriage) though he hear so much of him, because that would discourage her utterly. So Generals are not wont to tell Novices, and young Souldiers, of the dangers and hazards of War, of the impreg∣nableness of their Enemies Towns, of the heighth of their Walls, which they must scale, of the puissance, multitude, and sierceness of their Enemies, but rather of their weakness, and effeminate∣ness (as Curtius. Alexander the Great did, when he encouraged his men against the Persians) lest they should be disheart∣ned: But the Wisdom of God is wiser than the wisdom of men; for he, because he knows that hardships and difficulties fore∣shewn, do put men on hazardous, bold, and venturous attempts; therefore tells us be∣forehand, that it is no easie thing for a man to please God; that he doth most narrowly look after every Souldier of his, & after all his doings; that Heaven cannot otherwise be taken, but only by Violence; and that
therefore it is one of the hardest things in the world for any man to go about it. O Sirs, observe then, this great, this strange, this to be admired Wisdom of our God; who knows full well, that if he should not fore-tell us so much, we would be apt to say then, when we meet with dangers, with enemies, with difficulties, Non putaramus; that is, We did not think so; and so would basely and cowardly turn faces about, and run away. It is said of Laban, that when Jacob expected to have Rachel to be given him, to be his wife, and found that it was Leah, he told him, It must not be so done in our Countrey, to give the younger before the first∣born, Gen, 28.26. So, whereas men look for Rachel still, that is, all things fair, God con∣trarily tells them of Leah; that is, of things which are not so pleasing to them, not be∣ing so fair in their eyes; and saith in plain terms, as Laban said, It must not be so done in this Countrey, or in this world; to give men Rachel (I should say Heaven) before Leah; that is, before they have been matcht up first to hardships, and used to things which they like not: Rachel is reserved for the last place, and Leah for the first. O the
infinite and incomparable Wisdom of God in all this! for he knows that plain-dealing is best: Satan deals with the Sons of men far otherwise, for he tells them of nothing, but of all fair first; and afterward, when he hath them at an advantage, and thinks that he can make them irrecoverably fall, of all bad, all lost, and therein he places and centers a great deal of his Serpentine wisdom: but the most wise God holds it better, and takes it to be far greater Wis∣dom, to tell men of the worst first, and of the best next, because that usually speeds best; and therefore let us here take up that rare Admiration and Exclamation of the A∣postle, of and about the Wisdom of God; Rom. 11.33. O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How un∣searchable are his Judgements, and his Wayes past finding out! 3. Be informed, that no wonder it is there∣fore that so few are saved; as it is asserted, Mat. 7.13. Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads to lafe; and few there are that find it. Some wonder, that of six hundred thou∣sand men, that went out of Egypt, but two
should enter into the Land of Canaan, Deut. 1.36, 38. Numb. 14.38. But a wonder it is rather, that any did enter; for there, they heard were Anakims, huge Gyants, Walls reaching as it were to Heaven, Cha∣riots of Iron, Deut. 1.28. Josh. 17.16. And so it is more to be admired, that any one man is saved, and enters Heaven, than that but a few; for between us and it there are Gyants also, that is, tall and mighty ene∣mies, stronger than we; and men whose teeth and necks are like Iron; like those in Dan. 2.19. Isa. 48.4. and whose browes are of Brass; ibidem; and there are betwixt us and it, Walls, as it were, reaching to Hea∣ven; that is, such difficulties, and such ob∣stacles, as seem to be insuperable, and such as cannot be overcome by us. When Chrysost. ad pop. Ant. hom. 40. St. Chrysostome prea∣ched once at Antioch, he had these dreadful words in his Sermon; How many do ye think there may be in this our City (now Antioch was an excee∣ding great and populous City) which shall be saved? it will be very offensive what I shall say, but yet I will speak it; There may not be
among these thousands, one hundred; nay; of them I doubt also. And what would he say, if he did now live and preach among us? Augustine in Psal. 48. p. 528. So blessed Austin, in one of▪ his Sermons upon the Psalms, makes this speech, This People which in the midst of God's People, obtained mercy of what num∣ber was it? O how few are they! scarce any. And will God be contented with so few, say some, and destroy such a multitude? this they say, who promise themselves that which they never heard God say. How many be they that seem to keep God's Commandments? scarce will one, or two, or exceeding few be found; and will God save only these few? and damn all the rest? Far be it, say they, when he shall come and see such a multitude before him, and at his left hand; he will shew mercy then, and grant his indulgence. Truly this same thing did the Serpent once promise the first man; Thou shalt not die. Thus that holy Man. And no wonder that both he and we say so, for as much as you see what a Force and Vio∣lence is here required of every man and woman that will be saved. But I had al∣most
forgotten here to insert that dreadful Relation which one makes touching this matter, saying, Conside∣rat. of Eter∣nity, p. 285. Hieronymus Plautus reports of a certain wo∣man, that hearing Bertoldus, a powerful man in the Pulpit, in∣veigh very much against a sin that she knew her self guilty of, fell down dead in the Church; after a while, by the blessing of God upon the Prayers of the Congregation, coming to her self, related unto them what she had seen in this trance, saying thus; Methought I stood before Gods Tribunal, and sixty thousand souls more with me, called together from all the parts of the world to receive their final sentence; and they were all judged and condemned to eternal torments; but only three excepted. O what a fearful thing was this! I should hardly believe this womans relation, but that I be∣lieve Christ, Mat. 7.14. O Sirs, do ye not tremble at this? do ye not fear then what will become of you for the most part? are ye not ready to cry out, saying as they said, Mat. 19.25. Who then of us will be saved? But do not marvel at it, that this is so repor∣ted, considering what a Force and Violence there must be offered to Heaven, by every one that will win Heaven.
II. Be convinced. Whereof? That if ye take no pains, are not in trouble as other men, Psal. 73.5. do not strive, do not stir as for Life, to enter into Life, but live in ease, live in delights; if you be not ac∣quainted with the Saints most mighty wrestlings with Jesus Christ, both night and day; if their pressing and pricking them∣selves forward toward the Mark for the Price of the high Calling of God in Christ Je∣sus, Phil. 3.14. be a strange thing to you; if our telling of laying siege (as it were) to Heaven, be a mere Riddle to you; if you do not know what a life it is, which Hea∣ven forcing-Saints live, and what pains they ake, what trouble they undergo, what la∣bours they exantlate, and what endeavours they use to win Heaven by Force; then be convinced, I say, that except you wheel about, and betake your selves into an other narrower circle, and live a stricter life, you will never enter into Life. Here let me use this fit Comparison; Were a Traveller, be∣ing purposed to travel into a goodly Coun∣trey, told by a skilful Guide, that in the way to it, there are many Mountains which he must go over, raggy Rocks which he must
climbe over, huge Waters which he must pass over, and withal, whole Brakes of Pricking Thornes, and piercing Briars which he must make his way over, and in∣stead of all this, should find the quite contrary in the way which he takes and chuses, should meet with no such Mountains, no such Rocks, no such Wa∣ters, no such Thornes, should see nothing but pleasant Meadows, fair Gardens, fra∣grant Roses, and all plain, would he not say, Surely I am out of the way, for this is not the way I was told of, here is no such thing as was declared unto me? Now, my Brethren, ye are purposed to go to that goodly Countrey, which is called Heaven, or Heavenly, Heb. 11.16. are not ye? But do ye know the way, & what a way it is? if not, I will tell ye; It is a way bestrawn with Thornes, and not with Ita{que} ne imposte∣rum quidem Lipsi rosas cogita Sosa∣mum, aut papaver, sed spinas, sicas, ab∣sinthium, et acetum. Lips. de Const. l.1. c. 10. Roses; with labours which are like Briars that prick, and not with Lillies which toyl not, Mat. 6.28. a way full of Mountaines; that is, of high and mountainous services;
of Rocks, that is, of difficulties; of Rivers, of Waters, that is, great tribulations: and therefore if any of you meet with nothing here, but with pleasures, with delights, with ease, with all fair, all plain, all sweet, and with no wormwood, no bitter, no gall, no difficulties, no thornes, and live a lazie life, let him say likewise, Truly I am out of the way which I should go; for this is not the way which was shewn me; sure, sure it is not the way to Heaven; and therefore if I go on thus, I shall never come to Heaven. Thus be convinced. III. Nay, be startled and astonished; as the Disciples, Mat. 19.25. when they heard what a hard thing it was for a Rich man to be saved; the Text saith, They were excee∣dingly amazed; saying, Who then can be sa∣ved? So be you, because it will go very hard with you, and because you must sweat and toyl, and labour very hard before you can possibly be saved. Beloved, were ye in a deep and desperate Consumption, and to go against a hill as high as Caucasus, that highest Mountain of Asia; were ye like Pigmies, and yet to sight with a great Dra∣gon; were ye as little Lambs, and yet to
graple with Lyons; were ye, being so lit∣tle, to take a City kept by a mighty Warri∣or; were ye told by the way, that ye must in your way, or march, break through an Army of Gyants, who have destroyed thou∣sands and thousands, and that very few have yet escaped them alive, how would ye be startled at it; saying, O how shall we poor silly creatures escape those mighty creatures whom they call Gyants! O we shall never! This is just our case; we here present are, as it were in a deep Consum∣ption, and have but little flesh, I should say, strength about us; as it is written, Thou hast a little strength, Rev. 3.8. and yet must go against the highest hill that is; I mean that holy Hill spoken of, Psal. 15.1. We Pig∣mies are to wrestle with a Dragon, I mean that old Dragon, the Devil, who of a Ser∣pent is become a Dragon by his long stan∣ding, and growing in subtilty, and cunning; for he hath had almost six thousand years experience, and thereby hath gotten a Cui mille nocendi artes. Hieron. ad Hesiod. de vita Ere∣mit. world of skill and cun∣ning to hurt us: We Lambs are to graple with Lyons;. I mean Satans
Angels, and must take Heaven kept by a King, who is stiled a man of War, Exod. 15.3. and break by force thorow an Army of Gyants; I mean spiritual Wickednesses in High Places, Ephes. 6.12. who have slain millions, and few yet did ever escape their hands; and they that freed themselves from them, and were saved, were delivered and saved merely by a miracle of mercy: wherefore be out of measure astonished, especially if you be far from being such Wrestlers, and Pain-takers, and Force-infer∣ring, and Violence-using-Christians as ye ought to be, and cry out, saying, O then, who of us can be saved! who, O who of us that live such an easie life can enter into Life! And as for you that take pains, and use violence to take Heaven, yet be ama∣zed at this, and say, O how hard will it be for us also to be saved, for of the very Righteous it is written, that even he is scarcely saved! 1 Pet. 4.18. O the Dissi∣culties that we must pass thorow before we can, or ever shall pass into Life, even. Life Everlasting! IV. Be diswaded. 1. From rash censuring; If a Brother
be fallen, be foiled, be overtaken in a fault, be not too bitter against him, nor too cen∣sorious; for we walk in a very narrow, nar∣row way, nay but upon the edge and brink, as it were, of a Hill, or Rock; yea, if we be such as we ought to be, and do as we ought to do, we do not only travel in such a narrow way, but meet with those that will jet us, and go to throw us down; I mean those Powers, Ephes. 6.12. and there∣fore even a godly man may be soon down, and fall grievously; witness David; so that we must not be so for∣ward as we are apt to be, in Non sic judices proximum, sed ma∣gis excusa, et dicito apud temet ipsum, vehemens fuit nimis temptatio. Basil. Serm. 40. super Cant. fol. 145. judging. See Mat. 7.1. 2. From saring. And, First, If ye be Aliens yet from that strictness of living, and from that Forcing which here is required, and fear∣ful withal, then cease to be so; for fearful ones are not fit for such an imployment, nor indeed can be saved, if their fear be sla∣vish only, and bear sway; as you may see Rev. 21.8. But the fearful shall have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone. And therefore as Gideon made a Proclamation in his Camp, Judg. 7.3. Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from Mount Gilead; So I proclaim this day, and here in this place, and in these your ears, Whosoever among you is fearful, and yet hopes to van∣quish all his enemies, which are many, and mighty, being Rulers and Princes, which as Princes have many souldiers & subjects under them, Ephes. 6.12. even Improbos spiritus et homines pessimos. Aretius. wicked spirits, and most wicked men, and to win Heaven, let him early and betimes depart from his hopes, unless he will depart from his fears. 2dly, So if you be of the number of true Forcers and Endeavourers to take Heaven by Violence, but are pestered with a multi∣tude of fears mixt with your confidences, though not allowed, I shall say unto you as Christ to his Disciples, Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. even that very King∣dom which you are going to take by Vio∣lence; for the Violent, saith Christ in my Text, take it by Force. Your fear is that you
will not be able to hold out; but what saith the Apostle, Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. And besides, rather than you should fail, or fall away, I say moreo∣ver, that God will either end your Aut cito mors ve∣niet aut victoria lae∣ta Horat. dayes before, or your dangers, and then you will be no lon∣ger Souldiers in Armour, but Gown-men in long white Robes, Rev. 7.9. having Palms in your hands, and Crowns on your heads, as Conquerors; according to that of Paul, I have fought a good fight, and have finished my course, from henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all them that love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4.7. O Sirs, how should this cast out Fear? It is true, we de∣serve no such thing, no, no; and our Do∣ings and Wrestlings and Forcings come infinitely short of that height and heat of Zeal which is required of us: but let us comfort our selves with this, that by his Mercy he saves us, and not by works of
righteousness which we have done, Tit. 3.5. For my part, when I take a full view of my self, and consider my wayes, and my great and mighty failings, am forced to say this, That I obtain Heavon and the Bliss there∣of, as a felicity which I can neither think to deserve, nor expect as my due; For these two ends of us all, either as rewards, or punishments, are mercifully ordained, and disproportionably disposed unto our acti∣ons; the one being so far beyond our de∣serts, the other so infinitely below our de∣merits. V. Be perswaded then, if you would win Heaven, to force, 1. Your selves. 2. The Kingdom of Heaven it self. 3. The King thereof himself. I. I do not intend by this, to sow the seeds of Pelagianism, as if man had free will and power in himself, and of himself to believe, to repent, &c. but only to put men upon endeavours to be used with God, for God; according to Phil. 2.12, 13. Your selves, in, 1. Believing. 2. Repenting. Quoties enim bona agimus, Deus in nolis at∣que nolis cum ut operemur operatur. Concil. A∣raus. 2. Can. 9.
3. All the Duties of your high Calling. First, Believing, for there you must be∣gin, because Faith is the mother-Grace, and the mother-Vertue, from which all other do spring; and without which our best actions are all sins, Rom. 14.23. When Lucianus in Scy∣tha. Toxants saw his Countrey-man Anacharsis in Athens, he said to him, I will at once shew thee all the wonders of Greece, Viso Solone vidisti omnia; that is, In seeing Solon, thou seest all, even Athens it self, and all the Glory of Greece. Semblably, where∣unto I may say to you, That if you have Faith in Christ, you have more than all the Wonders of Greece, even all the wonderful Gifts of Grace. Grace your souls there∣fore, O dear Christians, with this rare and heedful Gift; and begin here, striving and labouring mightily to believe in Jesus, that you may be saved by the Faith of Jesus: O cry for this great Grace, as Children cry for Milk, because they live by it; cry and say, Lord help us to believe: And then strive more particularly to believe verily, and forcibly; that is, whether the flesh will
give way to it, or no, that Christ will I use this expres∣sion the rather al∣luding to our Mar∣riages, because God himself useth it to set forth believing, and because it is most ta∣king. marry you to himself, and there∣by save your souls; for that is one of the princi∣pal acts of Faith, to be∣lieve this, in that we are said to be married to God in Faith, Hos. 2.30. and by it, come to be one with God, and God in Christ with us, that we may be saved; even as two marri∣ed persons, by marriage come to be one: See John 20.21. where this Oneness, or Unity, and Believing, are so conjoyned. But here I must resolve a great Question. Quest. Suppose we should be perswaded by you to force our selves thus to believe, will Christ have us if we will have him? Sol. O yes, for you have his Promise for it, which brings me to the principal thing that * begets Faith, and without which we cannot To expect Faith without a Promise, is as if we should ex∣pect a crop of Corn without seed: For the Promise, is an immortal Seed, whereby the Spirit begets Faith. The Author of the Poor doubting Christian drawn to Christ. expect any true
Faith, even the Word of Promise. Quest. Where is that Promise? Answ. In the Prophet, Hos. 2.9. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever: And ver. 20. I will even betroth thee unto me in Understand the Grace of Faith be∣stowed upon us. Jun. Tremel. in loc. Faithfulness. Do ye hear this, O poor souls? In the Uses pre∣mised, I suppose ye were startled, and troubled not a little; for, for that end they were fitted, that thereby you might be For none can prove or shew president, that Faith was wrought in an in∣stant at first, with∣out any preparation going before. Ro∣gers of Dedham, in his Doctrine of Faith. p. 63. prepared for this, which puts you up∣on believing: But now be comforted, and now be perswaded, that Christ will have you, if you through the Riches of his Grace will have him: O Sirs, you may believe him, that what he pro∣mises, he will do, for it is impossible son God to lie, Heb. 6.18. Now here, you here and see his Promises; here it lyeth in this Book; here I shew it to you, shewing you the Book, the Chapter, the Verse wherein it lyeth, and shineth and sparkles above the
brightness of any Ruby or Diamond. O believe, believe only; for why should ye not? If a woman have a mans promise that he will marry her, she believes him because of his promise; and will ye not believe God; having his Promise? Man may lie, and often doth lie; but God cannot, there∣fore give credit to his Word, and be marri∣ed to him in Faith, and so make an end once of that great match which hath been so long hanging betwixt Christ and you. O cry to him, and say, Lord, I see thou wilt needs have me, and therefore I will have thee, and no other, for my dear and ever∣lasting Husband; O come Lord Jesus, and marry me this day in Faith and for ever; O for ever, for so thou hast promised me. Here give me leave to give you a Caveat about the Lord's Promise. The Promise is likea Staff; and you know the back-side of a mans hand cannot take a Staff, but let him turn the palm of his hand to the Staff, he may take it; so turn the right-side of your souls to the Lord's Promise, forcing them to believe, as Abraham, against hope, Rom. 4.18. that is, though you have but little, or no hope, when you look upon
your selves, and upon your great unworthi∣ness, yet in hope, when you look upon God's unparalellable Goodness, and his, by you, undeserved Kindness, and you may take it; but we turn the back-side of our hearts to the Promise, when the heart saith, O my stubbornness! and O my unworthi∣ness! this is the wrong-side of the heart; and this will never let you take Christ, but rather be a let to you, which will ever hin∣der you from marrying Christ, and from believing in Christ; therefore beware of it. But I desire to use one artifice more, to draw you unto Christ, so as that this very time, you may by God's Blessing come to believe in Christ. I'll deal with you, as they dealt with Rebecka, when Eleazar was come to her to have her married unto his masters Son, they called for the Damsel, and asked her, Wilt thou go with this man, Gen. 24.58. So will I call to you now, being come for you to marry you to my Masters Son, even to Christ, that heavenly I saac, will you go with me? will you follow me? Will you come after me to my Masters Son, Christ? I mean the Son of God; Formerly I did but perswade you, but now I come
nearer home to your hearts and bosomes, and ask you what you will do, expecting an answer: answer therefore, O ye men of T—and all you that hear me; and answer e∣very one of you in his heart, what ye intend to do; loe, I give you time, what say ye? will ye go, or not? believe, or not believe? be married to Christ, or not be married? if you have a mind to it indeed by an over∣ruling hand, and Power of God upon you, though flesh and blood be utterly against it, and say nay to it, yet do you say as Re∣beccka, now after all this, every one of you, I will go, I will go. ver. 58. come what will come, though all my friends be against it; though my unbelief do gain-say it; though my sluggish flesh do diswade me from it; and though sin and devils do as much as they can oppose me in it, O sweet Jesus, loe I come, though it be long first, yet now at last I come to take thee for my most dear and only Saviour, Lord and Husband; O take me sweet Saviour, and let me be thine, and be thou mine; as it is written, My Be∣loved is mine, and I am his; yea, and feed me among the Lillies; that is, with thy Lillies; or celestial Consolations, which for their
cooling & refreshing, are like Lillies, Cant. 2.16. O souls, souls, is this your mind? your purpose, your resolution this day? if it be, then say all of you Amen to it, in your hearts, I intreat you, and bespeak you about it once more. O my God, if this people have such an heart given them this day, then blessed be thy holy name for it, now and for ever; if not, give them such a heart now, before I leave them, that by believing and loving, they may be in thee, and thou in them, I humbly and heartily obsecrate and beseech thee. II. Repenting; that is, sorrowing for sin, and confessing, and forsaking of sin: which parts of true and sound repentance in this place, I chiefly aim at, the one ma∣king us lower then we were, the other bet∣ter, both are bitter; but better it is for all to tast of their bitterness now, than to suffer for the want of them hereafter. 1. Force your selves therefore to mourn, to grieve for your great and grievous sins now in this world; according to that in Jo∣el 2.12, 13. that ye may not suffer for them in the world to come: nay, come, let us all weep and lament together, as we have all
sinned together, that God may comfort us at that day, and wipe away our tears from our eyes; as it is written, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5.4. and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Rev. 7.17. Now, our tears may do us good, being shed for sin; but if we forbear weeping till we come to the place of weeping, Mat. 24.51. what will that weeping then avail us? O nothing, no∣thing. When that great sinner, Mary Mag∣dalen, wept, it was here, and it was for her great offences; and that made her so fa∣mous as she is, Luke 7.38, 50. O let her fame inflame us therefore, that we may weep so likewise, and that our end may be like hers, though she was a sinner, Luke 7.37. When Amphilochius, apud Vossium de vita Ephr. p. 16. St. Basil asked Ephreem, why he relused to be a Preacher, he said, Because he was a sinner; unto whom St. Basil replied, I would to God I were such a sinner: And so well were it for we, if we were such sinners as she, and others were, who so wept, and so repen∣ted. Again, Now force your selves to leave
what formerly ye did love, your sins I mean, which were as dear to you as your lives; and to confess them, according to these noted Scriptures, Jer. 3.12. Only acknowledge thine Iniquities: and Isa. 1.10. Cease to do evil. I joyn both Confessing and Leaving toge∣ther: for so doth God himself, Prov. 28.13. and therefore do not you put them assun∣der, but confess and forsake. Among Men, he that confesseth, dyeth; but here, and before God, he that confesseth, liveth. So he that forsaketh; Prov. 28.13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but he that confesseth and forsaketh them, shall have mer∣cy. Now, when I say con∣fess, I desire to be un∣derstood thus; confess with A Corollarie for Deprecations to be added to our Confessions. Deprecations, added to your Confessions as a Corollary; like Daniel, who so confessed, Dan. 9.4, 19. As thus, Go and spread a Catalogue of all your main and known sins (having one in readiness before the Lord) and say, thus and thus we have done. Here descend to Particulars; and when you have so done, cry and say with Daniel, O Lord hear, O
God forgive. And it shall come to pass, that if you shall so confess your Iniquities, and the Iniquities of your fore-fathers, and your un∣circumcised hearts shall be humbled, that the Lord will remember his Covenant made with, and Promise made to his People, that he will forgive their Iniquity, and remember their Sin no more, Lev. 26.40. Jer. 31.31, 34. 1 John 1.9. Your fleshly hearts will be drawing back, as being very unwilling to confess so, even so much, and all that they know, for that is tedious to them; but do ye make them stand to it, and to hold out to the end of this great and mighty Work, and so la∣bour to take Heaven by Force: And when that is done according to your minds, then forsake what you have confessed; accor∣ding to that fore-alleadged passage, in Pro. 28.13. and do even with much indignati∣on, and detestation, cast off the works of darkness, and walk for the future honest∣ly, as in the day; not in Ryotting and Drun∣kenness, not in Chambering and Wanton∣ness, not in Strife and Envying; for it is high time to awake out of sleep; the night is far spent, the day is at hand; according to that of the Apostle, Rom. 13.11, 12. O pre∣cious!
O blessed! O wonder-working Scripture! for this Scripture it was which so much advanced bles∣sed Aug. Confes. 1.8. c. 1, 2, 3, &c. Austin's to-be-ad∣mired Conversion; when in his Hoast's Garden, he heard a Voice, saying, Turn and read; and he had turned to that place, and read it, and wept, and cryed, and was fallen all along under a Fig∣tree, and had said, Why not now Lord? why not now? O my Brethren, as he did then being moved by that Voice, so do you, turn to this Scripture; read it; and having read it deliberately, either in a Garden, or in your Closets, and Chambers, fall all along upon your faces (I have done so my self in the like case, and in the beginning of my Conversion) and cry, and weep, and say, How long, Lord? how long? Why not now? why not now? O let this be the last day of our shame: O now let us be converted, now changed, now metamor∣phosed, now altered: Here be extraordi∣narily earnest; for the Conversion of a Sin∣ner is a greater work than that of the Crea∣tion,
as August. apud vegam in Jer. 31.18. Divines affirm, and no less than a mira∣cle, even a stranger mi∣racle than it was in the beginning to make the World; for there was nothing to hinder God in creating the great World; but in renewing this our lit∣tle World, besides our own natural corrup∣tion, all things on earth, all Devils in Hell, are ready to withstand him. Therefore cry again, and say with Ephraim, every one of you, Lord turn me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. And if your sluggish hearts would have you to make an end before you have your errands end, and would be gone, force them to stay, and make them to make an end; that is, do not give over crying, and praying for your Conversion, till you be converted; nor let your hearts depart from the place, till you can and do depart from sin, and so cast off sin, which else will cast off you; and put off the works of darkness, which else will throw you in∣to utter darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth for evermore. O Sirs, I have put you upon a hard task, but
For it is like ne∣cessity, which ; as Thales. Force will go far with it; and therefore force your selves to it. O my God, work upon this Peoples hearts, and take them into thine own hand, like a Potters vessel, and break them in pieces; and when thou hast so done, new-make them, and new-create them, effigiating them after thy own Likeness, and turning them from Dark∣ness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, I humbly intreat thee, Acts 26.18. III. All the Duties or Discharges of your High Calling. 1. In Resolving. Of this Resolu∣tion depends all our whole Service of God. Edm. Bun∣ny, p. 1. Re∣solution is a mighty thing, and puts us upon action, and brings migh∣ty things to pass; and without it, little or no∣thing will be done. Beloved, What is the reason why so many men do not travel so far as others do, nor go to wars as thou∣sands do? is it not because they are not re∣solved as others are? So that so many thou∣sands do not travel to Heaven, nor will war
for Heaven, it is because they are not yet resolved; For he that never resolves him∣self to do well, and to leave the dangerous state of sin, wherein he liveth, is far off from doing the same: but he that sometimes re∣solves to do it, although by frailty he per∣formeth it not at that time, yet is that Re∣solution much accepted with God, and his mind the readier to return to the like Re∣solution, again to put it manfully in executi∣on. Wherefore as the Lord by the Prophet Hosea, bids Israel to say, We will not ride upon Horses, nor will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods, Hos. 2.3. As if they should say, we will never more be so swift, and hasty, as to rush into sin, like a Horse into the battle, nor will we have any more to do with Idols. So do I bid you to say, and to resolve now, here before the Lord, after all your former endeavours used, and forementioned in the preceding Uses and Directions, We will never more, by the Grace of God, be so wild, so fierce, so ha∣sty, so eager in the pursuit of sin and lust as we have been, nor will we have any more to do with those sensual delights, those filthy & lascivious courses, those unlawful sports
those inordinate passions of anger and re∣venge, those vile thoughts, those vain and unclean communications, those covetous desires and practices, those bloody Oaths, those impure touches, those wanton ge∣stures, those monstruous fashions; those scarlet and crimson abominations, which were our Idols hitherto, and to whom we said upon the matter, Ye are our God's. I add: neither will we walk one day or hour longer in that broad way; which is, as it were, between the two posts of delight and ease, and leads to destruction. I spake but now of two posts; for so some Jun. Tremel. Expositors and Translators render and expound that place in Mat. 7.14. Enter ye at the strait Gate; for wide is the Gate, and broad  Way which leads to destruction, and many g in thereat; or In Syr. Tran∣slation. per medi∣um ejus, thorow the midst thereof; that is, say they, thorow that space which is betwixt two posts: In which sence the Hebrew word wch the Syriack Transla∣tion here answers, is apprimitur a Rab. Davide Kim∣chi. Hebraorum doctissimo. read
Zach 4.12. Again, Resolve, and say here in the presence of God, and of his holy Angels, every one of you, as Joshua once, As for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.16. Or thus; Let all this People say in their hearts, as God's People once with their lips; We also will serve the Lord, for he is our God, Josh. 24.18. Nay, but we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.21. As if they should say, Nay, we will stand to it. O my Brethren, such Promises and Resolu∣tions will put a mighty tye upon your con∣sciences; for when a man makes a pro∣mise, he is bound, and his promise becomes a debt, which must be paid. So that though in my former direction, I perswaded you to leave Sin; yet now again I fall upon Sin, but in an other manner, shewing how by the help of Resolution, you may be rid of it: and the same design I have for that, which I shall speak hereafter, concerning all those Duties which I shall press upon your Consciences, to tye you thereunto by such a Promise and Resolution as here I perswade you to. The Lord direct ye, and the Lord assist you in the making of it, that ye may not only make it, but also keep it. Amen. So be it.
2. In Resisting. For though you do cry against Sin, and cry to be converted, and resolve against sin, never to commit it more, yet will it, like an Improbitas Mus∣cae. im∣probous, and impudent Flie, return again; and therefore must be still resisted; as well as Satan, 1 Pet. 5.9. O dear Christians, do not you find by experience, how since you took that great work of Resolution in hand, which I formerly spake of, and since you began to take Heaven by Violence, you met with open war, as it were, within your selves, Sin warring against you in your members: as Paul also found it in himself, Rom. 7.25. and as most of the Cypr. l. 1. c. 1. Aug. l. 1. doctr. Chr. c. 23. Greg. Mor. 4. c. 23. Cy∣ril l. de orat. Orig∣hom. 30. in Exo. Hilar. in Psa. 118. Bern. in Psal. 90. Ancient Worthies can and do speak of it in their Books? and the reason of it is this; for that the Devil possessing quietly your souls before, lay still, and sought only means to content the same, by putting in new and new delights, and pleasures of the flesh; but when he seeth that ye offer to go from him, he be∣gins
strait to rage, and to stir up your selves against your selves, and to move sedition within your selves. This in figure was shewn by the Example of Laban, Gen. 31. who never so persecuted his Son-in-Law Jacob, untill he would depart from him. And therefore I must needs put you upon resisting. O Sirs, as the Apostle said once to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood▪ striving against sin; so may I say to most of you, with a little alteration; Ye have not yet resisted to the utmost, and as ye ought, striving against sin; and there∣fore I may well stir ye up as I do, even most earnestly, to resisting; saying, O strive, O stir as for Life against Sin; I mean against Pride, and against Lust, and against Passi∣on, and against Worldliness; for all these sins will trouble you again, and again, and again; and therefore you must resist them again, and again. If you ask me, How? I answer as the Apostle, in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. Believing verily, that God for Christ's sake will subdue them in you, and for you: for ye have a precious Promise for it, Rom. 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you. 3. In Reading. Search the Scriptures, saith Christ, John 5.39. and that requireth
labour: for so much the Original emphati∣cally doth imply [;] and that our sluggish flesh doth not like: and therefore Reading & Searching is so much neglected by us: for where be the men that will not only read, but search the Scriptures day∣ly? Acts 17.11. It is well if we read dayly; many will not do that. Again, where be the Christians that will read the Scriptures in their journies; as the Enuch; Acts 8. (who was but a Jew) in his Chariot? it is well if we read them at home: And therefore I must needs stir you up as much as I am able, to this most excel∣lent Duty, perswading you all, that after you have set up your Resolution for Hea∣ven, and Eternal Life, you will also reade as for Life; for therein is to be had Eternal Life, John 5.39. If the flesh draw back, do ye prick it forward; if it will not follow you, do ye follow it; if your eyes be hea∣vy, and will not look into God's Book as you would have them, force them, and by that make them lively by compulsion, to reade and to peruse the Book of Life, and of Salvation. O this kind of Reading and Searching, and Forcing! How will it
Like the men of Berea, who so be∣came Nobles, Acts 17.11. enoble then your blood, and enable your minds to mind heavenly things? for such are the things comprized in this Book, called the great things of the Law, Hos. 8.12. Put your selves to it therefore, and force your minds to this most noble exercise which will so enoble your souls. 4. In Relieving. And Relieving, 1. The Bodies. of others. 2. The Souls. of others. First, Their Bodies, with Food and Ray∣ment, and such other necessaries as they do want; according to that noted Scrip∣ture, Heb. 13.16. But to do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such Sa∣crifices God is well pleased: And that of our Saviour; Sell that ye have, and give Atms; provide your selves bags which wax not old, a Treasure in the Heavens which faileth not, where no Thief approacheth, nei∣ther Moth corrupteth, Luke 12.33. Where note, that in the , a nomine  quod ab altero nomine  misericordia deriva∣tur. Origi∣nal, there is a word for
Almes, which (by a Metonymie) declares the Benefactors and Almes-givers merciful Disposition shewn by his Donation, and that he gives his Almes as he ought; who by his giving, ostends and sheweth that he is affected with the misery of the Relieved: and therefore how few give Almes, and re∣lieve the Needy as they ought. Again, Note here, that the Chaldeans and Syrians, and Hebrews, call Almes, Righte∣ousness. Which . name is also retained in the Greek Testament, 2 Cor. 9.9. as it is written, He hath dispersed abroad; he hath given to the poor; his Righteousness remains for ever; to shew, that Almes-giving is a piece of Ju∣stice; and that he who gives Almes, is to observe the Rules of Justice; and to di∣stribute to every one according to his need: as it is written, Acts 4.35. And Distribution was made to every man according as he had Need. And who do so? not one of an hun∣dred. A little will serve with many, for ma∣ny. Few will do as Clerk in his Life, p. 251. Lu∣ther; who when a poor Student came to his door begging an Almes, and his Wife pleaded
Penury, gave him a Silver Bowl: and as Idem in his Life, pag. 760. Bernard Gilpin, who when he saw naked Peo∣ple, would pull of his Cloaths, and cloth them. Ministers had need therefore to call upon men frequent∣ly, Give Almes, gives Almes; and give to every man as he hath need. And you had need to call upon your own souls for it; for O, how backward are they! and how un∣willing to be drawn to it! With many, every penny of money which they give, when pressed to it, is as a drop of their blood, and they are as loath to spare the one, as the o∣ther. But I pray you consider this, you that are so backward to this. That mans Estate consists of three parts. 1. Necessaries. 2. Decency. 3. Su∣perfluity. God allowes you the two for∣mer, but requires the third for the poor. If a man refuse to part with it, he forfeits the former too; and God oft-times takes the forfeit. But I cannot yet so leave Cha∣rity, for it is so lovely, so comely, so ex∣ceeding goodly; O it ravishes with its Beauty, replenishes with its Bounty, and
cherishes with its Benignity all that, need it, and come near it, where it is in truth; for it is just like fire, for so it warms the na∣ked, makes lightsome the sadded, and with its comfortableness cherishes the de∣stituted; and therefore make much of this Fire; O let it not by any means go out, but rather go and kindle it, go and feed it, go and keep it in; and let many be fed, be filled, be refreshed by it: nay, let it set your selves on fire, that your hearts may burn with it like fire, which else will be as cold as a Key, and had need therefore to be heated with it, and inflamed by it. Secondly, Their Souls, you must feed with your lips; according to that in Prov. 10.21. The Lips of the Righteous feed many; name∣ly, with wholesome admonitions, seasona∣ble instructions, profitable reprehensions, and comfortable communications. O Be∣loved, what cause have we to inculcate this, such a time as this, wherein so many, who profess much, yet express little of that Goodness, that Sweetness, that Delight∣fulness, that Riches, that Happiness which is in God, in Christ, in his Word, in Hea∣ven. So as that I may well and seasonably
here take up that sad complaint which Isi∣dore made in his time, speaking of Heaven; Though this Kingdom be Eternal, not a word of that; for what man is there, that spends the least part of a day in meditating upon that? that once makes mention of that? that instructs his Wife and Children of that? all our talk is but vain. But let this be mended; and because our bashful natures are utterly averse from such talk, let us oppose Grace against Nature, and force Nature, let us offer an holy Violence to our selves, and constrain our selves to talk bet∣ter, and to talk more of Heaven. Evagrius, 1.4. c. 14. One Writes of some Martys, that though their Tongues were cut out, yet they did speak; and shall not we, that have our Tongues, and the use thereof lest us, speak? Oh speak, speak one to ano∣ther, and that often; as those in Mal. 3.16. and when you do speak, speak the wonderful Works of God; as the Apostles did, Acts 2.11. or as Nil nisi castum, vel Sermo Dei ex ejus ore processi. Author vitae Hieronymi. Jerome, of things chaste, and of God's Word▪
and begin so to do this very day, and after this very Sermon, as they at that day. O, do not defer it any longer, the sooner the better; the Matter in hand will furnish you with Matter, for it is of the great Kingdom of Heaven, which must be taken by Force; and therefore stir up one another, talking of it with your Wives, Children, Servants, Neighbours, Fellow-Hearers, saying one to another, as Aug. Confess. 1.8. c. 1. Austin once said to Alipius his friend, after he had heard much of some mens taking of Heaven by Violence; What is this? What suffer we under the Tyranny of Sin? Unlearned men (such as Authony, and others in Egypt, and Milan) do take Heaven by Violence; and we with all our Learning without Hearts, behold how we lie groveling in flesh and blood; so, what do we suffer, say Heaven suffers, and suffers Violence, and we suffer it to be taken by others, and will not take it our selves. O! come, come, let us also offer Violence to it, that by force we may take it, Heaven is high, but not too high for Forcers, For∣cers will carry it; Thesore let us force our
selves, and do our utmost to win it. Thus talk and speak one to another. 5. In Fasting. For turn to me with Fasting, saith God, Joel 2.12. And what eminent Fasters have most of the Lords most Renowned Saints and Servants been? David, that man after God's own Heart, how did he chasten his flesh with Fasting, though it was to his reproach, Psal. 69.10. So Jehosaphat, 2 Chron. 20.3. how did he seek the Lord with Fasting? So Daniel, Dan. 9.3. how did he set himself to call upon his God with Fasting? So that great King of Nineveh, how did he humble himself before the King of Kings in Sack∣cloth and Ashes, and with Fasting, Jona. 3.6, 7. And what shall I more say? For the time would fail me to tell of Joshua, Josh. 7.6. of Samuel and all Israel, 1 Sam. 7.6. and of Esther; and of Anna, which being a Widdow of four-score and four years, (to shame many of our young and lusty peo∣ple, that will not fast a day, unless it be by constraint, and by a command from the Higher-Powers) departed not from the Tem∣ple, but served God with Fastings and Pray∣ers,
night and day, Luke 2.37. The like instances could be given in many others, who lived since Christ, and flourished in his Church like the Trees of Eden; but Clerk in his life, p. 932. Calvin only shall serve, who for ten years toge∣gether fasted daily, and made but one meal a day, at night, spending all his time in and about the Things of God, and in Prayer; insomuch as that a very Rivetus reports it. Papist writing of him calls, him in Frend Un grand jeune∣ur, that is, a great Faster; and shall we spend our time in eating and drinking, and neglect so famous a Duty? Is that the way to Heaven? Is that to offer Violence to the Kingdom of Heaven? Because fasting is unsavory to the flesh, as making the Belly to suffer, therefore forsooth we will not fast; but had we that sweet and gracious appetite which the prementioned Saints had, then fasting would be as pleasant to us as feasting; For it is the Souls feasting, because it brings gracious Souls to the greatest dainties, and they to a tast, with which no savouriness of Meats, no variety
of Dishes, no sweetness of Wine, or Wo∣men can be parallel'd. O sweet feasting then that comes by fasting; Fast therefore, and thereby feast your Souls often; O Be∣loved, and if the flesh draw backward, force it forward, and make it to suffer; for Heaven suffers, and suffereth Violence, and why shall not our sluggish flesh? 6. In Considering, or Consideration which differs from Me∣ditation; thus Meditati∣on is an Agitation, and repetition of things Langius in sua Polyanth. p. 296. Aquin. 2, 2. q. 18. a. 3. pro∣ceeding from reason, and piece by piece, and tend∣ing to happiness to be in∣joyed in the enjoyment of the everlasting Verity. Consideration is a more Omnis operatio intellectus, Langius. p. 257. general operation of the Intellect, whereby she looks and dives into things deliberately, to find out what she desireth and ought to know. Now this consideration how needful it is, you may perceive partly by God's ex∣press Command, in Psal. 45.10. Hearken O Daughter, and consider; and partly by
her Operations and Properties, for she is the Key which opens the Door to the Closet of our Heart, where all our Books of Ac∣count do lie; she is the Looking-Glass, or rather the very eye of our Soul, whereby she seeth her self, and looketh into all her whole estate, her riches, her good gifts, her defects, her safety, her danger, her way she walks in, her pace she holdeth, and finally the place, and end she draweth to; and without which, in short, she runs on blindly into a thousand brakes and briers, stumbling at every step into some one inconvenience or other, and is continually in peril of some great and grievous sin: and a thing much to be admired it is, that whereas in all things else, men confess, and see that nothing can be either begun, prosecuted, or well ended without consideration; yet in this great bu∣siness of the Kingdom of Heaven, E. B. p. 12. no man almost thinks the same necessa∣ty. Were a Mariner to make a Voyage from England to Jerusalem, albeit he had made the same once or twice before, yet would he not now take such a great Voyage in hand again without consideration, whe∣ther
he were in the right or no, what peace he held, how near he were to Rocks and Sands which he must shun, and how near to his Voyages end; and think you dear Friends to pass from hence to the Heavenly Jerusalem, from men to God, from this miserable world, into that other blessed and pleasant world, and that by so many Hills and Hells; so many Gulphs and quick-Sands; so many Rocks and dangers never passed before, and this without considera∣tion at all; ye are utterly deluded, if you conceive so, for this passage hath far more need of consideration then that, being much more subject to miscarriages, every sinful pleasure, every sensual delight, every vain thought, every idle word, every wanton look, every inticing sound, every provo∣king and unclean touch, and every tempta∣tion of men or Devils, being a Pyrate ly∣ing ready to surprize, ready to spoil your poor Souls in their Voyage towards Hea∣ven; wherefore let me perswade every one of you that would take Heaven by force, to force his Soul to consideration, for the Soul is, and will be as unwilling to it as some Debtors, who are deeply indeb∣ted,
are to cast up their Accounts, to avoid trouble; for so men count it great trouble, to enter into a serious consideration of their estates, and of such like things, which is one of their greatest Follies; for as in things of this Life he were but a foolish Factor, who would never look into his own Account-book, whether he were before∣hand, or behind; and as the Mariner were very much to be blamed for his follie, that for shunning of care and trouble, would go into his Cabin, and be merry, eat, drink, play, not caring for his Ship which way it did run, and letting it go whither she would: So it is madness and folly in the highest de∣gree to shun consideration because of trou∣ble, and to make good chear instead of ma∣king Heaven by consideration sure, and to be negligent when you should be diligent; to get all things by consideration ready a∣gainst the day of your account, which you must give to God, that you may give it up with joy, and mansion for ever with God. O good God, stir up this peoples Hearts, that they may stir within them, yea boil, as it were, and boil over, so as to make them considerate; and be you, O my Brethren,
now like a good Factor, who when he is sent by his Master beyond the Seas to a place of Traffick, there to trade for his Masters benefit, doth not spend his time in eating, drinking, gaming, dancing, and such like things, but rather goeth, and con∣siders, wherefore am I here? am I not here to do my Masters service? And so goeth about his Masters business; so you being sent by your great Master in Heaven into this World to Traffick for him, as you may see Mat. 25.14, 15, &c. do not spend your time idlely, or doing worse; do not drink your selves drunk with the Drunken; do no glut your selves with the Glutton; do not dilapidate and mis-spend your preci∣ous time with Carding, Dicing, courting of Wanton Women; do not give up your selves to Chambering, and Lasciviousness, but rather retire your selves, and consider every one of you with himself, Wherefore am I here? here in this place? here in this Town? hath not my great Master in Hea∣ven sent me hither to look after his busi∣ness, and to do him service in this place, and shall I do the Devils business, and serve him? O God forbid: Or thus, as
Author vitae Ber∣nardi. St. Bernard was wont oft-times to call upon himself, saying to him∣self, Adquid Bernarde venisti; that is, Ber∣nard, for what art thou come hither? men∣ning to Claravall is, where his business lay. So say thou that hearest me this day, to thy self every day, calling thy self by thy name, John or Peter, Wherefore art thou come hither to this Town, or Parish? Camest thou not hither to serve thy God in this place, and in this Generation, that having dore the Will of God here, thou mayest life with God hereafter; and so go about thy business, and his business; thine in the second place, and his in the first; and with all earnestness & eagerness, labouring as for life, to obtain by Force that ever-du∣ring Happiness, and ever-blessed Life. 7. In Meditating. Meditation is with a man, as he that smells the Violets, the Ro∣ses, and the Orange-Flowers in a bundle; which is elegantly set forth in the Canticles, where the Spouse plaits up her Hair, trus∣sing it up into a knot, to shew, that we should not diffuse our thoughts into varie∣ty
of conceptions, nor yet consider of di∣vers things only, but should recollect our conceptions, rather into a Knot; the Knot I mean of Meditation, which I am now to speak of, and which is so much comman∣ded, and commended to us in sacred writ; as Josh. 1.8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy Mouth, but thou shalt medi∣tate therein day and night: and 1 Tim. 4.6. Meditate upon these things. And you know what the blessed Man's Commendation is, Psal. 1. That he Meditates in the Law of the Lord day and night: Which because it is a most difficult thing so to do both day and night, makes Meditation so rare as it is: For we Ministers can perswade, ten, twen∣ty, nay, hundreds, to pray, to read, to give Almes, before we can make one to Medi∣tate but one hour of the day; So rare is Meditation, and so rare Meditators. David tells us, that the Law of the Lord was his Me∣ditation all the day long, Psal. 119.97. And Mathias Pride∣aux, in his Intro∣duction. one writes of one of the ancient Kings of Eng∣land, that he spent Eight hours in Meditation eve∣ry day. But where are such Davids, such
Meditators now? Where shall we find them, where? So that we Ministers had need to press this also upon our People ve∣ry much: and you had need to urge, to force, and to reinforce your dead and back∣ward souls to this very much, and often; saying every one of you to his own soul, O my soul, Why art thou so averse from so high and heavenly a Duty? Is this to labour for Heaven? all the day long, not so much as to mind or mention Heaven? Is this to take it by Force? to let day pass after day, week after week, opportunity after opportunity, and yet never once to lay hold on any, or to redeem any part or portion of so much precious time, for any serious thoughts to be bestowed upon Eternity? O my Brethren, will ye therefore be dis∣couraged from meditating, because it is dif∣ficult work, and because few there are that do it? O far be it from such as some of ye be, Pretenders, I mean, to the taking of Heaven by Violence: The more difficult the work is, the greater will be your glory, if ye set your selves in good earnest to it, and the greater your reward; for by it we turn Eagles; and like Eagles, towr up, and
draw night to the very Sun it self; the Sun, I mean of Righteousness, the Lord Jesus; nay, by it we are even clothed with the Sun; I mean, that Sun, like that Mystical Wo∣man in Rev. 12.1. to whom were given two wings, as of a great Eagle, having about us the unspotted Righteousness of the Lord Jesus to cover our nakedness and unrighte∣ousness; and by it we out-soar all humane blandishments, overlook all earthly con∣tentments, transcend all sublunary Paradi∣ses, and emparadise our selves in the Para∣dise of God, Where Fulness of Joy is, and Pleasures are for evermore, Psal. 16.11. Be∣take therefore your selves to your wings of Meditation and Contemplation (which some say, is somewhat more & higher than Meditation) and fly aloft like so many great Eagles, even beyond the Moon, and be∣yond the Clouds, nay beyond the Sun it self, which is higher than the Moon, yea sar above all Heavens, I mean inferiour Hea∣vens; as Christ did, Ephes. 4.8. and strive to be there, even by force, where he now is, having your minds, your hearts, your conversations in that highest Empyrean Heaven. Heaven your selves thus as dear
Saints, and as other Saints have done be∣fore you, whose Conversation was in Hea∣ven, Phil. 3.20. 8. In Fimshing or Persevering. Be thou faithful unto Death, saith Christ, and I will give thee the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. and, I have fought a good sight, saith Paul, I have finished my course, 2 Tim. 4.7. Which there∣fore puts me upon Finishing: for it is not enough for a General to go into the field, and to charge an enemy; no, but he must overcome him, to win a Crown: So we, to overcome, and so to win the Crown of Hea∣ven, must persevere, and hold out to the end of our Militia; for, he that shall endure to the End, the same shall be saved, Mat. 24.13. Hence Victory in the Hebrew, is cal∣led Netsach, [] from Nuseach; signi∣fying he hath insisted eagerly, urged vehe∣mently, and continued indesinently to the very end of his undertaking; for Perse∣verance is needful in wars: Persevere therefore, most dear Saints, to the end, if you will have your errands end: It is con∣fessed, that ye will meet with many lets, ma∣ny discouragements, many taunts, many re∣proaches, many enemies, especially at par∣ting;
For as a Pyrate will set upon a ship, then most, and soonest, when it is richly la∣den, and near its Haven; so will Satan set upon us most busily and eagerly then, when we being fraighted, and filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, are near▪ our end: but all this must not emasculate, nor dismay us, no, but we must keep on our pace, hold up our heads, pursue our intentions, be in∣stant in our prayers, be constant in all our Christian Duties, and maintain our holy and pious Resolutions in despite of all, and be retarded by none of them all. Our own lazie souls will draw back most, and soon grow weary in every one of the several du∣ties which I have mentioned formerly; but we must not cease to put them forward stil, and that by Force: imitating in this that eminent Convert, mentioned formerly, blessed Austin I mean; whose words are these (after he had heard so much of those Worthies, which one Potitian, a Courtier, and a Captain, had spoken of to him, how they did take Heaven by Violence, leading constantly a most strict, austere, and vertuous Life, and had withdrawn himself a little) what did I not say against my self in this
conflict (for he was put thereby into a grie∣vous strait) How did I beat and whip mine own soul to make her follow thee, O Lord? name∣ly, constantly; for many were her fits; but she held back, she refused, and excused her self; and when all her arguments were convicted, she remained trembling, and fearing, as death, to be restrained from her loose custom of sinning, whereby she consumed her self, even unto death. As he thus whipt and forced his own soul, so let us ours; for have not ours their many sits and shists too, drawing back, when we are almost perswaded, and make us give over in our several Performances of the Du∣ties of Prayer and Meditation, and such∣like, when we are almost over; but hold them to it, as he did his, though they be never so averse, nay, though they do even tremble at it, and pine at it, and would ra∣ther not be, than lose then lose courses. O Christians, our Constancy will coronate all our labours, and remunerate all our good Endeavours used for Heaven; Heaven at last will pay for all▪ Wherefore let us nei∣ther faint nor fail, though never so much either discouraged or opposed. For a farther, manifestation and prosecu∣tion
of all this that I have spoken, I'll use this familiar Comparison; There is a Rock in the midst of the vast and boysterous Oce∣an Sea, the proud Waves of which beat upon it, the fierce Winds beat against it, those immeasurable Seas of water which are in it, encompass it; but do either Winds, or Waves, or Waters move it; or are they able to remove it, or to break it? No, no, they cannot; they cannot. Now a true Christi∣an is such a Rock: like Peter; whose Name signifies a Rock; and therefore no Winds of Persecution, no Waves of Temp∣tation, no Seas of Affliction, should turn him aside from his Stedfastness, nor from his holy Conversation, nor from his going to take Heaven by Violence; but he ought to be as stedfast and unmoveable, as others be unstable, vain, light, and variable. We have a notable place for this, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my beloved Brethren, Be ye stedfast, unmovable, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your la∣bour is not in vain in the Lord. Do ye hear this Sirs, what is required of you? do ye see what ye must be? I believe you do; and therefore let every man here present,
prove a constant man, and hold out firmly and strongly till he be unmann'd by death, that he may be saved, and heavened after death everlastingly; which God in mercy grant. 2. Be perswaded to force the Kingdom of Heaven it self. Q. If you ask me How? I answer; By a forcible Entry; striving, 1. To enter in at that strait Gate; which is called Christ. 2. To press thorow that narrow Way, of the difficultest and strictest of all good Works. 3. To break thorow the Ranks & Files of your great and mighty Enemies, which are betwixt you and it. 4. To pass with Courage and Patience through great Tribulations. 1. Striving to enter in at that strait Gate; which is called Christ, Mat. 7.13. compa∣red with John 9.10. where Christ himself saith, I am the Door. Many think that it is the easiest thing in the world to come to Christ, and by him to Heaven; but they are utterly deceived; for so strait and strict is Christ, as that he will not allow us so much, as a look cast upon a woman to lust
aster her in our hearts, Mat. 5.28. nor any thing more in our ordinary communicati∣ons, to bind them, than Yea or Nay; saying, Whatsoever is more than these, cometh of evil; that is, as Expositors say, of an evil Consci∣ence, or of the Devil, ver. 37. nor any private resistance to be made against evil; for That is, resist not out of revenge any evil offered to you. re∣sist not Evil, saith he, ver. 39. nor any miscalling of any man, by the name of Fool, or the like; nor yet any passionate sit of anger, or the like; ver. 22. nor any one sin, else whatsoever it be; for Sin no more, saith he, John 9.11. and if thy right eye offend thee; that is, cause thee to sin; for the Original is, Scandalise thee; and sins are Scandals; that is, Jun. in loc. Stones at which we stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; and if thy right-hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee, Mat. 5.29, 30. to shew, that Christus hyperbo∣lice docet resecan∣dum quicquid nos impedit, ne obsequi∣um Deo praestemus. Idem in loc. any sin, though it be as dear or near as ones right eye, or hand, must be cast away from us, if we would not be
Cast-awayes our selves, nor have the doom and sentence of Damnation past upon us. And besides, O! what a hard thing it is by Faith to go into Christ, and to lay hold on Christ, to believe Christ, or a Christ is nothing to that? That poor man in the Go∣spel, Mark 9.24. how he wept and cryed when he was to Believe in Christ? Take one Comparison more from a Rock. A man is Ship-wrackt at Sea, but seeth a fair great Rock in the midst of the Sea, and strives to get upon it; but the Rock is high, and he can sind nothing to hold by; and besides, when he comes very near it, the winds and waves of the Sea beat him from it; and if with much ado he get up∣on it, one wave of the Sea raketh over his head, and another, and another, and is like to wash him clean away, and to cast him back again into the midst of the Sea. This man is every man that goeth by Faith to lay hold on Christ; for he is one that hath suffered Ship-wrack, as well as others, in our Father Adam; and Christ is like a Rock in the midst of the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.4. which this poor Ship-wrackt-man espies,
and whom to he draws, and swims, and makes to lie hold on by Faith, to save him∣self in him, and by him; but Christ is high in his terms upon which he will be taken, as ye were told just now; and besides, when this poor man comes to fasten himself up∣on him, and to hold him, he can find no Faith to hold by, and so cries out, and saith, O I have no Faith, not so much as a grain of mustard seed, and therefore how can I lay hold on Christ! O I must needs be cast away, and be suffocated, and drowned in those merciless waters of woe and misery which are about me, and are even ready to swallow me, ready to drown me! O woe, woe is me because of Unbelief! for I can∣not believe that ever Christ gave himself for me: If this man be told by one of a thousand, that he hopes better things of him, and that his striving to come to Christ, is an argument that there is Faith in him, though it be so little as that he seeth it not; he saith and replieth again, Yes, I cannot but acknowledge that some Faith there is in me, but I fear that it is but a dogmatical or historical, or temporary Faith, and so
will by no means own any other true and Saving-Faith, which he saith still he wants: and if at any time he come somewhat near that great Rock, Christ, and begins to have some hopes, and some confidence that Christ dyed for him, and that he shall be saved by him, he is beaten off again by and by, either by Satans suggestions, or his own doubting hearts tumultuations, so as that he is where he was again, and denyeth again all that ever he spake and thought be o, concerning his Faith, and Christ; crying out, and saying, That he hath no pa  Christ, because he cannot believe in Christ▪ and if afterwards he get with much ado ∣on that Rock, and begin to relie upon him by Faith, and think himself sure, there comes upon him, within a short time, such trouble of mind, and such a variety of new temptations, and doubts, which, like the waves of the Sea, are like to take him clear off, and to cast him back again into the Abyss and depth of that Sea of misery which he was in before; and that makes  cry out again, O I shall never be saved! for whereas I thought verily I had Faith, true
Saving-Faith, I now see clearly that I have none; and therefore must die, and be dam∣ned, and perish, and be engulphed in an Ocean of trouble and tribulation, anguish and affliction, to an endless duration. This hath been my very case once, and therefore I know all this to be so by mine own experience; and I do appeal for it to your experiences also, whether some of ye do not find it so in like manner, that it went with you when first you believed, as with that poor man in the Gospel, whose doub∣tings were such, and so many, as made him cry out with tears, Lord, help thou mine un∣belief, Mark 9.24. So that it is one of the hardest things in the world to come to Christ by Faith, and at, and thorow Christ, to Life & Salvation; because strait is the Gate which leads to Life, Mat. 7.13. Strive there∣fore, O strive to enter in at the strait Gate, strive to lay hold on Christ; strive to get Faith, saying as that poor man said, Lord help our Unbelief: nay, with tears in your eyes, with sorrow in your hearts, with zeal as hot as fire, in your prayers, approach to the Throne of Grace for this Grace, and
never let God go, till by Faith you can go, and go to Christ, and by Christ to Heaven. Heaven is large, that is certain, and a man shall have room enough when he is in it: but the Gate to it, I mean Christ, is so strait, so strict, so hard to be entred, as that with∣out much striving, much stirring, much strugling, no flesh can be saved? Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, elevate the thoughts of your hearts, and bestir your selves at this Gate to enter; for there is no other Name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. As for Works, and Duties, and Performances for∣merly spoken of, they must all say, Salva∣tion is not in us: so Resisting must say, It is not in me; so Reading, It is not in me; so Fasting, It is not in me; the like may be spoken of all the rest. Neither is there Sal∣vation in any other, Acts 4.12. Object. You will say to me, Did ye not tell us of Believing, and Christ, already in a former direction; and therefore why do ye tell us of the same now again? Sol. I answer: When I spake of Belie∣ving, and of Christ formerly, my design
was to let you see the Necessity of Belie∣ving, and so to perswade you to it; but now my purpose is to make you see the Difficul∣ty of it especially; that seeing what a hard thing it is to come to Christ, and by Faith to enter into Christ, and by Him into Hea∣ven, you may strive the more, both first to lay hold on Christ, if never yet ye entered into Christ, and also afterward and alwaies, even after all the duties premised, that you may not be deceived, thinking that there∣by you may be saved; which is more than was yet declared by all that which hath been said of Faith and Christ, in the di∣rection formerly mentioned. 2. To pass through the narrowest way of the difficultest and strictest of all good Works; for, narrow is the Way which leads to Life, saith Christ. Mat. 7.13. And do not ye find it so? What a hard thing it is to pray continually, and without distraction; and to lift up holy hands, and without wrath and doubting, 1 Tim. 2.8. we being so apt to defile our hands with unclean touches, and to be at variance, and to fall out, and to be angry one with another, and so full of doubts.
Again, What a difficult thing is it to love our Enemies, and our Neighbours as our selves? Mat. 5.44. & 12.39. and to be perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect? Mat. 5.48. O Sirs, all this goeth against the stream, and against nature, and against flesh and blood; flesh and blood cannot endure it, say carnal men; nay, even good men say as those Disciples of Christ, John 6.60. This is an hard Saying: who can hear it? So these are hard Sayings; who can do them. But let them be never so hard, ye must do them: and do as they do in a certain Country, where with Horses they draw their Ships against the streams, and against that great River of Rhine; So, I say, ye must carry on these great Works against Nature, and against all objected and pretended Difficul∣ties, with Resolutions and Endeavours suitable thereunto. I speak the less here, because this doth somewhat border upon that which hath been spoken already, though it be not altogether the same, be∣cause I aim at Difficulty most in this place.
3. You must strive to break through the Ranks and Files of your great and mighty Enemies, which are betwixt you & Heaven. Q. What Enemies? A. The Devil. The World. The Flesh. 1. The Devil with all his Powers, Eph. 6.12, whom you must oppose and overcome. 1. By the Word of Promise, Rom. 16.20. And the God of Peace shall bruise (or as the Original hath it) tread down Satan under your feet shortly. Mark, 1. The God of Peace, and yet here is War; but the God of Peace makes peace, and therefore is called so. Again, Shall bruise Satan, ac∣cording to that sweet promise, Gen. 3.15. The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Ser∣pents Head; which our first Parents so re∣lished and esteemed, after they had once tasted it, as that they wrote it upon Pillars, as Josephus and Melancthon in Chron. Char. Josephus relates it, and from time to time re∣sorted to it and them, as to their Meeting-place, for their Souls refreshing: Or, Shall tread down Satan under your feet; as the Elders of Israel upon the Necks of the Cananean
Kings, as Conquered. Again, Shortly; ye fear ye shall never be freed from such and such Temptations, and from such Blasphe∣mous Thoughts as are injected by him: It was my case once, for I thought so too, that I should never be delivered, but you shall, saith God, and I found it so. Make much of this promise therefore, and prize it above fine Gold, and above Rubies, and above Pearls, for it is more worth, and more then all England is worth, and embrace it, and be perswaded of it, Heb. 11.13. 2. By the Word Promised, I mean Christ the Word Substantial, and God blessed for ever, for he is that Seed of the Woman which shall bruise the Serpents Head, Gen. 3.15. He it is that hath spoiled Principalities and Powers, and hath made a shew of them openly, Triumphing over them in his Cross, Col. 2.15. He it is, of whom it is said, that those which are now in Heaven, which they have won by force, have overcome him by his Blood, Rev. 12.10, 12. And he it is, which co∣vers us in our Warfare against Satan, from top to toe, even throughout, with him∣self, as with an Armour of Proof, Rom.
13.14. It is said of Xiphilin in vita Trajani. Tra∣jan the Roman Empe∣rour, that he would cut in pieces his own Garments rather then his Soulders should want a rag to cover their Wounds. Semblably whereunto Christ our Emperour so covers his Souldiers with him∣self, lest they should want an Armour to co∣ver their Souls in the day of Battel; Take therefore, dear Christians and fellow Soul∣diers, the Lord Christ along with you as you go to encounter Satan, and go sprinkled with his precious Blood, and when he tempts you, and tells you that ye shall be damned, and also entices you to unclean∣ness, to lasciviousness, to wrath, to envy, to malice, to revenge, to swear, to lye; Oppose him with Christ, and shew him his Precious Blood; Saying, Lo here is Christ, who will bruise thy Head; Lo the Blood of Christ which doth wash away all my sins, and cleanse me from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. And lo, the mighty Power of Christ, where∣by I trust that I shall overcome all thy pow∣er, having put about me that strong and mighty Lord, that I may vanquish thee,
and conquer all these thy Temptations, in the power of his Might, Ephes. 6.10. O Sirs! after  mode and method deal with Satan, and he will slee from you. For he cannot endure the sight of that precious blood, but must needs pass by us, and let us alone when he seeth it; as that destroy∣ing Angel passed by those Houses, whose door-posts were sprinkled with the blood of the Paschal Lamb, Exod. 12.23. It is reported, that Satan one time came to a poor sinner diguised, as if he had been sent by God, and told him that he must confess to him all his sins, and that he is to write them down, and to carry them up to God; whereupon the poor man confessed as ma∣ny as he knew; but told him withall, Write this too underneath, The Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanseth us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. which when the Devil heard, he vanished immediately: So powerful is that Precious Blood to profligate that po∣tent Adversary; which caused me there∣fore to write that very Sentence upon my Desk, when I was under great trouble of mind, that I might alwayes view it in myStudies, and be comforted by it in my di∣stresses. 2. The World. The whole World lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5.19. which in Latine is rendered thus; In Maligno positus, quasi in Royard hom. 2. in Eph. 6. malo igne positus; that is, Is placed in an evil Fire, set on fire by the Devil, here called Evil: and therefore we must needs oppose it, and by no means agree with it, though we must pass through the fire, as it were, to overcome it: As some brave Warriors have charged their Ene∣mies through the very Fire, in Towns set on fire. Object. You will say, That the World is strong and mighty, and that you find it so by woful experience, what a mighty enemte it is; and that therefore you know not what to do to overcome it: Sol. To this I answer. 1. Remember what was said by Christ, John 6.33. Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World: So that you have to do with a conquered slave; and therefore fear not little Flock, for you shall overcome it, because Christ hath con∣quered
it already for you, to make your conquest easie to you. 2. Ponder the words of St. John, This is the Victory which overcometh the World, even our Faith, 1 John 5.4. Mark; He doth not say, it will, but it doth overcome the World. O the Power! O the Strength! O the Puissance of Saving-Faith! which is so vi∣ctorious, saith he, as that it is a Conque∣rour over the World wheresoever it is; nay, is Victory it self. If then you have Faith, fear not, but use it, and use it against this vast, this vile, this vain, this false, this wicked World, believing verily, that it shall not prevail against you, because that Faith which is in you, is stronger than the World which is against you. 3. The Flesh. For O, what an Enemy is it to all Flesh! O how it wars, how it com∣bates, and, how it fighteth against the Spi∣rit, that the best of us cannot do as we would! So that needs we must fight against it, and break by force through all the allurements and oppositions of it. Object. You will say, Why then saith the Apostle, We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood? Ephes. 6.12.
Sol. I answer. His meaning is, as Zanchius in loc. some say, not simply; or, as others, not Petr. Lombard, Thom. Aquin. only; for then one Sword should be as long as an Marlorat in loc. other, and one man so strong as an other. The Flesh then must be conquered as well as Satan; for it is as great an Enemy to the poor soul, as he, if not greater: which caused the Apostle Pe∣ter to write thus; Dearly Beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from Fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. O the poor soul, how it is pe∣stered with it! For when it would fast, and humble it self before God, the Flesh saith, I must feast, eat, drink, and be merry; when the Soul would sill it self with Heavenly Meditations, the Flesh saith, I must ful∣fill my Lusts, I must fill mine eyes with A∣dultery, and fulfill my desires with this and that womans company, Embraces, Solaces; and I must be a little wanton, lascivious and extravagant this time, solacing my self with Loves: so that this lascivious and luxuri∣ant Flesh of ours, must be curbed, over∣come, and mastered.
Quest. You will say, But how? Answ. By Chastity and Sobriety; For Contraries are expelled by Contraries: Contraria, contra∣riis expelluntur. Be saber therefore, I say, with the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 5.8. The like may be said of Chastity, Be chaste; according to that of Paul, 1 Thes. 4.3, 4, 5. But I desire to insist on Sobriety most; for he that is sober, will be Sobrietas est men∣tis, & sensus mem∣brorum omnium corporis quo tutel castitatis; pudici∣tiaeque mun men∣tum. Aug. chaste also, because Sobriety is no∣thing else but a Sobrietas vir∣tus est appetets per quam prae voluptates, ne ap∣petuntur quidem. Aristot. de vit. et vit. Divis. Vertue, whereby corrupt and de∣praved Pleasures are not so much as desired, but rather restrained. And therefore O blessed So∣berness; how my soul is enamoured with it! O I love thee with my very heart, dear Soberness, for thou hast ravished me with one Chain about thy neck; and that Chain is a Concatenation of all manner of rare and ravishing Excellencies, which are all linked together in love, and make thee
so exceeding lovely! O thine is freedom, and with thee is contentment; and by thee comes a most sweet immunity from great offences; offences else will come, if thou do not come, come, I mean, to keep them off. Come then, my Brethren, and become as sober as ever were any Saints; and sober in dyet, sober in marriage, and sober out of marriage; and sober in apparel, apparel∣ling your selves with Humbleness; for that is well-pleasing to God. God grant that my speech may take, so as that Heaven at last you may take. 4. You must strive with Courage and Patience to pass through fiery Tryals, and great Afflictions: for, We must through much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. And of the Saints in Hea∣ven, clothed with white Robes, saith one of the heavenly Elders, These are they which came out of great Tribulation, Rev. 7.14. And when blessed Bradford was to go to the stake, to sacrifice his life to God by Fire, he took a Fagot in his arms, and embra∣cing it, said, Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leadeth to Life, meaning
fiery Tryals, and great Tribulations. It is not so with the Wicked, which offer no Violence to Heaven; for their way is broad; which leads to Perdition, Mat. 7.13. God deals with them, as men with Gregor. in Job. Oxen; as the Ox∣en appointed to the slaughter, are by them let run a fatting at their pleasure, when o∣thers are kept hard to dayly labour. In like manner the Tree that bears no fruit, is not beaten (as we see) but only the fruitful; and yet the other, as Christ tells, Mat. 3.7. is re∣served for fire. The sick man that is past all hope of life, is suffered by the Physici∣an to have whatsoever he listeth after; but he whose death is not despaired, cannot have that liberty granted. To conclude, The stones that must serve for the glorious Temple of Solomon, were he wed, beaten, & polished without the Tem∣ple, at the Quarry side, 1 Kings 6.7. that no stroak nor hammer might be heard within the Temple. Now S. Peter saith, 1 Pet. 2.5. that good Men are chosen Stones to be pla∣ced in the glorious Building of God in Heaven; where there is no beating, no sor∣row
nor crying, nor cross, Rev. 21.4. Here then, we must be beaten and he wed, and squared in the Quarry, of this World, here we must be fined, here polished; here we must feel the hammer, and pass through great Tribulations: and that requireth our Courage and Patience upon the considera∣tion of Heaven, which will make amends for all. Be patient, saith St. James, Jam. 5.7. and, Be not dismayed, saith God, Isa. 41.10. Which the Lord addeth for our en∣couragement. When thou passeth tho∣row the Waters (namely, of Affliction) I will be with thee; and thorow the Rivers they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest thorow the Fire, thou shalt not be burnt, nether shall the flame kindle upon thee: For I am the Lord thy God; the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour, Isa. 43. Which for our encouragement was even litterally fulfilled in the three Children, upon whose Bodies the Fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed; neither were their Coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them, Dan. 3.27. And in Euseb. l. 4. c. 14. Clerk in his Life, p. 7.8. Polycarpus, who
was so patient and couragious, and whose body would not burn, when he was to be burnt with fire, the Lord having caused him to hear a Voice from Heaven, saying, Be of good cheere, O Polycarp, and play the Man: which Voice his hearers heard; who write this of him; The Speaker no man saw; but the Voice many of us heard, say they. Let us be patient therefore, and couragious also in all our Afflictions which we suffer: And the Lord give us patience & courage, that we may run through all these fiery Try∣als, which are to try us; and after we have been tryed, as Gold is tryed in the fire, we may obtain the Crown of Heaven, which is set before us; and which otherwise than by Fire and Violence, cannot be had by us. 3. You must force the King thereof him∣self. Quest. If you ask me, How? Answ. By uncessantly violent Intrea∣ties. This Answer consists of two Branches. 1. By Violent Intreaties. 2. By uncessantly Violent Intreaties.
1. By Violent Intreaties; for the Effctual Fervent Prayer of a righteous Man availes much, Jam. 5.17. O it presseth into the Pre∣sence of God; it breaks through whole Hosts of hostile Powers; it chargeth through the thickest Troups of Oppositi∣ons; it mounts up beyond the Stars; it pe∣netrates the Heavens; nay, it towrs up be∣yond all aspectable Heavens, and never ceases towring, till it enters the very Hea∣ven of Heavens; where it wrestles with the God of Heaven for Heaven, and ne∣ver gives him over, till by Force it hath won Heaven. And therefore let this mighty Champion, which we call Wrestling, en∣ter the Lists with God for you, that Hea∣ven may be taken by you. Which God in mercy grant unto you. 2. With Uncessantly Violent Intreaties: For, Pray continually, saith Christ, Luke 18.1. and With all Perseverance, saith the Apo∣stle, Ephes. 6.18. which is much more; For in this Direction is a Climax, or Gradati∣on, from much, to much more; For to pray Uncessantly, is as much beyond Vio∣lent Intreaties, as the Sun is beyond the
Moon; in that as the Moon can have no light without the Sun, so we, without Perseverance in Prayer, can see no light of God's Countenance beaming upon us, no help to assist us, no strength to enable us, for high things to be attempted by us; there we may cry and roar in prayer, and yet in vain, unless we continue in prayer; and though we contend never so much, yet is it to no end, unless we contend so long by our violent Intreaties with God, till we have our errands end; O my Brethren, this is the very Life, the Soul, the Art, the Ma∣ster-peice of right Praying; by it we must needs carry Heaven; nay, with it we shall win the very God of Heaven, even by Force. Force your selves therefore my Bre∣thren; so to invocate the Name of God, and to draw near to the Throne of Grace, for Grace, even Grace to help in a time of need, Heb. 4.16. nay, go and strive by ma∣ny Prostrations before the Throne of Grace, and mighty and uncessant Encoun∣trings with God, to become Overcomers of God; saying to God, as once Jacob said, I will not let thee go, tili thou bless me, Gen.
1. By Violent Intreaties; for the Effectual Fervent Prayer of a righteous Man availes much, Jam. 5.17. O it presseth into the Pre∣sence of God; it breaks through whole Hosts of hostile Powers; it chargeth through the thickest Troups of Oppositi∣ons; it mounts up beyond the Stars; it pe∣netrates the Heavens; nay, it towrs up be∣yond all aspectable Heavens, and never ceases towring, till it enters the very Hea∣ven of Heavens; where it wrestles with the God of Heaven for Heaven, and ne∣ver gives him over, till by Force it hath won Heaven. And therefore let this mighty Champion, which we call Wrestling, en∣ter the Lists with God for you, that Hea∣ven may be taken by you. Which God in mercy grant unto you. 2. With uncessantly Violent Intreaties: For, Pray continually, saith Christ, Luke 18. 1. and With all Perseverance, saith the Apo∣stle, Ephes. 6.18. which is much more; For in this Direction is a Climax, or Gradati∣on, from much, to much more; For to pray uncessantly, is as much beyond Vio∣lent Intreaties, as the Sun is beyond the
Moon; in that as the Moon can have no light without the Sun, so we, without Perseverance in Prayer, can see no light of God's Countenance beaming upon us, no help to assist us, no strength to enable us, for high things to be attempted by us; there we may cry and roar in prayer, and yet in vain, unless we continue in prayer; and though we contend never so much, yet is it to no end, unless we contend so long by our violent Intreaties with God, till we have our errands end: O my Brethren, this is the very Life, the Soul, the Art, the Ma∣ster-peice of right Praying; by it we must needs carry Heaven; nay, with it we shall win the very God of Heaven, even by Force. Force your selves therefore my Bre∣thren; so to invocate the Name of God, and to draw near to the Throne of Grace, for Grace, even Grace to help in a time of need, Heb. 4.16. nay, go and strive by ma∣ny Prostrations before the Throne of Grace, and mighty and uncessant Encoun∣trings with God, to become Overcomers of God; saying to God, as once Jacob said, I will not let thee go, tili thou bless me, Gen.
32.26. When a City or Citadel is belea∣gured, the great Guns go off often; and when they cease, the Country concludes that it is taken. And so must our Prayers, which are our Canons, as Bombardae Chri∣stianorum Luther. Luther was wont to call them, go off often, when we go to win Heaven; that is, even indesi∣nently the same time when we are about it; crying, as the little Children did once, Mat. 21.9. Hosanna, Hosanna; that is, Now save, now save, even again and again; first here in this Temple, from your very hearts; and when ye are come home, from your Closets, your doors being shut; and never give over crying so, and discharging your great Canons so, till you have won Heaven; that is, never come out of your Chambers, after they have been shut, till you have got∣ten some assurances from Heaven, that you shall have Heaven; concluding so, because God hath heard them, and as it were told them, that Heaven is taken by them. But here I must resolve two Cases of Conscience.
1. Case. The first is; Sir, we have heard all this, and yet there is no stirring after all this, some will say; and therefore what shall we do in this Case? To this I answer in four Conclusions. 1. There may be no stirring with some of you, because you are not yet effectual∣ly called, and spoken to, nor yet blown upon by the Spirit of God, John 6.44. like those dry bones in Ezek. 37.2. even very dry, so as that there was no stirring among them at all; till after, when the Prophet prophesied to them, and the Wind, that is the Spirit of God, which is like Wind, did breath upon them. 2. Conclusion. There may be no stirring with some of you as yet, because your time is not come yet; some are called the third, some the sixth hour, some the ninth, some the eleventh hour, Mat. 20.3, 5, 6. 3. Conclus. If there be no stirring with you, because you are not yet effectually called, nor have been blown upon by the Spirit of God, then you must pray to the Lord, that this my preaching now at last, may work upon you, and there may be a
stirring among you: as thus; O our God, say, Let this man's preaching to us belike Ezekiels prophesying; For Lord, hast not thou sent him, saying, Go and prophesie to these dead dry bones, which are in that Town of T—that they may live? and wilt not thou bless his prophesying to our souls? O that there were a shaking among us, as there was among those bones! O most mighty God, let there be such a shaking, and such a stirring among us, now at last, after all this prophesying, that we may stand upon our feet, as a great and terrible Army with Banners, Cant. 6.11. and take Heaven by Force. Or thus, As Moses prayed, Numb. 14.17. And now I beseech thee, let the Power of my Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken: So let every one of you now cry, and say to Lord, And now I beseech thee, let the Power of my Lord be great, accor∣ding as thou hast spoken. So let every one of you, now cry and say to the Lord; And now I beseech thee, let the Power of my Lord be great, according as thou hast spo∣ken, saying, I will cause breath to enter in∣to you, and ye shall live, Ezek. 37.5. and, Ve∣rily,
verily I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God; and they that hear, shall live, John 5.24. Lord, I am dead; cause me to hear his Voice, this hour, this time, that I may stir, and live: O this stirring, it is that which must work, must move our hearts, must remove our affections, must elevate our spirits, must collocate our souls in a capacity and ability to attain to high atchivements; and therefore I advise you so much, and perswade you so earnestly to beg it. 4. Conclus. But if your time be not yet come; as it is said of those Figs, Mark 11.13. For the time of Figs was not yet; then you must even wait, till that Gospel-An∣gel shall come, which shall move the Wa∣ters; that is, your affections, so powerful∣ly, as that you may stir; as those blind, and lame, and impotent ones, at the Pool of Bethesda, John 5.3, 4. and till the Spirit of God himself shall come, and move upon the waters of your affections effectually; as he did, Gen. 1.2. to produce and to bring
forth a new Creation, even your Regene∣ration; which God in mercy grant. 2. Case. The second Case is this, But suppose there be a stirring amongst us since you preached thus, so as that many of the things which you pressed, have been done among us; may not all that be in vain? and if so, what shall we do in such a case? I answer three wayes. 1. Granting. 2. Discovering. 3. Advising. 1. Granting that you may stir, and do many things in vain; for, Many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able, saith Christ, in Luke 13.24. And did not Herod stir, and perform and reform many things in vain? Mark 6.20. 2. Discovering; namely, the Causes why you may stir, and do many things in vain: For first, You may build without a foun∣dation; that is, you may want a due deep and sufficient Humiliation, so much requi∣red, Joel 2.13. Jam. 4.9, 10. 1 Pet. 5.6. Secondly, You may refuse to go thorow∣stitch:
As Herod, who kept his Herodias, Mark 6.22. Thirdly, You may trust to your doings; as the Pharisee did, Luke 18.12. Which you may know by these two Signes: 1st. If you be proud upon your doings, as the Pharisee, who so boasted of his fast∣ing twice a week, and of his paying of tithes duely, Luke 18.12. 2d. If you presume upon your doings, so as that you make bold thereupon with one sin or other; as the Pharisees, who trusting in themselves, despised others, Luke 18.9. That sin of despising others, went with their trusting to their doings, and in themselves. Beloved, if a base fel∣low abuse a Kings Son, men are apt to say, Surely some body upholds this fellow, and he trusts to that, else he durst not do so: So we may say of men and women, that abuse the Son of God, with one sin or other, whe∣ther it be some base lust, or passion, or usu∣ry, or pride, or wrong, thereby doing de∣spite to the Son of God, Heb. 10.29. and and to the Spirit of Grace; certainly those men trust to their doings, to their prayers,
to their going to Church, that upholds them, and upon that they are so bold to do as they do, else they durst not; they hope that these their doings and duties will bear them out: as doubtless Herod thought so too, when he kept his Herodias, Mark 6.22. Fourthly, You may depend upon your sayings: As for example; Because you can say, and have said, Lord we believe; help our unbelief; and our Beloved is ours, and we are his: As I taught you in the forego∣ing directions to say, you may think that therefore you do believe, when you do not, but only say that you do believe. This is notably set out by St. James, What doth it profit, my Brethren, though a man saith that he hath Faith? Jam. 2.14. Mark: Though he say; Which sheweth, that, as it is now, so it was then; there were men, who thought that they had Faith, because they could say, and did say, that they did believe: That was their Faith; and that is most mens Faith now The World is now, as it was in Ages past. Rel. Medici. p. 12.: And therefore, O the infinite Deceits, and Fallacies of that old Ser∣pent!
O the unfathomable Mazes of his Devices! O the abyss and depth of his Subtilties! Thousands have been so delu∣ded by him: and millions there are now in Hell, suffering the Vengeance of eternal Fire, because they have hearkened to him. 3. Advising, I say Advising you, that, It, 1. You want Humiliation, and have not yet been duly, deeply and sufficiently dejected, and so have built without a good foundation, you lay such a foundation yet, for else how can your building stand? If a House or Castle be not founded upon a sure Foundation, we know it cannot stand, but must needs totter, and come down: And so must all that which you do, come to nothing, if this Foundation be wanting; lke that Seed which wanted deepness of earth; whereby we may understand depth of Humiliation, Mat. 13.5. and therefore be humbled, nay deeply and sufficiently humbled, for all the evils of your wayes; nay, for the evil even of your holy things, and doings, and be not quiet till you be un∣quiet, nor rest till you cannot rest, nor give
over, I mean humbling your selves, till you be come over to that depth of sorrow, which your horrid miscarriages, and mis∣demeanours call for; In a word, as David and his men wept, till they could weep no more, 1 Sam. 30.4. So do you grieve till you can grieve no more; for Nam ultra posse fiery, Non vult lex ulla requiri. then God will re∣quire no more. See 2 Cor. 8.12. 2. If you never went thorow-stich yet, then go farther, and thorow yet; for how many have come short of Christ, and Heaven, because they would not do a lit∣tle more? even as some miss sometimes, and go without a good bargain, or pur∣chase, because they will not give the other pound, or piece; nay, sometimes some part for a groat: O do not you so too; but if any thing be yet wanting, add it, if a little more be required, do it; if a little more must be given for Christ and Heaven, give it; O do not go without it for a smal matter, give the other groat, I pray you; & let it not be said of you, that you left Christ, Life and Salvation for a groat, that is, for a smal mat∣ter,
because you would not do a little more, and go a little further; pray a little more, meditate a little more, and do somewhat else more, which ye never did yet. O Sirs, I must needs press you to this; for so runs my Commission, Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Mat. 28.20. So that needs you must do all that, which in my former Directions I have taught you, and which Christ our Sa∣viour hath any where enjoyned you, though it be never so cross, and contrary to your depraved natures, if you would be sa∣ved. 3. If you formerly trusted to your do∣ings, do so no more, but say as Israel was taught to say, Ashur shall not save us, Hos. 14.3. So Prayer shall not save us, Fasting shall not save us; could we speak with the tongues of Men and Angels, could we set open our eyes, like Sluces, with weeping, could we soar up in the pensiveness of our thoughts like Eagles, and thereby even peep into Heaven, yet should we not be justified thereby: And therefore we trust to be saved only by our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, and by his infinite, and by us undeserved, Mercy, Tit. 3.5. 4. If you relyed on your sayings, go farther hereafter, and do not only say, that you do believe, but labour to believe in∣deed; that is, never be satisfied in that point, nor think that yo do believe, till you see Faith to be in you, by its effects wrought in you; I mean, 1. Love. 2. Holiness. And, 3. Pureness. For it is like Sarah, it will have out Hagar; that is, slavish and servile Fears, and all the Lusts of the Flesh, with the Affections thereof; and like Solo∣mon, it will overlay the Temple of the holy Ghost all with Gold; that is, it will make us all glorious within, nay, throughout, both within and without; even glorious in Holiness, Acts 26.18. and glorious in Love, Gal. 5.6. Need you Incentives after all my Dire∣ctions, and Solutions given you? then take these. Consider that that Kingdom of Heaven, which I perswade you so much to take by Force, is a Kingdom which is,
1. Very High. 2. Very Great. 3. Very Rich. 4. Very Pleasant. 5. Very Glorious. 6. Very Durable. 1. Very High. 1. For its Distance from us. 2. For its Terms upon which it must be taken by us. First, For its Distance from us: For how sar is it think you, from the Center of the World, to the Sun onely? Minima solis distantia a centro mundi continet se∣midiametrum ter∣rae millies & septu∣agies. Lambert. Dan. in Phys. Chrys. p. 2. tract. 4. c. 18. p. 160. Astronomers tell us, that the Distance which is between them, con∣tains the Semidiameter of the Earth, One thou∣sand seventy times. And how far it is from thence to the Empyrean Hea∣ven, who can tell? no man living. The Scripture therefore calls Heaven, Heights, Psal. 148.1. and saith further, that Heaven for Height is unsearchable, Prov. 25.3. So that no Thieves can approach it, no Ene∣mies
assault it, no Wars reach it. There may be another reason given for this, why Hea∣ven is above the reach of all its opposites, because it is not to be seen, being far above all aspectable Heavens, Ephes. 4.8. The Fratres Roseae Crucis. Bre∣thren of the Red Cross, as they call themselves, give out (as I have read it in one of their own printed Books) that the house of their meeting is not to be seen, which I question, whether they speak true in it (though they say, that they are of the purest Protestants) But this is un∣doubtedly true, that the Heaven of Hea∣vens is a place which by us here cannot be seen; for, the eye hath not seen the things (whereof this Heaven is one) prepared for those that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. If then, ye will be a in safe & secure place indeed, which may not be lyable to surprizals; then la∣bour for this Kingdom, to take it by force. Secondly, For its Terms, upon which it must be taken by us: For what are the Terms upon which it stands, think ye? the Terms of it are such as these, They that will enter me, saith this Kingdom, must exceed in
Righteousness, even the strictest Pharisees that ever lived; For except your Righteousness ex∣ceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pha∣risees, ye shall in no case enter into the King∣dom of Heaven, saith Christ, Mat. 5.20. and ye must be perfect, as God is perfect, saith this Kingdom, according to Mat. 5.48. Now, if some men were to serve as Souldiers un∣der a Captain, or General, who promises them, that they shall have for their Service, whatsoever they take, though it be a King∣dom, but that they must do more work than all other ordinary Souldiers, must wake when others sleep, must fast when others feast; they would all say, O what high and hard terms be these! And yet to win a Kingdom, be perswaded to serve such a General, and even force themselves to it, and take extraordinary pains for it, because the Terms proposed are so high, as that otherwise they cannot have it. And so should we force our selves to win the King∣dom of Heaven, and take extraordinary pains for it, because of the high Terms of it, and because else we shall never enter it, unless we do more work than all other
common Sonldiers among men, and keep our selves waking, when other men are sleeping, and abstain from all manner of meat many times, and from all excessive eating and drinking at all times, and that even then, when others at their feasts are inebriciting themselves with strong drink, and glutting themselves with creature-de∣lights, and varieties of dishes and dain∣ties. 2. A very great Kingdom. The World with the Kingdoms of it, is an extraordi∣nary great thing: They write that the Mr. Bolton in his direct. for a comf. walk. p. 13. So Speed, Am∣bitum ejus quidam esse volunt Leuca∣rum Gallicarum no∣vem millium et am∣plius. Lamb. Da∣naeus in sua Phys. Christ. p. 2. tract. 3. c. 23. compass of it is about one & twenty thousand English miles, and some∣what more: but Heaven is infinitely greater; for, Behold! Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens can∣not contain Thee: as if he should say, though it be so extraordinary great, how much less this House which I have built, saith Solomon, 2 Chron. 6.18. Now there is a time
when we may not seek great things for our selves, Jer. 45.5. but at all times we may and should seek after the great Kingdom of Heaven, and now more especially, ha∣ving been so much perswaded to it; and therefore go forth, O my Brethren, in the greatness of your spirits, and heighth of your hearts, to win, to take, to force this great King∣dom of Heaven, which I have so much extolled, and which cannot be otherwise taken, but only by Force. The Lord help you in the doing of it. 3. A very rich Kingdom, for in it are Streets of Gold, and Gates of Pearls, Rev. 21.21. So as that that Mr. Fox in his Acts and Mon. blessed Woman-Martyr of Exce∣ter might well say; when one offered her Money, and she refused it, I am going to a place where Money bears no mastery: all the Wealth of England, all the Gold of both Indies, all the Pearls in the Erythean Seas, are not to be compared with the Riches of it. Now if Riches be any thing esteemed by you, and ye desire to be rich indeed, then strive to win this King∣dom by Violence; for then you are made
rich for ever by it, unutterably rich; for all the Riches of Solomon, all the Trea∣sures of Hezekiah, nay, all the Treasures of Egypt, were as nothing to the Riches of it, 1 Kings 10.23. Isa. 39.2. Heb. 11.26. 4. Very Pleasant, for there the Sun shin∣eth alwayes, I mean the Sun of Righteous∣ness, which is the Light thereof, Rev. 21.23. and besides, there are Pleasures for ever∣more, Psal. 16.11. Mark; For evermore; and therefore far better Pleasures than here; for the Pleasures of Sin, and of this life, are but for a season, Heb. 11.25. like Jonas's Gourd, soon come, soon gone, Jonas 4.10. yea, like Lightning, which is gone sooner. No longer than meat is in the Glut∣ons mouth, and drink in the Drunkards throat, the Pleasure thereof lasteth, when both are down, the sweet gust thereof va∣nisheth; and therefore if you would enjoy better Pleasures, labour for Heaven, where there are Rivers of rarest Delights, Seas of sweetness, and Paradises of Plea∣sures for evermore. 5. Very Glorious. Glorious things are spo∣ken of thee, O City of God, saith David, Psal.
87.3. So I, glorious things are spoken of thee, O Kingdom of Heaven, for in thee are those glorious Mansions which Christ hath prepared for his; in thee those glori∣ous Saints, which shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13.43. in thee those glorious Teachers, Virgins and Martyrs, which wear their Crowns & Aure∣oales upon their heads, like crowned Kings for ever and ever; in thee those glorious Armies of Christ's valiant Souldiers, who have in the strength of his Might, over∣come and vanquished so many thousands of the terribly enraged Enemies of their souls; in thee those faithful men, whom all the de∣lights of this World could not make so ef∣feminate, as to draw them from the strength of their holy and heavenly Man∣hood; in thee those holy Women, who to∣gether with the World, have superated and overcome their own Sex; in thee those Children who have by their holy manners transcended their years; in thee those old men and women, whom here age had made weak, and yet the strength of their Ver∣tues and Graces did not forsake; all wea∣ring
their Diadems of Glory, in the King∣dom of Glory: in thee those glorious and blessed Seraphims, who chant forth their melodious Ditties to the Sacred and ever∣to-be-adored Trinity to all Eternity; in thee those glorious Joyes which stream from Jehovah's never-failing Love; in thee those glorious Rayes, which beam from the Light of his Pleasant Countenance, to re∣fresh all those blessed and crowned Inhabi∣tants, who mansion and dwell with Christ in Glory; in thee is that glorious Body and Person of Christ himself, which is so decked with Majesty, and doth so shine and glister above the Splendor and brightness of that Fountain of all created Light, the Sun, I mean, in the spangled skie. O ye that love now glittering Glory, labour therefore for this Glory, for this is Glory indeed: Nay, all ye that hear me this day, whatever ye be, be for this Glory, let this Glory keep you waking, let this Glory set all your Brains aworking; for Glory is a mightily working thing, O it will, like a Immensum Glo∣ria Calcar habet. Spur, even spur us on to high
Atchievements: And therefore O let this Glory prick ye forward, beyond all earth∣ly things, towards Heaven, that by Violence ye may take it, with all the Glory of it. And thou, O sweet Jesus, do not let this People sleep, or slumber, till they have put themselves upon the taking of it, by a Sa∣cred Violence. 6. Very Durable, for it is an Everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 4.3. and chap. 7.27. even the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, so called, 2 Pet. 1.11. in which regard, it also exceeds and excels all the Kingdoms of the World, even infi∣nitely and unspeakably: for they all shall have, & most have had their Changes, their Ends, their Zeniths, their Quoniam in ge∣nium hoc omnibus creatis ut insita quadam vi; ad mu∣tationem forantur et casum ut ferro consumens quaedam rubigo agnata est, ligno exaedens caries aut teredo, sic animalibus, opidis, regnis internae, et sue causa pereundi. Lips. de const. l. 1. c. 15. Periods, but this shall have none. So the things thereof, and the happi∣ness centered therein, shall have none; For my Salvation shall be for
ever, Isa. 51.6. And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion Cum venerint in caelestem Hierusa∣lem. Lyra in loc. sic Cyril Alex. in loc. with Songs, and everlasting Joy shall be up∣on their heads, Isa. 35.10. The like is said of the Glory of it, that there is, and will be an Eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. And blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be Hebrew  quod est sicut  et significat Aeter∣nitatem. still praising Thee, Selah, Psal. 84.4. and therefore shall the People (namely, thy People) praise Thee for Quod exten∣dendum ad beatitu∣dinem Electorum in Coelis Lorin. in loc. ever and ever, Psal. 45.17. which puts me upon Eternity; a Type whereof was once set forth at Constantino∣ple, in the year 459. after this manner; A certain Fraternity was set up, called by the name of Acaemets, who were so called for their not sleeping, because they were al∣wayes to praise God, both day and night, being divided into three companies, so as that when the first had made an end of sing∣ing, the second was to begin; when the
second had done, then the third; accor∣ding to that fore-alledged place, Psal. 84.4. And therefore O blessed Kingdom, which is thus Eternal, and in which there is sing∣ing for ever and ever; O incomparable Kingdom! for what Kingdom else is like to thee? in thee is Life without Death, Glad∣ness without Sadness, Consolation without Perturbation; Stability without Mutabili∣ty; O Kingdom to be desired of all men! as which hath no O Regnum vere beatum carens morte, vacans fine, cui nulla tempora succedunt per a∣vum. Aug. in med. end; no night, no adversary that can destroy it: there∣in, O my soul, thou shalt enjoy Rest without la∣bour, Joy without dolor, Life without end, and fe∣licity through all eternity: O endless King∣dom! I can hardly make an end of prai∣sing thee; I must needs speak a little more yet of thee, saying, Yesterday was with thee (never, But to day is present ever. Non est in te heri, nec hesternum sed est idemhodiernum.
Tibi Salus. Tibi Vita. Tibi pax Infinita. Tibi Deus omnia. Thou hast Peace that ever lasteth, Health and Life that never wasteth. O that this people were so affected with thee, as they ought to be; but herein appears most mens extreamest both misery and folly, that whereas all men, or most, are for Land, rather than for Lease, if they can reach to it, because it is, as they say, for ever; and whereas they will be sure to have a penny-worth for a penny, and will give so too, yet they are not so wise, nor will be, in heavenly things; for this heavenly and eternal King∣dom they care not for; they prefer their holdings for their frail lives, and meer tri∣fles, before Land for ever; and this Hea∣venly and Everlasting Kingdom, is worth nothing with them, nor will they give or do any thing considerable for it, as if it were not worth looking after, which makes
me the more earnest to press this matter so as I do upon your Consciences, using such Incentives as these be, and especially this last. O my God, do thou work upon this peoples hearts, and let the Spirit of Life come into the wheels of their souls; let him so move their affections, as that they may be lifted up; like those Wheels in Ezeki∣el, Ezek. 1.20, 21. because the Spirit of Life is in them. O let not all these my la∣bours be utterly lost, but let some poor souls be now won to the Shepherd of souls. O Souls, Souls, are ye nothing moved yet with all this? I hope you are; nay, me∣thinks you are by your attention; if ye be, then move, and move indeed; I mean so strongly, so vigorously, so effectually to∣wards Heaven, to take it by Force, as that the world may see your change, your zeal, your forwardness, your labouring for Hea∣ven; Heaven ye see is even at hand; as the Baptist said once, The Kingdom of Hea∣ven is at hand, when he so preached it up, Mat. 3.2. it was so, and so it is now, and
divers enter into it; nay, take it by Force; O do you so likewise, and so live for ever. So be it. To God alone be all Honour and Glory.
A New and Living Way OF DYING: OR A TREATISE, Shewing how Saints, after they have comfortably overcome Sin & the World by Faith, and after a New and Living Manner have lived an Holy and Heaven∣ly Life by Faith, may die at last after a New and Living Way, by, in, and according to Faith; Upon that Famous Scripture, HEBREWS 11.13. These all dyed in Faith.— And provided especially, for Preparation to be made by all men, against the Approach of Death, in these Sickly Times. By Christopher Jelinger. And Published by some Christian Friends. London, Printed in the Year, 1664.
To The Vertuous Lady The Lady ANNE SEYMOUR, Grace and Mercy be multiplied. MADAM, MY great Respect, and thankful Mind which I bear to your Wor∣thy-Self, and to your, No∣ble Family, for many Favours received, hath caused and
compelled me to Dedicate this Tract to your much-ho∣noured Name: and if it may but find entertainment and acceptance, I shall count my labour well bestowed. Only give me leave, Much Honoured Lady, to give you a short Account of this my present Undertaking. These late Times are and have been very sickly, and many every where are fallen asleep; and when the time of our depar∣ture will be, the Lord only knoweth: and we our selves also know this, that it cannot
be long before we likewise shal go to our long home, and be no more seen at our present homes, because our life is but a vapour, Jam. 4.14. and we flie away, Psal. 90.10. which not with standing, how few are there which prepare them∣selves for that time; Cogitan∣tes de fine infinito, ut vivant in infinitum: VVhence it com∣eth to pass, that most men, when after they have lived a careless life, they come to be unmanned by Death, they go Imparati in locum paratum, Unprepared to a place prepa∣red,
idque in aeternum, and that for ever; for that which ends All, is without end. And their nearest friends are much the cause of it; for the com∣mon fashion of Friends is to put their friends in mind of Death, when they doubt that they can live no longer; Zenas the Lawyer, and Luke the Physician, must have given them over, before they will send for Barnabas to give them good Counsel and solid Consolation against their dis∣solution. But I for my part will not deal so with my Chri∣stian Friends.
My design in this Tract is this, To tell men plainly that shortly they must put off their caribly Tabernacles, & shew them evidently, How they must die whilst they live, that they may live when they die; dying in, by, and according to Faith. This, this I aimed at when I penned this Treatise; which, if it be acted by Faith, will so work upon mens and womens precious souls, and do them so much good, as that they will even long to enjoy the chiefest good; and when their work here is done, will
shew them Heaven open for them; where there is health only, and no sickness; living, and no dying; incorruption, and no corruption; ease, and no pain; singing, and no sor∣rowing; For the former things are passed away, Rev. 21.4. Many, I confess, have writ∣ten on this subject of Death, but you will find, that I have left the common road, as much as I might; for my principal aim in this Tract is, To put men upon that New and Li∣ving Way, which the Apo∣stle
speaks of, Heb. 10.20. and which must be taken by Faith; according to which we must die, to live for ever. That Great God, and Sa∣viour, who can do whatsoever he will in Heaven and on Earth, so bless these my La∣bours to you, Madam, and to al that shal read them, as that both you and they may fare the better for them here, and hereafter, for ever. So prayeth Your Ladiships Most humble Servants, CHRISTOPHER JELINGER.
A New and Living Way of Dying. HEB. 11.13. These all Dyed in Faith.— ALmighty God (as one saith well) hath given to men three Mansions of a diverse Quality; 1. The World, wherein they live. 2. The Grave, wherein they corrupt. 3. Either Heaven, wherein they are crowned; or Hell, wherein they are tor∣mented. In the World, their Companion is Vani∣ty; In the Grave, the Worms; In Heaven,
the blessed Angels; and in Hell, cursed De∣vils: I add, For like and like sute best one with an other; Good Men, I mean, with good Angels, and evil Men with An∣gels-Transgressors: and yet such is the fol∣ly of most men, that they would have per∣petual habitations, and an ever-during hap∣piness in this vain World, where neither such felicity, nor perpetuity is to be expe∣cted: for as all have sinned, so all for Sin must be by Death dissolved, even the best not excepted; as by those Worthies which my Text speaketh of, it appeareth. So that men should rather forecast, what course it were best for them to take, that being thrust out of those earthly Tabernacles, in which now they mansion, they might mount up into that most blessed and bliss∣ful House of God, which is not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. What this Course is which men should take, you will understand by my future Discourse, wherewith I shall, God willing, entertain your Christian Patience, decla∣ring FAITH to be that most happy In∣strument, which must bring you to such a
firm, durable and glorious settlement, This ushered and conveyed those gracious Saints which my Text speaks of, out of their earthly and unstable habitations, into those heavenly Mansions above, and places of unexpressable Delights; for they all dy∣ed in Faith; and the end of Faith is, as St. Peter tells us, the salvation of our Souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. I shall therefore call the whole ensuing Discourse, A New and Living Way of Dying, and shew therein, how we may in a most sweet & comfortable manner, af∣ter an holy and heavenly walking, die at last, by, in, and according to Faith; Faith, I mean, unfeigned, lively and saving; In which the antient Patriarchs dyed, accor∣ding to my Text, These all dyed in Faith. In the beginning of this Most Excellent Chapter, the holy Apostle describeth Faith by three several Effects. The first is, That it procreates and be∣gets a sure and certain hope of things pro∣mised by Almighty God, ver. 1. The second is, That by Faith men please God, ver. 2.
The third is, That we believe things to humane reason incredible, ver. 3. Which done, he illustrates and brighten∣eth the said Effects by Examples prompted out of the Sacred Book of God. And first of all, he produceth some Be∣lievers, who flourished before the Flood; as Abel, Enoch, Noah, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. to prove both the second and third effect; the se∣cond by Abel and Enoch, the third by Noah. Afterwards he descends to a second Class of Examples, reckoning up such ancient Fathers as lived after the Flood, before Is∣rael went down into Egypt; Abraham, I mean, Isaac, Jacob and Sarah, to confirm the first Effect, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Having explained the said Examples, he super-adds an Amplification, which begin∣neth with the words of my Text, declaring that the forementioned ancient Patriarchs and Believers, were both most certain in their Hope, and constant in their Expecta∣tion of the Impletion of the Lord's Pro∣mise which he had made unto them; For they dyed in Faith, saith he, such was their constancy.
And thus you may see the coherence of these words with the former. Two things we may note in the Text it self, which is a Sacred Narration. 1. Qui. 2. Quid. That is, 1. Who they be that are spoken of. 2. What is spoken. 1. Who? All these. And who be these? I answer; We may un∣derstand Eagnejus in loc. either Abra∣braham, Isaac, Jacob and Sarah, living after the Flood (for of such he spake before;) Defuncti sunt omnes isti] quipest diluvium fuerunt, vel omnes praeter Enochum transla∣tum. Dionys. Car∣thus. in locum. or all those Patriarchs which lived both before and after, Enoch excep∣ted. 2. What is spoken of all these? That they dyed in Faith. Where observe with me again, two things.
1. Quod. 2. Quomodo. Or, 1. That they dyed. 2. How they died. 1. They Dyed. This puts me upon Death. Aphilosopher called Secundus, being asked of the Emperour Trajan, What Death was? described it thus; Death is an eternal sleep, he should have said a long sleep) the disso∣lution of our bodies, the fears of rich men, the desire of poor men, an mevitable event, an un∣certain Pilgrimage, a Robber of Mankind, the Mother of sleep, the passage of Life, the de∣parture of the living, and a dissolution of all; thus he: But we may more briefly term it a departed breath, enlivened at first by breath cast upon it. Thus they dyed, and yet they were very good, gracious, and most emi∣nent Saints; for Death favoureth none, but like a cruel Mower, cuts down flowers, even the fairest and goodliest; the very best and Holy Men, I mean, which are the very Stars of the Earth, as well as common grass; ordinary and common men, I mean, in the spacious and capacious field of the world.
Doct. 1. Good Men then (as you see) must die, like other men. Death, like those merci∣less and inexorable Creatures, Fire and Wa∣ter, spareth none, Omnia sub leges Mors vocat atra suas. all must away, both good and bad. This is the point which I will, 1. Confirm and fortifie. 2. Vindicate. 3. Explicate. 4. Apply. I. I'll confirm it, 1. By Scripture. 2. By Experience. 3. By Reason. 1. By Scripture, which is full of such sad Examples, as will sufficiently evince the truth of this Assertion. Pervolve but the 5th chapter of Genesis, and you shall find that all those good Patriarchs that lived be∣fore the Flood, dyed as well as other wick∣ed and ungodly men. And then search for those that lived in succeeding Ages, be∣sides those whom my Text makes mention
of, as Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Samuel, David, Josiah, Hezekiah, Isaiah, &c. and you shall find them all dead, Acts 7.15. 2. Nay do you but ask Experience what is become of such holy and heavenly men and women as you knew in your time, and it will tell you, they are all dead; or if you will August. l. de Nat. et grat. view but the Graves and Monuments that are in this Church and Church-yard, and they will affirm the same. 3. But I suppose that some of you do rather wonder why it should be so, than doubt whether it be so, seeing the truth of this assertion is so manifest and apparent; and therefore understand, 1. Reas. That when Adam fell, it was not the man that fell, but mankind, Rom. 5.19. so that all, both good and bad, must therefore taste of deaths cup; as it is writ∣ten, Wherefore as by one man Sin entered in∣to the World, and Death by Sin, so Death pas∣sid upon all men, for that all have sinned, Rom. 5.12. 2. Reas. It is a favour afforded by Na∣ture,
Quod gravissimum fecit, fecit commune, ut crudelitatem fati consolaretur aequalitas. That she hath made that common which is most grievous, that so Equality might so∣lace the Cruelty of that fate which is alto∣gether inevitable. And, 3. Reas. That which thou sowest, is not quickned except it die, 1 Cor. 15.36. So that the Godly cannot be raised according to the order and method which God hath de∣creed & ordained in his Wisdom, for their entrance into his heavenly Kingdom, un∣less they be first by Death dissolved, and like seed, sown and interred in the ground from which they were first extracted. To this purpose also is that, 1 Cor. 15.50. Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; that is, Calvin in loc. our Bodies, as now they are corrupti∣ble, unless they die, and so be changed, being raised again by the Power of God, and made incorruptible. 4. Reason. God's Word must needs be ve∣rified; Now God hath said, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die, Gen. 2.17. So that even the best must needs die
one way or other, that God may be true; but eternally they cannot die, because Christ dyed for them, to exempt them from that Death, Rom. 5.10.21. they must needs die temporally, though they neither can nor shall be under the tyrannizing power of Death eternally. 5. Reas. The Godly are compounded of Elements, as well as others; And there is a Rule in Philosophy, That whatsoever is made up of Elements, must be dissolved again into the same; for Composition is a begin∣ning of a Combate, a Combate of a Sepa∣ration, a Separation of a Solution; so that needs they must die as well as others. 6. Reas. Christ himself, the eternal Son of God, died a temporal Death, to bring them to everlasting Life, John 3.16. and therefore how unreasonable a thing would it be, if themselves should be exempted from that Death, of the which he himself tasted? shall the Physitian taste of a bitter cup for the Patients sake, and shall not the Patient also himself drink of the same Cup too? 7. Reas. Nay, how can they be confor∣mable
to the same eternal Son of God, their Lord and Saviour, as they must be even by the unalterable & eternal Decree of God, Rom. 8.29. if they should not die as he dyed, leaving us all an Example to follow after: As if he should have said, as much in effect, as once Gideon said to his followers, Judg. 7.17. As I do, so shall ye do; or, rather (mutatis mutandis) as I die, so shall you die after. The Third Prosecution. Object. You will say unto me, Why then was Enoch translated before the Flood, and Elias after? and why saith the Apostle, We shall not all sleep, 1 Cor. 15.51. if good men must die as well as others? To this I answer. Sol. Their very Translation was not without a kind of Death, for they were changed; and Death is but a change, Job 14.14. The same may be said of those, 1 Cor. 15.51. 2d. Object. If you reply, But what
meaneth then the Apostle by this Antithesis, when he saith expresly, We shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed? Sol. I answer. These words have troub∣led some not a little; and therefore we shall find three differing Latin Transla∣tions. 1. Some read the words thus, We shall not die, but we shall all be changed. 2. Others read them thus, We shall all rise, but we shall not all be changed. 3. Others thus, We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. The Cause of which diversity I conceive to be this, Because some were offended by the Greek Copies, as  they did con∣tradict that in Heb. 9.29. but we need  go so far as they, a Distinction  all There is a twofold Death; 1. Ordinary. 2. Extraordinary. 1. The Ordinary is a Solution of the Soul from the Body.
2. The Extraordinary is an Abolition of mans corruptible Nature. Now then when the Apostle tells us, We shall not all die, but we shall all be changed; the sence of his words is not, that therefore some shall not die at all; but only that some shall not die an ordinary death, because their souls shall not be severed from their bodies; which notwithstanding it may be said, that they shall die a kind of death; which we call Extraordinary, because there cannot be a change without an abolition of the former corruptible Nature. The Third Prosecution. I should now set sail, and lanch forthwith into the deep of your hearts, by some pow∣erful Application, but that I must clear all things first behind me, before I can com∣fortably commit my self to such a vast Sea of Matter as is now before me, declaring what I mean by the Death of the Godly, when I say, They must die like other men.
1. Some things their death hath com∣mon with the deaths of the Ungodly. 2. Some thing it hath peculiar. I. The Commonness of both Deaths consists in six Respects. 1st. Respect. As the Souls of the Ungod∣ly are separated from their Bodies, so the Souls of the Godly; unless God take them away by a Death Extraordinary, like Enoch and Elias, Ecles. 12.7. 2d. Respect. As the Dissolution, being natural, and not violent, followeth in the one, when natural heat faileth, the radical humour being by heat dryed up and exhau∣sted, like Oyl in a Lamp, which also there∣upon goes out, and is extinguished, so in the other. Hence it is that the Grecians have called the dead , because they are humourless. 3d. Respect. As this Dissolution, when it is Cic. l. 1. Tuscul. Quaest. violent, happeneth in the one either by a casual substraction of the radical humour, or by a suffocation of the natural heat upon some opposition
made inwardly or outwardly, so in the other. See 1 Sam. 31.6. 4th Resp. As the disso∣lution of the one (if it be not sudden) happeneth Suarez. Meta∣phys. Disputat. 11. to. 1. sect. 3. fol. 232. two wayes; 1. By divers Alterations and Dispositi∣ons which precede the instant of Death, and corrupt the subject. 2. By that destruction which it causeth in the very instant of death. So the other. 5. Resp. As the Dissolution of the one is not only a separation of their souls and bodies, but also a dissolution of those things where∣of their bodies were compounded; which also is aptly called, Corruption, 1 Cor. 15.12, so the Dissolution of the other. 6. Resp. As the one leaveth this world, and goeth hence to some other place, so the other, Psal. 39.13. Acts 1.25. So that Socrates apud Plat. Socrates's description of Death, may well be recei∣ved as very proper and per∣tinent; Death is the souls change of one place for another.
II. The Peculiarity of the Death of the Godly, consisteth or will appear in sive things. 1. Though the Souls of the Godly be dis-joyned from their Bodies, like the souls of others, yet are they not so violently taken away like the souls of others, Luke 12.20. but rather surrendred with their good will and liking, Mat. 27.50. Acts 7.59. 2. The death of the Godly is not only a dissolution of the soul and body, but al∣so a separation of both from Sin, Rom. 6.7. 3. It is an abolition of all humane Frail∣ties, Rev. 11.4. so that one may truly say of it, as a Martyr said to his fellow-Martyr, of that bloody Bishop of London, My Lord of London will be our good Physitian, and cure us both, &c. 4. It is but an , or Peregrinati∣on, as Socrates calls it; or a Transitus, and an Exodus, a going over, and comming out; not an Interitus, or going down; I say it is an Exodus, or going out; like the comming of Israel out of Egypt; for so the Godly do but leave this World,
which is like Egypt, full of toyl, and pass on even triumphantly, thorow the abhor∣red Confines of the King of Fear, being carried upon the wings of Joy, and in the arms of Angels, into the Celestial Canaan, which is full of unknown Delights, and endless bliss, Luke 23.43. Rev. 14.13. 5. Nay it is a making, rather than a mar∣ring of them; a reparation, and not a de∣struction; In a word, a state of Perfecti∣on, and not of Perdition; for being dead, they are said to be made perfect, Heb. 12.23. So that the Hebrews have aptly termed Death in that regard,  and  which words being inverted, are  and  which words signifie Perfection, and Inno∣cency, to shew that Death shuts up and si∣nisheth all Imperfection, and makes com∣pleat and perfect. When therefore I say, that the Godly also must die like others, I regard those six Respects, which their death hath common with the death of others; for otherwise, though they dye as well as others, yet do not they die like others, in regard of those five Peculiarities, which here I have purposely specified, that the vast
Difference which is between the Death of both, might appear, and be evidently seen of all. The Fourth Prosecution. Now for Application. 1. Use. This may inform us of the Great∣ness of the Wrath of God against Sin, seeing that the very best cannot be ex∣empted from Deaths Tyranny, which God's flaming Wrath against and for Sin hath subjected us all unto. It is al∣most 6000 years agone, that Adam sinned by eating of the forbidden Tree, and yet could not all this length of time, make him forget that one Offence; no, no, Manet alta mente repostum judicium Paridis, said Virgil in another case; and we may say as much in this, The Lord remembers that Sin still, and keeps his Anger against it still, so as that no intervening Grace or Good∣ness in the holiest person, can make him let go his Wrath, or remit his first Mulct or Penalty, Death, I mean, once menaced and decreed: and yet as Moses complain∣ed
once, Psal. 90.11. so may we now, Who knoweth, or understands, considereth and believeth, as Luther in Dutch rendreth the Original, the power of thine Anger, though we be even consumed by it, ver. 7. Where∣fore in the first place let us learn, and lay to heart, the Power of the Lord's Anger; for you see by Moses's complaint, that scarce any knoweth it, or considereth of it: Whereupon it cometh to pass that Sin is, 1. So slighted as it is in your Judge∣ments. 2. So embraced in your Affections. 3. So multiplied in your Conversati∣ons; because you do not once seriously consider the Powerfulness and Greatness of God's Wrath, by which we are consu∣med one by one, the very best not exemp∣ted. The Second use. Must godly Men, who are like precious Wheat, die like other men? Then woe to
the Ungodly, which are but Chaff; for what will become of them? if God so deal with the green wood, what will he do to the dry? if he be so severe against his own, for that old sin of Adam, how rigorous then will he be against Aliens? if they that are reconciled unto him by the death of his Son, yet must taste of Deaths cup, what will be the end then of you that are yet un∣reconciled? Certainly my tongue is not able to express that unutterable and un∣speakable Wrath, which will most cer∣tainly seize on you unreconcil'd Adulte∣rers, Boasters, Idolaters, Lyars, Cozen∣ers, and on you, fierce, proud, envious, worldly and covetous Men and Women, for you must taste of a double Death, the first and the second, Rev. 21.8. Now how fearful and formidable the very first Death is, you know all, who ever saw a man unmann'd, and laid in the dust to pu∣trifie, and to be meat for Worms, where∣by you may easily conceive, how dreadful needs must be, and will be both, when one after another, as it were, shall require your souls, as it is written. Luke 12.19,
20. Thou fool, this night they shall require thy Soul from thee, as the Original hath it: Mark; They shall require it; and who be They, but the first and the second Death? as I conceive, one seconding the other. O think on this double Death, all ye Drunkards, and Fornicators, Swearers, Usurers, Epicures, Gurmands, Atheists and Hypocrites; and imagine in what a woful plight your Souls will be, when those two Deaths shall so require them, and they shall be forthwith thrown and cast in∣to that formidable Lake that burneth with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death, Rev. 21.8. Lamentable was the case of the Men of Sodom, when suddenly they saw and felt both Fire and Brimstone dropping down from Heaven upon their Bodies; but infinitely more grievous, woful and deplorable will be your condition then, when these your immortal Souls shall begin to feel in a moment after their depar∣ture,
that ever-during Fire and Brim∣stone, which the Lord in his Fury will rain upon them in that infernal Pit: for as the Bonavent. Brevis. cap. 6. pag. 7. peccant Spirit or Soul of man, subjects it self to the baseness of sin, perverting the Dignity of its Noble Nature; so the order of God's Justice requireth, that it, as well as the Body, should burn in the very dregs of worldly bodies; cor∣poreal Fire and Brimstone, I mean, which never shall be quenched. This will be the Catastrophe of all your sports and delights, and profits of your sinful Life. It was a witty saying of a learned man, That Marriage was a short and sweet song, but that it hath a long and doleful close. So of all the Pleasure we take in sin, we may truly say, that it is a Song short for the time, and sweet for tune, as long as it lasteth, for it runneth much upon Quavers and Semiquavers, of Mirth and Jubilation,
but the time suddenly changeth, and the tune is altered, for then followeth, without rest, the Sarges and Songs of sor∣row and lamentation, which cannot be measured by any time, or uttered by any humane tongue: Hence when one who had lived but a lewd and ungodly life, was departing, as one Doctor Hill in his Direction to dye well, p. 123. re∣lates it of him, he cryed out even in this World most lamentably, O la∣mentable Destiny! O in∣finite Calamity! O Death without Death! O those contiual Cryings, which shall never be hearkened unto! our eyes can see nothing but sorrowful Spectacles, and intolerable Torments, our ears can hear nothing but Wo, Wo, without end woful. O thou Earth, why dost not thou swallow? O ye Mountains, why do not ye co∣ver us from the presence of the Judge? How far do the Torments of Hell exceed all the tor∣tures of this Life! O ye bewitching Pleasures of this World, how have ye led us blindfolded to the Horrors of Hell? Wo, wo for ever un∣to us, who without hope are cast from the Fa∣vour of God, so that after ten thousand years
we might be delivered! O that in any time we might have an end! But it cannot be; Our Temporal Pleasures have Eternal Pains, our Mirth is now turned into Mourning, and we are cast into Everlasting Fire. Thus he. I do not speak this to drive you to despera∣tion, but to perswade you to an alterati∣on, that you may change your Estates and Lives for better; praying God, All-pow∣erful, to turn you, that you may be turned from your sins; and he from the fierce∣ness of his Wrath, and so consequently may not come into that woful, woful place of Torments, which shall never have an End. The Lord touch your Hearts, that you may consider both your own Misery, and this blessed Remedy, and so may flie from that wrath which is to come. The Third use. If the Godly must die like other men, then let every one of us that is Godly, be more mindful of his own death, then usu∣ally the very best are; and let him make
his particular application to himself; Then I also must die as well as other men, and moulder away into rottenness and dust, see Deut. 23.29. Plato that Princeps Philosophia, or Prince of Philosophy saith, There is Nulla Sa∣lutatis Philosophia, no wholsom Philoso∣phy, sed perpetua Mortis Meditatio, but a perpetual Meditation of Death. It is, saith Scipio, The most honourable Philosophy to study a mans Mortality. The Meditation of Death, is the Life of the Wise; nay, it is the very Life of a Christian Life, say I, and the greatest wis∣dom of the Godly who is truly wise; And therefore (to help our selves herein.) The First Help. Let us now and often pray with Moses the man of God, Lord teach us to number our dayes, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom, Psal. 90.12.
The Second Help. Let us take an occasion by every thing we see, to remember our latter end; for as King Philips Remembrancer told him eve∣ry day, Philippe memento Mori, Philip re∣member that thou must die; so every Crea∣ture almost that comes to our view, minds us of our Death, saying as much to each of us in effect, Remember man that thou also must die. I'le instance in Particulars. The First Instance. Our very Shooes we wear, being made of Skins of dead Beasts, tell us so much, and therefore when we put them on, let us remember that we also must die. The Second Instance. Our Victuals we eat, being the flesh of dead Beasts, say so much, and therefore
we need not then a Deaths-head to put us in mind of Death, Lang. Pol. as in ancient time among the Egyptians, Deaths Picture was shewed to men at their Feasts▪ to mind them of Death: the Meat it self represen∣ting the Image of Death, is a sufficient re∣membrancer, whereby we may, if we will, yea, ought to remember our Mortality. The Third Instance. When we walk in the coloured Fields, and view the gay Diaperie of the Earth, we may thereby be put in mind of Death; for every Pile of Grass, and every fading flower there, tell us of it; so as that we might, if we did not turn our deaf ear to such Pow∣erful Lectures, hear as it were, a Voice be∣hind us, saying, All flesh is as Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof as the Flower of the Field; the Grass withereth, the Flower fa∣deth, because the Spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it, Isa. 90.6. I pray you therefore take notice of this Lesson.
The Fourth Instance. The Earth we tread on preacheth the same Lecture, telling us, that being compound∣ed of that Element, we must needs return again unto it, according to that Damasc. l. 1. de Fide. c. 4. Philosophical Axiome, Whatsoever is compacted of Elements, must needs be dissolved again into the same; Wherefore as often as we do but look on the Earth, let us remember the Word of the Lord, Dust thou art, and to dust shalt thou return, Gen. 3.19. The Fifth Instance. The Corps, Sepulchres, and Monu∣ments of the Dead tell every one of us so much, saying as it were, Hodie mihi, Cras tibi, To day it is my turn, to morrow it may be thine; Wherefore I advise you to walk now and then up and down in a Church, or Church-Yard, and to view such Sepulchres and Monuments of the de∣ceased
deliberately; for then you cannot but mind your own Mortality, reading theirs upon their silent Tombs, and memo∣rials engraved with most legible Characters; not so much in Marble, as in the very dust wherein they lie, and unto which they are returned. The Sixth Instance. Your own frail Bodies consisting of con∣trary Elements, as Fire, Air, Water, Earth; I mean the four Humours, Cho∣ler, Blood, Phlegm, Melancholic, which are like them, combating and fighting one against another, can tell you, that needs there must follow a dissolution; for, as I told you, Composition is the beginning of a Combate, a Combate of Separation, a Separation of a Dissolution. Wherefore, as in old time, one came after the ancient Emperors, riding in their Tryumphant Chariots, crying with a loud voice, Tertul. in Apol. adv. Gentes. cap. 33. Respice post te, Look behind thee: So let me now come after
all those high and hurtful conceits which you have had of your own Parts, Worth, Strength, Youth, Wealth, Health; and after all those applauding Flatterers, which have made you often too secure, saying with a loud Voice, Look but upon your selves, and behold your Bodies, which a thousand wayes may be on a sudden dissolved, though but one way they entered into this present World; for whilst you are speaking, walking, eat∣ing, writing, thinking, or sleeping; these four contrary Elements are ever fighting, whereupon, as in other Battels, one party may prevail in an instant, and cause a great slaughter; so one of them may prove pre∣dominant, and cause a final dissolution of your weak and mortal Bodies; and this may fall out so, even suddenly and unex∣pectedly; as experience hath taught us by the sudden Deaths of many, who had not so much leisure as once to speak one word more after they were so suddenly and vio∣lently assaulted.
The Seventh Instance. When you go to bed, you are even by that silent custom of yours thought and told you of your Mortality; for how can there be almost a more lively emblem of Mans dying, than 1. His unraying of himself? which may mind him of the putting off his Body of Earth, 2 Cor. 5.4. 2. His Cum in lecto cu∣bas sit tibi ipse ja∣centis habit is figu∣ra in Sepulchro Clausi. Isid. de summo bone. lying down upon his Bed; which may put him in mind of his lying down in the Grave, which will be his Bed. 3. His very sleeping, which may call to his mind his last and longest sleep, when he shall sleep in his Death, and rise no more till at that great and dreadful day of the last Doom, the shril and loud sounding Voyce of the Son of God shall awake him
out of his sleep, saying, Surgite Mortui, venite ad Judicium, Rise O ye Dead, and come to Judgment. Hence the very . Homer. Iliad. 14. Heathen, as well as the Chron. 21.1. Acts 1.60. Pen-men of Gods Holy Spirit have resem∣bled Death to a sleep, and called sleep Deaths . Mnesimachus Com. Mystery, and Death, Sleeps Brother. So In Filiavel sci∣ent. bené moriendi. Fol. 47. Sy∣nopa the Cynick, being nigh his end, and very sleepy, said to his Physician, awakening him, Ne mireris, frater fratrem autevertit, Wonder not at my sleep∣ing, one Brother preceds another. Pausan. in Lacon. Pausauias in like manner writes of the Laconiens, that they set up two Simulachres, for Death and Sleep as two Brethren. Wherefore I beseech you, that as often as you are going to bed, to take your natural rest, you will constantly remember by these
three things, that one needful thing, which is Death, making a particular application of each emblem, as thus; let a Godly man say to himself, As now I go to my bed, so I must go to my Grave; and as I put off my Cloaths, so ere long, nay this night it may be, I must put off my Earthly Tabernacle, which is my Body; and as I shall fall asleep, and know nothing that is done while I am a∣sleep, so must I very shortly sleep up, and die, not knowing any thing that shall be done here about me, or with me, or to me; nor can or will any Sanctity or God∣liness that is in me, be able to deliver me from the fatal stroak of Death, which will steal upon me like sleep; for the very God∣ly must die as well as others. And here let me press upon you a few Perswasives to this remembrance, which is so rare in the very best.
The First Perswasive. Consider how secure the best of us are without it, like the people of Lais, before the Damtes came upon them and slew them, Judg. 18.27. so are we; no longer then death is before us, doth any thing al∣most go neer us, or move us, as appears by many things. The instance but in a few: 1. When the Plague doth cease in a place near us. 2. When any other common sicknesse doth leave us or ours in our Families. 3. When Warrs or rumours of Warrs threatning us do surcease among us. 4. When a Funeral, which did mind us of Death, is forgotten again by us; how secure grow we by and by and slow to good! whereas as long as we were in some fear or danger, and so consequently mind∣ful of our latter end, we were mightily stirred up to Duties. And therefore should we not for this ve∣ry cause strive to remember our Mortality
more then we do, that so doing, we might shake off that gross security, which is so common among us. The Second Perswasive, And do ye not see how strongly sin doth prevail against you, when such holy thoughts of Death are departed from you? Just as it was in the dayes of Moses with Is∣srael, so it fares with us now, when Moses was but gone out of their sight upon the Mount, they presently fell to Idolatry, and made a Golden Calf, Exod. 31.3, 4. So soon as Death is but a little departed out of our mind, we fall to Spiritual Idolatry, and make a God of the Belly, Phil. 3.19. Or of out Parts, or of our Money, Ephes. 5.4. Or of our Children, or of our Gar∣dens, Houses, Walks, Friends. In a word, how foolish and vain are we, as Moses implyeth, Deut. 32.29. Psal. 90.12. Do ye not find it so? can ye deny it? and had we not need then to keep Moses, I should say death, ever with us, and not to
let him go out of our minds, that we might not so soon and easily fall to such Idola∣try? The Third Perswasive. Consider we likewise how unquiet and how dubious we are most times, when we do put off the most needful remembrance of death. For, as thereupon it comes to pass that we grow secure and backward in Duties, and prone to sin; (as I have al∣ready shewed) so can we not but (after that) even question our estates to God∣ward, and interest in those unknown and unexpressable joyes, delights and plea∣sures, which attend the Godly after Death, in Heavens Kingdom: like Aristotle, who said, when he was dying, Anxius vixi, du∣bius morior nescio quo vado; so should we be forced to say in a manner, if in that Case, we should be assaulted by Death, Anxiously we have lived, doubtfully we die, we know not whether we shall go to Heaven or Hell.
So true is that excellent saying of a wise man, that sine Meditatione Mortis tranquillo esse Ammo nemo potest, That without this Meditation of Death, none may be quiet or enjoy true tranquility in his Mind. Let none therefore that is Godly, either refuse to pray (as I said) with Moses, Lord teach us to number our dayes, that we may be more wise and sober, or to be beholding to any Creature to be put in mind by it of Death. Forasmuch as you all see what need we had all so to do, that we may not be so se∣cure, so prone to sin, and so doubtful as many times we are and have been. The Fourth use. Must Godly men dye as well as others? then let none of us that is Godly build Ta∣bernacles here, but rather let him live as a Pilgrim upon Earth, like those ancient Be∣lievers, Heb. 11.13.
And as the Chrysost. in Matth. 22. hom. 70. Scythiens, who travel up and down, not having any fixed or certain mansion-house; so let him be in this present World, as without a House, without Lands, without Money, without a Wife, without Children, and without Friends; that is, if he have an House, Land, Money, Wife, Child, Friend, let him be so loose, so indifferent, so free, so un-engaged, un-intangled, and untyed in his affection, as if he had none, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. because he may, yea, must ere long be Habui enim illos tanquam amissurus. Se∣neca Epist. 64. without them: And if he have no great means, let him rather pass by them valiantly, than peruse after them inordi∣nately, or wickedly; for if he had them, he would be forced very shortly to leave them, and to be gone, though he should be never so holy and godly; according to my Text, Those all dyed. Guerrius Considerat of Eternity. hearing these words read in the Church, Gen. 5.5, 6, 7, 8. And dyed,
and dyed, was so wrought upon thereby, that he retired himself from the world, and gave himself wholly to his devotion, that he also might die the death of the godly. Let these words of my Text work in like manner upon you, I pray you, and then your hear∣ing will make you as happy as his did him. How they dyed. 2. You have heard of the death of these holy Patriarchs that lived before and after the Flood; would you know how they dyed? then mark what followeth, [In the Faith,] or rather, According to Faith, as the . Original hath it, and both antient and modern Interpreters translate it; and the meaning of this speech is, as Gagueius in loc. Expositors say, they dyed Lyra in loc. by and with Calvin in loc. Faith; that is, being Piscat. in loc. constant in the Faith, and laying hold on the Promises made to Faith: where by Faith, we must understand like∣wise
not a dead, or historical, or tempora∣ry Faith, but a lively, saving, justifying Faith; which is first discribed in the very front or first verse of this Chapter; and then exemplified by so many Instances in the residue to the very end and period of it. Whence resultes this most profitable and useful Observation. The Second Doctrine. That the Saints of God being true Belie∣vers, do not only live by Faith, but also die in, by, with, and according to Faith. So did all those holy Patriarchs that are mentioned by the holy Apostle, in the be∣ginning of this Chapter; and so did the test whom he reckoneth up in the middle and ending of it; as you may note, vese 21, 22, 31, 39. So did Stephen the Proto-Martyr, uttering, when he was dying, with much considence these very words, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: Mark; first he calleth Christ Lord, implying him to be his Redeemer, and Owner, that bought him.
Secondly, He commendeth into his hands his spirit, being perswaded that he was able to keep it, and to restore it. So Such Exam∣ples are superad∣ded for Illustra∣tion. Ba∣bylas of Antioch, the Martyr; for he said when he was dying, Return, O my Soul, un∣to thy rest, because the Lord hath bles∣sed thee; because thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, my feet from falling, I shall walk before the Lord in the Land of the living. So Dr. Hill in his direct. to dye well. p. 179. Peter Martyr, for he said, My Body is weak, but my mind is well. There is no Sal∣vation but only by Christ, who was given of the Father to be a Redeemer of mankind; this is my Faith in which I die.
So blessed Bagshaw in the life and death of Mr. Bolton. p. 34. Bol∣ton, who when he was dying, said to his hearers, I feel no∣thing in my soul but Christ, with whom I heartily desire to be. So Pareus (as the Preacher re∣lates it in his Funeral-Sermon, which I heard my self) wrote to the same effect, when his speech was gone; This Catarrh hath taken a∣way the use of my speech, but he shall never rob me of my Faith in Christ. The first Reason. And it cannot be otherwise. For, 1. Their Faith can never fail them, Luke 21.32. being like mustard∣seed indeed, Luke 17.6. which be∣ing
ing once Hemin. l. 3. c. 24 sowen in a garden, can hardly ever be rooted out again; so that needs it must shew it self in death as well as life. The second Reason. 2. In death the Saints of God had most need of the use of their Faith; by reason of, First, Satan; who then will be sure to sift them as he sifted Peter, Luke 22.31. and to bend all his for∣ces against them, to make them ei∣ther presume or despair. Secondly, Carnal Reason; which then will most of all discourage them, suggesting such reasonings as these;
Bernard Serm de Parm. 7 mise∣record. Who art thou, or how great is that Glory, and by which works think∣est thou to obtain it? Thirdly, Their own self-accusing Consciences; who then above all times, will most accuse them, Rom. 2.15. being stirred up by Satan; who is called the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10. So that they cannot but then espe∣cially exercise their Faith: even as Souldiers in assaults, and sharpest conflicts, and battles, when they must either conquer, or die, will then use their chiefest weapon most of all, and so even die fighting, if they must needs die: like Plutarchus. Epaminondas, who so ended his
dayes in a fight. I say, the Saints cannot but so in like manner, use their Faith, as their principal wea∣pon, then most of all, and so con∣sequently die in, with, by, and ac∣cording to Faith. APPLICATION. For Application, I'll now deduce hence three Inferences. 1. The Excellency of Saving∣Faith. 2. The Nullity of many mens pretended Faith. 3. The Duty of all that will be counted godly, and to be truly en∣nobled with Saving-Faith. Of these in order.
The first Inference. 1. Great then is the Excellency of Saving-Faith, which holdeth out in death it self, when Strength, Physick, Friends, and all things else faile us. Saul and Jonathan, (said David after their death) were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their Death they were not divided, 2 Sam. 1.23. The same may be said of all the Godly, and their Faith, af∣ter their departure, that they were lovely and sweet compani∣ons in their lives, and that in their very death they were not divided; for, These all dyed in the Faith, saith the Apostle of the Godly; that is (as I shewed in my former Ex∣position)
with Faith, having Faith for their companion in their death and expiration. And therefore what do we talk of Silver, Gold, and earthly Jewels, that they are excellent and precious things? here is a Jewel indeed, a most excellent and precious thing, without all comparison, even Saving-Faith, which in death it self stands by us, and tells us in a manner, that whilst we breath, it will never leave us nor forsake us; yea, abideth with us, (in some sort) as Est etiam fides rerum, quando non verbis sed rebus ip∣sis praesentibus cre∣ditur, quod erit cum per speciem manifest am se con∣templandam praebebit Dei sapientia. Aug. 2. quaest. Evangel. cap. 39. Est enim duples sides; 1. Verborum in hac vita. 2. Rerum in futura. Vid. Lombard. 1.3. dist. 24. Ames. Medulla Theol. lib. 2. c. 6. some say, even
after death, which is more; where∣as neither Silver, nor Gold, nor Gemmes, nor any other earthly thing can then stead us, when the last breath leaves us, & the pangs of death are upon us: O Faith, Faith, how admirable and amia∣ble art thou therefore, and must needs be in the eyes of him that hath thee! for if heaps of Sil∣ver, and Gold, and Pearls, which in death we must leave behind us, be so precious, as usually they are in the estimation of those that possess them, thou must needs be, or shouldst be infinitely more precious in the judgment of him who so hath thee, as that in death it self he cannot lose thee! O that my soul were but con∣dignly
affected with thy tran∣scendent Excellency, that so I might accordingly set that value and price upon thee, as befits thy most rare and admirable Eminen∣cy! And O that you also, my Belo∣ved, were but thorowly convin∣ced of this stupendious Excellen∣cy of Saving-Faith! For then there is no question but you would labour more after so rare a Jewel as Faith is, if you did want it, and make more account and use of it then you do, if you have it. The Lord open your eyes, that you may see the Orient Splendor, and matchless worth of this rarest Pearl, which in death it self will not depart from ye.
The Second Inference. 2. This sheweth the Nullity of many mens pretended Faith; for who will believe it, that they have or ever had true Saving-Faith, who before they come to die, live so loosely, as that Heathens and Turks themselves, who are profes∣sed Infidels, cannot well live more licensiously! Of this sort are they that, 1. Hate and despise so the Power of Religion in all those that are most happily ennobled with it, 2 Tim. 3.12. 2. Live so prophanely them∣selves, as that Esau himself in his Prophaness, could not out-strip
them, Heb. 12, 16. caring neither for God, nor Church, nor Teach∣er, nor Prayer, nor Bible, nor Sabbath, nor any other part of God's most holy Worship. 3. Tear so the sacred Name of God with their bloody Oaths. In a word, those that are so dis∣obedient to Parents, Husbands, Masters, and so angry, fierce and passionate in their speeches, so un∣faithful, unjust and deceitful in their dealings, so mendacious and false in their communications, so envious, covetous and ambiti∣ous in their hearts, and so lascivi∣ous, filthy and wanton in their lives; these, even all these (que∣stionless) neither have now, nor ever had yet that true and Saving-Faith, in which, by which, with
which, and according to which, the Godly, who only are true Be∣lievers, both live and die; for they rather live in their sins in general, and by their cozening, cheating, usurious lending, and lying in special, and according to their envious, lustful, covetous, ambitious, prophane and athe∣istical hearts desire, than in, by, with, and according to Saving-Faith; and as they live, so they will die (unless God grant them Faith and Repentance before) in, with, and according to their sins. (Nam qualis vita, finisita; For as men live, so they die, usually.) My meaning is, 1. As here they have no Faith, so in death they shall have no Comfort, nor Joy, nor Peace, Isa. 48.22.
2. And as here they could not live without scoffing, deriding, swearing, cursing, cozening, ly∣ing, contending, whoring, and prophaning of God's Sacred Name, Word and Sacraments; so after their death they shall not be able to live without suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, for their boldness in sinning, Rom. 2.8, 9. 3. And as here they did even ex∣ceed in their drink, pride, malice, envy, wrath, strife, contention, lust, avarice, atheism, authothe∣ism, polytheism and epicurism; so God will exceed in punishing, adjudging and condemning them to so much greater torments than others, as they have been greater and more heinous offenders than
other; for God will render unto every man according to his deeds, Rom. 2.6. Mark; According; that is, proporti∣onably. Hence Bonaventura Brevil. p. 7. c. 7. Bonaventure, be∣cause that infernal Fire burneth not, but according to the disposition of sin, and of that guilt and spot which preceding the improbity of lust, hath contracted: and because that is not equal in all, therefore it is that some are more burnt than others, in the same. This will be the catastrophe, end, and pe∣riod of all such as do not, or will not live and die according to Faith, but according to their sinful desires: He that suffreth least in that Infernal Lake, suffers more pain than all they together; who either were troub∣led with the Stone, Gout, Cholick,
Strangury, or else were racked, skin∣ned, boiled in Oyl, rosted upon a Spit or Gridiron, burnt, starved, or buried alive: Haec omnia quae hic patimur merus lusus ac risus sunt sicum illis supplici∣is in contentionens veniant. Chrys. ad pop. Ant. hom. 49. all these things which men here suffer, are but a meer play, sport, a laughing∣matter, being com∣pared with those unutterable, unexpressable, and un∣conceivable Tortures, which by any damned wrecth are to be indured in that horrid Dungeon, called Hell, to all eternity. And therefore conceive propor∣tionably, how grievous, and how insufferable will be the burning of some among us, who having out∣matched others in sinning, shal suffer to the very uttermost the vengeance
of that merciless Fire, without ease or end. O my Brethren, how can you sit here so quietly under your Ministry, you that are guilty of such sins, as convince you to be both void of Saving-Faith, and also to be the persons that shall endure those unspeakable Tortures, and burn in those merciless Flames, which will torment you for ever and ever, so as that you shall have no rest, or ease neither day nor night? The third Inference. 3. If godly men, being Believers, do not only live by Faith, but also die in, with, by, and according to Faith, then it behooveth us to die so too, whensoever we shall be called to that state, if we count our selves
to be of the number of the Godly, and will be certain of it. To help those which heartily de∣sire to be informed herein, I'll in the next place set down such Principles as are most necessary to the right happy attaining to such a blessed Death. Four Principles. 1. These two Prin∣ciples, the first and second, make migh∣tily and mainly for that Preparation which is to be made against the day of Death. They that will die so, must first live so, as that they may die so. 2. These two Prin∣ciples, the first and second, make migh∣tily and mainly for that Preparation which is to be made against the day of Death. They must make comfortable provision for death. 3. They must be sure that they have Faith.
4. They must use their Faith ac∣cording to that condition in which then they are. Of these methodi∣cally. For the first. 1. They must live so; that is, 1. As Abraham (who dyed in the Faith) left his own Countrey, and died Mors Civi∣lis nihil aliud est quam exilium ci∣vis. Dr. Vulteius Jurispr. l. 1. c. 24. Civilly be∣fore he died Corpo∣rally, vers. 8. So must they leave their na∣tive soil, which is the Countrey of sin, and die to sin; mortifying the Body of sin, before Death approach∣ing dissolves the body of earth, Col. 3.5. I am not ignorant of the extream difficulty of this heavy Task, unto which I perswade the Godly; and
therefore I'll labour to facilitate it as much as I may, affording a few Subsidies; which I desire God to bless unto you. The first Subsidy. 1. Set Faith on work, that migh∣ty Conquerour, and then the con∣quest will be very facile and easie; for, This is our victory that overcometh the World, even our Faith, 1 John 5.4. Quest. How shall I overcome sin by Faith? Answ. Believe verily that sin shall not
over-power thee, though it trouble thee; Because, 1. God hath promised thee that it shall not have dominion over thee, Rom. 6.12. 2. Christ himself hath died for thee, that sin might not live, but die in thee, Tit. 2.14. 2. Unsheath against sin (when it assaults thee) the Sword of the Spi∣rit, which is the Word of God: as Christ himself did, Mat. 4. 3. Discharge the great Ordnance of Prayer against it: as Paul did, 2 Cor. 12.8. 4. Famish it by detaining and withholding all such occasions from it, as usually feed it: like Joseph, Gen. 39.10. 5. Over-awe it and affright it con∣tinually with the gresly remembrance
of Death; for then, as all the men of Israel fled when they saw Goliah, that huge lump of flesh, with his deadly weapons about him, 1 Sam. 17.24. so all your sins will flee, as not daring to shew themselves in the presence of death, who with his deadly arrowes, may shoot you, and cut off the silver Cords of your pre∣cious and dear Life, in the very act of sin. So as that you may do well to reason thus with yourselves when fin doth entice you; would I do so if I were now to die? No, no; and therefore why should I yeeld to such an evil, in the which it may please God to cut me off by death, so as that I shall not be able to say so much as God be merciful unto me a sin∣ner. See Eccles. 7.33.
6. Assure your selves that nothing will plague you more when you come to die, than such sins as did not die before you; for Satan will then be sure to muster them up be∣fore your face, when he cometh up with you to have his last bout with you, being indeed the craftiest and subtilest Adversary you have, Rev. 11.12. Brethren, what I tell you now of this Adversary, before you come to die, the Dying have found by ex∣perience, and confessed it as an in∣fallible truth. O God, said the Earl of Essex, at the point of death, and Judge of all men, thou hast let me know by warrant out of thy Word, that Satan is then most busie, when our end is nearest. Moriantur ergo ante te vitia tua, Let thy sins die therefore before thee,
that when thou art dying, they may not so torment thee. 7. Mortifie your sins by degrees one after another, for then your con∣quest will be far more easie than if you should set upon all at once. Nam virtus unita fortior; For united Forces are ever stronger. If you take a bun∣dle of Arrowes, you cannot easily break them, but take one by one, and you shall burst them quickly. It is proportionably so with your sins, which are like Arrowes piercing the very soul, 1 Tim. 6.9, 10. and there∣fore take one, and one, and break them by degrees, and then it will be an easie matter for you to burst the necks of all your sins in time; that is, as you are tempted now to one, then to another; being bent never∣theless
against all in the purpose of your hearts. 8. You must make this account, that you can never attain to a well∣grounded and comfortable assurance of everlasting Bliss to be enjoyed after death, unless you may see the death of your sins in a competent sort before you; no, no; for he that will live when he dyeth, must die while he liveth; die, I mean, to sin, and to the world, Gal. 6.14. and there∣fore what certainty can you have of such a life, if you be not sure of a such death? 9. On the contrary; perswade your selves, that dying after the death of your sins, you may be sure you shall die as Conquerours; nay, shall live most certainly, and be new born,
rather than forlorn; Like valiant Epaminondas, who dying after the conquest and slaughter of his ene∣mies, said to his victorious Souldi∣ers, Nunc Epami∣nonda vascitur, quia sic moritur. Valer. Max. Now Epami∣nondas is born, be∣cause he dieth after this manner. Die, die therefore, before you die, that you may be sure you shall not die, but live when you die: which the Lord in mercy grant unto you. 2. As the Patriarchs, Heb. 11.4, 8. so must you correspond with the Will of God in all good things. Particularly. 1. As Abel offered, and offered a more acceptable Sacrifice than Cain,
Heb. 11.4. so must you offer, and of∣fer more acceptable Sacrifices and Services to God, than others; that is, you must pray, fast, sing, read, hear, visit, speak and give, &c. in a better manner than common, prophane and civil men, and hypocrites, which you must transcend. 2. As Abraham being commanded to go into a strange Countrey, went he knew not whither; so must you go even about those many strange duties unto which God leads us; as he sent him to a strange place: As for instance. 1. The Duty of Reconciliation, Mat. 5.25. 2. The Duty of not resisting Evil, ver.26.
3. The Duty of suffering evil men with patience, ver.39. 4. The Duty of loving our Enemies, ver.44. 5. The Duty of labouring after that Perfection which is in God himself, ver. 48. 6. The Duty of not carking and ca∣ring so much for the things of this life, Mat.6.25. 7. The Duty of entering into the nar∣row Way which leads to Life, Mat. 7.13. With none of these we may dispence, but we must put our selves upon them all, being called thereunto by that great God and Saviour, who can command all. 3. As Abraham, being in a strange Countrey, dealt justly, paying for what he bought, and purchased most
exactly (For the sacred Story re∣lates, that he weighed his Silver to Ephron for a burying-place, that it might not want anything, Gen. 23.16.) so must you, 1 Thes. 4.6. As he instructed his houshold in the fear of God, Gen. 18.19. so must you, Ephes. 6.4. 5. As he was liberal, expressing so much by his ready and chearful entertaining of strangers (for he sate in his Tent door at noon, which was dinner time, looking out for strangers; whereas some will rather hide themselves from strangers, Gen. 18, 1.) so must you, Heb. 13.1,2,16. 6. As Isaac was wont to exspatiate, and to walk out into the field to me∣ditate, Gen. 24, 63, so let us in like manner duly and dayly, either at
home or abroad, John 1.8. 1 Tim. 4.15. More particularly let us meditate, on these four last things. 1. Death. 2. Judgment. 3. Heaven. 4. Hell. 7. As those antient Believers, who dyed in the Faith, did what they did in Faith, and by Faith, Heb. 11.4,8, &c. so do you; for whatsoever is not done in Faith, is sin, Rom. 14.23. Quest. If you ask me, How must we do things in Faith?
Answ. Believing, 1. That God will assist you, as he hath promised you, Ezek. 36.27. 2. That he will accept of your good Deeds in and for Christ, in whom he is well pleased, Matth. 17.5. 3. That he will graciously re∣ward you, Heb. 11.6. Of these three Acts of Faith, together with your good Works, make a Confection, like that of, 1st. Stacte, 2ly. Onicha, 3ly. Gal∣banum, and 4ly. pure Frankinsence, which after the art of the Apo∣thecary was to be made in the time of the Levitical Law, Exod. 30.34, 35. that it may yield a sweet savour unto the Lord, who
takes delight in Faith, which must be the chief ingredient in so sweet a composition. The Second Principle. You must make comfortable provision for the day of Death, like Marriners, who against a long and troublesom Voyage, provide sundry strong and Cordi∣al Waters which may strengthen them when they navigate over the great Ocean, and meet with grievous Storms and Tempests. Quest. If you demand what I mean by this Comfortable Provision?
Answ. Such seasonable and sutable Sentences as shall be able to sup∣port your fainting Hearts in that last and forest conflict, as Hos. 13.14. Luke 12.32. & 23.43. Rom. 14.7, 8. 1 Cor. 15.41, 42, 43. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. Rev. 14.13. Rev. 21.2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8. These precious Cordials, be∣ing well digested, will make us even long for Death, and cause us to be chearful in Death; Like a Kings Son, who being sent for to come home from a far, cold and barren Countrey, into which he was formerly banished, to take possession of a most rich, most spacious, and most flourishing
Kingdom left him by his Father, cannot but take his journey, and go on in his way with much re∣joycing. For so we are but sent for, when we must die, to come away from the barren and uncomforta∣ble soil of this world, to be en∣stated in the most Glorious and Capacious Kingdom of Hea∣ven. And therefore imprint them all in your memories, that so those everlasting Spirits of yours, breathed into your bodies by the All-powerful God, I mean your Souls, may feed on them, and sill themselves with them, and be re∣vived by them; & so consequent∣ly with such Honey-sweet-Cor∣dials strengthening them, may go
hence, when the time of their de∣parture is come, to God your Heavenly Father, as Sampson to his Father, with Honey in his mouth; for he came eating, Judg. 14.9. The third Principle. You must make it sure, that you have faith by an infallible Tryal (2 Cor. 13.5.) trying your selves often by these three never∣deceiving Signs. 1. A thorow Humiliation, Acts 2.37. 2. A thorow Purgation from sin, even every known sin, so as that none reigns or rules in the heart, Acts 15.9.
3. A thorow Sanctification, Acts 26.18. manifesting it self by a constant and earnest endea∣vour to walk in all God's Holy Commandments in general, Luke 1.6. and by love unfained in spe∣cial, I mean that singular Love which the true Believer bears to God in Christ above all, seeking his Glory in all things, and more then all things; and to the Ch∣dren of God, for God, Gal. 6.5. 1 John 3.14. Of which love St. Aug. de Trin. l. 8. c. 7. Au∣stin saith truly, That a man knoweth more the love with which he loveth, then his Bro∣ther whom he loves.
The Fourth Principle. You are to make use of your Faith, when death approacheth, as the state of a dying Believer requireth it; observing these en∣suing Rules. The First Rule. A dying Believer must set his House in order, Isa. 38. and if he be free and of ability, and have not done so before, make his last Will and Testament, according to Faith, believing verily that God will be a Father to his Chil∣dren (if he be a Father) and a Husband to his Wife (if a Hus∣bard) and that he will bless that
well-gotten Estate which he lea∣veth to his God-fearing Posteri∣ty, whether it be much or little, so as that they shall find content in it, and so far forth as his bles∣sing of it shall make for their good. The Second Rule. He must according to Faith possess his Soul in Cum ei & Deus sit qui nos ca∣stigat & is miseri∣cordiae suae non ob∣liviscatur, cur it a nos conficimur ma∣rere? cur solvimur in ejulator? Cur murmuramus & fremimus? Doctor Daniel Tisianus in Lament. 4.39. Patience, eying by Faith such pla∣ces as these, Isa. 26.3. Rom. 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. The consi∣deration whereof caused an ancient Aug. in Psal. 36. Cenc. 2. Doctor to say most aptly, When thou dost consider what thou art to
receive, all the things that thou sufferest here, imagine the most bitter pains & pangs which thou must undergoe in thy last and sorest sickness, will be vile unto thee, neither wilt thou esteem them worthy for which thou shouldst receive it: Thou wilt wonder that so much is given for so small a labour. For indeed Brethren, for everlasting rest, e∣verlasting labour should be un∣dergone; being to receive ever∣lasting felicity, thou oughtest to sustain everlasting sufferings: but if thou shouldest undergoe ever∣lasting labour, when shouldst thou come to everlasting felici∣ty? So it cometh to pass, that thy tribulation must needs be Temporal, that it being finished,
thou mayest come to infinite fe∣licity. But yet Brethren, there might have been long tribulation for eternal Felicity. That for example; because our felicity shall have no end, our misery and our tribulations (add sick∣ness in special) should be of long continuance; for admit they should continue a thousand years, weigh a thousand years with e∣ternity! Why dost thou weigh that which is finite, be it never so great, with that which is infi∣nite? Ten thousand years, ten hundred thousand, if we should say, and a thousand thousand, which have an end, cannot be compared with Eternity.
So Macarius the Eygptian Anchorete, . Macar. Hom. 15. Touching the Gift which Christians shall inherit, this a man may rightly say, that if any one from the time Adam was created unto the very end of the world, did fight against Satan, and undergo afflictions (add, or should be so long visited with the most grievous sickness) he should do (or suffer) no great matter in respect of the Glory that he shall inherit; for he shall reign with Christ without end. 3. Let him give good instructions to the Survivers according to Faith; like Jacob, Gen. 49.2, 3, 4, &c. and
like Dr. Hill in his Directions to die well, p. 129. St. Austin, who being near his end, said, Nature com∣pelleth me to be dissol∣ved; I according to the Scripture phrase, am to go the way of my fore-Fathers: Now Christ inviteth me; now I desire to see celestial Sights. O keep you the Faith, think you also that ye are mor∣tal men. Let this be your care to keep the Commandments of God, if you regard me, or keep any re∣membrance of me, your Father, think of these things, savour these things, do these things. 4. Let him take his fill and fare∣wel of Repentance, viewing, con∣fessing and lamenting his sins as much as he can according to Faith; and in Faith; that is, be∣lieving verily, that he shall see
them no more again for ever; even as the Children of Israel saw the E∣gyptians (of whom they were so much afraid) no more again for ever, Exod. 14.13. 5. When he is brought to the very confines of that King of fear, so as that now forthwith he must yield up his Ghost, then let him even sleep up in Faith, and die in the Lord according to Faith, Rev. 14.13. I'll explicate my meaning herein by these few Directions. 1. Let him now eye the Promi∣ses, formerly gathered for the same purpose; like those antient Belie∣vers, Heb. 11.13. 2. Let him labour to be perswa∣ded of them, as they were. Ibidem,
3. Let him even imbrace the Lord Christ in the arms of his faith, as old Simeon imbraced him in the armes of his body, believing verily, 1. That he died for him in parti∣cular, that he might not die the death which is eternal, Gal. 2.20. 2. That he purchased Heaven for him in particular, as the Author of his Salvation, Heb. 5.9. like sweet Guillermus de vita St. Ber∣nard. l. 1. c. 12. St. Bernard, who when he seemed to stand before God's dreadful Tribunal in a grievous sickness, told Satan, ac∣cusing him, That he for his part, was not worthy indeed of everlasting Life, but that his Lord and Saviour, Christ, having a twofold right to it, by inheritance, and by vertue of his passion, was contented with the one,
and did impart unto him the other. So let him perswade himself in like manner, and answer the same Ac∣cuser of the Brethren in the same words, if he trouble him, as at such a time he is wont to do, with his accusations to drive him to despara∣tion. 3. Let him pray in Faith to the Lord, saying either with Stephen, the Proto-Martyr, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7.59. or with Christ him∣self, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, Luke 23.46. and if God seem to be angry at that time, then let him interpose the Death of his Son between his Wrath and his own soul in his last pray∣ers, saying, Hosius in Con∣fess. petrocoviens. c. 13. I en∣terpose the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ, be∣twixt
me and thine anger; no otherwise do I contend with thee. And if he say to him, Thou art a sinner; let him an∣swer, Lord, I put the Death of the Lord Jesus Christ, betwixt thee and my sins. If he say, Thou hast deserved Damna∣tion; say, I set the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ betwixt me and my bad me∣rits, and I offer his Merits instead of the merits which I ought to have, but yet have not. Thus I instruct the dying Christi∣an to pray, as men were taught ma∣ny hundred years agone; and there∣fore I beseech you, that you will lay up these sayings in your hearts; as Mary, the thrice blessed Virgin, the Shepherds words, Luke 2.19. that so you may be able, with much rea∣diness, to prompt them, and to make use of them, according to Faith, and
in Faith, to your unutterable and endless Comfort; which the Lord of Life in mercy grant unto you. Let me add a few Incentives, and then I have done. So doing (as hath been shewed in all these Rules and Directions) you shall purchaseto your selves, 1. Much Boldness. 2. Much Quietness. 3. Much Chearfulness. 1. Much Boldness. There is a twofold Boldness; 1. A Well-grounded. 2. A Groundless.
The one is good, the other is bad. 1. The good and Well-grounded, I mean, which proceedeth, 1. From Righteousness, and an holy walking with God, which maketh a man as bold as a Lyon, Prov. 28.1. For as the Hemin. l. 1. c. 105. Lyon, being pur∣sued by the Hunter, doth not hide, but ra∣ther shew himself, and counteth it a great shame to flee; yea, Isidore, E∣tymol. l. 6. looketh the Hunter in the very face, and is not affrigh∣ted or daunted, but rather encoura∣ged. So, careful holy Walkers, do not flie, or shrink, or fear, or hide their faces, but shew themselves most when death is nearest, and are
bold even to look him in the face; as we may note in the three Chil∣dren, when they were threatned with death, yea, with a most grievous and extraordinary Death, Dan. 3.18. and in divers holy Martyrs: I'll instance but in one; Ignatius E∣pist. ad Pim. de Smyrna per E∣phes. O that I might but once enjoy those Beasts, said Ig∣natius, which are pre∣pared for me, and which I wish may quickly consume me, and not being terrified, abstain from me as they did from others; and if they will not touch me, I'll impel and urge them. Forgive me. I know what is expedient for me; let the Fire, the Cross, the constancy of Beasts, Abscision, Separation, confraction of all my Members, and a dissolution of my whole body, and all Satans whips come to
me, that I may win Christ. Thus he. 2. From a holy Confidenc in God upon former experiences; for such as be so careful to walk so ho∣lily (as hath been formerly shewed) cannot but find much sweetness in God, and receive many tokens of love and favour from God, Psal. 31.19, 20. so that needs they must be very confident in their lives, & bold at last in their death. The Hebricians call therefore Boldness, Betac, Con∣fidence, because it proceedeth from it: and the Aqum. 2. Sent. dist. 26. q. 1. a. 3. Schools define it by Consi∣dence. II. Much Quietness; For, 1. There can be no such discord,
as is, and must be in careless provi∣ders for Death, between, 1. The Law of God, and their own Consciences, because they strive to the utmost to agree with it, that it may not prove in the end their greatest adversary. So Austin under∣stands our Saviours speech, Mat. 5.25. 2. Hope and Reason; for Rea∣son it self cannot but reason for them upon such grounds drawn from ho∣ly Writ, as cannot be denied. For instance; that one pregnant passage 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. cannot but afford such a Premise, as must needs infer for them a most firm Conclusion, that entrance shall be ministred unto them (upon their diligence in ma∣king their Calling and Election sure by an Holy Walking) into the ever∣lasting
lasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour, Christ. 3. God himself, and them: for, In every Nation, he that feareth him, and worketh Righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10.35. and as without Faith its impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. so with and by Faith a man cannot but please God, and so be at peace with God, Rom. 5.1. 2. They that shall follow these Rules, shall fix their minds upon the Lord's never-failing Promises, ac∣cording to one of the said Rules; and therefore they must needs be very quiet, stayed and firm, for the Promises are most firm, even Yea and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. and therefore they that stay themselves in them, must needs be so too; even as he that buildeth upon a Rock
builded firmly, and as he that stand∣eth upon a Rock stands firmly: Hence, when an holy Man was ask∣ed how he could pass his last sick∣ness so without any trouble? he an∣swered, That he did ever eye that ex∣cellent promise, in Esa. 26.3. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because be trusteth in thee. True it is, that some holy Walkers and eminent Believers, as Mr. Glo∣ver, Mr. Peacock, and others, have been much troubled for all this in their latter end, which may seem to cross what I have said, but their trou∣ble was not perpetual. For fist, They had comfort at last. 2. Was rather a kind of peace, then a war; for their trouble was a war with Satan. Now our war
with Satan, as Tertullian saith truly, Is our peace, because it brings peace at last. 3. Was extraordinary, whereas ordinarily an holy walking and con∣fidence, brings quietness; and so I desire to be understood. I close up therefore the prosecuti∣on of this second Incentive with a Speech, like unto that which an Hebrew Interpreter made to King Ptolomy, asking him, How he might be at rest when he Dreamed? Let Piety be the scope of all thy sayings and doings; for by applying all thy Discourses and Works to excellent things, whether thou sleepest or wakest, thou shalt have quiet rest in regard of thy self. Thus he. And as he said to him, so say I un∣to
you; would ye die and sleep up quietly? then do as he advised him, and put your trust in the Lord with∣all, and it will be so. 3. Much chearulness (which is a higher degree of comfort, being Positive; wheras quietness is Ne∣gative comfort) I or, 1. There is not such cause and matter of discomfort and sadness in such as do so carefully provide for death, and labour to die in and ac∣cording to Faith, as in other loose and careless persons, who 1. Quench the Spirit that should comfort them. 2. Grieve the Spirit that should comfort them.
Whereas careful providers for death rather, 1. Blow up the good motions and workings of the Spirit, as much as in them lyeth, by their careful and holy walking, and applying of the Lord's Promises; so that needs they must feel more joy and comfort then others that do not so, even as one that bloweth up Coals doth feel more heat then he which suffers them to go out. 2. Please the Spirit of God, and cherish his motions by their con∣formity to his Nature, in that they labour to be as Spiritual as possible they may, and so consequently to partake of his Nature; so as that
the Spirit, being pleased and che∣rished, cannot but please and che∣rish them again, as they please and cherish him; for if we that usually are very unkind and ungrateful, yet cannot but be kind to those that be kind to us, and make much of them as they make much of us; how much more will that most kind and holy Spirit of God chear up those that cherish him, and make much of them as they make much of him? See Acts 9.31. how therefore they that walked in the fear of the Lord, are also said to walk in the Comforts of the holy Ghost. 2. Such are most fit for comfort and joy. For, 1. The muchness of Grace which is in them, and procedeth from them, cannot but be evidently seen and ob∣served
by them, and cause them to joy in it, and to be even ex∣ceeding glad for it, like a man that hath and finds a treasure that was hid in his field, see Mat. 13.44. Now the finding of such a Treasure will chear up the heart. 2. The enlargment of their ho∣ly desires and endeavours cannot but procure joy, which is an Laetitia quasi latitia. enlargement of the Heart, Psal. 119.32. and is given to holy and care∣ful walkers, as a gracious remu∣neration from God, Psal. 97.11. 3. Holy walkers and careful providers, for death cannot but attain to a most happy consecu∣tion of that good which they de∣sire, even the enjoying of Christ by Faith, & a cognition or know∣ledge
of the same consecution, which is Delectatio re∣quirit consecutio∣nem boni conveni∣entis et consecutio∣nis cognitionem. Tho. Aquin. 1.2. q. 32. a. 1. requir∣ed unto delectati∣on, as well as the consecution it self; so that they cannot but rejoyce more or less, sooner or later, with that joy which is called, Unspeakable, and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. or at least with a lesser degree of joy, if God, for causes best known to him∣self, be pleased to suspend and to deny that higher degree of rejoy∣cing. 4. They are in a manner in Heaven already, and Heaven is in them, in that they mind no∣thing almost but Heaven, as I shewed that men ought so to do, so as that they cannot but joy in
that which is so full of joy (enjoying the very same objective Happiness with the Saints in Heaven, though not the same subjective Happiness, as not being yet capable of it) for if he that is but in a Goldsmiths shop, can∣not but receive some splendor from the Gold that is in it, how much more shall they that mind nothing but Heaven, and so have their conversa∣tion in Heaven, partake also more or less of that Joy & Blessedness which is in Heaven, and which the true Be∣liever seeth, as it were, and beholds by his Faith; and seeing, admireth; and admiring, in a manner, posses∣seth; for, by Hope we are saved already, saith the Apostle, Rom. 8.24. Arist. 2. Rhe∣tor. 11. Aristotle saith expresly, That Admi∣ration is the cause of Joy and Dele∣ctation,
because it maketh us hope, that we shall acquire something which is delectable and joyful. And therefore conceive ye what Joy the vision & taking possession of Heaven it self, which is so rare and so full of admiration, must needs cause in a tru∣ly serious & savingly believing mind. For your greater delight and en∣couragement, I'll here set down some of those triumphant passages which some careful Providers for Death have uttered to this purpose, a little before they were by Death unman∣ned. I feel a light, said, Fox. Ju∣stus Jusbery, one of Christ's blessed Martyrs, which refreshes me with joy, far above that which I am able to ex∣press, desiring nothing more now then to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. So Adolphus Clarebachius, Martyr, at
his death; I believe there is not a merrier heart in the world at this instant than mine. And for my part, said Mr. Deering, as concerning death, I feel such joy of spirit, that if I should have the sentence of lise on the one side, and the sentence of death on the other side, I had rather chuse a thousand times (seeing God hath appointed the se∣paration) the sentence of death, than the sentence of life. So Mr. John Holland, a fruitful Mi∣nister of God's Word, having the day before he dyed, continued his Medi∣tation and Exposition upon Rom. 8. for the space of two hours, or more, said on a sudden, O stay your rea∣ding; what Brightness is this that I see; have ye lighted any Candles? No, said one, it is the Shunshine: Sunshine, said he? No, it is my Sa∣viours Shine; Now farewel world,
welcome Heaven; the Day-Star from on high hath visiced my heart: O speak it when I am gone, and preach it at my Funeral (for he spake to a Mi∣nister, Mr. Leigh in his Sermon, intitled, The Souls Solace against Sorrow, p. 17. who relates it) God deals famili∣arly with men: I feel his Mercy, I see his Majesty, whe∣ther in the body, or out of the body I cannot tell, God he knows, but I see things unutterable; O what a happy change shall I make? from night to day, from darkness to light, from death to life, from sorrow to solace. Thus joyful holy Walkers, and true Believers, have been at their de∣parture; and therefore be ye perswa∣ded to trace their steps, and to follow as ye ought, those most needful Di∣rections and Rules which were
formerly delivered, that so living and so dying, by, with, and according to Faith, you may also be mounted, as the said Believers were, upon the wings of Joy, and feed as they did, on those ravishing and trans∣cendent Comforts which God, like Manna, is wont to rain down upon his holy Walkers in this men devouring Wilderness, the World I mean, from which God in mercy bring us all, in the end of our dayes, to a World of Joy and Glory which shall never have an end. Amen. Soli Deo Gloria. FINIS.
