L1314A 27364478 110083
TO The Right Honorable, EDVVARD EARL OF CLARENDEN, Lord High CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND: The Humble APOLOGY OF ROGER L'ESTRANGE Verbera, sed Audi. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brome, at the Gun in Ivy-lane. M.DC.LXI.
MY LORD, I Am deliver'd from all other Care then of my Duty and my Honour; and This Tranquillity of Thought, I am to thank the Malice of my Fortune for; which has left me neither worse to Fear, nor much better to hope for. In This Estate of Freedome and Security, I must presume to Dedicate this Paper to your Lordship: which is no more then a fair offer of a supposed Cri∣minal to a Publique Tryal. Be pleas'd to know (my Lord) that upon Friday Morning last, in Westminster-Hall, a Gentleman took me aside: L'Estrange (sayes he) I am glad to meet you: for I'm unquiet till I have told you something, which both in Honour, and in Conscience, I think my self oblig'd to acquaint you with. Continuing Thus, I am the Person that gave Intelligence to my Lord Chancellour, that You betray'd the King's De∣signs; but with such Caution, and Deliberation as you your self in my place would have done no lesse.
My Lord; he told me the whole matter, with so obliging and so Frank a Cleerness, that truly when I weigh one Office against the other; (that is, accor∣ding to their true Intention) his Iustice and his Kindness here, compar'd with his former mistake, I reckon that I have an Obligation to him. This Gentleman was further pleas'd to give me a view of your Lordships Answer to him; which I confess, was Charitable, considering the Suggestion, but as related to my Innocence, 'twas sharp and Cruell. I do not wonder now (my Lord) at some Dis∣courses I have heard of late; as if your Lordship were my Enemy; (having such Reason for it) nor at his Sacred Majesties Displeasure, toward a Person under so Black a Character. To clear my self to You my Lord, and to the World, must be the Businesse of This Paper. Waiving the Parties mediate to this Notice; the Ground of all is fix'd upon Mr. Iames Whitlock: a Captain of Horse, and a Knight of Cromwell's. He (as this Gentleman my Friend undertakes to prove) declar'd, that L'Estrange WAS A TRAYTOUR; AND TO HIS KNOWLEDGE HAD RECEI∣VED six hundred Pounds In Gold, from CROM∣WELL.—Hinc Illae Lachrymae. I shall not passe good manners so far, as to call This Scandal by the right Name: but This I humbly Begg, and Offer that I may put my Life upon the
Tryal; which I profess I had rather lose, than in the case of Treason, Wear it as a Mercy. Further my Lord, I shall be bold to add, that These ensuing Particulars are Truths. 1. I never took Protestation, Covenant, Oath, or any Engagement of That Quality from them. 2. I never Comply'd with the Party in any thing whatsoever, related to the Publique. 3. I never spake to Cromwell, save four times in my Life. First, being his Prisoner at Chambridge. Twice more, while I was a Prisoner in Newgate, I went to him (under a Guard) to move for an Exchange. The Fourth and Last time was in 1653. when being ty'd by a Restreyning Order to attend an Examination, and my Father lying then upon his Death-sickness, I mov'd Cromwell that I might go down and receive my Fathers Blessing. 4. I did never communicate Directly or Indirectly (as I have said elsewhere) with any man of the Party upon Publique Business. 5. I never made a Particular Acquaintance with any man of that Side, that had not first disown'd the Cause, and Actually serv'd the King. 6. I did never decline either Hazzard, Labour, or (to my little Power) Expence, in order to his Majesties Service: nor did I ever let slip any Oppor∣tunity of doing my Duty.
Now (with your Leave my Lord) I challenge the whole World to contradict me: and by your Lordships favour yet a little further. I was engag'd in the First Scotch Expedition: after which, when the Broyls began in England, I was Confederate with divers Gentlemen to endevour the Securing of Lin Regis for his Majesty. That failing, I betook my self to Oxford, and Serv'd in Prince Rupert's Troup. My next remove was to Newark (then Govern'd hy the now-Lord Byron:) where, after a while, I reciev'd an Invitation out of Norfolk to attempt something upon Lin. The Motives to the Enterprize were These. Walton the Governour was before Crowland; (a place of Consequence and Strength.) And Lin left almost with∣out a Guard; and a considerable number of Gallant Gentlemen, that had been taken at Lincoln, and Gainsborough, then Prisoners in the Town. This Occasion call'd me to Oxford, where I re∣ceived his late-Majesties Commission, to endevour the Surprizal of the Place. It was sign'd, and deli∣ver'd to me, by the now-Earl of Bristol. I was Betray'd in the Attempt by one Leman, formerly of the Kings Party, and ty'd up by an Oath of Faith, and Secresie, as binding as Syllables could make it. Thence, I was carried to London, and there ad∣judg'd to Dye; under These Solaecismes.
First; I condition'd for my Life when I was taken. Next; It was contrary to Articles betwixt the Earl of Manchester, and the Governour of Newark; to which Garrison I belong'd. Thirdly; The Committee by their own Law were not empowr'd to try me. Fourthly; They jugled up a Court almost at Midnight, and Sentenc'd Me to Death without a Hearing. Lastly; I was adjug'd to Dye by a Court-Martial as a Traytor, yet they themselves confess'd that I never receiv'd any Trust: D. MILLS the now Chancellor of Norwich was my Iudge-Advocate. Betwixt my Doom, and my appointed Execution, Mr. Thorowgood, and Mr. Arrowsmith, (then of the Synod) gave me a Visit; and very friendly tendred me the utmost of their Interest to save me; if I would but Petition for Mercy, and offer to take the Covenant. These Gentlemen will acquit me (my Lord) that I refus'd it. At length by the Interest and Kindness, particu∣larly of the Earls of Northumberland, Essex, Stamford with others, I was Reprieved; First, for a Fortnight, and till further Order; and then, under Colour of a further Hearing: which in almost four years I could not obtain, although I pressed it earnestly. With the same Faith and Openness have I proceeded to this Instant. Out of Newgate, I slipp'd into Kent in 1648, and of that Action I presented your Lordship with a Printed Accompt in Flanders: to which I dare refer the most unsatisfy'd of my Enemies. After that De∣feat I cross'd the Seas, and return'd in 1653, fixing in London, as the most proper place, in Relation both
to my Publique Duty, and particular Safety. Since which time my Lord, let my Soul answer for it, if (according to the best of my own memory) I ever exchang'd one Syllable with Cromwell. During the Cheshire Motion, I can appeal to a hun∣dred several persons in London, and to a Declaration now Extant in my Apology, that at that time I was not Idle. And touching those succeeding Broyles which more immediately led to his Sacred Maje∣sty's Return. I dare remit my self to half the honest Part of the City; who Then were of opinion that Those Remonstrances, Protests, Resolves, Engagements, Declarations, &c. however drawn by my unlucky hand, were no Ill office toward his Majesty: They will at least acquit me, of Ill meaning. At last my Lord, having scap'd all these Rocks and Storms, I meet new dangers in the Harbour: I find my self crush'd under fresh mistakes. But I shall be too Bold.— Briefly; I have spent Twenty yeers now in his Ma∣jesties Service according to my Duty; and after all, I only beg not to be thought a Villein. MY LORD, Decemb. 3. 1661. I am Your Lordships most obedient Servant. Roger L'Estrange.
