L1452A 15651668 104293
A Letter from CHESTER Of the Twenty Second Instant, Giving an Account of some Affairs in Ireland, And of the Arrival and Reception of the General The Duke of Schomberg, And of the Forces there. Licensed, July 24. 1689. ON Thursday last arrived here the Heer Schravanmore Maistre de Camp General, who, next day, laid out the Ground for the Camp, which is close by the Town on the South-side. On Saturday last arrived here the Count de Solmes, about Two in the Afternoon, and presently after there followed a Battalion of the Dutch Foot Guards, which im∣mediately Encamped. The Duke of Schomberg arrived here on Saturday about Ten a Clock at Night, and was received by the Mayor and Aldermen in their Scarlet, and all their For∣malities, attended by the several Companies with their Flags carried before them. The Train'd Bands of this City met his Excellency at the Bars, and conducted him to his Lodgings at Alderman Mannerings, who came along with him from London. This day his Excellency, attended by the Count de Solmes, Lord Brandon Gerrard, the Governor of the City, and a great many others are gone to view the Ships which lie at Liverpool, High-Lake, and Nessen, for the Transportation of the Forces for Ireland. On Thursday last arrived here, with much hazard and difficulty, several Pas∣sengers in a small Wherry , which left Dublin the Monday before. I can add but little to what you may have known already; only that at Dublin, they say that very considerable Numbers of Protestants, with their Families, having setled themselves there, in hopes of being more safe, and less Exposed to the Inso∣lencies of the French, and Irish Soldiers, than in the Countrey where the Danger threatens them on all hands : They have had the Misfortune to be obliged to re∣move, and go home to their Houses and Habitations in the Countrey, by Vertue of a Proclamation from the Late King, Commanding them, on severe Penalties, to repair to them; which is look'd upon by them, as an Exposing of them to the mercy of the Rabble. They say that the Late King is so Exasperatcd at the Dis∣appointment His Forces met with at London-Derry, That He is now resolved to have the last Push for't; And, to that Effect, has sent down a great quantity of Ladders, with Orders to scale the Walls, and take the Town that way if possible. This day, and to morrow, 8000 Men are to Encamp here, which, with the 3 or 4000 at Whitehaven, are to be commanded by the Count de Solmes, and, with all Expedition, to be immediately shipt off for Loughfoyle, to join the Forces there un∣der the Command of Major General Kirk. When these are gone, they say that 18 or 20000 Men more come in their room, who are to Encamp also; these are to be commanded by General Schomberg himself, but whither and when they are to go, is not yet certainly known. London, Printed for D.K. 1689.
