L505 11849763 49918
THE Last SPEECH, AND Confession OF THE WHORE of BABYLON, At her place of Execution, on the Fifth of November last. Whereunto is added, The Famous Story of the BELL, used by the Irish Papists, taken out of the Bishop of Down and Conner's Epistle to his Perswasive against POPERY. Nola to them did give a Bow, La Fleche a Dart did bring; But who upon them will-bestow What they deserve, A String. LONDON, Printed for K. B. in Little Britain. MDCLXXIII.
THE WHORE OF BABYLONS Last SPEECH and CONFESSION. MAy it please your Young Wits, to hearken to me one word or two before you make me a Sacrifice to your popular Fury; and see∣ing you must be my Judges; let it not be said, you were more forward to sit upon my Skirts than upon my Cause; and so hang me before you try me. Alas! Good Boys, I am afraid you have suckt in your Enmity against Me, with your Mothers Milk: and your Tutors, who should have learnt
you to rise up before the Aged, and reverence my Antiquity, hath learnt you to call me, (who pretend to be your Mother) WHORE: Nor is that all; but I must be a Witch too, and be burnt for one. Had it not been enough for you to duck me, or pump me, but you must burn me too? well I know what all this is for: 'tis your Guides have taught you this, calling me, a Deceiver of the Nations, and one that hath made the world drunk with the Cup of Fornication. Well, well, Gentlemen, when you burnt me in the City last 5. Nov. I dare appeal to to all the Company, if I did appear such a Beauty, as to bewitch you, or any body else, with my Face: I know nothing that was so takeing in it but my Roman Nose. When you bid your Fellow-Wags first take me & hang me upon an approved Gibbet, and be sure snickle me fast, lest I slipt the knot by some Equivocation, then let me hang in a perpendicular Line without motion, then turn me gingerly towards the Fire, as if you had a de∣sign to warm me; but I know your Intent—How∣ever pray consider what you do before you proceed farther: Remember the strange & mighty Feats that have been done by me: have you heard of none of my Miracles? Did you never read the Story of St. Francis, who hath done more Mira∣cles than all the Apostles, (if you will believe me,
and if you won't, the Devil take you.) I say, my St. Francis was once at Mass, and as he was going to drink, he saw a Spider in the Chalice: Now, you must know, he was loth to lose a Drop of Blood for a sorry Spider and therefore off it goes: Presently his Hipp began to itch, and he falls to scratching, and out comes the poor Spider, sound wind and limb, as ever she went in. Do not think, Sirrahs, the Spider afterwards spun this Cob∣web-story to catch such young fools as you. No, I can tell you another. One of my Daughters at Venice, a certain Nun there, (ah poor thing! it would break her heart, to see me in this pickle.) But to my story. This Nun used to fast sometimes a week, sometimes a fortnight together, or more, feeding her self upon nothing else but pious Meditations and devout Prayers all the while. I know not why this may not go for a Miracle; although it afterwards was found, she had an Alabaster Box, made in the fa∣shion of a Bible, filled with Marchpanes, Sweet∣meats and Spirits, by the help of which she could fast very handsomly. Bellarmine tells us of a Mare kept three days without Meat, and when Provender was offered her in the presence of our Breaden-God, she would not touch it, (the misery is, she was Chap∣fall'n)
nay she fell down upon her Knees and worship'd the Host, (because she could stand no longer.) Just when she was brought to live with∣out Meat, the poor Mare died. St. Dunstan once upon a time (as all Tales be∣gin) was going to consecrate a Church, and, find∣ing it did not point full East and West, he set his shoulder to it, and with one small hitch cured it of its Uncanonicalness. Valder saith (if you will believe him) That Ig∣natius did more Miracles with his Name written in a piece of Paper, than Moses and all the Apo∣stles put together. A Nobleman of Venice was troubled with Vo∣miting, that he could not receive the Sacrament: whereupon the Priest laid it to his heart side, (which opened before them all) the Host went in, his side closed up again, and all was right. One Damascene had his right Hand chopt off, but as he was praying before the Image of the Virgin, his Hand was perfectly set on again. If these will not prevail upon you, I have no truer stories to give you; you can but send me to Purgatory, and I have a Bell will soon Ring me out again: And so I bid the world good night.
A brief Relation of the BELL used by the Irish Papists, taken out of the Bishop of Down and Connor's Epistle to his Perswasive against PO∣PERY. I Was lately, within a few Months, very much troub∣led with Petitions and earnest Requests, for the restoring of a Bell which a Person of Quality had in the time of, and ever since, the late Rebellion. I could not guess at the reasons of their so great and violent importunity, but told the Petitioners, if they could prove that Bell to be theirs, the Gentleman was willing to pay the full value of it; though he had no obligation to do so (that I know of) but Charity: but this was so far from satisfying them, that the importunity increased; which made me diligently to enquire into the secret of it. The first cause I found was, that a dying Person in the Parish desi∣red to have it rung before him to Church, and pretended he could not die in peace if it were denied him; and that the keeping of that Bell did anciently belong to that Fami∣ly from Father to Son: But because this seem'd nothing but a fond and unreasonable Superstition, I enquired far∣ther, and at last found, that they believed this Bell came
from Heaven, that it used to be carried from place to place, to end Controversies by Oath, which the worst men durst not violate if they swore upon that Bell, and the best men amongst them durst not but believe him; that if this Bell was rung before the Corps to the Grave, it would help him out of Purgatory; and that therefore when any one died, the Friends of the Deceased did, whilst the Bell was in their possession, hire it for the behoof of their dead, and that by this means that Family was in part maintain'd. FINIS.
