L576A 99825047 29415
The LATIN PROPHECY. BONUM OMEN Ex Augustissimae Domus Austriacae Inscriptione. A. E. I. O. U. Austriaci Erunt Imperii Ottomanici Victores: Sed quando? Tum quando A. E. I. O. Ʋ. Vocales fuerint Consonantes: nempe quando in unum Faedus contra Turcas consentient sequentes. Austriaci, Emanuel Dux Bavariae, Iohannes Rex Polo∣niae, Odeschalchus summus Pontisex, Veneti. Atqui Hoc secundum jam est sactum per Dei gratiam singularem; Ergo sperandum est primum, unde demum verificabitur, Austria Erit In Orbe Ultima. Tria miranda. Omnes Christiani sumunt Arma contra Turcas, Praeter Christianissimum; Omnes Filii Ecclesiae parant bellum contra Turcas, Praeter Primogenitum: Omnia Animalia laudant Deum ob partas à Turca Victorias, Praeter Gallum. Tria alia magis Miranda. Catholicus magno servore oppugnat Christianissimum; Christianissimus persequitur Catholicum; Turca desendit in Hungaria CHRISTI Evangelium; A FAIR OMEN From The Inscription of the most August House of Austria. A. E. I. O. U. To the Austrian Empire the Interests of the Ottoman shall Vail. But when? Then when the Vowels A. E. I. O. Ʋ. shall be Consonant: That is to say, When these following agree to spell a League against the Turks. The Austrian House, Emanuel Duke of Bavaria, Iohn King of Poland, Odeschalchus the Pope, the Venetians: But, The Latter, by the special favour of God, is brought to pass; The Former therefore is to be hoped: that it may be verified, The Austrian Empire shall be the Last in the World. Three Marvels. All the Christians arm against the Turks, But the Most Christian: All the Sons of the Church take the Field against the Turks, But the Eldest: All Creatures sing Te Deum for the Successes against the Turks, But theThe Latin expressing in one Word a Cock, and a French-man, The Wit de∣pending upon a Latin Equi∣vocation, that cannot be made English, is lost. French. Three greater Marvels. The Catholick King, with great heat, opposes the Most Christian: The Most Christian King presses the Catholick: The Turk in Hungary, asserts the Gospel of CHRIST. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Fox, next the Fleece-Tavern in Fleet-street, and at the Angel in Westminster. Hall. 1684.
