M1500 99826366 30768
MORBƲS POLYRHIZOS ET POLYMORPHAEƲS. A TREATISE OF THE SCURVY. Examining Opinions and Errors, concerning the na∣ture and Cure of this Disease. ESTABLISHING A Method for prevention and cure, found∣ed upon other principles; concordant with Reason, verified by Practice. By Everard Maynwaringe Doctor in Physick. Ʋnum hoc Medicus recte agit, quod recte cognoscit. LONDON, Printed by R. D. for T. Basset under S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1665.
IMPRIMATUR. Ex aedibus Lamb. Sept. 9. 1664. Tho. Cooke Reveren∣dissimo Patri ac Do∣mino D. Gilb. Arch. Cant. a Sacris.
To The Right Honourable MOƲNTAGƲE BERTIE Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, &c. My Lord, HEalth being of so va∣luable a considerati∣on that without it, the best temporal in∣joyments are insipid; and rather may be termed representations and shadows then really fruitions, and therefore the Phiolosopher said truly, .
The business of this little Ma∣nual, is for preservation and re∣storation of that invaluable re∣quisite, which seasons, and gives a pleasant relish to mundane hap∣piness and felicity. My Lord, I have not used your name in a small concernment and inconsiderable matter; 'tis a pub∣lick affair wherein all are high∣ly interessed. This scene represents the Pro∣tean shapes and delusive actings or motions of a subtile Impostor; or rather, discovers a combinati∣on of Diseases, listed in hostility to break the Peace and disorder the regular government of the Microcosm, and consequently to ruine it; and having undertaken to discover, oppose and extirpate
these Confederates, and break their association; I have assumed this boldness to invite your Ho∣nour to the Prize: and seeing so great a Champion stand by to view the contest, puts me in mind of what is truly noble, exempla∣ry and renowned: for looking to∣wards you, I see a pattern of pru∣dence, of fortitude and skil at arms, which you inherit from your Ancestors of most worthy memory, who have defied the fiery breath and thundering voice of Canon; From whose sides the Loyal Sword of Honour hath oft ap∣peared naked, to vindicate the Truth of Royal interest, and a Kingdoms safety: and what not, worthy to be recorded? To you therefore, My Lord, a fa∣vourer
of Arts and Learning, are these endeavours peculiarly offered; waiting this opportunity to make my acknowledgments for Your Ho∣nours favour and kindness re∣ceived, and to let the World know the respects I bear to this Re∣nowned Family, and that I am Your Honours Most devoted Servant. Everard Maynwaringe.
Viro Doctissimo, Amico suo singulari D. Dri. Everardo Maynwaringe Medico Peritissimo. S. Pergratae mihi fuerunt literae tuae, amice plurimum colende benevolentiae & candoris in com∣municando plenissimae: verae & constantis amicitiae (abhinc diu in America contractae, postea hîc fe∣liciter continuatae) symbolum & munus gratissimum. Gratias habeo maximas pro communicatis; ha∣bebunt & omnes pro tuis accuratè in scorbuto tractando laboribus (cum publici juris fuerint) ma∣gni sane aestimandis, serioque ab omnibus notandis.
Quamobrem multum desidero, moram omnem abjicias, atque the∣saurum illum miseris ubicun{que} scor∣buticis feliciter a perias; ut medica∣menta tua eximia antiscorbutica (secundum leges spagyricae artis quam peritissime concinnata.) Communi bono nulli etiam la∣teant; ut & languentibus, varie∣que hoc morbo cruciatis eorum auxilio quam primum succurras. Plura notatu digna (vere & fine blanditiis dico) tuis scriptis repe∣rio: grata manu ea quidem me accepisse fateor. Perge itaque tu, quod facis: faxitque Deus, omnia tua studia, in aegrotantium exopta∣tam valetudinem & nominis tui fa∣mam, feliciter cedant; de quibus nihil dubito. Hisce vale, & memoriam mei
quod hactenus benigne fecisti, re∣tine: meque promptum & ob∣servantem in omnibus promitto. dab. Dublinii. Calend. Septemb. 1664. Christophorus Laurentius. Med. Doctor.
THE PREFACE. AMongst the complaints of the diseased none more frequently mentioned than the Scurvy, and none less known, except by its title: most of them shewing a several character of the disease, and in several parts; some spots in this place, others in a∣nother, and different colours: some loosness of teeth, putrid gums, ill savoured breath; pains in several parts, weakness of the legs and thighs, lassitude and indisposition to motion or action, and other symp∣toms accompanying this Protean dis∣ease.
And although the signs be many which discover the Disease, yet to the most they are rather a disguise (save only the name Scurvy) to cheat their Judgment, than a guide to lead them into the knowledge and discovery of it, from what causes, its chief seat of residence, and manner of generation. The variety of spotted faces and dresses that this Disease puts on, and presents it self in; the variety of places and parts of the body, differ∣ing in constitution, fabrication, and office, that this takes up for its quar∣ters and aboad; displaying it self in colours above board, and yet a jugler, deceiving and deluding, that comparing one sign with another, they disown their alliance as Hetero∣gene, and seem to clash one with a∣nother as if they were not the off∣spring of the same Parents, the fruit and productions from the same ra∣dix. Hence variety of opinions and er∣rors
concerning the nature of this disease; and from false principles, erroneous practices in the cure have ensued, and is prosecuted by many ineffectually and frustraneously; which causeth many Scorbutick Per∣sons to think and say their disease is incurable: for having undergone so many courses in Physick spring and fall, and tryed variety of Medicines; yet they are the same, or benefited but a little, or for a short time, the symptoms only abated, and nature alleviated for a while; but soon after they return to their former condition, or worse. These considerations moved me to ventilate this subject, as well for my own satisfaction and more certainty in the cure thereof; as also to inform others; and by a strict disquisition and serious examination, tracing step by step; made discoveries of errors which passed for warrantable and un∣questionable truths, being supported by the authorities of Learned and ap∣proved
Authors: and being suffici∣ently satisfied Theoretically and pra∣ctically, I cannot but recede from some opinions, which before tenaci∣ously I maintained, being nourished and bred up in those doctrines. I have not therefore bestowed these pains for an affected singularity, to gain popular applause, or be account∣ed a novelist and innovator; but that the dictates of reason, confirmed by observation and practice, have caused me to dissent from the common opini∣ons; for being frustrate of my inten∣tions in effecting cures by the usual method, established upon unsound prin∣ciples; was urged to make inquiries into the causes from whence such fru∣stration and failings did arise, and being sufficiently perswaded and sa∣tisfied herein; have therefore deserted the usual method and Medicines, for that which is more certain and effectu∣al; as the Medicines subjoyned will testifie these truths to those that shall prove them: and although hetedox in
the prosecution of this work, I have inserted nothing for ostentation, or aemulation towards others, or biassed with affectation of subtilities; but contending for the truth and benefit of the diseased, is the scope and aim of these endeavours. If any disgusted at what is delive∣red, thinking their own opinions hereby injured; I shall stand by these asserti∣ons, and reply to the opponent. E. M. London, Next the Blew Boar on Ludgate-Hill.
ADVERTISEMENT, Tutela Sanitatis SIVE VITA PROTRACTA. The Protection of long life and de∣tection of its brevity, from diaetetick causes and customs. Wholsom Precautions, Theorems and daily Practical Rules for the Preservation of Health and Prolongation of life. WITH A TREATISE of Fontinels or Issues. By Everard Maynwaringe Doctor in Physick. Sold by S. Thompson at the Bishops head in St. Pauls Church-yard. T. Basset under St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street, Booksellers.
ERRATA. Page 13. l. 26. read separated, p. 22. l. 19. barely, p. 38. l. 25. air, ☞ p. 34. l. 12. parts, ☞ l. 15. read stomack and spleen, p. 75. l. 25. obedience.
NAMES Given to the SCURVEY. DIseases, for the most part, have significant Names, whose Ety∣mology discovers either the Na∣ture of the Disease: as, Hydrops the Dropsie, from , aqua, water; or points at the part principally, or primarily affected: as Pluritis the Plurifie, from that Membrane compassing the brest, called Pleura. Or intimates the manner of invasion; as Epilepsia the Epilepsie, from , ap∣prehendo, to seiz, or take suddenly. Or denotes the procuring cause; as Lues Venerea, the Venerial Pox. Or declares the manner of afflicting, as Convulsion, from Convello to pluck.
With many other, whose Names do im∣port and carry various significations perti∣nent and declarative, which for brevity sake I omit. That which I have particularly de∣sign'd to handle, is the Scorbute, or Scurvy in the English tongue; but in other langua∣ges, denoting some part symptomatically affected: In the Danish 'tis called Schorbect, signifying a vitious depravedness in the mouth, because in many it was discovered by loosness of Teeth, and putrefaction of Gums, to which the Greek name agrees, . In the Low-Countries 'tis called Schor∣bunct, signifying torsions or gripings in the belly, which attend this disease in some per∣sons. It is also called Scelotyrbe, from the spots and pains in the thighs: It hath been cal∣led by some Gingipedium, from the Gums and feet, that frequently are affected in this disease. The Latin word Scorbutùs, now most fre∣quently used among Physitians, being a name not of long standing, unknown to the Ancients, and therefore called by some a new disease, but falsly; and it is not against Reason to think this disease to be of as great antiquity, as most infirmities incident to the body, (as may appear hereafter) though
known by divers appellations, suting with some of the symptoms, or products that fol∣low this Disease, yet insufficiently and erro∣neously discovered in their Causes. Concerning the several Names, whether proper or improper, I shall not insist, the nature of the Disease being the thing aimed at to be detected and prosecuted, and not to spend time upon words. How to discern the Scurvey in its va∣rious signs, symptoms or products, and complications with other infirmities. IN the disquisition and search to know and find out the nature of this Disease, I must survey the concomitant effects and products of it, which discover its being, gradual ma∣turity, fortitude or progress, and parts affected or infected, though not the Foun∣tain Spring and Rise thereof. Many and various are the Symptoms which accompany this Disease, though all do not appear in every Person, but some more, some fewer, according to the greatness, durati∣on and progress of it. The Morbific disposition and debility of
parts to consent, degenerate, and be de∣praved. Propter inaequale robur partium, by reason of the Natural integrity, and defici∣encies, Fortitude and imbecility of Parts in divers Persons; some have one Part strong, and vigorous in its Office, not easily depra∣ved and vitiated: another hath the same Part weak, soon consenting with any Distem∣per, easily perverted from the integrity of its Office, and contributing its vice: And since the parts be divers, their Use and Offi∣ces various; their enormities, vitiosities and defections also must be various, and their effects dissimilar, heterogene and unlike, ac∣cording to the consent and dissent of Parts, in their integrities and defections. Which being rightly understood, it is no wonder that the Scurvy appears in divers colours and shapes, acting a part here and there in the body, in various difformities; We shall not need then to fly to the admix∣ture of Humours, and diversity of Tempera∣ments, to derive the variety of Symptoms charging the innocent, and freeing the no∣cent Parts. Now as the several Parts in the Body have their several Offices distinct from each o∣ther, yet all harmoniously (in the rectitude of Nature) cooperating subserviently and subordinately for the preservation and well-fare
of the whole; so is there distinct Cha∣racters for their duties and deficiencies, dis∣covering which part acts in integrity, and which is irregular, degenerates and falls off. From hence the Scorbute, as it is variega∣ted and discordant in the Symptoms and Products, which cheats the judgment of many, and puzles them to appropriate a fit Medicine; yet may the able Physitian here∣by collect and find out the conspiring and contributing Parts to the difformity of this Disease, which rightly known, the difficulty of the Cure is much abated. Some complain of laxity, and breaking out often into fluxes; others complain of costiveness, but a stool in 2, 3 or 4 daies; some complain of burning and flushing heats; o∣thers their limbs are rigid and stiff with cold, the bloud setled, black and livid. Some are heavy, drowsy and sleepy; o∣thers tired and worn out with watching, and indisposed to the Nights refreshment; some have a slow, weak, languid pulse; o∣thers a quick, fierce, leaping Pulse. Some have thin, pale, watery Urine; o∣thers thick, muddy, and high coloured U∣rine. Some have black, loose Teeth, and putrid Gums; the thighs and legs free from pains
or spots; others the contrary, have spots and pains, but the Teeth and Gums sound. Some are molested with erratick wandring pains from part to part; others more fixed and constant in particular Parts. Some their Bodies pine away, wast and are consumptive; others grow corpulent, swell'd and puffed up. Some complain of shortness of Breath, straitness and compression of the Breast, diffi∣cult or hard breathing, & palpitation of the heart; others their vital parts are more free, but complain of the Head, Hypochonders, and loins, loss of appetite, &c. Some are molested with thirst, heat of the Stomack, and driness of Mouth; others are troubled with salivation, superfluous moi∣sture and spitting. The variety of opposite and different Symptoms, which accompany the Scorbute, do startle many in their judgment, to de∣termin certainly when they meet with the Scurvy, when not; and because the Symp∣toms are not peculiar but common, and the effects of other Diseases as well as the Scur∣vy, it is no wonder if their Cure be so un∣certain, difficult and seldome performed, since they are equivocal effects, obscured in their causes by a dubious complication, and alternative causation.
To resolve the ambiguous, and such as stagger in their judgments; Take these fol∣lowing Corollaries. 1. Many are the Symptoms which accom∣pany and follow this Disease, which appear and vanish, are greater and lesser, as the Dis∣ease encreaseth or diminisheth in its essen∣tial primitive Causes. 2. Many are the Products and off-spring of this Disease, which exist afterwards of their own ability and enormity, having per∣verted the parts wherein they reside, and drawn them to consent with their vitiosi∣ty. 3. Many Diseases are complicated with the Scurvy, which had not their producti∣on and generation from it, nor is their de∣pendance of it, though probably made worse and exasperated by it. 4. That none of the Smpytoms or Signs a∣fore mentioned, singly do declare the Scur∣vy to be present in the Body, but may chal∣lenge other causes for their Parents; and therefore to judge and determine that Per∣son Scorbutick, barely from the appearance of any Sign or Symptom that frequently ac∣companies the Scorbute, his judgment is fallible and uncertain and erroneous in the dependance: for, any Symptom or Sign a∣rising in any part of the Body, usually atri∣buted
to the Scurvy, may be the peculiar defect of that part, or effect of some occasi∣onal cause, without a praevious Scorbutick disposition. 5. That the subsequent digestions have their proper errors and degenerations, from a spontaneous defection and lassitude in their vital principles, without disturbance from an injurious object, transmitted by errone∣ous preceding digestions, or improper ali∣ment in sua natura; whose effects are consi∣milar and equivalent to some Products and Symptoms of the Scurvy; therefore to di∣stinguish and know aright to whom they be∣long, and whence they had their rise, is by examining each faculty in their proper Cha∣racters of rectitude and declensions. 6. That the Diagnostic Signs of the Dis∣ease usually so accounted and most frequent, as defects in the mouth, pains, spots, weak∣ness, lassitude, &c. some or more; antece∣dent causes concurring, some or more; as a close Chamber air, and confinement within doors; or a Region where the Scurvy is En∣demical, gross food, sedentary, inactive, re∣tired Life, studious, melancholly disposition, or splenetic, indulging sleep and ease: In the concurrence of these causes collated with the Signs mentioned, a certain determina∣tion and judgment of the Disease will result;
and from thence a certain process in the Cure may ensue: Examination of opinions concerning the nature of the Scurvy. BEfore I explicate the nature, quiddity, or essence of this Prothean Disease, I shall first recite the judgments and determi∣nations of the most learned and eminent Physitians that have writ upon this Subject, to whom the most of our age do adhere, and imitate their practice in the Cure. Senner∣tus gives this definition or description of it. Scorbutus est prava & occulta qualitas, seu dispositio, toti corpori, praecipue vero visceribus nutritioni dicatis impressa, ab humore melan∣cholico crasso, seroso seu ichoroso, peculiari modo corrupto orta; cum spontaneae lassitudinis & gravitatis, in cruribus praecipue, sensu; pecto∣ris angustia & respirationis difficultate, gingi∣varum corruptione, & oris graveolentia ac ma∣culis purpureis in cruribus inprimi, aliisque morbis, ac symptomatibus plurimis ab eadem causa pendentibus, conjuncta. He saith, It is an evil occult quality, or disposition, impressed upon the whole body,
chiefly the Parts destinated for nutrition, a∣rising from a gross melancholly or serous i∣chorous humour after a peculiar manner corrupted with lassitude and heaviness. This Definition looks imperfect and unsa∣tisfactory. An evil occult Quality.] Here's a ne plus ultra to our enquiry, if we would sit down here, and be contented only to know, that we know not what it is; an occult quality. A Quality.] Here he makes the Disease to be accidens, when as it is ens substantiale habens propriam radicem in vitali principio. Arising from a gross melancholy, or serous i∣chorous humour after a peculiar manner corrup∣ted.] To find out this gross melancholy, or se∣rous ichorous humour peculiarly so corrup∣ted, is the same task as to find out the oc∣cult quality; this is ignotum per ignotum, to describe one unknown thing by another. The Scurvy does not arise from a grosse me∣lancholly; that's a grosse error, or a serous ichorous humour: but if the Scorbutic de∣praved humour may go under those deno∣minations, they are the effects of the Scur∣vy and not the cause; you must dig deeper to find the radix of the Disease.
Chiefly the parts destinated for Nutrition.] Here he saies the Scurvey is an evil disposi∣tion impressed upon the Parts for Nutrition; but I must say it is chiefly arising from the Parts destinated and appointed for Nutriti∣on: which difference is as great, as between the terminus à quo, and the terminus ad quem. Impressed upon the wholo body.] Here is the Disease in facto esse, and its progresse, but from whence it sprung as yet is not discovered, you must return back and trace it farther, if you will see it in fieri, in its generation; in radice, and the womb from whence it springs; and that not from a melancholly or serous humour; the Dis∣ease is not seated in excrementis, but in vita∣libus principiis: for, as sanity or health con∣sists in vita integra; so the Disease, in ipsa∣met vita oblaesa, and therefore health and sickness in eodem hospitio vitali degunt, suc∣cessively dwell in the same Mansion. Ecthius in his Epitome of the Scorbute, describes it thus. Scorbutus est morbus Splenis aliquando ob∣structi, aliquando intemperati, aliquando cum incipiente Scirro, qui praepedit ejus attractio∣nem, ac consuetant atribilariae redundantiae se∣questrationem, ex hepate venisque, eoque humore universum corpus vitiat, sed peculiariter crassiore
feculentia crura contaminat, atque evaporandae acredine gingivas inficit. He saith, the Scurvy is a Disease of the Spleen, obstructed, distempered, or hardened, which hinders the attraction and separation of abounding Melancholly from the Liver and veins; by which humour the whole bo∣dy is vitiated, the grosser part affecting the thighs, the thinner acrid part the gums. A Disease of the Spleen obstructed, distemper∣ed or hardened.] Here the essence of the Disease is set forth and defined, per effectus separabiles à morbo; by effects which may, or may not be, and the Scorbute in being: and it is absurd to define a thing essentially, by effects which are but results à posteriori and separable; and that which is an effect cannot be constitu∣tive, the ratio formalis of the thing from which it doth proceed. Which hinders the attraction and separation of abounding Melancholly. Here the Spleen is made a place of recepti∣on and sink, to drain away excrementitious Melancholly from the Liver and Veins: an inferior Office for so noble a part; nor is it fabricated or situate conveniently for such a use; having no ample cavity for recepti∣on, nor a fit passage for emission of such an excrement, being intertexed variously with
small vessels, having insertions into each o∣ther, and dores of communication, argues a place of elaboration, and grand affair, not a draught or sink for venting an excremen∣titious humour: if it had been destinated for so mean service, why was it contrived with so many arteries, that no other Part is fur∣nish'd like it, but that it was appointed for higher purposes and design, and therefore is plentifully stock'd and enriched with vi∣tal spirits. More might be said to take off this aspertion from the Spleen, but let this suffice at present. Brunerus in his Tract of the Scurvy de∣scribes it thus. Proprie hic morbus est affectio lienis, in quo a∣cervato & leviter putrefacto humore melancho∣lico, qui à sanguine separatus ad lienem trans∣mittitur, pars tenuior seu effervescens, effertur sursum & obsidet gingivas, tanquam tenerrimas oris partes, & putredini maximè obnoxias, eas∣que inficit & erodit, imo etiam emollit: crassior decumbit ad crura — He saith, this Disease properly is an effect of the Spleen; in which a putrid melanchol∣ly humour is accumulated, suparated from the blood and transmitted thither.] He makes the Spleen to be sedes morbi, the part primarily affected, and yet the peccant
humour is only transmitted thither; and so it is but a part recipient, as other parts of the body are; pars infesta, not primario affe∣cta from whence it doth arise. The thinner part is carried upwards and infects the Gums, the grosser settles down∣wards and affects the Thighs.] This Distinction of thicker and thinner parts is frivolous: for, that degenerate scorbutick Disposition of the Stomach, whe∣ther the depraved matter lodged there be thick or thin, it will affect the mouth and gums, because the stomack and mouth have one membrane lining both the parts; and therfore when the stomack is foul, the mouth hath a bad relish, and an unsavoury tast (which is most perceived in a morning after digestion is past;) and let any disgustful thing come into the mouth, the stomack nauseates presently, and is ready to vomit, although it be not swallowed down; and this is by reason that the mouth and stomack have one membrane investing both the parts, that the one cannot be affected but the o∣ther immediatly consents and participates, by reason of the continuity of the mem∣brane; which is more or less manifest ac∣cording to the greatness of the cause: So that thickness or thinness of the matter is not to be taken notice of, but the effect's the same be it thick or thin.
And for that he saith, the grosser part af∣fects the thighs, the reason is as light as the former, though not to be refelled by the same Argument: I shall not anticipate my intentions in another place, but refer you to a future opportunity in the discourse fol∣lowing, where this point is cleared. Eugalenus in his book of the Scurvy treats largely of this disease, in whose foot-steps most Writers since have trod, or digressing but a little from his opinions, have relied on him as the best guide in tracing this Dis∣ease. His observations are many in his own practice, upon several persons variously af∣flicted with this disease; and brings in seve∣ral infirmities complicated with it, worth your reading. Notwithstanding the basis and foundation that he laies, whereon he makes this disease to be founded, is not firm; and that is Hu∣moris Melancholici exuberantia, abounding Melancholy: to which something hath been said already that I shall not repeat, and more to be said in another place, in satisfa∣ction to this error. And in his determination of the internal cause and generation of the Scurvy, he de∣livers his judgment in ambiguous wavering terms, not positively and resolvedly; but
with some kind of dissatisfaction and uncer∣tainty: his words are these, that you may not think I traduce him. Interna hujus morbi causa, melancholici hu∣moris exuberantia censetur, ex jam dicta vitae victusque (scilicet inordinati) ratione acquisita: qui circa lienem & hepar, vel in intermediis in∣ter haec & ventriculum spatiis, vel in ipsis etiam venis, quod puto, coacervatus; propriam & huic morbo familiarem corruptionis formam su∣bit, qua adjacentia, vicinaque viscera, sua vel substantia, & contactu, vel qualitate & fumis de∣pravat, naturalem eorum temperiem corrum∣pendo, donec in contagii communionem consenti∣ant: Where you may observe by censetur, vel, puto, his determination with haesitation and uncertainty. In finding out the Scurvy; for his Dia∣gnostick signs, the Pulse and Urine are his two great discoverers; that in most of his Observations the one or both confirms his o∣pinion, and relies upon their signification: both which are very uncertain; for, there is no particular Pulse or Urine peculiar to this Disease, but almost all Pulses and Urins may be in Scorbutick persons, as most Diseases may be complicated with it: and therefore their judgment is very fallible and uncertain that depend on these signs. Others there are who have written Tracts
of this disease, as Ronsseus, Wierus, Sal. Al∣bertus, Martinus, whose judgments and opinions are involved and agree in the main, with those already recited; that what hath been said in castigation of their errors suffi∣ceth for these, that I need not spend time ine xamining them apart: nor have I re∣counted their failings intending their dis∣honour (whose names I think worthy of memory, for their learning and labours in the medicinal faculty) humanum est errare: but that it is the duty of every one, to exa∣mine the principles and tenents of our Pre∣decessors, and not subscribe to the autho∣rity of any, when a clearer light of Reason, confirmed by experiments and due observa∣tion, commands a recession from their opini∣ons and practice. Amicus Eugalenus, amicus Sennertus, Sed magis amica veritas.
Prolegomena. Induction to the knowledge of the SCURVY. BEfore I come to define the nature of the Scurvy, its matter and manner of gene∣ration and germination, I must premise som∣thing concerning the Office of digestions, for the clearer apprehension of what shall be thence deductively asserted; lest I taking that for granted, which others in that action or office deny, it will be objected I state my positions upon false suppositions, and so de∣nying the basis of my Reasons, will think they have satisfied the Argument and evin∣ced. I shall therefore survey the digestive offi∣ces in the regularity and irregularity of their actions, defections, and errors, assign their causes, and draw my conclusions ad punctum, to concenter with my intentions and scope aimed at. Meat being received into the stomack, must suffer a transmutation there in the first
laboratory and preparatory Office, for nu∣trition of the body: The principal agent in this work, is the stomachical ferment; this ferment by its incisive acidity penetrates, rarefies & volatiseth the food, and transmutes it into Chyle, or white juce: That which before was fixed, gross, hard or tough, is made Volatile, rare and fluid, which ha∣ving obtained that praevious digestion and perfection proper for that place, the lower orifice of the stomack opens and gives it emission, sending it to the next Office of digestion for a new impression. Contrary to this doctrine have the anci∣ent Physitians asserted, and built upon, as a sure foundation, that heat is the prin∣cipal efficient cause of digestion; being in∣duced to this opinion, from the similitude of artificial concoctions and digestions: And finding humane bodies to be actually hot, supposed by increasing of natural heat, to fortifie the digestions; and that the diffe∣rence of digestions in several persons, or the same person at several times, did de∣pend and vary, from the degrees of heat, its debility and fortitude, but upon a due examination you will find it otherwise, and from the strength of reason be forced to conclude with me thus.
1. That heat is a chief agent in the artifi∣cial preparation and praevious digestion of meat, before it be received into the sto∣mack, whether in rosting, boyling, baking, &c. but not in the natural digestions of the body: For, nature in its principal operati∣ons works not primarily by the signa∣tures and concomitant effects of life (as heat;) but by vital principles as efficient primitive causes. 2. That the changing of food into Chyle is a fermental transmutation from a vital principle, not an impression of a subordi∣nate instrument. 3. That digestion in humane bodies, is accompanied with heat, though not the proper effect of heat. 4. That internal natural heat by its own power and peculiar efficiency, makes not a digestive transmutation, but is a conco∣mitant of vital operations, contributing instrumentaliter & equivocè to various effects; and is subservient in the several digestions distinct from each other. 5. That extraneous and additional heat does excite the vital principles to operation, and is asistant instrumentaliter & excita∣tivè, in performance, propter symbolum quali∣tatis.
6. That heat quatenus heat, acts univocè, alwaies producing the same effects; but as it is the instrument of various efficient causes, concurs in the production of various heterogene effects; as also in respect of di∣vers objects upon which it acts. 7. That the variety of heat in several bo∣dies are but gradual differences; but diver∣sity of digestions are from formal distinct proprieties. 8. That the gradual difference of heat in divers persons; or in the same person at several times, do signally testifie the ability of the vital principles in their vigour à pri∣ori, in their essential causes; or à posteriori in their manifested operations Claudicari, to be impedited or depraved accidentally. 9. That heat acts not as principle instru∣mentally in the stomachical digestion, but subordinately inferior to a superior mani∣fest quality, more immediately the organ of the vital principle or primitive cause of di∣gestion: For, heat may be sufficient, yea, abound, and digestion weak or depraved (as in Feavers;) but the other cannot be in its rectitude and vigorous, but the digestive faculty must be strong and unblamable. 10. That veriety of appetites, suting with and desiring some kind of meats, but refusing and rejecting other as dissentaneous and disgustful, ariseth from the peculiarity
and singular propriety of stomachical fer∣ments, and not the gradual diversity of heat: For, that which is principal in opera∣tion is also principal in election of the proper object of that faculty, embracing and cove∣ting what is most suteable and agreeing, but repugning and shewing aversion, from what is discordant and disagreeing, by an innate power and prerogative, as supreme modera∣tor of that faculty. 11. That the digestive faculty in fishes, being of another region, is not accompani∣ed with heat; because their vital principles do differ toto genere from land creatures: And therefore heat is not necessarily requi∣red as a principal agent, or instrument, in digestion; but shews it self as a distinguish∣ing character of vitality; yet not vainly or bare so, but usefully where it is. Hence it appears from these theses, with their connexd reasons, that heat is not the primary efficient cause of digestion, but an emanative accident, or characteristical con∣comitant of vital principles, instrumen∣tally subservient in the digestive faculties; and therefore I must rest upon another basis, more firm in reason, and assign a vital principle the parent of digestive transmuta∣tion specifically distinct in every digestion: which that you may the better understand
what they are, I shall divide and distinguish them into these following propositions. 1. That the primary efficient cause of di∣gestion, is the ferment of that digestive Office; which is a vital principle endowed with a transmutative power (by way of simi∣litude astral or influential) discharging its vertue upon the object matter to be wrought upon or digested. 2. That the several digestions have pecu∣liar distinct ferments, acting subordinately in their own stations, until aliment be brought to its heigth of perfection, for nutrition of the body. 3. That these ferments are primitive essen∣tial causes, and therefore à priori indemon∣strable; but discover themselves à posterio∣ri in their distinct operations and effects. 4. That the impressions of the several ferments upon their alimentary objects, are so distinct that their productive alterations are alien, dissimilar and opposite, yet con∣ducing to one ultimate intention, the nu∣trition and conservation of the body. 5. That the producted alteration of the precedent digestion, if not subdued & chan∣ged by the subsequent in its passage, is hostile, injurious and a morbifick cause; if it submit not to the power and government of that Office, through which it hath transmission,
by receiving the transmutation and cha∣racter of the place: So the acide cremor of the first digestion, is changed into a saline nature in the second; else gripes in the bowels and fluxes do ensue. 6. That the emanative influential power of the ferments is absconded in their causes (because vital principles) but detected by assuming similar homogeneous manifest qualities, subservient to their intentions and instrumental in their operations, do shew the diversity of their natures, and what they are. 7. That the instrumental qualities of di∣gestion are indisposed, and unfit, by their intention or remission, being vitiated and depraved from their own natures and pro∣prieties, by improper discordant food, car∣rying in their natures alienating and hostile qualities; or similar qualities in excess, ad∣vancing the fermental qualities to a lux∣uriant injurious exaltation: As pricking and gripes in the stomack from acide juices, as of lemmons, &c. 8. That errors in digestion may arise from the depravation, enervation and decay of the ferments: or the indisposition of their instrumental qualities and organs by which they act; or the intractability, discor∣dancy and unfitness of the object matter to be wrought upon.
9. That the vital Principles, by provoca∣tion from unnatural bad Customs, are thrust and enforced from the constancy and regu∣larity of their operations; thence grow dis∣ordered, debauched and habituated in diso∣bedience to the institutions of Nature; do hardly and with difficulty return and be re∣duced, unless coacted by prevalent good means, and regular care for their reduction and restoration. 10. That the vital principles, without vio∣lence offered or disturbance, ab extra, from injurious bad Customs and irregular living, do deficere in radice, spontaneously fall off and desist, sooner or later according to their strength and radication ab ortu; in their first plantation and initiation: and there∣fore it is that some in the ordinary course of Nature (though irregular in living) do out∣live, and have their faculties perform vi∣gorously of longer duration, than some o∣thers more regular and conformable to the Laws of Nature; because the difference is great in the Principles of their Nature, and foundation of their beings. 11. That Diaetetick errors, as in meat and drink, sleeping and watching, motion and rest, passions of mind, &c. do so discompose and disorder the vital Principles in the go∣vernment of their Offices, that their strength
and vigour is thereby impoverished and aba∣ted, their duration shortned, and hastens them to a period of extinction: for, as vital Principles are radicated and established by Nature, so are they best kept and longest pre∣served, by that course and method which Nature hath enjoined for their tuition and conservation; but being transplanted out of their genuine and native regularity, by incongruous and unnatural Customs, they degenerate, decay, and are of shorter dura∣tion, much sooner declining and termina∣ting their beings; as more fully is set forth in Tutela Sanitatis, therefore I forbear here. What the Scurvy is, its essential con∣stitutive Causes and manner of Generation. HAving determined the use and Office of the digestive ferments, their manner of operation, and specifick distinction from each other, their divers subordinate effects con∣ducing to one ultimate intention, their de∣clensions and durations: which being pre∣mised and rightly understood, the Nature of the Scurvy in its Essential causes and manner of Generation will more cleerly be detected,
and made obvious to reasonable capacities: and to facilitate your apprehension and re∣tention, to prevent mistakes or cloudiness by a long dependant concatenated discourse, I shall aphoristically deliver my opinions, and divide them into morsels, fit for your recep∣tion and more easy digestion, which you may take thus. First Ngatively. 1. It is not one univocal homogeneous preternatural Humour, the materia ex quae that generates the Scurvy; for as the Symp∣toms and concomitant Effects are various, so is their material cause different & various. 2. It is not melancholly degenerate and depraved, acquiring a specifick malignity (as most Physitians I meet with in Print do affirm) that is the material cause of the Scurvy: for (à signis diagnosticis) admit there were such a melancholly humour depraved and speci∣fickly malign, this specification would deter∣mine it to some certainty, and confirm it to some distinct diagnostick signs, indubitably declaring its peculiarity and separation from others; for there must be some specifick di∣stinguishing character which necessarily must accompany such a specifick malignity; but there is none such, for a man is adjudged to be Scorbutick, with looseness of Teeth and without, with spots or without spots;
and so likewise of the other signs, in their absence and presence: and the Symptoms are so various that they contradict and op∣pugn one another in their declarative signs, that they own distinct causes not one pecu∣liar malignity. Secondly, The diversity or difference of the scorbutick spots do argue variation of the material cause, and not one Specifick malign humour: for, if you judge of temperaments by colours, making them one sort of distin∣guishing Characters, (as you do) saying this person is Phlegmatick, because pale; and that sanguine, because rosy; and this cho∣lerick, of palish yellow: as also of preterna∣tural tumors, saying, this is a Phlegmone, that Erysipilas, or oedema, &c. from the va∣riation of their colours and external appea∣rance, assigning several humours and com∣plication of humours for causes; then why not various commaculations and discolou∣rations in parts, as well as various extubera∣tions, should challenge divers material cau∣ses, since they differ but ratione quantitatis, in the quantity of peccant matter, the one hath more, the other less; and sometimes these spots do germinate and swell into Scor∣butick tumors ex abundanti materia, from en∣crease of the same depraved matter, and have their variations and denominations as other preternatural tumors have.
A juvantibus & contra. If melancholy humour be the foundation of this Disease, then Purgatives that attract melancholly (as you suppose) would prevent this Disease, or eradicate it; but you may purge and purge Spring and Fall, and yet the Scurvy shall come on and prevail: but if it be melancholly degenerate & malign, as you say, then sudorificks would be the grand opposers of this Disease; but neither Pur∣gatives or Sudorificks, nor both, are the ade∣quate medicines of this Disease, yet both useful à posteriori, applied to the Effects and Products of it: but that which unhingeth this Disease, stops the spring, prevents or e∣radicates it, roborates the faculties intentio∣nally and primarily, restores them to integri∣ty and pristine vigour in the performance of their Functions and duties. A Causis antecedentibus externis: Certain Climates, Regions and bad Airs are procuring and promoting Causes of this Disease; not that we can imagine they in∣gender melancholly more than other places, but because they are infested with noxious fumes and vapours, which surrounding and being drawn into the body, commix with the Spirits, and do labefactare vitae principia, debilitate and deprave the faculties in their operations, from whence Scorbutick effects do ensue.
But you may say, a sedentary, studious and melancholly Life does often breed the Scur∣vy, and therefore it must needs be a melan∣cholly humour, the material Cause & foun∣dation of this Disease: To which I answer; that a melancholly inactive Life does breed the Scurvy, but how? not to conclude from thence that it is a melancholly humour de∣generate and malign; but because by such a condition of Life the vital Principles do receive much prejudice, decay and fall off from their Functions; for mirth and an a∣ctive Life do roborate all the faculties, keeps them vigorous, the Spirits being chear∣ful & lively in the performance of their du∣ties, but by the contrary are languid, debile and insufficient, from whence many incon∣veniences and prejudices to the body do en∣sue, as you may see enumerated in that Book called Tutela Sanitatis. But you may farther say, the Spleen be∣ing the seat of that passion, is chiefly affect∣ed and injured thereby, and therefore it must needs be a Splenetick luxuriant hu∣mour. That a melancholly Life does debilitate and frustrate the Spleen in the rectitude of its Office, I agree, and not the Spleen only, but other principal parts and Offices of di∣gestion also; for if melancholly seiz and
fix the Spirits, makes them torpid (as it is the property of it so to do) and the Spirits are principal agents in all the faculties, then not the Spleen only is prejudiced, and a sple∣netick humour only that abounds, but all parts do participate of the injury idiopa∣thically; and all the digestions are vitiated, and their ill effects do appear Scorbutical, and variously complicated as their several Actions and Offices are various. Having shewed you Negatively, and de∣termined that the Scurvy is not what some have supposed it to be; I shall now posi∣tively set down what it is, in these follow∣ing Theorems. 1. That the Scurvy is generated by the conjunction or conspiration of divers Cau∣ses; yet disjunct in their causation, subor∣dinately and distinctly contributing to a Scorbutick difformity; for, although the de∣ficiency of the first digestion lay the founda∣tion, yet it is not compleated so as to chal∣lenge the denomination of the Scurvy, un∣til by addition from the irregularity and depravedness of other parts. 2. That the Scurvy is a complication or concatenation of Diseases, conspiring to the making up of its difformity and Prothean shapes; not arising from a single Disease, or any solitary cause: for, as the variety of
symptoms and products do appear in seve∣ral parts, dissimilar and unlike, being the effects of several inordinate faculties; must of necessity Challenge and own distinct im∣mediate causes, as the parts wherein those faculties do reside, are distinct and separate in place and Office. 3. That the difformity of the Scurvy, in the diversity and dissimilarity of symptoms, ariseth from the complication of errors in the digestions, and variety of parts thereby affected and drawn into consent. 4. That the individual variegation of the Scurvy ariseth from the peculiar association of causes, and idiosyncratical propriety of particular persons, producing such and such symptoms, which in no other person you will exactly find the like: For, as sound bodies in respect of sanity having a parallel equality and proportion in the whole; yet particularly and disjunctively collated there is great variety and difference; in stature organization, complexion, inclinations, appetitions, performance of functions, &c. If there be such variety of parts, proprieties, and operations in humane bodies in a state of sanity and integrity which is uniform: then much more variety and disproportion in a state of declension and irregularity, which is deform and multiform.
5. That the Scurvy is generated formali∣ter & essentialiter, in the vital principles ut ens invisibile, not discerned by sence: But the effects and products are distributed, have their residence in all the parts, and are sensitive objects; as spots, pains, loosness of Teeth, putrid Gums, Tumors, ulcers, &c. 6. That the Scurvy is planted Seminaliter & radicaliter in the digestions or digestive Offices, whose ramifications, spread through∣out the body, and are increased extensivè, more or less, according to the fortitude and debility of parts, to resist or consent and be depraved. 7. That the Scurvy increaseth, or is worse intensivè, from the greater frustration of digestions and degeneration of the digestive matter, ex causis antecedentibus quibuscun∣que. 8. That the Scurvy is procured occasiona∣liter, by numerous and various diaetetick acci∣dental causes, seducing the vital principles to declension and deviation from their rec∣titude and integrity. 9. That the ratio formalis, quiddity and essence of the Scurvey is defection and enor∣mity of the vital principles; occasionally procured ab extra & moved to such a devia∣tion: Or spontaneously inclining through
an innate deficiency and hereditary propen∣sion; or natural inability, longer to perse∣vere, from the fragility of constitutive prin∣ciples in nature. 10. That the Scurvy is not restrained to any certain symptomes either in quantity or quality; or univocal material cause: But is various and equivocal as to the ma∣terial products, by degeneration and com∣plication; as also unlimited in the symp∣toms. 11. That the part affected principaliter, cheifly and contributing prae aliis, to the pra∣vity and deformity of this disease, is the Spleen. For that the Spleen is a principal member, in chylification, and sanguificati∣on as to perfection and conservation; and by a deficiency in the Spleen, both are vitia∣ted, there wanting due fermentation: and therefore the Spleen is fabricated and con∣trived with so many arteries, having plenty of spirits for this office. 12. That Scorbute spots arise from im∣pediment, vitiation, or extinction of the last digestion, or assimilation; and that ratione ob∣jecti deturpati: vel facultatis transmutativae deficientis: Either the alimentary object is depraved and unfit; or the assimilating fa∣culty is languid, deficient or extinct.
13. That spots appear chiefly upon the Thighs, and Leggs, not from the gravity of their material cause & ponderous propensi∣on of grosser matter downwards, as is com∣monly alledged for the reason; but because ignoble parts are more weak & debile in their assimilation, being more remote from assi∣stance & supply of vital spirits, have first the tokens of defection: And farther, not the low∣er parts only are so affected, but the superi∣or parts frequently, as Arms and Shoul∣ders, from the same cause, do bear the same characters, not distinguishable by tenuity and grossness of humor. 14. That Scorbutick pains are caused from alien qualities arising out of the degenerate matter in the parts so molested; or from sto∣machical acidity transmitted unsubdued; from defect or debility of the second digesti∣on, or its own luxuriant exorbitancy resist∣ing transmutation and obedience in its pas∣sage. 15. That pro ratione corporis perspirabilita∣tis, plus minusve, scorbutus variatur: As the body is perspirable or impervious more or less, is the Scurvy varied, intended and re∣mitted in the symptoms: And therefore the Crassities, impenitration of the skin, and constipation of the pores, prohibiting tran∣piration, is a partial organical cause of pre∣ternatural
spots, and makes for their con∣tinuance and duration: For, as the body in its natural good state is transpirable, giving emission to what is superfluous remaining after the last digestion; on the contrary, the restraint thereof by congestion, begets com∣maculations and defaedations of the skin, tu∣mors and apostumations, one or other, pro magnitudine causarum. 16. That although the Scurvy, eo nomine, is not of long standing, and unknown to the ancient Physitians under that title, and the distinguishing characters that we denote it by; yet the disease in specie is antique, though in individuis not so frequently then, nor perhaps characterized altogether alike, as we now distinguish it: For, as humane bo∣dies do decline in these latter daies, and de∣generate from the pristine vigour of the an∣cients in all the faculties and abilities of bo∣dy, by reason of intemperance, and various manners of abusive living, transmitted in se∣mine from generation to generation; so likewise, and for these causes, diseases do not continue alike and certain, but have their variations, and complications different; which occasions new names, though the dis∣ease be the same in its essential constitutive causes and manner of generation.
Preservation from the Scurvy, and to be observed in the Scurvy. IN the due Regiment of Health, and prote∣ction from Diseases; you must consider and know that all things which belong, and are necessary for the preservation of the body and support of Nature; that they also may be the antecedent procuring causes of sick∣ness; as also the fomenting and aggravating causes of diseases already generated: as when contrary to the law or disposition of our peculiar Natures, they are applied or used unseasonably, immoderately, incon∣gruously, or any waies unsutably to our Nature and Condition of Body: And there∣fore both in the time of preservation and curation they are to be regarded. And since there is not a moment of time in which we do not stand in need of air; and that being constantly drawn into the body, must needs make for, or against the continuance of health, according to the conditions and properties it is pregnant with. Wherefore in preservation from the Scur∣vy, it is of no small concernment the air and climate that you live in, to dispose or defend you from it: the nature of the air is
such in some places, that few there are not tainted with it, and this as a principal cause. And therefore in Holland, Denmark, Sweden, and such places this disease is most common; and chiefly in the Fenny and Marrish parts: for that a moist foggy cold air is apt to ingender this disease or increase it: because the spirits thereby are clogged and fixed, dull and inactive; from whence defects in fermentation, humors incrassated and obstructions, the pores occluded, and transpiration prohibited. But a warm, drie, serene air makes much in the preservation from the Scurvy: the spirits thereby are kept more vigorous, live∣ly and brisk; humors attenuated, volatile, and freely circulating; the pores more open and perspirable, giving emission to excre∣mentitious vapours unprofitable and hurt∣full to be restrained; and all the parts more free in their communications and subser∣viency one to the other. Those that retire themselves voluntarily to a studious sedentary life, or are confined to a close chamber airy, are thereby disposed to this disease; or much aggravated and en∣creased, if already they are scorbutick, more specially if melancholy be their companion: and where the air is impure, not to be avoi∣ded, as in great Cities, correct it somthing
by Art in your houses, with wholsom fumes, especially in moist cold weather: They that live in Cities, especially some parts thereof, more close and noisom than others; as in narrow streets, lanes and Allies, are much prejudiced in their health. There is great difference in the place and parts of a City to live in; the broader streets and places more open and airy, the wholsomer: and the outside (caeteris paribus) near the fresh fields is better than to be crouded in the middle, provided no stinking ditches or dunghils be adjacent. And here I cannot but take notice of Bloomsbury (the Right Honourable Earl of Southampton's propriety and Seat) for the best part about London, both for health and pleasure exceeding other places: It is the best air and finest prospect, being the highest ground, and overlooking other parts of the City. The fields bordering upon this place are very pleasant, and drie grounds, for walking and improving of health; a fit place for Nobility and Gentry to reside in, that make their abode about London; there being the Country air, pleasure, and City conveniencies joined together: Now lately improved and built upon, and still encreasing with fair and well contrived Buildings, a good addition, and Ornament to this place.
The next considerable in a regular preser∣vation from the Scurvy, is Diet; which ought to be duly observed: for, as by con∣venient food, sutable and agreeable in all the requisite circumstances, quantity, quali∣ty, time, and order: so on the contrary, by a disproportionate and unsutable diet, the faculties are disordered and debilitated in their several functions, inclining to this or that disease, according to the nature and quality of the food, and other circumstances that attend it. And therefore some kind of meats and drinks do dispose, and are the antecedent causes of this disease; as also do cherish and help to maintain it where it is already ge∣nerated, although procured first by other causes. The grosser meats, and such as do not easily digest are to be avoided; but light meats, and such as the stomack does well agree with, covet, and digest best, keep to such. Milk and Milk-meats in a foul body do soon alter and degenerate, and therefore injurious to Scorbutick Persons; but in clean bodies 'tis good food. Broom buds, Capers and Sampire are good sauce to your meate, helps the Stomack in digestion, and is profitable for the Spleen;
a part chiefly affected in the Scurvy. Also Oranges and Lemmons, Berberries and Sorrel helps fermentation, and are good. But old flesh, drie and hard meats long kept, Rie-bread, and brown, especially Crusts, fried, or broyled meats, are to be avoided: for these are more stubborn, do not soon yield to fermentation, nor beget good nutriment: as also salt fish, and meats smoak-dried, as hang'd Bief, Bacon, dried Tongues, and such like, are injurious, and promote this disease: But for variety of meats and their qualities you may see a Ca∣talogue in my Tutela Sanitatis, therefore I shall not repeat them here. For Drinks take these observations: Drink not your Beer new, because not yet fully purified by fermentation, but rather stale, well hop'd, clear, & reasonable strong, if your stomack be weak and declining. And it is very considerable, of what wa∣ter your drink is made; for that there is great variety and difference in the goodness of waters, being impregnated with several qualities from the nature of earth through which it passeth; and several accidents that happen to change water from its genuine properties, and make it impure and unwhol∣som, by carrion, filth, and such like admix∣tures that may corrupt it.
And from these causes many places are more disposed to breed the Scurvy than o∣thers, from bad water with which their Beer or Ale is made, and meats dressed. And Ply∣ny relates, that Caesars Army by drinking of bad water but a few daies, had the symp∣toms of the Scurvy. Ale I do not approve of; but white Wine and Rhenish is good for you to drink a glass or two somtimes, to open obstructions, cleanse and whet the appetite, and promote fermentation. Sider also is good drink, if it be made of the best Apples; as Pippins, Pearmains, and such like; and that it be clear, having had good time to ferment, separate, and purifie: but withall have respect to your stomack, that it be agreeable, and desired by it: but if you have a cold, raw stomack, a warmer liquor will be more acceptable; as a glass of Canary somtimes, to fortifie the stomack and help digestion, is agreeable to the most. The next considerable for praecaution of the Scurvy, is exercise and motion: which duly and moderately used, is a good preser∣vative from this disease: a sedentary sloath∣ful life makes the body to degenerate from its purity and vigour. Corrumpunt otia corpus.
From hence Defects in fermentation, hu∣mours incrassate and obstruct; the Spirits being torpid, dull and inactive, do not ra∣rify and circulate the blood, as when by motion they are excited and stirred up to their duties and performances: by seasona∣ble exercise the digestions are strengthened, obstructions opened, and evacuations more duly performed: and since an idle Life doth procure and promote this Disease, you must account it as your enemy to avoid it. And like to this is the indulging of sleep unseasonably, beyond its limits and due times; from whence necessary evacuations are restrained and put by their due accu∣stomed times; and superfluous humours ac∣cumulated and lodged, that otherwise Na∣ture would have sent forth profitably in good time; the spirits are made sluggish, dull and inactive, and all the faculties in∣jured. But on the contrary, let not watching ex∣ceed its just times appointed by Nature; for from hence the inconveniencies are as great; especially to such bodies as are lean and spare, or inclining to be Consumptive and hectical; by over-watching the spirits are heated and tyred, the bloud degenerates and turns acrid or sharp, leaving its balsa∣mick
nature, and is disposed to a colliquati∣on or separation of parts; the vigour of na∣ture is hereby abated, and the functions de∣praved. Passions of mind, though in the last place accounted, are not the least, but principally to be regarded, and due order to be kept there for preservation from infirmities: for the Soul being the better and more noble part, from whose command and power bo∣dily actions do proceed; of necessity if that be discomposed and disordered, the instru∣mental part must act irregularly and depra∣vedly; and of all the Passions, melancholly and sadness do most dispose to this Disease, and aggravate it; the reasons are these. The Soul in that Passion suspends and withdraws her influence and emanative ver∣tue, which was wont to be enlarged and let forth into all the faculties, mediately by the spirits, her chief and appropriate Agents; and the Soul in this state and condition of sadness, being as it were lock'd up and strait∣ned within her self, darkened and overspread with a cloud of melancholly, does not emit∣tere & emanare, send forth her wonted quick∣ning power; by which suspension the Spi∣rits are disposed to cessation from their du∣ties, whereby the faculties are enervated and deficient in their functions.
The Spleen which is accounted the seat of this Passion, is chiefly debilitated and impe∣dited in its office; the spirits hereby are fixed and deaded, fermentation cohibited and restrained, from whence scorbutick ef∣fects do ensue; for that by the benefit of fermentation, our food is decocted, deserts its crudity and fixity; is raised and promo∣ted to a state of volatility, that it may be fit for nutrition, and assimilation into the sub∣stance of the body: but if fermentation be deficient and wanting, neither chylification nor sanguification can be good, but altoge∣ther depraved and vitiated. But concerning the several Passions of mind, and their various effects wrought in the body, is set forth in that book called Tutela Sanitatis, to which I refer the Reader for satisfaction. Determinations of the Scurvy con∣cerning the difficulty and fa∣cility of the Cure. BEfore I enter upon discourse of the Cure, to lay down fundamental precepts, and rules upon which it does depend; I shall say something as to the possibility of the
Cure in particular persons, in whom there is a great difference; that by examination every one may give a rational conjecture of their own condition and state in this Dis∣ease; and be something satisfied of the diffi∣culty or facility of their Cure before they undertake the Course, and method to ef∣fect it. Many there are more curious and inquisi∣tive to know what their Disease is, how dan∣gerous and whether curable, than they will be industrious afterwards for a Cure: If it be the beginning of a Disease, and not very troublesome, they contemn and slight it: if it be of long standing and difficult to deal with, they despond and have no hopes to part, being so long associated together; and then give themselves the liberty of their phancies in the discipline and order of them∣selves, whether it be good or bad, for or a∣gainst their Disease. Others more rational in their actions, de∣sire a satisfaction concerning the nature and radication of their Diseases, and state of their bodies, that they may order them∣selves to the best advantage, and to oppose their Disease with that strictness and dili∣gence, in the use of good means, as is thought requisite for such a cure. In satisfaction to such which are scorbu∣tical,
that you may know in what condition you are, and the strength of your Disease, and what possibility of Cure, whether diffi∣cult or more easy: Examine your self by these questions. 1. What Functions in the body are decay∣ed and irregular, more or fewer; and whe∣ther such faculties so injured be principal or of a lower degree: for, according to the number of Functions disordered and debili∣tated, is your Disease better or worse: and if they be from principal faculties the worse also: therefore look to the distinguishing Characters that belong to each faculty, which will declare whether they perform re∣gularly, or disorderly and dificiently: the Characters of rectitude are the common signs, when every part performs its Office according to the custom of Nature: the cha∣racters of declension and a depraved condi∣tion, are all such as declare the contra∣ry. 2. The duration and time, how long such symptoms and signs hath appeared and been manifest; for by how much the longer this Disease hath been rooted in the body, by so much the more difficult it is to be eradica∣ted; for that the vital principles have so long deviated from their rectitude and inte∣grity, and is more difficult to return, by
the length of time habituated to the contra∣ry. The Scurvy in the beginning is of easy cure, and soon yields to gentle medicines, properly appointed, with due orderly Cu∣stoms; but after it is fixed and radicated firmly by time, stamping impressions of its depraved Nature upon all the Parts, is then more stubborn and difficult to be removed, and will require more time in the prosecu∣tion against, although with effectual medi∣cines. 3. Whether the Scurvy be haereditary; that is, descended of scorbutick Parents, or their Ancestors: and here you must know, that the Scurvy haereditarily derived, is worse than that which is acquired by ill dy∣et, bad air, melancholly and unwholsom cu∣stoms: for, if the Scurvy be worse and more difficult to be removed in those habituated to it, by length of time, acquired only by a declension and degeneration; then much more when it is radicated in the principles of Nature from the birth, and derived from their Parents or Ancestors, it being then connatural to them à principio. 4. What Sex, Male or Female: the Sex makes some difference in the facility or dif∣ficulty of a Cure; it being worse in Wo∣men, who are more obnoxious to the preju∣dice of this disease than men.
First, because they are of a weaker na∣ture, more apt to degenerate and accumu∣late ill humors; whose constitutions are sooner changed, being more exposed by such a feminine debility; not so able to resist the procuring and occasional causes of this Disease, as masculine vigour, and fortitude of their vital principles. Secondly, by reason of their accustomed courses in Nature which are apt to be sup∣pressed, decreased, qualitatively altered, or be disordered in time, that Nature hath ap∣pointed for that purgation, which brings much detriment; and this happens to Wo∣men from small occasions sometimes; espe∣cially infirm and diseased bodies, which ag∣gravates and promotes their other infirmi∣ties, or inclinations to such. Thirdly, in respect of Child-bearing and the weaknesses that attend such a condition, which decay and abate their vigour and strength; and in the time of their going with Child the Scurvy doth prevail very much; partly for some of the preceding reasons; as also that in such a condition they cannot so well oppose the Disease by that Discipline & order as is required: and several I have ob∣served to die in Child-bed by scorbutic Fea∣vers, and some suffocated soon after a pro∣bable good delivery, by a sudden and great
fermentation, occasioned from the prece∣ding Labour, and extraordinary internal motions. 4ly. In giving judgment of this Disease, the age of the person is to be considered, whe∣ther it be in young or old: in old age the cure is more difficult by how much the ol∣der, because the vital principles are declin∣ed in their vigour, and fall off from the in∣tegrity and rectitude of their Natures spon∣taneously, from their proneness to desist, and natural inability to a longer duration; and therefore are not to be restored, but may be retarded in their speed of declension; their ill affects corrected and abated, not wholly prevented, being the inevitable con∣sequents of lapsed Nature. The Scurvy in Children argues an haeredi∣tary infirmity derived from their Parents, or the vital principles debile and weak in their initiation and plantation: or that their Nurses were scorbutical, and tainted with this infirmity, from whom the child hath imbibed and drawn in impure nutriment, to corrupt the principles of its Nature in the in fancy and tender daies, being then more apt to receive, and longer to retain any im∣pression quo semel est imbuta. — In all these Causes the difficulty of the Cure is advanced; and since so great a pre∣judice
may arise to Infants from their Nur∣ses, therefore there ought to be a strict and diligent care in the choice of them, and that by the approbation of an able Physi∣tian before the Infant is committed to them. 5ly. The colour of scorbutick spots declaring this Disease, is to be regarded; for that such spots by how much they encline to black∣ness, so much the worse: denoting a grea∣ter degeneration of the material product, or extinction of the assimulating faculty. Quicquid est in effectu, praeexistit in causa; arguing the vital principles to be very enor∣mous and deficient; or the materia ex qua and nutrimental object to be of a very de∣praved Nature, not to be reduced. 6ly. That the Cure is more difficult and will be longer in effecting to those that are irregular, live high, loose and careless; not observing laudable Customs, and such a Discipline as is required to oppose the Dis∣ease: as also to such, whose low condition and inability, constrains them to a bad dy∣et, inconveniencies and ill customs which promote and aggravate this Disease also.
The Therapeutick or Curative part examined. THe common method in curing this Dis∣ease, is carried on by these intentions: preparation of the scorbutick matter; open∣ing of obstructions; evacuation of the mor∣bifick cause; and roboration of parts. For the first intention namely Prepara∣tion it is performed (as they suppose) by medicaments that are attenuating and in∣cisive, and by a more peculiar property do respect the malignant Cause: and such me∣dicines are compounded of these ingredi∣ents, Fumiterry, Spleenwort, Germander, Ci∣chory, Borrage, Bugloss, Harts-tongue, Enula∣campane, Squils, Bark of Tamarisk, Cappar roots, Polipody, &c. Of which decoctions are made, and drank some daies before purging, to prepare the morbifick humor, and make it more fit for evacuation. That some of these rightly used are good against the Scurvy, I do not deny, but un∣der the notion of preparation is a delusion of judgment: First, because there is no pos∣sibility of reducing this degenerate scorbu∣tick matter into a good state and condition,
à privatione ad habitum non datur regressus. Ax. Secondly, for that the humour which you intend so to prepare, is occult and unknown in its proprieties (by your own determina∣tion;) the preparation then is but a blind business, and a shooting at random. Thirdly, for that there is no purgative which attracts electivè this humour you in∣tend thus to prepare: wherefore no prepa∣ration is available or beneficial, distinct from that which is antiscorbutical and cura∣tive. The second intention is opening of ob∣structions, and that is necessarily included in antiscorbutical medicines, which are a pe∣ritive, rarifying, volatising and of a fer∣menting Nature: but if it be meant only as a praevious disposition to the Cure, I think it more nicely distinguished, than necessary to be observed. The third intention is evacuation of the morbifick cause; and that is supposed to be performed by phlebotomy and purgation. Phlebotomy I cannot approve of (except there be a plethora urging) for that this Dis∣ease is generated and depends upon the de∣fect of fermentation; which rather requires addition of spirits to help the lassated vires, exciting and assisting their wonted operati∣ons;
not detraction and diminution: but hirudines venis haemorrhoidalibus appositae for some persons may be profitable. It fares with the Bloud, as in other Li∣quors; when their spirits are gone, flat and dead, they change their former nature and degenerate; and all things that exhaust, de∣press or fix the Spirits, are promoters of this Disease: and I much wonder Phlebotomy so frequently used upon slight occasions, perni∣ciously sometimes and mortally; as in the e∣ruption of the small Pox, more apparently, at such time when the bloud is fermenting for a purification; detraction of blood then abates the strength of Nature, by emission of spirits; which ceaseth the ebullition, and checks Nature in the very height of contest, for expulsion of the malignity and virulen∣cy of the Disease, but this obitèr. Purgation is appointed to be performed by such medicines as evacuate melancholly, supposing that predominant humour to be the cause of this Disease; but if I should grant melancholly to be the morbifick cause, and that purgatives do attract electivè; yet the process of the cure is not rationally grounded; for that this melancholly (as you say) is degenerate and changed from its spe∣cifick known nature, into that which is se∣cret and unknown; metamorphosed and
disguised by occult proprieties, arising from its secret and new Nature: so that it is not the same, but another humour distinct from what it was before: and now you must seek for another Purger, peculiar and different from the common Purgers of melanchol∣ly. And farther, here is a great mistake in taking that to be the morbifick cause, which is the morbifick effect: that excrementiti∣ous matter which is purged out, is but the product or effect of the Disease, not the cause; except it be occasional; not essenti∣al and constitutive. You must distinguish between the Disease and the product thereof: depraved matter and excrements are the products of a Disease, and may be the internal occasional causes of another Disease: but in respect of the Disease of which they are so a cause, they are external; that is, they are not the constitutive essential causes: for Causae constitntivae & constitutum sunt simul in esse: but occasional causes are antece∣dent and have priority of exstience; so like∣wise the product matter or effect is distinct and separate from the Disease; for that the Disease hath a real existence before such a production; and also after this degene∣rate matter is removed, unless otherwise
obliterated; or that Nature sua sponte returns to her integrity and rectitude. The last intention is Roboration, which is the perfection of the Cure, and praecaution for the future; and this is so necessary, that although the Disease make a cessation for a time, yet there will be a recidivation and re∣currence: the parts being debilitated by the pravity of this Disease, will shew their propension to it; until those impressions be totally obliterated, and the parts restored to their pristine vigour. And this is not performed by dyet-drinks, Apozems, Syrups, and such like heterogene languid medicines; but with such as are purely defaecated from terenity, volatized, spiritallized, and graduated to a pitch of energy, symphoniacal with vital princi∣ples. Having briefly discoursed the scope and intentions of the common method in the Cure of this Disease; I shall now give you some Theses curative, deducted from the Theorical part of this work, founded up∣on the Doctrine delivered. 1. That the difficulty in curing the Scur∣vy does depend upon the principal causes in the digestive and distributive faculties, be∣ing more or less enervated, deficient or ir∣regular; not from the contumacy of a me∣lancholly
humor (as is alleaged;) for, as the vitiosity and difformity of the Scurvy does arise from the complicated defection of the digestive and distributive faculties; so the difficulty also, or facility of the Cure does depend upon the possibility of restoration to their integrity and rectitude: and if the in∣ternal constitutive causes of the Scurvy be cut off and subdued, the symptoms and ef∣fects that from thence do depend, will soon die and vanish, not being supplyed by their causes of generation and conservation: therefore it is not the contumacy of a pro∣ducted degenerate matter that protracts, or makes the Disease incurable, but the diffi∣culty of reducing the vital principles to their integrity and rectitude, being weakly or depravedly radicated, or habituated to en∣ormity and irregularity, enforced by diaete∣tick bad Customs; or promoted and conti∣nued by some unavoidable occasional cause. 2ly. That an haereditary scorbutick dispositi∣on is not to be changed and altered in the radication; but will shew a propension and inclination suiting with the peculiarity of its Nature and principles: for, Nature de∣praved à principio in principiis, is not to be reduced, but will retain her vitiosity being indivisible and inseparable from her self; nor is capable of reduction, having
not had the principles of rectitude to return to. 3ly. That an haereditary Scorbutick dispo∣fition as to fructification and symptomati∣cal production, may be prevented, retarded, or lessened; for that the symptoms and pro∣ducts which usually attend this disease, are under the command, and must give obedi∣ence to a diaetetick and pharmaceutick pow∣er and authority. 4ly. That the various symptomatical ap∣pearance of the Scurvy, and difference of scorbutick matter by degeneration in divers persons, does not alwaies necessarily require variety of Medecines, but will admit the same cure; for, although in the production & pro∣gression of the disease, there is great varie∣ty; yet there is more certainty and unity in the essential constitutive causes, the spring or fountain from whence those issue; to which rightly applied the cure will suc∣ceed, reliquum supplente natura juvata. 5ly. That the occasional, or antecedent in∣ternal causes of this disease, by way of prae∣caution; or the product matter and ef∣fects of this disease, in primis viis seated, may conveniently be removed by manifest eva∣cuation: that is degenerate Chyle, which will not be reduced, but deprave and infest where it resides, passes, and is transmitted;
yet the spirits and ferments are chiefly to be regarded, that they be kept in their purity and vigor, being the principles in each fa∣culty; and this is performed privativè, by subducting what is offensive and injurious; and also positivè, by contributing an additi∣onal strength, having some equality or pro∣portion suting with their natures. 6ly. That purgation cannot eradicate, or take away the constitutive causes of this disease; but only carry off some of the pro∣ducted scorbutick matter, which is not redu∣cible, and is remedium à posteriori: for, the essential constitutive causes of the Scurvy are enormity and deficiency of the vital princi∣ples in their duties; which are to be redu∣ced to their regularity and fortitude: but evacuation per se respects the producted mat∣ter and effects, not the essential causes, but per accidens: and therefore that which does apply radically to the internal causes of this disease is symbolical and consimilar with the vital principles, uniting with them, roborating and confirming them in their functions; and therefore they that lay all the stress of the cure upon evacuation, whe∣ther purging, vomiting, bleeding, or sweat∣ing, as if that alone must do it, are much deceived and frustrated in their expecta∣tions.
7ly. That strong purgations, offering vio∣lence to the vital principles, exasperates and makes them more irregular and defective, and thereby promotès rather than abates the strength of this disease: But purgation or abstersion rightly instituted (not every purge that makes you go to stool) is convenient and helpful in the Cure. 8ly. That Scurvy-grass, Watercresses, Brook∣lime, most frequently used for the Scurvy, in Diet-drinks, Syrup, and juice, is not the specifick remedy against the Scurvy; that is, challenging a peculiar propriety and singu∣lar vertue against this disease before other Medicines; but comes far short of other Me∣dicines (though good, and may be more ad∣vantagiously used) in their activity and re∣storation of the digestions to their primitive vigour and rectitude of their office and du∣ties. 9ly. That Cochlearia &c. does not resist this disease by a specifick, peculiar antipathy a∣gainst the occult malignity and products thereof; but by restoring and roborating the digestive faculties, by their saline vola∣tising vertues, natura reliquum perficiente; which endowments are not specifick, but common. 10ly. That the diseases complicated with the Scurvy are not cured by their own pecu∣liar
Medicines, usually effectual; unless they have respect to this disease, and that which is antiscorbutical added to their specifick vertues; or alternatively used: and there∣fore scorbutick Consumptions, Fevers, Dropsies, Gouts, Astmaes, &c. will not be subdued and yield obedience to the com∣mon way of Cure. I have now prosecuted this disease, and made disquisition into the nature of it, so far as time will give me leave at present: something more I have to say upon this sub∣ject, but want due leasure to deliver it to you, and therefore must defer, and wait for an opportunity to revise and augment this Treatise. What follows are the Medicines I use in the cure of this disease.
Arcana Artis Spagyricè fideliter & Cura singulari, propria inspectione praeparata. Potestatum vitalium deficientium Virtute resuscitativa & instau∣rante dotata. In levamen aegrorum ad praxim ac∣commodata; & ad morbos contumaces domandum valentissima. Usu & experientia quam sae pissime probata. Modo exhibendi, dosi, vehiculo, tem∣pore, cum discrimine sexuum aetatum, virium, pro re nata & eorum natura, legibus appositè restricta. Quicquid aliud de his curiosus, vel difficili morborum complexu coreptus cautè dubitabit; me consulat, supplebo. Everardus Maynwaringe, M. D.
Antiscorbutick MEDECINES, Exactly prepared and fitted for the principal cases that oc∣cur in Practice. Largely endowed in universality, opposing many and grand DISEASES, Limitted and distinguished in their Appropriation and Virtues. Regulated praecisely in their Use, by fit Doses, proper Vehicles, due times, with respect to strength, Sex and Age. London, Printed for T. Basset under S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1664.
PREFACE. IN the former discourse having traced the Scurvy, from its infancy and generation to its full strength and growth, its chief places of residence, va∣riety of appearance and mon∣strous deformity: it remains now to propose some effectual means to check and subdue the prevailing power of this spreading dis∣ease, that dayly grows and increaserh to the ruin and decay of Nature; being possessed and seated in the vital principles, seducing and constrain∣ing them to enormity and defection from the re∣gularity in which they were planted by Nature. And having strictly surveyed the condition and nature of this disease, with its variety of atten∣dance and additional strength, being ready to join with any morbifick cause, and be transfor∣med: I was unwilling to sit down here & rest with a contemplative knowledge of the disease,, and
leave the greatest part of the work undone; the subduing and vanquishing of it by powerfull Me∣dicines: nor being willing to commit the remai∣ning grand part to the industry and care of o∣thers (for good Reasons;) I have there∣fore laboured to form medicinal Instruments and prevalent means to oppose this Gigantick Monster; being alwaies ready prepared for my own Patients, and those that desire the benefit of them: Namely, the Scorbute Pills and Ca∣tholick Elixir, efficatious Medicines for the purposes appointed; with sufficient Instructions here annexed, for their proper and most ad∣vantagious use. I shall not recount the benefits and advantage that many have received by them, nor publish the Persons, (a way practised by some Quacks to induce credit to their Medicines, though the stories be oftentimes feigned, or effects fallaci∣ously and unduly imputed) but leave every one to beleeve of them what they please, if my word be not sufficient to pass for their reputation. LONDON, Next the blew Boar on Lud∣gate Hill. E. M.
Scorbute Pills. THe Scorbute Pills are efficacious against the defects and errors of digestion in the first, second, and third Office: In the first Office, namely, in all diseases of the stomack, requiring pur∣gation, and cleansing downwards, this Me∣dicine is very proper; it evacuates and un∣loads a heavy oppressed stomack, clogged with indigested or depraved matter, that cor∣rupts good food retained, or duls the Appe∣tite, and hinders digestion; prevents Fluxes, Gripings and pains in the stomack and bow∣els, Cholick and Iliack passions, by taking away their causes, and leaving a grateful astriction and roboration upon the parts. By their abstersive quality, they remove crude viscous phlegm impacted in the cor∣rugated Tunicles of the stomack and guts, being a receptacle for inflation and wind. They destroy Worms, and prevent their bree∣ding, by carrying away the putrid matter whereof they are generated; they correct a nauseating and belching stomack; make the stomack clean and fit for the reception of wholsom food, and not till then can you expect good nutriment.
In the subsequent digestions, and splenetick diseases, they are powerfully abstersive and a peritive, opening obstructions of the Spleen, Gall, Mesentery, Liver and Reins, removing their morbifick causes, which produce a Ca∣chectick, or ill habit of body, the Scurvy, Dropsies, hypocondriack Melancholy, Jaun∣dice, &c. These Pills cleanse and evacuate gently, whereby the fore-named parts are exonera∣ted and discharged of crude, coagulated, de∣praved fermenting matter, which remain∣ing there congested, or transmitted, various symptoms do arise in several parts of the body, appearing in a scorbutick difformity: as lassitude, debility, and decay of several functions in the body, from frustrated and corrupt digestions: Fluxes from Crudities, or stimulation of acrimonious qualities, with erosions and torsions of the guts: febrifick aestuations, turgid ebullitions, and unna∣tural fermentation, producing various dis∣quietudes and erratick pains; flatulent di∣stentions, painfull compressions, angust and difficult breathing; obstructions of the ves∣sels, and ductures, from slimy and viscous coagulations; causing unnatural retention of excrements which ought duly to be voi∣ded; impeding and retarding the expedite and free conveyance of nutriment, made degenerate & depraved by a sluggish passage
and impure commixture in the way; from whence Atrophies and scorbutick Consump∣tions, spots, and defaedations of the skin; the spirits also obtunded in motion, inactive and torpid, dark and impure, being but the rarefactions and subtiliated extractions from depraved matter, alien and counterfeit; from whence dulness, heaviness, and unwon∣ted sadness. These symptoms, and many more in seve∣ral persons, are variously complicated, more or fewer, this with that, according to the plurality and complication of causes, which makes scorbutick persons to be differently and variously affected. For the Scurvy, these Pills are the best ab∣stersive and purgative Medecine I ever made use of, in any the fore-named cases, leav∣ing no bad impression behind, or debility upon the parts, as most purgatives do, and are offensive to Nature and disgustful, though per accidens auxiliary and helpful, by remo∣ving some material morbifick cause, yet re∣quire correction and roboration of parts af∣terwards. For Hydropick Infirmities and watery tu∣mors of the body, whether universal, puffing up the whole body, as the Anasarca: or in particular parts, as the Hydrocephalus, being a collection of water in the head: or the Hydrops pectoris, in the cavity of the brest:
or Ascites in the belly: or Hydrocele, when the Cod is filled with water like a bladder: and sometines in the legs only. In any of these cases, these Pills are very profitable, and do evacuate serous, or watry humors, accumulated and preternaturally retained in the body. They are Aperitive, resolutive, and diu∣retical, dissolving coagulated matter that obstruct the urinary ductures, provokes the Reins to discharge their office, in freeing the body from superfluous watry humors, at∣tracting and transmitting them by urine, which is the due regiment and imperial po∣wer of the kidneys. They open obstructions in Women whose Courses are stopt contrary to the custom of Nature, and brings them into their right order; they clense the matrix, and evacu∣ate noxious humours collected there, dissi∣pate vapours, and is profitably used by those who are subject to fits of the Mother. For diseases of the head they are not im∣proper, but fit and efficacious against infir∣mities, afflicting the Brain and Nerves; by eradicating their occasional causes that re∣quire abstersion and evacuation in the lower regions of the body. Diseases attributed to the head, for the most part do arise from inferior parts, occa∣sioned by their impurities, obstructions and
distempers; for one that is idiopathically af∣flicted, ten is Sympathically affected, by consent of parts, and transmission of some morbifick matter thither; but the foundation of the disease is elsewhere, and to that part must the Cure be directed. And therefore if well observed, we fre∣quently meet with, scorbutick palsies, scorbu∣tick convulsions, apoplexies, soporiferous, or sleepy diseases, falling sickness, pains of the head, giddiness, tremblings, deafness, dull fight and blindness: And all these arifing from the Scurvy or Scorbutick impurity of the body oftentimes: And these are not cured but by antiscorbutical medicines; and those that endeavour otherwise with their specifick and appropriate medicines to the parts where such symptoms and diseases do appear, labour in vain and are frustrate in their in∣tended cures. For those that are troubled with Rheums arising from indigestion and crudities, these Pils are profitable; not so much that they attract rheum, but because they cleanse and strengthen the digestions, and so the ante∣cedent cause is cut off. And for the same reason they are good in pectoral infirmities, diseases of the breast, arising from phlegm and crude indigested humors, sometimes sharp or falt, causing pertinacious coughing, and disturbing the
Lungs in the performance of their office, by an unquiet irritation: sometimes viscous, tough and thick, stopping the pipes of the Lungs and vessels for respiration; obstruct∣ing and occluding the pores of the Lungs, which ought to be pervious into the Cavity of the breast, whereby the air is drawn in with difficulty, although so thin a body and penetrating: from hence Asthmaes, wheez∣ings, short and painful breathing; and in these cases of obstructions, the Lungs (or rather the intercostal muscles) to supply this defect is forced to a double or swifter motion, that the heart should not want air, necessari∣ly required in the performance of its noble office. And that these infirmities are caused of∣tentimes from the Scurvy, none that under∣stand will deny; and so great have these Scorbutick Asthmaes been, that many have been suffocated in the extremity of a sudden paroxism, or fit of this disease. And not only difficulty of breathing, but angustness, compression, palpitations of the heart, or heart-beating, and swoonings som∣times are caused by this disease: in such cases these Pils are proper and beneficial; they open obstructions, dissipate putrid ma∣lign vapours that afflict the heart, and disturb the regularity of its motion. There is also Scorbutick Consumpsions,
accompanied for the most part with a Hec∣tick fever, whereby the body wasts and pines away, being defrauded of good nutriment, that should support and maintain the facul∣ties; but is converted into impure depraved matter and excrementitious; hereby the body is enfeebled and weak, the spirits hea∣vy, dull and sad, the skin lax or loose, the flesh soft and wasting, and all the faculties languishing and declining. In this case these Pills are a fit medecine to begin the Cure; then use the Elixir fol∣lowing: but cooling drinks and restaurative Broths hurtful: Corpora impura quo plus nu∣triveris eo magis laeseris: foul bodies the more you feed and endeavour to nourish them the worse you make them. Finally, for all occasions where purgation and clensing is necessary these Pills are fitly used, and is a universal medicine in purga∣tion. Nor do they only clense and carry a∣way excrementitious degenerate matter which occasions many diseases, (according to the diversity of parts to which it is trans∣mitted, and from consent of parts though not transmitted) but also do roborate and strengthen the parts in their passage, being amicable and friendly to Nature. The Dose for man or woman is 3 or 4 Pils; perhaps 5 Pils may be required; according to the strength and condition of the body to operate.
So great a difference there is in bodies for purging, that two or three of these Pils are sufficient for some, when as others will re∣quire 4, or perhaps 5, if a robustick body: therefore try your body first with a lesser Dose; then if it require more, you may add to the next, and be not too Bold at first. The times for taking them generally is thus, except good reason to the contrary: Take one Pill over night going to bed, ha∣ving eaten but a light supper at 6 of the clock before; the next morning early in bed take the remaining part of the Dose, and you may sleep an hour after if you will; but lie not long in the morning: when you are up drink a little warm posset-drink, and for∣bear eating until dinner time; but drink you may. These Pils take thus every fourth or fifth day; and you will find it best to give such intermission: Chronick or old diseases must have time to be eradicated, and you must reduce Nature from an ill habit by degrees, better than hastily; as diseases come on, gradually prevailing upon Nature; so Na∣ture by degrees must be restored again to its power and regularity: Cum natura malè su∣stinet repentinas mutationes. But on the intermittng daies you are not forbidden every thing medicinal, but may take the following Elixir conveniently.
Concerning Doses I must say something more, that none may mistake, but know what is meant by a Dose. A Dose is the true quantity of a Medecine to be taken at once, or for one operation: A Dose is not a set quantity (as some may suppose) to be given equally alike to all; but such a proportion as is convenient for the condition of every body, to some more, to others less, according to strength and con∣condition of the body in operation. For the Doses or quantities of Physick sutable to every body (chiefly in purging) there is as much variety, as in the propor∣tion of meat for every mans stomack: so much as will fully satisfie and be convenient for one man, may be too little for another, and too much perhaps for a third. There∣fore in a regular diet, to the weaker sort of persons we allow a spare and slender diet; but to the strong and lusty, firm and solid bodies, we allow a larger proportion, and that necessarily. The same Rule in Physick is to be obser∣ved, to fit every one with a due quantity and Dose, to strong bodies more, to weaker less. The Dose of these Pills is not praecisely ap∣pointed to a Pill, neither more nor less to all; but with some latitude, 3, 4, or 5 (being gentle in operation:) for the difference
of bodies is such in operation, (especially purging) that they require a different quan∣tity oftentimes for their proportion, which cannot so exactly be determined and ap∣pointed by the praescience of the most skil∣ful Physitian, but by rational conjecture, until the first experiment and trial of their bodies; and after the first Dose, your own Reason and ability of body will prompt you in the next, whether to keep to the same, to augment or abate; Taking this caution, that 4 or 5 stools in a day is enough; and that number I intend you to aim at, and no more. For example; if you have a stubborn bo∣dy, difficult and hard to purge, and your Physick works very little, the next Dose you may take one Pill more: but if you have a lax gentle body and easie to purge, then take a lesser Dose, and abate a Pill, if the for∣mer work too nimbly with you: and re∣member this as a necessary Caution, That you covet not strong purges, to have many stools in a day (a common error) which offers violence to Nature, and forcibly sweeping down both good and bad together; but ra∣ther choose to draw away the offending cause gently by degrees, giving Nature time for separation, the pure from the impure and noxious: 4 or 5 stools in a day is suffi∣cient, and you will find it much more bene∣ficial,
Nature more kindly assisting, and less weakned. Some there are (brain-sick fools) who un∣less their Physick work a douzen times, think they have kept house for nothing, and their money cast away, accounting the goodness of their Physick by the number of stools; but they deceive themselves very much in desi∣ring strong purgations, which weaken and impare Nature, leaving such impressions be∣hind, sometimes worse than the disease they took them for. These Pills, although purgative, yet their chief vertue is not contained in the purga∣tive faculty, but in other appropriate qua∣lities, opposing the several diseases, to which the laxative adjunct property is but a Hand∣maid and subsidiary: nor must you expect alwaies the disease to be brought into the Close-stool, there are other Conveyances and ways of emission of Natures providing besides the common back door. Concerning preparation before purging, muck talked of, take this advice: That so∣luble bodies easily yielding obedince to gen∣tle purging Medecines, need no other pre∣paration than what Nature hath provided in the disposition of their own bodies: for those bodies that are hot and costive, it will be advantagious and facilitate their purga∣tion, to eat stewed Prunes, or drink Whey
two or three daies before, which will prepare and open your body, make it more soluble and easie in purging. For the manner of taking; whereas these Pills are appointed to be taken, one Pill o∣ver night, the other part in the morning; yet if you find any inconvenience thereby, you may take the whole Dose in the morn∣ing very early; but if you have not a just cause of alteration, observe the former pre∣scription. For going abroad after your Pills, if you desire it, or your occasions require, take this advice: if your body be indifferent strong, not apt upon small occasions to take cold, the weather temperate, having ordered the Dose of your Pils to work but three or four times; you may then go abroad without pre∣judice; but if otherwise, it is better to for∣bear. The Catholick Elixir. BEfore I proceed to tell you the vertues and profitable use of this Medecine, I must first give you the reason of the Title, that none may stumble at it. Catholick is universal; and this Medicine may be stiled so: not that it cures every dis∣ease', but that it is effectual against some dis∣ease
or infirmity in every faculty, as they are thus divided and distinguished into the natural, vital, animal, and genital faculties: and being thus endowed with a competent measure of universality, it may not impro∣perly be called a Catholick or universal Me∣dicine, since its vertue is extended to all the grand faculties. But you may ask, why an universal Medi∣cine should be composed and appointed for a particular disease, it being intended chiefly for the Scurvy? In answer to this; if you look into the preceding Tract, you will find the Scurvy not to be a single disease, but a complication of diseases, whose root, or branches, if arrived at some height, extend to all the faculties, bringing detriment and decay throughout the body. For the word Elixir, concerning its Etymo∣logie and derivation, there are several opi∣nions; some will have it from the Arabick, others from the Greek; but I shall not trou∣ble you with that: it is sufficient that you understand it is a Medicine of noble descent, and may have the use of it: If you expect I should tell you of what it is made, and the process how? you must pardon me there, it does not belong to you. If an Artist should view the ingredients of this Medicine, before operation upon them, would determin them only for the deficiency
of the natural faculties, and their parts; as the Stomack, Spleen; Gall, Mesentery, Liver, Reins, &c. but being spiritalized, gra∣duated and advanced; they do extend fur∣ther: as also, for that the other faculties do depend very much upon the integrity of these, as well as the compleatness of their own peculiar organs, by and in which they execute their several functions: for, either by transmission or consent the rest suffer if these be injured. I shall not demonstrate this truth, and explain it further; being a Doctrine not so necessary for you to know: but proceed to give you an account of the vertues this Me∣dicine is pregnant with, and manner of use. And first of their essicacy in the natural functions. This Elixir is used with good success a∣gainst most infirmities seated in the Stomack, Spleen, Guts, Pancreas, Mesentery, Liver, and Reins, especially if they be languid and weak; degenerating and falling off from their duties; being obstructed, loaded, or clogged with crude, depraved and indigested matter; wanting spirit and vigor, and ac∣cuteness of ferment fit for their proper works: This Medicine does acuate and vi∣gorate, giving spirit and activity in the per∣formance of their duties. For surfeits, oppression, and overcharging
the Stomack, it is a sure Remedy; working off the offending matter, cherishing and refreshing the stomack. It excites and quickens a dull or weak appetite, and procures a good digestion, (which is the main pillar of health) being ve∣ry auxiliary and assistant to the stomacks di∣gestive ferment deficient and decayed, or ob∣tunded and overlaid with crudities or depra∣ved matter from intemperance, incongruous diet, and bad customs. By its Balsamick Amaritude, is healing and grateful to a waterish, crude, raw stomack: corrects nauseousness and vomiting (safely in breeding women) suppressing and subduing the offensive causes, leaving a good astriction upon the stomack, and roborating the reten∣tive faculty. Is helpful to those molested with belching, and grip'd with wind in the stomack, or guts, by correcting and digesting crudities, and preventing a discordant fermentation the causes thereof. Amends a strong offensive breath, and checks unsavory risings in the stomack from frustrated and corrupt digestions: prevents and destroys worms bred from such putrid indigested mat∣ter. This Elixir hath an aperitive and opening power, and is profitably used by those mo∣lested with hypocondriack Melancholy; that have obstructed Livers or Spleens; distended
and full in the sides under the short ribs; or pained there, by reason of wind and humors obstructed in motion. 'Tis a good Medicine in the cure of Dropsies, and beneficial for Hydropick persons, or in∣clining thereto and troubled with a watry hu∣mor in any part: it digests superfluous humi∣dity, opens obstructions of the vessels leading to the reins; excites the attractive faculty of the Kidneys which before were sluggish, imbe∣cile, or impedited in the attraction and trans∣mission of urine; roborates the parts and confirms them in their duties. For intermitting Fevers, called Agues, quotidian, tertian, or quartan, it is very good; they being seated in the fore-named parts, to which this Medicine is properly assistant and auxiliary; dischargeth its vertue upon the parts so affected, alters and subdues their morbifick causes, and hastens their diseases to a period, by removing their fuel of conserva∣tion and continuance; and afterwards does strengthen those parts, debilitated and weak∣ned by such diseases harbouring there; and raseth out the bad impressions left behind them, which breed future inconveniencies, and are foundations laid for other diseases; which will succeed, if not prevented after this manner by good Medecine, to clense and re∣store the parts; as frequently we do observe in practice.
In the vital faculties this Elixir is of good use, and beneficial for those that are troubled with palpitations of the heart, angustness and compression there; arising most frequently from vitiated digestions and scorbutick fecu∣lency, an ill affected spleen, or matrix; from whence noxious vapours arise, and are com∣municated to the vital Spirits, which afflict and irritate the heart to this distempered mo∣tion: and if the cause be very great and sud∣dain, sometimes swooning is caused thereby, as in Fits of the Mother, and passions of the spleen: this medicine dissipates the vapours, and prevents their causes of generation, by rectifying and roborating the parts from whence they proceed. It is good in asthmaes and stoppings of the breast from crude Phlegme; opens the pipes of the Lungs and helps difficulty of breathing; strengthens the Lungs and is very advantagious for Consumptive Persons, and that have a faint short breath, or that are molested with a troublesom and dange∣rous Cough, inclining and disposing them to a Consumption. 'Tis Cordial and restaurative, cherisheth and refresheth the Spirits, by the aromatick vertue and pleasant transpiration of its o∣dour, raising the Spirits and affecting them with delight. In the animal faculties, and for infirmi∣ties
of the head; as Convulsion, falling Sickness, Vertigo or giddiness, sleepiness lassitude and dulness, pains of the head, rheumes and superfluous moisture, this me∣dicine is very good, and beneficial to strengthen the brain and nerves; to ener∣vate, lessen and abate the antecedent causes of these infirmities, generated in other parts, although they appear and shew themselves most here. And although this medicine is more pe∣culiarly appropriate to supply the natural faculties than the other, primo intentionaliter; yet consequenter and in effect, the vital, the animal and generative faculties is improved and made more vigorous in their perfor∣mance and functions; and also freed from many diseases by the rectitude and integri∣ty of the natural faculties, both in respect of prevention and cure: for that the natu∣ral faculties are the basis and foundation of the rest in conservation; and are supported from thence as the Tree from radix, the Bran∣ches from the root: and defects, impediments and decay of the natural faculties, causeth de∣bility, disorder and infirmities in the rest, by transmission or consent. And though the Symptoms appear in one part, and disorder one faculty more apparent∣ly; the cause often lies obscure and is the proper defect of another; between which you
would think there were no relation, nor com∣merce or incommodation one from the other. If the natural faculties be vitiated in their functions; all the rest decline from rectitude, and abate in their vigour: as in the Scurvy, first the natural faculties are debilitated and disordered; then from hence the vital, the animal and genital do degenerate, and are discomposed; and there is sufficient reason, for that these are supplied from thence: and when the natural faculties are restored to their vigour and rectitude; the other also par∣ticipate of this change and are restored in a great measure; except the particular Organs of those faculties be made incapable. Wherefore and for these Causes, if I ex∣tend the vertues of this Medicine yet farther, and shew its power and prevalency against more infirmities, I do not ascribe above what it doth justly challenge. In the genital parts: if I should tell you it were good against deficiency in generati∣on, and defects of the seed: as crudeness, thin∣ness degenerate pravity, and infaecundity, the causes of barrenness, perhaps you would think I go beyond my bounds; but I could easily prove, and make it a rational assertion, deductive from the principles of Physick, besides what is said before; but my inten∣tion here is not so much to improve your knowledge as your health; the preservation
of the bodily functions in their integrity; and restoration of them declining, languishing and deviating from their primitive rectitude; if your faith will not put you upon the tryal, I shall not raise arguments to convince your reason and perswade, believe what you please. It is very good for Women that have lost their Complexion, looking pale, yellow and ill coloured; by reason of that weakness cal∣led the Whites, or wanting the due course of nature, by reason of obstructions from cold, bad dyet, ill customs and vitiated digestions; or a distempered melancholy mind; which di∣sturbs nature in her constant order, and due regiment of preservation: it is very profitably used during the time of their monthly pur∣gations; it procures them effectually. For those that have sores, or abound with cor∣rupt humours which enforceth them to keep issues open, to prevent greater inconvenience & danger; this Medicine applyes to the springs from whence they issue, and where they are bred; prevents them in their causes, in some persons; in all it abates and lessens in the quantity; corrects and alters the stinking cor∣rupt quality, and makes your body more sweet and wholsome. This Elixir as it is properly used in the particular cases mentioned singly, so likewise in the same conjunct and variously compli∣cated and graduated, amounting to, or chal∣lenging
the denomination and title of the Scurvy; against which this medicine is very effectuall, and necessarily follows the use of the preceding pills, to strengthen the facul∣ties after abstertion and cleansing; whereby the like Scorbutick impurity and ill symp∣toms arising from thence, for the future is prevented, and a return of the disease prohi∣bited (in a regular due course of living) for, as the disease did grow by errors and defects in the digestions, producing such various sym∣ptomes; so are they prevented by assisting the digestions, and preserving them in their inte∣grity & due course of nature from declension. For which purpose and intention this me∣dicine is prevalent, to roborate the faculties and principal parts ordained for those offices: resolveth and volatiseth coagulate and fixed matter; attenuates and rarefies gross subsi∣ding humours which cause obstructions, tu∣mours and pains: resists putrifaction, depu∣rates and renovates the blood from a degene∣rate condition, stained with Scorbutick fecu∣lency and impurity, restoring its balsamick na∣ture and genuine proprieties. Of necessary use for aged and weak persons whose faculties fall off from their integrity, and abated in their vigour, do perform but weakly and deficiently; as also for such who are recovering or lately recovered from some great disease, which hath enervated and debi∣litated
all the functions, leaving the chara∣cter and impressions of an evil cause behind upon the parts, chiefly where they were seat∣ed; which renders them indisposed and unfit in their duties, and layes the foundation of new diseases to ensue from hence. In such cases this medicine is a good as∣sistant and requisite auxiliary help to per∣formance, and restoration of vigour in a competent measure, if there be a capacity of restoration in the parts remaining, where such faculties do reside and are exercised. And that you may use this medicine to the best advantage, take this advice; that if your body be foul, first cleanse with a dose or two of the Scorbute pills; then begin with this E∣lixir to strengthen the faculties, and you will daily perceive a growing benefit incouraging you to continue the use thereof; which is done with the least of trouble not incommo∣dating your occasions; that amidst affairs, in journeys, it prevents you not in your law∣full customs, or tyes you to inconvenient ob∣servance, nor of the season, but is profitably used at any time of the year. Take this caution: be not too hasty in your expectations, and leave not the use of it too soon; your disease came on gradually, and was longer in breeding than you imagine, though the symptoms or signes of it appear to you suddainly and lately; perhaps some years, or many years have laid the foundati∣on,
and but now makes a discovery, being arrived at some heigth: you must then in rea∣son allow some time for eradication and re∣movall; since nature will not admit of vio∣lence and suddain changes, but is disturbed and injured at such rude dealing: therefore take time as nature, and the medicine does re∣quire; nor will you want incouragement to persevere, but have daily advantage against your infirmity. The full dose for Man or Woman of strength, is thirty drops: for twelve years old, twenty drops: for five years old, ten drops. And observe this rule; that at the first ta∣king, you begin but with half the dose that is appointed for your age: as thus; thirty drops is appointed for a Man; let him begin with fifteen drops, and then augment two or three drops every day after, until he ascend to thirty, and there continue. Take it (in bed if you be very weak) in a spoonful of good Canary; and one spoonful after to wash your mouth; every morning, fasting an hour and a half after: and likewise at five of the clock in the afternoon: (those dayes only excepted that you take pills) but you are not so strictly to observe the after∣noon; that if your occasions do not well per∣mit; as when you must be abroad, or the like; you may omit. Note that this Elixir is never to be taken or tasted alone, but mixed in some liquor.
Of Diseases and Medicines. IN the preceding tract of the Scurvy, you may remember that in the body there are several digestions and digestive offices for the preparation of food, subordinate one to the other, whereby aliment is prepared gradually untill it receive the complement and perfecti∣on of assimilation for nutrition, and conserva∣tion of the body. These digestive offices as they are the grand laboratories of the body necessary for preser∣vation, so occasionally by their errors and de∣fections from their integrity of operation, most diseases in the body do arise, and are planted radically in some principal member the mansion assigned where these faculties do reside and exercise their power & jurisdiction. And although Diseases are very numerous and various in their denominations, sometimes from the diversity of symptoms that accom∣pany them, as if they were the off-spring of divers Parents, by their several faces and ap∣pearance: yet trace them up to their original descent, you may find many to spring from one radix, and own the same occasional causes, notwithstanding their dissimilarity, in their growth and progress; yet their affinity is such by birth, that with a single medicine, or per∣haps
two may be required, rightly prepared and fitted for the work, you shall eradicate or destroy the root; and the branches that grow from thence though spread in divers parts of the body, shall whither and fall away. It is not necessary therefore to multiply me∣dicines for every particular spmptom that springs from a disease, but to level and aim at the root or fountain from whence they spring. The discourse is metaphorical, and carries illustration with it; but to make it more plain and facile to your apprehension, and to shew you the verity of it, take this example for a Confirmation. A Physitian coming to his Patient finds him thus affected; feavourish, head ach, pained at the Stomach, grip'd in the belly, a looseness: all which may proceed from one cause, and will be cured with one good medicine. The cause producing all these symptomes, may be acor indebitus; a domestick luxuriant, or peregrine acidity in the first digestion: hence a febrile temper ariseth, from the Spirits tu∣multuating, agitated and troubled at this exorbitant hostile quality; the stomach pain∣ed by the lancing of its sharpness; the head ach by consent from thence; the belly grip'd and collick pains by transmission of this pec∣cant acidity with the chyle; a flux or loose∣ness procured by the same purging quality, stimulating and provoking the expulsive fa∣culty,
which endeavours to eject and expel it, You see that one morbifick cause may pro∣duce various symptoms and effects: and it is unnecessary, yea improper and without suc∣cess to apply particular medicines to each, not respecting the cause; and herein a wise Phy∣sitian is known from him that is otherwise. In the case recited, some there are, and those thinking they do secundum artem, will prescribe a Julip to abate or prevent the feaver in∣creasing: apply a frontale to the head, or give a specifick medicine for the head ach: an emul∣sion for pain of the stomach and griping of the guts, which allayes for the present, but soon after it is received into the body, turns sour and joynes with the morbifick cause. For the loosness, perhaps you will give an astringent medicine and lock the Thief up: but I will imagine you to be wiser, and con∣sult about a Clyster, to draw away the cause, the peccant humour that stimulates, and when that is come away, nature being no longer provoked with an intestine enemy, will re∣turn in peace to her former sedate temper. This is something you say, and plausible; but what Clyster will you give (in this case) to attract the peccant humour, which is the Chyle in the stomack, alienated with a luxu∣riant acidity? your Phlegmagoga and Chola∣goga, &c. I know, but Chylogoga, I know none, nor you: but you will say, the guts be∣ing
emptied by any Clyster, the stomack also will be exhausted and drained, by the attracti∣on below: if I should grant your reason to be good, the practice notwithstanding is not good: for, if this exorbitant quality in the Chyle mentioned, be the only disturbance, as it is in the case, then the transmutation sub∣jection and subduing of the same, is sufficient, and an exact Cure without evacuation and subducting the Chyle: but this, a single Alka∣lizate medicine will perform, cito, tuto, jucunde, without any other help & means, & all symp∣toms arising from the said cause shall cease. In jurious it is to make exhaustion of the body, when the blotting out of an aliene im∣pression, or the taming of a luxuriant quality is the scope of the Cure; which may be done, salvo succo nutritio: and like to this is the mul∣tiplying of medicines impertinently, when a single medicine will effect the intention, ac∣cording to the axiom; frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. An able practised Physitian, rightly princi∣pled in the nature of Diseases, and expert in pharmacy, may well contract his practice with∣in the compass of a few medicines; such I mean as are graduated to a high pitch of energy, ha∣ving acquired a latitude of universality, qua∣drate with the grand faculties, opposing all their deficiencies and depraved operations. Indigestion and depraved digestion are the
foundations of many diseases and bad symp∣toms: as vomiting, nauseousness, wind, oppres∣sion, pains, loss of appetite, fulness, heat and thirst, in the stomack primarily affected; by consent, and transmission of the same morbifick cause, divers parts are variously affected, pro∣ducing fluxes, feavors, distention of the Hypo∣chonders, Cholick, head-achs, obstructions and pains in several parts: the radix and fountain from whence these spring is the stomack or first digestion; the symptoms & products are branched and spread into several parts of the body: now for the cure, not many medicines are required, but one or two efficacious and proper, aiming at the cause, directed by the hand of art; a good abstersive and roborating medicine after to confirm the faculty, is both prevention and cure. I might farther exemplifie and make it plain, by the paralell cases in the other facul∣ties, but verbum sat sapienti, and others it con∣cerns not, therefore I pass on. But I would not be mistaken herein, that a∣ny should think I countenance the Panphar∣macums of Quacks, by them decanted and cryed up for their excelling vertues, & univer∣sal property to oppose aery disease: I know it is a grand delusion and cheat that is upon those who believe such aery empty boasters; but that an elaborate perite Artist, solidly grounded in the true principles of Phy∣sick,
may prepare medicines endowed with a large portion of universality, bringing within the lattiude and circle of their ener∣gy, very many diseases, restoring the facul∣ties decayed, the great engins of our bodies; ro∣borating the primum mobile instrumentaliter, and of this, reason and experiment can demonstrate the truth, and convince the unbeliever. The greatest deficiency I have observed, in some, though otherwise sufficiently stockt with Learning and accomplished, is in Medicines; I mean the Pharmacopoietical part; but if more time were improved in that practice, it would much compensate their labour, and redound to their success, honour and advantage: they were then Masters of their secrets which now are ex∣posed, the consequents whereof sero nimis senti∣unt; and I must say that Doctor Medicinae ought to be peritum in medicinis, and that practically: me∣dicines then would be more nicely and exactly scruted into, their defects supplyed and amend∣ed, their superfluous accumulation of ingredi∣ents in many compositions abated; many errors in preparation and composition corrected, not to be known, because not experimented by their own inspection, thinking a fiat seeundum artem sufficient. Hence it is some diseases pass for incurable, through the penury & deficiency of medicines, not for the quantity, but quality, being meanly graduated, not extracted from their feculency
and terenity, but remain complexed in their heterogene parts, with a super addition of sugar, honey, &c. to drown the energy and power of the medicine. For variety of medicines, there were never more im∣pertinent, frivolous, and I may say dangerous, from the multitude of spurious pretended Chymists, illigiti∣mate, and not the Sons of Art; being ignorant of Phy∣losophical principles, and the abstruse natures of what they deal with, blindly run upon many errors, ob∣truding their casual experiments upon the People, un∣der the titles of laudable approved Medicines: others are guilty of great abuses, wilfully for advantage, to spare cost and labour, thus, most places abound with base Medicines which brings defamation to Physitians lingring sicknesses and death to their Patients. The charge incumbent upon Physitians in these cases, for prevention, is not small; and it much concerns them to be very circumspect what Medicines they make use of; and the quality of the Artist they trust: and I must assirm that an expert knowledge in the Pharma∣copoietical part of Physick, do as much belong to a Physitian and is so necessary, that without it he cannot be said to be compleat; for, he that is not an Artist herein cannot direct and correct as he ought, by the promptings of a bare contemplative knowledge: and although he excludes himself from inspection into the practick part, as an unnecessary trouble and below the dignity of his title, yet he is not excused thereby, but his reputation payes for the miscarriages and abuses therein. But this is an excursion beyond the limits of my in∣tention, at the entrance of the discourse, and therefore I wave the prosecution. FINIS.
