M184 12305126 59223
OBSERVATIONS ON THE ACTS of PARLIAMENT, MADE BY King James the First, King James the Second, King James the Third, King James the Fourth, King James the Fifth, Queen Mary, King James the Sixth, King Charles the First, King Charles the Second. Wherein 1. It is Observ'd, if they be in Desuetude, Abrogated, Limited, or Enlarged. 2. The De∣cisions relating to these Acts are mention'd. 3. Some new Doubts not yet decided, are hinted at. 4. Parallel Citations from the Civil, Canon, Feudal and Municipal Laws, and the Laws of o∣ther Nations are adduc'd, for clearing these Statutes. BY SIR GEORGE MACKENZIE of Rosebaugh, His Majsties Advocat for SCOTLAND. EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. 1686.
TO THE KING. SIR, NOne are so much obliged to Laws as Monarchs, since by them Millions whom cor∣rupt Inclination, and mi∣staken Interest tempt to shake their Thrones, are yet forced by these to defend them, and find great satisfaction in the reasonableness and gentlenss of that kind of force; By those Your Majesties Predecessors were able to Govern us very long, without any other Arms: And when successful Usurpers got the most victorious Armies in Europe, these Armies were perswaded by Law to serve You and ruine them, tho they saw in Your service a dissolu∣tion of that Society for which they had with much
Courage, but no Justice so often exposed their lives: To prevent which for the future, provident Law sett∣led on Your Majesty, suitable Revenues to defend Your Authoritie, and therein shewed that the safety of the King and Law were inseparably joyned. It is to our IAMES'S that we owe the great Bo∣dy of our Laws, and so there lyes a special obligati∣on upon Your Majesty to cherish them as their Off∣spring, to maintain them as Your surest and least ex∣pensive Guards, and to look on them as the only Counsellours that can neither be byassed by partiali∣ty nor interest. But because Your Majesty has a special esteem for Heroes, and Courage; Allow me to represent to you that all those eminent Romans, who conquered the World, were raised by Pleading, and the Command of Ar∣mies were rewards bestowed by the suffrages of the People on those who Pleaded best for them; nor did Cesar (as their Story observes) take him to the Camp, but because he loved rather to be first there, than se∣cond to Cicero at the Bar, where if he had stayed, he had not destroyed his native Countrey, which Cicero
who continued to Plead, so wisely preserv'd. That is the most generous heart, which is warmed by Reflection, elevated by the hopes of Fame, and used to Victory; And no Reflections are so strong as those of men always imploy'd in reasoning; Fame has no such Trum∣pet as Eloquence; nor can Courage give so many and solide Victories as Reason does, and such Cou∣rage does the love of Justice inspire in those who a∣dore it, that our Profession has had its own Martyrs too, who dar'd to die for it, without being diverted by action, from looking fixedly on the terrours of death, or comforted by the hopes of escaping it, as Souldiers in Battels are. The vertuous Papinian is a glorious instance of this, who being chief Minister of State to his Emperour, after he had illustrated the Law by many learned Volums before he attained to the age of 36. choosed rather to die than justifie a barbarous act even in his Prince & Master; This only use of our Reason we want under Your Majesties hap∣py Reign, you being more unwilling to command what is unjust, than any of Your Subjects would be to suffer. And it was, Sir, the attending Your Royal Bro∣ther & You, that hightn'd thus in me an esteem of Law, for I could not but admi that fixt Justice which
govern'd so absolutely two Glorious and Wise Mo∣narchs, and made so many thousands happy under them, amongst whom none is more sensible of that general Happiness, and of Your Majesties speci∣al Favours, than, May it please Your MAIESTY, Your MAIESTIES most Dutiful, Loyal, and Obedient Subject and Servant, GEORGE MACKENZIE.
TO THE READER. MY great pleasures are to inform and defend my Countrey, the one whereof I do without vanity, and the other without hu∣mour, equally desirous to have my designs succeed, and care∣less how they are censur'd. We have an excellent pattern for a Lawyer in the great Labeo, tit. de Orig. Juris. Labeo plurimum studiis ope∣ram dedit: & totum annum ita diviserat ut Romae sex mensibus esset, sex mensibus ecederet, & conscribendis libris operam daret. In those Observations I have satisfied the ardent desire our Parliaments have had to have the Laws revised; & I have sincerely endeavour'd to preserve honest men from falling into snares by their ignorance, and to instruct my yung∣er Brothers in a Science, by which I wish them to rise, for the sevice of their Countrey, and their own advantage; One of the reasons which mov'd me to undertake this work, was, that even after I was a Lawyer, I found that I understood ot our Statutes, though these be the chief Pillars of our Law, and I wisht often then such an Interpre∣ter, as now I hope this Book will be. These who have read my Ob∣servations upon the Act concerning Bankrupts, will find that I might have been more Voluminous, and seemd more Learn'd; but my design was to write Notes, and not Commentaries: And this Book, as all others of this kind, should not be judg'd by any one Page, but by the whole; and yet oft times a Line which may seem easie now, ha cost me considerable pains, even after I was Kings Advocat. The diffi∣cult Acts or Questions, which sometime I omit, shall be largely treat∣ed in the Papers I shall leave. 1. It is  for my  to know, that I  these Acts y Skeens Edition, and sometimes by Glendocks, an so that Act which for instance is the 3d in the one, may be the 4th in the other. 2. Sometimes I refer my Reader for the Explication of one Act, to the Observations on another, and yet sometimes possibly it is not treated there, which was occasion'd by my not having all my Papers together; but the Reader may look the Index of Glendocks Acts, and he will find the Acts omitted treated in one or other of the Acts relating to that Subject: and thus also that Index may serve generally for one to this Book also. 3. I follow sometimes the ordinary opinion, though possibly it is not my own: Common opinions being still safe even when they are not well founded. 4. The errors of the Transcriber have occasion'd those here corrected, and it ere very fit that the uyer would cause correct the Book before he read it, for thus by small pains he may prevent considerable mistakes.
Errata. PAgina 1. Linta 4. for Justimans read Justinians. Pa 8. Act 11. l. 3. r. 74. ibid. l. ult. for Sunday r. Moonday. P. 14. l. 8, Act 37. for Act 1. Par. 6. 1. Par. 12. Act 126. P. 25. Act 115. l. 8. r. Esloinʒie. P. 26. l. 9. for Reub. r. Repub. P. 30. Act 137. l. 17. dele (n) P. 36. in∣sert betwixt the 10 and 11 Acts K. James the 2d, Par. 6. p. 37. Act 17. l. 8. for revetis r. re∣vives. P. 38. l. 16. r. one helr. P. 46. l. 35. r. person. P. 47. l. 5. for s r. as. P. 65. after the end of the 16 Act, add K. James the 3d. Par. 3. P. 68. Act 31. l. 2. r. get. P. 71. l. 31. r. a 3d. Comprising. ibid. l. 34. r. 4th. ibid. l. 38. r. fith. P. 72. l. 3. for prejudged r. perjured, ib. l. 8. r. to more than 5. P. 74. l. 31. r. 3d Session. P. 83. dele the whole 20 line from y &c. P. 87. l. 2 for null r. quarrellable. P. 113. l. 13. Act 74. for of r. under. P. 129. l. 44. for re∣paration r. repetition. P. 132. l. 2. r. 155. P. 134. l. 21. Act 57. r. Judges. P. 136. l. 5▪ Act 70. dele (8) P. 138. l. 5. Act 70. . probioatur. P. 41. to notwithstanding, &c. Add in the Margn Act 82. ibid. for 82. r. 83. ibid. for 83. r. 92. P. 147. l. 4. Act 118. r. appoints. P. 159. l. 7. Act 65. r. l. 1. § 2. ss de legatis 3. P. 170. l. . Act 88. for Confirmations r. In∣estments. P. 176. l. 28. r. § sed naturalia. P. 185. l. . r. Par. 9. P. 186. l. 2. Act 55. r. was first. P. 187 l. 20. for Acts r. and. ibid. l. 21. r. for one only, was only. P. 188. l. 9. Act 66. r. their Rights. P. 193. l. 18. Act 80. r. is probable. P. 226. l. 12. r. quod Clericus in Patrimonialibus ut Laicus tractandus. P. 228. l. 44. r. 189. P. 233. l. 4. for Erections r. Kirk lands. P. 258. l. . r. as. P. 263. l. 5. r. Hujusmodi. P. 276. l. 7. Act 156. r. Par. 11. Act 42. ibid. l. 11. r. l. 43. ss. de via pub. P. 278. l. 21. Act 166. r. Par. 3. Ja. 5. P. 298. l. 18. Act 251. r. volentibus. P. 299. Acts 255▪ &c. l. 8. r. 55. P. 300. l. 3. Act 263. for not in observance, r. not put in practice, P. 339. l. 7. Act 2. r. gestabat. Ibid: l. 8. . tit. 17. P. 358. l. 17. r. correctoriae. P. 376. l. 8. r. this Act. Ibid: l. 38. for proportn, r. property: P. 377. l. 24. dele and for the property that was Feued out the time of  Erection. Ibid: l. 29. r. nfavourable. P. 379. l. 16. Act 17. for Beneficed person, r. Heretor. P. 396. Act 29. r: 177. P. 399. l. 32: add after prerogative these words, in matters of Trade, and delet all that follows. P. 405. l. 41. r. could not sell. P. 406 l. 19. for first Compriser, r. Debitor. P. 407. l. 42. r. a fir Compriser. P. 413. Margin, r. Act 4. P. 415. l. 4. r. l. 1. in in. P. 416. l. . dele (as that.) P. 427. l. 30. dele (refuse to.) P. 428. l. 10. Act 5. for satisfied, r. ufilfied. P. 49. l. 6, for transact, r. tranm. Ibid. l. 2. r. Improving. P. 437. l. 44. r. the half of the Fines of all who are not Heretors. P. 448. l. pn. dele (not.) Ibid. for short, r. foresaid. P. 462. all from before Act 16. should have been placed before Act 15.
OBSERVATIONS Upon the STATUTES and ACTS OF K. JAMES I. Parliament I. IT is observable,ACT. 1. that our Parlia∣ments, do ordinarily begin with Acts in favours of the Church, as Justi codex Does: and this Statute renews the first Statute, Robert 1. cap: 1. Our History observes, that this Act was made to oblige the Clergy to assist the King against Duke Murdoch; and this is the first of these Acts, upon which the reduction of Erections was founded in anno 1627. It being subsumed there, that though by this Act, all Deeds done to the prejudice of the Church, are declared null; yet these Erections were very prejudicial to it, be∣ing in effect alienations of Church-benefices and Lands, in favours of Laicks. TO make War against the King, is Treason;ACT. 2. and even to make War against private Persons, is punishable conform to the Common Law; that is to say, conform to the Civil Law: for the Civil Law is still called the Common Law in our Statutes,
which word we have borrowed from the French, who call the Civil Law (Le droict commun;) and by the Common Law, and our present custom, the raising of Men in War-like manner, by Muster∣ing them, or forming them in Companies, or swearing them to Colours, though no design against the King be proved, is Treason: for to raise War, is a part of His Majesties Prerogative; and who∣ever makes War, usurps the Regal Power. The Civil Law, to which this relates, is, l. 3. ad l. Jul. Maj. & l. un. C. Vt armo∣rum usus, inscio principe, interdictus sit: Nulli prrsus, nobis insciis atque inconsultis, quorumlibet armorum movendorum copia tribuatur; but the Justices refused to sustain the raising of fewer than an hundred men, to be Treason; or to sustain, that the raising them till after Letters of Fire and Sword, did infer more than a Convoca∣tion. Earl of Seaforth contra Assint, Feb. 2. 1674. And Invasions made by one Subject upon another, with numbers of Men without these qualifications, was found only punishable as a Convocation by an Arbitrary punishment, but I consider more the design than the numbers. ACT 3.REbellion, is properly rising in Arms against the Common∣wealth, openly and notorly. It was called Perduellion by the Common Law: and that is the species of Treason, that is here punished by forefaulture of Life, Lands and Goods, vid. R. M. l. 4. c. 1. leg. Malcol. 2. c. 12. quon. attach. c. 19. ACT 4.THese who refuse to assist the King, to punish notor Rebels, are by this Act punished as favourers of them. Notor Rebels, are only such as are denounced Rebels, or against whom there are Commissions of Fire and Sword granted by the Council, or these who have risen in open Rebellion, though there be yet no legal dili∣gence against them; as was decided February 1680. and these who refuse to assist against such, are punishable as favourers of such Re∣bels; that is to say, as Art and Part of their Crimes; as is clear by the 29 Act Par. 3. Jac. 4. where favourers of Rebels, are declared pu∣nishable, as Art and Part; and consequently, the staying from the Kings Host, after open Proclamation, commanding all Heretors to go thereto, is punishable as Treason: and it is clear by the Journal Books, that this Crime has been punished by Forefaulture, Jan. 9. 1577. and the 21: of April 1599. Likewise, I find Andrew Naiff in Baldordy, pannalled for Treasonable abiding from the Kings Host, at the Raid of Bigger, 1568. And yet I find, that Absents from the Host are Bail'd, March 15. 1576. though Treason is not of its own nature Bailable; and that these Pannals, who are doom'd to have lost their Estates and Goods, after much debate, are notwith∣standing quoad their Persons only warded during the Kings pleasure: And His Majesty, by His gracious Letter Nov. 1679: allowed such as were absent from the Host at Bothwel-Bridge, to be only fined at most, in two years valued Rent. This Act was also the foundation of all our old Proclamations, whereby all the Heretors, betwixt sixty and sixteen, were charged to come to the Kings Host, when our Kings were either engaged
against their Enemies at Home or Abroad; at which occasions, He∣retors and Liferenters, whether Men or Women, holding immediat∣ly of the King, were cited; and they cited and brought out their Vassals: and therefore it was a good defence that they held not of the King, as is to be seen in the Journal Books, Feb: 19: 1600. But now the Council commands all Heretors by Proclamation, to go to the Host, under the command of such Captains as are named in the Proclamation. This Obligation and Statute, is not now taken a∣way by the late Act, giving His Majesty the Militia, as was found by the Privy Council October 1677: and by the Justices in March 1680. so that Heretors must attend either, but not both in the same Countries: so the last Act abrogates not the first, and that being given as a favour, were none, if it took off the first, which is greater, and arises from a feudal obligation, or at least is due to the King as King, and without which the peace of the Country could not be maintained: and by the Act 25: Sess: 3: Par: 1: Car: 2: after the Militia is granted, the Parliament in the same Act, makes a further tender of all their Lives and Fortunes, betwix sixty and sixteen, when they shall be called for. Secundo, It was found that this Crime was not punishable now on∣ly by the punishment exprest in Chap: 15: Stat: Alexander 2: where∣by a Thane was only punishable in six Cows, and a young Cow: an Ochiern in fifteen Ewes, or six Shillings: and a Labouring Man in one Cow and one Sheep: for that Statute is justly abrogated by this Act that is posterior; the Remedies in that Statute having been probably found ineffectual because of their meanness. This Ochi∣ern is by Skeen called a Freeholder; but I find by many old evi∣dents, that an Ochiern is a Chief of the Branch of a great Family, who has a considerable command; and it is the corruption of the Irish Wochteran, which signifies still in the Highlands, a Master or Superior. Tertio, It was found, that though such as were above sixty, or be∣low sixteen, were not obliged to go to the Host themselves, because of the 23. Stat: K. Will: (and this is sustained Feb: 21: 1600:) yet their Age did not excuse them from sending, which clears, why David Lawson was convict for byding from the Raid of Dumfries, in Regent Mortons time, though he was alleaged to be past sixty five. Quarto, That such Burgesses as had Lands in the Countrey, were obliged to send one for these Lands (though it was alleaged that Burgesses did not usually keep Horses) except they had been commanded by the Town where they lived, to serve there. Quinto, That the Captains under whom they were command∣ed to go to the Host, could not warrand them to stay at home; because this Feudal obligation could not be dispensed with by Cap∣tains, who were only impowered to command: but if they came once out, and were listed; it was found, that the Captains might al∣low them to return home, upon occasion of sickness, or for other ex∣cuses, of which he was a competent Judge. Sexto, That the King needed not prove that the Pannels came
not to the Host, that being a Negative; but that it was necessary for the Pannel to prove that he was at the Host. Septimo, That the King was not obliged to prove the Pannels to be Heretors, but that they were obliged to renunce any Heretage they had, in favours of the King, if they denied they were Heretors; even as in other cases, the King is not obliged to prove that any were his Vassals, but they behoved to disclaim, upon their hazard: and of old, the notoriety of their being Heretors, was refer'd to the Assize, without any further probation, as June 12. 1557. and some times to the Pannels oath, as in the case of William Wallace, July 2. 1600, Octavo, That not only such as were Heretors by being actually In∣feft, were to send to the Host, but that appearand Heirs, and such as possessed the Lands, were to send; it being unreasonable, that the appearand Heir's lying out, and not entering, should prejudge the King more in this case, than it does as to the casuality of Es∣cheat, &c. Nono, It was found, that such as possess'd by the courtesie of Scot∣land, were obliged to go to the Host, by an express Decision at this time, though the curiality be but a Liferent, and other Liferenters were not obliged to go, since Heretors in our Law are exponed in opposition to Liferenters. These words in this Act, (without a reasonable excuse) seem to in∣sinuate, that not only relevant or legal Defences, but even reason∣able or equitable Defences ought to be received, to defend such as stayed from the Kings Host: And thus Inquests favour such as were known to be of so infirm a Constitution, as that they could not with∣out great danger to their life, undergo the fatigue of an Army; though they were not labouring under any present form'd Disease, or Morbus Sonticus: and for the same reason, mean Heretors were excused, though of old; I find that this was found to be no Defence, in the case of John Ross of Drumgranich, July 2. 1600. but the rea∣son that inclined the Judges in this year 1680. not to fine small He∣retors, was, because the Proclamation commanded none to come out, but such as were to come upon Horseback; and so, such on∣ly could be fined as could keep Horses: and though the Decisions at this time, did only oblige such as had 100l: of valued Rent to go; yet by the 120 Act Par: 9: Jac: 1: such as can spend twenty pounds of Land-rent yearly, are obliged to keep a Horse; which by the 267 Act Par: 15: Jac: 6: is to be computed 200 l: of yearly constant Rent. I find by the Feudal Law, that the Vassal qui Dominum in bello non adjuvavit, aut periclitantem deseruit, feudum amiebat, Rosen∣thal. Conclus: 16: num: 1: but yet the words of the Text in the Feudal Law, feudorum lib: 2: tit: 24: Par: 2. are only, Item qui do∣minum suum cum quo ad praelium iverit, in acie periclitantem dimiserit, beneficio indignum se Judicavit; and yet even by this Text it is imply∣ed, that he is obliged to go, and the expressing of that Obligati∣on seems omitted, because it was unnecessar, being implyed in the very nature of the Few▪ Crag expresses it thus, Alia est etiam feudi,
si non anitendi, saltem Vassalli, ob quasi delictum, puniendi ratio, si Dominum, se pro Caesaris expeditione instruentem, non suerit Comita∣tus, feudum enim eo casu amittet & dimidium fructuum illius anni, ex feudo domino pendet, non enim hic tantum contra dominum, sed contra imperium & Remp: peccatur: so that it seems in his time, the Vassal who hld of another Superior then the King, forfaulted his Feu for not going to the Host; but the immediat Superior had Right to half a years Rent; and the reason of this seems to have been, because, by all our old Laws, the Vassal was obliged to at∣tend his immediat Superior in going to the Kings Host; and the Pro∣clamation then commanded every man to come with his Vassals; and therefore, as the King had Right to the Forfaulture, for not at∣tending his Host, so the immediat Superior had right to this half years Duty, for his not attending him; and sometimes by the Journal Books it appears, that when Vassals were Fined, and not Forfault∣ed, the immediat Superior craved the half of the Fine. THe punishment of such as ride with moe than their ordinary Houshold, is Arbitrary;ACT 5. and this Act must only be interpret against such as ride ordinarly with great Trains, and which may look like an unpeaceable design; nor is any man punished for riding at so∣lemn Occasions with his Friends and Followers; and I also think, that this Act would only extend to such, against whom there lies a presumption, that they gather, or keep men together, upon some sinistrous design, either against the Government, or their Neighbours; for if this were allowed, great men might keep Troups together; and for this same reason are Convocations dis∣charg'd by other Acts; and betwixt these Acts and this, there is this difference, that by these, the Convocating for a time irregularly those in whom the Convocater pretends no interest, is discharg'd; but by this Act, the conveening men upon pretext of a Retinue is discharged; and though it may seem, that every man may keep as great a Retinue as he pleases; yet quilibet tantum in suo fa∣cere potst illud quod fieri potest sine aemulatione vicini, but multo ma∣jus sine aemulatione Republicae. THough by this Law it is only appointed,ACT 6. that there be Offi∣cers and Ministers of the Law, made through all the Realm indefinitly, without telling by whom they are to be made; yet by the 2. Act Par. 1. Ch. 2. The power of choosing Judges is declar'd to be one of His Majesties Prerogatives. It is observable from this Act, that none can be Judges who have not sufficiently of their own, where-through they may be pu∣nished, if they transgress, which is very just; for a Judge who Decerns unjustly by palpable unjustice litem suam facit; and there∣fore it may be well argu'd, that when any who is a Judge, or has an heretable Office, becomes insolvent, he may be forc'd to find a Depute, who is solvent, or else he may be discharged to sit. Obs. Though it may seem, That if any Heretable Officer be in∣capable to exerce; the King should name Deputs jure devoluto;
yet by this Act it is ordained, That if the Heretable Officer be incapable, he shall ordain others, for whom he shall be answer∣able. ACT 7.The Design of this Act is to empower the Sheriff to arrest Op∣pressors and Vagabonds; By these words to sojourn Horse, is meant, to quarter Horse, from the French word sejour; By Husbands of the Land, is still meant Husband-men in our Acts of Parliament; By taxing the Kings Skaith is meant, to cause mo∣difie what is due to the King; and by Assything the King is meant, the causing the Malefactors pay what is modified. Obs. That the Legislative Words in our Statutes are very vari∣ous, for in this and many other Statutes of this King, the formu∣la is the Parliament Statutes, and the King forbids, which words shew, that the Legislative Power is in the King; for to forbid is the chief and most vigorous part of a Statute. In the 17th Act it is said, It is Statute, and the King forbids. In the 14th It is Statute by the whole Parliament, and the King for∣bids. In the 13th It is Statute by the whole Parliament, and by the King forbidden. In the 30 Act 2 Par. Jac. 1. It is Decreeted by the whole Parlia∣ment. In the Act 37 It is Decreeted and Statute. In the Act 47 Par. 3d. It is ordained by the King and Parlia∣ment. Act 50. It is ordained and forbidden. Act 60 Par. 3. Jac. 1 Our Soveraign Lord through the whole Ordi∣nance of the Parliament Statutes. Act 125 Par: 9 Jac: 1: Through the consent of the whole Parliament, it is ordain'd. Act 62 Par: 3 Jac: 1. It is seen speedful. Act 76 Par: 5 Jac: 1. It is Statute and Ordain'd, and Act 78 and 79: It is Ordain'd. Act 83 Par: 6 Jac: 1. Rex per modum statuti ordinavit. Act 85 Rex mandavit. In the old Statutes of King Robert and King Alexander &c. It is said, Dominus Rex vult, or statuit Rex, or desinivit Rex, or prohibet Rex, or decrevit & deliberavit Rex, without speaking one word of the Parliament or Estates. Act 105 Par: 7 Jac: 1. The King with the consent of the Coun∣cil. Act 104. The King with the consent of the Parliament and Council. Act 108. The King of deliverance of Council. But the formula now is, Our Soveraign Lord with advice and con∣sent; or, Our Soveraign Lord and Estates of Parliament; which last is not so proper, and though in most of the Acts of the 14th Par∣liament K. Ja. 3d, It be said, That it is, Statute and Ordained by the whole three Estates, yet it may be easily seen, that these Acts were but in effect Overtures propos'd by the three Estates, to be Rati∣fied
in Parliament; and so in effect are conceiv'd rather as Over∣tures than Acts: As also, where any thing is to be put in executi∣on by the King, there the Act runs in name of the Parliament, and not of the King, as in the 23d Act Par. 1 Jac: 1. It is said, that the Parliament has Determined and Ordain'd, that Our Lord the King garmend his Money; and in the 6 Act Par: 3: Jac: 2. The three E∣states has concluded, that Our Soveraign Lord Ride throw all the Realm, &c. THere are many wayes whereby the Superior may crave Pro∣duction of his Vassals Evidnts:ACT 9· for the King sometimes gets an Act of Parliament ordaining all the Vassals of such a Countrey to produce their Evidents, as 262. Act. Parl. 15▪ Jac. 6. whereby all the Heritors in the Highlands are ordain'd to pro∣duce their Evidents, with certification of losing their Rights. The Superior may also crave exhibition of these Rights; But the or∣dina way is by an Imprbation, wherein certification is granted against the Papers that are not produced; which is deriv'd to us also from the Feudalists, who affirm, that Vassallus imperari potest sub poena caducitatis, comminatione legali, & certus terminus statui, si tra eum instrumenta non edat. This Commination is our Certi∣fiation, and this Terminus, is our Term in Improbations. Rosen∣thal. cap. 8. concl. 33. num. 13. and 14. In these Actions the King needs produce nothing to prove that he is Superior, for the King is presum'd to be general Superior, and is Infeft Jure Coronae, in all the Lands of Scotlad; but though other Superiors must produce a Seasing of the Lands, yet they need produce no∣thing to prove that the Dfender is Vassal who is oblidg'd to pro∣duce upon his hazard, or else to disclaim; and yet if the Superior, Libel only that he is Infeft in such an Earldom, and that the De∣fenders Lands are part and pertinent of the Earldom, without pro∣ducing any thing to instruct that he stands expresly Infeft in these Lands, as a part of his Earldom; the Lords would not put the Defender in that case to produce Simpliciter, but allowed the same day to the Pursuer to prove that they were Part and Pertinent of the Lands wherein the Pursuer stands Infeft, and to the Defen∣der to produce, if that were proved; for the Lords thought it hard, to force Heretors to propale and lay open the secrets of their Coveyances, where it was not certain, if the Pursuer had any Interest, albeit it was alleadged, that this would occasion two Liti-contestations in one Cause. (viz.) One, whither the Pursuer had Right, and another, whether the Defender had suffi∣cient Interest to seclude the Pursuite; for the Lords thought, that this being an Act before answer, did solve this difficulty; and the ordinar Maxime, that the Vassal must disclaim upon his hazard, and the Argument, that either the Pursuer was Superior, and would be found to be so, and then there was no wrong done, or else he was not, and in that case the Defender was in no danger by disclaim∣ing, were both found only to take place, where the Pursuer pro∣duc'd a special Right to the Lands Libell'd, but not where he
pretended only, that the Land possest by the Vassal was part and pertinent of his Land, which any Pursuer might alledge. The third, and old way of forcing the Vassal to exhibit his Evi∣dents, was by a Feudal Tryal, per pares curiae, that is to say, be∣fore an Inquest; for of old, the King summoned his Vassals to appear before an Inquest, to bring with them any Right they pre∣tended to such or such Lands; and that way is exprest in this Act, as well as the other; and in Statut. 36. Rob. 3. num. 3. but is now in Desuetude, The Lords of Session being come in place of the Inquest. The Earl of Rothes as Donator to the Ward of the Countess of Bucleugh, having pursued the Tutors for inspection of the Charter-Chist, that he might know what Lands held Ward; The Lords ordained one of their own number to take inspection, and to shew to the Donator what Papers could prove the Ward∣holding, because it is presumed that all Lands hold Ward, Decem. 20. 1661. ACT. 10.FRom this, and the subsequent Acts: Its observable, that the Parliament may, without citing parties, discharge priviledges contained in private mens Rights, though they cannot without citation case and annul privat Rights. ACT. 11.FOR understanding this Act, It is fit to know that the distance betwixt the Hecks of Cruivs should be 3. inches wide, which is renew'd by the 74. Act Parl. 10. Jac. 3. and should not be 5. inches conform to the 15. Act. Parl. 2. Jac. 4. which the Lords found 29 July 1665. to be ane error in the Printing. They there also found that the Mid-stream was in Desuetude, notwithstand∣ing that it was reviv'd in all these Statutes; but that the Saturn∣days Slop was to be observ'd in all Cruivs, which was to continue by pulling up all the Hecks to the breadth of an ell in every Cruive, from Saturnday at six a clock till Sunday at Sun-rising. ACT. 12.THough Mines of Gold and Silver, be by this Act declar'd to belong to the King, yet by the 27 Act. Parl. 4. Sess. 2. Car. 1. they were declared to belong to the Heretor, he paying to the King the tenth Penny, which was the Canon Metallious, that was only due out of Mines found in private Fields, l. 2. C. de Metal. But that Act is resinded in the general Act Rescissory, and this Act is conform to the Feudal Law, Feud. lib. 2. tit. quae sunt Regalia 56. It has been doubted, whether Lead, Copper or Tin belong to the King, or the Heretor; but the King is in pos∣session of disponing upon these also; and when He dispones them in a novo damus, even to the Heretor, He reserves a tenth part to be payed in to His Exchequer: and His Majesty has granted general Gifts of all Copper-Mines: and Craig tells us, lib. 1. dieg. 14. that omnium gentium, omniumque aetatum consensu, odins omnes auri, argenti, stanni, aris, & similium, in patrimonio principis nu∣merari; but yet they are not enumerate in the foresaid Text of the Feudal Law, otherwise, than by being comprehended under
the word argentaria; & frequens est in jure, sub majoribus minora comprehendi; and yet I think, that if His Majesty dispon'd Land with all the Silver-Mines, this would not comprehend Copper, Tin, &c. So that this Rule holds not in all Cases; nor doth it hold in any Case, where things require special Dispositions, as omnia regalia do; Nota, From this Act to the 23. the Acts are either in desuetude of no import, or explained in the Observations upon other Acts. BY this Act, it is ordain'd, that our Coyn be of the weight and fynness of England,ACT. 23. which was formerly ordain'd by the Ch. 38. Stat. Dav. 2. and though by the 17. Act. Parl. 1. Ja. 6. It is declar'd, that Our Soveraign Lord cause Print and Conʒie Gold, and Silver of sick fynness as other Countries doe; yet after King James succeeded to the Crown of England, He past a Contract betwixt the Mints of both Nations, wherein they oblige themselves to keep the same Standart; and though the denomina∣tions be different now, yet the Standart is now the same; For the English Denomination is 11. vnces, 2. deniers fine, which is cal∣l'd Sterling fyne, ours is 11. deniers and 2. graine; and albeit upon a very subtile inquirie, It is alleadg'd that the Denominations cannot be adjusted, without some difference, yet it is so small a fraction as is not to be regarded; and there are four indented Pieces, two of Gold, and two of Silver made of the same fynness, and out of the same Essay-pot▪ two whereof are sent to Scotland, the one of which is kept by the Thesaurer, and the other in the Mint; and two are retain'd in England, the Denominations are Printed upon these Pieces; and in the Lord Hattons case, it was found that this common Standart was to be the Rule. Vid. Ob∣servation on the 249. Act 15. Parl. Ja. 6. The last Act of this first Parliament in the Black Impression, is an Inhibition made by King James the First to the Bishop of St. An∣drews, delegated by the Pope, to proceed upon the Dismembration of a Benefice purchased at Rome. Nota, There are many Acts omitted out of Skeens Impression which were in that Impression, because Skeen judg'd them Tempo∣rary, as this Act and a Taxation impos'd for the Kings Ransome by this Parliament, wherein so much was put not only upon every Boll of Victual, but upon every Beast of Cattel. Some Acts are also to be found in Skeen, which are not in that Black Impression, as the 80. Act. Parl. 10. Ja. 3. (in the old Impression it is Act 79.) concerning Purprision; As also, some Acts which were there only temporary, are made by Skeen constant and perpetual Laws, as the 29. Act of the 2. Parl. of this King uns thus in Skeen, It is statute and ordain'd that the breakers of the Acts of Parliament be punish'd after the form and ordinance thereof; whereas that Act runs thus in the Black Impression, Item, that it be enquired by the Kings Ministers gif the Statutes made in his first Parliament be kept, and if they be broken in any of their pnctilio's, that the breakers of them be punisht after the form and ordinance of the said Parliament. The Rubricks also of the Acts of that Black Impression differ almost every where, and very much from this Impression, which
proves that Argumentum à rubro ad nigrum, is of no great weight with us, the Rubrick being an Inscription made by the Clerk Regi∣ster, and no part of the Act of Parliament. King JAMES the First, Parl. 2, IN the Inscription of this Parliament it is said, and of his Kin∣rick the 19. year, by which word Kinrick is meant his Reign; for Kinrick in the Saxon Tongue signifies Reign, and some∣time Kinrick signifies Kingdome with us, as in the 145. Act, Parl. 13. Ja. 1. In the Inscription of this Parliament according to the Black Im∣pression, it is said, that to the three Estates of the Realm there ga∣therit were propon'd sundry Articles, to which was answer'd in man∣ner as after-follows, by the Inscription of the first Parliament, ac∣cording to that Impression it is said, Electae fuerunt certae personae ad Articulos datos per Dominum Regem determinandos data caeteris licen∣tia recedendi: By which it appears that the Lords of Articles being nam'd, the Parliament Adjourn'd; and the custome was, that they never mett again till the last day of the Parliament, when the reso∣lution of the Articles was voted. 2. The resolution of the Articles is said to be Per Dominum Regem, because he is only Law-giver, and the Parliament only consents. It is said in the Inscription of the third Parliament, that these Articles were put to certain persons chosen by the three Estates, which insinuats that the Lords of Articles were chosen by the three Estates, whereas now the way of choosing the Articles is prescrib'd by the 1. Act, 1. Parl: Sess: 3: Ch: 2. ACT 26.BY this Act it is ordain'd, that if any Lands or Possessions of Ha∣ly Kirk be wrongously annaly'd, they should be restor'd by Process of Law. For understanding whereof, It is fit to know, that Regularly, the Lands and Goods of the Church, are not Annaliable; and Church-men are not Proprieters of them, but Administrators, and Lirenters, praecarij possessores, quibus tanquam commendatis, non tanquam proprijs uti debent. Salv. lib. 1. And this is clear by the Canon Law, Canon sine exceptione. 12. Quest. 2. & can. ult. Quest. 1. and the Civil Law, l. Jubemus, 14. C. de sacro-sanctis Ecclesijs; But yet there are three cases excepted, in which it is permitted to alienat them exprest in Gloss. causae, 12. Quest. 2. viz. 1. In causa necessitatis, if the Churches Debts require the same, as for maintainig its Fabrick, or to maintain the Christian Religion against Infidels or Hereticks. 2do. Causa pietatis, as to maintain the Poor, when starving, or to redeem Prisoners from Infidels. 3tio. Causa damni vitandi, when the Lands are not otherwise improv∣able; for which last there is an Act in the Lateran Council under Alexander the 3d. Cap. ad aures Extr. de Reb. Eccles▪ non alienand.
By our Law, all Ecclesiastical Persons are discharg'd to lessen the Rental of their Benefices, by setting Feues, Tacks, conversion of Victual for Money, or any other Disposition. By the 5th Act. Parl. 22. Jac. 6. Bishops are discharg'd to set in Tacks their Quots and Casualities, and though this last Act seems unnecessary, because of the former, yet it was made, least it might have been debaitable whether Casualities fell under the former Prohibition, since Tutors may transact for these, as we see in Francies Mont∣gomeries case, against the Earl of Liven, where it was found, that Tutors, who cannot alienat, may transact for Casualities, as to give a Liferent to the Husband of the Heretrix, in place of the Courtesie, and though Prelats, aswel as Barrons, were allowed to Feu their Ward Lands, for the better improvement of them, Act. 71. I. c. 2. Parl. 14. Act. 91. Jac. 4. Parl. 6. Yet these Acts are only to be understood of Lands to be Feu'd out for the equiva∣lent Rent, when at first they were Barren, but they are no war∣rand to Bishops to Tax their Wards for a certain Dutie, for this is contrarie to the Interest of the Church, and is so far from being warranted by any Law, that there is an express Act. (viz.) 9. Parl 23. Ja. 6. allowing them only to few out their Ward Lands by a Temporary Statute, to endure for three years allanerly; which shews that Regularly it was not lawful, and this did prejudge the King also, who might have right to the Ward, and Marriage, sede vacante, from which he would be debarr'd by Taxing these Casualities: And therefore Sharp Arch-bishop of St. Andrews having Taxt the Ward-holdings of the Lands of Blebo, that Right was reduced by his Successor, 12. March 1684, Though it was alleadg'd, that though Church-men cannot alienat Teynds, which are the Spiritu∣alities of the Church, yet they are domini, and not administratores tantum, as to the Temporalitie, which was said to be also Craigs opinion; and Taxing was a more constant Rent to the Church, and as a Bishop might Gift a Ward which could not be quarelled by his Successors, even for years after his Death, or Removal, so might he Tax. Nota, Though by the 41. Act, Parl. 10▪ Ja. 2. The King may resume the annext Property unlawfully Dispon'd, but any Process of Law, yet in this Act Kirk-men are not to resume the Lands wrongfully annalʒied by them, otherwayes than by lawful Process of Law. BY this Act Hospitals founded by the King, are to be visited by the Chancellor, but Hospitals founded by Bishops,ACT 27. or o∣ther Subjects, are to be visited by the Bishop, and ordinary; which Act is renew'd by the 63. Act, Parl. 5. Ja. 6. But by the 101. Act, Parl. 7. Jam 5. all the Visiters are to be appointed by the King, and by our present Practice. All Actions intented for causing Patrons, or others, Compt for their Intromissions with the Rents of Hospitals, are still intented at the instance of the Chancel∣lor. By the Canon Law, Curis Hospitalitatis, & Hospitalium ad
Episcopi solicitudinem pertinet, sed ubi non aedificantur Hospitalia cum permissione Episcopi locus non est sacer, nec est sub Episcopi cura. ACT 28.HEreticks are by this Act to be punished as Law of hali Kirk requires, id est, by Excommunication, with us they were burnt; and by Act 46. Parl. 3. Jam. 6. Church-men who are Hereticks are to be Excommunicated, and Depos'd, if they revock not their Heresie; the punishment by the Common Law is Burning, and Confiscation of Moveables, Clar. Num. 13. This Act was made against the first of our Reformers, called then Lol∣lards, for the Rubrick in the Black Impression bears of Hereticks and Lollards. Obser. From this Act it is observable, that the Kirk was Judge to Heresie, in prima instantia; and Clarus makes the Tryal so far Ecclesiastick, that the Cognition belongs to the Church, and the punishment to the secular Judge, but with us the Justices are Judges in prima instantia. IT may be alledged from this Act, that all Transgressions of Law are not punishable as contempt of Authority,ACT 29. where there is no express sanction in the Law, since by this Act it is appointed that the Breakers of Acts of Parliament are to be punished after the Form and Ordinance thereof; By which words also it seems, that all Acts of Parliament are with us stricti juris, and not to be extend∣ed de casu in casum; but yet with us Laws are extended by Parity of Reason, and by Analogie, as in the case of making Men answerable for their Wives not going to Church, &c. And the meaning of this Act is, that Judges shall not have liberty, commutare paenam Lege definitam expresse, for the best Lawyers acknowledge, that though an Statute should say, And it is ordained that this Statute shall be understood exactly according to the Letter, yet it is capable of even an extensive Interpretation, if no unjustice fol∣low on that extension, but much more if without this it would be unjust. Bald. de stat. num. 3. Voet. de statut sect. 7. cap. 1. And a declaratorie Interpretation is by all Lawyers acknow∣ledg'd to be a Literal Interpretation, Voet. ibid, albeit in general it cannot be deny'd, that these who have power to make Sta∣tutes, must by a necessarie consequence have power to modifie and qualfie them as they please; and as they may allow inferiour Judges a Power to Interpret Statutes in general, so they may discharge them in a particular Statute to use that their Power, and in that Case an inferiour Judge cannot Extend or Interpret otherways than in the terms foresaid. ACT 30.LEagues and Bonds are by this Act only declared null, but by the Act. 12 Parl. 10. Jam. 6. and Act 4. Parl. 1. Ch 2. they are declared punishable as Sedition, and were punishable by Ward∣ing, Act 43. Parl. 6. Q. Mary.
IF any carry Horses under three Years old,ACT. 31. to be sold out of the Country, they Echeat them by this Act, and by the 22 Act Parl. 1. Jam. 6 If Horse (without making difference as to their Age) be carry'd beyond Sea, the Horse and Ship and Goods of the Owner are Escheated, and their Persons to be punished arbi∣trarly. It is declared by that Act, that there were several Acts be∣fore discharging the exportation of Horses, whereas I see none save this, and therefore these behov'd to have been Acts of Council, or unprinted Acts of Parliament, though generally all Acts inferring Escheat should be printed for Certioration. These Acts are now in Desuetude, carrying Horses out of the Country being an Im∣provement of Rent, though that was then discharg'd upon the ac∣count of our Wars with England; but it would appear that the carrying Horses out of the Kingdom till they be three Years old, was not discharg'd upon the account of War, but to the end the Horses should be kept till they gave a greater price, and so should bring in more Money; therefore this Prohibition it seems should still last. BY this Act, Tallow transported is escheated,ACT. 32. and the reason hereof is given by the 123. Act. Parl. 7. Ja. 5. because by the transportation thereof it became very dear at home, and there∣fore the escheat of the transporters whole Moveables is added, but the ill Increasing the Moveables of the Masters, and Skippers of such Vessels in which it is transported, are declar'd to fall under Confiscation, Act. 40. Parl. 6. Q. M. And this Act extends the former to Strangers It is Observable, that though this Act discharg'd all Persons to export, yet all other Acts mentions Strangers, when it is design'd that the Prohibition shall be extended to them, as is also clear by the Act. 22. Parl 1▪ Ja. 6. and the 31. Act. Parl. 7. Ja. 2d. So that it may be doubted if such penal Acts should be extended to Strangers where they are not mention'd▪ and if the words, (all Persons) are not in our Acts to be restricted to Natives. Though by the Civil Law the owners be lyable for the Skip∣pers fault, in so far as concerns the prejudice done in the Ship; yet it seems hard, that an owners escheat shall fall for the Skip∣pers taking in Tallow, else Rich men would not be Owners, and Skippers might Maliciously ruine their Owners, and therefore it seems that by Masters here should only be mean'd Skippers, and by the Civil Law, the Skipper was call'd Magister Navis. THough this Act punishes only Stealers,ACT. 33. or Cutters of Green Wood in the night time, yet they are punishable for such Faults at all times, the punishment is exprest, Act. 84. Parl. 6. Ja. 6. but thereafter cutting of Green Wood is punisht as Thift with Death, Act. 82. Parl. 11. Ja. 6. and yet I find none ever punished Capitaly for this Crime, and the ordinary way of pursuing, is, by Process before the Sheriffs, or the Lords, for pecuniarie mulcts.
ACT 34.BY the Common Law no Judge can cite a Malefactor without his own Territorie, and therefore, if a man cut my Trees, I could only pursue him within my Jurisdiction ratione criminis com∣missi, if I find him within it; but yet hee it is enacted, that if a man steal my Wood, the same shall be punished in the Court within which te Lands lye, out of which the Wood was stolne, and none other; but it seems that this being only introduced in favours of the Person injur'd, he may renunce it, and pursue be∣fore the Judge of the Jurisdiction, in which the Offender dwels, who cannot obtrude this Statute. ACT 35.FOr clearing this Act, Vid. infra Ja 1.9. Parl. Act 131. ACT 36.BY this Act, Stalkers of Deer are to pay 40 shilling to the King, and their Resetters ten pounds; Nta, Reset in some cases, and in this, is more severly punished than the Malefact∣ors. The pain is augmented to a 100. lib. Act. 210. Parl. 14 Ja. 6. And at last shooting them with Guns is declared punishable by death, Act. 9. Parl 4. and Act. 51. Parl. 6. Q. M. ACT 37.BY this Act▪ These who wilfully Reset, Maintain, or do favours to open and manifest Rebells are punishable by Forfalture. For understanding whereof, it is fit to know, that there are some manifest Rebells de jure, and some de facto. Such as are de∣nunced and registrated, are manifest Rebells de jure; for though the Leidges know them not, yet they ought to know them, and it would seem that this requires a Denunciation within the Shire where the Resetter lives, Act▪ 2▪ Par▪ 6▪ Ja. 6▪ And though that Act bear, that the Denunciation at the head Burgh of the Shire be sufficient, yet it seems that the Denunciation being only a transi∣ent Act, is not sufficient to put the Leidges in mala fide, except the Rebel be Registrated as Registration of other Letters is necessary to put buyers in mala fide: Such likewise, as are by positive Act of Parliament declared to have been Forfaulted, (as these exprest in the Act. 11. Pal. 2d. Ch. 2d Sess. 1. are likewise manifest Rebels de jure, since all are oblig'd to know what is in Acts of Parliament; but it has been doubted, whether the resetting even of these after they have been allow'd for many years, to appear publckly in Kirk and Mercat, to the knowledge of the Kings Servants should infer paenam ordinariam; or whether the said paena ordinaria can be infer∣r'd, by resetting such as are mention'd in a Proclamation. These are manifest Rebels de facto, whom the Pannel knew to be Rebels, or Traitors, though they wee not Denunced; and thus Hamilton of Munkland was Forfaulted for resetting his own man, whom he had seen in the Rebellion; and if a man did see one kill the King, or should assist Rebels in Armes, before they were de∣feated, it were ridiculous to alleadge that this were not punishable as reset, because the Rebels were not denunced Rebels, since they could not be denunced before Citation, and the danger in resetting actual open Rebels is greater than in resetting poor lurking Vaga∣bonds; but this kind of accession must be inferr'd only from clear
qualifications of knowledge, such as these whereupon Lawrie of Blackwood was Forfaulted Winter Session 1682. In which Process it was likewise found, that Letters of Intercommoning were not ne∣cessary to infer nottor Rebellion, because Denunciations for Trea∣son includs Intercommoning ex sua natura; it being hard to leave so dangerous certifications to be arbitrarly inferr'd from conjectures; and the Acts of Parliament require very wisely, that the Rebellion be wilfull; These who are here call'd Manifest, and open Rebels, are by the 4th Act. Parl. 1 Ja. 1. call'd Notor Rebels, and notorium, by the comon Law, is that which is committed Palam &. inspectante populo & non ege probatione Mattheus de prebat. cap. 15. Clar. § Fin. Quest. 9. which is to be understood of that which is in se notorium, but there may be notorium respectu noscentis with∣out this, as in Munklands case. By the 97. Act. Parl. 7. Ja. 5. Such as reset any Rebels are pu∣nishable by Death, and Confiscation of Moveables; but it seems strange, that resetting Rebels for a Civil Debt should infer Death, or that resetting Traitors should infer no more; and therefore the 144 Act. Parl. 12. Ja. 6. is more just, ordaining the resetters of Rebels to be punished with the same pain, that the Rebels ought to have been punished with; By this Act also, all men are bound to search, take and apprehend them, or to certifie the Kng and Council of their lurking in their bounds, sub paena talionis. By the 29 statut. David 2d. The Resetter is not to be punished till the principal Malefactor be convict, but this was Repell'd in Black∣woods case, because he had reset persons that were de facto, not∣tor Rebels; and certainly if a man should reset a company of not∣tor Rebels, who could not be Convict, because they could not be personally and distinctly known, yet the Resetter might be Con∣vict. IS in Desetude.ACT 38. THough this Act appoints Deacons to be,ACT 39. yet all Deacons are discharg'd, Act 86 Par. 6 Jac: 1. and Wardens re appointed in their place. Act 103 Par: 7: Jac: 1. and thereafter Visitors are brought in. Act 52 Par. 6 Q Mary, But now Deacons are restored to all Incorporat Trades; But Maltmen are discharged to have Dea∣cons by Act 29 Par 2 Jac: 6. And yet if a Trade be not in Possessi∣on of a Deaconie, they cannot begin to choose Deacons, without first obtaining liberty from the Council for that effect, by Petition; so far still is the pulict Peace of the Nation thought concern'd in all Deaconries, and in a Process at the instance of the Trads-men of Brunt-Island against their Magistrates, concluding that they ought to have Deacons, because their Charter gave them as great Privi∣ledges as Edinburgh had. The Lords found that this Charter gave the Trades a Liberty to have Deacons, but did not oblige them to have them; and therefore they having liv'd so long without Deacons, and the Trads men being so few, they were not oblig'd to have Deacons. In Spain and France, such Colledges are discharg'd, vide
Perez: ad tit. 16: lib: 11: num: 19: Habere tamen possunt Decanum suum ibid: vide infra Act 86. p: 6: Jac: 4. ACT 40.IS much innovated by the Book of Rates. ACT 41.IS in Desuetude. ACT 42.BEggars (or Thigsters who are gentle Beggars) should have a Token from the Sheriff, or Magistrates of Burghs, else they are to be burnt in the Cheek, this Act Ratifies only the 25th Act Par: 1 Jac: 1. and adds to it, that the Chamberlain shall inquire in his Air concerning this, but all this is Regulated by the 18th Act Par. 2d Sess: 3 Ch. 2. ACT 43.THis Act is extended to Hearers of such Leasing-making, Act 134. Par. 8. Jac. 6. by this Act Leasing makers lose Life and Goods, and this Act is made to determine the uncertainty of the cap: 21. stat. Rob. 1. whereby the inventers of Rumours be∣twixt King and People, were put in the Kings will. I find an Act in England against he same Crime, vid: 3: Hen: 8: cp: 10: annot 1637. ACT 45.NOta, That though the Legislative Power belongs properly to the King in the Parliament, yet the Judicative Power belongs properly to other Courts; and therefore by this Act, private Causes are appointed to be discus't before inferiour Courts, and the Parlia∣ment should not be Judges in the first instance, But de facto, many privat cases are intended before them. ACT 46.THough by this Act it be ordained that honest men be appoint∣ed to modifie Assythments; yet this modification now be∣longs to the Exchequer, who modifie the Assythment, when the Sig∣nature for the Re-in-mission passes in the Exchequer. King JAMES the first, Parl, 3. ACT 47.IS in Desuetude. ACT 48.THis Act was made to exclude all pretentions of the Emperour or Pope, and all Laws made, or Priviledges granted by them, but was not design'd to exclude the Civil and Canon Laws, which by many of our Statutes are call'd the Common Law, and are followed in this Kingdom, and to exclude the Danish Laws in the Isles, Jac. 4 Par. 6 c. 79. ACT 49.THis Act against Transporting of Money, is after many Innova∣tions severly renew'd, and the Merchants ordained to swear
thereupon, allowing only sixty Pounds to Passengers for their Char∣ges, by the 11 Act Par: 1. Sess: 3d Ch: 2d. But many think it more reasonable to allow Exportation as in Holland, since the hindering Exportation prejudges much all manner of commerce. THe first part of the Act discharging Officers in the Countrey,ACT 50. wherein any man is Indyted to be upon his Assize, seems to be founded upon the suspition that arises from an Interest they may have, in having the Pannel Convict, since a part of his Escheat belongs to them; and therefore I think this should not be extended to exclude any such Officers within the Shire, as may expect no share, such as Commissars, &c. The second part of the Act which discharges those who Indyte a man to be upon his Assyze, extends also against Informers, and these who gave advice for raising the Libel; but from this part of the Act it clearly appears, that it is not generally true, that when a penalty is adjected to an Act, the deed is not null, though the penalty be due, for it is here forbidden, that any Offi∣ciar, or other who Indyts a man, shall be on his Assyze, under the penalty of ten pounds: and yet certainly this Act would sett the informer from being on the Assyze; and though to this it may be answered, that this is unlawful by the Law of Nations, prior to all Law, and so this Law is only declaratory; yet that cannot be al∣leadged as to discharging Officers within the Shire, to be upon as∣syzes, it may be also alleadg'd, that this Penalty is only irrogat∣ed, in case any should pass on such Assyzes, without being known to be such. But I do really believe, that we in our Parliaments con∣sidered not the subtile distinction betwixt Acts, which proceed pae∣nam irrogando, and these which proceed actum irritando vide Obs: on the the 216 Act Par: 14 Jac: 6. It may be likewise concluded from this Act, that the Kings Advo∣cat is oblig'd to condescend who is his informer, for else the Inform∣er may be upon the Pannels Assyze; and yet because that would dis∣courage men from informing, & interest Reipublicae ne crimina mane∣ant impunita; Therefore the Council has several times found, that the Advocat is not oblig'd to condescend upon his Informer, further than that, if it be referred to the Advocats oath of Calum∣ny, that some of the Assyzers, or Witnesses were his Informers, as to which he will be oblig'd to give his Oath of Calumny. THe difference betwixt Forethought-fellony and Chaudmella,ACT 51. is only observed as to Murder, though this Act seems to extend it to all Transgressions, and even as to murder the Murderer is to be imprison'd, whether it be committed upon Forethought-fellony, or Chaudmella, for Chaudmella or homicidium in rixa commissum, is Ca∣pital by our present Law. THis Act appointing all Barons to appear in Parliament,ACT 52. may seem abrogated by the 102 Act Par: 7 Jac: 1. Whereby the Ba∣rons of each Shire, are allowed to choose two wise Men to Re-present
them, which is the Custom at this day: But it is observable, that though by that Act they may for their conveniency, choose two; yet they are by no expresse Law discharg'd to come in greater num∣bers. Nota, It seems by that Act, that a Prelat or Earl may send their Procurator to Vote for them, if they have themselves a lawful excuse; but yet de praxi, that is not allow'd; but this Act is more fully Ex∣plain'd in the Observations on the 7 Act Par: 22 Jac: 6. ACT 54.OBserve that this Act proves the Books of Regiam Majestatem, and Quoniam Attachiamenta, to be our Law, for they are cal∣led the Books of Law. ACT 57 and 58.ARe Explain'd in the 96th Act Par: 6 Jac: 4. ACT 59.THis Act appointing all Ferriers to have Bridges in places where Horses are to be Ferried, is renewed by the 20 Act Par: 4 Jac: 3. Wherein all passages on each side of the Water are ordained to have Bridges, whereupon Brunt-Island and Kinghorn rais'd a Process a∣gainst Kirkaldy, to have their Passage-Boats discharg'd, as not being able to have such Bridges, and for the good of the King∣dom, since if all places were allow'd to have Boats, Kinghorn and Brunt-Island (which in the old Evidents is called Wester Kinghorn) could not have sufficient Boats against Storms as now, but this be∣ing thought by the Council, matter of Property was remitted to the Session, it being dangerous upon pretext of publict good, to dis∣charge Property, for else many Innovations might be pretended. ACT 65.BEfore this Act the Kings Council were the Supream Judges in ci∣vil Causes; but by this Act some Commissioners of Parliament are to be chosen by turns, who with the Chancellor, are to be the Session, and are to be pay'd out of the Unlaws; so that the Session was then a Committee of Parliament, their power is further settled and declared by the Acts 61, 62, 63, Parl: 14 Jam: 2d. By which it is clear, that they were to Sit but fourty days at a time, and that the Session was then ambulatory, and their sitting was Proclaim'd in each Shire where they were to Sit, three Moneths before; and they were by that 63 Act to bear their own Expenses, after which the Sessions were by K James 4 Par. 6 Act 58. turn'd in a dayly Council, which was to be chosen by the King, and was to Sit at Edinburgh continually, and wherever the King Resided, they had the same power that the Session had, and their Sitting was to be no∣tified to the People by open Proclamation at the Kings pleasure; In place of all which, The Colledge of Justice, and The Lords, as they now are, were Instituted by King James 5th Parl. 5th Act 36.
Nota, There is power granted by this Act to determine Causes fi∣nally, which may import an excluding of Appeals, but thereafter Ap∣peals are discharged expresly, Jac. 2 Par. 13 Act 62. THe Sheriff; are not now oblig'd to publish the Acts of Parlia∣ment,ACT 67. but they are to be published at the Mercat Cross of Edin∣burgh only, and bind not the Leidges till fourty dayes after Publica∣tion, K. James 6 Par. 7 Act 128. King JAMES the first, Parliament 4. ARe Explained in the 96th Act 6 Par: Jac: 4.ACTS 68, 69. BY this Act, wilful Fire-raising is Treason.ACT 75. 2. Fire-raising by Mis-governance is punishable in Servants. 3. Reckless Fire-raising is punishable, either in the Owner, or the Mealer, or Ten∣nent. By the Civil Law, incendium casu fortuito is not punishable, but conductor tenetur de levissima culpa & incendium praesumitur culpa in∣habitantium factum fuisse si intra domum originem habuerit & o casu pater familias tenetur ex facto & delicto familiae sed non tenetur si or∣tum habuerit incendium extra familiam vide Gail. lib: 2 Obser: 21, & 22. Though by this Act, the Magistrates of Towns are to enquire con∣cerning the skaith suffered by Fire-raising, so that this seems to be a matter of Government, and consequently proper to be try'd also by the Privy Council; yet where the case is intricat in point of Law, the Council uses to remit the same to the Session, as in Doctor Sibbalds case, April 1684. King JAMES the first, Parliament 5. FOr Explication of this Act Vid: sup: Act 39 Par: 3 Ja: 1. and Act 86 Par: 6 Ja: 1.ACT 77. THis Combination of Workmen was also punished by the Civil Law, and it was found in the case of the Lord Hattoun,ACT 80. against the Deacon of the Masons of Edinburgh, that a Man might choose any Stranger Mason to build his House, and if any Mason within the Town give over the Work, any other Mason within the Town might undertake it, notwithstanding of their own private Statute.
King JAMES the first, Parliament 6. ACT 85.THe Act here related to, is 24th Act Par: 1: Jac: 1. ACT 86.DEacons are discharged by this Act, as tending to Sedition; and in place of them, the King did introduce Wardens of Crafts, who were to Supervise the Work of the respective Trades-men, and were indeed Deacons, but were called Wardens, quasi Guardians, Act 102. par. 7. Jac. 1. But thereafter, though Q: Mary of new supprest Deacons, and introduced in place of them Visiters; yet thereafter, about the time of the Reformation, to strengthen the Popish party, and to oblige all Trades-men thereto, she restored Deacons by a special Gift, and a Letter to the Council of Edinburgh, since which time, they remain still legal Corporations, and each private Trade has their Deaconry, Confirmed by Parlia∣ment Vid. Act 39 Par. 3 Ja. 1. ACT 87.THis Act Regulating the Expenses of unjust Pleas, seems to have been first made in a Provincial Synod, for it relates to the Official, or Commissary Court, and ends thus, Et quod istud statuatur de au¦thoritate Concilij provincialis. But I find that in Voet. de stat. that general Laws are call'd jura provincialia. ACT 88.THough all Submissions with the Decreets following thereupon, be declared null, if the Submission be not made to an odd per∣son; yet this is now in Desuetude, vide R. M. l. 2. c. 5. num. 4, 5, which sayes, that it is ordinary to submit to two, though it be difficult to make them agree; and therefore the Law recommends to them, to submit to an Odd Man. ACT 89.THis Act relates only to Processes, for by it the Causes of all Mer∣chants dying abroad, should be decided by their ordinary Judges within the Kingdom, viz. in the respective Commissariots and Shires, where they liv'd, if they went not abroad, animo rema∣nendi; but notwithstanding of this Act, the Testaments of such as live abroad, though animo remanendi, must be confirm'd in Scot∣land, by the Commissars of Edinburgh, as communis patria, else no Pursuite can be sustained, for their Moveables that are in Scotland, July 18. 1666. in the case betwixt Duff and Bisset. ACT 90.ANd if it be Fore-thought-Fellony, he shall die therefore. This may seem to imply, that men die not for Murder committed without Fore-thought-Fellony; But this holds not in our Law,
for Murder, though committed without Fore-thought-Fellony, is punishable by Death, except it was either Casual, or in Self-Defence, and then it is call'd properly Homicide or Man-slaugh∣ter. It is observable that Crimes ought regularly to be punished in the place where they were committed, that where the Scandal was given, there the Reparation should be made, vide act 34 par: 2 Jac: 1. & act 148 par: 12 Jac: 1. and this same Act is renew'd act 98 par: 6: Jac: 1. THe way prescribed by this Act,ACT 91. is now obsolet and in Desue∣tude; but the juster way now used is, That when a man is Denunced Fugitive for a Crime, there are Letters of Intercommun∣ing got out against him by authority of the Council, and these are publish'd at the Mercat Crosses, where he uses to reside; and if any within these Shires, where these Letters were publish'd, do reset or speak with him, they are pursu'd as Intercommuners. Nota, The Resetter of a Murderer is punish'd as a Murderer, and this by the Civil Law is clear in Resetters, as to all Crimes, l. 1 ff: de receptat: l: un: C: de crim: pecul. which is made our Law by the 144 act par: 2 Jac: 6. and yet some think, some Resetters are only to be punish'd as severely as the principal Offenders, who as∣sist in the Crime, and then reset, for these contract a double guilt; but that such as only reset them who are guilty, should be more benignly punish'd, and, this answers, d. l: un. C: de crim: paec: in fine & l: ult §. ult: ff: abg. The Civil Law excuses Parents, who re∣set, and punishes less Friends and Allies who reset, than others, l: 2: ff: h: t: and though this Act be general, yet it seems that it ought to be restricted by the Common Law. OBserve first,ACT 92. That though Barons do not use to judge Murder∣ers, yet by our old Law, such as are Infeft with Pit and Gal∣lows, may punish Slaughter, Q: attach: c: 77. and this Act allows them, if they be Infeft with such freedom. Observe secondly, That by this Act, Judges who are negligent to arrest Malefactors, if they escape the being warned in both these cases pays 20 pounds. IT is fit for understanding this Act,ACT 93. to know that Magistrates with∣in Burghs, have not power to judge Murders, except they be She∣riffs within themselves, as Edinburgh, Pearth, Innerness, and some other Towns are. A Lord of Regality and his Deputs,ACT 94. have as much power in judging Murder as the Justices have, though some contra∣vert, whether they can judge Murder under Trust▪ because that is Treason, and the Justices are only Judges competent to Treason.
Nota, There is a Case exprest in this Act, where moe Witnesses than two are required to prove a Crime; The Word Croy here sig∣nifies an Assyhment, which the Judge should pay to the nearest of Kin, if he be negligent in Ministring Justice against the Murderer, but this is in Desuetude. ACT 98.THe sense of this Act is, that if a man has found Law-burrows, which was called Assurance by our old Law, the Friends of him who has found the Law-burrows, are punishable if they wrong him to whom Law-burrows are found. He who assaults with Edge and Ure, is to be imprison'd, that is to say, with an Edg'd-tool, or any thing made of Metal▪ for Ure in Scots, signifies Metal. King IAMES the first Parliament 7. ACT 101.THe Banishing such as pay not Custom, is in Desuetude, and they now lose only their Goods so stold, as by the l. 2. C. de Vectigal. ACT 102.ALL Barons might come to Parliament before this Act, but by this Act they are allow'd to choose Commissars, who are now call'd Commissioners; and by this Act their Expences are to be pay'd to them which is now done thus, The Clerk Register gives them a Tstficat declaring, That according to the Sederunts of Par∣liament, such Commissioners did Serve so long; and by the late Act they get Letters of Horning, for five pounds a-day, vid. supra Act 52 Par. 3 Jac. 1. Nota, That though this Act impowers these Commissi∣oners to choose one to Re-present them as their Speaker; yet there is no such Person now chosen, and the Chancellor is now constant President of the whole Council, by the Act 1. Parl. 1. Ch. 2d. ACT 108.THis Act ordaining such as Interpret the Kings Laws wrong∣ously, to be punished arbitrarly, stricks only against such as Interpret the Kings Laws so, as to make them a meer Cloak for for doing un-justice, but mistakes and probable Errors, are not punishable; nor are the Lords punishable for such mistakes, be∣cause ipsorum sententiae pro veritate habentur. Nota, Laws like Oaths, are to be taken according to the mean∣ing of the Imposer, else they be elusory; and otherwise, every man would be his own Law-giver and Judge. The Earl of Argile was found guilty upon this Statute, 1681. for Mis-interpreting so the Test, by an quality adjected to his Swearing of it, That he reserv∣ed
still a power to himself, to rise in Arms when ever he judg'd the same fit. King IAMES the first, Parliament 8. BY this Act, all the Prelats, Lords, and Barons are to swear the same Alleagance to the Queen, that they swore to the King;ACT 110. and by the 136. Act Ja. 1 they promise Literas retinentia & fidelitatis to the same Queen; but the Queen being a Subject, there is no Oath now made to Her; and tho by this Act none were to be allow'd to enter to their Feu till they had given this Oath of Fidelity to the King and Queen (which was conform to the Feudal Law) yet no such Oath is required as to either King or Queen, before the Vassals entry Princeps legibus solutus est, Augusta autem licet legibus soluta non sit, tamen eadem illi tribuunt privilegia, quae ipsi habent, l 31. ff. de leg. BY this Latine Act, It is Statute,ACT 112. that all such as flee from the King, or His Lieutenent, are to be punished as Nottor and Publict Rebels; which Act stricks not only against such as were sworn to Colours, for those are punishable only by Death ac∣cording to the Military Law; But all such as leave the Kings Host being obliged to attend; and though it may be alleaged, that this Act is to be extended only against such as flee in to the Ene∣mie, for else the punishment of Treason were too severe for simple deserters; and by the Common Law, there is ground for this di∣stinction; but by our Law there is no ground for this opinion, because the going in to the Enemie is per se Treason. Not. This is to be punished as Perduellion and Rebellion; but it is not declar'd Perduellion, or Rebellion; and therefore it may be argu'd, that the Fisk has not the same Priviledges, as to the way of Procedore here, that he has in other Species of High Treason, or Perduelli∣on; such as that the Person himself may be Pursued and Con∣demn'd in absence upon Probation; and that his Heir may be Pursued after his Death, &c. Not. It may be argu'd, that this Act should only be extended against such as Flee from the Armie, when the King, or His Lieu∣tenent are there in Person in the Fields, because then, there is great hazard, but not against such as desert any under Officer.
King IAMES the first Parliament 9▪ ACT 112.THe Office of Maires was to Execut Summonds, and the Kings Maires praeco Regis assisted in Criminal Courts, there are yet some Maires of Fee, or Heretable Maires in Scot∣land, who have Right by their Charters to so many pairs of Shoes, and so much Money, &c. out of every Pleugh, which Fees are now very much regulated by Possession; By this Act, Maires of Fee are to present Persons to the Sheriff, to serve under them, and if there be no Mair of Fee, id est Heretable Mair in that word or district, the Shireff is to present an able Person, who shall sup∣plie his place by Summonding, and this is the Origine of Sheriffs in that part to whom all our ordinar Summonds are direct, by the 51 chap. stat. David 2. The Serjeand or Maire (for they are the same) is ordained to give in his Execution in writ, or by word, if he cannot writ, but he must prove all by Witnesses, and there the Sheriff, or Mair may make Executions or Records; for so Ex¦ecutions were call'd of old. ACT 113.THat Witnesses in Executions should dwell in different Ba∣ronies is in Desuetude; That Witnesses should swear that they by-stood, saw, and heard is only required now, in the Exe∣cution of Breives, who must swear the verity of their Executions, but the Witnesses even in that case, needs not swear that they were Witnesses especially required to be Witnesses; which is only re∣quired now in Seasines which bear, that the Witnesses were ad hoc specialiter requisiti, and yet by this Act all these qualifications are requir'd in all Executions. ACT 114.Not. IT may be argu'd from this Law, that the Dates are substantial, not only in Breivs, but in all other Papers; Likeas the rubrick of this Act calls them substantialia; and there∣fore, if they be false, the whole writ is false, and it was so found as to Executions; whereupon one Creditor is to be preferr'd to another such as are the Intimations of Assignations, 29. March, 1628. or the Executions of Arrestments, for there to allow Wit∣nesses to make up the Dates, were in effect to allow Witnesses to prefer one Creditor to another, and to establish considerable Sums by Witnesses; but if the Date of any other Writ, or Security be blotted, the owner is allow'd to astruct it by Witnesses, 10. Feb. 1636. And though the Moneth and Day be blank, yet if the Year be exprest, a Bond, or such like Writ is sufficient, being in re anti∣qua, 15. January 1662: Grant contra Grant, but in such cases, the Law presums, that the Bond was granted the last day of that Year, Vid. Gem: Consil. 79. Vid. R. M. l. 1.11.
THere is no necessity now, that he who propons ane Essonʒie,ACT 115. or Excuse shall find Caution to prove it at the next Court, for now ane Essonʒie being a Dilator of its own nature, must, like all Dilators, be instantly proven. Not. Sicknesse is only allow'd here to be proven by two Leil-men, or the Parish-priest, or Minister deponing upon it; but with us Testificats upon Soul and Consci∣ence are allow'd in all Courts, except the Justice Court, where ssonzie must be proven by Witnesses present in Court, And to allow Testificats is dangerous, because they may be forg'd, yet they were allow'd even in Treason, in E. Laudons case, 1: Apryl, 1684. but the speciality there was, that the Earl was in Holland, for it was thought hard to bring Phisicians from thence, and yet I think the Seal of the Town should be brought in that case, Vid. stat. Will. c. 26. num. 2. & Quon. Attach. c. 33. THe meaning of this Act is,ACT 116. when any Defender finds Caution to answer as Law will (which is called here a Borgh upon a Weir of Law) he may either answer presently, or may have a day to give in his Defences, he finding Caution to answer of new; this is explained, R. M. l. 1. c. 11. num. 4. But now with us there is no dyet allow'd in Criminal Courts, for the dyets there are per∣emptor. THis falsing of Dooms, or Appeal was altered, and in place of them are come our Suspensions, and Reductions of Decreets,ACT 117. for the Doom is a Decreet; and in these Reductions and Suspensi∣ons it is lawful to insert only one Reason at first, and the rest may be now eeked without protesting for a Liberty to eeke new Reasons, as is required by this Act; and a Borgh or Caution is yet necessary, in Suspensions, as it was in falsing of Dooms. By the Civil Law, Appeals were to be interpos'd within ten days after Sentence; but by this Act, the Appeal was to be us'd immediat∣ly, or at least before the Pursuer walkt 40 paces by the Act 99. Parl. 6. Ja. 4. and in place of the words here used, viz. That Doom is false stink and and rotten in the self, and thereto a Borgh, the party lea∣sed was to say, I am gratumly hurt and injured by the said Doom, and therefore I Appeal; and this was done, because the words here us'd were Rude, and Unmanerly. THe meaning of this Act is,ACT 118. That if the Pursuer be forc'd to find Caution, to answer as Law will, he may force the De∣fender to Recounter it; That is to say, to find Caution also▪ and whosoever is absent, after Caution is so found, shall lose the cause, and shall be unlaw'd also, Vid. c. 18. vers. 2. & 3. l. 1. R. M. THis Act appoints,ACT 124. That the Ships which break in this King∣dom shall be Confiscated amongst us, if the Ship belongs to a Countrey which uses that Law against us. For clearing this, it is fit
to know that by the Civil Law, the Goods of Ship-wrackt Persons fell not to the Fisk. l. 1. C. de naufr: si quando naufragio navis ex∣pulsa fuerit ad Litius, vel si quando aliquam terram attigerit ad Domi∣nos pertineat fiscus meus sese non interponat, quidenim jus habet fiscus in aliena calamitate ut de re tam luctuosa compendium sectetur; and by the Canon Law, qui christianos naufragium sacientes damnata cu∣piditate rbus suis spoliant excommunicantur, c. 3. Extr. de Rapt. But yet France does Confiscat Ship-wrackt Goods, le bris est confisque au segnieur Soveraigne. odin de  C. ult. Where it is assert∣ed, that this was the Law of both Eastern and Western Seas; which is false, for it is not the custome of Holland nor Pole, nor Denmark, Vid. Curick ad tit. 9. jur Hans; with us, if no Living Creature escape that was in the Ship, the Goods are Wreck, and belong to the Admiral, by his Gift from the King; but if any Living Creature escape, neither Ship nor Goods are Wreck, as was decided where only ane Ox escapt, 12 December 1622. And yet by the present custome of the Admirality, though no Living Creature escape, the Admiral secures only the Goods, and restors them, if the true Owner claime them, and prove his Propertie within year and day, being repayed of his Salvage, for which we have no positive Statute; And it seems we have borrowed this from the Statute of Hen. 3. anno 1226. cited by Curick tit. 9. Though Skeen de verb. sig. verb. Wrack cites another Statute, viz. Anno 3. Ed. 1. C. 4. So that though the Custome seems unjust, yet this Law has seem'd just, because of Lex talionis; And the Title, quod quis{que} juris in alium statuit ut ipse eodem jure utatur; tit. 2. lib. 2. ff. And yet our present Custome has justly corrected this Law in manner above mentioned. And I likewise believe, that even after the Year is Elapsed, the true Proprietar may recover his Goods, if he prove the Propertie, and if his Goods be extant; for 1. That which is mine, cannot be taken from me without my own fact and deed. 2. There were as good reason for the King to seize upon Goods that were Robb'd by Land, for the Proprietar quytes his Goods as unwillingly in the one case as in the other, 3ly. Even in Goods that are thrown over Board for the securitie of the Vessel; the Law presums no design in the Proprietar to quite them; as de relicta § Fin. Inst. de rer. divis; And therefore much lesse ought this to be sustained in Goods forced from the Proprietar by a Tempest, since there is some consent in the one, but none in the other. 4to. If any privat man seize on such Ship-wrackt Goods, his seizing on them would be a Crime, l. 1. & l. ult. de inend. ruin. l. de submersis C. de naufrag; And it is strange, that private men should be punished, because they seized on what was anothers, and yet the same calamitie which aggrages the Crime in them, should establish a Right in the Publick; and it may be well argu∣ed, that either the Propertie is lost by the Ship-wrack, and if so, why has the Proprietar action against the seizers; or if it be not lost, how has the Fisk acquyred the Propertie, for duo non possunt esse domini ejusdem rei in solidum. 5o. There is lesse reason for a shorter prescription in such than in any other Moveables, For in
other Goods there may be a presumed design to quite the posses∣sion but here there can be none; for it is palpably to be imput∣ed to force. 6o. This is destructive to all Commerce, and no Nation ought to sustain it, because all Nations will loss equalie by it. 7o. The Owners may not know where to seek their Ship-wrackt Goods because lost in very remote Countries; and often∣times the Owners themselves being lost with them, leave none to prosecute their Rights; so that upon the whole matter it seems, that the custome of other Nations can no more justifie ours in this, than the eating of our men amongst the Cannibals would justifie our eating them; and it seems rather that Letters of Mark ought to be granted in such cases, if restitution be refus'd. THough this Act appoints Advocats to give their Oath of Calumnie only in Temporal Courts,ACT 125. yet this holds also in the Commissar Court, which is a Spiritual Court, and curia chri∣stianitatis. Obs. 2. It seems that Oaths of Calumnie can only be craved in ini∣tio litis, in the beginning of the Pley or Cause, but yet now an Oath of Calumnie may be asked at any time. Obs. 3. That though this Act appoints Advocats to give their Oaths of Calumnie, if their Client be absent, yet that only holds in matters of Fact, as to which the Advocat is not obliged to swear, if his Client be present, but as to alleageances in point of Law, the Advocat is obliged to swear though his Client be present. Thir Verses are taken out of Hostiensis tit. de jur. Calum. & Gloss. in § 1. just. de paen: tem. litigant; which shews amongst o∣ther arguments, that the Acts of Parliaments, as we have them now Printed, are not the same as they past in Parliament. I have heard it debated in the Process, Keith contra Purves, March 1684. That an Adocat was not obliged to give his Oath of Calumnie, whether he thought the Right upon which he Debated was really to the behoove of the Earl of Marshal, but only in ge∣neral, that the Advocats had good reason to Debate it was not to his behoove, because their Client said so to them; But if this be allow'd, an Oath of Calumnie will signifie nothing, for Advocats may alwayes find subterfuges to depone, that they have good reason to urge such a thing, for they may think their Clients Informati∣on sufficient warrand for them, though they are convinced the same is palpably false; whereas the true Design of the Act of Par∣liament was to debar Advocats from proponing Defences, and in∣sisting in Pleas which they thought unjust and Calumnious. ARe in Desuetude. But I am of Opinion,ACT 126 and 127. that Brieves with us have not their Origine from the Civil Law, as Skeen thinks, because sententia erat de brevi recitanda, or from the breve testatum of the Feudal Law, for these are very different from our Brieves; but from the Court of Rome, for their Brieves are exactly the same. With ours, as breve de capienda possessione breve contra intrusum vi∣de Amydenium de stilo datariae, cap. 28. lib. 1. Rebuff: praex: Reg: 34.
THis Act is abrogated by the Union of both Kingdoms, but from it may be observed,ACT 128. that to go and live in a Coun∣trey, that is in War with the KING, is Treason, since the Ene∣my becomes thereby stronger and richer, and the Kingdom weaker and poorer. UPon this Act is founded the stile of Law-burrows, which bears, That the Raiser dreads Bodily Harm of him against whom he seeks Law-burrows,ACT 129. and that he has given his Oath to that effect: This is like that Oath of Calumny, Quod tenetur ille prestare qui novum opus nunciat, l. 5. §. 14. ff. de novo oper: nunciat: But it is the same exactly with the cautio de non offendendo, us'd both in France and Flanders, in which the Oath of the Party is sufficient, ubi ex∣pectatio mali juramento ejus qui securitatem petit confirmari sufficiet Christien: ad leg: Mechlin: art: 1. tit: 4. num: 4. And with us, such as break Law-burrows, are pursu'd by an Action of Contra∣vention; Which Term is likewise us'd among them in the same sense, art: 8. num: 16. Ibid. Observe, That though the Letters of Law-burrows contain no such Warrand in the Body of them, for taking the Chargers Oath, that he dreads bodily harm; and though the Messenger who executes the saids Letters, does not exact the said Oath from him, at whose Instance the Letters are to be Execute; yet that neither annuls the Letters, nor the Act of Caution, though it would seem that Caution is only to be found, because that Oath is given; but yet the Party might have Suspended upon that ground, and would not have been oblig'd to have found Caution, till the Charger had given his Oath, conform to this Act. FRee-holders or their Acturneys, should compear at Head-Courts;ACT 130. but though this Act sayes, That if they be absent upon a necessary Cause, they may send their Acturney; yet de praxi, though they can prove no reasonable Cause, they cannot be Unlaw'd, if they send any person with a Letter of Acturney, which is rais'd out of the Chancellary, and the sending of Seals is now in Desue∣tude, for Services and Verdicts in Criminal Causes, which are the only Papers that need now to be Seal'd, may be Sealed with any borrowed Seal. Obs. primo, Several Regalities in Scotland, have Chappel and Chancery of their own, and grants Acturneys themselves. Obs. secundo, Regalities are still a part of the Shire; and therefore the Sheriff may cite the Vassals of the Regality, but the Lord of Regality cannot cite these who live within the Shire, with∣out Letters of Supplement, obtain'd by deliverance of the Lords for that effect, vide Act 10 Par 5 Ja. 2. Obs. tertio, That the Unlaw warranted by this Act to be impos'd by Sheriffs, for absence from Head-Courts, cannot exceed 10 pounds, February 7. 1624. December 6. 1628. And the same Unlaw of 10 pounds is allow'd for absence from Baron Coutrs,
March 16. 1622. It has been likewise found, that though a Vas∣sal having been in use to have his Servant received as his Actur∣ney at those Courts, without a formal Letter of Acturney out of Chancellary, cannot be Fined quoad by gains, because of the pre∣ceeding Custom; Yet for the future, they will be oblig'd to send formal Letters of Acturney, or else they will be Fineable, Intima∣tion being made to them, that the former Custom will be no more allow'd, July 11. 1678. The Bailie of the Regality of Paisley against the Laird of Duntreath. THe taking of Salmond at all times is allow'd on the Waters of Saloway and Tweed,ACT. 131. as long as Berwick and Roxburgh are in the English Mens Hands, but it is Rescinded upon our Kings succeeding to the Crown of England, by the 5 Act 18 Par. Ja. 6. King JAMES the first, Parl. 10. THis Act discharging the selling Salmond abroad,ACT 132. except the one half of the price be pai'd in Money, is in Desuetude. THis Act is Declaratory of the former Law,ACT 133. else it could not have been drawn back to the prejudice of the private Right here mentioned, and this was suitable to the Common Law; for the Governour of the Kingdom is but a Tutor, and a Tutor cannot alienat Lands belonging to the Crown. King IAMES the first, Parliament 11. THese who break the Kings Protections are ordained to be pnish'd, and the Protections here mention'd,ACT 134. are these Letters which our Kings of old granted to Monastries, Burghs, &c. taking them into his special Protection, and discharging all his Subjects to injure them, under pain of his high∣est Displeasure; and it is observeable, that Assizes were to sit upon these, whether the Party accus'd was present, or absent. Those Protections are now in Desuetude, nor can any Pannel be proceeded against now in his absence, except in the case of Perdu∣ellion allanerly. What we now call Protections, were called there Supercederes, but not Protections. By the Civil Law, publica tutelae assertio principis solius eratl, capital: §. ad statuas. ff. de pan nunc salvagardiae dicuntur, vid. argentrate pag: 190.
King IAMES the first, Parliament 13. ACT 137.IT was lately doubted, whether Theft-boot, which is the Trans∣acting with Thieves, by a Judge, for freeing them from pu∣nishment, be in Desuetude; and it was found a Crime yet pu∣nishable. There are two kinds of Theft-boot declared by this Act, to be punishable, the one is to sell a Thief, which is to take a Ransom for liberating him,  other to Fine with a Thief, that is to take a share of what he has stoln, and so dismiss him, both which are exprest, Act 2 Par. 1 Ja. 5. by concording with the Thief, and putting him from the Law. The punishment by this Act seems to be the loss of the Right of Regay, as to Lords of Regaliy, but to be death in Sheriffs, Justices, &c. And if so, it seems strange that the Lords of Regality shall be  punished than others. But I think the punishment as to both,  of Life and Office, and the words of the Act are only ill plac'd. And by the Civil Law, whoever commits either of these, are punish'd as the Thief himself, l. 1. ff. de Receptator, where the two species of Theft boot exprest  in this Act, are also there exprest, quia cum apprehendere latrones possint pecunia accepta vel subreptorum parte de∣miserunt; and this Act punishes only Theft-boot in Judges: but yet if a private person take a part of the stoln Goods, he may be punished as a Resetter, albeit the meer letting of a Thief go is not a Crime in him, since he is not oblig'd to take him. This Act was necessary, because formerly, Transacting with Thieves was discharg'd, but no punishment exprest, Quon. Attach. c. 42. & 77. & stat. 1 Rob. 1. c. 3 & stat. Will. c. 15 By which last, who Redeems a Thief est legem aquae subiturus, which is now in De∣suetude. ACT 138.THis Oath is not now put to Assizers, except the Party require that they be purg'd of Partiality; for the ordinary Oath now us'd is, That they shall Truth say, and no Truth conceal, in so far as they are to pass upon this Assize. ACT 139.CRowners do not now arrest Male-factors, for all arrestments are by Messengers, or the Macers of the Criminal Court; but yet some Heretable Crowners do assist at Justice-Airs to this Day, and keep the Bar, and secure Malefactors as they go, and come from, and to it.
THere is a double interest in all Crimes,ACT 140. the Fisk or King has an interest, because his Peace and Laws are broke, and his Subjects wrong'd, and this is call'd by the Civil Law, vindicta pub∣lica. The person wrong'd has another interest, which is call'd vin∣dicta privata. That the King may pursue without the concourse of the person injur'd, is clear by this Act, but because this Act allow'd only Sheriffs to pursue without consent of the party; therefore this is extended to all cases, in vours of the King, Act 76. Par. 11. Ja. 6. THis Act is abrogated by the Union of both Nations,ACT 141. but argumento hujus legis, the taking Protections from, or assur∣ance with any Enemie of the State is Treason, and it may be alleadg'd that assuring Merchant Goods, or Ships by Hollanders when we had War with them▪ vvas Treason by this Act, and by the Common Law; for this is a corresponding vvith Enemies. A Thief novv by the Regulations must be pursu'd upon 15. days only, as all Malefactors.ACT 142. VIde Act 50. Parl. 7. Ja. 3. & Act 107. Parl. 7. Ja. 6. and such as failʒie to bring in Bullion are punished,ACT 143. Act 51. Parl. 7. Ja. 3. & Act 65. Parl. 8. And all is novv innovated by the Act 37. Parl. 1. Ch. 2d. THe Bell rung in Edinbrugh, at 9. at night, conform to this Act,ACT 144. till it was ordain'd to ring at 10. (as it does) which being altered at the desire of the Earl of Arrans Lady when he was Chancellour, it is therefore call'd the Lady's Bell. From her also the Steps leading to St. Giles Church are call'd the Ladies Steps. BY this Act,ACT 145. the Law is to be holden where the Trespass is done, which is most just; because, by punishing Crymes up∣on the Place, the Scandal there given is taken off by a proporti∣onal terror. 2. The Friends of the Party injur'd, are thereby better repaed. 3. Probation is more easy got, and Assysers upon the Place are readier to do Justice, as knowing better the mat∣ter of Fact. Vid. Stat Will. Reg. c. 18. And is conform to the Civil Law, l. 3. ff. in prin. de Re milit: & tot: tit. C. ubi de crimine agi oportet; and that this was the old Law of Nations, is clear by Quint. Crt. THe carriers of Gold and Silver,ACT 146. (except in so far as is necessary for Spending) infers also the escheat of the Carriers other Moveables, Act 69. Parl. 9. Q. M. But the falling of their Escheat was but 5. lib. after that Act, and is now in Desuetude, so that the words under the pain of Escheat is to be interpreted of Escheating the Money so carry'd allanerly.
K. JAMES II. Parliament I. THIS is not an Act,ACT 1. but a Decla∣ration concerning the Fidelity Sworn by the Parliament, to their young King; and I find no such Declraation, or ac∣knowledgement in an other Parliament of any other King: So this is rather set down as a Narration, than as an Act of Parliament; For it mentions not Bishops, and it expresses the consent of al the Free-hol∣ders. THis is the first Revocation that I find made by any of our Kings, and here Dispositions made by the King of Moveables,ACT 2. is Revocked, and though no mention be made of Moveables, in latter Revocations; Since a King who is Minor, Disponing Moveables without an onerous Cause, may Revock them. 2ly, It is observable that the King is (as his Subjects) Minor till 21 years compleat, and that the Parliament is in place of Tutors to Him. 3ly, This Inventar is conform to the Civil Law, whereby the Tutor was oblig'd to make an Inventar of his Minors Estate, and which is made our Law, by the Act 2. Sess. 3. Parl. 2. Ch. 2. and to make an In∣ventar unto Dupois, is to make it according to weight; Dupois being a French word, signifying Weight. 4ly, That in this Act, rather the Parliament than the King Re∣vocks, for the King was then minor; but regularly the King's Re∣vocation passes under His Privy Seal first, and then is Confirmed, and past by an Act of Parliament, Vid. Act 9th. Parl. 1, Ch. 1.
But sometimes it passes first by Proclamation, and then by Act of Parliament, Act 51 Par. 4th Ja. 4th. And sometimes by way of In∣strument, Act 70. Par. 6th Ja. 5th. King JAMES the Second, Parl. 2. ACT 3.THE only Act in this Parliament Warrands the Kings Lieutenent to force such as ly under violent presump∣tions of Spilling and Troubling the Countrey, to find Caution, that the Countrey and the Kings Subjects shall be unharm'd, which shews clearly, that the King may upon Presumptions (of which He is sole Judge) oblige any of His Sub∣jects to give Bond to live Peaceably, without which, the Govern∣ment could not Subsist. This Act was occasion'd by the great Outrages, committed by Archibald Earl of Dowglas, in the South, during the Kings Mino∣rity. King IAMES the Second, Parliament 3. VID. Stat. Dav. 2d cap. 42. Concerning the Liberties of the Haly-Kirk.ACT 4. ACT 5.TWo Justice Courts were to be held Yearly by the Justices, at Edinburgh and Peebles, c. 79. Quon. Attach. and two Justice-airs are to be held yearly, the one upon the North-side of Forth, and the other upon the South-side of Forth, c. 30. Stat. Rob. 3d. And by The Scottis Sea, is mean'd here, The Water of Forth. Se∣cundo, That part of this Act, which appoints Lords of Regality to hold Justice Courts twice a year, is now in Desuetude. BY this Act, after word is sent to the Council, that there is any Rebellion,ACT 6. Burning, &c. The King is to call the Sheriff, and see it Re-drest, and all the Barons oblige them to assist the King with their Persons and Goods, as oft as it shall be seen need∣ful, by Advice of His Council: From which, it is observable, That the King needs not call a Parliament, to assist Him in a War; but that the King and His Council, may call for Men and Main∣tainance, in case of War, and this was very reasonable, for Rebel∣lion may be Invincible, before a Parliament be assembled, and Parliaments do often give little help, in case of Combination, if the
occasions of it be popular, as was too clearly discover'd in our late Rebellion. The reason why in the former Act and this, the Advice of the King's Council is still exprest as necessary, was, because the King was then Minor, and His Person had been several times sur∣priz'd. In all this Parliament, there is no mention made of the Authority of the Regent, as uses to be when the King is Minor, but only the hail three Estates have Ordain'd, which I think proceeded from the Hatred, the Nobility had at that time to Alexander Living∣stoun, who was then Regent. I find, that in the Ratification of the Acts of Parliament, called the black Acts, Folio 149. The Duke of Chattelrault then Governour, is plac'd before the Queen-Mother, then Regent. King IAMES the Second, Parliament 4. OBserve that Excommunication takes away personam standi in judicio,ACT 7. So that Excommunicate persons cannot pur∣sue nor defend; for the Act sayes, That they shall not be heared nor answered in the Law of Judgement; and though the Word (answered,) would import only, that they cannot pur∣sue; yet the Word, (Heared,) Imports both Pursuing and De∣fending; and the Words, Heared, nor, Answered, had been super∣fluous, if they had been to express only the Pursuing. This Act and the 4th Act 3d Par. Ja. 2d. Were made upon the Earl of Crawfords Cruelty to Kennedy, Bishop of Aberdene. King IAMES the Second, Parliament 5. THis is the first time I find Art and Part mentioned in our Law.ACT 8. Nota: The time forbidden by Law for killing of Salmond is, from the Feast of the Assumption, viz. the 13 of August to St. An∣drews, which is the 30 of Nov. Act 34 Par. 2▪ Ja. 1. And though the third Fault was death by the 10 Act Par. 1 Ja. 1. Yet by this Act, the third Fault is only punishable by loss of Office. vid. Act 224 Par. 14 Ja. 6. THe form of causing restore Goods Spuilʒied now is,ACT 9. That the She∣riff, or any Judge discern, and upon this Decreet Letters of Horn∣ing are rais'd, and the Defenders Denunced; We find by this Act, that old Rule of the Canon Law, Spoliatus ante omnia restituendus, here Confirm'd, and the meaning of it is, That though the Spuil∣zier
have a sufficient and valid Right to what he has Spuilʒied, yet being pursu'd, his Right will not defend him; but he must first re∣store the Person Spuilʒied to his Possession, for the Law will not allow any man to be his own Judge, and to Intromet at his own hand. Obs. secundo, That of old, all Decreets were under the Kings Wax, that is to say, His Seal; and till of late, and the last Institu∣tion of the Session, all Decreets, even of the Session, were under the Quarter-Seal. OBserve, That all Scotland is divided in Royalty and Regality. The Royalty is that which was Judged by the Kings imme∣diat Judges,ACT 10. as Sheriffs, and they are here and else-where, call'd the Lords of the Royal. THese who were Excommunicated, were denunced Rebels, and Letters of Caption raised against them; and this Act, as to this point,ACT 11. is founded upon cap. 6th. Stat. Rob. 3d. and is morefully explained, Act 53. Parl. 3. Ja. 6. Where these Letters are appointed to be raised by the Authority of the Council, after 40. days are expired from the date of the Excommunication. Nota. This is the first Act that speaks of Appryzing of Lands, and it was done then at the Mercat Cross, in the same way that Moveables were then, and are yet poyndable. Nota. THe punishment of such as break the Peace, is left Arbi∣trary by this Act,ACT 12. and by this Act, Justices of the Peace are ordained (Irenarchae by the Civil Law,) of which there are whole Titles in that Law. VId. Sup. Act 3d. Parl. 1. Ja. 1. As also by this Act, it is clear,ACT 13. that Forfaultors for Rebellion were only to be led before the Parliament, for it is here said, that they shall be puni∣shed by the advice of the Three Estates; but now open Rebels, rysing in Armes, may be Tryed and Forfaulted by the Justices, by the Act. 11th. Parl. 2d. Ch. 2d. ACT 14.THis was Statuted before, as to Murder, C. 17. l. 3d. R. M. by a Trespassour justified in this Act, is mean't a Person con∣demned by Law or Justice, and it is oft so mean't in all old Laws. ACT 15.THere are now no Wardens in the Borders, but these affaires are manadged by Commissions from the King, cal'd Com∣missioners for the Borders. ALL Officers offending wilfully, are to lose their Offices for a Year,ACT 16. by this Act, but this Act is not the only punishment, for if a Judge execut a man wilfully, he will die for it; and a Judge being partial, or refusing to do Justice, is to be punished Ri∣gorously, Ja. 1. Parl. 2d. Act 45. and if he be Faulty, or Negligent, he loses his Office; if it be Temporal for a Year; or
is to be Suspended from it, if it be Heretable; Ja. 2d. Parl. 14. Act. 76. vid. Ja. 3d. Par. 5. Act 27. & Ja. 3d. Parl. 14. Act. 105. And the punishment of Judges offending in their Offices, is now Arbitrary, suitable to the nature of the Offence. TAcks, which before this Act were only Personal Rights,ACT 17. and were only valid against the granter; are by this Act (for encouraging Tennents to improve their Rooms by Tacks, and for the security of Poor Labourers) made Reall Rights, and defend against all Singular Successors, that is to say, the Buyer, or the Superior of Lyfrent Escheats, or Compryzers, or Donators to Bastardies, or Ultimus Haeres; but if the Land fall in the Superi∣ors hands, through Ward, the Tack sleeps, and reverts again at the expiration of the Ward. Vid. Obs. on Act 26. Parl. 3d. Ja. 4th. and they will defend against Donators to Forfaultors, though the Tack be not confirmed, if it be Set for an ordinary Dutie, and without design to prejudge the Fisk, as was found in the Case of General Dalʒiel contra the Tennents of Caldwall, 28. January, 1674. For though the Rubrick sayes, that the Buyer shall keep the Tacks, yet the Act bears, in whose hands soever they come; and as no Tacks-men craved ever a Confirmation to Defend against Forfaulting; So it would shake louse all poor Labourers Securities, if they were not Secure against such delinquences; and might pro∣bably prejudge much the Kings interest, by tempting them to fol∣low their Master, if they knew that they behoved to be Forfault∣ed by his Crime. This Decision agrees with Craig, pag. 206. and a Decision 1570. Hume of Manderstoun; But the Council did justly think, that this Decision could not defend the Tacks∣man of a Castle from giving it up to the KING, since Fortalices are not made for labouring the ground, and therefore also Summar Warnings are allowed from them on six days. Though this Act be only conceived in favours of Labourers of the Ground, yet it is extended so, as to defend all Tacks-men, whether of Tenements within Town, (though the Act seems only to be made in favours of poor Labourers of the Ground), or of Casualities; such as Salmond-fishing, Coal-heughs, Coal-work; &c. and generally it extends to all Tacks, but not to Rentals, for these are Tacks for Grassumes and Entries, and so for small Duties; pro∣vyding alwayes these Tacks be cled with Possession, for Possession is the same thing to Tacks, That Seasines are to Alienations, and of old some Tacks had Seasines, or Instruments of Possession, but neither was necessary, nor is now usual, but Possession is so far necessary, that the last Tack, with the first Possession is preferred; and the reason why they used Seasins then, being to make the Tack Reall, and to defend against Singular Successors; this was no more used after this Act of Parliament, by which Possession makes a Tack a Reall-Right, but a Tack is preferred to an Appry∣zing, though the Appryzing was led before the Tack was cloathed with Possession, since the Lands were Denunced after the Date of the Tack, March, 1628.
Since Tacks are only declared valid against Singular Successors, by this Act; Therefore Obligations not to remove a Ten∣nent, will not be sustained against a Singular Successor, albeit it be exprest in the Tack, though that as a Personal Obligment be valid against the Setter, and his Heirs; For if this were sustained, the Buyer would be thereby debarred from using and improving his Propertie, as he thought fit, contra naturam dominij: And that it is not of the nature of a Tack, is clear from this, because Tacks must have a certain ish, which this has not, though the Obligati∣on should bear not to remove till Money Lent at the Setting of the Tack were payed, 15. June 1664. Thomson contra Reid, and for the same reason, a Tack set to one during his Lifetime, with express provision to receive the Tacks-mans Heirs as kindly Ten∣nents, for payment of the accustomed Tack-dutie, will not be valid against a Singular Successor, as wanting a certain ish; al∣beit the Tacks-men offer to restrict the Tack to the Life of an Heir allenarly, 2. March, 1626. And a Tack set from 5. Years to 5: years. upon payment of the old Dutie, was not sustained against a Sing∣ular Successor, 26. July, 1631. But Tacks are valid, though they bear no special time of Entrie, since the present time is in the Construction of Law presumed to be the time of Entrie in that Case, 4. December, 1629. As also since a Tack must have a certain Tack-Dutie, as well as a certain ish; Therefore, where the Tack con∣tains not a certain Tack-dutie it is not valid against a Singular Successor, and thus a Tack bearing, that a Tacks-man should retain the Annualrent of 600. merks, for the Tack-dutie would not have been valid against a Singular Successor, be∣cause, in that case, there would nothing have been payable to the Singular Successor, yet if the least superplus had remained over the payment of the Annualrent, though it had not exceeded one pennie, the Tack would have been valid, because there would have been in that case a Tack-dutie, 15th June, 1664. Thomson contra Reid; and for the same reason, a discharge of the Tack-dutie before hand, though for an onerous cause; and though the discharge was in the bodie of the Tack, will not Defend a∣gainst a Singular Successor; and this very Statute bears, that these Tacks shall be valid to the Tennent for sicklike Maill as they took them, for 31. January, 1627. Ross contra Blair; and there∣fore it being controverted whether a Tack set to a Creditor where∣in he was to have Retention of the Tack-dutie, aye and till he were payed, and relieved of the Sums due to him, should be sus∣tained against a Singular Successor, it was found, 11th. December, 1671. Currie contra Oliphant, that the Tack was to be sustained, because the Retention was to be allowed, by an expresse Clause in the Bodie of the Tack it self, and not by a Paper a part, and because the Tacks-man was to pay a dozon of Hens, and another of Capons by and attour the Sums that he was to retain, and was to relieve the Setter of the publick Burdens, which was to be in place of a Tack-dutie; but though this may hold where the Tack bears
the Sums expresly, whereof the Tacks-man is to have Retention; yet it were very dangerous to allow Tacks bearing only in gene∣ral; that the Tacks-man should retain his Tack-dutie till he were payed, and Relieved of what Sums were due to him, and for which he stood engaged; and if this were allowed, no Singular Suc∣cessor could know even by Production of the Tack whether there were any superplus due, which might be in place of a Tack-dutie, and it cannot be denyed, but that the first design of this Statute, was to continue Tacks, the Tacks-man paying the true Dutie, and therefore this Act sayes; They shall be valid for sicklike Mail as they took them for, and Craig pag. 205. sayes, Si assedatio facta fuerit, nec certam contineat mercedem, non valet ex jure & si eadem merces assignata sit calono, assedatio non valet; And therefore a Tack for 36. lib. of Dutie, bearing, That the Tacks-man should retaine the Tack-dutie for Reparations, was not sustained, in so far as concerned the Reparati∣ons, though the Reparations were necessary, nor is there any ta∣cite Hypothetick in our Law for Reparations, as in the Civil Law; but if the Singular Successor had known of such a Clause, in the Tack, the Lords inclined to think that the same had been obligator against him; and yet a Singular Successor is not obliged to consider a prior Seasine, except it be Registrated, or a prior Disposition, nor any Assigney a prior Assignation 5. February 1680. Rae contra Finlason. By the Civil Law, Tacks were not valid against Singular Suc∣cessors, l. 9. C. de locato, but the Law of Holland agrees with this Statute, Neolstad: decis: 30. THis Act was thought to have been in Desuetude,ACT 18. till it reviv∣ed by a Decision, Feb. 1666. Lord Lee contra Mark Porthouse, but it is yet so to be understood, as that the Land set in Tack, must be valued according to what it was worth when the Land was Wodset; for if the Land be improved by the Wodsetter, it were unjust, that the Wodsetter should lose thereby, and there∣fore a Wodsetter improving Land, will not lose his Tack, though the Land become worth more than twice the Tack-dutie, and though it would seem, that there is a contradiction in this Act because it sayes in the first Part, That if any man has Wodset Lands, and syne takes them for long time after the Land be quit out, for half Mail, or near there∣by, that these Tacks shall not be keeped, but if they beset for the very Mail, or near thereby; yet the answer is, that this Law was so worded, to show that the Parliament designed, that Tacks after Wodset should not be keeped after Wodsets are Redeemed, except they be set for a Tack-dutie, somewhat proportionable to the worth of Land; and because this could not precisely be determined, there∣fore by comparing these two expressions; It is clear, that such Tacks after Wodsets are to be sustained if they be set for more than the half of the Real-dutie, though they be not for the full Dutie.
This Act is in effect, but an exception from the former Act, which having appointed all Tacks to be valid against singular Suc∣cessors. This Act begins, But if Lands be Wodset, and the Hereor Granter of the Wodset be obliged to grant long Tacks for an unconside∣rable Duty, after the Lands are Redeemed, these Tacks shall not be kept. and therefore it may be argued, that this Act should only defend against the Setter, but not against singular Successors, because the preceeding Act, from which it is an exception, was only conceiv'd to secure against singular Successors. But to this it is answer'd, that the for∣mer Act needed not secure against the Granters, for they were ever, and still are Sufficient against them; and this Act runs not against singular Successors, but in general, declares such Tacks null, as Exor∣bitant and Usurary, and so should be null against all; but if there be a valuable consideration to clear, that they are not Forc'd and Exorbitant, they will be sustain'd, as in the case, Polwart contra Hume, January 21. 1662. where it was found, that a Tack for a Dewty, far within the worth, to be granted after Re∣demption, was valid, because it was by one Brother to ano∣ther, who might have given it for a Patrimony, and the Bro∣ther who got the Wodset, was excluded by a Liferenter thirty six years. Thir Tacks who are to begin after the Redemption of Lands Wodset, are valid against singular Successors, though they be not cloathed with Possession, prior to the singular Successors Right, because they are a part of the Reversion, and not because they could not begin till the Lands were Redeem'd; for if that were a good reason, then a Tack whereof, the Entry is deferr'd, for several years, should be valid against the singular Successor, who had got a Disposition of the Lands, long after the setting of the Tack, though before the Tack was cloathed with Possession, which is not true; and if it were true, since Tacks are not to be registrated, no man should know with what Tacks Lands are burdened, for this can be known no otherwise but by Possession. These Tacks which are to follow Redemption, are valid, though they be not contained in the Wodset, if they be of the same Date with the Wodset and Reversion, as Hadingtoun Observes; but in this case it may be doubted, whether these Tacks ought not to be Registrated, since all eeks to Reversion are to be Registrated, or else how can a singular Successor know them; and yet it is otherwise in Tacks, which are to follow Redemption of Annualrents, for as an Annualrent is different from the Land, it being but a Servitude upon the Land, so the Possession of the one cannot in Law be constructed to be the Possession of the other.
VId. Stat. 2d Rob. 1. c. 12. But now Spuilʒies are pursu'd before the Lords or Sheriffs, as other Civil Actions.ACT 19. There are many severe Acts in this Kings Parliaments against Spuilʒies, because there were many then committed by the Douglasses and others. FEinʒied Fools, and Bards, and Sornars, and such like Runners,ACT 21. are by this Act to be Imprison'd, and have their Ears nailed to the Trone for the first Fault, and to be Hang'd for the next; and such as feinʒie themselves to be Dumb, are punishable by the general words of this Act, or others such like Runners. But it may be doubted, if such punishments infer'd argumento legis, can be extended beyond an arbitrary punishment; and yet the fein∣zing ones self Dumb, thereby to draw Money from the people, is species falsi. THe buying and keeping of Victual to a Dearth,ACT 22. is a Crime in all Nations, and is punish'd with us, as Regrating; by this Act it is punish'd as Usury, and by Escheating the Victual: and yet this punishment has never been practis'd, but the ordinary course to prevent this Crime is, that either the secret Council sets prices, in cases of foreseen Dearth, or else the Magistrates use in their re∣spective Towns, to cause break open the Doors where such Victu∣al is kept, and sell it at convenient prices, which is Warranted by the 29 Act 4 Parl. Ja. 5. Vid. crim. pract. tit. Forestallers. THe escheating of old Corn-stacks,ACT 23. that are kept longer than Ʒuil, was found to be in Desuetude, at the Justice-air in Jedburgh, 1669. and the first part of the Act, ordaining all Victu∣al bought by private persons, more than will entertain their Fami∣lies for that Cropt, to be therefore Escheat, is also in Desuetude, this was punish'd in the Civil Law, per. l. Jul. de annonâ, and is pu∣nish'd tanquam crimen extraordinarium, l. 6. ff. de extraor: crim: and such as are guilty of it, were called Dardanarij, or revenditores, Tholos: cap: 135. num. 10. NOt only such as keep out their Houses upon publick accounts are punishable as Traitors,ACT 24. but even these who keep out their Houses for private Quarrels, if they be Charged by Letters from the Council, to render them as use is by Heraulds, they are also punish∣able as Traitors, in case of contempt; but if these who keep out their Houses upon private Feids, do thereafter yield them, the keeping them out is only punishable arbitrarly, and not as Treason; not only are such as keep out their Houses immediatly against the King, executed as Traitors, as we see in Robert Steuart's case, who was Executed January 5. 1615. But such as hound them out to keep their Houses, are Executed as Traitors; and thus the Earl of Orknay was Executed, for hounding out his Son, February 1. 1615.
Though hounding out be not exprest in this Act, for hounding out is still Art and Part; But the Justices refused, February 2. 1674. In Assints Case, to sustain the Garisoning of Assints House, to in∣fer Treason, except it was Garisoned after the Publication of the Letters of Fire and Sword, and that the Garisoning of it before, did only infer Deforcement, it being commanded to yield by the Sheriff, in the Kings Name; By which it seems, that Garisoning Houses, to defend against Execution of the Law, infers not Trea∣son, except it be done, either upon a publick account, or after raising and publishing Letters of Fire and Sword. 2do, Some ar∣gue from Act, that since the assailing of Houses, where the Kings Person is, shall be repute Treason, if it be done without consent of the three Estates, that therefore it is lawful to assault Houses, or rise in Arms, with consent of the three Estates; But this is a great mistake, for no opposition to, or Invading of the King, can be justified by a Warrand from the three Estates; and the meaning of this Act is, That though it be pretended, that the King is Prison∣er in any Castle, it is not lawful for any private person, upon that pretext, to raise Armies and Invade that place, without authority of Parliament; For it is dangerous to make private persons Judges in such considerable Cases. And the rysing in Arms, or defending Castles, on what pretext soever, is declar'd Treason by the 5 Act 1 Par. Ch. 2. The occasion of this Act was, because this King had been twice kept in Castles in His Minority, once by the Chancel∣lour Sir William Creighton, and thereafter by Sir Alexander Living∣ston, Governour; and at both times endeavours were us'd to besiege the Castles of Edinburgh and Stirling, where he then was, Vid. obser. on 5 Act 1 Par. Ch. 2. ACT 25.BY this Act, Regalities returning to the King in Property, viz either by Sale or Forefalture (for the Kings property is never erected in a Regality, but in a Stewartry) shall be judg'd by the Sheriffs, and the ordinary Judges; and ordinarly when Regali∣ties return to the King, they are expresly supprest, and Erected of new in Stewartries, as Orknay, Act 13 Par. 2 Ch. 2. Obser. That regulariter, these who dwell in Regalities are not sub∣ject to the Sheriff, vid. Act 43 Par. 11 Ja. 2. And Erections of Re∣galities do ordinarly bear a power to Repledge. ACT 27.THe meaning of this Act is, That the Justice Clerk shall not re∣veal who raises Summonds, or obtains Warrands for appre∣hending Malefactors, &c. Least also the Malefactors, or Defen∣ders escape, before they be cited or apprehended; as also, that when any man is Delated for one Cryme, the Justice-Clerk change not the pursuit, and raise it for another Cryme, and whereas it is said, That it shall not be lawful to him to translate such Actions, ex∣cept it be for the better to the King; the meaning is, that if the In∣former ignorantly Inform in a great Cryme, as if it were a small Cryme, as if he should Inform only that to be a Ryot, which is Treason, the Justice-Clerk may raise the Pursuite as for Treason.
It is clear, that since by this Act the name of the giver up of Ditty in the Porteous Roll is to be conceal'd (which is done for encouraging Persons to delate) that therefore Treason should not be given up in a Porteous Roll, or else the paena talionis is lost, nor do I remember, that Treason was taken up of old so, and if this were allow'd, dis∣contented Tennents, or Servants knowing they were secure against talion might be induc'd easily to destroy their Masters. THis Act appoints the Strickers of false Coyn to be punished as Law will, and by the Act, 124. Parl. 7th. Ja. 5.ACT 28. It is ordained, That they who falsify Money, or counterfits the Kings Irons shall be punished according to the old Law, and yet I find no Law before that time, specifying the punishment in general; For the 41. Act Parl. 5. Ja. 3. punishes only with Death, the Home-bringers of Black-money, That is to say, Copper-money and by the Act 70. Parl. 9. Q. M. The Home-bringers of the false Coyn should be delated, and the Delaters is to have the half of all his Goods Moveable, and immoveable, but though the puni∣shment of Treason be not specified in any express Act; yet it ap∣pears, that it infers Forfaulture, for else the Revealer could not have the half of the Offenders Goods immoveable, and I find one Drummond burnt for False Money forging, the 27. November, 1601. And his Brother Patrick Murray burnt also, for Art and Part, red counsel and concealing the Treasonable Forging, Coyning, and Out-putting of false Money, and the Sentences upon False Coyn, bear ordinarily Forfalture. vid. supra Act 49. Parl. 3. Ja. 1. But it were expedient to make an express Act in this case. THis Act is now in Desuetude;ACT 29. and it was sounded upon the missio in possessionem per primum & secundum decretum, so much Treated of in the Civil Law; but in place of all these are come our Compryzings, and Adjudications, whereby, if the Debitor pay not, the Creditor Compryses, and is put in Possession, and if he Redeem not within the Legal, then the Land belongs absolutly to the Creditor without Redemption. King IAMES the second, Parliament 7. BY this Act, The Home-bringing of Poyson is discharged,ACT 30. under the Pain of Treason; and yet I find none punished as Traitors upon this, and John Dick, in Anno 1649. For poysoning his Brother and Sister, is only executed, but not For∣faulted, but I believe he has had no Lands to Forfault; nor do I see how a Judge can proceed less severely in this case, than the Law appoints; especially, seing the Act is so express, that this shall remain as an aye lasting Statute. And the reason why the Law is severer against Poisoning than Murder, is, because no man can
defend himself against Poison; and Poison uses never to be given, but by persons who have some Trust, and so is Murder under Trust, which is likewise Treason by our Law, and yet it was only punish'd Capitally by the Civil Law, l. 1. §. 1. ff. ad L. Cornel de si∣car. Though this Act discharges the bringing home of any Poison, for any manner of use; Yet Apothecaries are allow'd to bring it home, for their Medecines, and this is likewise allow'd by the Common Law, and Doctors; and there is a venenum bonum, as well as malum; and though buying and in-bringing of Poison, be declared Treason by this Act, though it be not given; yet by the Opinion of the Doctors, it is only punishable in that case, paenâ extraordinariâ Gothofred: §. venenum. num. 21. THis Act against Strangers bringing home Poison, has not been observ'd amongst us,ACT 31. and it is hard to punish Strangers for a Law that they are not oblig'd to know; and it appears they can∣not be lyable, except they be advertised by some Magistrate, that there is such a Law; and that therefore they should carry back these Commodities; and yet if a Stranger should actually give Poi∣son, he would be punishable, though no such Act as this had been made, since every man is oblig'd to know, that it is unlawful to give Poison. King JAMES the second, Parliament 8. ACT 36.EIther it is provided that Wodset Lands shall be Redeem'd for payment of ordinary Money of Scotland, and then it must be pai'd according to the rate the Money gives at the time, when the Redemption was us'd, and not according to the rate it gave at the time when the Wodset was granted; as for instance, if Lands be Wodset for ten thousand pounds, and there∣after the Money be cry'd up, so that the Dollar that was fifty six shilling, is to give a Crown; or a Shilling is to give a Merk; in that case, the ten thousand Pounds is to be Consign'd, according to the rate as the Money gave, though the Wodsetter pay'd moe Dollars and Shillings, than he is to get back: This holds not on∣ly in Redemption, by vertue of this Act, but in all payments, as is clear by Act 19 Par. 3. Ja. 3. and Act 68 Par. 8 Ja. 3. But if the Money to be Consign'd, be tailʒied Money (that is to say, a specifick kind of Money, from the Word Talis) as for instance, five thousand Merks in Rose-nobles, or the like specifick kind of Money, then if so much Money cannot be had of that kind in specie, it may be pay'd in as much of the present current Coyn, as will answer to that kind of Money, being of the same value as the Gold and Silver specifi'd in the said Reversion, conform to the Common Law, which the Lords interpret to be payment, ac∣cording to the price, and value that the said tailʒied Money
was worth, the time of granting the Obligation, March 3. 1623. King IAMES the second, Parliament 9: THis Act discharging the keeping of old Stacks of Corn;ACT 37, 38. and the next Act discharging the Girnaling of Corn, seem to have been Temporary, and the Justices have refus'd to sustain Dittay upon either. THis Act discharging the keeping up of more Victual than will serve a mans Family for a Quarter of a Year,ACT 39. and that they shall present the superplus to the Mercat within nine Dayes, seems likewise to have been but Temporary, because of the scarcity that then was; and at any time of scarcity, the Magistrates of any Burgh Royal are in use, and may lawfully (as some think) break up the Doors of Victual-houses, within Burgh, and ordain the Victual to be sold at competent rates; if the Merchants be either unwilling, or absent; but if the Privy Council be sitting, it is safer to make ap∣plication to them. King JAMES the second, Parliament 11. OBser. 1o. This is the first formal Act of Annexation,ACT 41. and though it bear only, That it shall not be lawful to the King to Analʒie any part of His annexed Property in Fee, Heretage, or Frank-tenement, without consent of Parliament; yet this extends to long Tacks; for it is not lawful to set even long Tacks of the annex'd Property, and if it were, then the de∣sign of Annexation, might easily be eluded, and the Crown im∣poverish'd. Albeit this Act declares it lawful to the King, to intromet with any of the annex'd Property, without Process of Law; and by the 203 Act Par. 14 Ja. 6. Such as had, or should intromet for the future, by the Kings Command, with annex'd Property, are secur'd: Yet by our present Custom, the King uses to Reduce such Rights, and not to intromet with them brevi manu. Obser. 2o. That because this Act bears, That the annex'd Pro∣perty cannot be Dissolv'd, except by Deliverance, and Decreet of the whole Parliament, and for great seand and reasonable Causes of the Realm; Therefore a Dissolution contain'd in a Confirmation of the annex'd Property, after it is Dispon'd, is not sufficient, but is Reduceable, since Dissolutions should be specially Read and Con∣sidered: Whereas, Confirmations and Ratifications, pass in course without Observation: Likeas, Disposition of the annex'd Proper∣ty,
made before the Dissolution, are declar'd null by the 236 Act 15 Par. Ja. 6. This was so decided, February 25. 1669. The King's Advo∣cat contra the Earl of Mortoun; and by the 13 Act 2 Par. Ch. 2. That Decreet bearing this Interpretation of all former Annexations is Ra∣tified, and it is appointed, That Orknay shall not be Dissolv'd without the Advice of the whole Parliament, and for great and weighty Causes, relating to the publick interest of the whole Kingdom, to be consi∣dered before the Disposition, least by a previous Disposition, the Parliament should be pre-determined in their deliberation; and therefore it would appear, that where there is a Disposition grant∣ed before Dissolution; not only is that Dissolution null, as being filius ante patrem; so that it could not make the preceeding Dispo∣sition to Convalesce, even from the date of the Dissolution: But that a posterior Disposition, relating to that Dissolution, would be null, since by the first Disposition, the Parliament is once pre-de∣termined in the Deliberation; and therefore it would be fit, that such Dissolutions should expresly bear this difficulty, and dispense therewith, per expressum. It is here also fit to observe, that Dispositions of Rights, made of annex'd Property, in the Kings Minority, though Ratified in Parliament, and after the Kings Majority, are null; albeit any other Deed done by a Minor, in his minority, is valid, if Ratifi'd in Majority; For though it may be alleadg'd, that the reason of this Speciality is, because Ratifications pass in Course, and the Grounds are not considered, as ought to be in Annexations. Yet the true Reason of the Speciality must be, that it is easie to ob∣tain Ratifications of such null Rights; and therefore the Parlia∣ment, to preclude all from seeking them, has declar'd, That they shall not be valid when obtain'd; or else, because a lawful Dissolution is pre-requisit, and ought to preceed a lawful Disposition of annex'd Property; And therefore, though the Ratification might supply the defect of the prior Disposition, yet it cannot supply the nullity arising from the want of the former Dissolution. Obser. 3o. That when any Dispositions are Reduc'd, the per∣son who took such unlawful Dispositions, must restore the bygone Mails and Dewties from the very date of his Intromission; for his Right being contrary to an express Law, he is not bonae fidei posses∣sor nec facit fructus suos. And this Act bears, That the Takers shall refound all Profits, for the time they had the Lands; so that the Pos∣sessor has neither the benefit of a possessory Judgement, though he has possest seven years; nor should such Rights prescrive, being null, and contrary to an express Law, & quod non est alienabile non est praescriptibile; nor doth the Possessor sacere fructus consumptos suos, not being bonae fidei possessor; and yet the Lords shunn'd to de∣cern such as had intrometted with the Rents of Orknay, lyable in repetition of the bygone Mails and Dewties, when their Rights were Reduc'd upon this Act, because it had not been in observance, as some Lords affirm'd; and there was a most probable ground of g∣norance in that case.
AS the Wardens could not cognosce upon these Crimes,ACT 42. which are call'd The Points of the Crown; so neither can the Com∣missioners for the Borders, who are now come in their place. The meaning of the Exception made in this Act is, That tho the War∣dens cannot generally cognosce upon points of the Crown, i Trea∣son, Fire-raising, &c. Yet they may, if such a Tryal be necessary, for conservation of the Truce: That is to say, if these Crimes be committed by Common Robbers upon the Borders. THough this Act discharge any Regalities to be granted other∣wise, than by Deliverance of Parliament;ACT 43. yet they are or∣dinarly granted by Signatures under the Kings Hand, and a De∣fence propon'd by the Vassals upon this Act, was repell'd by the Exchequer, 1664. at the passing of a Signature, containing a new Ere∣ction: But I see not how this could be Repell'd by the Lords of the Session; the Act is so express, and so reasonable; for the Erecti∣on of a Regality, makes a new Justiciar, who has very great power; and a Lord of Regality is Regulus, a little King, and takes off the People from an immediat dependence upon the King. Likeas, the Lord of Regality gets Right by the Erection, to the single Escheats, which prejudgeth both King and People, and is expresly contrary to the Act 69. Par. 11 Ja. 6. Discharging the giving away the Kings Casualities in great, and they prejudge much the prior, and establisht Rights of Sheriffs, subject the people to moe Jurisdictions, and by multiplying Registers, distract and render uncertain all Buy∣ers, and others who are oblig'd to know the condition of their Debitors, and so much is the King concern'd in Erections of such Regalities, that they are expresly Revock'd, by all our Kings in their general Revocations. Though by this Act, it would ap∣pear, that Regalities ought to be null, if they be not originally granted in Parliament; yet a posterior Confirmation in Parliament is by our Decisions found sufficient, though it may be alleadg'd that Confirmations pass in course, without exact consideration; where∣as such Regalities ought not to pass so slightly, since they esta∣blish a summar Jurisdiction over the Lives of the Subjects; and such previous Grants do pre-determine the Parliament in their free Voting; and therefore should no more be regarded than they are in the case of annex'd Property, vid, not. on Act 41. Supra. and on Act 94. Par. 6 Ja. 1. NOtwithstanding of this Act, several Sheriff-ships are granted in Fee since this Act, and therefore are Reduceable;ACT 44. but it is very observable, that though these two Prohibitions fell under the Parliaments consideration at once, yet the Parliament dis∣charged only Regalities, without consent of Parliament, but they discharged Heretable Offices simply, as tending for ever to fix the dependence of a whole Shire upon an Subject; whereas Regalities are only over a mans own Lands, or his Vassals; But Sheriff-ships
are over other men, and were it not for this, it may seem that the first Act concerning Regalities, was unnecessary, since this Act would have serv'd for both, vid. observ. on the Act 4 Parl. 18 Jac. 6. ACT 45.THe Rubrick and Body of this Act being compar'd, makes Theft to be capital; for the Rubrick bears, That Sornars shall be punished by Death; and the Act sayes, That Sornars shall be punished as Thieves; therefore Thieves should be punish'd Capitally, but we have no positive and specifick Law for punishing Theft Ca∣pitally. ACT 46.ORdinary Actions within Towns, are not Judged now by the Counsel of the Burgh, as this Act requires, but by the Baillies. ACT 47.THis Act, as to the Habit of Members of Parliament, is in Desuetude, for the Dukes, Earls and Lords, wear all Scar∣let Cloath, with Bars of Ermine; the Duke has five Bars, the Earl four, and the Lord three, and the Burrows have no special Habit. The Fore-speakers for Cost, here mention'd, and who are to have Green-habits, were the Advocats, who were allow'd to Plead be∣fore the Parliament, and this Habit for them is in Desuetude, for they Plead before the Parliament; without any Gown, or special Habit. They are call'd Fore-speakers for Cost, because they may speak for Money; and Advocats in our old Journal-Books, are still call'd Prolocutors, or Fore-speakers; But Friends are also in the Journal-Books, call'd Prolocutors; and therefore Advocats are here distinguish'd from them, by the words Prolocutors for Cost. King JAMES the second, Parl. 12. ACT 48.THe meaning of this is, that Bone-fires (call'd here Bails) be made at several places, to forwarn the people of the approach of the Enemy, this is here call'd Taikenings. ACT 49.THough where Treason is committed, the Committers are to be imprison'd, and cannot be let out upon Caution, because the Crime is not Bailable; yet where there is only a presumption of Rebellion, though it may be violent, the party may be let out up∣on Security, for else a person might be punish'd without probation; for Imprisonment is a severe punishment. Likeas, by the lib. 4. R. M. cap. 1. num. 3, 8, 9, & 11. It is there said, That he who is accus'd of Treason, may be let out upon Caution, and if he want Caution, he is to be imprison'd: And yet by this Act, it is appointed, that per∣sons slander'd, or suspect of Treason, shall remain in Firmance till they be try'd by an Assize, and this last is now in use; But there must
still some previous Tryal be taken, by Precognition and Examina∣tion, before any man can be Imprison'd, or his goods secur'd for Treason, it being most unjust to use such severities, without very good ground. Because this Act of Parliament sayes, That if persons be slandered for Treason, they shall be tane, and their persons warded therefore. It was given as an Instruction by the Council to the Circuit Court 1683. That such as compear'd and desir'd to go to the knowledge of an Assize, might be Bail'd, and let out upon Caution because this Act struck only against such as would not appear, but needed to be taken; and yet this is not universally true, for if there be good grounds from a previous Tryal by two Witnesses, to suspect the person guilty, it is not just to admit Caution, and the true speciali∣ty upon which the Council founded that Resolution, was, because above four thousand were delated in that Porteous Roll for Trea∣son, and it was almost impossible to Imprison all. The Acts 50, 51, 52, 53 are abrogated by the Union of England,ACTS 50, 51, 52, & 53 and so is the 56; but though they be abrogated, yet the follow¦ing Observations may be made from them. Obser. 1o. From the Act 52. that the supplying the Scottish Towns, then under the Command of the English, is declar'd Treason, as is in general, the assisting of all Enemies to the State, vid. Ja. 1 Par. 13 cap. 141. Ja. 2 Par. 12 Act 50. For though we have no speci∣al Statute, declaring the assisting of Enemies of the State to be Trea∣son; Our Acts running generally against such as assist declar'd Trai∣tors, or assure with English men in particular; yet it is Treason by the Common Law, l. 3. ff. ad l. Jul. Maj. And such of our Nation as continued in the Dutch Service, during the War with Holland, in anno 1666. were forfaulted as Traitors. By the second part of this Act, it is declared Treason, for any who ride with the Warden of the Marches, or any other Chif∣tain, to go away with any manner of Goods, till they be thirded, that is to say, till they be divided: for one third, by the Law of the Borders, belongs to the King; a second third to the War∣den, or Chiftain; and a third to the Apprehenders: For under∣standing whereof, it is fit to know, that Lands, when taken from Enemies, become the Kings, or the Common-wealths, by the Laws of all Nations, but Moveables by the Law of GOD, Deut. chap. 20. vers. 14. Josh. chap. 8. vers. 1. when taken, were divided equally amongst the Takers: But sometimes there was a Division, the one half falling to such as Fought; the other, to these that stayed with the Baggage; and a fiftieth part of their part, who Fought not, was dedicated to the LORD; whereas one of five hundred was only Consecrated out of their part who Fought, Num. 31. verse 50. At present Grotius distinction, lib. 3. de jur. Bell. c. 6, 11, 12. Is generally observ'd, whereby if Moveables be taken
by a party led on by an Officer, who only knew the design, then the Souldiers get no share, but all falls to the publick; but if the Moveables be taken in Excursions, or free Adventures, they belong to the Takers: And Voet. c. 5. n. 19. de jure milit Sets down the several pro∣portions, whereby Goods are divided amongst a Party and Offi∣cers in Holland; where, if the Party exceed 50. the Captain gets a tenth, the Leiutenent a fifth, the Ensign a third, the Quarter-master a double portion, the Serjeant one and an half, and each Souldier a single share; but still the Horse get double of what is due to the Foot. ACT. 53.BY this Act, which is a continuation of the former, it is de∣clared Capital, for any man to take from another, Goods, or Prisoners, which they are in Possession of; from which it is ob∣servable in War; that Possession or Capture gives only right thus, Inst. de rer. div. Par. 17. It is said, Item quae ex hostibus capiuntur statim jure gentium capientium fiunt; and therefore a Ship being pretended to be∣long to the King, because one of the Kings Friggots had beat the Convoy that Guarded her, and was in pursuit of another, and had taken both her and this Ship, here controverted, if the Privateer had not interveen'd, and it being answer'd, that an actual Capture could only establish the Property; and this Statute requir'd Posses∣sion. The Lords before answer, granted mutual Probation, for try∣ing whether this Ship could have escaped from the Friggot, if the Pri∣vateer had not taken her. ACT 54.IT is Treason to raise a Fray wilfully in the Kings Host, for this wilfully done, shews a Design to ruine the Army, and I find that the Master of Forbes was Hang'd for raising a Fray in the Kings Host at Jedburgh, July 14. 1537. The words without Cause, are added here, because if a man doing his duty was the occasion of raising a Fray, he ought not to be punish'd, as if an Officer pu∣nishing a Mutineer, should by that occasion, raise a Fray; this would not be punishable. By the Civil Law, such as were Au∣thors of Sedition in an Army, (for a Fray is properly Sedition) were punish'd as Murderers, l. 3. §. 4. ff. ad l. Cornel. de sicariis; But if the Common-wealth was in danger, they were punish'd as Traitors, as in this Statute, and in l. 1 ff. ad l. Jul. Maj. and they are eve∣ry where now punish'd by Death, Sand. Decis. 165. tit. 9. des. 12. vid. Voet. de jure milit. c. 4. num. 40. And if the Authors cannot be known all involv'd in the Guilt, are forc'd to cast Lots, Voet. ibidem. Sometimes also, if the Sedition was carried on, sine gra∣vi tumultu & intra vociferationem, the guilty were only Casheir'd l. 3. §. 20. ff. de re militi; if the Tumult was rais'd upon pri∣vat picques or grounds; but if it was rais'd upon prejudices against the Common-wealth, or Prince, it was punish'd, even in that case, and though no actual prejudice follow'd, as Treason, d. l. 1. ff. ad l. Jul. Maj.
King IAMES the second Parliament 13. THis putting the Kingdom in a posture of Defence,ACT 56. was for∣merly ordain'd, Stat. Will. cap. 23. Stat. 1. R. 1. cap. 27 But all these Acts are now in Desuetude; and the Act concerning the Militia, is regularly come in their place; but yet the King may call for either, vid. observ. on 4 Act 1 Par. Ja. 1. By the Kings Letters, by Bailis is mean't Letters to raise Fire or Takenings for ad∣vertising the Countrey. By Out-hornes, is mean'd these who follow'd the Sheriffs, and whose Office it was to raise the Kings Horn, for warn∣ing the Countrey to assist the Kings Officers. THis Act contains what is fit to be done in time of Pestilence,ACT 57. and because it was an Affair to be Govern'd by Christian Charity; therefore the Regulation of it was referr'd to the Cler∣gy; and upon this account it is, that the Act says, The Clergy thinks, without speaking of King or Parliament, it being ordinary in our Acts of Parliament, to set down the report, without drawing it into the formality of an Act of Parliament, and thus in the 91, and 92 Acts, Parl. 13 Ja. 3. It is said, The Lords thinks it expedient, by which word, Lords, must be interpreted Lords of Articles THere was of old Distresses taken from such as came to Fairs, that is to say,ACT 59. some thing was taken to be a Surety for their good behaviour, and was deliver'd back at the end of the Fair, if the Owners committed no wrong, during the Fair. THis Act is only to be interpreted of the Fees due to the great Constable of Scotland, who is now the Earl of Errol,ACT 60. for he only can exact, during the time of Parliament; but yet that Exacti∣on by him at Fairs, in time of Parliament, is in Desuetude; and other Constables have Fees, which they exact in time of Fairs, by special Infestment, as the Constable of Dundee; and it is obser∣vable from this Act, that a long Custom of exacting Fees and Customs from the people, is not Warrantable, except either that old Custom be founded upon an old and express Infestment, or warranted by an Act of Parliament. King JAMES the second, Parliament 14. SPuilzies are here divided in Spuilʒies of Moveables, and Spuilʒies of Fee, or Heretage;ACT 61. but that improper way of speaking is, not now us'd, for the Dispossessing a man out of Heretage, is called Ejection and Ejections, are now
pursu'd before the Lords, as ordinary Actions, but not in the spe∣cial way here prescribed. That Maxim of Spoliatus ante omnia restituendus, extends to Spuilʒies, of both Moveables and Heretage. ALL those Forms of Process are to be consider'd at the Institution of the Session,ACT 62. by King James 5th. By this Act Appeals to King or Parliament, are utterly discharg∣ed; But the Question is, whether only Appeals stopping executi∣on, be hereby discharg'd: and it is alleadg'd, that Appeals were only discharg'd here, because the Session was then a Committee of Parliament, and there lyes no Appeals from the Parliament; but it seems there is likewise no Appeals from the Session, as pre∣sently Constituted, because they are invested in all the priviledges the former Session had, and that the 99 Act Parl. 6 Ja. 4. al∣lowing Appeals, after this Act must only be interpreted of Appeals from inferiour Judicatures; but even these are also in Desuetude: Whether Protestations for remeid of Law, be allowable, notwith∣standing of this Act, was Debated in Anno 1674. and the King de∣termined by his Letter in Anno 1674. That they were not to be al∣low'd to Advocats, nor Parties, after the Lords of Sessions Decisions; albeit it was alleadg'd then, that by an Act of Sederunt, in Anno 1567. Protestations for remeid of Law, were expresly excepted in the Act discharging Murmuration against the Lords; and that Le∣thingtoun, Balfour and Hope, in their Practiques, Tit. Lords of the Session, do express these as allowable; nor are they discharg'd ex∣presly by these Acts; and though neither Appeals to the Parliament, nor Protestations for remeid of Law, before them, be not now to be practised by Parties, or Advocats; yet it is not yet decided, how far the Parliament may Rescind the Decreets of the Lords; and though they might, yet it was urg'd, that it is not fit they should, since Parliaments may seem more subject to passion and factions then the Session, great men have too much influence there: and by these, and such Appeals, the sitting of Parliaments would be very much lengthen'd; and because their sitting is un∣certain, the Sentences of the Lords could not be acquiesced in as a Security, and all Pleas would be thereby both endless and expen∣sive, and there is as great reason for discharging Appeals to King and Parliament, as there was at this time; for the Lords then, though a Committee of Parliament, were not more Learn'd than the Session now; and upon these considerations the Parlia∣ment, 1661. Did by a Letter to the King, in a case betwixt Sir Thomas Hamilton and Alrud, declare that there could be no Ap∣peal from the Lords of Session. ACT 66.THis Act against Litsters, buying and selling Cloath, is ex∣tended so by the 12 Act Parl. 2 Ja. 3. That no Crafts-men may use Merchandise; and the reason of this Law is, because if they were allow'd to buy, they would make none, and so neither im∣prove themselves, nor the native Commodities of the King∣dom,
this Act is renewed by the 47th Act 1 Sessi. 1 Parl. Ch. 2d. EVery Merchant must Sail with at least, three Serplaiths of Goods, and the Serplaith contains 80 Stone of weight,ACT 67. but by the 13 Act Parl. 2 Ja. 3. It is appointed, that no man Sail without half a Last of Goods, which was introduced, because pedling Merchants having very small Stocks, were both a discredit to the Nation, and were also forc'd to sell at any rate, for they could not wait for a price; but now all such Acts are in Desuetude. Obs. That by this Act it is appointed, that none Sail or Trade but free Burgesses, which is restricted by the 11 Act Parl. 2 Ja. 3. In which it is declar'd lawful for Prelats, Lords, Barons, and Clerks, to send their own Servants; and by the 5 Act Parl. 2 Ch. 2 Sess. 3. It is declared lawful for Indwellers in Burghs of Regalities, or Baronies and others, to send abroad Corn, Cattel, Neat, Hydes, and all the Na∣tive Commodities of the Kingdom. IN all Acts for visiting Hospitals, the Chancellor is still one;ACT 69. and though by this Act, where the foundation of Hospitals cannot be found, the Remeid is refer'd to the King; Yet by the Act 10 Parl. 1 Ja. 3. It is appointed, that where the Foundation cannot be found, the Rents shall be bestow'd upon the Poor. By the Canon Law, Hospitals are not Benefices, and yet the care of them be∣long'd to the Bishop, tit. 10. quest. 2. vid. not: on Act 27 Parl. 2 Ja. 1. Supra. THis Sumptuary Law is in Desuetude,ACT 70. by Musling of Women here is mean'd, being Masked. FEues being free and gratuitous Donations, bestow'd for Service,ACT 71. it was just that the Vassal should not have liberty to sell with∣out the consent of the Granter, for else others might be obtruded upon him as Vassals, and he might want the service of that Family, which he particularly chus'd; but yet the Feudal Law allow'd the Vassal to grant a Sub-feu, which though it may seem a kind of Alienation, yet was allow'd by that Law, lib. 2. tit. 3. §. Sed eti∣am. Because in Alienations, the Superiour would have lost the Service of the first Family, and would have had but one Vassal; whereas in Sub-infeudations, the first Vassal must still remain Vassal, and be lyable to all the Casualities and Services, and the Superiour gets likewise another Vassal, viz. the Sub-vassal, a Sub-feu being likewise but Emphiteusis, the Sub-vassal is but in ef∣fect a Tennent; and therefore by this Act of Parliament, the King declares, that for better cultivating and labouring of the Kingdom, he will allow all his own Vassals to set their Lands, which they hold imme∣diatly of him in Sub-feu: and it is declar'd, that this Act shall be equivalent to a Confirmation. And these Sub-feues are by this Act on∣ly call'd Assedations; and are by the 9 Act Par 6 Ja. 4. ordain'd to
be Set for the Policy of the Realm; because, as I conceive, the Kings Vassals being thus freed from the Labouring of their own Lands, they might be the abler to serve the King in his Wars; and the Land likewise be the better Laboured, by these Sub-feuars, who could attend the Labouring thereof. Upon which Words, Our So∣veraign Lord, shall Ratifie and approve the said Assedation. It was Debated, whether a Sub-feu, set by vertue of this Act, did fall under the Forefalture of the Vassal, though it was not Confirm'd in the Person of the Sub-vassal; and it was alleadg'd, that the Sub-feu could not be quarrell'd; because the King by this Act, hav∣ing invited men to take Sub-feus, it was not just, that the Invitati∣on given by a publick Law, should become a snare; and having promis'd to ratifie and approve the Sub-feu, that promise being insert in this publick Law, was equivalent to a Confirmation; and therefore should defend against a Forefalture, as well as a Confir∣mation could have done; and though these Words were alleadg'd only to import a promise to Ratifie, which did imply, that appli∣cation should have been made for a Confirmation. Yet to this it was answer'd, that this was an Invitation, and the Words sub∣joyn'd thereto, must therefore be considered as a present Approbati∣on, especially, seing there is no time prefixt for craving of a Confirmation, nor any irritancy annex'd to the not craving thereof. It was likewise urg'd, that by the 91 Act Parl. 6. Ja. 4. This Sub-feuing should be no cause of Forefalture; and that since this Act would defend against Ward and Recognition, it should much more defend against Forefalture upon Treason, for that being a most personal crime, of which, not only the Sub-vassal is innocent, but oft-times concurs with the King, against his own Supeiour; the poor Sub-vassal ought therefore to be less troubled upon it, than upon Recognition, to which the Sub-vasal himself is somewhat accessory, because he receives the Right, upon which the Recogni∣tion is infer'd. And whereas it was urg'd, that by the 37 Act Parl. 2 Ja. 6. The Sub-vassals of the Kings Vassals, who were Forefalted at that time, are secured, if themselves were innocent; which Act had been unnecessary, if this Act had secured them, and that Act is declar'd to have been only Temporary, & pro eâ vice, by the 201 Act Parl. 14 Ja. 6. To this it was answer'd, that by this Act, such Sub-feus are only allow'd, as are set for the just avail, and all other Feus might have been quarrell'd; and therefore that Act was made to se∣cure the Sub-vassals of Forefalted Persons, whose Rights might have been quarrell'd upon that head, or else that Act has been made ad majorem cautelam, and to prevent all debate, which is most usual. Upon this Debate the Lords found, that this Sub-feu fell not un∣der the Forefalture, this general Law being equivalent to a Con∣firmation, February 12. 1674. Marquess of Huntly contra Cairu∣burrow.
It has also been Debated, whether Wodsets Feu'd out are secur'd against this Act, as well as Lands irredeemably Dispon'd, and I think they are, since a Wodset Right is as properly a Feu, as an irredeemable Right. What is meant in this Act by the competent avail; for which Ward Lands may be feu'd, is dubious, but the just avail, for which the Kings proper Lands may be feu'd, is by several Acts of Parliament, declar'd to be the Retour-dewty, or new extent; and therefore I think that the competent avail here, must also be interpreted to be the Retour-dewty, and in January 1680. betwixt the same par∣ties, it was found, that though the competent avail be the Retour-dewty, exprest in his Service; yet the Sub-vassal getting a part of the Lands feu'd to him, he ought to pay no more for the competent avail, but his proportion of his Superiours Retour-dewty▪ and that if a Charter was given him blank by his Superiour, which he fill'd up himself with a special Reddendo; the Charter was not there∣fore null, and he was only lyable in his just proportion of the said Retour'd-dewty, and the Vassal, if he pleases, may by a Process against his Superiour, get this competent avail, to which his share should extend, determin'd, and that being specifi'd in his Service, will thereafter become his Retour-dewty, though ordinarly the Sub-vassal, to prevent expence, or by mistake uses to Retour the Dewty that was payable by his Superiour, especially if the difference be not great. THe punishment of such as abuse the power of their Jurisdiction of Regality, is left arbitrary by this Act. vid. c. 14. Stat. Rob. 2.ACT 72. THis Act is Explain'd in the 96 Act 6 Parl. Ja. 4.ACT 73. BY this Act all Remissions are null,ACT 74. except the Party injur'd be Assythed, and he who produces the Remission, must either find sufficient Caution to pay the Assythment within fourty days, or to stay in Prison till the payment, and by the 155 Act 12 Parl. Ja. 6. and 136 Act 8 Parl. Ja. 6. It is provided, that if the Remision contain not an Assythment expresly in the body of it, the Remission shall be null; but because these Acts were Temporary, therefore by the 174 Act Parl 13 Ja. 6. If any Remission or Respit be granted, before the Party injur'd be first satisfi'd, the Remission is to be null; and though by that last Act, it would seem that an Assythment subsequent to the Remission, would not make the Re∣mission to convalesce; because that Act requires, that the Remissi∣on shall be null, as said is, yet the meaning of that Act seems only to be, that without an Assythment the Remission shall be null. From the same Act, exception is made of Remissions granted, for quieting the Highlands or Borders, which may be valid with∣out Assythment, Gratiâ factâ a princip nocenti non valet nisi pax sit prius habita ab haeredibus offensi, which we call a Letter of Slains, vel
nisi fiat reparatio damnorum, Plot. concil. 78. Clar. Quest. 58. num. 40. ubi traditur posse Regem tamen gratiare nocentem sine pace privati, quando damnandus elaborasset pro bono reipublicae, vid. l. non omnes §. fin. ff. de re milit. The second part of this Act relates to Remissions, for Spuilʒie or Theft, as to which, the Lords of the Session may restore the Par∣ty, and Assyth him, notwithstanding of the Remission. ACT 75.By this Act, no Free-holder can be forc'd to come to Parlia∣ment, except he hold a twenty pound Land of the King; but none can be now compell'd, and this was only in the time when all Free-holders were oblig'd to compear in Parliament, as the Kings Head-Court, nor can any now Vot in the election of the Commissioners, except they hold a 40 shilling Land of the King immediatly, or hold ten Chalders of Victual, or a 1000 pound (Feu-dewty, all deducted) off a Bishop, or Abbot formerly, and hold the same now of the King, Act 35 Par. 1 Ch. 2. But now again, since the restitution of Bishops, the Bishops represent their own Land in particular, and so their Vassals are not allow'd to sit in Parliament. vid. Act 21 Par. 3 Ch. 2. ACT 76.THe negligence so severely punish'd in Judges by this Act, must be negligentia dolosa & supina, and the distinction here ob∣serv'd, betwixt the punishment of Heretable Officers and others, is ordinary amongst the Doctors, Bald. ad l. 1. ff. de serv. fugitiv. where he says, that pro negligentia Judex removetur ab officio sed hoc non tenet in judice perpetuo Farin. Q. 3. num. 423. says, that Ma∣jores Officiales non removentur, sed minores facile removentur, by th cap. 14. Stat. Rob. 2. A negligent Judge, viz. a Baillie of Regality is to be punish'd by escheating his Moveables, and their life is to be in the Kings will. A faulty Judge is also punishable by this Act, in the same way as a negligent Judge, which must not be mean'd of the meanest fault, seing the punishment is so great; but whereas by this Act the punishment is the loss of Office for ever, if it be not Heretable; yet by the 26 Act Parl. 5. Ja. 3. The Heretable Officer lose his Office for three years; whereas this Act bears, this being lawfully prov'd, and notorly kend, we must not conclude, that a Judge may be con∣vict upon this notoriety without probation, for these two are only exegetick of one another, and the sense is, they being convict up∣on notor probation, Vid. supra observ. on Act 16 Parl. 6 Ja. 2. ACT 78.THe Form now to be follow'd in case any man should masterful∣ly possess another mans Lands is, that if violence was us'd at the entering, then the Council upon a Complaint, will restore the party dispossess'd; but if the Intrant entred in vacuam possessionem, though without any Right, he behov'd to be pursu'd before the Session, by an action of Intrusion.
K. JAMES III. Parliament I. BY this Act,ACT 2. the third of the KING'S Rents of Assyse; that is to say, the third of His Lands and Customes, belong to the Queen as her Dow∣rie, or Terce allenarly, which is conform to the Common Law of this Kingdom, by which the Wife has right to a Third of all the Lands, in which a man dies Infest, and that though she be otherwise pro∣vided, if she be not expresly secluded from it by her Con∣tract of Marriage, so that it seems the Queen would have had right to a Terce of proper Lands belonging to the King, though this Act had not been made. But now by the 10 Act Parl. 3 Ch. 2. If a Wife be provided to a particular Provision, though never so small, either in her Contract of Marriage, or in any o∣ther Write, she will be secluded from a Terce, except her Terce be expresly reserv'd to her by and attour the particular Provi∣sion. Nota, The Rents of Assize, comprehends the Kings Customes and Lands, as was found, Decemb. 9. 1466. and March 11. 1500. Ogil∣vie contra Gray. It may be doubted whether this Act was Temporary, relating only to this Queen, or if any Queen of Great-britain will have
right as Queen of Scotland, to a third of the Property, conform to this Act, since the Act seems to be reasonable in it self, and that the Queen is founded in this right by the Common Law, and if this had been only a Temporary Right, relating only to this Queen, it would not have been inserted amongst the general Laws; or at least, it would not have been generally conceiv'd, as this Act is, in these Terms, The Dowrie of the Queen, for terminus indefinitus aequiollet universali. I find, that in the 191 Act Parl. 13 Ja. 6. Queen Ann is provided to the third of the Property, but not to the third of the Customes, but that being by express paction, dero∣gats not from this Law. ACT 3.SOmetimes Benefices Ecclesiastick, were bestow'd upon secular persons, who were call'd Commendators, because the Benefice was commended and intrusted to their oversight, and they were Procuratores in rm sam & habebant tantum detentionem & possssio∣nem; but were not Proprietars, and so could not Dispone, Ro∣man. Concil. 350. And because Commendators were but Trusties or Tutors; Therefore Rights made by them, though with con∣sent of the Chapter, are no longer binding in our Law, than du∣ring the Commendators own Right: And by this Act, these Com∣mendams are discharg'd, and yet the Deeds done by them, are not annull'd; and therefore many Rights made by Com∣mendators since this Act, are sustain'd as valid, though they were not Proprietars. By the Canon Law, only the Pope could grant commendam per∣petuam, and the Bishops could only grant Commends for six Moneths, c. Nemo. Elect. l. 6. ACT 5.THe pain of Lawburrows here exprest, is hightned by the Act 166. Par. 13 Ja. 6. by which every Earl or Lords Penalty is made two thousand pounds; every great Baron, a thousand pounds; every Free-holder, a thousand merks; every Fewar, five hundred merks; the un-landed Gentleman, two hundred merks; and the Yeoman, one hundred merks, which last Act is now observ'd: and though Penalties be exprest here, against breakers of Lawburrows, found to Church-men, and that there be no men∣tion made of them in the last Act, yet an Arch-bishop, or Bishop, can pursue now for the same penalty that is due to an Earl: and Bi∣shops and their Wives are allow'd the same Solemnities at their Fu∣nerals, that are allow'd to Noblemen and their Wives, by the 14 Act 3 Par. Ch. 2. And though there be no mention made here of Dukes and Marquesses, yet the priviledge granted to Earls, is ex∣tended to them. 2o By this Act, the Penalty is to be apply'd to the King, and is due by and attour the Reparation due to the person les'd; but by the last Act and the present Custom, the Penalty is to be di∣vided betwixt the King and the Party, and though by this Act the Master is free, if he present his Servant, who breaks the
Law-burrows. Less than the Law-burrows; that is to say (he who found the Lawburrows) bring the Trespassors to the King or She∣riff, within fourty days, Dominus noxali judicio servi sui nomine con∣ventus servum actori noxae dedendo liberatur; yet by our present Cu∣stom, the Master finds Caution, that the Raiser of Law-burrows shall be skaithless from him against whom it is rais'd, and his Men-Tennents and Servants; and therefore the Master seems now lyable, though he should present his Servants. Albeit these be the ordinary Penalties allow'd, where there is no other proof of the Danger, then the Oath of the Complainer; yet if the Complainer prove Threatnings, the Council or Criminal Court, may ordain surety of Law-burrows, to be found upon such sums as they think proportional to the danger. Vid. Not. on Act 129 Par. 9 Ja. 1. Supra. THough by this Act,ACT 6. all Summons are to be on twenty one days Warning; yet all Summons that are priviledg'd by their own Nature, or the Lords Deliverance, come in upon six days. vid. Hope Form of Process; and by an Act of Sederunt, July 21. 1672. It is declar'd that no Actions can be priviledg'd, ex∣cept Removings, recent Spuilʒies, recent Ejections, Intrusions, suc∣ceeding in the Vice, Exhibitions, Causes alimentary, Summons, for making forthcoming, Transferrings, Poyndings of the Ground, Wal∣kennings, special Declarators, Suspensions, Prevento's and Transumpts, all which, and all second Summons in all Actions, are to come in up∣on six days warnings, except recent Spuilʒies, because by the 65 Act Par. 6 Ja. 4. these were to come in on 15. days; Ejections, In∣trusions and succeeding in the Vice, which are of the nature of re∣cent Spuilʒies: But since this Act appointed all Summons to come in upon 21. days; dubitatur, how the Lords could have priviledg'd any Summons upon fewer days, though there was an old immemo∣rial Custom for this, prior to this Act of Sederunt; and it will be fit to Ratifie this Act of Sederunt in the first Parliament. By that Act of Sederunt likewise, second Summons may be ex∣ecuted against persons within Edinburgh, or the Suburbs thereof upon twenty four hours. Vid. Observations on the Act 65 Parl 6 Ja. 4. THis is abrogated by the Union of the Nations.ACT 7. MOney is yet escheated to the King and his Customs,ACT 8. if taken out of the Countrey without a Warrand; but that part of the Act which allows a Noble for every private man's expence, is in Desuetude for now every man is allow'd to carry out what may defray his Expence; and that part of the Act, appointing every man to make Faith, and swear that he carries no Money out with him, is also in Desuetude: but any man may be pursued for hav∣ing carried out Money, and his having carried out, and the quan∣tity may be proven by his Oath. We see also in this Act,
that Seculars could not Judge Ecclesiasticks, for Ecclesiasticks were to be Judg'd by the Official, that is to say, the Bishops Judge, in whose place the Commissars are now come, and this priviledge descends to Church-men from the Canon Law, c. 2. de judiciis: But since the Reformation, this Priviledge fell, for now all men whether Secular, or Ecclesiastick, answer to the Civil Judge. The great reason why our own Coyn should not be carried out is, because our Money is finer nor forraign Money, being eleven denier fine, and so is constantly Exported, and being melted down into forraign Coyn, is brought home again to us, at a greater extrinsick value; but yet because it might be doubted if this pro∣hibition extended to the carrying out of all Money that is current, or if that which is not current may be carried out▪ such as Ry∣als, &c. For the carrying out of Gold and Silver, is generally ordain'd to pay Custom when it is carried out, by Act 15 Par. 1 Ja. 1. but by the 149 Act Par. 13 Ja. 1. The carrying out of all Gold and Silver, Coyn'd or Un-coyn'd, infers escheat of the Gold and Silver so exported. Vid. not. on Act 49 Par. 3 Ja. 1 Supra. King JAMES the third, Parl, 2. ACT 11.BY this Act Noblemen and Gentlemen pretend to be free from Custom of what is imported for their own use, as to which, I have insert this Paper. Reasons, why the Nobility, Barons, and other Heretors in Scotland, are lyable to pay Customs and Excise, for what Commodities they bring in, though for their own private use. OUr Laws and Acts of Parliament, have granted to His  Majesty, the Custom of all Goods, exported or to be im∣ported, as is clear by the 251 Act 15 Par. Ja. 6. The Words being, That His Majesty, with consent of the No∣bility, Council and Estates; have ordain'd that all Cloath, and other Merchandice, brought into this Realm, shall pay Custom, &c. And therefore the King being, as to this, founded in the Rule, all must be lyable, except where there are clear exceptions derogating from the general Concession. Likeas, by an express Statute, 14 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. The Customs of all Goods, are Confirmed to the King. And a special, A. B. C. Of all Customable Goods, expressing what each species is to pay. In which Act there is no exception of any person whatsoever.
By the foresaid Act 251 Par. 15 Ja. 6. Customs are to be paid  to the King, according to the use of any other Kingdom, But so it is, that y the use of other Kingdoms, and particularly of Eng∣land, and France, the Nobility, Barons and others, pay Customs for all imported Goods. The Customs being granted for the Defence of the Kingdom, and the Support of His Majesties Royal Dignity, it is just that the Nobility and Barons, should rather pay than any others, since they are of all others most concerned, to maintain the one, and support the other. Scotland being a Countrey, that has no Consumption, for im∣ported Goods, save within themselves, if the Nobility and Gen∣try  should not pay, they might bring home all their own Com∣moditie, and so there should be little or no Customs due to the King. They might colour the Trade of Merchants, by granting simu∣lat Commissions, for bringing home, the Goods of Merchants, un∣der  their names, which would occasion much Perjury, and at least put the Customers to a Process, and Suspend the payment of the true Customes, till that were clear'd by Process. When this Kingdom thinks fit, to guard against the importati∣on of any forraign Goods, they do this by imposing great Customs, as was lately done by imposing 80 per cent. upon all English Cloath. But so it is, that if this exemption were allow'd to the Nobility and others; these Prohibitions would be useless and ineffectual, for those Prohibited Goods might be brought in by them, and so our Ma∣nufactories, could never be encouraged, nor could we force other Nations, justly to ballance their Trade with us, or keep our Money within our own Countrey. If these Exemptions were allow'd, there could be no possibili∣ty  of lessening and curbing the Luxury of the Nation; For the Nobility and Gentry, might still wear what they pleas'd, at least it would be an encouragement to them, to bring home things superflu∣ous, they being free from Impositions, whereas their being burdened with Custom, would discourage them to bring home su∣perflueties. The Exchequer has in their Tacks been in use to set the Customs with express order, to allow no exemptions, and the Customers  have exacted Customs from the Nobility and Gentry, which proves the Kings Possession, and the acquiescence of those, who plead the exemption. Whereas it is pretended, 1o. Customs are regularly a Duty, impos'd upon Merchandice and Traffique; But what Noble∣men and Gentlemen, import for their own use, is not Merchan∣dice, nor Commerce. 2o. By this Act and by Act 152.
Par. 12 Ja, 6. the 251 Act Par. 15 Ja, 6. And the 143. cap. Leg. Burg. There is an express exemption from Customs, granted to the Nobility, Barons and other Heretors, for what they import to their own use. It is answered, that as to the first, Custom being impos'd for the uses foresaid, the payment should be regulated, by the reason that imposed the Imposition, and not by the nature of the Traffique; and if that were a good reason, neither Merchants, Burgsss, nor any else should pay Customs, for what they are to apply and con∣sume for their own privat use. 2o. Though that were generally true, as it is not, yet the Laws and Customs of this Kingdom, should alter the case here, as it does in other Kingdoms. To the 2d it is answered, that 1o. There is a great difference in our Law, betwixt these, persons being free to Trade, and so not lyable to the pains of un-free Traders, and their being free from paying of Customs; and the first two Acts cited, do certainly Militate only in the first case, by granting them a freedom to Trade, but not a freedom from paying of Customs. And as to the 251 Act 15 Pr. Ja. 6. It does not grant an exemption from Customs. And albeit it may be urg'd, that the first part of that Act having im∣posed Customs on all, and this being an exception, it must be an exception from the Rule, yet consequential Arguments, should not take away express Laws, nor is this an exception, but rather a Cautionary Reservation, and these use to be insert ad majorem Cau∣telam and should never be extended beyond the Terms of the Re∣servation. But so it is, that the Reservation is not conceiv'd ab∣solutely, but only conform to the Laws and Liberties, granted to them before. And therefore since it cannot be subsumed, that there are any former Laws, granting this exemption from Cu∣stoms, it must be restricted to the priviledge of their bing free, from the pains of un-free Trading only. 2o. It is to be consi∣der'd, that the former Laws, allows them only the liberty from being punish'd as un-free Traders, as to what they import by their own Servants, for their own privat use, and as the return of Commodities of their own product, exported by them. Nor does the 143. Chap. Leg. Burg. extend further than to exeem Ba∣rons, from in-land Customs, due to Subjects. 3o. The time of that Act, the Customs were justly impos'd, upon exported Goods, But thereafter His Majesty was graciously pleas'd, to lay the great∣est part of the Customs upon the imported Commodities; and so having very much freed the Barons of a Duty, that burdened their product, it was not reasonable, that their product and im∣ported Goods should be both free. Likeas, so convincing was this Argument, that albeit some shadow of an exemption, was sub∣joyn'd, when the Customs were imposed, upon their product by the first Constitution, in that Act 251. yet when this burden was transferred, by the Act 1670. from the export to the import, the
Barons did require no such exemption, nor does the Act bear any▪ And so this Act is innovated, by the said posterior Act. As to the Excise, there can be no pretence, for any exemption from it, since there being no such Duty extant, the time of the Act 251. That Act cannot be extended to the Excise; And whereas it is pretended, that by the Act 3 Sess. 2 Pa. Ch. 2. This exemption is renewed after the imposing of Excise. It is answered, that the said Act Ch. 2. does not express any such priviledge, but only says, that the Regulation of the differences, be∣twixt the Burghs Royal and Burghs of Barony, introduced by that Act, shall be but prejudice, to the Noblemen, Prelats and others, of their priviledge of importing any of the Goods, allowed to be then im∣ported, for their own and families use allenarly; Which can only be interpreted, to relate to their freedom of Trading, that being the only design of the whole Acts, in which there is no design of Re∣stricting or innovating any thing, with relation to Custom or Ex∣cise. And thereafter since at all times, the King is founded quoad the payment of Customs; much less ought we to Debate this with him at this time, when His Majesty is content to lessen his uncontro∣verted Right in the Customes, for the enriching these who contro∣vert this his Right, by consenting at their desire to discharge, more imported Goods, than would pay him more Customes then he can expect from these not exeemed. Notwithstanding of these Reasons, yet by the present Tacks, Noblemen and Gentlemen, are exeem'd from paying Customs for what they bring for their own use, but they are not, exeem'd from Excise, nor the additional Duties, because these were granted to the King, in contemplation of what the King lost by the want of the Custom due to him, upon Goods now prohibited, vid. Gim∣nas. de vectig. p. 76. Where it is told us, that by the Laws of Germany, Illustres & generosi sunt immunes pro his quae sunt pro victu & cultu suo vid. l. omnium. C. de Vectigal. VId. Annot. Act 66 Par. 14. Ja. 2.ACT 12. VId. Annot. Act 67 Par. 14. Ja. 2. OBser. 1o. This Act appoints all Ships to have Chartor Parties,ACT 13. and because there was no penalty against these,ACT 14. who had no Chartor Party; therefore by the 109 Act Par. 14 Ja. 3. The penalty of twenty pounds is adjected; and yet both these Acts are in Desuetude,; for within the Kingdom, no Chartor Parties are used, nor are they found necessary, even for these who Sail abroad.
Observ. 2o. That though it be said in this Act, that when any Debate happens betwixt Master and Merchant, that they shall un∣derly the Jurisdiction, and Ordinance of the Burgh, to which the Ship is fraughted, without any exception; yet by the Custom now observ'd, such Pursuites may be intented against the De∣fender, wherever he dwells, or before the Lords, even in the first instance. Observ. 3o. That though by this Act it be ordain'd, that no Merchant Goods be riven or Spilt, with unreasonable stowing, or the Masters fault, under pain of tinsel of the Fraught, and a∣mending of the Skaith, yet the Skipper is lyale, if the Goods be spilt, though without his fault, & ex casu frtuito, as by Water from a Pomp, though the Pomp had a Stellage about it, and was proven to have been a sufficient Pomp, before the Ship set forth, so that this danger could not have been foreseen, & quamvis loca∣tor non tenetur ex casu fortuito; and the words in a Bill of Loadning obliging the Skipper to restore the Goods well conditioned, can only bind, ad exactissimam diligentiam Vid. Peckium pag. 34. Yet the Lords thought, that if such Defences were allow'd, Mer∣chants could have no Security, for they were neither oblig'd to know, nor could they prove the secret frailties of Ships, Novem∣ber 7. 1677. Lowrie contra Angus. This Act in so far as it appoints a Seek-Fraught to be paid to the Chaplain of the Nation, is in Dsuetude: And by the Chaplain of the Nation, here is mean'd the Kings Almoner, which was to be given to him for the use of the poor, for in the next line it ap∣points a Tunn Fraught to be paid to the Kirk-work of the Town, to which they are Fraughted; but I know there are some who say that Capellanus noster, mentioned among the Witnesses, to the Kings Deeds, is mean'd the Director of the Chancellary: the Chancellary being call'd in all our old Writs, Capella Regia. ACT 16.BRuges was the first Staple of this Nation, but it's discharg'd by this Act, to be the Staple for the future, and our Ships are allow'd to go to the French Ports by the following Act, because of the Alliances we had with France, and that France and Flanders were then entring into Wars▪ ACT 17.STaple Goods are by this Act to remain in Staple, and not to go to Mercats, for clearing of which Act, it is fit to know that Kings and Common-wealthes, allow some Goods only to be sold at particular places, and these are call'd Staple Goods; and the place is call'd, the Staple Port, Jus stapuli est potestas sistendi in suo foro restringendi{que} merces speciali emporii beneficio certis civitatibus competens Loccen. de Jur. Marit. lib. 1. c. 10. num. 3. Potest enim Rex ob bonum publicum in hoc casu dispensare, l. ult. C. de leg. But this priviledge of Staple, is not competent, except it be specially granted, and Strangers as well as Natives, may be forc'd to ob∣serve that priviledge, for they are here tanquam subditi temporarii,
Grot. de jur. Bell. Part 2. num. 11 and 5. But yet this Act discharging the carrying of Staple Goods by Sea, from Simon and Jude's Day, till Candlemas, is in Desuetude; for our best Trade is now in Winter, but the reason why Winter Trade was then discharg'd, was because our Vessels were small, and our Sea-men ignorant, so that many pe∣rished by Winter Voyages. ARe Explain'd in the Acts 67, and 68,ACTS 18 & 19 8 Par. Ja. 3. and by the 36 Act Par. 8. Ja. 2. as is also the last Act of this Parliament. VId. Annot. on Act 59 Par. 3 Ja. 1. Supra.ACT 20. King JAMES the third, Parliament 4. THis Act is conform to Iter: Camer: cap. 30. And the last Act ordain'd to be put to Execution by this Act is Act 73 Par. 14 Ja. 2.ACT 23. THis Act is in Desuetude,ACT 25. for it is now lawful to carry any kind of Cattel out of the Countrey, without hazard of Con∣fiscation. It is clear from this Act, that the Warden might then have granted Licences for Goods prohibited, but this the Commissioners of the Borders cannot now do. King IAMES the third, Parliament 5. VId. Act 76 Par. 14 Ja. 2. But it is to be observ'd from these words,ACT 27. in this Act It shall be lawful to the Kings Highness to take the Decision of any Cause that comes before Him, at His empleasance. Likeas it was wont to be of before, That the King Himself may be Judge as he pleases; but though the King did call an Action to be judg'd before himself, that was depending before the Lords; yet His Majesty was thereafter pleased, upon a Representation of the Inconveniences that would arise, to refer it back to them; and some interpret this of the Kings power, when he is sitting in his Judicatures; though I think the Act will not bear that gloss: ut certain it is, that at first all Masters were Judges in their own Families, and that Kings themselves Judg'd in their own Kingdoms, as we see in the instance of Solomon and others, vid. ch. 16. Stat. David 2. Where there is a Decision of the Kings insert amongst his Statutes, and the Doctors are of opi∣nion, that princeps habens causam cum suo subdito potest ipse judicare si vult. Peregr. de jure sisci tit. 2. num. 7. and this seems founded on l. & hoc Tiberius 41. ff. de haer. instit. & l. proxime ff. de his qu in test. delent. And though thereafter they did disburden themselves of
that Charge, by electing other Judges, yet they did not debar themselves from that power; and therefore we use to say, that all Jurisdiction in Scotland is cumulative and not privative; but if the King take the Cognition of any Cause, He will try it ac∣cording to the Forms of that Court, where it should have been decided; and therefore if He be to Try a Criminal, the Pannel will be allow'd to hear the Witnesses Depone against him, and the matter of Fact will be judg'd by an Assyze. If it be alledg'd, the meaning of this Act is only that the King may Try any Acti∣on He pleases in His Council, that is to say, His Session, (for of old, the Session was call'd His Council, and yet they are call'd His Coun∣cil and Session) To this it may be answered, this At appoints that Causes should be first Try'd by the Judge ordinary, and if he either refuse to Judge, or Judge wrong, the Council is to Judge, not the Cause, but him, and this induc'd some to urge, that the absence from the Host could not be pursu'd before the Council, though the punishment was restricted to an arbitrary punishment; for which they brought these Reasons: 1o. That this would confound the na∣ture and limits of all the Judicatures, which are the great foun∣dations of our Law, and which is contrary to this Act. 2o. It is the great security of the People, that when they are Try'd for Crimes, they should be judg'd, not only by the learn'd Judges, as to Relevancy, but by their Peers, whom they may judge again as to the Probation. 3o. Advocats are to be heard before the Cri∣minal Court, but not before the Council▪ and the Debate is to be there in Writ, which obliges a Judge to do justly, and the Probation is to be led in presence of the Pannel. 4o. Before the Council the Crime may be refer'd to Oath, which is not suitable to the Cri∣minal Law, even where the punishment is arbitrary, except the Party be by Act of Parliament, oblig'd to Depone, as in the case of Conventicles. 5o. There are no Exculpations before the Coun∣cil, which are necessary in Crimes. 6o. Several Acts of Parlia∣ment appoint, that cases may be pursu'd before the Criminal Court, or Council, when that is intended, and which were unnecessary, if all Causes might naturally be pursu'd before ei∣ther. It being likewise Debated from this Act, that a Judge for giv∣ing an unjust Decreet, might be pursu'd before the Council in the first instance for oppression, the Council did in January 1682. find, that a Sheriff, or other inferiour Judge, could not be ursu'd before the Council, until his Decreet were first reduc'd before the Judge ordinary, and that because the 105 Act Par. 14 Ja. 3. Ap∣points all Actions to be first pursu'd before the Judge ordinary, and the Lords of the Session are Judges Ordinary to Reductions, and are there appointed to cognosce the wrongs done by inferiour Judges; and if this were Sustain'd, the Privy Council should be∣come the Session, nor would any man be a Sheriff, since he might every day be pursu'd before the Council; And whereas it was pre∣tended, that the Council were Judges to Oppression, and there might be great Oppression committed by inferiour Judges, sub sigu∣râ
judicij. It was answered, That when the Decreet was Re∣duc'd, they might then be punishd as oppressours, if there was no colour of Justice for their Decision, as the said 105 Act provided, Sheriff of Bamff contra Arthur Forbes. Vid. Obs. on the 16 Act 6 Par. Ja. 2. and 16 Act 3 Par. Ch. 2. WE see that the granting Reversions by the Wodsetters,ACT 28. were but new Inventions in Anno 1469; and Reversi∣ons were only personal, and did not oblige singular Successors be∣fore that Act, but by this Act they affect singular Successors, pro∣viding they be Registrated. And though this Act speak only of Re∣versions; yet elks to Reversions, and obligations to grant Rever∣sions, are also real Rights, if Registrated. 2o. A Reversion, though not Registrated, is by our Law valid against singular Sucssors, if it be Incorporated, and contain'd in the body of the Wodset it self, for then the singular Successor must know the same, since it is Incor∣porated in his own Right. BY this Act personal Rights are ordain'd to prescryve,ACT 29· if no Di∣ligence was us'd thereupon within fourty years, as Heretable Rights do prescrive by the Act 12 Par. 22 Ja. 6. And though this Act appoints only Obligations to prescryve; and that the word, Obligation, does properly signifie only Bonds and Cntracts; yet this Act extends to Testaments and Decreets, July 26. 1637. and this prescription is also extended to all personal Actions for Move∣able Goods, and so it did defend against an action for a Kirk-Bell, December 7. 1633. For in effect all these are Obligations. Whereas the Act says, except document be taken thereupon; the meaning is, that Diligence upon the Writ, that is, to prescryve interrupts Prescription; and thus Horning upon a Bond, or Cita∣tion upon an Action interrupts, July 6. 1671. Mcrae contra Mcdonald: and payment made by the principal Debitor, inter∣rups as to the Cautioners. It is observable, that Prescription up∣on this Act, runs not against Minors, & contra non valentes agere, though neither of these are excepted in this Act; because these Ex∣ceptions are warranted by the Common Law, and it may be al∣leadg'd, that it runs not against furious Persons, since they are in all things compar'd to Minors, albeit there is this difference, that a man may feign himself to be fuious, to the end Prescrip∣tion may not run against him: But yet Prescription runs against things left, ad pios usus; nor is the time of War and Pestilence, when there is no Judicature, nor Session to be defalked, June 30. 1671. Prescriptions runs only against personal Bonds, from the Term of payment, and not from the Date of the Bond, because till then, the Creditor cannot pursue, Feruary 19. 1680. Lutefoot contra Glencorse.
ACT 30.IT is pretended that this Act is in Desuetude, and that Magistrats may be continued for many years, or at least, that this Act must be so Interpreted, as to infer only a necessity of a new Election yearly; but not of yearly changing the persons elected; for some∣times there are few to be choosed, as in small Burghs, and in great Burghs a forc'd alteration might prejudge the Towns Interest, because there are few worthy to be Elected in these little Towns, and the Lords inclin'd to this Gloss, in the Town of Edinburghs Process against Sir Andrew Ramsay. The Burrow Law here related to is, cap. 77. leg. burg. it appears by this and many other Acts, and old Evidents, that Alderman, was the same of old with our Provost, and they are still plac'd above Baillies, it comes from the Saxon Word Ealdor Senior, thus we say for age, or for eeld. ACT 31.NOtars are now only chosen by the Kings Authority, and are Examined by three Lords of the Session, and get their Pro∣tocals marked at their admission by the Clerk to the Notars, who is one of the Registers Deput Clerks: Nor are the Notars to be admitted by the King, to be Examined by the Bishops, as this Act appoints; and yet our Style retains to this day, so much of the old Form, that the Notars express still in all the Instruments, and other Papers sign'd by them, that they are Notars of such a Diocie. ACT 32.BY this Act all Woolen Cloath is to be met by the Rig, and not by the Selvedge, but by the 43 Act 1 Par. Ch. 2. Linen Cloath is ordain'd to be taken up by the Selvedge, and not by the Rig; because Woolen Cloath stretches, when measur'd by the Sel∣vedge, but the Selvedge of Linen hinders it to stretch. THough this Act appoints only Heretable Sheriffs, or Sheriffs in that part,ACT 33. that is to say, any ordinary person who exe∣cutes the Kings Letters, to put their Stamp to the Execution; yet by the 74 Act 6 Par. Ja. 5. The execution of all Letters must be stamped; and though here, the not Stamping makes the Exe∣cutions to be only null; yet by that Act, such as omit to stamp are punish'd by Deprivation. Vid. Observ. on that Act. ACT 34.Oppression of the Kings Leiges in Fairs, by taking more Cu∣stom from them than is due, is by this Act punish'd only arbitrarly, as to the offenders Persons, and by a years Suspensi∣on from their Offices, and what Custom is allow'd in such cases, is exprest, Act 60. Par. 13 Ja. 2. How far arbitrary punishments may be extended, is doubted. These who have Fairs, had not power to exact Toll, gl. in l. un. C. de nundinis, because Fairs enrich the place, and Toll wrongs Commerce.
THough removing of Tennents, and poinding their Goods,ACT 35. be appointed by this Act, to be three days after Whitsun∣day or Martinmass; yet by the 39 Act 6 Par. Q. Mary. All warn∣ings against Tennents, are to be used fourty dayes before Whit∣sunday only; the old Form of Removing was, That the Master did only intimate to the Tennent that he was to remove, and broke a Lance before the Tennents Door, as the Symbol of breaking their Tack; and within 3. days ejected the Tennent, as Craig observes; but now the Tennent must be warned 40 days before the Term, and a Decreet of Removing must be had, whereupon he must be Charged and Denunced before he can be Ejected; and after that Letters of Ejection are directed to the Sheriff. ALL Murders committed by Fore-thought Fellony,ACT 36. that is to say, upon design, or per insidias (called Assassinium) are denyed the Protection of a Sanctuary, or Girth by this Act; but it appears that the Crime of Assassination was here excepted ex∣presly, because it not being exprest in the very Text of the Canon Law, there were several debates about it; vid. Covar. Variar. Re∣solut. cap. 20. For though it be ordinarily proved, per cap. 1. de homici∣dio si quis per industriam occederit proximum suum & per isidias ab altari meo avellet cum ut moriatur; which Text seems to be mean't by these words in this Act; For the which the Law grants not the Immunitie of the Kirk; and in which our Law has followed the common opinion, that Assassinators are denyed the priviledge; yet cap. inter alia gives Immunitie to all, except publicus latro & depopu∣lator agrorum; and that cap. de homicid. Excepts only Church-men, who have Assassinated proditorie, and who indeed should have less Immunitie than others; but now the Churches being a Sanctuary or Girth, is in Desuetude, since Poperie was abolished; though the Kings Palaces are still Sanctuaries in all Nations, if Princes be dwelling therein; and yet I think they should not be Sanctuaries if they dwell not there, except that allowance be granted them, either by express Concession or Prescription; but these gave not Protection to such as were notorious Criminals, Novel. Justin. 17. cap. 5. verb. Neque homicidis, neque adulteris, ne{que} Virginum Raptori∣bus, delinquentibus terminorum custodies cautelam, sed etiam inde ex∣trahes & supplicium iis inferes: non enim talia delinquentibus parcere convenit &c. And now I find not that any of the Kings Palaces are Sanctuaries as to Cryms with us, and in no case should they be a Sanctuary against searching for, and apprehending Male∣factors; as is clear, l. 3. ff. de fugitiv, Div. Marcus facultatem dedit in∣grediendi tam Caesaris quam Senatorum praedia volentibus fugitivos in∣querere. The Conʒie-house pretends also to be a Sanctuary with us. This priviledge of a Sanctuary was only granted to Holy, and Consecrated Places, and amongst Protestants, no Consecrati∣ons are in use, but yet according to the Canon-Law, Churches even before Consecration, are generally thought by Lawyers to have that immunitie, vid. Covar. variar. resolut. cap. 20. num. 4. And al∣beit
this Priviledge be properly a Canonical Priviledge, yet it cannot be denyed, but that the very Churches of the Gentiles had this Priviledge, as is clear by Tucid. lib. 7. and was approved of by Councils and Fathers, who are cited cap. 17. Quest. 4. Prae∣sertim cap. Miror & cap. pen. & fin. de Immunitate Ecclesist. vid num. cap. 35. Isua cap. 20. Deuter. cap. 19. Exod. cap. 21. But though by the Canon Law, 40. Paces about the Mother-Church, and 30, about other Churches had the same Priviledge of Immunitie; albeit Skeen speaks only of the 30. paces in his Annotations, ad cap. 6. Statut. Alex. 2d. Yet I read of no such Priviledge to either the 30. or the 40. paces, nor to the Palaces of Bishops, nor to Hospi∣tals, vid. Covar. ibid. BEfore this Act the Tennent might have been Poynded by the Brief of Distres, for all the personal Debt owing by his Master, but by the first part of this Act, it is appointed, that the Tennents shall be poynded only for as much as they owe their Master which did hold only in poynding for moveable Debts;ACT 37. for in Decreets of poynding the Ground, the Creditor might have poynded all he found upon the Ground, and all invecta & illata, though the Tennent owed not so much to the Master; yea, though he owed him nothing, as was found 11. July 1628. And though the Ten∣nents Term of payment were not come, if the Term of payment of the Annualrent were by-past; and they who were so poynded, had their relief of the Heretor, for whose Debt they were poynded; but now the Lords extends this Act so, as to defend Tennents against poynding upon Infertments of Annualrent granted by the Master, so that execution cannot passe against them for more than they owe their Master, as to which only they can be personally lyable, and their Goods or invecta & illata can b only poynded; but yet this was not properly an Extension for debita fundi are the Heretors or Lords Debt, since the Heretor is personally, and the Land is really lyable therefore. This Act extends only to Tennents of Lands, but not to Tennents of Teinds, who cannot be poynded for their Ma∣sters Debt, 14. January 1556. The second part of this Statute prescribes the way of Appryzing Lands from Debitors, and it is the Original Statute whereupon Apprysings are founded in our Law; and it seems strange, that so material a part of our Law should not have an entire Statute, but should have been brought in at the close of another, and less im∣portant case. The form prescribed to Compryzings, by this Statute, is, that if the Creditor cannot recover payment by poynding the Moveables, the Sheriff shall cause sell the Land to the avail of the Debt; and from this Act it is, that to this day the Moveables must first be fought, and though the Appryzing will be null for want of this Solemnitie; yet the offering to prove that there were as many Move∣ables upon the Lands as might pay the Debt, will not reduce the Compryzing, except these Moveables were offered to the Messen∣ger, when he was executing the appryzing, and when the Sched∣uls
of appryzing were laid on upon the ground of the Lands; tan∣tum creditur nuncio referenti se fecisse executionem in stabilibus quia non tbant bona mobilia debitoris quod non auditur volens probare contrarium ad annullandam executionem Surd. Concil. num. 1. lib. 1. This Solemnitie descends from l. 15. § 2. de re Jud. by which Moveables were first to be poynded, and then Immoveables failʒing of these, and was formerly introduc'd into this Nation by the cap. 9. Stat. 2d. Rob. 1. By this Act, it is appointed, that the Lands be appryzed to the avail of the Debt, this proportion was long observed, and much was referred to the arbitriment of the Judge and Inquest. Bal∣four, who collects the oldest Decisions, and such as were about the time of the Institution of the Colledge of Justice, in his title of Comprizings▪ chap. 3. gives this for a Rule, that ilk twenty shil∣ling Land of old extent, was comprized to twenty Merks, 4 July 1533. James Heren contra Henrie Livel, and ilk Mark Land of yearly profit was to be Comprized to twenty Merks of Stock, which answered to five for the hundred, penult May 1589. Adam Dick∣son contra John Carhattel, penult. March, 1539. But I have seen diverse old Comprizing led about this time, at the instance of George Lord Seaton, and Lady Jean Hepburn his Mother, against some Vassals, and Wodsetters in the Barony of West-niddery in Linlithgow Shire, where more then five of the hundred was allowed, as will appear by computation; one of these Comprizings dated 18. March, 1523. bears 21. Aikers, with 12. shilling Scots per aiker to have been ap∣pryzed in payment of two hundred and fourty pounds of principal due to the said Lord George; and a second Comprizing also led at his instance, dated 17. December, 1541. bears, 25 Aikers, and two parts of an Aiker of infield land to have been appryzed in payment of two hundred and fourty pounds of principal due to the said Lord George; and a  Compryzing also led at his instance, dated 17. December, 1541. bears, 25. Aikers, and two parts of an aiker of infield to have been apprized for payment of three hun∣dred and fourty two pounds of principle, each aiker being valued to a merk of yearly Rent; a third Appryzing at his instance, dated 6. Feb. 1544. bears, 20. Aikers and a half to have been appryzed for 244. lib, of principal, ilk aiker being valued to 15. shiling of yearly Rent, and a fourth Comprizing, dated, 5th May, 1547. bears, 18. Aikers to have been apprized in payment of two hundred and twenty merks principal, and the Rent of an aiker to be va∣lued to a boll of victual, and the price of the boll to have been valued to 18. shilling Scots yearly; and this was by and attour the Sheriffie, for which the like proportion of Lands was appryzed, as the several appryzings bears; and for the better making of the proportion, they also bear, that the Sheriff and Inquest came to the ground of the Lands, and measured off the aikers, and set a constant price on the victual, but by one of the Decisions cited by Balfour, later than these; It's like that five per cent has been their∣by appointed to have been the Rule in time coming, as he sayes.
When Annualrents out of Lands were appryzed, the Inquest did never exceed 5 per cent without a Dispensation from the Lords of Session, or else they were prjudgd, sayes Craig, pag. 332. And the Compryzings were reduceable, but Dispensations were easily granted▪ and Craig saye, they were sought to free the Inquest from hazard of perjury, but upon what ground it was, that the Inquest scrupled more in Compryzing of Annualrents, than in Compryzing of Lands, where they allowed a Rent answerable to 5 per cent, I cannot conjecture, except for one or two Reasons, 1. That annual∣rent is a thing odious, and unlawful by the opinion of many Divines▪ and therefore not to be stretched. 2. Annualrents were free of publick Burdens, to which Lands were subject, and therefore a greater allowance might have been given of Land-rent than annu∣alrent. When Life-rent Rights, such as Conjunct-fee, Simple-liferent Ter∣ces or Curialitie were comprized, the estimation was made according to the age of the Life-renter, or Life-rentrix, when within 40. years, the estimation was 5 years purchase, that is as much as the Fruits and Rents had yeelded for 5. years preceeding, or might yeeld in 5. years thereafter; and when the Life-renter exceeded 40. years of age, and was not of the age of 50. compleat four years pur∣chase was the estimation; and if 50 years of age was exceeded, and the sixtieth not attained the estimation, was three years purchase; and if the Life-renter was weak, or sicklie, or that there was any other cause that might interrupt the Liferent-right, the Inquest did value, as the Circumstances determined; Craig pag. 331. in fine. & dict. pag. 332. in princ. And when any Servitude was apprized, the Inquest did also value as they thought the Servitude profitable, Craig loco citato. This was the way of Procedor in old Comprizings, in making a proportion betwixt the Debt, and the thing Appryzed. The form and stile of Decreets of Compryzings of old was shortly thus; the Clerk of the Compryzing, who was ordinarily the Sheriffs Clerk, did extend a writing upon Parchment, con∣taining all the particulars of the procedor, to wit, that the Cre∣ditor having obtained a Sentence before the Sheriff, decerning his Debitor to pay a certain sum, and there being no Moveables to pay it, the Sheriff came to the ground of the Land with an In∣quest of most knowing Persons within the Shire selected for that effect, and there measured off some aikers for the Money, and Sheriffie corresponding, each aiker paying so much victual, and the victual being valued to a suitable Rate, redeemable always by the Debitor within the time contained in the Act of Parliament; and which Writing is Seal'd with the Seals of the Judge, and of the In∣quest. 2o. Though this Statute appoints the Sheriff to sell, yet upon deliverence of the Lords of the Session, they will appoint the Compryzing to be led before Messengers, or Macers, whom they will make Sheriffs in that part.
It being debated, whether a Compryzers Marriage fell to the King, where the Comprizer was payed within the Legal, though he was not payed when the Marriage fell, but was payed there∣after, and before the Legal expired; it was urged that it did fall, because the Compryzer was Vassal, and so as all Casualties due by other Vassals should fall, and that the King should rather have this casualty from Comprizers, than from any Vassals, because a Compryzer could by a special Statute, be entred by the King, though a singular Successor. 2o. If the King were seeking this ca∣sualty by the Debitors Death, the Comprizer would exclude him, by alledging that the Debitor was Denuded, and it were unjust, that by this means, the King should want his casualty from both. 3o. The King falls all other casualties by the Compryzer, such as Recognition, Liferent Escheat, and the Compryzer by being en∣tred, can do all Deeds that other Proprietars can do; and there∣fore should be lyable in all other casualties, as they are. 4o. If this were not allow'd, the King might be still defrauded of this casualty, for the Comprizer might still secure the Debitor, and if his own Marriage fell, he might thereafter cause redeem him∣self; And whereas it was pretended, that a comprising is but a pignus praetorium & in pignorius non transfertur dominium, and so the Debitor being still Proprietar, remain'd still Vassal. To this it was replyed, That though a Comprysing resemble pig∣nus praetorium, yet it is truely an alienation, and this Statute ap∣points the Land to be sold to the Creditor; and by the whole Te∣nor of Comprisings, it is clear that it is a judicial Vendition made under Reversion, and so resembles more a legal Wodset; and therefore as in Wodsets, the Wodsetters Marriage would fall, so ought the Comprizers, and its being a legal Vendition and Alie∣nation appears from this also, that it falls under Recogniti∣on; and Recognition presupposes still alienationem dominij. The Lords upon this Debate (which clears much the nature of Comprisings) prefer'd the King, for they found that the Compriser being Vassal, the Marriage fell by his Death, he having died before the Comprysing was redeem'd, and therefore it may be doubted, whether the Compriser will have his relief, for the damnage in∣cur'd by this casualty from his Debitor, before the Lands can be redeem'd from him, since it fell by his fault, in not paying him; nor is the Debitor much prejudg'd, for if the Lands had not been Compris'd, this casualty might have fallen by his own Death, and the inconveniency urg'd from the multitude of Marriages, that would fall by the great number of Comprizers, is of no wight, since if a man had sold his Land, and divided it amongst his Cre∣ditors, all their Marriages had as well fallen, in that case, as in this. 3o. Whereas by this Act, the legal is to extend to seven years only, so that if there be one shilling resting after seven years, the Comprysing expires; yet by the 62 Act 1 Par. Ch. 2. Anno 1661.
This legal is extended to ten years, but both the seven and ten are to be compted from the Date of the Decreet of Apprising, and not from the Date of the allowance, by our practick. 4o. Though Superiours be not oblig'd to receive singular Suc∣cessors, yet they are bound to receive Comprizers upon payment of a years Dewty of the Lands Comprised, and this singularity is introduc'd in favours of commerce, and of poor Debitors, but to ballance this speciality, the Superiour is allow'd to retain the Land comprised to himself, upon payment of the sums comprised for, because he is also proprietar of the Lands, having dominium dire∣ctum, as the Vassal who is Debitor has Dominium utile, vid. 5. March. 1634. Black contra Pitmedine. But it was lately found, that the Superiour could not redeem after seven or ten years, no more than the Vassal, for though the legal, as to the Superiour, be not limited, yet he comes but in place of the Vassal, and so ought to have no more priviledge, and this general must be restrict∣ed by the other parts of the Act. 5o. Though the Superiour be bound to receive the Comprisers, and that without producing their Authors Right, because it is not presumable that their Debitors, from whom they comprised, will produce their Rights to them; yet where Adjudications are led, for compleating Dispositions, or other Rights, the Superiour is not oblig'd to receive such Adjudgers, until they instruct the last Vas∣sals Right; for such Adjudgers as these are not ordain'd by the Act of Parliament to be received, June 24. 1663. Mcneil contra Mcdougal. But it may be doubted, what an Adjudger, who has done ultiat Diligence, to recover his Debitors Writs, shall do, if he cannot obtain them, it being very hard, that he should ly out of his Right, because of the contumacy of the person, who is oblig'd to compleat the Right. Vid. obs. on the 19 Act Par. 2 Sess. 2 Ch. 2. ACT 39.THough it is said here, that Justice-airs need not be continu'd; yet Justice-courts are declar'd peremptor, so that if Actions before them be not call'd, the day to which the citation is given, the citation is null, & perit instantiâ. Act 79. Par. 11. Ja. 6. Vid. Observ. on that Act. ACT 40.BY this Act it is declar'd, that the Rolls and Registers be put in Books, and have the same strength that the Rolls had: for understanding which, it's fit to know, that both in Parliament and Exchequer, there were no Registers but Rolls. And by this Act the Rolls are ordain'd to be turn'd into Books. and these Books are declar'd to be as authentick as their Originals, and the Clerk is yet design'd Clerk of the Council Register and Rolls. ACT 41.THis is the only Act, by which counterfeiters of Money are punish'd by death; and yet this Act properly stricks against the counterfeiters and coyners of Copper-money only, which in our Law is call'd black Money.
It has been doubted, whether the Officers of the Mint could coyn Copper-Money without express permission; but it was lately found they could not, because coyning is ex sua natura inter rega∣lia. 2o. There have been several warrands expresly granted to the saids Officers themselves, for coyning Copper-money, and deter∣mining the quantity to be coyn'd, and the rates to be follow'd, which had been needless, if this could have been done without a Warrand. 3o. There is so great profit to the Coyners, and so great loss to the people, by coyning Copper and black Money, that it was necessary the coyning should have been determin'd. 4o. It had been unnecessary and absurd, to have discharg'd the counterfiting and currency of Black-money by this Act, if it had been lawful to have coin'd without a Warrand; and whereas it was alleadg'd that black money was Coin'd in England without warrand; To this it was answer'd, that such farthings &c. past only in the place where they were coin'd in England, but what passes in one place of Scotland, passes through all. Vid. Annot. on Act 28 Par. 6 Ja. 2. Supra. King JAMES the third, Parliament 6. THe design of this Act is,ACT 42. to shew that in Reductions of De∣creets of inferiour Courts before the Parliament, the De∣fender is not allow'd to propone Defences, that were competent and omitted in the first instance; and yet in Reductions of Decreets of inferiour Courts, before the Session, al∣leadgances, though competent and omitted at the time of the first De∣creet, are receivable by the Lords, especially if the Decreets be in absence Nota, That Dilators might have been then propon'd, separatim; but now after a Dilator is repell'd, all the other Dilators must be pro∣pon'd together. Nota 2o. It is clear by this Act, that Decreets of inferiour Courts were reduc'd before the Parliament, but these Lords were then not what our Session is now; the Session being then a Committee of Parliament, as is also clear by this Act. Nota 3o. That Brieves of mort-ancestrie (which are now call'd Brieves for Serving of Heirs, were then led and expede in Justice-airs, though it was still by an Inquest, as this Act bears; and if then Difficulties did occur in serving of Heirs, it is clear that supe∣riour Courts might give their opinion upon these, though they can∣not serve an Heir; and thus two several persons having rais'd Brieves for serving themselves Heirs to Captain Ross, they were Advocated from the Macers; and it was Debated before the Lords, what Probation was sufficient to exclude the King as ultimus Hares, al∣beit it was alleadg'd, that this was only proper to be De∣bated before the Inquest, and yet though the Lords may deter∣mine, how a thing may be proven, & ipsum modum probandi, as in that case where the Debate did run, whether the being ha∣bit and repute Cousins, was sufficient in agnatione antiquâ; yet the Lords in the case Forrester contra the Heirs of the Laird of Wrights-houses,
refused to consider the Probation it self, and the Objecti∣ons against the Writs produc'd, but remitted the same to the In∣quest; though it was alleadg'd, that it being objected here, that the Writs produc'd for Probation were vitiated, the Lords could on∣ly judge this as being species falsi; but withal, the Lords declared, that if the Inquest desired to know whether the Papers were vitiat∣ed, they would give them their opinion therein. The Lords of the Session themselves have been sometimes the Inquest, as in Serving King CHARLES the First, Heir to Queen Ann his Mother, and King CHARLES the Second, to the Duke of Lenox; though it was alleadg'd that this was inconvenient, because no other Judge could reduce their Verdict; but certainly, either the Parliament might have reduc'd it, and found them guilty of Error, or the Lords of the Session might have reduc'd their own Verdict, upon new Probation; for in this case they proceeded, not as Su∣pream Judges, but as Members of Inquest. The Parliament have been sometimes the Inquest, as in Serving the Earl of Mar Heir to his Mother. ACT 43.BY this Act, the Party put to the Horn for Slaughter, is to find Caution before he be Relax'd, not only to compear to un∣derly the Law, but to pay twenty pounds for his Escheat Goods, and this is to this day exprest in all Relaxations. ACT 44.VId. observ. on Act 38 Par. 4 Ja. 4. ACT 47.BY this, and by the first Act of this Parliament, it is clear, that that Parliament did Delegat some of their number, not only in some particular cases, but with a general power to repre∣sent them in all things which seems hard; for that were to make and create a new Parliament: but here their power was Delegat∣ed only as to Debatable cases, for these Lords were then in place of the Session; and I have heard it Debated, if the Council could Delegat their Power, to any of their number, as to all things, for that were to make a new Council; and since the King impower'd only nine to be a Quorum, they might not impower a fewer num∣ber; nor were it fit for the People, to have the Supream Power committed to so few, nec potest delegatus delegare: Nor can the Justices, nor Commissioners for Teinds, make such Committees, though they are as Supream as the Council. vid. Observ. on the last Act 10 Par. Ja. 3. ACT 48.BY this Act it seems that the Council may reduce the Verdicts of Inquests and Sentences of the Justices, though the regular way of questioning Assizers, who assoilʒe, be by a Summons of Error before the Justices, and a new Inquest of fourty five persons; and de facto, the Council do cancel such Verdicts and Sentences, before themselves, as they did in George Grahames
Case; and ordinarly they mitigat the Sentences of the Ju∣stices. Nota, The Books of Regiam Majestatem, are by this Act cal∣led His Majesties Laws, and the place here related to, is lib. 1. R.M. cap. 14. BEcause the Riches of this Realm, consists chiefly in our Fishing,ACT 49. therefore Bushes are ordain'd to be made, since these are able to ride out in Storms, which lesser Vessels cannot do, and it is best fishing when the Waters are troubled; this is renew'd by the 49 Act Parliament 4 Ja. 4. THough by this Act, he who tines his Action is to pay fourty shilling of expences;ACT 50. yet the modification is left arbitrary to the respective Judges, conform to the Civil Law, which ap∣points condemnationem in expensas & litium damna contra temere li∣tigantes Inst. hic. depen. temerè litigantium §. 1. And by the 43 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. The Defender pays twelve pennies out of every pound to the Lords; and the Defenders expences at the Lords modification. King IAMES the third, Parliament 7. BY the Civil Law, he who is to succeed as Heir, is still to be Tutor of Law; but because this could not well be,ACT 52. where the immediat Heir was himself under twenty five yeas; and therefore by this it is appointed, that the age of a Tu∣tor of Law, or Tutor legitimus, shall be the age of twenty five years, though the age of majority be twenty one, because it re∣quires greater experience to Govern other mens Affairs than our own; and if the immediat Heir, be not of that age, the next Heir who has attain'd to that age, is to be Tutor. And by the Civil Law, no man could be a Tutor, even by a Testament, till he attain'd to that age, Inst. qui testament. tutor § 2. By this Act also, the nearest Agnat, that is to say, the nearest of the Fathers side is to be Tutor, which was conform to the old Civil Law; but Justinian; by the Nov. 118. did take away this difference betwixt Agnats and Cognats, both as to Succession, and Tutories, and we in both follow the old Law, and not this Novel. BY this Act, the Laws called leges burgorum, bound in with Reg. Maj. are declard a part of our Law,ACT 54. and the Chapter particular∣ly related to is cap. 125. Though this Act appoints only the Heirs of Barons, Gentlemen, and Free-holders to have Heirship-moveables. Yet by our Law, all
Prelats, Barons and Burgesses may have Heirs, and these Heirs have right to the best of every thing that belong'd to their Predecessor, as their heirship-moveable, conform to a Roll, expressing what is heirship-moveable, a copy of which Roll may be had from the Clerk of Edinburgh; the reason why moveable-heirship was allow∣ed only to Prelats, Barons, and Burgesses, seems to be, either because these being the only three States of Parliament, they on∣ly ought to be allow'd such considerable Plenishing, as heirship-moveables; or else because in those dayes, none but persons of these qualities, could have such moveables; under the word Pre∣lats are comprehended all benefic'd persons. By Burgesses are under∣stood all Trades-men, and others Traffecking, or working within Burghs, but not honorary Burgesses; By Barons are understood, all who are Infest in Lands, though not erected in a Barony, and that maxime, semel baro, semper baro, is to be interpreted presumptive, so that he who is Infest in Lands, is presum'd to die Infest: But if he was devested before his death, either by Comprysing, Re∣signation, or otherwise, he cannot be counted a Baron, and have an heir, January 27. 1636. Straton contra Chirnside. These words (of the best of ilk thing) must be interpreted, de corporibus, but not de quantitatibus & rebus ungibilibus quae pondere numero, vel mensurâ constant, as Money, Cloath, &c. and so the Stool of a Salt-pan, which was out of use, was accounted but Iron, and fell not under moveable-heirship, Had. 1497. Reid contra Thom∣son. Item, where there are a dozen of Spoons, or moe, the Heir shall have a dozen, if they be fewer, he gets but one Spoon, Dict. cap. 125. l. burg. which Custom hath extended, not only to other things that go by dozens, but likewise so; as these things that go by pairs, and are of one use, must belong to the Heir; and thus the heirship of Oxen was found to be a yoke, July 20. 1610. Black contra Kincaid. Dubitatur, 1o. If the appearand heir of a man, who has only a Disposition, but is not Infest, may have moveable heirship. Dubitatur, 2o. If the appearand heir of him who has an Assignation to a reversion of Lands, may have moveable heirship, since Assignations to Reversions, are real Rights. ACT 55.BY this Act it is declar'd, that the Act ordaining personal Obli∣gations, to prescrive in fourty years, was to be interpreted so, as to extend to all Obligations, prior to that Act, which seems hard; for these who had these Obligations, were in bona fide, not to do diligence; and therefore, some time should have been allow'd to do Diligence, as thirteen years were allow'd in the Act of Prescription 1617. and therefore it would seem, that the Act 29 Par. 5 Ja. 3. Ordaining personal Obligations to ex∣pire in fourty years, rather declares what was Law before, and that such Prescriptions have been formerly allow'd hereupon, the common Law, or some old Act; for this Statute likewise says, the time of the making of the said Acts, so that it appears there have been other Acts besides that one, to which this relates.
REtours to this day express the old and new extent;ACT 56. by the old extent is meant, that to which the whole Lands of Scot∣land were valu'd, by the first general Valuation. And by the new extent is understood the second Valuation, which was long after the former: The old extent is said in all Retours to be tem∣pore pacis; and the new tempore guerrae, or belli, the reason of which, some think to be, that the new extent being made in time of War, there was a necessity to highten the Valuation, for maintaining the War; These Casualties being the greatest part of the Kings Revenue; whereas the old extent is very inconsiderable, being in time of Peace, when there was no necessity for any additi∣on to the Revenue, and when the value of the Money was very mean. BY this Act,ACT 57· four of the old Council are to sit with the new Council; but this Act is now innovated by the posterior dif∣ferent Constitutions of privat Burghs, Edinburgh, and many other Burghs having far more, whilst others have but the numbers here prescrived, or fewer. And as to Edinburgh, the manner of choosing the Magistrates and Councl thereof, is regulated by KING IAMES the sixth, his Decreet arbitral, commonly call'd the Sett. Vid. Ja. 3. Par. 5 Act 30. THe Superiour not entering to his Superiority,ACT 58. to the effect he may enter, his Vassal tines his Superiority for his lifetime; and though this Act determines not for whose lifetime the Superi∣ority is to be lost; yet by an Act of Sederunt Anno 1634. It is or∣dain'd That the Superior tines his Superiority for his own lifetime, and not for the Vassals lifetime, and declares this to be the meaning of the Act. BY this Act it is clear, that stealing of Dogs, Hauks, and the like,ACT 60. is not to be punish'd as Theft, but only by a fine or Penalty of ten pounds, and in effect this is not contrectatio rei alienae lucri faciendi causa; these Beasts being rather useful for sport than gain, but it may be doubted, if a Fowler, who makes it his Trade, & ita lucrum sacit, may not be punish'd as a Thief, for stealing another poor Fowlers Dog, who lives by that Trade, and whose Dog is his Pleugh, and especially since such Dogs are now bought and Sold. THis Act containing the pains of such as break Dovecots,ACT 61. Cun∣ninghares, &c. is alter'd, and the Penalty hightned by sub∣sequent Acts of Parliament, viz. by the 84 Act 6 Par. Ja. 6. and by the 3 Act Par. 19 Ja. 6. but these Acts are without prejudice of putting all former Acts to Execution, made against the foresaid Crimes.
ACT 62.THis penal Statute against Ferriers, not making Bridges, is in Desuetude, as are the Prices here exprest▪ Vid. Act 39. Par. 3 Ja. 1. Supra, and Act 20 Par. 4 Ja. 3. King JAMES the third, Parliament 8. ACT 63.IT would seem by this Act, that all ordinary Actions must be first pursu'd before inferiour Courts, which is likewise appointed by the 105. Act 14 Par. Ja. 3. But now any Action may be pursu'd before the Session or Parliament, in the first instance. But there can no action be rais'd before the Parliament without special warrand first past in the Articles, for bringing the same before the Parliament. Vid. not. on Act 16 Pa. 6 Ja. 2. Act 76 Pa. 19 Ja. 2. and 27 Act 5 Pa. Ja. 3. supra. ACT 64.BY this Act which is in present observance, such Assyzers as as∣soilʒie a Pannel unjustly, are to be pursu'd for Error; but such as condemn him unjustly are not, the reason whereof seems to be, that the Law-givers presum'd, that no Assyzer would condemn unjustly, but that probably they might shew fa∣vour in absolving; and if Assyzers were punish'd for condemning, they would never Condemn▪ and since they get no Sallaries, they should not be severely us'd, but though we have no Law al∣lowing assyzes of error, against such as condemn; yet it may be al∣leadg'd that Assyzers may be pursu'd if they condemn a man with∣out any shadow of probation. 2o. This Act appoints that the Assyzers who are to judge of the Error, be noble persons; for these that are to judge of the Error of others, ought to be more judicious than they; but by a Statut Sess. 1591. c. 117. It is declar'd, that by noble persons is meant only Landed-gentlemen. 3o. The error must be infer'd upon Principles and Grounds, which were represented to the Assyze, at the time of the Verdict, though the Retour may be reduc'd upon other grounds than such as was than represented, as is clear by the Act 13 Par. 22 Ja. 6. It is also appointed by this Act, that though the Verdict be reduc'd, yet the person assoilʒed unjustly, cannot thereafter be punish'd, there being jus quaesitum to him by the Verdict, and upon the same principle; by the 91 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. If any speak to the Assize after they are inclos'd, the Verdict is declar'd null, but the Pannel being thereby acquit, cannot thereafter be accus'd. 4o. The place of Reg. Maj. cited, but not exprest in this Act is, lib. 1. c. 14. where an assize of error is said to consist of twenty four leil and lawful men, though they are call'd here twenty five noble persons. 5o. It may be doubted from this Act, whether though the Pannel be not assoilʒed; yet it any, or moe assizers who voted to assoilʒe, notwithstanding of the clear Evidences to the contrary, may not be
pursu'd as temere jurantes super assisam, since he is guilty of Perju∣ry, and Perjury is infer'd from an unjust Oath, and not from the Effect; and though it may be pretended, that he follow'd his privat knowledge, yet that cannot defend, since this may be urg'd, for all of them, if all should assoilʒe; nor could any thing deter each particular Assyzer more, than that each may be found guilty, whereas if they thought that they would not be lyable, except the major part assoilʒed, they would adventure upon assoilʒing, as an uncertain Event: But yet the Justices inclin'd not to this Opinion, since no Error was ever pursu'd, except where a per∣son guilty was freed, this being the vindicta publica, allow'd in that case. It is likewise observable from this Act, That the Assyzers com∣mitting wilful error, shall first be called before the King and His Council, who shall give them a great Assyze, and therefore His Majesties Advocat having pursued an assyze of Error in July, 1681. He first called the Persons who had committed the Error before the Privy Council, and asked at every man Judicially, whether he owned his Verdict, or not, and these that owned not the Verdict, were not insisted against Criminally, but when this Cause came to be called before the Justices. It was alleadged for them, 1o. That the Verdict bearing only, that the major part had assoilʒed & non constabat, who had assoilʒed, and who condemned, which should hold much more after the Act of Regulations, in Anno 1672 by which it is appointed that the assyzers should mark in their Ver∣dict, who assoilʒed or condemned, to the end it might be known who should be pursued for Error, but this was repelled, because the King being prejudged by the Verdict, their giving in the Ver∣dict made all Criminal, and such as were free should prove their in∣nocence, for else it should be impossible for the King to be able otherwise to prove the guilt, which should hold much more now, because the Assyzers had, by the Regulations, an easie remedie for preventing this, & sibi imputent, who did not mark who assoil∣zied, and who condemned; and though these Regulations intro∣duced that, as a further remedie for clearing this matter, yet that was not necessary; for there were Assyzes of Error, before Assyzers were ordained to be so marked. 2o. It was alleadged, that this was not wilfull, nor by partial means, which partiality behoved necessarily to be proven by the words of the Act, but this was repelled, because the Error being clear, the Error behoved neces∣sarily to be wilfull, and by partial means, nor was it possible to prove these occult qualities otherwise than ab efctu. 3o. It was alleadged, that there being fourscore upon the Pannel, the diffi∣cultie of differencing the Probation might excuse from wilfull Er∣ror, but this was repelled, because the probation adduced was so clear. 4o. By this Act, Assyzes of Error are only to be allowed, where the Persons Indited are shown before the Assize, in the as∣syze of Error, but so it is, the persons assoilʒed by the former as∣syze were Forfaulted in absence, and were neither then nor now shown to the Assyze; and the reason of this speciality, is, because,
if the Persons assoilʒed were present they might prove their own innocencie, and so clear likewise these who assoilʒed them, but this was repelled, because, by these words Shown before the Assyze is only meaned, that their Designations and not their Persons should be shown to the Assyze of Error, for else there could be no Assyze of Error in Forfaulters in absence, and though the Persons were present, they would not be admitted hoc ordine, to clear their own innocence, and the Assyzers should have assoilʒed, or condemned according to the Probation then led. ACT 65.FOr Explication of this Act, vid: Not one Act 143. Par. 13. Ja. 1. ACT 66.THis Act is explained in the Observ. on the 17. Act 1 Par. Ja. 6. ACT 67.BY this Act, Deeds done, and Rights made by Furious Persons, or Idiots are reduceable, not only from the date of the Brievs, but from the time that these Persons were found to be Idiots or Furious; for the Verdict of the Inquests upon such Brievs is de∣claratory, and finds that these Persons were such from such a time. Observ, That albeit, from the Stile of the Brieve, of old a Furious, or Idiots deed could only be reduced from the date of the Brieve, and that by this Act, such Deeds be only declared to be Reduce∣able from the time that the Inquest found, that the granter was Furious or Idiot, yet the granter himself being convalesced, may reduce Deeds done by himself, though there was neither Brievs, nor Inquest, finding him Furious, the Furie being clearl proven, there being no reason that the negligence of Agats or Friends in not raising Brievs should prejudge the Furious Person, 21. Feb. 1632. and which seems yet harder, the Heir of the Furious Per∣son will be allow'd to reduce, though there was no Brieve nor In∣quest in his own lifetime; and it is very hard to know his condi∣tion after Death, July 26. 1638. for sententia aut decretum judicis non facit furiosum sed declarat; but there is this difference, that if the furious person was declar'd by an Inquest that Verdict proves per se, as to all deeds done after; but if this Idiotry or Furiosity, was not found by an Inquest, it must be prov'n by Witnesses, and when the furious person is re-convalesc'd, deeds done by him af∣ter that are valid, though there be no Declarator, and if there be only lucid Intervals, the deed is presum'd to have been done in the fu∣ry, or lucid Interval, according as the deed itself is reasonable or unreasonable; and for clearing of this, the Lords in a case, Steu∣art contra Steuart, ordain'd Witnesses to be led before answer, to clear what condition the Granter was in, at the subscriving of the deed contraverted, and it would seem that the presumption lyes for its being done during the ury, and not during the lucid In∣terval, if the Granter was found furious by an Inquest; bcause this Act of Parliament sayes, That frae it may be known by the Inquest,
that the persons are Fools or Furious, all Alienations made by them, shall be null. Oserv. 2o. This Act of Parliament stricks only against natural Fools and Idiots; and therefore where men become Idiots, by doting or old age, though they cannot recover, or by sickness, where they may recover. It was thought that they could not be found Idiots by an Inquest; and indeed this were very dange∣rous, for many who have been very famous and great men, might have been thus affronted in their old age or sickness, or at least the Exchequer will not grant Tutories Dative to the nearest Ag∣nats, until their condition be first try'd by an Inquest, though the Cravers offer to prove the same by Witnesses, beyond all Excepti∣on; and thus it seems, that though deeds done by Idiots or Furi∣ous Persons may be declar'd null by way of Action; yet themselves cannot be declar'd Idiots otherwise, than by an In∣quest. Observ. 3o. That though all deeds done by furious Persons, are here declar'd null; yet sometimes they may oblige themselves va∣lidly is absents, and Pupils may be oblig'd, . furiosus ff▪ de act & oblig. & l. si a furioso ff. si cert. Pet. vid. Act 18 Par. 10 Ja. 6. Observ. 4o. From these words, and though it be known by the In∣quest, that the Inquest may find a person Idiot or furious upon their proper knowledge, for they are both Judges and Witnesses by our Law. Vid. observ. on the 18 Act 10 Par. Ja. 6. BY the Act 68, Money and Gold being cry'd up, that is to say,ACT 68 & 69 the value of Coyns being rais'd by the Parliament here, which is now usually done by the Council (both as to forraign Coyns and our own) the Parliament did by the 69 Act, ordain that all Debts should be paid with sick Money, and of the same price as the money had course before this Proclamation and Act, which was only to take place, where the Terms of payment were by-past before the Act, which makes me think, that the reason of the Act was, because the Parliament thought it just, that no mans Breach of Ob∣ligation & mora, should be advantageous to him; and if the Cre∣ditor had got his Money in specie, he might have made other use of it, by carrying it abroad, &c. But yet now all Debts may be paid, according to the course that Money has the time of the pay∣ment, for as the Money may be cry'd up, so it may be cry'd down, and to bring both to an equality, the Debitor and Credi∣tor run an equal hazard; for whatever difference may be, as to the taxing the price of other things, si aestimatio rei creditae creverit aut decreverit: yet in Money perpetua est aestimatio l. 1. ff. de contra hend. Empt. For clearing of which Question, Vid. Vin. Quest. Select. lib. 1. cap. 39. and so this Act is in Desuetude, Vid. Act 19 Ja. 3 Par. 3. But though Debts upon privat Obligations, were to be paid with Money at the same avail that the Money was at the time of the Contract, and not the time of the payment; Yet the Kings Taxa∣tions
and publick Dues, were by the Kings own Concession, to be paid according to the value of the Money at the time of the pay∣ment, and are not to be exacted in Money, according as the Money was worth before it was cry'd up, Vid. last Act Par. 3 Ja. 3. It has been much doubted, whether it was true Policie to cry up Money; for though this seems to be an encouragement to for∣raigners, to Export our Commodity, of which we have too much, and to Import Money, of which we have too little; Yet it is urg'd on the other hand, that in crying up Money, we do but underva∣lue our own Commoditie, and our own Land, and raise the va∣lue of Money, which is the Commodity of a forraign Countrey, such as Spain and other places who have Mines; as for instance, if we have use for carrying our Money abroad, Forraigners will on∣ly give us Commodities conform to the intrinsick value, for they will not consider our raising of it, and so he who got the Money, which was so rais', is cheated in as much as the Money is rais'd above the intrinsick value. 2o. As to our own Commodities at home, either they are rais'd to the same proportion with the Mo∣ney, and then forraign Merchants will not bring in Money for our Commoditie, because they can gain nothing by bringing it in, and so we lose the design of raising our Money, or else the Com∣modities are not rais'd in value to the Money, and so the forraign Merchant does only cheat us; as for instance, if our Money be rais'd a tenth part, the forraign Merchant gives us only nine Pieces for ten. 3o. This raises the Exchange to our great loss; for he who draws the Bills upon London or Paris, considering that our ten Pieces are but nine, there he will add the value of a tenth Piece to the Exchange. 4o. If forraign Princes find we have advantage by this raising of our Money, they will either raise their own to the same proportion; and then we shall have no gain, or to a high∣er, and then we shall have loss; and at best, diferent rai∣sings of Money will occasion but great variation, and uncertainty in Coyns. ACT 70.COurts of Guerra here forbidden, seem to have been Courts holden upon Neighbour-feid and Riots, and Skeen founds them upon § ult. tit. 17. de pac. tenend. lib. 2. de feud. Si ministe∣riales alicujus domini inter se Guerram habuerint, comes sive judex in cujus regimine eam fecerint per leges & judicia ex ratione prose∣quatur. King IAMES the third, Parliament 9. ACT 71.THis Act is Ratifi'd by the Act 30 Par. 11 Ja. 6. Vid. Observ. on that Act.
King JAMES the third, Parl. 10. THough all men be allow'd to bring in Victual from for∣raign Countries by this Act,ACT 73. yet the Importation of Victual from Ireland is Prohibited by Act 3 Sess. 3 Par. 2. Ch. 2. THe Act concerning Cruives,ACT 74. is explain'd in the Act 11 Par. 1 Ja. 1. Which is the Act here related to. THis Act appointed the taking more than just raught,ACT 75. to be a point of Dittay, because it was oppression, and irregular exa∣ction, and this is still taken up as dittay in Circuit Courts; yet the Council does also punish it, and I think, the Master of the Ground where the Ferry is, may punish such irregular Exacti∣ons. THe unlaw of such as burn Muires, is by this Act five pounds,ACT 76. which is renew'd Act 71 Par. 6 Ja. 4. but by the 11 Act Par. 4 Ja. 5. The punishment is five pounds for the first time, ten for the second, and twenty for the third time, and these penal∣ties are Ratifi'd Act 84 Par. 6 Ja. 6. THe using other Barrels than the Hamburg Measure,ACT 77. is made point of Dittay, because other Barrels were lookt on as false Measure; but our Barrel now is, ten gallons for Salmond, and eight and an half for Herring. THe Act here related to, is Act 7 Par. 1 Ja. 1.ACT 78. Where this Act is Explain'd. PVrprusion is the usurping and appropriating our Superiours Lands or High-wayes and Purpresture is much now in Desuetude.ACT 80. The ordinary Remedy now, being actions of Molestation, or De∣clarators of Property; but Purprsion is not absolutely in Desue∣tude: For by the 5 Act 16 Par Ja. 6. It is ordain'd that such as Till the Kings Parks, or Commonties, shall be lyable in Purprusi∣on, and punish'd according to the old aws, the same being Try'd, either by way of Molestation, or before the Lords of Session; and the old Punishment was an arbitrary Punishment, and the loss of his Lands, which he held of the King, and the reason why that Act did appoint the Tryal to be by Molestation before the Lords was, because of old it was only Try'd by an Assize before the Justices. Vid. lib. 1. cap. 5. num. 4. & lib. 2. cap. 74. R. M. It is doubted, whether Vassals of Regalities Building upon the Streets of Burghs of Regalitie, may be punish'd for Purpresture, or
whether the Building a Foot or two furder than formerly, even in Burghs Royal, would infer that punishment. From these words of the Act, That nae Vassal, nor Sub-vassal, or other Tennent under the Baron, has Power or Jurisdiction to hold a Court. It is fit to observe, that this holds not only in Purprusi∣on, though that be the case mention'd in this Act; but generally, Vassals nor Sub-vassals cannot hold Courts, except they be Infest, cum curiis; and even then they have only power to hold Courts for payment of their own Rents, or such other things as necessarly follow the labouring of Land, except the Vassal be a Baron, in which case he has power to jdge ryots, and unlaw for Bloodwits, as Sheriffs do. This Act is not o be found in the black Impression. There is an Act omitted by Skeen, which is the last in the black Impression, whereby the Parliament delegats their full Par∣liamentary power to some of their Number, for hearing some Am∣baciitors, and deciding some Causes, licet delegatus non potest delegare, and such Delegations of the Supream Power may be dangerous. King JAMES the third, Parliament 11. THough this Act appoints Barons and Lords, who led their own Men or Vassals at that time to the Host,ACT 82. to be lyable for the skaith they do, in coming to the KINGS Host; Yet this Act is now upon the parity of Reason, extended to all Officers, who are now come in place of these. It may be al∣leadg'd from this Act, that it is not lawful for such as go to the KINGS Host to take free Quarter, or Meat and Drink gratis, which we call Free-quarter, which may be further clear from cap. 5. Stat. 1. Rob. 1. Where these that come to the Host, are or∣dain'd to be serv'd for their Money, and that they take nothing, but at the sight of the Baillies, and others there mention'd, un∣der the pain of being punish'd as Robbers: But it is still doubted, whether the Countrey may be put to be the first advancers, when the Militia is rais'd in such haste, that these who are remote, cannot provide present money, and the Countrey into which they are sent, have by their irregularities occasion'd their coming, it being unjust that innocent Shires who send in their Militia, should be put to expences, in levying and entertaining men to repress the irregularities of others. ACT 83.IT is observable from this Act, that it is not the Parliament but the KING, without mentioning consent of Parliament, who commands the Proprietars of Castles to furnish them for Defence against the Enemy, with Victual and Artillery, and the reason of this is, because there was no Fort nor Strength, or turris pinnata, call'd Tower-houses, allow'd to be build in Scotland, without an ex∣press Warrand under the Kings own hand, this being one of the effects o his Prerogative, in the sole disposing, and making of Peace and War; and since Arms cannot be born without his Li∣cence,
much less should Strengths be built: and from these grounds, and the practise of other Nations, it was contended lately, that the King may Garrison any mans house, when he and his Council find the hav∣ing a Garrison in that place, for maintaining the Peace of the Coun∣trey is necessary; But Craig is of opinion, that it is Treason, or at least Purpresture, to deny the King the use of our Castles, or Towers in such cases, Jure anglorum turres omnes, quia ad defensionem, su munitionem, regni extructae tantum praesumuntur, ad regem per∣tinent, ad quem & regni defensio; quod si idem & jure nostro observa∣ri quis dicat, non, ut opinor, aerrabit, cur enim qui turrim sive for∣taltium suum regi denegat, crimen laesae Majestatis incurrit, magis quam si equum, aut aedes, aut rem aliam, nulla alia ratio probabilis reddi potest, nisi quod negatio haec ex jure feudali, regem & dominum videtur privare jure fui dominij, & species quaedam purpresturae est, & alias res nostras principi poscenti possumus negare sine perduellionis periculo. Which agrees with the opinion of forraign Lawyers who treat of the power of Kings in general, Fritz. de jur. praesidij, pe∣nes quem Monarchia, is urbes, arces occupare potest, is{que} pro tuenda securitate publica praesidia imponere potest. But in this as in all such cases, the prerogative should not be made use of, except in cases of extream necessity, and even then the Heretor is to be repaid, if he must hire another House, as at Sea in Storms, all the par∣ties concern'd in the Ship are to contribute for repairing his loss, who for lightning and securing his Ship, is forc'd to throw his Goods over-board. IF a Woman who has a Conjunct-fee,ACT 84. alienat it during her mar∣riage, the alienation is , except she ratifie the same judici∣ally outwith the presence of her Husband upon oath, never to revock it, and then the alienation is valid, but though this Act sustains a judicial Instrument under the Seal of the Judge, as a suf∣ficient probation; yet now something must be produc'd under her own hand, or by two Notars, and the Lords would not sustain the Act of Renunciation, though under the hand of both Judge and Clerk, February 15. 1678. Gordon contra Maxvel. The rea∣son of which Decision I conceive to be not because this Act to which the Decision is contrary, is only set down as a Memorandum, and relates a Decision of Parliament, without Statuting any thing thereupon, for confirming the same, for the meer setting down this Decision among the Acts of Parliament, gives it the strength of an Act; but because the time of that Act▪ one Notar was suf∣ficient, but now, either a Woman must subscrive her self, or two Notars for her. Observ. 1o. That Decisions of Parliament bind as Laws, though they be not set down as general Laws, for the inserting them amongst Laws, make them equal to Laws. Some times Decisi∣ons by the King, are inserted amongst the Acts of Parliament, as cap. 16 David 2. Observ. 2o. That though an oath is sufficient to confirm the Re∣nunciation of a Joynture stante matrimonio; Yet it is not suffici∣ent
to confirm a personal obligation, granted by a Woman, stan∣te matrimonio, as is decided, November 8 1677. Sinclar contra Richardson and his Spouse; the reason of which disparity seems to be, that in Conjunct-fees, she is domina, and the Obligation is not to take effect till after her Husbands death: But in other Obliga∣tions, where the design is to bind her self, the Obligation is in∣valid, because she being sub potestate mariti, cannot oblige her self; and upon the same ground it is, that Dispositions granted by He∣retrixes stante matrimonio, will be sustained, they having therein plenum dominium, as to the Property; and even personal Obliga∣tions for sums of Money granted by a Woman, who was an ap∣pearand Heir, there being a Back-bond granted to her, declaring that she should not be thereby personally oblig'd, was sustain'd to be the foundation of a Comprizing; for as she might have dis∣pon'd her own Heretage expresly, so she might have lawfully granted an Obligation, whereby the same might have been Ad∣judg'd, January 23. 1678. Pringle and Bruce contra Paterson. vid. Stockman. decis. 59. BY the Canon Law, Laicks have no power of choising or electing hurch men,ACT 85. c. Quisquis 43. c, massana. 56. de elect. & elect po∣test. So that the priviledge here granted, seems contrary to the Canon Law; But as the King of France had power by the Concor∣data with Pope Leo 10th, to nominat Bishops and Abbots; so our King had the nomination of Bishops and Abbots, and the provisi∣on of them belong'd to the Pope, as is clear by the 125 Act 7 Par. Ja. 5. Which though this Act says, did belong to our Kings by the Priviledge of their Crown (for prerogative was then call'd privi∣ledge) yet it is cone, that they deriv'd this priviledge from the Pope, Act 53 Par. 5 Ja. 4. For understanding this Act, it is ne∣cessry to know, that if the Kings who had these priviledges, did not nominat within six Moneths, the Pope might confer the Bene∣fice as he pleas'd: and if the King did nominat an unfit person, the Pope might refuse him; and the King was oblig'd to nme ano∣ther within three Moneths, vid. past. de benefi cap. 8. But our Kings not acknowledging this power of precluding, It is Statute by this Act, that our Kings may present at all times, till the Prelate named by the Pope show his Bulls of Provision to the King and Chapter, and though the King should admit to the Temporality a Prelate before showing of his Bulls, it will not be prejudicial to the Kings priviledge of presentation, that is to say, that though the King had admitted a person, whom the Pope had rejected as unfit, he might yet of new present, and the Pope should not have Right, jure devo∣luto. ACT 86.FOr understanding this Act, it is fit to know, that regulariter beneficia vacatura, could not be purchast; and yet the Pope had reserv'd a power to confer, even these ex plenitudie potesta∣tis, cap. proposuit de confer. praebend. 6. decret. But this Act i
made to annul all such Provisions to Benefices, not yet va∣cand. King IAMES the third, Parliament 12. THis Act giving the Warden power to continue his Courts,ACT 87. shews that the continuance of Courts, is not of its own nature lawful; and therefore no Judge may continue his Courts, except he have an express Warrand for it, since such as are cit∣ed, may be thus prejudg'd by delays: But since the King is the Foun∣tain of Jurisdiction, it is thought the King may grant such Warrands, tho there be some cases wherein the King has restricted himself by ex∣press Statute, as in Criminal Courts, which are declar'd to be peremp∣tor by the 79 Act 11 Par. Ja. 6. Where it is observable, that these Courts are declar'd not to be coninuable by the Kings spe∣cl will and direction, to shew that continuations of Courts de∣pended upon him; and generally it is by the will of the Letters, that it is known what Actions abide continuation or not; and though the Wardens Courts be Justice-Courts, yet it is thought they may be continued, notwithstanding of that posterior Act. BY this Act the breakers of the King or Wardens safe Conduct, are punishable by death, which is conform to the Civil Law,ACT 88. l. 1. ff. ad Leg. Jul. Majest. and to the practice of other Nations, Christin. tit. 4. Art. 8. What difference there is inter pacem, se∣curitatem, salvagardiam & salvum conductum. Vid. afflict. lib. 3. tit. 16. THough the selling or buying of corrupt Wine,ACT 89. after it is found to be such, be declar'd punishable by death; yet the selling corrupt Wine willingly, even before that, is punishable: and though selling corrupt Wine in the general be punishable; yet this must be restricted to the case of knowledge, for he who sells or buys without knowing of it to be corrupt, or to have been found so, is not punishable by death. King JAMES the third, Parl. 13. OF old every Heretor brought his own men to Weapon-showing, and to the Kings Host,ACT 90. as is clear by the 81 Act Par. 11 Ja. 3. and all these were commanded by the Sheriffs, Lords of Regalities, and the Kings other Officers, and were call'd together by Letters patent under the Pri∣vy Seal, directed to these Officers, as is clear by this Act; But
now the Militia is commanded by Colonels, and chosen by the King, and are call'd together by Proclamation, and Letters from the Council, subscriv'd only by the Chancellor or President of the Council. From this and other old Writs, it is clear, that the Privy Seal was then the Seal of the Privy Council, but now they have a Seal peculiar to themselves, which is call'd the Signet of the Privy Council. Vid. Annot. on Act 30 Par. 3 Ja. 4. ACTS 91, 92.The Kings Rents of old were Govern'd by the Kings Master-houshold and Compt-roller, and the Council, but now by the Ex∣chequer, and the Master-houshold has no interest in them, ratione officij; that Office belonging Heretably to the Earl of Argile, is now extinct by his Forealture, But the Office of Compt-roller is engrossed in the Thesaurers Office: By this Act, such as detain the Kings Rents, are to be distrainʒied, that is to say, pursu'd in the ordinary way, viz. by poynding the ground for their reddendo, by Hornings upon their Tacks; but though the uplifting the Kings Feu-duties was design'd once to have been by quartering, yet this was thereafter found illegal; nor could the Excise be so lifted, if that way were not warranted by Parliament, there is no special punishment exprest here against the Officers. who detain the Kings Rents: But by the Civil Law, these who abstracted publick Mo∣ney, or converted it to their own use, Erant rei peculiatus, qui olim paenâ quadrupli postea deportatione punibantur, magistratus vero qui durante officio publicas pecunias abstraxerunt capite puniuntur, l. un. C h. 1. but this Crime only holds in the misapplying of pub∣lick Money, and not in the withholding the Kings Rents. Nota. This and the next Act bear not to be made with con∣sent of the three Estates of Parliament, but only that the Lords think expedient; by which I think must be mean'd the Lords of the Articles, or else this and the next Act being Concessions of the Barons, in what related to themselves, they were not thought fit to be drawn as Acts of Parliament, but only as concessions; but I incline rather to think that by Lords here is mean'd, the Lords of Articles, because the Acts 95 and 96 of this Parliament bear the conclusion of the Lords of the Articles, though some∣times by the word, Lords, are mean'd the three Estates of Parlia∣ment, as in the 30 Act Par. 7 Ja. 2. ACT 93.BY this Act the Rose-noble was made the standart of all the Gold, and it was of twenty two Carrets and ten grain fineness, but now our Gold is only of twenty two Carrets fineness, that Gold being too soft, and consequently, subject to be wasted. By this Act also the Warden of the Cunʒie-house were first in∣stituted, for understanding of whose Office, it is fit to know, that the Master of the Cunʒie-house has the care of Coyning, and as checks over him, are for trying the fineness, the Essay-master, and for trying the weight are the Warden, who trons the Money, and
the Counter-warden, who weighs after him, and is his Check, and over them all is the General of the Mint. BY this Act Respits are discharg'd, whereby Justice is delay'd;ACT 94. and it's here said, that Respits are more against Justice than Remissions; the reason whereof seems to be, that Remissions are only granted after some Tryal; but Respits are granted more easi∣ly, and may be sought more frequently, and that before the state of the case be examined; nor is the Party injur'd, assyth'd here as in Remissions: For the same reason also, Precepts for continu∣ing Justice Courts, are discharg'd, and the Justices allow'd not to respect them Act 79 Par. 11 Ja. 6. and by the 47 Act of that same Parliament, they are discharg'd also; for that Act stricks a∣gainst Respits, as well as against Protections. THe Act anent Ferries is Explain'd in the observations upon the Act 75 Par. 10 Ja. 3.ACT 95. OBserve 1o. From this Act,ACT 96. that the Silver of Scotland should be 11 penny fine; for though this Act says, that it shall be the fineness of 12 penny fine; yet the meaning of that Act is, because 12 penny fine is the finest imaginary value, but there must be still a twelfth part allow'd of alley to make the Siver malleable; and albeit the punishment in the Act against these who work not up to this fineness be arbitrary, yet it is declar'd to be punishable by death, by the 56 Act Par. 6 Q. M. Observ. 2o. That the ordaining this Act to take effect after for∣ty days Proclamation, implys, that regularly Acts may be put in execution sooner, as by the 20 Act Par. 3 Ja. 3. King JAMES the third, Parliament 14. THis Act is only a Temporary Statute,ACT 98. ending with these who swore to observe it, but the bringing Malefactors to the Bar in sober manner, without assisters, is command∣ed by many Acts, and though by this Act it seems, that the Justices cannot hinder some of the Pannels friends to stand with him upon the Pannel; that is to say, to stay at the Bar, and that four friends are allow'd to the Pursuer, and ten to the Defender, by the 41 Act Par. 6 Q. M. Yet the Justices do suffer few or none to stand with the Pannel, as they see occasion for it. THe Crowner of old received the Porteous Rolls, that is to say, the names of such Malefactors as were to be pursu'd at Justice-airs, but now the Justice Clerk keeps it himself,ACT 99. and gives it to the Macers of the Criminal Courts, or Messengers who cite the persons to be pursu'd.
ACT 100.THe Defenders in slaughter are by this to be cited upon six dayes to find Caution, or else are to be denunc'd Rebels; but now if the Criminals be not in prison, they are to be cited to find Cau∣tion upon fifteen dayes, but if they be in prison they may get an Indict∣ment to answer upon twenty four hours. ACT 101.BY this Statute it is clear, that a person apprehended and incar∣cerated, must first be maintain'd upon his own expences, and if he be not able to aliment himself, the Sheriff is to aliment him upon his Majesties allowance, and by a late Act of the Justice Court The Keeper of the Tolbooth of Edinburgh is discharg'd to receive any Criminal Prisoner, till he who enters him Prisoner, find Cau∣tion to aliment; for before that Act, poor people were starv'd and ruin'd by their Imprisonment. ACT 102.THis Act is in Desuetude, for nothing is due now to Crown∣ers, because they do not attach as formerly, and this was the price of their pains or Fee. ACT 103.THis Act is in Desuetude, for no Sheriff tholes now an Assize, the last nor no day of a Justice-air, except he be pursu'd for some particular Crime, or for Malversation in his Office. ACT 104.BY this Act if the Sheriff hear of any Convocations, he should charge them to cease, and if they refuse, he should continue the Court, and pursue them, and the punishment is Imprisonment for a year; from which Act, it was argu'd justly in the Earl of Caithness case, that though men refus'd to dissipat at the Sheriffs desire, he could not summarly fall on them, and kill them, for that were too dangerous a power to be given to any Sheriff, and all that he could do by this Act, was to acquaint the King, and then pursue them. ACT 105.THis Act ordaining the Causes of Widows and Orphans, Kirk-men, &c. only to belong to the Cognition of the Lords, is in Desuetude, and these Actions do properly belong to the Commissariot Court. ACT 106.THe Burrows of Scotland have liberty to meet in time of Parliament, and to propose as a Body, and third Estate, any overtures for Trade, but no other state of Parliament can lawfully meet, this be∣ing a singularity indulg'd to them for the good of Commerce; and the subsequent Acts are propos'd by that Estate to the Parliament, and by them turn'd into Acts, as appears by the Rubrick it self.
VId. Act 12 Par 2 Ja. 3. Vid. observ. on 47 Act Par. 1 Cha. 2. and on Act 66 Par. 14 Ja. 2.ACT 107. THe Act here ratifi'd, though not exprest,ACT 108. is Act 30 Par. 5 Ja. 3. THough this Act allows the Burrows to meet every year at Inner-eithing only,ACT 111. yet thereafter they are allow'd to meet four times in the year, at what place they shall think most expedient, Act 64 Pa. 5 Ja. 6. and the burgh of Edinburgh, with six of the rest may conveen them, Act 119 Par. 7 Ja. 6. Now they meet in July at Edin∣burgh, Pearth, Dundee, Aberdene, Stirling, and the Provost of the Town in which they meet, being always President without Ele∣ction, and though the Fine of each absent Burgh be here five pounds, yet it is made twenty pounds, Act 119 Par. 7. Ja. 6. THis Act adds to the ordinary annexations,ACT 112. that the King shall be bound by his oath at the Coronation, that he shall not alie∣nat the annext Property, which oath is given by all the succeeding Kings. It is observable also in this Act, that the Kings great Seal, and the Seals of all the Prelats, Lords, Barons, and Commissi∣oners for Burrows are appended, which was usual in these days, in all Concessions granted in Parliament, and I have several Patents of honour, granted by the King in Parliament, wherein the Kings great Seal was appended, as now it is to the Patent; and the Seals of all the Ecclesiasticks, were appended upon the right side, and these of the Laicks on the left side, each Seal hanging from a Label or Tag, on which the owners Name was writ, and in anno 1558. a Commission to the Lord Seton to be Ambassador in France, was thus Seal'd by the King, and Sign'd by the Nobility, and by the 191 Act Par. 13 Ja. 6. The Morning-gift of the Abbacy of Dum∣fermling is said to have been under the Kings great Seal, and the Seals and Subscriptions of the Estates in favours of Q Ann. THis priviledge was granted by Malcolm 2 leg. M. c. 3 num. 4. but both that priviledge and this Statute,ACT 113. are now in Desue∣tude, so that now the Crowner has none of the Malefactors Horses. THis Act appointing that strangers be well us'd, and that no new Customs, Impositions or Exactions be put upon them,ACT 114. seems to limit the Kings prerogative acknowledg'd by the 27 Act Sess. 3 Par. 1 Ch. 2. by which it is declar'd, that the King may dispose and order Trade with Forraigners as he pleases, a consequent of which Prero∣gative is, that he may either discharge Trade with Forraigners, or burden it as he pleases, since by this Act no new Imposition can be laid on. But the answer to this is, that this Act relates to strang∣ers, and not to the Kings own Subjects, so that though Strangers come, they should be civily us'd by this Act, yet they may be de∣bar'd by that Act.
ACT 115.THis Act granting a Commission to Examine the Laws, and put them in one Book, took effect in Skeens Edition of the Acts of Parliament, and Regiam Majestatem, in which many of the old Acts, yet to be seen in the Records of Parliament, are left out. Observ. That the Acts of Parliament are call'd the Kings Laws, and not the Acts of Parliament, for the King has only the Legislative power, and the Estates of Parliament only consent. The Books of Regiam Majestatem, are likewise numbred amongst our Laws, but what is mean'd by the words (Acts and Statutes) added in this Act to the Kings Laws, and Reg. Maj. I do not understand, ex∣cept by these be mean'd the Burrow-Laws, and the Statutes of the Gildry, and these other Books that are bound in with Reg. Maj.
K. JAMES IV. Parliament I. BY the twelfth Articl. Iter. Just.ACT 1. The Burrows had liberty to re∣pledge their own Burgesses from being upon assizes; which pri∣viledge is here regulated; but now the priviledge it self is in Desuetude; for all Burgesses are oblig'd to pass upon assizes, ex∣cept the Chirurgeons of Edin∣burgh, who have a special pri∣viledge, because of their neces∣sary attendence upon sick per∣sons. BY this Statute all Ships must come first to free Burghs,ACT 3. and no Strangers can fraught Ships; but now by the 5 Act 3 Sess. 2 Par. Ch. 2. all urghs of Barony and Regality, may Traffick in the product of Scotland, as freely as Royal Burghs. Vid. That Act and the observ. thereon: That part of the Act discharging stran∣gers to buy Fish that is not salted, is now in Desuetude. It was argued from this Act, in the case of the Town of Lin∣lithgow against Borrowstounness, that the Burrows Royal had the only priviledge of having all Goods Liver'd and Loadned at their Ports; and which is likewise clear by Act 88 Par. 6 Ja. 4. and by Act 152 Par. 12 Ja. 6. 2o. Without this priviledge, the Bur∣rows were not able to pay the sixth part of the burdens laid upon them, in contemplation of their Trade, since a Clandestine Trade
without this might be carry'd on by the Burghs of Barony and Re∣gality, who, since they may retail publickly, might have the same priviledge as they, if they had likewise power to import publick∣ly. 3o. This was most convenient for securing the Kings Customs; because where ever there is Livering allow'd, the King must have Waiters, and upon which consideration, the Magistrats of Burghs Royal are by the Acts of Parliament, appointed to assist the Kings Customers; and whereas it was pretended, that the priviledge of Commerce was inter regalia, and consequently the King might grant a free Port to any Burgh he pleas'd. 2o. The priviledge of a free Port was different from that of Livering, and Loadning. 3o. The Acts of Parliament cited, did only discharge Strangers to Load and Liver, which is yet more clear by the Act 120 Par. 7 Ja. 6. To which it was reply'd, that the King and Parliament, having former∣ly granted the sole power of Loadning and Livering to free Bur∣rows, it was no diminution of his power to assert, that he could not give a new grant of that to any, whereof he was formerly di∣vested. To the 2d it was reply'd, that the sole priviledge of a free Port granted by a King to a Burgh of Regality, or Barony, can extend no further, than that thereby they may have the priviledge of bringing into their Port, the Goods proper only to be sold by them. To the 3d it was reply'd, that this Act discharges Stran∣gers and others to Liver at any place, except at the Ports of Burghs Royal; and though in that 120 Act Par. 7 Ja. 6. This Act is repeated, as relating only to strangers, yet in the next line, Strangers and others are in that 120 again discharged; Likeas by the Acts of Parliament, the sole priviledge of losing and loosing, is declar'd to belong only to Burghs Royal, which in Sea-faring Terms, signifies loadning and un-loadning. ACT 4.BY the Act 85 Par. 11 Ja. 3. The Rents of Churches, or Be∣nefices, whereof the King is Patron, are declar'd to belong to him sede vacante, by the priviledge of his Crown, and this was so formerly declar'd by the 7 cap. Stat. 2 Rob. 1. And Skeen there observes, that cum alicujus beneficii Ecclesiastici patronatus pertinet ad Regem terra si quae sunt ei annexa pertinent quodammodo ad Re∣gem; and therefore by this Act it is appointed, that it being de∣clar'd by the best and worthiest Clerks of the Realm, that if any Church-man received, and purchast such a Benefice at Rome, they should be punish'd and these who supplyed them; This Declaration from Clerks was requir'd, because the Secular would not meddle with Church-men in these days, till Church-men had some way de∣clar'd them guilty.
King JAMES the fourth Parliament 2. THat part of the Act appointing the intromission with the Kirk Rents, to be a point of Dittay (that is to say,ACT 7. to be a Crime) is now in Desuetude; for they have no other priviledge here, more than Laicks; but to intro∣met with their Rents, either by Arms or open Force, is the Crime of oppression with us, and was punish'd by the Romans, lege Ju∣lià de vi, per deportationem in liberos homines, & ultimum supplicium in servos. Observ. That by this Act, Parsons and Vicars are founded in jure, as to Teinds, for it is declar'd a Crime to intromet without a right from them. I Understand not how it is said here,ACT 9. that the King could not discharge any part of the Taxation granted to him, though it was granted for a particular or publick use, for it is ordinary and lawful to Kings with us, to discharge privat parties their particu∣lar proportions, except the contrary be expresly provided, and the offer be so qualifi'd by the Parliament; but here the King was mi∣nor, as appears by the subsequent Act, or rather this Taxation be∣ing granted originally for maintaining an Ambassador for the Kings, Marriage, as is clear by the Act, and so ad particularem effectum, it could not be diverted from that particular use, lest else the Em∣bassie should have fail'd; And from this we may observe, that what is granted for a general and publick use, cannot be otherwise ap∣ply'd or taken away. IT is observable from this Act that the King was Minor,ACT 10. and that is the reason why he could not discharge something here exprest, which falls not under his annex'd Property. THe Parliament here recommends only to the King,ACT 11▪ that his Majesty shall cause his Wardens observe the days appoint∣ed for Truce, and they meddle not with it, because what con∣cerns Peace and War, belongs to the King, and not to the Parlia∣ment. THe restrictions here put upon the King,ACT 12. proceeded from his minority. Nota, Councellours are made accusable to the King and Parlia∣ment of their Council, till the next Parliament; for the words are, and shall be responsal and accusable to the King for their Counsel; but
this was in the Kings minority, and therefore there were greater reason that they should have been lyable for their Counsel, than when a King is major, for then he may judge of their advice; in which case, nemo tenetur de concilio nisi doloso aut fraudulento. But it may be infer'd from this Act, that regulariter, Counsellours are not lyable for what they do, else this Act had been needless, obliging them to be lyable only till the next Parliament. But it is also observable, that this Act was made by these who had risen in rebellion against King James the third, under pretext of his Sons Command, though in effect they forced him when he was a Child, to head them against his Father, and in this Act they force him to make use of their Counsel; and yet the Act bears only, that the King humbled himself to abide at their Counsel; the same per∣sons made an Act declaring that Rebellion lawful, which is yet ex∣tant amongst the black Acts, but was Expung'd as most abominable and Rebellious. ACT 13.THough this Act appoints that our Gold and Silver shall be of the fineness of Brudges; yet by the 96 Act 13 Par. Ja. 3. and 56 Act 6 Par. Q. M. the Silver is to be eleven penny fine, and the Gold twenty two Carret fine, so that the best Money being but twelve penny fine, and the best Gold twenty four Carret fine; there is a twelfth part of alley allow'd in either, and so our Silver-work, and our Coyn should be of the same fineness; but this Act has been in Desuetude, as to Silver-work, for which the Gold-smiths alleadge, that the people are to be blam'd, and not they, since the people will not go to the price, and they do the people no wrong, since they proportion the price to the intrinsick value. We observe both in our Plate and Coyn, the same Standart with Eng∣land; but the Standart of the French Plate is finer than their Coyn, to discourage their Subjects from having much Plate, and encouraging them to bring it to the Mint, for current Money. The reason that is alleadg'd, why this alley is allow'd to both Gold and Silver is commonly said to be, because they are not malliable without some mixture of Copper, but the contrary will appear to these, who use to refine Silver with Lead, and Gold with Antimony, by which, Gold and Silver may be brought to the exactest fineness, without all mixture, and they are then most malliable and soft; but the true reason why the Copper is added, is, because without it, both Gold and Silver would be too soft, and so too much subject to wearing and loss, as appears in the English Rose-nobles, and the double of Hungarian Ducats, and the Venetian Cequins; for which cause the Emperor now adds more Copper to his Ducats; and the English make no more Rose-nobles, or any other Gold so fine. ACT 15.IS formerly Explain'd in the 11 Act Par. 1 Ja. 1.
THe Prince of Scotland was Earl of Cumberland,ACT 16. whilst that Countrey belong'd to this Crown, but when the Steuarts came to the Crown, which was in the Reign of Rob. the 2. Their Heretage which was Renfrew, &c. was Erected in a Principali∣ty. That there was such an Erection, is clear from the Revoca∣tions made by K. Ja. 5. and K. Ja. 6. Where all Dispositions of Lands annex'd to the principality, are Revocked, but the Ere∣ction it self is lost. However to supply that, the Rights made by the King bear still to be as Prince when there is no Prince, and as Administrator to the Prince when there is a Prince, and the Re∣venue of the Principality is manag'd in cumulo, with the rest of the Kings Revenue, when there is no Prince, but when there is a Prince, he has a Chamberlain, who receives and compts for the prin∣cipality a part. It was debated January 1680. whether when there was no Prince existing, the Vassals who held of the Prince, were to be repute Vassals holding of the King immediatly; or as Vassals hold∣ing still of the Principality, and so holding of a Subject, the Principality being still a distinct See, whereof the King had only the Administration. But it was found by the Lords, that when there was no Prince, they held of the King; and therefore they found, that the Laird of Lusses Marriage fell to the Kings Dona∣tor; though it was alledg'd that his Marriage of these Lands could not fall to the King, since he held other Lands Taxt Ward of the King, and he who holds Lands of the King, is not lyable in a Marriage, for Lands holden of a Subject, and consequently, he being content to pay the Taxt Marriage to the King, the ordinary avail of his Marriage could not be crav'd, for Lands which he held of the Prince, who was but a Subject. The reasons of which De∣cision were 1o. That Appanages given to Children, do in their own nature imply to be only Temporary, and whilst the Child exists to whom it is provided for an Appanage; and therefore since we have not the foundation of the Principality it self, we must construct it to have been thus erected. 2o. By this Act it is ordain'd, that when there is no Prince, the Vassals of the Princi∣pality shall come to Parliament, and none can come to Parlia∣ment  such as hold of the King; and that same Act says, till the King have a Son, who shall be immediat betwixt the King and them, which clearly demonstrats, that till there be a Son, they hold immediatly of the King. 3o. This is yet more clear by the 16 Act 1 Par. Ch. 1. and the 58 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. Whereby Lands holding of the King and Prince, are aequiparate quoad all legal ef∣fects. 4o. When the Kings comes to any Estate jure privato, by Succession or Forefalture, these Lands alter their nature, and the Vassals hold of the King as King, and are not consider'd as hold∣ing of a Subject as formerly; and therefore the same should hold when the principality by the not existing of a Prince, returns to the
Crown. 5o. By an express Decision observ'd by Dury. It is found, that whilst there is a Prince, the Lands of the Principality hold of the Prince, but when there is no Prince, they hold of the King. 6o When there is no Prince, the King Dispones the Casualties, and sometimes the Lands, as he does these of his own Property, and it were absurd to assert, that when there is no Prince, the King Dispones as Administrator, for else he behov'd to be comptable; nor can there be an Administrator where there is no Pupil: but the King is term'd sometimes an Administrator ex errore stili, or ad majorem cautelam, or else the King is truly made to Dispone both as King and Prince to keep up the Principality as a distinct Fee and Erection, lest otherwise the knowledge of the Lands might perish, the Erection being lost. 7o. This is clear by the practice of forraign Nations, Perez. ad tit. 1. lib. 10. cod. num. 10. Ter∣rae quae in Appanagium dantur penes domanium semper manent solo usu∣fructu provisionalier concesso, alias contingeret Regium Domanium sen∣sim diminui. ACTS 18 & 19MEn used to give their best Horse or some other acknowledg∣ment to great men, and especially to Chiefs of Clans, for their protection, and these are here discharg'd, and are a kind of Black-meal, they are now intirely in Desuetude. Nota, Possession past memory of man is not sufficient in unwar∣rantable exactions & oportet consuetudo sit rationabilis alias non tenet. THis Act is in Desuetude, for actions of poinding the Ground, are now pursu'd for recovering bygone annualrents,ACT 20. in the ordinary Form of Process. THe Forcing the Kings Tennents to do Service, is punish'd as oppression by this Act,ACT 21. but the punishment is not specifi'd, and though Oppression be punish'd by death, Act 42 Par. 4 Ja. 4, and by the Act 88 Par. 11. Ja. 6. Yet I think that here Op∣pression could not reach that far, and though it be ordain'd to be a point of Dittay (that is to say a Crime) by this Act, yet such Oppressions use to be pursu'd before the Council, Though some Oppressions may be pursu'd before the Justice Court, or Council, as is clear by the 2 Act 1 Par. Ch. 1. and Oppression is a general name for Violence, as Stellionatus is in dolo.
King IAMES the fourth, Parliament 3. THe Alliance betwixt Scotland and France is here ordain'd to be renewed, and new priviledges to be desir'd,ACT 23. which were accordingly obtain'd, and the Alliance here mentioned is inserted in the 66. Act, 8. Par. Q. M. THe form of the Chancellary is not to be alter'd,ACT 24. except in the Brieve of the Summonds of Error; the reason of which exception is, because by the 35. Act of this Parl. the Form of the Summonds of Error is alter'd in some points: But by the Act 13. Par. 10. Ja. 6. the Stile is to be alter'd in no Letters. BY this Act the Superior of Ward Lands, or his Donatar,ACT 25. are obliged to maintain the Heir during the time he has the Ward Lands, if the Heir has no other Blensh nor Feu-Lands; and though he have Blensh or Feu, yet if he have not as much of either as may entertain him, or if they be Appryzed, in either of these cases the Heir will have Action ex paritate rationis; and by the same parity of reason, it may be doubted whether Donatars to Liferent Es∣cheats are bound to entertain the Rebels whose Escheat they have purchast, and it may be argued that they are not, since a man is on∣ly at the Horn by his own fault: This Donatar to the Ward is o∣bliged to Aliment the Ward Pupil, by allowing him an Ali∣ment, and not by keeping him in his House; and the Donatars Assigney is bound to Aliment, though he got no Mails and Duties, if he cannot shew why he was excluded from getting them, Sibbald contra Faulconer. The Sheriff of the Shire, or Baillies are warranted to take Sure∣ty of the Superior or Donatar, that they shall not waste nor de∣stroy the Lands during their right which our practique extends also to Liferenters, who are bound to find Caution to keep up their Liferent Houses and others in the same condition wherein they found them, and this is conform to the common Law; and all this mat∣ter is learnedly treated, Christin. ad leges Mechlin. tit. 14. And the way how this Caution is to be found, is fully cleared, Act 15. Par. 4. Ja. 5. where this shall be explained: This Act is founded upon Cap. 1. l. Malcolm 2. by which there is a mutual Contract betwixt the King and his Vassals, in which that King Distribuit totam terram Regni Scotiae hominibus suis & omnes Barones concesserunt Wardam & rele∣vium de Haerede cujuscunque Baronis defuncti ad sustentationem Domi∣ni Regis. And though Arnisaeus de potest. Majesti. num. 8 inveighs against this Law (for which he cites Boethius and John Majors Hi∣story) as contrary to reason, that being to add affliction to the af∣flicted: and because Pupils may serve the Superior by a Substitute, or by allowing a part of the Feu to him who serves. Yet I know no man would refuse Land upon this condition; and it is presumable that whilst the Vassal is a Pupil, he will only need an Aliment, but
yet I confess that according to the very Text of the Feudal Law, Pu∣pils are neither obliged to serve by themselves, nor substitutes, lib. 2. Feud. tit. 26. cap. Si minor, §. Si quis decess. 5. Tho posterior custume introduced the necessity of Substitutes, Gloss. in dict: §. Si quis. To which we by the foresaid Contract have added that the Superior shall have the Feu, and not be obliged to accept even of a Substitute. It is the received practice of Scotland, that the Liferentrix should entertain the Heir if she Liferent his whole Estate, which is only founded upon a consequence from this Act, and the paritie of rea∣son; but in my judgement, this practice is neither warranted by this Act, Argumento Legis, nor is it founded upon the Principles of, nor suitable to the Analogie of Law, for as to the Act of Parliament it (being joyn'd with the Act 15. Par. 4. Ja. 5. whereby it is ex∣plained) ordains that the Donatar to the Ward shall find Caution not to destroy the Biggings, &c. As also that he shall entertain the  the Ward, but when it comes to Statute anent Life-renters, it appoints only that they shall likewise find Caution not to destroy the Bigging, but it appoints not that they shall Aliment the Heir, ergo, not only is there no warrand for the Liferentrix A∣limenting the Heir from this Act, But on the contrary, the Parlia∣ment having both cases under their consideration, and not having extended the case of Alimenting to Life-renters, it must be con∣cluded that they design'd not that Life-renters should Aliment nam casu omissus habetu pro ommisso. 2o. Laws ought not to be extended at most but ex paritate rationis, and therefore though Life renters and Wardatars aequiparantur by these Statutes, quoa d the finding of Caution, that was most reason∣able, because there was eadem paritas rationis, since neither should waste that to which they had but a temporary right, and by the Common Law Life-renters were lyable in the same way which was called cantio usu fructuaria, but quoad the Alimenting, the Superior in the Ward, or his Donatar, should be in a different case from the Life-renter, because the Superior in effect is but Tutor durante Wardâ, and therefore he should Aliment the minor, but the Life-rentrix is a singular Successor. 3o. In making Contracts of Marriage, there is no more allowed for a Life-renter than what may be a competency for entertaining the Life-rentrix, and suitable to her quality; and therefore it is a∣gainst reason & contra illud quod agitatum est inter partes contrahentes, to take away a part of her Aliment to Aliment another. 4o. She being made Domina of her Life-rent by her Contract, and there being jus quaesitum to her thereby quod ejus est auferri ab eà nequit sine consensu suo. 5o. Tochers are oft times augmented in consideration of the Coniunct-fie, and therefore its most unreasonable and illegal that what was given her for an onerous cause, should be taken from her and applyed to the behove of one who represents the Contracter, who was bound to warrand her Life-rent, and who got good deed upon that account; And it is unjust that the Husband by spending
his Estate should burden her, or that his Heir should not rather want than she. 6o. Whatever may be said to oblidge a Mother jure naturae to en∣tertain her own Children; and I think this Aliment has been at first founded on that Principle of Justice, whereby Donatores, Pa∣troni & Parentes, were only lyable in quantum facere potuerunt, cal∣led by Lawyers Exceptio competentiae, yet there is no reason that a Life-rentrix should be oblidged to entertain an appearand Heir, who is a meer stranger; and this jus naturae oblidges the Mother not only to entertain the appearand Heir, but all her Children, as was found in the case of the Countess of Buchan: And albeit the Act of Parliament speaks only of Heirs; yet by our Law, even appearand Heirs will get an Aliment allow'd them, though thereafter they re∣nounce, but it is less clear, if it will be allow'd them after they have re∣nounced, July 16. 1667. Hamilton contra Symington: And yet in this case they are but meer strangers, and can no more be called Heirs, or appearand Heirs, after Renunciation; as also, though this Act mentions only Ward Lands, yet it is ex praxi extended to others who have no Ward Lands, the 22 Feb. 1673. Finnay contra Oliphant; And though both the Rubrick and the words of the Act provide only Aliment for Minors, yet it is extended to appearand Heirs, who are Ma∣jors, as in the case of Rig contra the Lady Carberrie; nor will it be sufficient that the Life-rentrix offer to entertain the appearand Heir in the Family with her, as Durie observes, the 14. Feb. 1627. Noble contra his Mother; nor is this only extended where the Mother Liferents all, but it is even extended to the case where all the Mi∣nors Estate, beside what is Life-rented, is not sufficient to pay the debt, and is affected by legal diligences; as was found 13 Feb. 1662. Antonia Brown contra her Mother; but it may be very well doubted whether this last Decision may be extended where the debt is only personal, and I find the Lords did refuse to decide this point in a case debated 1667. betwixt the Lady Staniehill and her Son, though the Son there alleadg'd that he sold his Land to hinder Com∣prising, and if it had been Comprized she would have been lyable. And this Action for Alimenting the Heirs was still sustained against both the Grand-Fathers Relict, and the Fathers Relict pro rata, of their Life-rents which they had of the appearand Heir; albeit it was al∣leadg'd that the Mother having a nearer relation, and being the Wise of him who spent the Estate, should be only lyable, or at least first ly∣able, 12. Decemb. 1677. Laird Airdrie contra the two Ladies; but yet I find the Grand-Father was found lyable in no proportion with the Mother, where he had only reserv'd a mean proportion to himself, when he did Infest the appearand Heirs Father, 7. July, 1629. It may be doubted whether a Husband marrying the Life-rentrix, having given her a provision in contemplation of this Joynture will be ly∣able to Aliment, since he is a meer stranger, to which all that can be answer'd is, that he was oblidg'd to know it was lyable to this bur∣den; and if he will be found lyable, it may be doubted if he will not be free from the provision given in contemplation thereof; tan∣quam causa data causa non sequuta. As also, it may be doubted whether
the pursuing such an Action as this will infer a Passive Title, seing the appearand Heir is thus lucratus, but yet I think it will not, since he reaps thereby no advantage which would have accresced to the Creditors to whom no part of his Aliment would have belong'd; and even appearand Heirs renuncing, will have right to an Aliment, as is observed before. The Civilians think that a Mother is oblig'd to Aliment her Child till it be past three years of age, l. 3. C. de Patr. Pot. & ibid. gloss. and even after three years of age, if the Father be not able to Aliment the Child, the Mother is, because the Child is oblig'd to Aliment and reverence the Mother, vid. Surd. de Aliment. quaest. 14, tit. 1. But they make no mention of such an alimentary action as this, which we allow. ACT 26.THough buyers of Land be obliged to keep the Tacks set by their Predecessors, yet the Superior is not obliged to keep them when the Land falls to him in Ward, during which time he is Proprietar, nor are Life-renters nor Conjunct-fiars oblig'd to keep them during their temporary Rights; but when these Rights expire, the Tacks revive; and yet by this Act the Superior or Life-renter cannot remove them till the next Whitsunday after the Ward or Life-rents fall, the Tennents paying the Maills and Duties to the Superiors or Life-renters; but it may be doubted whether this will hold, when the Duty is only a simulate Duty, and not near the Rent of the Land, for this was design'd to secure the Tennents rea∣sonably, but not to prejudge the Superior or Life-renter; but cer∣tainly this Act will not defend these Tennents who have payed their Duties to their Masters before hand. ACT 27.THough particular pains be set down as to Law-burrows, in Civil cases, by former Acts, yet in Criminal cases, because of the importance and danger, it is left Arbitrary to the Judges to cause the Parties find Caution under what sums they please, and before the Council, likewise, the sum under which Caution is to be found, is, de praxi Arbitrary. Since this Act sayes that the Party complainand shall be harmless, it would seem by this Act, the Council can oblige no party to keep another harmless, except where the party himself complains, in which case he must give his Oath he dreads bodily harm, conform to the 129 Act, Par. 9. Ja. 1. vid. observ. on that Act. But yet the Coun∣cil is in use to cause men find Caution to keep others skaithless, even where the parties do not crave it; but this is only in cases where there have been previous breaches of the peace amongst them, so that either a party does complain, and then he must give his Oath, and if he complain not there must be a previous breach of the peace, and in that case there is no need of an Oath or a Complaint that he does fear bodily harm. Though the Council or Justices may by this Act exact Law-burrows, yet by this Act it is only ordain'd where Complaints are rais'd before them, and by Complaints here is not to be understood Common Bills, for Law-burrows upon Common Bills are only raised in course before the Session; and there is a
particular Servant in the Bill Chamber, whose Office it is only to write upon these Bills, and take the Bonds, and see that the Cautio∣ner be sufficient; but the Council and the Criminal Court, only exact Caution of Law-burrows, when there are Proces∣ses intented before them, and the Judges there do see that either Party has reason to fear bodily harm, because of what has pre∣ceeded. BY this Act Dismembration is made equal to Slaughter,ACT 28. and it is to be try'd within three Suns, and seems by this Act to in∣fer death, if it be upon Forethought-fellony; but I have not ob∣serv'd it punish'd by Death, but only as mutilation by an arbi∣trary punishment, or Confiscation of Moveable and Assythment to the party, Vid. 118 Act Par. 7 Ja. 5. BY this Act the Kings Leiges are to assist at Justice-airs,ACT 29. un∣der pain of being punish'd as favourers of the Trespassers, and that Dittay is to be taken up against them for that effect; but by our present practice, though the Heretors of every Shire be by a Proclamation ordain'd to attend the Justices, whilst they re∣main in their Shire, yet their absence is never made point of Dit∣tay. I find by the Registers of Council, that all the Southern Shires were cited to attend the Justice-airs in Q. M. Reign, and to bring with them provision for twenty days. ALl these Acts are in Desuetude;ACTS 30, 31, 32. but it's observable that Park of Foul∣foordlies, being charg'd to wait upon Hume of Wedderburn his Su∣perior, at the Host, conform to his Charter, and being thereafter pursu'd for not attending him. The Lords found the Vassall fine∣able, though he pretended that by this Act 31. he was to attend the Sheriff, for he ought to have waited upon his Superior to the Sheriff, or the Kings Captain, and these obligations were different and very consistent, July 1680. Vid. observ. on Act 16 Par. 6. and Act 76 Par. 14 Ja. 2. supra for clearing the 30 Act. COnvocations in the Countrey are punish'd only by pecuniary Mulcts, or Imprisonment before the Secret Council;ACT 34. but Convocations within Towns are more dangerous; and therefore punish'd in this Act by Confiscating the Moveables of the Offen∣ders, and their Lives are to be in the Kings will, so that their lives may be taken; but by this Act, the rising at the Command of their Magistrats, is declar'd no Crime; and therefore it may be doubt∣ed, whether if the Magistrats should raise their Burgesses to in∣vade their Neighbours, or to oppose His Majesties Forces, if in these cases they can be pursu'd for Convocation, since they are by this Act warranted to rise at command of their Magistrats, which certainly might defend them in dubious, but not in clear cases▪
Observe that by this Act all Burgesses are ordain'd to obey their Ma∣gistrats, when, and in what ways they shall be charg'd, either for the defence of the Kingdom, or common Good of the Burgh, under the pains foresaids, but the Magistrats use only to fine such as refuse to Ride with them, and I have heard the Lords demure, whether Burgesses were oblig'd to attend Prisoners without the privi∣ledge of the Town, at the desire of the Magistrats, since Sheriffs were bound to receive prisoners there, and Burgesses are only bound to Watch and Ward within their own Town and Terri∣tory. ACT 35.THe Rule laid down in this Act, Viz. That wherever the De∣fender may be punish'd by Infamy, he must compear personally, holds not still true, but wherever he is to be punish'd personal∣ly, he must compear personally; and therefore it is that Defen∣ders before the Criminal Court and Council, must compear per∣sonally. ACT 36.THe Common-Good of Burrows ought not to be Sett with∣out consent of the Deacons of Crafts, which is observ'd to this day, nam quod omnes tangit ab omnibus debet approbari; and by the Act 181 Par. 13 Ja. 6. It is ordain'd that the Common-good shall be Rouped yearly, which is also observ'd, and though that Act appoints it to be Set, by the advice of the Magistrats and Council, without speaking of Deacons of Crafts, yet that does not exclude them. By the Civil Law Bona civitatum non possunt vendi sine per∣missu principum propositis sacro-sanctis Evangeliis & insinuato decreto apud praesidem provinciae l. ult. C. de reb. Civit. Ven∣dend. By this Act also the Rents of Burrows cannot be Set for longer time than three years allanerly, but it may be doubted, if they may be set from three years to three years, for many three years in one Paper; or if such Obligations will force Magistrats to re∣new the Tacks, for if this were sustain'd, the Act might be easily eluded, but the 10 of February 1631. The Earl of Galloway contra Burgesses of Wigtoun. The Lords found that this nullity was not receivable ope exceptionis, especially not being propon'd by the Town. These Tacks seem likewise to be valid, if restricted to three years, Vide Annot. ad Act 200 Par. 14 Ja. 6. ACT 37.VIde Act 17 Par. 2 Ja. 4. & Act 97 Par. 6 Ja. 4. By all which, crack'd Gold is commanded to be taken, if it be of fineness, all which renew'd Acts shew, that the people were un∣willing to receive such Gold.
King JAMES the fourth, Parl. 4▪ VIde Annot. ad Act 85 Par. 11 Ja. 3.ACT 38. But for further clear∣ing this Act, it is fit to know that the Pope was in use, and pretended Right to confer by prevention, Benefices which were elective, and some whereof, the Patronages belong'd to the King and Subjects, Vid. Coras. specimen Jur. Eccles. lib. 1 cap. 2. as appears by this Act and by the 53 Act Par. 5. Ja. 4. and therefore by this Act the impetration of these in such cases, is discharged under the pain of Proscription and Banishment; but by the 44 Act 6 Par, Ja. 3. and the 4 Act 1 Par. Ja. 4. It is also punisht as Treason. IT is against the interest of the Church to unite Benefices,ACT 39. because every Union extinguishes some Benefices, and les∣sens the care of the Souls; and yet Union is allow'd when the Benefces to be united are impair'd, by Poverty, Hostility, or by Destruction of the People to be car'd for, and least the interest of persons should be more consider'd than that of the Church. It is by the Canon Law appointed, that all Unions of Benefices must be perpetual; but the Pope having reserv'd to himself the power of uniting any Benefices, propter plenitudinem potestatis cap. 6. de prebend. in 6. Clem. 1. ut lit. pend. nihil innov. Therefore the Sub∣jects of this Kingdom went to Rome, and got Benefices united; and to prevent this, all unions of Benefices are discharg'd by the 44 Act Par. 6 Ja. 3. and the obtaining such Unions and Annexati∣ons is declar'd Treason, and since our Bishopricks and Abbacies were founded by our Kings, it was unjust that they could have been united without his consent, because even by the Canon Law, Benefices cannot be united without consent of the Laick Patron Ben∣geus de Benefic. cap. 3. §. 3. num. 7. Unions are now made by the Commission of the Kirk, and the ordinary reasons upon which Churches are united with us, are the meanness of the provision, the meanness of the two Parochs, and the paucity of the hearers; To the granting of which Unions the Patrons must still be call'd, be∣cause of the above-cited Constitution of the Canon Law, but they may be united, though the Patron consent not, if he shew no good reason for his dissent. The Popes also us'd to value Benefices upon new informations, whereby the value was much hightned; and therefore by that Act it is ordain'd that no Benefices be higher than they were in Bagi∣monts Roll, which Bagimont was a Cardinal, who had made a Rental of all the Benefices in this Kings time, as Skeen de verb sig observes, Verb▪ Bagimont; and this Taxation of Benefices, is founded on Extravag. suscepti Regiminis lib. 6. It is therefore appointed that none supply with Money, those who are to go to Rome, to make such purchases,
Act 86 Par. 11 Ja. 3. But that Act seems unnecessary, for the Pur∣chasers being declar'd Traitors, it was certainly Treason to assist them with Money, so that the said Act was made to certifie and clear ignorant people, which the Law calls ad majorem eviden∣tiam. ACT 41.THis Act is formerly Explain'd, and that part of it which ap∣points the Hosts, with whom strangers lodge, to be compt∣able for their uncustomed Goods, is in Desuetude, except they were conscious to the guilt. Vid. observ. on Act 3 Par. 1 Ja. 4. supra. ACT 42.CRafts men who exact from these of their Craft, are to be pu∣nish'd as oppressors; but I doubt what is the meaning of these words, and shall buy their life as common oppressors; and the most pro∣bable meaning is, that they shall be bound to take Remissions for so doing, as for a capital Crime. Nota, Common oppression is capital by this Act, and such Sta∣tutes, or Impositions laid on by Crafts-men, for extortioning the Leiges, are reprobated by the Laws of all Nations, as a species of Monopoly, Vid. Tritz. de monopoliis cap, 12 Vid. observ. on Act 21 Par. 2 Ja. 4. Supra. ACT 43.CRafts-men leaving off mens work, if others refuse to compleat it, because of Statutes among themselves, forbidding them to undertake any such work, such are punishable as oppressors; but if they refuse upon any other account, they are not punishable; for this Act punishes only such as make use of such unlawful Statutes, and if Crafts-men should come in to cheat this Act by a general re∣solution not to suffer any to compleat what another had begun; I believe that the Magistrat might punish this as a cheating contra∣vention of this Law. Nota, That Trades-men who make Statutes against the Common-well of the Leiges, are punishable as Oppressors, for otherwise Crafts-men might extortion the people at their pleasure. This is al∣so discharg'd, l. un. C. tit. 59. lib. 4. de monopoliis & nov. 122. cap. 1. Aedificiorum quo{que} artifices vel Aergolabi, aliorum{que} operum professores penitus arceantur pacta inter se componere ut ne quis quod alteri commissum sit opus impleat, vid Trith. cap. 12. and observ. on Act 80 Par. 5 Ja. 1. supra. ACT 44.IT is free to sell Victual in all Burrows any day of the Week, though it be no Mercat day by this Act; yet now every Burgh has its own Mercat days for Corn as well as for other things.
THough by this Act the users of false Measures and Weights be only punish'd as Falsaries;ACT 47. yet the Justices found that the havers of false Measures should be also punish'd as Falsaries, though using could not be proven; since these who had them, are presum'd to have had them only for use, ex∣cept the presumption were taken off, as by proving that the Weights were only borrow'd, or laid aside upon Tryal, May 1671. In the case of Porteous at a Justice-Court in Jedburgh; but by the 14 cap. Stat. Dav. 2. The users of false weights were only to pay 8 Cows to the King. IT is clear from this, that the Masters commanding his Servants,ACT 48▪ or Cottars to break Laws, such as Muir-burning, specifi'd in this Act, does not free the Servants, but makes both lyable (albeit Ignorance and Command when joyn'd, might seem to excuse the breach of a penal Statute, at least a poenâ ordinaria) but the Ma∣sters Command should not excuse from the punishment where the Transgression is either against the Law of God, of Nature, Nations, or the Crime is atrocious in it self. SOme of the Nobility having most Rebelliously fought against King James the third, upon a false pretext,ACT 50. that he was bring∣ing in the English upon the Kingdom, they advanc'd his Son King James the fourth to be Leader, and having prevail'd, they secur'd themselves by several Acts, yet extant in the black Impression, but which are omitted in this Impression except this one. THe King Revocks all Tailʒies made to Heirs-male in preju∣dice of heirs general;ACT 51. because (as Craig observes) this is against Conscience, and is defrauding of the Righteous Heir; and I have seen old Licences granted by the Pope, to make such Tailʒies and Alienations for reasons exprest in the Bull, and upon Considerati∣on whereof the Pope dispences with the matter of Conscience, and in the Act 50 the Estates without the King revock all such Rights, quod notandum. Nota, The King here Revocks all change of holdings from Ward to blench, and not from Ward to Feu, because it was lawful at that time to change from Ward to Feu by the Act 71 Par. 14. Ja. 2. Nota, Union of Lands in Barony is revocked by this, and all the posterior Revocations of our Kings, because one Seasine serves after the Union, and the Proprietar is only oblig'd to answer at one Court, so that the King loses several Casualties. Vid. Act 93 Par. 6. Ja. 4.
King JAMES the fourth, Parl. 5. ACT 54.BY this Act Barons are to cause their Sons learn Latin & jure, that is to say Law, because the Act sayes, that they may have knowledge of Law to prevent needlesse coming before the King's Principal Auditor, for which reason also Advocations are much discourag'd by many subsequent Acts: Au∣ditor was not a proper term for the Session, for Andientia is proper∣ly allow'd only to such as have not Jurisdiction, as is clear by Gothesr. ad Rubr. C. de Episcopali Audientia. ACT 57.BY this Act all Actions of Error against Brieves, or inordinate Process are to be pursued within three years, else they pre∣scrive: And by the Act 13. Par. 22. Ja. 6. It is declared that the prescription secures only the Assyzers against wilful Error, but that the Retour may be quarrelled within 20 years, as to the right of Blood prejudg'd by the said wrongous Retour. And it is observable that the Law favours still revenge less than reparation. Obs. 1. Notwithstanding of this Act a Retour, or the execution of a Brieve, or any other piece of the Process may be improven at any time within fourty years, and the Process it self may be reduc'd in consequentiam by Reduction of any Writ whereupon it followed, Hope tit. Reductions of Decreets. Obs 2. That this short Prescription of three years runs not against such as are Minors, or out of the Realm, in imitation of the Civil Law, which allow'd immobilia praescribi inter praesentes decennio, inter absentes viginti annis. Obs. 3. That these words, (be rais'd and pursu'd,) imply not that the Process must be ended, but that it must be begun within three years, and the Process is said to be pursu'd when the Summonds is executed. Vid. Observ. on Act 64. Par. 8. Ja. 3. King JAMES the fourth, Parliament 6. IT is observable that though this Parliament is exprest in the Prin∣ted Acts, as held upon the 11th of March, and all these Acts are exprest as past upon that day, yet I find by the Records themselves, that they were all past upon the 15th of March, which is also called quinta dies Parliamenti. Item, It is observable that all the Acts of this Parliament are only set down in way of breviat, and thus the 62 Act is thus exprest in the Original Record. Item, It is Statute and ordain'd that where any person happens to get a Remission in time to come, that the said Remission shall not extend nor save the taker for greater Crimes, be any general clause nor is con∣tain'd especially, and that the greatest action shall be specified, or else it shall not be comprehended; and that the general clause shall not include greater nor the special clause.
THis Act is formerly explained.ACT 58. In the Observ. on Act 65. Par. 3. Ja. 1. and Act 62. Par. 14. Ja. 2. THese Acts are useless,ACTS 59, 60. for all these Jurisdictions are now other∣wayes divided and established. THe Shires of Inverness and Ross having been again after this Act united, they were and are now disjoyned;ACT 61. and whereas this Act makes the Town of Thane and Dingwall to be the head Burghs of the Shire of Ross, the Town of orteross is added as another head Burgh to the other two, by an Act of Parliament, 1661. IT is appointed that general Clauses in Remissions,ACT 62. remitting all Crimes, shall not be extended to greater Crimes than the Crimes specially condescended upon in the Remission, but to evite this, Remissions do now express specially all the great Crimes, and then a general is subjoyned; and upon this Law it was controverted in Glenkindies case, whether a Remission for slaughter should be ex∣tended to Murder, since Murder was pretended to be a greater Crime, as proceeding upon forethought Fellony; to which it was an∣swer'd, that Slaughter was a general term comprehending both Slaughter and Murder. It may be argued from this Law by a parity of Reason, that Discharges granted for a special Sum, and thereafter discharging generally all debts, shall not be extended to other Sums greater than that which is specially discharged; but yet the 24th February, 1636. It was found that such general Clauses did cut off all Sums, even though greater than the Sum discharged in special. THis Act ordains all Remissions for Slaughter to be null,ACT 63. if the Slaughter was premeditated, and upon forethought Fellony; nor is this Act temporary, being to last in all time coming, till the King revock the same specially; but yet this excellent Law is not de praxi now observed, though it be most reasonable, Vid. Act 169. Par. 13. Ja. 6. And the same reason given here for it, (viz. because many in trust to get Remissions did commit slaughter,) is set down to the same purpose, Canon injusta, Quaest. 4. Nonne etiam cum uni in∣dulget indigno ad prolapsionis contagium provocat universos, facilitas e∣nim veniae incentivum tribuit delinquendi. By the cap. 50. Stat. Dav. 2. It is ordain'd that no Remission for Murder upon forethought Fello∣ny shall be given, except in Parliament, and for a publick good. Observe here the discreet stile wherein Kings are limited in the exercise of their Royal Power, for here the King declares it is his pleasure that such an Act be past, and desires the Estates to pass it; and since this Act is to last till it be revocked by the King, it may be doubted if the King alone may revock it without Authority of Parliament. The like Act discharging Remissions for burning Corns, Ja. 5. Par. 7. Act 118.
ACT 64.THough Bishops are by this Act to appoint and deprive Notars, yet they are now both tryed and deprived only by the Lords of Session. Though this Act appoints Bishops and their Ordinars to take in∣quisition who uses false Writs, yet none but the Lords of Session are now Judges to improbation, which is the only Process competent for trying falshood of Writs in the first instance, and the Commissar who is the Bishops Depute can never Judge of falshood now; except where the falshood falls in only incidenter, and by way of exception; as if I were pursuing any Action before the Commissars, and it were alleadged that the Execution of the Summonds were false, there the Commissar would be Judge competent to try the falshood of the Executions, for else his Jurisdiction were useless; and all Sheriffs, Lords of Regalities, Stewards and the like, have the same privi∣ledges. BY this Act Summonds for recent Spuilʒies must be executed upon 15. days,ACT 65. whereas all Summonds were to be executed upon 21. days, by the 6 Act, Par. 1. Ja. 3. which is the Act here related to, though not cited; and by an Act of Sederunt 21 July, 1672. this pri∣viledge is extended to recent Intrusions, which is a kind of Spuilʒie in immoveables. Observ. 1. That since the Parliament thought that the former Act of Parliament could not be derogated from without an express Statute, it may seem strange why the Lords do priviledge any Summonds by their own power, or if they had power, why they did not make actions of recent Spuilʒie and Intrusions to come in upon 6 days, as well as Exhibitions, Poynding of the Ground, and other less favourable Causes? to which nothing can be answe∣red, but that there was an old custome for the one, but not for the other. Observ. 2. That the last words of the said Act, viz, That there shall be no exception dilator admitted against that Summonds, it being lawfully indorsed, seem to imply that the Judge should grant no con∣tinuation, though that properly cannot be called an exception dila∣tor, or else that the Judge should restore spoliatum ante omnia, and admit no exception upon property nor compensation, &c. but these are not properly dilator defences, or that the not continuation of the Summonds upon 21 days warning, should not be objected, but that is likewise unnecessary, since the first part of the Act did that sufficiently; and so these words with that sense had been superflu∣ous, and therefore I rather incline to think that these words were only designed to show the Parliaments great desire to have recent Spuilʒies dispatch'd, though ill exprest; it may be doubted whether recent Spuilʒies being only such as are raised within 15 days after the Spuilʒie is committed, Sabbath or Feriot days should be count∣ed amongst the 15. Observ. 3. That it may be argued that Spuilʒies regularly cannot be pursued before the Sheriff, or else why is it allowed here as a pri∣viledge to recent Spuilʒies, that they may be pursued before the She∣riff;
and it seems the reason why Spuilʒies regularly should not be pursued before Sheriffs, is because the dammages in Spuilʒies must be taxed by an Oath in litem, and that is nobilis officii, and consequent∣ly cannot be administrated by any inferior Judge, nor can these inferi∣or Judges modifie what is sworn by an Oath in litem, that being yet nobilioris officii. BY this Act the Sheriff is to have 12 pennies of every pound, as Sentence-money, which was called Sportulae by the Civil Law,ACT 66. and this Sentence-money is still in use. THis Act appoints every Lord and Laird to have a Cuningare; but it may seem strange why none are allow'd to have Dove-coats,ACT 74. except they have ten Chalder of Victual in Rent; and yet men are commanded to make Cuningars, since Cunins may prejudge Neigh∣bours, as Doves do; which makes Craig, as I conceive, doubt whe∣ther the Vassals may have a Cunigare, except the same be granted to him: But though the Superior grant Cunigars with the clause cum Cuniculis Cuniculariis, the former doubt remains, for the Superior cannot prejudge third Parties. To which these answers may sa∣tisfie. 1o. That it was necessary by this Act once to invite men to plant Cunigars, whereas Dove-coats were frequent before the Act 1617. that restricts them. 2o. This command is only to Lords and Lairds, which implyes men of Estates, but is not given to all the Lieges; and I doubt not but if an Heretor of ten Chalders of Victual, or thereby, should plant a Cuningar, but his Neighbours might by common Law, and an Argument drawn from the Act 19. Par. 22. Ja. 6. force them either to inclose their Cuningar, or to give it over. BEfore this Act the Heir could not have been pursued for any debt till the Executor was first discust;ACT 76. but by this Act the Heir is made lyable to the Creditor after his annus deliberandi expires, both as to Heretable and Moveable debts, which was very just, be∣cause quoad the Creditor, they all represent the Defunct, but yet he will get his relief of all Moveable debts from the Executor, as far as the Inventar extends; and if he be served Heir within the year, the Creditor will get action against him for heretable debts, even within the year, for by entering Heir he renounces his benefit of deliberating, and if he possess the Estate, he ought to pay the He∣retable debt; but though he enter Heir within the year, he should not be lyable for Moveable debts by this Act till the year expire, since as to these he has no benefit by entering, and though he re∣nounce the benefit of deliberating, yet he does not renounce the benefit of this Act, Hading. Tit. Heirs. Nota, Heirs are call'd in this Act Heretors, from the French word Heretiers. But Quaeritur if the Executor be discust, and found insolvent, may not the Heir eo casu be pursued within year and day, and the af∣firmative
seems strongly founded upon the reason and decision of this Act: And yet by the present practice, the Heir enter'd is lyable even for moveable debts, tho pursu'd within the year. Item, Though by this Act the Executor is bound to find Cauti∣on to relieve the Heir of all moveable debts, yet there is no Law obliging the Heir to relieve the Executor of Heretable debts, but de practica, the Lords sustain ex paritate rationis, actions against the Heir for relieving the Executor of all Heretable debts, 7. March, 1627. Faulconer contra Blair, vid. Spotswood, tit. Executor Carnous∣sie contra Laird Meldrum, which seems to be contrary to the words of this Act, whereby it is more than insinuated that the Fathers Move∣able Goods should pay his debts; and by the Narrative of 106 Act Par. 7. Ja. 5. is yet more clear; By the Civil Law the Children that were in potestate patris were forced to enter Heir, but thereaf∣ter this was thought too severe, and therefore the Roman Praetor al∣lowed even to these Heirs a liberty to abstain, and a year to de∣liberate whether they would be Heirs, which we have borrow∣ed from thence, but jure novissimo the Heir was to be only lyable according to the Inventar, if he made one, & non ultra vires Inven∣tarii, which holds only with us in Executors who are Heirs in Move∣ables, for Heirs in Heretable Rights are lyable in solidum, if they once enter. ACT 77.IF the Marriage was not quarreled by a Process in the Husbands time, as unlawful, the Wife will have right to her Terce, with∣out necessity of proving a lawful Marriage, and will possess her Terce till the Marriage be found to have been unlawful; for in the common Law, and ours, an unquarrel'd cohabitation is a valid pro∣bation of the Marriage, l. in libera 24 ff. de rit. nupt. Yet it cedes to a contrary probation, as all praesumptiones juris do, vid. Pacian. tract. de prob. lib. 2. cap. 3. And in our Law Bastardy is not inferr'd, because the Marriage cannot be proven, but it must be prov'd positive that the Defunct was reputed Bastard, Feb. 19. 1669 K. Advocat contra Craw, & June, 15. 1670. Livingston contra Burn And if that be prov'd, he who pretends to be Heir must prove also that the Defuncts Father and Mo∣ther were lawfully Married. By the same parity of reason the Husband will have right to the courtesie of Scotland till the Marriage be found null; and the allegiance of Bastardy is not receivable summarly against the service of an Heir, vid. infra observ. on Act 94. Par. 6. Ja. 4. ACT 78.ALL who did hold of the King were of old oblig'd to come to Parliament, till by this Act these whose Lands are within 100 Merks of new extent are indulg'd not to come, except they be specially called by the King. This Act seems obsolet, for none are spe∣cially called now; whether the King may yet call any Barons he pleases, is dubious, both because they were once bound, as well as impowerd to come; and this faculty was only remitted for their own advantage, and after that, this Act allows the King to call them; And it seems rea∣sonable that if there be any wise Baronin the Kingdom, the King who calls Parliaments for consulting the great affairs of the Kingdome,
should have liberty to call him, albeit the Shire choose him not, and the King may make any man a Lord of Parliament. Nota, These who were then Members of Parliament could have sent their Procurators, but now no Procurators are admitted for absents further than to excuse their absence, which is done by a Let∣ter to the Commissioner, or Chancellor, or by a Member. Vid. obs. Act 52 Par. 3 Act 101 Par. 7 Ja. 1. Act 75 Par. 14 Ja. 2. supra, and Act 21 Par. 3 Char. 2. infra. THis Statute is explained Act 48. Par. 3. Ja. 1.ACT 79. But the reason why it is here added, that the Isles especially shall be govern'd by the Kings Laws, was, because the Kings of Denmark pretended that the Isles of Orkney and Shetland should be govern'd by their Laws; for the King of Denmark renounced all right to these Isles in favours of K. James the third his Son in Law, in Anno 1461. Vid. Skeen de verb. sig. verb. Annuel. THat all Officers should be chang'd yearly, is formerly gloss'd,ACT 80. in the observ. on Act 30 Par. 5. and Act 5 Par. 7 Ja 3. That none have Jurisdiction within Burgh, but such as use Mer∣chandise, is by some interpreted to be sufficiently satisfied in those who once used Merchandise, even as semel Baro is semper Baro, and few present Provosts are actual Traders; and therefore it was doubted whether one who has been a Merchant, but was thereafter a Senator of the Colledge of Justice, might not be a Provost. Vid. infra observ. on Act 26 Par. 4 Ja. 5. IT is fit to know that the Dukes of Burgundy gave the Scots the first priviledge of Staples,ACT 81. which was transferr'd to Camphire at the Christening of Prince Henry. The Conservator is by a right under the Great Seal constituted Judge there betwixt Merchants, and he must have by this Act six Assessors, or at least four, which is still ob∣serv'd, and the Decreets run in his name, with the consent of his Assessors; and of late by articles with the Prince of Orange. The Conservator has the sole Criminal Jurisdiction, when Crimes are committed by Scots Merchants; he is likewise by his Patent Consti∣tuted Agent for all affairs relating to Scotland, as well as for Trade. By an Act of the Burrows at Air 1602. It is declar'd that all Goods that pay Custom, either when they are carri'd out from, or in to the Kingdom, shall be accounted Staple Goods, and so being un∣der the Protection of the Conservator, he claims to have Fees for them; but in anno 1612. There is a List of Staple Goods made by the Burrows; and in 1647. they made a new List, declar∣ing and ratifying the former. THis Act is still observ'd,ACT 82. for the Conservator uses to come or send in July; But by twenty pounds great, here exprest, are mean'd twenty pounds Fleems. THis Act forbidding Mercats to be holden on holy days, is in observance,ACT 83. but this part which forbids Mercats in Kirk-yards, under pain of escheating the Goods, is not observ'd, though renew'd Act 70 Par. 6. Ja. 6. and Mercats are discharg'd in Churches,
decret. pars 1. distinct. 42. But I find them not discharg'd expresly in Church-yards, though Church-yards had in other things the same immunity with Churches, and thus they were Sanctuaries, as Churches were, Can. sicut antiquitus Canon definivit 17. Quest 4. and their extent was to be fourty paces in greater Churches, thirty in lesser. Vid. observ. on Act 36 Par. 5 Ja. 3. ACT 85.THis Act is useless, for no Taxation can be laid on, except either in Parliaments, or Conventions of Estates, and to these all the three Estates must be call'd; but it shews that of old, Taxati∣ons were laid on in Conventions, which consisted of any the King call'd summarly off the Street; nor were the Burrows oft-times call'd, Therefore this Act was made, declaring that no Taxation or Contribution should be given without warning the Burrows, as one of the three Estates: Taxations are properly Burdens laid on by Parliaments; and Contributions are our voluntar offers made by Conventions; but we use now the word Taxation for both, what burdens are laid on by Parliaments and Conventions; though this Act requires indefinitly the Burrows to be call'd, yet by the 82 Act 9 Par. Q. M. It is only requir'd that six of the Burrows be call'd. The Burrows Royal pay a sixth part of the Taxation of Scotland, and they divide their proportion amongst themselves, according to 100 pounds scots, which is their As, or imaginary total, accor∣ding to which every Town pays their proportion: and though any Burgh resign their priviledge in Parliament, they must pay till they Dispone their Common Good to the rest, and then their pro∣portion is divided amongst the rest. ACT 86.THis Act appointing no Burgesse, or Gild-brother to be made without consent of the great Council of the Town is in Desue∣tude. ACT 87.VId. leg. burg. cap. 122. The pain now is arbitrary, and pu∣nishable, either before the Council or Criminal Court, vid. Act 27 Par. 4. Ja. 5. ACT 89.THis Act is useless because of the Act 1617. ordaining all Sea∣sines to be registrated, and this Act is thereby in Desuetude. ACTS 90, 91.THese Acts are but Temporary, and yet they serve to clear the Act 71 Par. 14 Ja. 2. And the Lords found that by Forfalture in the Act 91. is mean'd, not only Recognition, which is some∣times call'd a Forfalture, but Forfalture for Treason, &c. and by this we may see, that abrogated Laws, and Laws that are in Desue∣tude, should be read and consider'd, and may be of great use in De∣cisions and arguings.
THe reason of making this Act was, because Lands united are fi∣ctione juris, one and the same,ACT 93. and so should properly an∣swer to the Court, to which the principal messwage answers; and therefore this Act was made to secure the interest of the ordinary Judge, which declares, that notwithstanding Lands are united in a Barony, yet they shall answer as formerly, to their own Juris∣dictions, but the Baron whose Lands are united, needs only com∣pear by this Act in that Jurisdiction, where the principal messwage by the Union is, and yet de praxi, they are still call'd in all the Sute∣rols of the other Shires, where any of their Lands ly, and are for∣ced to send Acturneys which seems contrary to this Act. THere are two kinds of Brieves, one call'd a rieve of pley,ACT 94. which is our ordinary Summons; another call'd a Brieve of Inquest, which is yet in use, as in Services of Heirs, Tutors, &c. vid. For clearing this Act, lib. 3. R. M. cap. 28, & 29. & Stat. Rob. 3. cap. 1. And because the Service of Heirs is no Brieve of Pley, therefore no exception is to be admitted against it, except it be in∣stantly verified. This Act appoints all Brieves to be executed upon fifteen days, and the Lords have found, that all such Acts as these appointing Citati∣ons upon such a number of days, do not require that both the day of Citation and Compearance be free, but it is sufficient that either of them be free, July 27. 1626. Meculloch con. Meculloch. If the Brieve be not proclai'd upon a Mercat day, then it must be proclaim'd before the Town Officers, and six honest men to make it publick, and thus it seems the Parliament thought these equivalent to a Mercat day; but this holds not in other cases, where Proclamations are to be upon Mer∣cat days, nor even in Brieves is this now used. Nota, By this Act, if persons refuse to pass upon the Inquest, the Sheriff is authoris'd to compel them; and this I think the Justices may do in Criminal cases also, for the Justices ar higher Judges than the Sheriffs; and as the publick is more concern'd in these cases, so men will be more unwilling to pass upon them, ex∣cept they be compell'd; and though there be pecuniary Penalties appointed against absent Assyzers, yet that is but an ordinary re∣medy, and does not exclude this extraordinary one; even as the penalties appointed against Witnesses, does not exclude the taking them with Caption. FAlsing of Dooms are now in Desuetude altogether,ACT 95. and to them have succeeeded Reductions, in our present pra∣ctice. Vid. bs. on the 117 Act Par. 9 Ja. 1. BY this Act it is ordain'd,ACT 96. that all Measures and Weights be made the same thorow all Scotland, and the Standarts to remain at Edinburgh, and to be ordain'd by the Chamberlain and his Council, for then the Chamberlain, or Camerarius Scotiae, was Judge in all
things that concerned the Burghs of Scotland, and was in use to hold a Council, who with him judg'd in Matters that concern'd all the Burghs in general, as the Dean of Gild and his Council Judge in every particular Burgh, and his Statutes of old concerning Weights and Measures, are to be seen, Iter. Camer. cap. 30. but this Office and Jurisdiction over the Burrows, is now obsolet, and the rec∣tification of Weights and Measures is only considered by the Par∣liament, or by the Council in prosecution of the Acts of Parlia∣ment. Though by this Act all the Standarts of Weights and Measures, are ordain'd to remain at Edinburgh; yet by Act of Burrows they have been divided thus; The Standart of the Stone-weight re∣mains at Lanerk, because the chief Commodity of old that was weighed by the Stone-weight, was Wool, which was paid in to the King at Lanerk, and was therefore call'd Lanae-Arca. The Stan∣dart of the Pynt or Jugg, was left at Stirling, because the Kings Court recided there. The Standart of the Furlot remains at Lin∣lithgow, because the King had no other Residence in the three Lo∣thians, which were the chief Countreys for Corns. And Edinburgh had the Ell, which is the chief Instrument for measuring Silks, or other forraign Stuffs. I find likewise, that the Town of Wigtoun, and other particular Burghs, have an acknowledgment paid them for Measuring the Jaggs within particular Brewaries within their Territory, and these who agree with them to pay this, are said to have a free Stallage; and the Imposition is call'd their Deaurie, be∣cause it is taken up by their Dean, when the Shire resolv'd to quarrel this Imposition. It was answer'd, that it was just, be∣cause thy inspected the Measures for the good of the Lieges, and that it was confirm'd by immemorial Possession. I have here set down the Foundations of all Measures and Weights for what was set down in the cap. 22. Stat. Robert 3. is not exact. Of the Weights, and Foundati∣on thereof. A Corn or pickle of Wheat, taken out of the midst of an Ear of Wheat, is the foundation of a Grains-weight. Eighteen of these Grains make the half-Drop-weight. Thirty six Grains make a Drop-weight. Four Drop-weight is a quarter of an Ounce. Four quarter▪ make an Ounce-weight. Eight Ounces is a Merk-weight. Two Merk-weig  a Pound-weight. Sixteen Pound-weight makes the Stone-weight of Laner▪ There was also a Trone Stone-weight, which did weigh nineeen
pounds and eight ounces of Paris weight, wherewith the Butter, Cheese, Wool, Tallow, and such other Countrey Commodities as carry refuse was weigh'd. There are other quantities whereof the weight is here set down, to give some contentment to the Reader, as a Tun-weight of light Goods, which is the Common fraughting of all Merchandise betwixt this Countrey and France, England or Spain, which Tunn is esteem'd to weigh 600 pounds weight. A Sack of Goods, which is the common fraughting of all Merchandise from this Countrey to the Low-countreys, esteem'd to weigh 40 Stones, or 640 pound weight, The Sirplith of Goods which was the common Fraughting of Mer∣chandise betwixt this Countrey and the Eastern Countreys, is esteem'd to weigh eighty Stone-weight, or 1280 pound weight. The Last of Goods is esteem'd to weigh 120 stone-weight, or 1920 pound weight of light Goods. The Last of Metal and other heavy Goods▪ is 2850 pound weight. The Fodder of Lead is 126 stone, or 2000 pound weight. The VVeights follovving are us'd by Apothecaries, in mixture of their Medecines, vvherein the least is a Grain. TWenty Grains make a Scruple. Three Scruples maketh a Draghm. Eight Draghms maketh an Ounce. Sixteen Ounces maketh a Pound. The Medicinal pound is twelve ounces. A Sheckle-weight mentioned in the Bible, is half an ounce. A Talent is counted 120 pound weight. A Talent of Money is 600 Crowns. The weight of all quantity of wheat Bread, at every price of Wheat is set down in a Table hereafter following. In all our Neihbour Countreys, the Flesh is sold by weight. If the Meal were sold also by weight, it might prove profitable to the Lieges. The twelve ounces Troy weight  England, weigh twelve ounces three drop twenty one grains  weight. Now of these our weights, are made other Measures, both for Corns and liquff.
The Foundation of the liquid Metts, proceeding from the vveight. THe Scottish Pint, or Standart Jugg of Stirling, is found to contain three pound seven ounce weight of the Water of Leith. Every Pint is divided into two Chopins, or four Mutchkins. Two Pints maketh a Quart. Four Quarts or eight Pints is a Gallon. The Herring-barrels contains now eight Gallons and an half, though by the 57 Act Par. 4 Ja. 6. it is to contain nine Gallons, twelve of these go to a Last, and eight to a Tunn. The Salmond-barrel contains now ten Gallons and a Quart, though by the 110 Act Par. 14 Ja. 3. it ought to contain fourteen Gallons; and by the 57 Act Par. 4 Ja. 6. it should contain twelve Gallons; but by an Act of Council, July 15. 1619. it is to contain ten Gallons. Two Barrels, or seventeen Gallons is the full of Burdeaux-hogs-head. The Puncheons of High-Countrey Wines, are of thirteen or four∣teen Gallons. Three Paris Puncheons make a Tunn, or four Hogs-heads makes a Tunn. Two Pypes, or two Butts is a Tunn. Six Barrkins or Ters make a Tunn. Six English Buns of Bear is a Tunn. Six Salmond-barrels is a Tunn. Eight Herring-barrels is a Tunn. Twelve Barrels makes a Last. Our Scottish Pint contains being fill'd to the top, very near four Pints and an half of English. Now if the Ground be true, that the Pint doth weigh fifty five ounces, then consequently the Tunn should weigh 116 Stone fourteen pound. The Puncheon full twenty nine Stone three pound and eight ounces. The Barrel being full fourteen Stone, nineteen pound, twelve ounces. The Gallon should weigh one stone, eleven pound, eight ounces. The Quart full six pound fourteen ounces. The Pint three pound, seven ounces. The Cho∣pin one pound, eleven ounces and an half. The Mutchkin full thirteen ounces twelve drops. By our Custom there is a Plouck in every Jugg or Stoup, and the Wine is only measured to the Mark or Plouck, but Ale and strong Waters are measur'd to the top. By the 14. cap. Statut. Dav. 2. The pound of Caithness is or∣dain'd to be the common measure, but that weight is not so much as known now; but it is clear by the cap. 22. Stat. Robert. 3. The pound then contain'd fifteen ounces, but now it is sixteen ounces.
The Foundation of the Dry-metts. THe Furlot of Linlithgow, which is the Standart for the whole Countrey, for metting of Wheat, Ry, Beans, Pease, Meal, and white Salt contains twenty one Pints and a Mutch∣kin of Water; which Furlot is divided in four Pecks, and the Peck is divided in two half Pecks or four forparts. The Furlot for metting of Bear, Malt, or Oats, which were call'd heaped Corns, contains thirty one Pints of Water. Four Firlots make the Boll. Sixteen Bolls is a Chalder. Eighteen Bolls and an half is counted for a Last of Ry. The half Boll Mett of the Water measure of Leith, contains nine Pecks of the ordinary measure. The English Quarter of Corn contains near by two Bolls of Scot∣tish Measure. The Boll of Wheat will weigh fourteen Stone and three pound. The Furlot of Dry-wheat three stone, eight pound, twelve ounces. The Peck will weigh fourteen pound three ounce. The half Peck seven pound one ounce and an half. The measure for Coals is declar'd to be the Culross Chalder, by the 17 Act 3 Sess. Par. 1. Ch. 2. The Foundation of measures for length, breadth, and thickness. THree Barley Corns fair and round, lying in length, with∣out the tails make an Inch. Twelve Inches maketh a Foot. Three Foot is an English yard. Three Foot and an Inch or thirty seven Inches makes the Ell of Edinburgh, which Ell is parted in four quarters, and every quar∣ter in four nails; which measure of a foot having fallen in Desue∣tude, is renew'd by the 18 Act 3 Sess. 1 Par. Ch. 2. Fourty five Inches is the English Ell. Twenty seven Inches is the Fleemish Ell. In France every Town hath a divers Measure, The Foot where∣with the Glassen-wrights measure their work, is sometimes of nine Inches, and sometimes of eight Inches.
Of the Rood of vvork. A Rood of Land contains 240 Ells of measure; but a Rood of work wrought by Masons or Sklaiters contains but thir∣ty six Ells, that is, if any piece of work be found to be eighteen Ells in length, and two Ells in breadth, it makes a Rood. Twelve Ells in length and three Ells in breadth, is a Rood. Nine Ells in length and four in breadth is a Rood. Eight Ells in length, and four Ells and an half in breadth, is a Rood. Six Ells in length and six Ells in breadth is a Rood. A Rood of Land within Burgh is esteemed of old to be twenty foot, that is, five foot in length, and four in breadth. The Foundation of an Aiker of Land. SIx Ells of the Standart of Edinburgh, makes a lineal-fall where∣with Land is measur'd. Six ells long and six ells breadth, make a superficial, or square-fall, wherewith Land is reckon'd. Fourty lineal Falls makes a Rood. Ten Falls in length and four in breadth, makes a Rood. Eight Falls in length and five in breadth, makes a Rood. Four Roods is an Aiker. So an Aiker contains 160 lineal Falls, or 960 Ells. Eighty Falls in length, and two Falls in breadth makes an Aiker. Fourty Falls in length and four in breadth, makes an Aiker: Thirty two Falls in length and five in breadth, is an Aiker. Twenty Falls in length and eight in breadth, is an Aiker. Sixteen Falls in length and ten in breadth, is an Aiker. Four Aikers are counted for a Ministers Gleib. Six Aikers arable Land for a Husband Land. Thirteen Aikers is counted an Oxen-gate. Four Oxen-gate is esteem'd a pound Land of old extent. ACT 97.VId. observ. on Act 17 Par. 2 Ja. 4. supra. THis Act is only conceiv'd in prohibitive terms, without any penal sanction,ACT 98. and though this be forbidden, yet it is not declar'd a Crime, and yet it was found a Crime to poynd Labour∣ing Oxen in time of Labouring, and punishable by a pecunial
mulct, January 1666. Lord Rentoun contra the Sheriff-Depute of the Merss. The Time of Labouring is not determin'd by this Act, and there∣fore the Lords have special regard in this to the Custom and Sea∣son of each respective Country, as was decided November 15. 1627. So that tho they were labouring, yet if it was not the season of la∣bouring, they have not the priviledge. But if the Debitors Labouring be ended, though the Season of Labouring be not generally ended in the Country, yet his La∣bouring Goods may be poynded, November 22. 1628. Spootswood h. t. tells us that a paritate rationis, this priviledge was extended to a going Salt-pan, sed leges in privilegiis non sunt extendendae. If the Debitor have no other moveable Goods; the Creditor may poynd even Labouring Goods, by the words of this Act; for it seems the Parliament thought it not just that a man should lose his Debt altogether, and though the priviledge here granted may seem only a delay, yet by abstracting the Goods, during that Sus∣pension, he may be totally frustrated. The Common Law, to which this Statute relates, is l. 8. C. Quae res pigr. obl. possunt & authent. agricultores ibid. but by that Law, the persons of the Labourers could not be apprehended, nor made that Law any distinction whether there were other Goods poynd∣able. Vid. Tract. Crim. tit. 31. where this Act is more fully ex∣plain'd. THis Act is Explain'd, Act 117 Par. 9 Ja. 1.ACT 99. THe former Acts of Revocation, revock not expresly all things done in hurt and prejudice of the Kirk,ACT 100. but this was imply'd under the general of what was done in hurt of the King's Soul and Conscience; but in this Latin Revocation, which appears has been ordain'd to be in Latin, that a Church-man might draw it; The King Revocks all that has been in detrimentum seu laesionem Ecclesiae Catholicae, and to shew the King and Parliament enixa voluntas, all such Deeds are ordain'd to be raz'd out of the Books of Parliament. The word Kirk, comes from the Greek word , for so the House of God was nam'd amongst the Christians who were Greeks, as the Latins nam'd it, Domus Dei vid. Mons▪ Fleurii des mocurs des Christiens, who gives this Origination for the word Kirk. King JAMES the fourth, Parliament 7. BY the Act 73 Par. 6. Ja. 4.ACT 101. Some places were ordain'd to an∣swer at Justice-airs in other places than the head Burghs of their own Sheriff-doms, which is here restricted only to Ju∣stice-airs and Sheriff-courts, by which I think is mean'd tak∣ing of Dittay; but now both these Acts are in Desuetude, for every place answers to Justice-airs, according to the Division of their own Shires.
IT is most observable from this Act, that it was made in a Sco∣tish Parliament or Council,ACT 102. holden within England, which Re∣futes that Opinion, that our Kings cannot hold Parliaments nor Councils without their own Territories, upon the mistaken prin∣ciple that Judex extra territorium jus non dicit. It is likewise ob∣servable, that this Act is made only by the King, with the advice of his Lords. And it is probable, that this Act like a testamentum militare in procinctu, must have some allowance given to it against the Common Rules, and that it imported only a Discharge of the Wards and Marriages of such as died in this Host, and was only valid because the King and Lords remitted only therein a Casuality due to themselves; so that this Act was but a general Discharge by the King and his Subjects then present, who were Superiours; but why then is it inserted amongst the Acts of Parliament? Or how could it have oblig'd absents? And the Rubrick calls it an Act made by our So∣veraign Lord King James the 4. and yet this is not properly an Act of Parliament; for this Parliament is held in Anno 1509. whereas this Act is made in Anno 1513. and it may seem only an Act of Council made by the advice of the Lords, that is to say, the Lords of Council, which Judicature then Govern'd the Kings Property by its Acts; and it has been thereafter inserted amongst the Acts of Parliament, for the greater security of those who had hazarded their lives at this time; and therefore by the 3. Act p. 2. I. 5. This Favour is extended to the Vassals holding of Subjects.
K. JAMES V. Parliament I. THE Master by this Act is bound to deliver up his Servant who is attach'd or challeng'd as a Thief,ACT 2. or Robber, vid. Stat. Alex. 2. c. 21. Stat. Will. c. 15. Stat. Da. 2. c. 1. and Act 6. Par. 3. Ja. 5. And in the Registers of the Council there are many Bonds given by Ma∣sters in those terms, vid. obs. on the said 6 Act. King JAMES the fifth, Parliament 2. THese two Acts discharging the Wards of those who were kil∣led in the Kings Host,ACTS 3, 4. or prorogating for 5 years the Tacks of Tennents, were very reasonable, but being temporary, are not now in observance, for the Wards of these who died in the Kings Host at Worcester, or else where, fell without any priviledge▪ That the 3d Act is Temporary only, appears from these words, That are now killed in pursuing or defending in time of Weir, a∣gainst our auld enemies of England; for that enmity ceas'd by the Uni∣on. Observ. From both these Acts, that the receiving a deadly wound, is equiparated to the being killed.
King IAMES the fifth, Parliament 3. BY this Act the Porteous Roll was to be deliver'd to the Crowner,ACT 5. but now it is deliver'd to the Sheriff when Ju∣stice-Airs are to be held, though these who are Crowners do still protest against this Innovation. When the Crowner got the Porteous Roll, containing the names of those who were to be cited to the Justice-Airs, he was obliged to cite them at their dwelling houses, and Paroch Kirks, by this Act; for by the word, Arrestment in this Act, and many of our old Laws, is meant Citation; but if they can be apprehended personal∣ly, this manner of citation is unnecessary, though that be not here exprest. By the present Practique, if they cannot be apprehended per∣sonally, they are to be cited at their dwelling houses, and at the Mercat Cross of the Head Burgh of the Shire where they live. 2. By this Act if the persons to be cited can be found, the Crowner is to take Surety of them for their appearance, which the Sheriff yet does; but if they be not Streinʒieable, that is to say, if they cannot be apprehended, then the Crowner was to arrest their Goods, like to the annotatio bonorum in the Civil Law. 3. If they have no Goods to be arrested, they were to be put in the Kings Castles, that is to say the Kings Prisons. 4. If the King has no Castles within that Shire, they were to be deliver'd to the Sheriffs, who are bound to keep them securely. By this Act the Crowner is to be answerable for the Caution he takes; for the Act says, That they shall take sicker Surety, sik as they will stand for to the Kings Grace; and it is pretended that the Clerk of the Justiciary is not bound for the Surety he accepts, though the Crowner and Sheriff be, because the Crowner is oblig'd to know who are Solvendo in the Shire, which the Clerk of the Criminal Court cannot know through all Scotland; but I think that both are equally oblig'd, viz. to do exact diligence to know the solvency of these they take; and since the punishment of taking insufficient Cau∣tion is not here exprest, it seems to be Arbitrary, and in effect to take Surety that is notorly insufficient, seems the same guilt with let∣ting a Malefactor escape. THe Master here is only oblig'd to present such Tennents as dwell within the Shire with him;ACT 6. but by the Act 2. Par. 1. Ja. 5. If the Complainer would attach the Tennent, & the Master be required to deliver him up, whether he liv'd in the Shire with the Tennent, or not, he was to be punish'd as Art and Part, in case he refused to deliver him up; and by this Act he is only to pay the Unlaw. But this last Act is not well observ'd, for now no man is lyable for his Tennent, except Highland Heretors, and Chiefs of Clanns, who are to find
Caution to the Council for that effect, vid. Acts 92, 93, 94, &c. Par. 11. Ja. 6. But by this Act it is clear that the King may make Masters still lyable for their Tennents who live upon their Ground, and that in any Court, though this Act appoints them to be presented to Justice Airs, since eadem est ratio, and this Act was adduc'd for justifying the Proclamation that appointed Masters to be lyable for their Tennents, vid. Act 2. Par. 1. Ja. 5. And the Acts there cited, where Masters are lyable for Servants, vid. tit. 55. lib. 2. Feud. where Vassals are oblig'd to present their servants to their Superiors, if they have offended them: But since by this Act Masters are only to be lyable for the Tennents unlaw, if he present them not. It may be doubted what this unlaw is, since in Justice Airs if the Tennent was absent, he was ordinarly denunced Fugitive; for the Justice Court does not unlaw an absent Defender, and therefore by this unlaw may be mean't what the Tennent would be unlaw'd in, if he had been present, vid. Stat. Will. Regis, cap. 7▪ & 8. BY this Act these who are Surety to the Party injur'd,ACT 7. for Assyth∣ment, may be called before the Lords of Council, either in Session or out of Session; but this is now abrogated by the late Con∣stitution of the Session, who are come in place of the Lords of Council who then were. The meaning of these words in the Act (And as for Slaughter and Mutilation, to keep the order of the Act made thereupon of before;) Is that Slaughter and Mutilation are not comprehended under this Act, because by the 63. Act, Par. 6. Ja. 4. No remission can be grant∣ed for these Crimes, and therefore there can be no Assythment. THis Act is further explained in Crim. pract. tit. Fire-raising; but it is fit here to observe, that in these words,ACT 8. that particular Justice Courts shall be set thereto, as shall please the Kings Grace, his Council, and the Justices; the word (And) is taken disjunctive, as is often in the Civil Law, and our Statutes, l. 66. ff. de haered. Instit. Nota, The killing of Thieves is declared no Crime. King JAMES the fifth, Parl. 4. EXcommunication is here called the Process of Cursing,ACT 9. and Excommunication used in time of Popery to be granted for not payment of Civil debt, or not performing of Contracts, or not restoring of spuilʒied Goods, is now in desuetude (for all these were held to be mortal sins;) and by this Act Letters to Poynd or Ap∣pryze were to be granted thereupon; And by the 7. Act, Par. 4. Q.M. their Moveable Escheat falls to the King, if they ly under the Pro∣cess of Excommunication for a year, the Creditor being first payed,
which Acts are further enlarg'd by the 3. Act 20. Par. Ja. 6. By which their whole Rents and Revenues are to be applyed to the use of the Publick, and all Gifts of Escheat granted to the behove of the Wife, Children, or Confidents of such as are Excommunicated for Popery, are declared null, Act 197. Par. 14. Ja. 6. It may seem strange that Excommunication repells ab agendo sed non a defenden∣do, and yet Horning debars from both, though the person Excom∣municated be the greatest Delinquent, being at Gods Horn, 8. July, 1636. Colstoun contra Cranstoun, Vid. observ. on Act 11. Par. 6. Ja. 2. supra. ACT 10.THis Act is innovated and enlarged by the 1. Par. Ch. 2. Sess. 1. Act. 41. ACT 12.THis Act is in observance to this day, but it holds only in For∣rests notoly known to be such; for if there was probable reason of doubting whether it be a Forrest, the Goods feeding in it will not be escheat for bygones, vid. Leg. For. c. 2. §. 2. & sequen. Because this Act sayes, if any person be found putting their Goods in Pa∣sturage in the Kings Forrest, they shall escheat the same; therefore it seems reasonable that if Goods be only found there, this is not suf∣ficint to escheat them, since they might have strayed there, & Do∣minus non tenetur ad poenam si animal ex seipso ingrediatur in locum prohibitum ut est Forresta Borel, de Magistrat. Edict. lib. 4. cap. 6. num. 18. ACT 13.VId. Annot. on Act 61 Par. 7 Ja. 3. supra. ACT 14.THis Act relates to Act 88 Par. 14 Ja. 2. Whereby Hares are not to be kill'd in time of Snow: and Act 59 Par. 11 Ja. 6. and Act 266 Par. 15 Ja. 6. whereby Hares are not to be kill'd at any times by Guns, Girns, Nets, or Cross-bows, which last is yet in observance, and all these Acts are reviv'd by a Proclamation of Council, in Febr. 1680. ACT 15.BY the 25 Act 3 Par. Ja· 4, It is ordain'd that the Superior of Ward lands or his Donatar, shall find Caution to leave the Houses, Orchyards, Woods, Stanks, Parks, &c. in as good condition as they found them, they taking their Sustentation, or using them in needful things, without waste or destruction, which is extended to all Life∣renters and Conjunct-feers, who are ordain'd to find the like Cau∣tion by this Act. By which also, all Sheriffs, Stewards, Magistrats within Burgh, and Spiritual men within their bounds, are also com∣manded to exact this Caution. These Acts are also extended to all such as have Life-rent Tacks from the Heretors, without payment of any considerable duty, though the words of this Act run only against such as have Liferent Infeftments; but this Act should not be extended to such as have Liferent-Tacks, for payment of an equivalent Duty, Qui sunt
conductores & non usufructuarii; for the Heretor is rather oblig'd to entertain the Houses to such Tacks-men, than they to him, Janua∣ry 23. 1635. Laird of Laidly contra Boyd. But this is to be under∣stood of such Tacks-men, as pay a Dewty equivalent to the Rent, for else Relicts would in place of Liferents, take Tacks during their life for any imaginary Dewty, which should not free them from the finding of Caution. In that case it was also found, that this Act did oblige Donatars of Liferent-Escheats, to find Caution to maintain the Houses, Orchyards, &c. which fall under his Gift; but quid juris, if the Fisk retain Liferents so faln in his own hands, & peregr. de jur. fisc. tit. 1. num. 35. is of opinion, that usufructu sisco legato siscus non satisdat de utendo fruendo arbitrio boni viri; but it is hard that the Heir should be in a worse case by the Crimes of the Liferenter, or their going to the Horn, so that his Estate should be thereby expos'd to mis-managment: and albeit where a Liferent is left to the Fisk, Caution may seem to be remitted by the intention of the Party, yet that should not be extended to the case of its falling to the Fisk, without his consent, and it rather seems, that since a Donatar is ty'd to find Caution, that therefore the Fisk should. Nota, There needs no precognition to be taken by an Assize of the condition the Houses were in conform to the 226 Act. Par. 14 I. 6. For that Act only ordains such precognitions to be taken when Houses are ruinous within Burgh, and the Liferenters re∣fuse to concur in Re-building them, in which case the Heretor is allow'd to repair, he finding Caution to pay the Liferenters the Dewty that these Houses pay'd formerly, March 23. 1626. Foulis contra Allan. Though this Act ordains the Sheriffs, and others who refuse to exact this Caution, to be lyable to the Heretor of the Ward-lands, without mentioning that they shall be lyable to Liferenters, or Conjunct-fiars, yet doubtless they are lyable to them also for the damnage sustain'd, in not exacting this surety. Though in some cases cautio juratoria be allow'd, yet it would not be allow'd here Gail. lib. 2. obs. 47. for that Caution cannot secure the Heretor, and there is as little reason to receive it in this case, as in Removings. But Perez▪ is of opinion, that cautio jurato∣ria is receivable si offerens sit probatae & honestae vitae. There was likewise cautio usufructuaria by the Civilians, & introducta est per senatus consultum in iis quae usu consumuntur, §. 3. just. de usu∣fruct. & l. 1. ff. de usufructu earum rer. quae usu consum. But all this matter is learnedly Treated by Christin. ad Consuetud Mechli. tit. 14. where he determines that the lesser and temporary expences are to be bestow'd by the Liferenter, but that she will get  from the Heretor of these expences, quae perpetuam rei utilita. tem concernunt, if she advertise the Heretor, that they were neces∣sary, and first desir'd him to repair, but that she cannot by her Reparation alter the form of the thing, though for the better, nor use it otherways than the Proprietar himself did.
By the former Act Ja. 4 Par. 3 cap. 25. to which this relates, the Liferenters are to find Caution that they shall not destroy the Orch-yards, Woods, &c. From which it may be observ'd, that where Woods are upon Liferented Lands, the Liferenter as well as the Conjunct-fiar, may make use of as much of the Wood, or Coal, as is necessary for her own use, since she is only restrain'd by this Act from wasting; and by the custom of some Countreys, she cannot pretend Right to Trees fallen by Winds or accidents, if the Trees be such as are fit for sale, & in sylvâ caedua ita inisio∣nem facere potest ut ad fructum pertineat non vere ad destructionem vid. l. ex sylva 10. ff. de usufruct. which agrees with our Law, by which the Liferentrix has only right to as much of the Coals or Trees as are necessary for her own use; but even this Right is on∣ly due to her, whilst the Land is the Fiars, but does not hinder the Fiar to sell his own Land, Craig. pag. 189. FOrestallers are these who buy Goods before they come to an open Mercat;ACT 21. and Regraters are properly only these who buy up all Goods, that they may sell them again at dearer rates. But our Law has us'd these two words promiscuously, though by this Act such as buy any thing before it be presented to the Mercat, or who buy it in the Mercat; but before the Mercat be proclaim'd, which is call'd here the time of day of the Mercat, are punish'd as Forestal∣lers; yet there must be something of design proven, as if they should stand in the way upon a Mercat day, or should every day cause buy up what were going to such a Town, to hinder the Traffick of that Town; for it were hard to make generally all who buy things going to a Town, or a Mercat Forstalling, for that may be done either ignorantly, or necessarly. Though the punishment here be Imprisonment and escheating of the Defenders Moveables, yet by the 148 Act Par. 12 Ja. 6. The punishment is ordain'd to be fourty pounds for the first fault, a hundred for the second, and escheating of Moveables for the third; and though severals have been found guilty of Forstalling, as par∣ticularly upon the 9. of June 1596. and the 6. of August that year; yet I find no punishment follow'd. The Chamberlain of old was the only Judge in his Chamberland-air, cap. 35 Stat. Will. Reg. But now the Justices are only com∣petent Judges to this Crime, they were call'd Dardanarii by the Civil Law, and were punish'd poenâ extraordinariâ l. 6. ff. de extraor. crim. ACT 22.THis Act is innovated and enlarg'd by the Act i6 Sess. 3 Ch. 2 Par. 1. ALL Officers within Burgh are discharg'd to purchase Lord∣ships out of Burgh,ACT 26. least they give dreadure to their Neigh∣bours; by which they are as I conceive, discharg'd to be Lords of
Session, or Lord Barons, or at least they lose their Offices how soon they attain to these. Each Burgh does to this day compt in Exchequer for their Feu∣dewty yearly, conform to this and other Acts. It was thought that a pursuit against the Magistrats of Edinburgh, for compting for their Common good upon this Act, was not com∣petent at the Instance of a privat Burgess, or of any save the Lord Thesaurer of the Kingdom, who comes in place of the Chamber∣lain Air, though it was said to be actio popularis, and a species of suspectae tutelae; but this would have given too great occasion to Faction, and would have discourag'd Magistracy too much, nor are such popular actions in matters of Government to be easily allow'd under Monarchy, though they are necessary in privat Rights. THough this Act appoint such as trouble Burrows in using their Liberties, to be punish'd in Justice Courts,ACT 27. as com¦mon oppressors▪ yet this is in Desuetude, except the oppression▪ be very attrocious; but the ordinary remedy is now, either by actions of Molestation, or declarator of Property before the Ses∣sion, or by actions of Ryot before the Privy Council. COlonel Borthwick having gotten a Gift of this penal Statute, pursu'd the Malt-men criminally thereupon;ACT 29. which Pursuit was discharg'd by the Council 1672. upon a Bill, and these Statutes found to be in Desuetude, and impracticable in this age, wherein Malt cannot be sold for two shilling more than the price of the Boll of Bear, as this Act appoints. BY our Law, all single Escheats fall to the King,ACT 32. for bona mobi∣lia sunt allodialia, and hold not of the ordinary Superior, who has no Right, jure proprio, to the Escheats of such as dwell within his Territory: and thus Lords of Regality have only right to such Escheats by their Erection from the King. But the Liferent-escheats which fall either for civil or criminal Causes, belong to immediat Superiors respective, so that if a Vassal who is at the Horn, have Lands holden of many Superiors, each Superior will have right to the Land which holds of himself; for Feus being given for service, and the Vassal being nullus in jure; by his Rebellion the Feu returns to the Superior, except in the case of Treason, in which it falls to the King. Observe from this Act, that the Lords of Articles are Judges to Processes in the first instance, but the Debate must be resum'd to the Parliament. BY this Act Justice-airs and Courts are peremptor at the second Diet;ACT 33. but by the Act 79 Par. 11 Ja. 6. they are peremptor at the first Diet, and parties not appearing now are unlaw'd if pur∣suers, and are declar'd Fugitive if Defenders, at the first Diet. Vid. observ. on Act 39 Par. 5 Ja. 3. supra.
This Act relates to another Act of Parliament, dated the 10. of July 1625. but there is no Parliament amongst our Printed Laws of that date. ACT 34.THough by this Act Depredations, Reiffs and Spuilʒies, are or∣dain'd to be first civily pursu'd; yet the Justices use to su∣stain Criminal Pursuits for these causes in the first instance; except a defence be propon'd upon matter of Right, as if the Defender alleadg'd he had a Disposition, or other Right; and in these cases the Justices superceed to give answer to the Criminal Pursuit, till the Civil Right and Title be first discust; and this the Privy Coun∣cil uses to do in Riots pursu'd before them. King JAMES the fifth, Parl. 5. ACT 36.AFter many Alterations observ'd by me in the Annot. on Act 65 Par. 3 Ja. 1. and Act 62 Par. 14 Ja. 2. at last the Session was establish'd in the way it now is by King James the fifth, in this his fifth Parliament, and is or∣dain'd to consist of fourteen Lords, seven whereof were to be of the Clergy, or Spiritual; and seven Temporal with the Presi∣dent, who was to be of the Clergy; but since the abolition of Po∣pery, they are all Seculars or Laicks, though sometimes Bishops were extraordinary Lords; and though this Act of Parliament ap∣points the half to be Spiritual, and the half Temporal, with a President; yet by the 93 At 6 Par. Ja. 6. It is declar'd it shall be lawful to the King to present any able Person, whether he be of the Spiritual or Temporal State. ACT 37.VId. observ, on Act 7 Par. 3 Ch. 2. ACT 39.THe present Lords are ordain'd to have all the priviledges that the Lords of Session (for so they were call'd in the Reign of King James the second) had formerly; and therefore it is alleag∣ed, that since Appeals could not be received from them, that they cannot be received from the Lords of Council and Session, as was formerly observed, Act 62 Par. 14 Ja. 2. ACT 40.THe Chancellor when present, is to preceed, and because he preceeds, therefore he gives his Vote last; and because it was controverted, whether he was to be President in the Parlia∣ment, therefore by the 1 Act 1 Par. Ch. 2. He is declar'd to be President in all Courts, and he did preceed by vertue of this Act in Exchequer, till he was discharg'd by His Majesty by a Letter in anno 1663.
These words, And sicklike other Lords as shall please the King's Grace to subjoyn to them of his Great Council, who shall have Vote, to the number of 3, or 4. are all the warrand that there is for no∣minating the extraordinary Lords of Session, who cannot exceed 4. They are still named by a Letter from the King, as the ordinary Lords are, but they are not examined like them; and these extra∣ordinary Lords are marked in the Books of Sederunt after all the or∣dinary Lords. THese words, And the Lords to subscrive all Deliverances, and none other,ACT 41. is all the warrand that was for the Lords sub∣scriving all the Bills for raising Summonds before the Criminal Court, but I think these general words should be restricted, secundum sub∣jectam materiam, as all general words in Law ought to be, for we see that notwithstanding of these general words, the warrands for raising Summonds before the Privy Council are subscrived only by Privy Counsellors, and now the Justices are only in use to sub∣scrive their own Bills, though the other Lords of Session are not ex∣cluded from that power. THis Act is the warrand that the Lords have for making Acts of Sederunt, which were so called,ACT 43. because the Lords sitting are marked, Sederunt such and such men; but these Acts are to reach no further than the ordering of Forms of Process, or the re∣gulating their own House, and therefore this Act sayes, For advising and making of their Rules and Institutes for the order of Justice; This same power is almost allow'd by all Nations to their Supream Judi∣catures, Vin. Comment. ad §. 9. Inst. lib. 1. tit. 2. Christin. Vol. 2. Decis. 51. num. 8. THis division of the Kingdom, in order to the calling Causes,ACT 44. is now in Desuetude; for all Causes are now Enrolled accor∣ding to the order of the returns of the Process, vid. Act. 16. Sess. 3. Par. 2. Ch. 2. Artic. 1. NO Session sits now on Munday, and so this Act is in Desuetude; Suspensions are called on Tuesday and Wednesday,ACT 45. and ordi∣nary Actions upon Thursday, Friday, and Saturnday. The Friday was allotted for the Causes of the King and Queen, and the Actions of Ministers and Strangers; but by the Regulati∣ons the Kings Causes may be call'd on any day, the Party De∣fender being advertis'd 14. dayes before, of the particular day on which it is to be called. It has been doubted before this Act, whe∣ther the Queens Causes should enjoy the priviledge of the Kings Causes; And the priviledge is by this Act extended to her, & ita Augusti privilegia ad Augustam sunt extendenda, l. 31. ss. de Legi∣bus.
ACT 49.NOw the Lords sit from 9. to 12. and they sit down sometimes before 9. as occasion requires. ACT 51NOta, By this Act Parties were allow'd to plead their own cause, and they needed not have Advocats, except they pleased, but no other Party not contain'd in the Summonds can have liberty to speak; But the Lords can now hinder Parties to Plead, or force them to have Advocats, to shun confusion and nonsence. It seems also that though an Action be to a mans behove he cannot be al∣low'd to speak, except his name be in the Summonds. ACT 52.THe order of Tabulating Summonds is now much alter'd, for no Summonds are Tabulated except Actions of Declarators, Im∣probations, Contraventions, and other Actions at the King's Ad∣vocats instance, upon the back of which Summonds he Writes, Ta∣buletur erga diem Veneris proximè sequentem, and except this be writ∣ten upon it, the Action cannot be debated; and some think that if the Action be called without this, a Decreet thereupon pronoun∣ced would be null. ACT 53.WItnesses are now examin'd by one of the ordinary Lords in the afternoon, as here, and that Lord who sat last Week in the Outer-house does the next Week Examine Witnesses. THe Quorum of the Lords by this Act is ten, either ordinary or extraordinary,ACT 57. for either make up the Quorum; but now eight Lords with the President make a Quorum, which alteration proceeds from the 44. Act 11. Par. Ja. 6. Nota 1. By this Act that advising of Processes cannot be recom∣mended to any particular Lord. Nota 2. That by this Act publication of Witnesses is allow'd, else how is it ordain'd here that publication of Witnesses should be before the hail Auditor, and Advocats were allow'd to see the De∣positions, and to debate against them, till the year 1666. at which time this was discharg'd, upon pretext that Advocats did spend too much time in debating against the Depositions, and that Witnesses Depositions were more to be credited when no man was to see them, or know them, than when the persons interested were to see them, because it was probable they would take pains to please them: But we find great mistakes by not letting Advocats see the Depositions, since they might clear many things that seem inconsistent, and which depend upon other matters of Fact; and it's rather presumeable that Witnesses knowing that what they say is not to be seen, will take li∣berty to Depone too liberally, the not publication also of the De∣positions tends much to make Judge▪ Arbitrary, since the warrands whereon they proceed is not known; and publication of Testimo∣nies i a kind of confronting Witnesses with the Parties, which is oft-times very useful, and this publication is for these reasons allow'd by the Civil Law, and in most Nations, vid. Marant. de processus publicatione, and in England in all cases, and is even with us allow'd in some cases yet, as in Falshood▪
CLerks to the Signet are now called Writers to the Signet,ACT 59. but their Fees specified by the next Act are innovated by the Regulati∣ons; at first there was but one Clerk of Session, who was called the Clerk of Council, as is clear by the 53. Act of this Parliament, and he was chosen per vices, out of the Writers to the Signet; but all the Writers to the Signet, or Clerks of the Signet, were at first ad∣mitted to be present at the decision of Causes, whereof this Act is a Vestige; Thereafter there were two Clerks of the Session, and at last three, but lest their number should increase, by an unprinted Act of Parliament, it was declar'd that they could not be moe than three, notwithstanding whereof, in Anno 1661. The Register ap∣pointed six, whereupon the King by his Letter in Anno 1676. re∣duced them again to three, and now again there are six Clerks, as before the year 1675. IT is appointed by this Act,ACT 61. that deliverance upon Bills presented to the Session be only Written by a Writer to the Council (that it to say, a Clerk of Session) and not by a Writer to the Signet. BY the last words of this Act it appears that an Advocat may be mpelled to plead for any man,ACT 64. except he can alledge that he  employed for the other Party, or the like, &c. which is  the Civil Law, l. 7. C. de postulando. present practice Advocats and all remove at the advising  the Cause,ACT 66. though in England and France Causes are openly advised, which discourages very much all arbitrariness. THat Advocats should propone all their Dilators together the second time, is still ordered, but never observed;ACT 67. for where the Dilators are of importance, or intricat, the Lords will allow them to be proponed separatly. BY this Act such as misrepresent the Lords,ACT 68. or accuse them un∣justly, either by a formal Process, or to the King,, are to be punish'd Arbitrarly by way of Action, for they are here appointed to be called before the King, but such as dishonour or lightlie them, are to be punished by the Lords themselves; and the Lords are in use to send such as contemn them or their orders to the Castle, or Tolbooth, or to ordain them to crave pardon upon their knees, &c. suitable to the offence. The Lords are to this day free of Taxations, conform to this Act; but of late if there be no exception of them in the Acts imposing Taxations, they are in use to get a Letter from the King, declaring them free, though this may seem needless, because of 23. Act Par. 1. Ch. 1. and the 23. Act Par. 1. Ch. 2. Though the Precedency due to the Wives of Lords of the Sessi∣on, or Advocats, be continued with them after their Husbands
death, which we derive from the Civil Law, l, faemina 8. ff. de Se∣natoribus, yet immunity from Taxes is not extended to their Wives, Stockman. Decis. 65. King JAMES the fifth, Parliament 6. ACT 69.THough regularly Crimes die with the Committers, and can∣not be punish'd after their death, yet by this Act it is or∣dain'd that Treason may be pursu'd after the committers death, which holds only in Treason committed against the Kings person and Common-wealth, that is to say, in perduellion, where there is a design against the Kingdom, such as raising War, bringing in Forreiners, &c. but holds not in simple Treason, or laese Majestie, such as are the keeping out of a Castle, or in of∣fering to detain the King's Person Prisoner upon any private ac∣count, for the words against the King's Person, or Common-weal are copulative; neither does this Act hold in Statutory Treason, which are meerly Treasons by vertue of a Statute, such as Stealing in Lan∣ded men, or Murder under trust, &c. In all cases where Treason is to be pursued after the death of the Committer, it is necessary to call the appearand Heir, because his right as appear and Heir, is to be forefaulted by the sentence; but though it is ordinarly believ'd that the bones of the Committer must be raised and brought to the Bar; yet this is not necessary. Nota, That the Common or Civil Law is a sufficient warrand to sustain Actions in this Kingdom, because of its great equity, except where the same is over-ruled by a contrary Law or Custom. The Civil Law to which this Act relates, is l. ult, ff. ad l. Jul. maj. Extinguitur crimen mortalitate nisi sorte quis Majestatis reus suerit. It has been much doubted amongst Lawyers how far the Delict or Crime of the Predecessor should infer Action against their Heirs, which may be resolv'd in these conclusions. 1. That all corporal punishment expires with the Committer, nam noxa caput sequitur, instit. lib. 4. tit de nox, Act. 8. per tot. & §. 5. 2. As to any Civil conclusion, & quoad interesse pecuniarium; the Civil Law did only sustain restitution against the Heir in two cases, viz. If either Litis-contestation had past in the Defuncts own time, or if the Heir had got advantage by the Crime or Delict of his Predecessor, as if for instance, the stollen Goods, or the Money conceal'd by his Pre∣decessor had remain'd with him, §. Non autem omnes 1. Instit. de perpet. & temporal. Action. 3. By the Canon Law the Heir was lyable to refound the dam∣nage done by the Predecessor, though there was neither Litis con∣testation past in his time, nor did any advantage remain with his Heir, cap: ult. ext. de sepult. cap. in literis ext. de rapt. And though the opi∣nion of the Canonists seem to the Lawyers of this age more equi∣table, they thinking Litis-contestation but a subtilty, yet I conceive
that there was very much reason for the Civil Law to require Litis-contestation, since if the Defunct himself had been pursu'd he might have alleadg'd many things which might have defended him that were unknown to the Heir; as for instance, he might have alleadg'd that the Sheep alledg'd to be stollen were intrometted with by the Owners warrand, and might have cited Witnesses who were present, which the Heir could not know, and yet our practice follows the Canon Law, as more conscionable. I find that in the 5. Council at Constantinople, it was after debate found that Origin and Theodorus might be Anathematiz'd after their death, though Vigilius then Pope of Rome maintain'd, neminem post mortem condemnandum, and this occasion'd a great Schism. There is interpos'd betwixt this and the next Act a distinct Act in the Black Impression, whereby the King and Parliament ordain several Acts past in the last Parliament to be now pronounc'd and authoriz'd by his Grace and the three Estates, which has been left out, because the way of authorizing Acts now, is only by His Ma∣jesties touching them with the Scepter, and if they be Voted in a former Session, they may be touch'd without any new Vote or Act; but if they were past in a former Parliament, they must have a Vote, else they cannot be call'd the Acts of the present Par∣liament. THe King here Revock'd when he was in France,ACT 70. and his Re∣vocation is subscribed by a Notar, which was at that time sufficient, but his supplying the Solemnities by His Kingly power, was unnecessary, for the King cannot supply the want of Solemnities, either in his own or other mens Acts or Deeds, there is little in this Revocation different from what was in former Revocations, save that, 1o. The King Revocks all Tacks and Assedations made for longer space than five years; which Article is also repeat∣ed in the 31 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. and the reason of it is, because there is too great a restraint laid upon the King, by these long Tacks, hindering Him thereby to improve His Property, or Ca∣sualty; for which Reason likewise, long Tacks set by Tutors, are not allow'd, and though this may seem only to extend to Tacks sett by Kings in their Minority; Yet by the same Reason, and upon the same Act, a Tack of the Customs set by the King in His Majority, to Fleming and Peebles, was Reduced before the Exche∣quer, November 17. 1634. because the Tack was sett for seven years. 2o. The King here Revocks all Rights made by Him, by evil or false Suggestion, or by expreeming of a false Cause, though or∣dinarly false Narratives do not Reduce Deeds betwixt Majors; this Lawyers terms ex suppressione veri & expressione falsi; and this ar∣ticle of Revocation, agrees with the Civil Law, Vid. tit. C. de precib. offerend. & tit. C. si contra jus vel utilit. public. His Majesty here Revocks all Tacks and Assedations made in his minority for longer space than five years, which is likwise a Clause repeated in all the posterior Revocations, and though it may seem,
that no Deed done by a Minor in his Minority, is Revockable, except Lesion could be alleadg'd; yet Craig is of opinion, that the very setting of a Tack is a Lesion, though it be not set under the true value, Minorem enim laedi puto quod rei suae liberâ administra∣tione prohibentur lib. 2. dieg, 10. THe three Head-Courts to be held by Sheriffs, &c. conform to this Act,ACT 71. are as follows; the first is upon the first Tuesday after the four∣teenth of January, which is the first Tuesday after the twelfth day of Yule: The second Court is upon the first Tuesday after Law-sunday: The third is upon the first Tuesday after the twenty ninth of Septem∣ber, which is Michaelmas day; but now they need not writ any ex∣cuse to the King, or Council, if they be not personally present. This Act makes a difference betwixt such as owe sute and pre∣sence, and these who owe sute only; all such Barons and Free-holders as owe sute and presence, ought to be present in these head Courts; but this Act determines not who owe sute and presence: and though the 2 cap. 2 Stat. Rob 1. Statutes that none owe sute and presence, but these who are expresly lyable thereto by ther Infeftments; yet by our present practice, Vassals of Ward Lands, and consequently of taxt Ward Lands, are also lyable to compear in the Superiours head Courts, without any Citation, though they be not Cted; and though this be not exprest in their Infeft∣ment, for hoc mest, in the nature of their holding, but Vassls who hold blesh or eu, are not oblig'd to compear without Citation, except they be thereto ty'd by their Infeftment, March 12. 1630. Bishop of Aberdeen contra his Vassals. And by this Act also, the Infeftment is made the rule of compearance; these who owe sute only, are only oblig'd to send an able man to attend, and serve upon Inquests; and ordinarly Charters bear tres sectas curiae. ACT 73.THis Act appointing Sheriff-deputs, and all other Deputs to be sworn yearly is in Desuetude. ACT 74.THis Act appointing all Executions even of Letters, by war∣rand of inferiour Courts to be stamped, was running in Desuetude, till it was revived by a Decision in January 1681. where an Execution proceeding upon a warrand before an inferi∣our Court, was found not sufficient, because not stamped, and Horning and other Executions before the Lords were always null by way of action, if not stamped, July 2. 1630. This Act appoints that all Mayors and Officers shall have a Sig∣net, bearing the first Letters of their Name, or some other Mark that shall be universally known: and therefore, though the Exe∣cutions bear that they were stamped, yet if they do not appear to be stamped, the Executions may be quarrell'd as null, especially if they be recent, even as Testaments were null by the Civil Law, if they did not appear to have formam insculptam{que} signi imaginem, l. 22. §. 6. qui testament. fac. but on the contrary, if the Executi∣ons bear not that they were stamped, they will not be valid, though
they appear to be stamped, because another than the Messenger might have affix'd that stamp, Vid. observ. on 33 Act Par. 5 Ja. 3. ALbeit this Act appoints all such as execute Sheriffs or Barons Precepts, &c. to leave Copies; yet it has been found,ACT 75· that the execution of a Barons verbal Precept needs no Writ, but my be prov'd by Witnesses, But this was betwixt a Baron and his Tennents, where there needed no written Precepts; whereas this Act requiring written Executions, is only to be in∣terpreted, 'where there are written Precepts, because it says they shall indorse their Executions; and there can be no Indorsation, where there is no written Precept. It is requir'd by this Act, that the Executor should show the Letters, which are his Warrand, and that he should offer a Copy to the Servants, and yet both these are in Desuetude. This Act requires six knocks, and the affixing of a Copy upon the most patent Door of the Defenders Dwelling house, which the Lords found was only in the case where there could be no entry, but found that there was no necessity of knocking when the Door  patent, and Servants found therein, December 11. 1679. Coun∣te  Cassils contra the Earl of Roxburgh; but it may be doubted still, whether six knocks be necessary where the Door is patent, but no Servants within, and the Act says only, that if they get no entress, they shall knock; though a man may be cited in an or∣dinary action, by a Copy left at the Inn where he stayed fourty days; yet a man cannot be Denunc'd upon a Copy left at his Inn, which is so determined in odium of his Escheat, November 20. 1672. It has been doubted, whether a Messengers Execution, bearing that he came to the Defenders House, and was by force keeped out, so that he could not give a personal Citation; if in that case the De∣fender should be holden pro confesso, as personally apprehended, it being offered to be proven that he was really within, and some of the Lords were of opinion, that he should be holden as confest, the Messenger proving that he was within; or if the Execution had born that he and the Witnesses had given a particular evidence of their knowledge of his being within. Othes thought that he should be holden as confest, unless he could instruct that he was alibi, in regard of the Contumacy. But most resolv'd, that hold∣ing as confest, being a solemn and important Certification, peculi∣ar to Scotland that the assertion of the Messenger and his executi∣on, should not be sufficient, nor put the Defender to alleadge alibi, but that warrand should be granted to cite at the Mercat Cross, with Certification to be holden as confest, July 5. 1670. Lindsay and Swinton contra Inglis. This order of citing, first pr∣sonally, and failʒing thereof, at the Dwelling-house, was allow'd by the Civil Law, l. 1. §. 1. ff. de lib. adgno. And all thee practi∣cal questions are much cleared by Christ. ad leges Mechlin. lib. pri∣mo, tit. 1. articulo 14. in fine, where it will be found that the being holden pro confesso, is not a Certification peculiar to our Na∣tion, for other places use it, as Brabant.
ACT 76.THis Act appointing all Notars to be examined by the Sheriff, and that the Sheriff keep a Book containing their Subscrip∣tions, is in Desuetude. ACT 77.THis Act appointing all Seasins upon Precepts out of the Chan∣cellary, to be given by Sheriff Clerks and their Deputs, is declared by the 15 Act 18 Par. Ja. 6. to extend only to Precepts past upon Retours, and not to Seasins past upon other Precepts; and it is very observable, that though that last Act Narrats that this Act appoints such Seasins to be taken by Sheriffs and their Clerks, yet there is no mention here of Sheriffs, but only of Sheriff Clerks, and yet the Lords of Session do now find Seasines null, ope excep∣tionis, except they be given both by Sheriffs as Baillies, and She∣riff Clerks as Notars. The Reason why Seasins upon Retours must be given by the Sheriffs is, because he is to answer for the Retour'd Dewty, for which he ordinarly takes surety when he gives Seasines, and at the delivery of the Precept, there is a Note made by the Director of the Chancellary in the Responde Book, bearing the sums for which the Sheriff is to take Surety, and he is to be Charg'd, and compts therefore yearly in Exchequer by the 99 Act 7 Par. Ja. 5. and 64 Act 11 Par. and 124 Act 12 Par. Ja. 6. ACT 79.THis Act is in Desuetude since the Registers were introduced in anno 1617. ACT 80.FAlsifying the Kings Charter, or the Counterfeiting of it, was of old Treason, but the falsifying the Charter of a privat per∣son was only to be punish'd by Mutilation, R. M. lib. 4. cap. 13. and thereafter, by the losse of the Right Hand, Statut. Alex. cap. 19. By this Act all Falshood is punishable conform to the old Statutes, which are these I related, and conform to the Civil, and Canon Laws, and that was deportatio cum publicatione bonorum, l. 1. §. ult. ff. ad l. Cornel. de falsis, but because this Act relates only to false Instruments, therefore by the 22 Act Par. 5. Q. M. It is extended to all Evidents, but because both these Acts struck only against false Notars; therefore by the 22 Act Par. 23. Ja. 6. All Forgers of any Writs, and all who are in accession thereto, are to be punish'd, and Death is the ordinary punishment with us, though sometimes, if the matter be small, the punishment is les∣sened. As to false Witnesses, Vid. tract. Crim. tit. Falshood. ACT 81.BY this Act there must be still Instruments taken in the hands of the Clerk of Court, if any be taken at all; but if the par∣ty be jealous of the Clerk of Court, he may take another Notar with
him, and take also Instruments in his hands, after the form and manner prescribed by this Act. NOtwithstanding that by this Act no Commission can be grant∣ed to apprize Lands, or serve Brieves to any but to the Sheriff if Heretable, yet it is ordinary now for the Lords to grant Commissions to their Macers, in both these cases, who are there∣by made Sheriffs in that part, and this Act of Parliament being ob∣jected against Struans Service, 26 Feb. 1681. It was found to be in Desuetude. LEasing-making betwixt the King and his People,ACT 8▪ is punish'd by tinsel, or loss of Life and Goods, by the 43 Act 2 Par. Ja. 1. And by this Act it is ordain'd, that such as make Leasings of His Majesty to his Barons and great Men, shall be punished in the same way as they who make Leasings to His Majesty of His Ba∣rons and Lieges, and though there seem'd a clear parity of Reason for this, before the Act, and that eadem est natura & idem est affectus correlativorum; Yet our Predecessors would not extend Crimes by consequence, and by the 205 Act 14 Par. Ja. 6. The hear∣ing and not revealing, and apprehending such Leasing-makers, is punish'd as Leasing-making. BY this Act there is an Indemnity granted under the name of a general Remission;ACT . but though in general Remissions and In∣demnities there needs no extract be taken of the general pardon, yet here every man is to take an Extract of the Pardon. Nota, That though such as keep correspondence with Rebels after their guilt, be punishable as Traitors, yet here such only as kept intelligence with the Dowglasses, and with Kilspindie their am, which is an old word signifying Cousine, after the doom of For∣faultor against them, are declared punishable, and this seems just where the Crimes were not clearly understood by the people to be such. King JAMES the fifth Parliament 7. BY this Act there ought to be a constant Vice-President in the Session, but this is in Desuetude;ACT 93. for Vice-Presidents are chosen by the Lords in absence of the President, and thus the Lord Stairs was chosen Vice-President in Sir John Gilmor's absence, 1663. Likeas, though by this Act the eldest Lord is to be President in absence of the Vice-President, yet now in absence of the President the Vote of the Lords elects him who is to Preside in his place.
It is also observable that our Kings have been so jealous of suffe∣ring any Act of the Pope to have authority, without being ratifi∣ed by them as Kings, that the Popes Ratification of the Colledge of Justice being thought convenient, because of the assignation of some Ecclesiastick Benefices, for its better support, the King does in this Act ratifie and confirm the Popes Ratification of the King's first Act. ACT 96.SHeriffs, Stewards, &c. compear yet yearly in Exchequer, and make their Aeque, and the time of their compearance is in July, vid. supra obs. on Act 77. Par. 6. Ja. 5. ACT 104.BRibing is expresly discharged by the 25 Cap, Stat. K. Will. and by the 22 Cap Stat 1. Rob. 1. They who take Lands to Champart, are to be in the Kings will, and lose their employment for all their life∣time. Champart is a rench word, signifying a part of the Land controverted, so that whosoever takes part of the thing controver∣ted, per pactum de quotâ litis, falls under that Law. By this Act whoever takes Rewards or Buds are punishable by tinsel of Ho∣nour, Fame, and Dignity; and by the 93 Act, 6 Par. Ja. 6. the taking by their Wives and Servants, which was here omitted, is punishable by Infamy, Deprivation, and Confiscation of all the De∣fenders Moveables. By this Act, giving of partial counsel, that is to say, consulting, is declared a species of Bribing, though nothing be taken, at least it is punishable as bribing, so that it seems a Judge may not consult albeit he abstain from judging in that cause. These words, That he shall take no further Rewards nor Buds than is permitted of the Law, are set down to shew that Judges may law∣fully take the Quota allowed by Law to Judges, which we call Sen∣tence-money, and the Civil Law Sportulae. The taking Bribes was in the Civil Law punish'd per l. Jul. repe∣tundarum, l. 1, 3, 6. d. t. And the punishment was death, if Mo∣ney was taken to pronounce a Capital Sentence, or Confiscation of Goods, and Banishment in other cases, l. 7. §. 3. eod. tit. but by the Doctors, and in our Law, this Crime is called Barratrie. Such as defame Judges as Bribers, are punished here as Bribers; but besides the poena talionis which is inflicted upon all such as mur∣mure against Judges; there is likewise an Arbitrary punishment ad∣jected, and either the King or his Council are Judges competent to the cognition of this Crime by this Act. Nota, That if a Spiritual Man murmure against any Judge, he has the priviledge to be called before his own Judge ordinar by this Act; but this revocatio sori is not now in use since the Refor∣mation. BAse Infeftments are these which are given to be holden of the Disponer,ACT 105. which are valid Rights in themselves, though they never attain possession, for else they could not give good Interest to reduce the Rights that may hinder them to attain possession.
These base Infeftments are introduced with us contrary to the prin∣ciples of the Feudal Law, which allows no Feudal conveyance without the Superiors consent, and were introduc'd rather by accident than upon design. This Act upon which they are founded being introduc'd rather to suppress simulate Infeftments, than to strengthen base Infeftments, and the great priviledges a∣rising to them now, did insensibly grow from the favour which our Law shewed alwayes to lawful Creditors, even as the priviledge of necessitating Superiors to receive Comprizers did. Base Infeftments, though yet wanting possession, are preferable to posterior Arrestments, but they are not preferred to posterior Life-rent Escheats, except they attained possession in cursu rebellionis, Feb, 21. 1667. Miln contra Clerkson; and before this Act of Parlia∣ment, 1540. they were still preferr'd to posterior publick Infeft∣ments: But by this Act it is statuted that publick Infeftments cloath∣ed with Possession for year and day shall be preferr'd to base In∣feftments not cloathed with possession, though prior, which prae∣sumptione juris & de jure, are by this declared to be simulate Rights. But though this Act requires that the publick posterior Infeftment be granted for onerous Causes, yet a publick posterior Infeftment, though gratuitous, will be preferr'd, 3 March, 1626. Law con. Balgow∣nie. But this may be doubted because of this Act, and in that Decision the publick Infeftment was preferr'd, because Inhibition had fol∣low'd thereupon, for any Act that can take off the presumption of simulation, and which will make the Infeftment any way to be known, doth fortifie the Infeftment, as well as if possession had follow'd; and so an Inhibition following upon the debt for which the base Infeftment was granted, will prefer that Infeftment to a po∣sterior publick Infeftment, without necessity to reduce ex capite In∣hibitionis, and an Infeftment following upon an Appryzing was with∣out reduction ex capite Inhibitionis, preferr'd to a prior base Infeft∣ment, though clad with possession, because the Appryzing follow'd upon a debt whereupon Inhibition was serv'd before that base In∣feftment, the said 3 of March, 1626. And likewise, if other diligence was done, or the time was so short that a years possession could not be attain'd, then a Terms pos∣session was sustain'd; or though there followed no possession at all, the base Infeftment will be preferr'd to a posterior publick Infeft∣ment interveening, before the possession could be acquir'd, 13 Feb. 1624. Possession likewise of a part of the Land sustains the Infeft∣ment for all, but this should hold only in Lands erected in a Barony, or such wherein one Seasing may serve, 5 Feb. 1668. Ker contra Ker. Hope in his lesser Practiques is of opinion, that in the concourse of two base Infeftments, the prior will be preferr'd in petitorio, though no possession follow'd thereupon, which seems to be reasonable, because before this Act of Parliament, jus illud obtinebat, and by this Act, Nihil quoad hoc est innovatum; yet de practicâ a base Infeftment is as null till it be cloathed with possession, as an Infeftment à me is before it be confirmed.
If neither of the two base Infeftments be cloathed with possessi∣on prior in tempore est prior in jure. The Husbands possession was alledg'd to be the Wifes possession as to her principal, but not quoad her additional Joynture, 7 Decemb. 1664. Lady Craig contra Lord Loure; and in our Law the Husbands possession is accounted the Wifes possession whether the Husband possest by himself, or by Wod-setters, or Comprizers deriving right from him, though it was alledg'd that this was not the Husbands possession, they having possest proprio jure, which priviledge is not only introduc'd ob savorem detis, but because she could not possess, for which reason likewise a base Infeftment for relief is preferr'd to a posterior publick Infeftment upon a Comprizing, albeit the Cau∣tioner was only charged to make payment, which was found a suffici∣ent distress, 28 July, 1625. As also, after a solemn dispute, the Lords did prefer a prior base Infeftment for warrandice, though not cloathed with natural possession to a posterior publick Infeftment, 9 January, 1666. Brown contra Scot. But here the Infeftment of warrandice was given simul & semel with the Infeftment of the principal Lands, so that there remains still a doubt as to Infeftments of warrandice given ex intervallo, but Infeftments for relief were not found sufficient∣ly cloath'd with possession, by payment of the Sums for which they were granted as Infeftments of warrandice are by possession of the principal Lands, because it was alledg'd that it was more natural that the possession of one Land should cloath the Infeftment of ano∣ther, than that possession of Annualrents should cloath an Infeft∣ment of Land, and that there might be greater collusion in payment of Sums, than in possessing of Lands, because Creditors might alter their Sums, and take new Assignations, or retire old Rights, where∣as no man could quite his principal Lands, 26 June, 1677. Cra∣mond contra the Tennents of East-barns. But a Fathers possession as Life-renter was not sufficient to pre∣fer a base Infeftment given to the Son to a posterior publick In∣feftment granted to a second Wife, or to any Creditor the like in a base Infeftment granted by a Good-sir to his Oye by the Daughter, which was not found sufficient, being cloathed with the foresaid Civil possession of the Good-sirs reservation of Life-rent to exclude a posterior publick Infeftment, 17 of July, 1635. And this pos∣session by the Husband, or Father, or Disponer, is called possessio per constitutum, and is not favourable in a competition with other Creditors, and therefore a Factory granted by the Father to the Son to uplift the Mails and Duties of Lands dispon'd, to be hol∣den base by the Son of the Father, was not found sufficient to cloath the Sons Infeftment, though there were several Processes intented upon the Factory, 10 July, 1669. This Act requires natural possession, by labouring the Land, or Civil, by uplifting the Mails and Duties; and before Registers were invented, that kind of possession was only able to put their Creditors in mala fide, but though Civil possession hath been found sufficient, such as obtaining of Decreets, and payment of Annual∣rents, albeit the same had no relation to the Infeftment of Annual∣rent,
but was only relative to the Bond whereupon the Infeftment followed; yet the setting of a Back-Tack by the accepter of a Wodset, hath not been found sufficient to maintain a base Infeft∣ment, except payment of the Back-Tack-Duty had likewise fol∣lowed, so that it appears that possessio Naturalis vel Civilis sufficit sed non illa quae a doctoribus dicitur civilissima, as is a Back-Tack. By this Act also, such as make double Dispositions to defraud their Creditors, shall be declared infamous, and shall be punished in their persons and Goods at the Kings pleasure, and this punish∣ment is extended against such as make double Assignations, and the 140 Act Par. 12 Ja. 6. bears, That no Dewty shall be Dispon'd to two sundry persons, which is Crimen stellionatus by the Law, and though this Act does not make double Dispositions to be crimen Stel∣lionatus, yet it is so in effect; but the Civil Law distinguisheth thus, l. Quin. duobus ff. ad l. Corn. de falso Qui rem unant duobus vendidit dicens rem esse suam tenetur falsi, at si non dicat esse suam tenetur Stellio∣natus. Though by this Act Superiours receiving double Resignations are guilty and punishable as said is, and seing to receive such Resigna∣tions, is a great prejudice, because it puts the Parties to great ex∣pences, and that the Superior is presum'd to get, and may get advantage by accepting such double Resignations, or contributing to the making of such double Rights, therefore they ought likewise to be lyable in Damnage and Interest to the Party in∣jured. BY this Act it is Statuted, that a Charge to enter Heir,ACT 106. may be directed against the Successors of the Defuncts (they being of perfect age) to enter to their Lands, within fourty days, Year and Day being first past, after the Decease of the Predecessor, and a Comprizing being led upon their failʒing to enter, the same shall be as valid as if they were Infeft. Nota, Though this Act bears the being of perfect age, yet Mi∣nors may be validly charged to enter Heir de practica; but seing this Act is only made against such as may enter, but wilfully ly out: It might have been doubted whether Minors in Ward-Lands may be Charged to enter Heir, for these cannot enter till they be twenty one years compleat; but by our constant Practique they may be Charged, since this is necessary for compleating the Creditors Diligence. Nota, That this Act does not appoint that generally such Execu∣tion should pass against the appearand Heir, as if he were entred, but only that his Land may be apprized; and therefore quaeri∣tur what execution may be gotten against his moveable Heirship, and it may be urg'd that the same may be affected, as the De∣functs other moveables; for though they be Heirship, respectu hae∣redis, yet they are but moveables respectu Creditoris, for they be∣come only Heirship after they are drawn; and yet it hath been found, that the moveable-heirship may be adjudg'd, and by that
Decision it would appear, that they can only be affected by ap∣prising; but there is a Warrand wanting in this Act for apprising them; there is an Act of Sederunt anno 1613. allowing Charges to enter Heir, to be rais'd within the Year and Day, but the Summons thereupon must be execute after the Year and Day expire, but not till the fourty days expire after the execution of the Charge; but this annus deliberandi, being introduced in favours of the appearand Heir, he may omit the same, and Re∣nunce within the year if he pleaseth; Neither can an Adjudicati∣on following within the Year be challeng'd ex eo capite, July 14. 1631. albeit that the said Act appoints, that a Charge to enter Heir may be rais'd after Year and Day expire, after the Defuncts Death; Yet the Year and Day must only be computed from the ap∣pearand Heirs birth, if he was posthume Spots. tit. Heirs, Living∣stoun contra Houlerton, & de jure civili posthumus non habetur pro nato cum de incommodo ejus agitur l. etiam §. Ille, ff. de minor. ACT 111.THough the meaning of this Act seems to be, that where Trades∣men, who are Free-men, either desert their work, or de∣lays the same, the Owner of the Work may choose other Free-men, or complain to the Deacon; Yet it was found in July 1675. by the Council in the case of Borlands against the Masons of Edin∣burgh, that where a Free man either deserted or delay'd, the Own∣er of the work might imploy any, even Unfree-men; though it was alleadg'd, it was not just to punish all the Free-men for the fault of one; Nor was it convenient for the Common-wealth, that Unfree-men should be admitted, for whose work none can be answerable. ACT 116.THis Act is Verbatim, formerly set down, Act 90 Par. 6. Ja. 4. ACT 117.BY the Civil Law, Testaments and all Writs of importance were to be Seal'd; and with us the appending of the Seal without the Subscription of the Party was sufficient, R. M. lib. 3. cap. 8. num. 3, & 4. and Papers were then Tri'd by comparison of Seals, as now by comparison of Subscriptions; but by this Act the Subscription of the Party and Witnesses is likewise to be added with the Seal, and thereafter, K. Ja. 6 Par. 6. Act 80. all Papers of importance are to be both Seal'd and Subscrived; but now they need only be Subscrived without being Seal'd; and though by this Act, the Subscription of the Notar is sufficient; Yet by that Act two No∣tars and four Witnesses are requisit, where the Party cannot Write. By the 4 Act Par. 9. Ja. 6. Writs that are to be Registrated, need not be Sealed, but there is no express Law dispensing with Seal∣ing, as to other Papers which need no Registration, so that the not Sealing is in these warranted only by uncontroverted Custom.
FIre-rising, and ravishing of Women are to be put under surety,ACT 118. as Mutilation and Slaughter, by this Act; From which, some conclud∣ed that Mutilation was punishable as these Crimes were; but the Act ap∣point not the punishment to be the same, but the way of finding Cauti∣on to be the same, and by the old Law, Stat. Rob. 2 Cap. 11. Mutilation is to be proceeded against as Murder; but yet licet redimere vitam, and it is not declar'd there punishable by Death, and in all the Journal Books, no man was ever punish'd with Death for Mutilation; the punishment being ordinarly confiscation of Moveables, and As∣sythment to the party; nor see I any warrand for Confiscation of Moveables, since the Crime is not punishable by death, nor any express Statute to warrand Confiscation; I find that Mutilation is infer'd upon the cutting of a Thumb or Finger, though digitus was alleadg'd not to be membrum; but pars membri, June 27. 1677. and it was formerly found, July 15. 1642. Chin contra Mowat; but though this may infer Mutilation; Yet I conceive it would not infer Dis-membration, Vid. observ. on 28 Act 3 Par. Ja. 4. BY this Act all the Lieges may sell Fleshes on Sunday, Munday,ACT 122. and Thursday, but thereafter all Mercats being discharg'd on Holy-days, there is an Act of Town Council, ordaining these Landward Fleshers to bring in their Fleshes only on Tuesday, Thurs∣day and Saturnday, and not to sell in pieces, but in Quarters, which is confirm'd by a Decreet of the Session, July 7. 1595. and ratifi'd in the Parliament, 1681. FRom this Act it is clear that the Acts of Parliament cannot be Re-printed without the Kings special approbation even though the Lord Register consent;ACT 127. for else why needed the Regi∣ster get a Warrand by this Act, and the Custom alwise is, that the Register gets a special Warrand for that effect, and the Coun∣cil the 17 of November 1681. found that the Kings Printer hav∣ing Re-printed the Acts of Parliament without such a special War∣rand, the Copies were Confiscable and should be burnt, and the reason of this is, because of the great danger that may arise from the wrong Printing of Acts of Parliament, the difference of a word altering the sense to a contrariety; but yet it seems the Re∣gister should have liberty to Re-print them, since he is answerable for all the Errors; and therefore we see that the Register used still to subjoin his Subscription to the Acts he Re-prints, as is to be seen at the end of the 15 Par. Ja. 6. where Sir John Skeen's or∣dinary Subscription is set down at the end of the Acts which he Re∣printed; and Sir John Hay's at the end of the first Parliament, Ch. 1.
Q. MARY. Parliament III. ALL the Acts of this Parliament except the first, are Tempo∣rary, for encouraging of such as were to hazard their Lives in that Army, and are renew∣ed fully by three equipollent Acts, viz. Acts 41, 42, 43, Par. 2 Ja. 6. BY this Act Church-men are to have Right to the Fruits on the Ground the year they die,ACT 4. and to the Annat thereaf∣ter; and from this it is to be observ'd, that the Annat was a Casualty that befel by and attour the Fruits that were on the Ground, which belonged to the Church-men jure proprio; and formerly the Church-men had right to all the Fruits of the year, if he surviv'd the first of January; for in beneficiis annus inceptus habetur pro completo; but if he surviv∣ed Michaelmas, he had right to that whole year, jure proprio, and the half of the subsequent year, jure annatae; But now by the 13 Act 3 Sess. Par. 2 Ch. 2. If the Incumbents survive Whitsunday, they have right to the preceeding half year by their own right, and to the next half year by their Ann; but if they survive Michaelmas, they have right to the whole year (viz. from January to January) by their own Right, and to the half of the other year as Ann; and though it may seem incongruous, that a Minister living till the
last day before Michaelmas, gets no more than he who lives till the day after Whitsunday; Yet this is regulated in this case, as it is in all Liferents, and this is allow'd them for the support of their poor Families, for that Act declares that the same shall belong to their Exe∣cutors, without necessity of a Confirmation; and though this Act declares, that the Ann is to belong to their Executors, yet in ef∣fect that is not well exprest, for it belongs to their nearest of Kin and Wife, though they be not nominated, nor Confirmed Execu∣tors. If there be Bairns the Ann is equally divided betwixt them and the Wife; but if there be no Bairns, it is divided equally be∣twixt the Wife and nearest of Kin, she having right in that case to a half, and not to the whole, because the Ann was of old in∣troduc'd in favours of the nearest of Kin, as appears by this Act, for Church-men had no Wives under Popery, when this Ann was introduced, June 24. 1663. Elizabeth Scremgeor con. the Executors of her Husband. Though this Ann falls to Bishops and Ministers, who die Incum∣bents, yet it belongs not to such as renunce voluntarly their Bene∣fices, as was found in Bishop Lightoun's case; and neither Manse nor Gleib fall under the Ann, for the last Incumbents Executors have no right to the Gleib, except the same was Sown be∣fore his Decease, July 6. 1665. Colvil contra the Lord Balmerino. The reason why Michaelmas, and not Martinmas is made the Term in this case is, because Ministers Stipends are payable out of the Teinds, or by somewhat which is come in place of them; and therefore Michaelmas should have been the ordinary Term, and generally in payment of all Stipends, the Terms of Whitsunday, be∣cause the Sowing is then ended, and Michaelmas, because the Corns are then separated from the Ground, are the legal Terms for pay∣ment of Stipends. The foresaid Act allows an Ann to Bishops, though the Act of the General Assembly, and the Kings Letter in anno (by which Anns were first establish'd as they now are) did not mention them, and under the Bishops Ann falls only the Quots of such Testaments as were actually Confirm'd in his Lifetime, or during his Ann, July 6. 1676. Captain Wisheart contra the Bishop of Edinburgh: By the Canon Law, the Annat was a quota pay∣able to the Pope and Colledge of Cardinals, by every Intrant, out of his Benefice, Vid. Tush. concl. 329. But a Casualty like ours is payable in the Protestant Churches of Germany, Vide Carpzov. jus consistoriale tit. de decimis. It may be doubted whether that Ma∣xim annus inceptus habetur pro completo, does yet hold good in other Beneficiary cases; for though it be altered by Act of Par∣liament, quoad Annats; yet where there is no Act of Parliament, why should not the old Rule hold. But I rather think that the Act extends to all Benefic'd Persons, albeit the Rubrick mentions only Bishops and Ministers, and so there are two Errors in the Ru∣brick of the said 13 Act, one, in that it mentions only Bishops and Ministers; another, in that it mentions only their Executors, and not their Relict, or nearest of Kin; and the Rubrick should have
born, Act Regulating the Ann of Benefic'd Persons, which shews also how weak the argument is, a rubro ad nigrum. The ancient Bishops allow'd sometimes the uplifting of the first years Rents of Benefices, for assisting Christian Princes against In∣fidels, but the Popes thereafter reserv'd them to the use of the Roman See, upon pretext to supply the general necessities of the Church. Pope John 22. extravag. suscepti. de elect. was in this follow'd by Boniface the 9. who stated them in an ordinary Re∣venue, till the Council of Basil oppos'd the same; and still many Learn'd Doctors of the Romish Church it self condemn'd them as Simoniacal, whereupon the French Kings did by Concordats, force the Pope to pass from the same in France. They were call'd Annats, Anns, or Annals, because they were fructus primi anni; and it seems with us, they were not at the Popes disposal absolute∣ly, else this Act of Parliament could not have dispos'd upon them. But it seems our Kings have in Parliament assum'd to themselves, what others settled by Concordats with the Popes, as may appear in all the Regalia throughout the whole old Acts of Parliament. The whole Doctrine of Annats is excellently Treated by Antonius Nassa de materia annatarum. But I conceive our Ann which is a half Years Stipend, comes from the Saxon reform'd Church, wherein ultra Salarium quod defunctus Aecclesiae minister promeruit ex singulari beneficio viduae ac liberis dimidi∣us gratiae annus assignetur Carpzov. Jurisp. Consistor. lib. 1. tit. 12. It was introduc'd there in anno 1580. a little before King James introduc'd it here by the Letter to the General-Assembly in Montrose. BY this Act, such as did dy in that Army were to have their Ward,ACT 5. Non-entress, Relief and Marriage freely from the Queen. It is observable, that though usually such Acts are made when our Armies are in procinctu going to Battel; and though the King nor his Exchequer seek no advantage by Casualties in such Cases, yet regularly it is no Defence in Law against a Ward or Marriage, that he by whose Death they were sought, were killed in the Kings Service. THough where there is a Governour,ACT 6. the style of Acts of Parliament made by him, is, The Governour with the ad∣vice of the three Estates; Yet this Act says, by the consent of the Governour, and the consent of the Noblemen, both Spiritual and Temporal; By which words also it is clear, that the Lords of the Clergy are to be accounted as Noblemen, and so are to find Cau∣tion under the same pains as Noblemen, and to pay publick Burdens as Noblemen, &c. Queen MARY, Parliament 4. BY this Act, these who are Excommunicated,ACT 7. and conti∣nues so for a Year, for any cause, lose their Moveables, Creditors being first paid; and by the 3 Act 20 Par. Ja. 6. They are to lose their Liferent-Escheats, if they be
Excommunicated for Religion, Vid. supra. observ. on 9 Act 4 Par. Ja. 5. ACT 8.VId. My Criminal Tract. tit. Treason. ACT 9.THis Act inflicting the pain of Death, and Confiscation of Moveables, upon such as shoot at Deer Wild-fowl, or Wild-beasts, is deservedly in Desuetude. Vid. infra observ. on Act 51 Par. 6 Q. Mary. ACT 10.THis Act and the Instructions subsequent to it, were but Tem∣porary Remedies, for repairing Lands burnt at that time by the English Invasion; But though only Parliaments can regu∣larly invert Property, yet the Privy Council do force Heretors to sell burnt Tenements, if they will not repair them themselves, to the end other Heretors, and the publick advantage of the Burgh may not be prejudg'd; and this the Council did in anno 1675. when all the Houses near the Parliament Closs were burnt, and this is conform to a power granted by the 6 Act 3 Sess. Par. 1 Ch. 2. by which it is appointed that the Provost and Baillies may Charge all persons who have the property of such ruinous Lands, to repair them within Year and Day, and if they refuse, the Magistrats may value and sell, Vid. observations on the 226 Act Par. 14. Ja. 6. Queen MARY, Parl. 5. ACT 11.THis Act as to the prices of Wine is in Desuetude, but not in so far as concerns the mixing of Wines, which by the opinion of the Civilians is a species of Falshood, and is pu∣nishable as such, Carpz. de falso. ACT 16.THis Act against abominable Oaths is enlarg'd, Act 103. Par. 7. Ja. 6. Vide my Crim. observ. Tit. Blasphemy, §. 6. ACT 17.THis Act against perturbers of the Kirk is enlarg'd, Act 27. Par. 11. Ja. 6. For that Act reaches all tumults in Kirk-yards, and the punishment in that Act extends to confiscation of all the of∣fenders Moveables. It is observable from this Act, that Children are only to be scourged for such Crimes, minority lessening the punish∣ment, and all within 14 years are accounted Children. ACT 19.VId. Crim. obs. Tit. Bigamie. ACT 20.VId. Crim. obs. Tit. Adultery,
VId. Crim. Tit. Falshood. NOtars are still according to this Act examined and admitted by the Lords, but are not presented by the Sheriffs;ACT 22. for now they are presented by the Clerk to the Notars, who gives in a Bill for them to the Lords. By this Act the Instruments of such as exerce the Office of Notar,ACT 24. not being lawfully admitted, are null, but yet if the pretended No∣tar was habite and repute a Notar, his Instruments will be sustained. Such as usurp the Office of Notars are punishable by this Act as Falsaries or Forgers, yet I never observ'd that for this Crime death was inflicted upon them. Nota, It is observable from this and many other Acts, that the Acts are call'd the Kings Laws, and not Laws made by the Parlia∣ment, and the Act related to, made by King James the 5. but not condescended upon here, is the 81 Act Par. 6. Ja. 5. IT is observable from this Act,ACT 25. that the Secret Council used by their own Authority to make Sumptuary Laws, both as to Meat and Cloathing; and by the Act of Council here related to, the con∣temners of the said Act of Council are to be punished in their per∣sons and goods at the Lord Governours will; and yet one of the accusations against the Earl of Middleton was, that the Lord Lorn being found guilty of Treason, the time of the Execution was re∣ferr'd to him, as being then the King's Commissioner, which it be∣came no Subject to accept. PRinting is Inter Regalia, and so the King may discharge any man to Print without his Licence,ACT 27. vide Fritch. de Typographiae abusu, where he makes the regulation of the Press to depend upon every Magistrat by the Law of Nations, and Printing may do as much mischief to the Government as Arms, and so the Magistrate should have the command of the one as well as of the other, though I know it is most unjustly pretended by some Republicans, that Prin∣ting being a Trade, no man can be debarr'd from the free use of it, except by Parliament, in which their own consent is imply'd: We see also that the King allows his own Printer only to Print Bibles, and other School Books, &c. vide Act 25 Par. 11 Ja. 6. against the Sellers of erroneous Books. Queen MARY, Parliament 6. IT is observable that this Revocation of Q. M. was under the Privy Seal,ACT 28. whereas other Revocations are only under the King's Hand, it differs in nothing else from the other Revocations. IN the first part of this Act, Reversions which were formerly,ACT 29. as all other Writs sufficient, if sealed by the granters Seal, are de∣clared null, if they be not Sealed and Subscrived, and though it is here declared that if the Party cannot Subscrive, a Notar may Sub∣scrive
for him; yet by the 80 Act Par. 6 Ja. 6. it is requisite that there be two Notars and four Witnesses, in matters of importance, or Heretage, where the Party cannot write. By the second part it is declared that all Reversions are null if they be not Registrated, except Reversions of Land within Burgh, which need no Registration, and this is again enacted, Act 16. Par. 22. Ja. 6. By this Act Reversions taken by way of Instrument in the hands of the Notar that gave the Seasine, are as valid as Reversions subscrived by the Party himself, and Registrat; for according to the Law then standing, Reversions were sufficient, if sub∣scrived by one Notar, though the Party did not subscrive, and Instruments taken in the hand of the Notar that gave the Seasine were as sufficient as a Reversion under a Notars hand; but since that Act all Reversions both without and within Burgh should be Signed by the Party himself, or by two Notars, and no Reversion within Burgh needs to be Registrated, 11 Feb. 1681. Irwine contra Corsen, which being found inconvenient, was thereaf∣ter first corrected by an Act of Sederunt, Feb. 22 1681. and now by the 11 Act, 3 Par Ch. 2. By which they are ordain'd to be Regi∣strated in the Town Clerks Books within 60 dayes after the date thereof, except they be incorporated in the Body of Rights. ACT 31.THough this Act runs only against Committers of Slaughter, yet it holds in all Criminal Causes. ACT 32.IF any man be out of the Countrey, he must be cited upon 60 days, but if he was in the Countrey the time of the first citati∣on, it is sufficient by this Act that he be cited upon 15 days; and though this Act says, that if he was eight days cited before his departure, he may be cited upon 15 days to the second dyet; yet it holds if he was in the Countrey at the first Citation, though he went immediatly out of the same. ACT 33.VId. Crim. obs. Tit. 21. of Libels, Part 2. ACT 34.VId. Notes upon Act 77. Par. 6. Ja. 5. ACT 35.THe form of citing the nearest of Kin is now introduced in the choosing of Tutors Dative by the Exchequer, and is esta∣blish'd most iustly by the 2 Act, Sess. 3. Par. 2. Ch. 2. though for∣merly the King might have granted Tutories Dative, without any citation of the nearest Kins-men. Nota By this Act it is clear that a Curator cannot by a privat Renunciation of his Office free himself, but he can only be freed by the Judge, for though by the Civil Law Tutors and Curators were forced to accept, yet by our Law they are not, but if they once ac∣cept,
or administrat, though without a formal acceptance they are still lyable from the date of their administration, and not from the date of their nomination, and that which was at first voluntary be∣comes necessary. THough this Statute anent Lentron be renewed,ACT 36. Act 221. Par. 14. Ja. 6. and that the Council used lately to grant Dispen∣sations, yet these Penal Statutes concerning Lentron are now in De∣suetude. VId. observ. on Act 36 Par. 8. Ja. 2. and on Acts 68,ACT 37. and 69. Par. 8. Ja. 3. THese Instruments of Resignations are not only to be Sealed by this Act, but to be Registrated, by the 3. Act,ACT 38 Sess. 1. Par. 2. Ch. 2. ALL Warnings are by this Act to be made only upon 40 days,ACT 39. which holds, though the Party be out of the Countrey, be∣cause the Act is general, though in other cases a Party out of the Countrey must be cited on 60 days, 20 Feb. 1666. Mcbrair contra Crighton; and yet though this Act be general, there needs no formal Warning conform to this Act from a Tower or Fortalice (turris pinnata) even though the Possessor had a Tack; Nor in Lands Life∣rented, for in these the Heretor will get upon a Bill Letters from the Lords, charging the present Possessor to remove upon 6 days, because Towers and such Houses belong not to Labouring, nor are useful for it; and this Act was made in favours of Labourers, and it were unreasonable that the Heretor, after a Life-rentrix is dead, should be put to all these delays for removing those who possess by a right, that is ipso jure expired. These words of this Act appointing Warnings to be made, either Personally, or at their dwelling Houses, and at the Ground of the Lands, are so to be interpreted, as that there must be still a Copy left upon the Ground of the Land, or at his dwelling House, and upon the Ground of the Land, which citation upon the Ground of the Land, was, as it seems, made necessary, because in all real Executions, quae praedia tangunt, Copies must still be left upon the Ground, and to the end that all who pretend to have real Rights, and even Sub∣tennents may be thereby certiorated, 25 Feb. 1680. Craw contra Craw. Because this Act ordains all Warnings to be made 40 days before Whitsunday, and speaks not of another Term, therefore the War∣ning must be made before Whitsunday, though the person warned be not oblig'd to remove by his Tack till the Martinmass, but Exe∣cution must be superceeded till then, vid. 8 July, 1626. and 16 De∣cember, 1628. Fowles contra Tennents, and Inglis contra Tennents, 15 June, 1631. Ramsay centra Weir.
Though this Act appoints these Warnings to be made at the Kirk doors of the Paroch within which the Land lyes, yet the Lords have sustain'd Warnings to be made at that Kirk which was re∣puted the Paroch, and where Warnings were used to be made, though it was not truly the Paroch Kirk, 24 January, 1667. Earl of Argyle contra Campbel; and though by this Act such Warnings should be read in time of Divine Service (that is to say, immedi∣atly after Sermon) yet they sustain'd the Warning, the Execution bearing, that it was lawfully used, and the user mending his Exe∣cution at the Bar, 25 of January, inter eosdem. Though the reasons of Advocation here exprest seem to hold on∣ly in actions of removing, because they are annex'd to this Act, yet they hold generally in all Advocations, vid. my Crim. observ. Tit. Advocations; and though the priviledge granted to Advocats here of being only pursuable before the Lords may only seem competent in removings, yet it is extended to all cases, and now they may Advocat any Action intented against them before inferior Courts. I find that the Advocats of Vtright have the same priviledge, Rub. de Advocatis, Art. 13. vide Voet. de statutis, Sect. 7. cap. 3. num. 16. where likewse he determines that this priviledge of ex∣emption extends not to Criminal cases, but that in these they may be pursu'd before inferiour Judges, for these are not properly com∣prehended under the word Actions, nor are Statutes to be extended de casu in casum. THis Act is Explain'd in the observations upon the 32 Act Par. 2 Ja. 1. supra. and 11 Act Par. 1 Sess. 3 Ch. 2.ACT 40. ACT 41.VId. crim. obser. tit. Pursuers. ACT 42.OF old when any Right was quarrell'd as null, the nullity was sustain'd by way of Exception or Reply, and a day was al∣low'd to the Defender to call his warrand, that is to say, the per∣son who was his author, and who was bound in warrandice; but now few Nullities are regulariter received by exception, but by way of Reduction, to the end the Authors may be call'd, who may defend him; and ordinarly the Defender intimats at the Bar, the pursuit to his Authors Advocats, to the end they may defend him, and if they do not, they are lyable in an action of Eviction for damnage and interest; but the old form of calling Warrands is in Desuetude. ACT 43.THough Bonds of Man-rent are hereby discharg'd; yet former Heretable Bonds are excepted. ACT 47.VId. crim. observ. tit. Falshood. num. 8▪
IT is observable that there needed a particular Act of Parliament for cutting down the Wood of Falkland, because as I think,ACT 48. the Queen was then a Minor, and it was to be cut down by the Re∣gent, and the Regent being but a Tutor, it has been thought he needed a Decreet or Act of Parliament for his warrand, even as the Tutor of a private party, cannot alienat his Pupils Lands, with∣out a Decreet of the Lords of the Session, and it may be argu'd from this Act, that though a Wood be old, yet it cannot be cut down by a Tutor, without the warrand of a Judge; for this Act bears, that this Wood was old and ready to perish. It may be like∣wise doubted, whether since the Kings Parks are a part of the an∣next Property, the King, or any having Right from him may cut down the Wood without an express Act of Dissolution, or other warrand from the Parliament, since the King is only but a Life∣renter of the annex'd Property, and a Liferenter can only cut down what is necessary for his own use. But since Woods would perish if they were not cut, I think there needs no previous Dissolution. THough by this Act,ACT 52. Deacons are Discharg'd as tending to Sedition, and Visitors appointed to be chosen in their place, yet the very next year, the same Queen Mary allows Deacons to be chosen by a special grant to the Crafts-men of Edin∣burgh; because, as that grant bears expresly the Act was never in observance, and since the making of it, it was found by experi∣ence, that Deacons were necessary in Towns; from which it may be argu'd, that when a Law is found absolutely inconvenient, the King may dispense with it till the next Parliament, especially where the Law had never been observ'd; But I think the speci∣ality of that grant lys in this, that this being an Act of Parliament relat∣ing to Government, and made for the security of the Crown, the Monarch may use it, or dispense with it as he pleases, as every person may dispense with what is introduced in his own favours, though to this it may be answer'd, that what is introduced for the good of the Common-well, as the Act bears this was, cannot be dispensed with, without the consent of the three Estates; To which it may be Reply'd, that matters of Government doe not concern them directly, but by consequence, Government being the interest of the King, as Property is of the Subject. THis Act is inlarg'd by the Act 156 Par. 12 Ja. 6. by which the Lords of Session are ordain'd to grant Letters summarly on six days, against such as stop High-ways.ACT 53. THis Act is Explain'd in the Act 13 Par. 2 Ja. 4.ACT 56. THough by the 5 Act 2 Par. Sess. 3 Ch. 2:ACT 57. The Burghs of Re∣gality or Barony; are allow'd to bring home Timber,
Iron, &c. as the return of the native Commodities of the King∣dom; yet it was controverted if they might bring home Salt, and it was found that they could not bring home Wine, nor Salt, nor Brandy, even as the return of their native Commodities, so that none can Trade in these save the Burghs Royal. ACT 58.THe Acts here related to, are the 60 Act 7 Par. Ja. 3. and 13 and 14 Acts Par. 4 Ja. 5. which declares the breaking of Dove-cots, Parks, and Ponds to be Theft, and upon the 25 of July 1623. Raith and Dean are ordain'd to be hang'd for breaking of Yards, stealing of Bees-skeps and Sybows; and it was Theft by the Civil Law, lege Pomponius 8. par. Pomponius 1. ff. Fam. erisc. Vide Crim. observ. tit. Theft, num. 15. ACT 60.THis Act against the speaking evil of the Queens Grace, or French-men, was made when the French-men came over to assist the Queen against the English; and though it be Tempora∣ry quoad the French; yet it is still a standing Statute quoad our Monarchs, and it is observable by it, that the hearers of false Re∣ports against the Queen, and not reporting the same, are pu∣nishable as the principal speakers, but it may be doubted, if Hearers are obliged to Dilate, when they cannot prove. ACT 61.THough this case in so far as concerns these Temporary Pleys have now no force, yet that part of the Act appointing Women and others, who make perturbation in the passage to Towns is still in observance, and the punishment is by our practice arbitra∣ry. Queen MARY, Parliament 7. BY this Act the Judge is allow'd to exact Caution from such as propone Improbation,ACT 62. and this Act was found to ex∣tend as well to exceptions of Improbation as to actions of Improbation; and though it appoints Caution on∣ly to be found, yet the Lords ordain oftimes the Money to be Consign'd, and fourty pound is the ordinary Sum, and sometimes they sustain cautio juratoria, where the party cannot find Caution, but this cautio juratoria, is never allow'd, except where there are previous and strong presumptions of Falshood, or else the Lieges might be extreamly vex'd, ordinarly the same day is appointed by the Judge for the proponer of the Falshood to consign, and for the producer of the Writ to bide by the same, like to these Con∣signations, were the Sponsions mentioned in the Civil Law, where∣by Litigators sponsionem faciebant certae pecuniae quae ejus lucro cederet
qui judicio vicisset l. paen. ff. de alcae toribus l. 17. §. ult. ff. de praescript. verb. Nota, By this Act where Improbation is propon'd at the Kings instance, the informer is to find Caution, but if the Kings Advo∣cat insist, ad vindictam publicam, I conceive he is oblig'd to find no Caution, because he is never presum'd to pursue Calumni∣ously. WHen any thing is to be proven by Writ,ACT 63. if the Writ be not produc'd, this Act appoints that Protestation shall be given against the probation of that part of the exception; but now the form is to call upon the Act, and crave Circumduction of the Term, which circumduction is here call'd Protestation, but if the Writ be produc'd, this Act appoints that the other party shall be heard against the same, after Renunciation of probation, and the form is, that when any Writ is produc'd in modum probatio∣nis, the other party protests to be heard against the same, at the ad∣vising of the Cause, and the producer puts up an Act renuncing further probation. THis Act appoints the expences of Plea to be Tax'd,ACT 64. and in∣sert in Decreets, which is conform to the Ch. 68 and 69. Quon. Attach. and though by the Civil Law, expences of Plea ought not to exceed the principal sum pursu'd for, Bart. in l. 8. Cod. de indiction: Yet I have seen more expences allow'd than the sum pursu'd for, extended to, and it were very unjust, that if a per∣son of quality were pursu'd unjustly by a mean Rogue, for a small matter, that his expences should not be determined according to what he was really forc'd to expend, for the necessity of expending is the only just rule in such cases. Queen MARY, Parliament 8. THis Act of Parliament doth enable French-men to bruik Lands and Estate in Scotland,ACT 65. and Naturalizes them so as that they may enjoy all the priviledges here, as any Scots∣man may do, but though quoad the point of Succession, strangers have by many Nations been debarr'd, and that by the Ro∣man Law, cum peregrinis Testamenti factio non erat, l. 1. C. de hared. instituend. l. 1. §. 2. ff. de . yet Craig. pag. 96. observes, that strangers were not debarr'd from Succession in Scotland, and I find it so decided, 13 January, 1575. in the case of one Richard∣son. These priviledges granted by this Act, are likewise confirmed to the Frenches by an Act of Sederunt, the 11 of June, 1595. From these first words in this Act appointing Letters of Naturality (or Naturalization) to be given to such of the French Subjects as shall
happen to be in the Kingdom of Scotland, It may be doubted that French-men cannot pretend to this right except they live here; but this is expresly contrary to the French priviledges there granted to us. It may be also urg'd that Dutch-men or others cannot pretend to it, though they be Naturalized in France; for to Naturalize them be∣cause they are Naturaliz'd in France, were to allow the French King to Naturalize any he pleas'd in Scotland, though enemies to us. 2. Only French-men are Naturaliz'd, which is to be interpreted only of such as are properly so. 3. This were fictio fictionis, which is reprobated by Law. It seems also just that except this priviledge be continu'd to us in France, French-men ought not to have it in Scotland. Quaer. If Merchants, though not naturaliz'd will not have right to heretable Rights granted for security of their Money, for without this there could be no Commerce. THis Act contains the French priviledges to us communicated by the French,ACT 66. whereby the Scots may succeed in France in the same way that the French-men themselves did, and they are by this Act Naturaliz'd to that and all other effects, and which was very necessary for us, since by the Law of France the Fisk excludes the true Heirs of strangers, except as to Goods brought in by them, which priviledge is call'd by the French droict d' anbeine, beside this right of Succession, the Scots likewise are free to be preferr'd to all Ecclesiastical Dignities. The Gentlemen are free from Taxes, and the Scottish Ships free from Imposts, albeit of late the French exact from us 50 Sols per Tun, as from other Strangers: As to which I drew this Memorial, as Assessor to the Royal Burrows. A Memorial concerning the Privi∣ledges due to the Scots in France. THe French Nation finding themselves oblig'd to have for∣raign Recruits, for maintaining their Wars, pitch'd upon Scotland, as a Nation very sit to furnish them Levies, and so old was their Alliance, that a League offensive and defensive was enter'd into betwixt Charles the Great, King of France, and Achaius King of Scotland, in Anno 787. at which time Charles the Great bestow'd upon the King of Scotland the Double Tressure, garnish'd with Flower de Luces, or as the French call it, Fleurie & Contre fleury born by them, at this day as all the French Histori∣ans and Heraulds do acknowledge. After this the French being ingaged in constant Wars with the English, they imploy'd the Scots on all occasions, in which their great succours and services are set down by Favin a learned French Author, in his Theatre of Honour, and to ingage that Nation the more, as well as to reward their services, the guarding of the King's Person
was bestowed upon them by Charles the 5th. and they were holden as Naturalized French-men, and were exempted from payment of all Customs; and though many of these Contracts and Leagues be lost, yet these following Papers are still extant. A Treaty containing these priviledges betwixt Alexander the 2d. and Lewis of France, called St. Lewis. Another betwixt King Robert le Bruce and King John. An Act of Parliament 1558. relative to the like Act in France, wherein Q. Mary, who was then Married to Francis, Dolphine of France, doth with the consent of Parliament Naturalize all the French in Scotland, and enable them to succeed to Estates moveable and immoveable here, and free them from all Taxes payable by strangers; In which Act of Parliament the Copy of the priviledges granted by the French to the Scots, is verbatim ingrossed. Item, A Patent by Francis King of France, dated May 1510. exeeming the Scots Nation from paying Custome in Normandie. Item, An Act of Exchequer approving thereof, dated the said year. Item, An Act of the Thesaurers in France, consenting to the same. Item, Letters Patent from the said King to his Great Council for expeding the former Patent, dated the said year. Item, Act of the Great Council consenting thereto. Item, An Act of the Cour des aides at Paris, approving the said Patent. Item, Charter by King Henry the 2d. of France, exeeming the Scots Nation from Customs in Normandy, and containing on the back thereof, the consent of the Cour du Parlement at Rouen, as also, an approbation of the Cour des aides, dated 1554. Item, Charter by the said King, exeeming the Scots Nation from paying any Custome through the whole Towns in France and Nor∣mandy, containing an approbation of the Cour du Parlement at Rouen, as also approbation of the Chambre des comptes of Rouen, also appro∣bation of the Cour des aides in Rouen, all in Anno 1554. Item, Extract forth of the Register of Cour des aides, for the Scots Merchants transporting wares from Normandy, to find Caution that the saids Goods shall be sold in Scotland, dated the said year. Item, Charter by the said King Henry, discharging the Act fore∣said of finding Caution, but to give their Oath if they be required, dated 1554. Item, Copy of a Confirmation by King Henry the 4. of the Scots priviledges granted by his Predecessors, dated 1594. Item, Supplication James Colvil to the Burrows of Scotland, craving recompence for obtaining the said Charter. Item, Copy of a warrand by King Henry the 4. to his Cours des Parlements, and other Judges, for restoring to Scots Merchants whatever has been taken from them, and granting them free Trade through his whole Kingdom, dated 1594. Item, Confirmation by the said King Henry the 4. exeeming the Scots Nation from paying Customs in Normandy, containing appro∣bation
of the Cour du Parlement of Rouen, and Registrated in the Chambre des comptes, with consent of the Kings Advocat, and also Registrat in the Cour des aides, with consent of the Kings Advocat there, as also Registrat in Rouen, in Anno 1599. Item, Charter by the said King, direct to the Cour des aides in Normandy, discharging the famine Act of finding Caution that the Goods transported from Normandy shall be sold in Scotland. Item, Extract forth of the Cours des aides of Rouen, for Registra∣tion of the former Letters. Item, Extract of the Register of the Cour de Chambre des Comptes of Rouen, for Registration of the saids Letters. Item, Extract of the Register of the Chambre des Comptes of Nor∣mandy, for Registration of the former Letters. Item, Extract forth of the Domain Books in Rouen, consenting to the Registration of the saids Letters in their Books; as also, extract of the Books of Diep, consenting to the Registration thereof in their Books. Item, Two warrands of the Thesaurers of the Finances in Nor∣mandy for the Registrating of the foresaids Letters; all the saids Writs are dated in anno 1599. Item, Extract of the Domain in Rouen for Customing the Scots mens Goods there, in respect the Scots priviledges were not con∣firmed by King Lewis 13. dated 1611. Item, Charter by Lewis 13. confirming the Scots priviledges, and exemption of Customs in Normandy, and Registrat in four several Courts in France, dated in July 1613. Item, Extract of the approbation of the said Charter at Rouen the famine year. Item, Extract of the said Chambre des Comptes the famine year. Item, Charter be the said King of the saids priviledges direct to the Chambre des Comptes in Rouen, dated in August, 1613. Item, Extract of the Cour des aides of Rouen of the former Let∣ters. Item, Extract of the Domain of Rouen approving the saids Let∣ters. Item, Warrand of the Thesaurer of Finances, approving the Re∣gistration of the saids Letters. Item, Warrand of the Burrow of New-haven, consenting to the Registration of the foresaids Letters, in anno 1613. Item, Extract in form of Arrest of the great Council of France, declaring that the Scots Merchants shall pay but for every 100 weight of Wool 25 Sols of Custome, and for every piece of Scots Hydes 2 Sols 6 Deniers, and that notwithstanding of the new Taxt of Customs raised in the Dutchie of Normandy upon such Merchan∣dice, and this to evite all Process that might fall thereupon, dated 1635. Item, Warrand by the said King Lewis to the Chambre des aides, and Mr. Desportes in Normandy, to proceed to the approbation of
the said Arrest of the great Council, which is Registrat in the Books des aides of Normandy in the foresaid year. Item, Extract of the Cour des aides, approving the Registration of the saids Letters. Item, Extract of Domain of Rouen, approving the saids Letters. Item, Extract of the Intimation made to the Customers of New-haven of the foresaids Letters, and approbation thereof in the Cour des aides. Item, Extract of the Burrow of Diep, consenting to the Registra∣tion of the saids Letters in the great Council, all dated in anno 1635. Conform to these priviledges, the Parliament of Paris did in an∣no 1586. discern the Scottish Nation to have right to all the Privi∣ledges, and to be capable of Employments, and free from all Cu∣stoms, whereupon the learned Mr. Servin that famous Advocat has written a learned Book, maintaining the saids Priviledges, to which he has annexed the said Decree and Sentence. Likeas the saids Pri∣viledges are acknowledged by le Bret, in his Book concerning the Prerogatives of the Kings of France, cap. Naturalization, and many other French Lawyers, and by Favin in his above-cited Theatre. By vertue of which Rights and Priviledges, the Scots have been alwayes esteem'd as Naturaliz'd in France, and have enjoy'd all the Priviledges due to the Natives, until of late, that there being 50 Sols per Tun imposed upon forraign Bottoms, some of the Scots in Rouen were charg'd for payment thereof, whereupon Mcmath, Blackburn and Pringle, having been pursu'd in the Cour des aides, they were not only in July 1649. absolv'd from paying any part of the said Taxation, but the Collectors were ordain'd to restore unto them what they had exacted upon that head: As also, there being a Scots Vessel consign'd to Mr. Pringle, in anno 1663. and he be∣ing charg'd for the said 50 Sols per Tun, he was freed from the said Taxation by the Parliament of Rouen after full debate, upon 16 June, 1663. On our part likewise the French enjoy all the Priviledges of Na∣tives, and possess Lands and Heretages, and are as capable of Suc∣cession as the Natives are, nor pay they any Taxes, being declared free conform to the said Treaties by several Acts of Exchequer in Scotland, though the English have impos'd a Crown per Tun to com∣pense that 50 Sols. From all which it appears most just and reasonable that the Scots should have all the Priviledges of the Natives of France, because, 1. The same have been granted to them by solemn Charters and Concessions, which though it had been free to the French King to have at first granted, yet being granted, he was not thereafter by the principles of Justice free to have recalled the same. 2. Though meer gratuitous priviledges might be recalled, as they cannot, yet renumeratory priviledges granted for Services done, as these Charters can never be recall'd without an open violation of Justice; and it is undeniable that Scotland has spent more blood and money in the French service than all those priviledges were ever
worth, and it's known that the last Concessions were granted to the Scots, for giving Q. Mary in Marriage to the Dauphine of France, whereby if he had had Children, Scotland it self had been annex∣ed to France; and because the Scots did refuse her to K. Edward the 6 of England, they were thereupon invaded by the English, and their Nation was almost ruined. 3. Though renumeratory Concessions might be quarrell'd, as they cannot, yet mutual Treaties and Contracts can never be abrogated nor taken away without the consent of both the Parties Contracters. 4. The Scots being secured by Decisions of the Supream Courts of France, as said is, they have thereby the greatest security that the Law of any Nation can give. As these reasons may convince any man that it were against the Ju∣stice of France to take away the priviledges of the Scottish Nation, so the principles of prudence and policy seem very much to oppose the taking them away, for, 1. What can any other Strangers expect from Concessions, Trea∣ties, or Contracts, when so old and well deserved priviledges are questioned, it being very well known to all Nations that Scotland has deserv'd extraordinarly of France, and this Alliance has been famous beyond all the other Alliances now known in the World. 2. The Scots and Scottish Nation have upon this account refused all other Alliances, to their great loss and prejudice, in so much that they have oft times suffered their Kingdom to be invaded, har∣rass'd and ruin'd by the English, because we preferr'd the French Al∣liance to theirs, and as our Countrey-men have alwayes been rea∣dy to spend their lives for the French, so within these 50 years we have lost 100000 men in their service, who did not amongst them all bring home 20000 Livers to this Kingdome; and it's very well known how ready we are to own the French interest in all Courts and Countreys where we live abroad. The Kingdoms of Scotland and England may come to divide by the failure of the Scottish Line in England, and so it still seems pru∣dent for the French King not to extinguish his interest in Scot∣land. And whereas it may be pretended that we have forfeited our pri∣viledges by declaring War against the French, to this it is answer'd, that 1. The denouncing of War by us was only the effect of a ne∣cessary obligation upon us as being a part of Great Britain, and not a War enter'd into by Scotland upon any National account. 2. By Treaties following upon the War, all things are restor'd to the former condition they were in, except in so far as former Treaties were innovated by express conditions; but so it is there is nothing inserted in any of those Treaties to the prejudice of our former Leagues and Priviledges, and therefore they must revive and return to the same force and vigour they were in before the War. I find this Act Registrated and Recorded in the Books of
Sederunt, and generally it is observable, that most of the publick Papers, whereupon any legal Debates or Securities might depend, were inserted in the Books of Sederunt, which was somewhat like the French Custom of verifying in the Parliament of Paris (that is the same with our Session) the Kings Edicts, and thus the pacification be∣twixt the Regent and the Hamiltons in anno 1572. and many such Papers are inserted there; and of old even publick accidents were likewise insert, such as Ecclipses, &c. Queen MARY, Parl. 9. ORdinaly in Acts of Indemnity, which follow Civil War, as this is,ACT 67. the King or State does only discharge all acti∣on that may be competent, for all manner of Omissions or Commissions, by vertue of any Power or Warrand of those in power for the time, as is to be seen in the 10 Act 2 Sess. 1 Par. Ch. 2. But here in this Act, all actions that may be competent for any Cause or occasion, during the time, for which the Troubles lasted, are once discharg'd, except there be a Warrand given by the persons named in the Act, for intenting actions during that time, but thereafter by the Act 44 11 Par. Ja. 6. the Lords of Sessi∣on are made Judges to the Interpretation of that Act of Oblivi∣on, and all Decreets recovered during these times, are declared irreduceable, if they be not pursued within Year and Day, and this short Prescription is declar'd to run against Minors, which is likewise conform to the said 10 Act, in which late Acts the nature o Amnesties and Oblivion, shall be more fully declar'd. VId. obs. ad Act 11 Par. 1 Ja. 1.ACT 68. VId. obs. ad Act 49 Par. 13 Ja. 1.ACT 69. UPon this Act the Forgers or Bringers home of false Money use to be forefaulted,ACT 70. as was found in the case of John Drum∣mond, November 27. 1621. and many other Cases, and though it was alleadg'd in defence of Hamilton and Burn, October 1677. that only Officers of the Mint-house used to be forefaulted because of their exberant Trust, and that it was easie for them to commit such Crimes, yet Drummond was no Officer, but a Sadler in Pearth, the words of this Act, that are ordinarly founded upon, are, that the Re∣vealers of Forgers or home bringers of false Coyn, shall have the one half of the Escheat of all their Lands and Goods, moveable and immoveable; and this punishment is peculiar to Treason; and it seems that Forg∣ing or Coyning is an incroachment upon the Kings Prerogatives;
one of which is the Coyning of Money, but I see not why bring∣ing home of false Coyn, could upon this account be declared Trea∣son. It is also observable from the former case, 1677. that the meanness of the quantity or value Coyn'd, excuses not from the punishment of this Act, Vid. Crim. observ: Tit. Falshood. ACT 72.BY this Act it is appointed, that no Parson, Vicar, or other Kirk-mans Manse or Gleib can be set in Feu, or long Tack; and therefore an Heretor, to whom the Vicars Gleib was Feu'd, though a year before this Act was refus'd relief, when that Land was design'd to the Minister, because the Feu set to him was con∣trary to this Act; and though the Feu was set prior to this Act, yet it was null, because it was not confirm'd before this Act, Februa∣ry 12. 1635. Vid. obs. on 48 Act Par. 3 Ja. 6. ACT 73.ALL such as practise Witchcraft, or consult with them, are by this Act punishable by Death, as are also all such as pre∣tend to have any such Craft or Knowledge, there-through abusing the people, from which it is observable, that such as pretend to fore-tell things to come, or to tell where things are lost, may by this Act be punish'd with Death, though really they have no such skill. By this Act also, all Sheriffs, Lords of Regalities, and other Judges, having power to execute the same, are ordain'd to put the same in execution; but it does not therefore follow that Stewarts and Bailliffs, and Sheriffs, are competent thereto, and de facto, the Justices only, or such as have Commissions from the Council, use to judge this Crime, Vide. crim. observ. Tit. Witch-craft. NOtour Adultery is by this Act declar'd punishable by Death, and by the 105 Act 7 Par. Ja. 6.ACT 74. That is only declar'd to be notour Adultery; Where 1o. There are Bairns, one or more procreated betwixt the Adulterers. 2o. When they keep compa∣ny, or bed together notoriously known. 3o. When they are sus∣pected of Adultery, and thereby gives Slander to the Kirk, where∣upon being admonish'd to satisfie the Kirk, they contemptuously refuse, and for their refusal they are Excommunicate, if either of which three degrees be prov'd before the Justices, the Commit∣ters are punishable by death; From which Act it is to be observ∣ed; 1o. That by the first Act, premonition to abstain, was still to be made in all cases; yet in neither of the two first cases here re∣lated, it is declar'd necessary; but since it is not lawful to kill him who was premonished, and thereafter conversed, except they conversed in suspect places, Gribald. de Homicid. num. 11. It seems that in neither of these Statutes, Conversation should be Criminal even after prohibition, except it be in suspect places. 2o. The Ju∣stices are only declared to be Judges to the notoriety of Adultery; and therefore it may be controverted, if Lords of Regalitie be
Judges competent to the Cognition of it, and this seems to be restricted to the Justices, because it is an arbitrary Inquiry in a capital case. 3. This Act does not exclude capital punishments in other cases of Adultery, but only ordains that these three degrees shall be punish'd by Death; and since there are other cases more grievous to the party injur'd, and more scandalous to the Common-wealth; It may be argued that the punishment of Death should likewise be extended to them; as for instance, to commit frequent Adulteries. THis Act declaring that the raising of Bonds of Men of War,ACT 75. and the rising in that manner is punishable by Death, is for∣merly explain'd, Act 2 Par. 1. Ja. 1 Vid. crim. observ. pag. 44, & 45. and this Act is ratified by the 12 Act 10 Par. Ja. 6. BY this Act the building of Kirk-Yard-Dikes,ACT 76. is refer'd to the Lords of Secret Council, who are to take such course therein as they shall think fit; but by the 232 Act 15 Par. Ja. 6. The Paro∣chioners are ordain'd to build them to the hight of two Ells. And the Lords of Session are ordain'd to grant Letters of Horning for that effect, which they use now to do. THis is fully Explain'd at the 7 Act 9 Par. Ja. 6. and the first part of it was enacted formerly by Act of Secret Council,ACT 77. December 21 1561. and that begins, It is Statute and ordain∣ed by the Queen, which seems strange, seing to Statute is only proper to Parliaments, but Acts of Council do oft∣times bear, Statute and ordain Vid. Costal. de Imperator. Quest. 73. num. 25. This Act mentions three kinds of Bishops, the Bi∣shop Elect, the Bishop Postulat, and the Bishop Consecrat; a Bishop Elect, is he who is Elected by the Chapter, upon a congé d'ésire from the King, but is not yet Consecrat; A Bishop Postulat, is he who was only call'd, but not Elected, and cannot be Elected as a Minor, a Bastard, &c. Vid. cap. innotuit. §. ha∣bile de elect. and it is observable from this Act, that both these us'd to Dispone Kirk-lands, or set the same in Tacks, else they need∣ed not to have been Discharg'd by this Act; But though we have now Bishops Elect, yet we have no Bishops Postulat; and these Elects exercent solum ea quae sunt jurisdictionis sed non ea quae sunt or∣dinis. BY this Act Notars are to be admitted only by the Lords of Council, that is to say, the Lords of Session,ACT 78. as de facto they now are; and by the Act of Sederunt, 1595. The Lords or∣dain'd that yearly in November one of their Number should be Named by them to receive Notars, who shall only receive such as are past twenty five, can write an Evident in Latin or English, and be Prentice five years to a Notar, though now they are ad∣mitted
before twenty five, and without having been Prentice at all. By this Act, such as exerce the Office without being admitted by the Lords, or after they are Dischag'd by them, may be pu∣nish'd arbitrarly, and even to Death; But it has been found, that Evidents subscribed by Notars, once admitted, though there∣after discharg'd, are valid, they having still been habite and repute to be Notars. ACT 79.THough this Act appoints that all Notars shall be admitted by the King, yet now they need no Letters from the King, but do depend upon the Clerk of Register, and his Depute, the Clerk to the Notars. The Clerks of Session are by their admission as such, Notars, though they be not admitted in manner mention'd in this Act, and Instruments under their hands in judicial Acts, makes as much Faith as the Instrument of any Notar. ACT 80.THe Act here dispensed with, is the 46 Act Par. 6 Q. Mary, and it is observable by this Act, that when former Laws have not been universally observed, no advantage is taken upon them, and this is one of these Cases, in quibus communis error sacit jus. ACT 81.THe observation in the former Act holds also in this, and the Act here dispensed , is the 38 Act Par. 6 Queen Mary. ACT 82.BY this Act it is declar'd that five or six of the principal Burrows shall be call'd to the concluding Peace and War, and to the lay∣ing on Taxations. It may be doubted, whether by the Council to which they are to be call'd, be mean'd here the Parliament or Pri∣vy Council, and though ordinarly the Parliament be call'd the Kings Council, and that it may seem they only should impose Taxations, yet it my be urg'd, that by Council, is here mean'd the Privy Coun∣cil, because all the Burrows must be cited to Parliaments▪ and the King and his Council us'd before to lay on such general Taxations; and de facto, His Majesty did so in many cases, without either Parlia∣ment or General Convention of Estates, as in laying on the Taxa∣tion, for defraying the expence of the Baptism of King James the 6. December 6. 1562. which Taxation was laid on by eight Earls, five Bi∣shops, and four Burrows, not mentioning Barons, because it seems the Earls were accounted Barons; the Taxation was 12000. pounds, whereof 6000. pounds by the Spiritual Estate, four thousand pounds by the Barons and Free-holders, and two thousand pounds by the Burrows: and another Taxation for defraying King James the sixth's expence, in his Journey to Denmark, and many other such Taxa∣tions; and this was then necessary, because Taxations behov'd to be impos'd, His Majesties Revenue being then very mean, and to have call'd a Parliament or Convention, would have put the people
to more expence than these necessary Taxations were worth; but now by the foresaid 5 Act 1 Par. Ch. 2. all sums to be rais'd for maintainance of Forts, or Armies must be first concluded in Parlia∣ment or Convention of Estates. And now the King has a considerable Revenue by the Excise, for defraying those small necessities, for which the Council then impos'd; and it is certain in the general, that all Countreys should supply the Monarch with Means to defray the expence of the Go∣vernment, Vid. Arnis. de jur. Majestatis in bona privatorum. Vid Act 85 Par. 6 Ja. 4. BY this Act the making privie Conventions or Assemblies with∣in Burghs, to put on Armour, or display Banners,ACT 83. &c. without Licence from the Soveraign, are punishable by Death. Observ. 1o. It seems that meer Convocations or Assemblies, are not per se, punishable by Death, without putting on Armour, or displaying Banners. Observ. 2o. That Naked-assistance at such Tumults with a Bat∣ton, was not found by the Justices to infer Death, in anno 1665. and I conceive that though a previous design were prov'd; yet the assistance with a Batton would not be sufficient, since the Act requires putting on Armour, or Cloathing themselves with Weapons, which imports hostile VVeapons, for neither of these can be verifi'd in a Batton, and penal Statutes are not to be ex∣tended; but yet the appearing with a Batton is sufficient to punish arbitrarly, such as assist at Tumults, THis Act Confiscating Ship and Coals,ACT 84. wherein Coals are Transport∣ed, is in Desuetude, but is not expresly abrogated by any Law; and though at first, Licences for Transporting Coals were necessa∣ry; yet now even these Licences are in Desuetude, we having now discovered more Coals than serves our Nation. THis Act Confiscating Beeff and Mutton, that comes to Mercat without Skin and Birn, is still in observance,ACT 85. and was made for discovery of Theft, for the Skin being upon the Beast that is kill'd, does bear all marks whereby it may be known; and for the same reason in the Southern Shires, the meaner sort who kill any Beasts, are oblig'd to keep their Ears, and if the Flesh be found where the Ears cannot be produc'd, it is commonly look'd upon in these Countreys as a point of Dittay; not only must the beasts be brought to the Mercat with their Skins, according to this Act, but by Acts of Burrows, the Skins that are brought to the Mercat, must not be scor'd nor holl'd, which Fleshers did before negligently; nor must the Haslock be pull'd that being the best part of the VVool; and by the Acts of the Convention of Bur∣rows, made at the desire of the Conservator, the Skins of Beasts
within this Kingdom did rise in value a third more than, when they were carried beyond Sea. Qeen MARY, Parliament 10. ACT 87.BY the second Act 1 Par. Ja. 2. which is the Act here related to; the Kings lawful age was declar'd to be twenty one Years; but it seems, that because it was left dubious by that Act, whether the Year twenty one was to be inceptus, or completus when begun or ended; therefore by this Act it is de∣clar'd to be twenty one Years compleat, and the word compleat, is twice repeated. And it seems that before this Act, even the year it self was debateable; for in the 93 Act 7 Par. Ja. 5. It is said that the King after his perfect age of twenty five years, Rati∣fies, &c. By an Edict of Charl. the fifth of France, anno 1375. Their Kings are declar'd Majors, & hors de tutelle, at their age of fourteen. ACT 88.IN this Act all Confirmations of Kirk-lands, not Confirmed by King or Pope, before the Year 1558. (at which time the Re∣formation begun) were declar'd null; and by this Act Confirma∣tions from Rome, after that Year are discharg'd, and the Queens Confirmations are declar'd equivalent to the Popes; and I find that by Act of Secret Council, September 10. 1561. the sending to Rome for such Confirmations is by Proclamation discharg'd under the pain of Barratry.
K. JAMES VI. Parliament I. QUeen Mary being Queen during her Life,ACT 1. appoints the Earl of Murray to be Regent, and his Election is Confirmed by this Act, and it is Declared to last till the Kings age of seventeen, at which time it is Declar'd, that he shall enter to the exercise of the Government; I find amongst the Un-printed Acts, subjoyn'd to this Parliament, a Resigna∣tion of the Crown made by her, which it seems was neces∣sary, she being Soveraign du∣ring her Life, as the King is during his Life. Observ. She calls the Earl of Murray Brother, though he was her natural brother, which was conceal'd ob honorem, but Ineptly and though the Earl of Murray is here call'd the Kings Cousine, yet he should have been call'd his Uncle: Nor are Uncles properly Cousines; But I think this was because all Earls who are Counsellors are call'd Cousines and Counsellors; but yet if he had been to have been call'd a Counseller, for this cause he should have been call'd Cousin and Counseller. I have also seen a Commission to one of the Kings Natural Sons in England, wherein he was call'd our Cousin. It is observable, that sometimes the Acts of this Parliament bear, to be by Our Soveraign Lord, my Lord Regent and the three Estates, as the 20, 21, and 29. which is not well exprest, for the Estates
and Regent had no power to make Acts, and therefore the rest bear better, Our Soveraign Lord, with the advice and consent of his clearest Regent and three Estates. Nota, The Parliaments saying my Lord Regent, seems very ill Grammar, for it should have been the Lord Regent. THose Acts Confirm, and relate to former Acts past in the Par∣liament,ACTS 3, 4, 5, 6 holden by Queen Mary, August 24. 1560. and yet we find no such Parliament; but the true answer to this is, as ap∣pears by Spotswoods History, that the Lords of the Congregation having met in anno 1560. and having past those Acts, abolishing the Popish Religion, many of the Members of that pretended Par∣liament protested, that this meeting was no Parliament, because there was none there to re-present the Queen, nor the King of France her Husband, whereupon Sir James Sandilands was sent over to procure a Ratification of these Acts, which being deny'd, the same Acts are here Ratifi'd by the Earl of Murray, when he came to be Regent, as if they had been past in a lawful Parlia∣ment. ACT 7.FOr understanding of this Act, and the nature of Patronages, it is fit to know that the Right of Patronage is a power of Nomination granted to him who either was Master of the ground whereupon a Kirk was built, or who doted any thing to the Maintainance of it, or who did build a Church, to present one to serve the Cure thereat, in all which cases he is accounted Pa∣tron, and may present a person to be Minister, or to any other Be∣nefice, and that only if he reserve such a power to himself in his Mortification, for Hope in his Lesser Practiques, is of opinion that reservation is necessary, and the reason is, because jus patronatus est servitus libertati Ecclesiae imposita, and therefore is not to be al∣low'd, except the same was adjected at first to the Mortification, Molin. ad Reg. de infirm. The first mention of Patronages is by St. Pan∣lin. about the Year 431. and Justinian I find mentions the Novel. 67. Patronages in Scotland are either Laick or Ecclesiastick; all Pa∣tronages are accounted Ecclesiastick, which either belong to Eccle∣siastick persons, or which have flowed from the King (though by Infeftment) since the Reformation, in so far as concerns these Be∣nefices, wherein the King succeeds in place of the Pope, who be∣fore the Reformation, was accounted universal Patron; Laick, Patronages are such as have been Disponed before the Reformati∣on by His Majesty, and these pass by Infeftment, or have been found∣ed by Laick persons since, and these must be now obtained by a Signature from His Majesty, even by such as either contribute, dotem, sundum, edisicationem. The words of the Concession are, His Majesty grants advocationem, donationem & jus patronatus Eccle∣siae de, &c. It is expedient to know the differences betwixt the old Laick Patronages, and these which are Dispon'd by the King since the Reformation, because by the Act of Annexation, July 1587. all
Kirk-lands, are annexed to the Crown, and an exception is al∣ways made of Lands which pertains to the Benefices of Laick Pa∣tronages, which exception is only extended to Laick Patronages, which were lawfully established before the Reformation; which is also conform to the Canon Law, by which the Pope may prejudge an Ecclesiastick Patronage, but cannot a Laick, Bevg. de union. be∣neff. §. 3. num. 9. After one is prefer'd by the Patron, he hath only jus ad rem, but his Collation and institution which is given him by the Church-man, to whom the Presentation is directed, gives him jus in re; but if the Benefice to which the Patron presents be a Benefice without Cure, that is to say, having no care of Souls, as Provestries, Pre∣bendries, &c. eo casu, there needs no Collation or Institution, De∣cember 11. 1632. L. Lugtoun con. Edmiston. The Patron must present one within six moneths after he comes to know the vacancy, else the Presentation pro eâ vice, belongs to the Church jure devoluto; in which we agree with the Customes of Normandie, as in many other things, But Molineus does more rationally conclude, ad Reg. de infir. resig. num. 63. That the Bi∣shop does confer jure proprio, after elapsing of these six Moneths, because all Churches of his Diocess sunt in illius ordinatione; so that substracto per lapsum hunc jure patronatus quod huic juri dero∣gabat, redit ad suam naturam quod probatur ex c. 22. &c. 2. Extr. de suplend. negl. praelat. and yet when the Arch-bishop presents upon the Bishops failʒure, he does it only jure devoluto nam inter utrum∣que est gradus jurisdictionis quae ab inferiori puta Episcopo post elapsum tempus legitimum devolvitur ad superiorem puta Archi-episcopum sed pa∣tronus nullum facit jurisdictionis gradum; but if the Presbytrie re∣fuse to admit a qualified Minister presented by the Patron, then the Patron may retain the whole Fruits of the Benefice in his own hands, Act 115 Par. 12 Ja. 6. This retention is likewise allowed by the 1 Act Par. 21 Ja. 6. But whereas by the former Act, the Presentation jure devoluto fell to the Presbytries by the last Act it falls to the Bishop; but though by these Acts it be lawful to the Patron to retain the vacand Stipends, or Fruits of the Benefice in his own hand, yet it may be doubted, if he may apply them to his own use, for these are not only different effects, but it seems that this being contrary to the nature of things Sacred, and to the principles of the Canon Law, he cannot, for though by cap. in qui∣busdam 12 de paen. cap. 13 de elect. Patrons had the Custody of their own Churches when they vacked; yet the Fruits of all vacant Churches were to be reserved for the future intranti, futu ro Clerico cap. 2. Extr. ne sede vacant. and though at first Kings, and then all Patrons pretended to the intrometting with the Fruits of their Churches, especially in Britain, as Malch. West∣monst. observes in the Year 1240. yet Alexander 1. by the cap. 14. Extr. de off. Jud. ord. appointed, that even Procurators should be appointed for intrometting with these Fruits during the vacancy quod patroni laici curam tantummodo & defensionem suarum Ecclesia∣rum haberent non etiam potestatem ullam in rebus quas iis donarunt
vid. can. Noverunt 10. Quest 2. Notwithstanding of which Canons Hostiensis, and others, except such cases, wherein by the founda∣tion, or by a singular priviledge, or by prescription the contrary is introduced, and Molineus asserts, that all Laick Patrons may ap∣point Administrators, and gather up the Rents, though they cannot fructus Ecclesiarum vacantium in usus uos converteresed futuro Clerico re∣servare vel utilier in Ecclesias impendere; and therefore it seems, that the Parliament having only allow'd Laick Patrons to retain these Stipends during the vacancy, they can only apply them to a pious use, but can in no case appropriat them to themselves; for as such an appropriation would be sacrilegious, so it would be suf∣ficient for preserving the Patrons Right, that he might bestow them upon such pious uses as he pleased; but since the Act 52 Par. 1 Ch. 2. and the Act 23 of the third Session of that Parliament, ap∣point all vacand Stipends to be imploy'd for Universities, and other pious uses, and that there are several exceptions there made, and yet none in favours of Laick Patrons, I see not why the Rents of Laick Patronages fall not likewise under the Collection of va∣cand Stipends, the Laick Patrons having been re-presented in that Parliament, and so consenting to this Act, especially seing the said Act 52 declares that the Benefices of vacand Kirks, should du∣ring the vacancy be imploy'd upon pious uses, and the Colle∣ctors of vacand Stipends, have alwise been in use to Collect these. Selden in his Treatise of Tithes, asserts that the Right of Investiture, was at first reserv'd by Lay Patrons in the Foundations, and that the Gleib and Tithes were at every Vacation confer'd by the Pa∣trons to the new Incumbents, by some Simbole or Ceremony, not differing from our Seasines; and it is probable that for some ages after Charles Martels Reign it was so, because Tithes were then Transmitted by Laical Infeudations; and I have seen several Rights of this nature in the Chartularies of our Abbacies; and though af∣terwards this was condemn'd by many Councils, yet Kings reserv'd to themselves the vacant Fruits of Bishopricks, as being Founders and Patrons of these Benefices; and with us this Clause, reserving to the Patrons power to retain these Stipends during the vacancy, seems a vestige of their old pretension; but I shall examine all this very fully in my Treatise of Tithes. If the Bishop refuse to admit one presented by the Patron, then recourse must be to the Arch-bishop, and if he likewise give not redress, then the Council will give Letters of Horning to Charge the Ordinary to receive the person presented; and by that Act the Bishop may refuse to admit a person, who hath not reserv'd to himself a sufficient Maintenance in setting Back-tacks of his perso∣nage to the Patron, which paction is accounted Simoniacal, and the Lords of Session declar'd only Judges competent thereto, though by the Ch. 2 lib. 1. R. M. patronages are declar'd to be∣long to the Ecclesiastick Jurisdiction, and the said paction is pro∣bable by the parties Oath, albeit regulariter nemo tenetur jurare in
suam turitudinem by the 1 Act Par. 21 Ja. 6. It is appointed that the Bishop shall not refuse to admit any qualifi'd Minister, who hath been once admitted and receiv'd a Minister; by which it is clear that the Bishop is not oblig'd to receive an Expectant, who is ot an actual Minister, and the reason is, because non constat, if he be yet qualified, and the Bishop cannot be obliged to En∣ter him, and consequently is not oblig'd to accept his Presenta∣tion. By the Canon Law four Moneths were allow'd only to a Laick Patron, and fix to an Ecclesiastick; this was our Law before this Act, as is clear by the 2 cap. R. Mai. lib. 1. and there was good reason it should have been so, for the constitution concerning it, c. 2. Ext. de suplend. negl. prael. is written Episcop St. Andreae in Scotiâ; and this is cited as our Law, by Le Roy de jure patron. c. 28. and in case of the Patrons negligence, a gradation was allow'd from Inferiors to Superiors, till it ended in the Pope. By that Law likewise, a Laick Patron might vary in his presen∣tation; but an Ecclesiastick person could not; and if an Ecclesia∣stick Patron presented a person that was unworthy, he lost the right of his Presentation pro ea vice; but a Laick patron did not: and by our Law, if the Patron present one that is unfit, he may pre∣sent another, and a third, providing all his presentations end with∣in six Moneths, for the presenting one within six Moneths inter∣rupts not so, as that he may thereafter present another within other six Moneths, as some think, except his not admitting be occasion∣ed by the Bishop, who cannot seek a jus devolutum, by his own fault, by the 7 Act Par. 1 Ja. 6. the gradations then allow'd, were from the Ordinary to the Super-intendant, and Provincial-assembly, and from them to the General-assembly. Where there are more Patrons, they have right to present per vi∣ces, and he who hath been in possession of presenting trina vice, that is to say, the three last times successivly, without interruption, hath the only right of presentation in possessorio, in a Competition with the other Patrons pro ea vice, without prejudice to the rest to declare their Right for the future, as accords; and by some it is alleadged, that Presentations trina vice ex decessu incumben∣tis, excludes all other Rights etiam in petitorio, but this is not our Law. Doctor Forbes in his Treaty of Simony, exclaims extreamly a∣gainst this Act of Parliament, for allowing the Incumbent to set Tacks, reserving to himself a sufficient Maintainance, and he urges violently, that this Act allows rather Simony, than ac∣cuses it. IT may be argu'd that this Act debars not such of the Royal Line as have right to succeed to the Crown,ACT 8. for this relates only to a Coronation, and the Coronation it self is not necessary, Corona∣tio enim magis est ad ostentationem quam ad necessitatem, nec ideo Rex est quia Coronatur, sed Coronatur quia Rex est Oldrad. Consil. 90. num.
7. Balbus. lib. de Coronat. pag. 40. Nor do we read that any Kings were Crowned, except Joash, in Scripture, and Clovis King of France was the first that was Crowned; nor are any Kings of Spain Crown∣ed to this day, neither is a Coronation Oath requisite, Sisenandus being the first who in the 4 Tolletan Council gave such an Oath a∣mongst the Christians, as Trajan was the first among the Heathen Emperors, Gregory was the first of our Kings, who anno 879. gave the first Coronation Oath, having embraced the Christian Faith, in which he was very zealous, swore to preserve it; but this Oath was not made to the people, for they were not present, but to GOD; nor could he, as Blackwood observes, Apol. pro Regib. c. 26. bind his Successors, quia par in parem non habet Imperium, nor could he bind himself for them to the people, quia Cliens jurat Domino non Dominus Clienti, tit. de formâ fidelitatis, lib. 2. Feud. Likeas it may be said that this Act being made in the King's Minority, and being prejudicial to the right of Blood in his Successors, it falls under his Revocation, made Par. 11. cap. 31. whereby he expresly re∣vocks every thing which might hurt the priviledge of the Crown, which this Act 8 would do, if Kings were thereby debarr'd from Succession, for differing in Religion from their Subjects: This is contrary to the Confession of Faith, which tyes us to obedience to our King, though an Heretick; and since private Subjects are not debarr'd upon this account from their property, the King ought not to be debarr'd from the exercise of his Government, which is his Property, and that Kings cannot be debarr'd by a Statute, is clear by all the Doctors, in Can. qui jura distinct. 8 Aecurs. in l. Princeps ff. de Legibus, l. 4. de natal. restit. l▪ Jura Sanguinis, ff. de Reg. Jur. sed naturalia instit. de Jure Naturali forma Juramenti quod praestant Reges in Coronatione per Gloss. 1. in cap. fin. de Eccles. aedif. est quod jurat. se Regni sui jura illibata conservaturum, vid. Ant Corset. de potest. Reg. pars 3. num. 62. Some are also of opinion, but injustly, that Co∣ronation is to a King the same thing that Investiture is to a Subject, and therefore as Heirs may continue the possession of their Prede∣cessors before the Infeftment, but cannot sell, excamb, or do any other deads of property till he be Infeft, so though a King before he be Crowned may do these things that are necessary for pre∣sent administration, yet he cannot hold Parliaments, dispone upon annexed Property, and do any other deeds which require the ex∣ercise of the Royal Power, till he be actually Crowned: And whereas this Act ordains that all future Kings shall take this Oath at their Coronation and the recept of their Princely Power, which implyes that they should take this Oath before they can admini∣strat: It seems that this implyes a contradiction, for they must ad∣ministrat in appointing the Coronation, and ordering all things thereto relating; and our King did govern long ere he was Crown∣ed; but these words are exegetick only of the Coronation, and by them is meant the recept of his Authority in the Coronation. This Act is Ratified by the 99 Act, 7 Par. Ja. 6. vid. Act 2. Par. 3. Ch. 2.
IT is fit to know,ACT 10. that whatsoever of the thirds was not assign'd to Ministers, did appertain to the King; and it was called Superplus, whereof there was yearly a Book made, which al∣tered, and was more or less, according to the Assignation to the Ministers, and according to the Superplus-Books, the Kings Colle∣ctor did charge for the Superplus for the King's use, and with it also the omitted Benefices, which the Prelats and Beneficed persons o∣mitted in the up-giving of their Rentals, and also for common Kirk, and Friers Lands, which also with the thirds were appoint∣ed for the uses aforesaid. The Rent of the thirds for the King's use, is altogether extinguish∣ed, partly by restitution of Bishops, who have right to their own thirds, and partly by erection of Abbacies and Priories, in which the thirds are discharg'd in favours of the Lords of Erection, they plant∣ing the Kirks. Likewise in Parliament, 1617. and 1621. And in our late Parliaments there was Commission granted by the Parliament for planting of Kirks, which has made the old Book of the Assignations of Ministers Stipends, and yearly Plat thereof, to be out of use. Many of these Books of Assumption are still preserv'd, and they are very useful for clearing what the old Rentals of Benefices were, so that it may be known whether Benefices be set with dinution of the Rental. FOr the better understanding this Act, it is fit to know▪ACT 12. that a Pro∣vost with us, is that which praepositus is in the Canon Law, prae∣positura est dignitas, quando est Collegiata alias non Fed. de sen. Consil. 80. Alia ergo est Jur. Can. praepositura Collegiata, alia non Collegiata; But with us, where there was a Colledge Kirk, it was govern'd by a Provost, and Prebends; and generally it was institute for Divine Service; but there are Colledges institute for instructing of Youth, as the old Colledge of St. Andrews, which is governed by a Pro∣vost. A Provost is in our Law no Prelat, and therefore Tacks set by him are null, without consent of the Patron, 12 July 1616. Hope tit. Kirk; but è contra, the Patron may gift Prebendaries without consent of the Provost, or Prebends, except it be otherwayes pro∣vided by the Foundation. The Collegiat Kirks, Provostries, Prebendaries, having been founded by Noblemen, for their own ease and advantage, they re∣tain still a greater power over them than over any other Benefices, and therefore by this Act the Patrons of these may provide them to Bursers or others, notwithstanding of the Foundation, which is ra∣tified by the 158 Act. Par. 12 Ja. 6. and by the 54 Act, Sess. 1 Par. 1 Ch. 2 vid. observ. on that Act. FOrnication is now punish'd only by the Kirk Session, and this Act is not exactly observed,ACT 13. for the offenders now only pay an Arbitrary Fine, and stand upon the Stool of Repentance.
ACT 14.THis Act and the next are explained in my Criminal Treatise, Tit. Incest. ACT 17.THe melting down of any Money already Coined within the Kingdom, under the pains here exprest, is punish'd with us, because our Coyn, being as fine as our Plate, it would be thus melt∣ed down, and so the Stock of the Money would be impoverished; and as the 66 Act, Par. 8. Ja. 3. observes, it would waste and minish by translation in the fire; but the Question being agitated, whether forreign Coyn may be melted for Bullion; it was urg'd, that by this Act no Gold nor Money already Coyn'd within this Realm was to be melted; for by the said 66 Act, no Gold nor Money that bears Form, and is Printed, should be melted: but to reconcile these, the answer is, that if Money be once allow'd to be current here by direct allowance, as by Proclamation, it is not thereafter to be melted down; and so it was decided in the Lord Hattons case, Feb. 1683. ACT 18.THough the Lords of Session are not Judges competent to re∣duce Sentences past in Parliament, as the more Soveraign Ju∣dicature, yet they are Judges competent to reduce Rights confirm∣ed in Parliaments, whereby the Confirmation falls in consequence, quia confirmatio nihil novi juris tribuit, vid. 25 March. 1631. Bishop of Dunkell contra the Lord Balmerinoch. This Act against forbidden Weapons is explained by me in my Criminal Treatise. Tit. 32. ACT 19.VId. the Criminal Treatise. tit. Falshood. ACT 20.THis Act was to supply the nullities which could have been objected against such Rights by the Court of Rome, who pretended to the only right of bestowing Church-benefices, so that our separation from the Church of Rome was first authorized by the Parliament in the year, 1560. ACT 21.VId. Crim. tit. Theft: But it is now fit to observe, that when any-man cryes for help against Thieves, all who are desired are obliged to concur with the Owners of the Goods, under the pain to be holden partakers of the Theft, which Huy and Cry with us was called Quiritatio by the Romans, by the Greeks , vid l. 1. & 2. Cod. de his qui lat. & l. 1. ff. de serv. fugitiv. ACT 23.ALthough by our Law Pactions for Gifts, or Rights to accresce to private men, though not actually as yet fallen to them, are valid; and thus it has been found, that a man may renounce or sll haereditatem futuram; yet by this Act a gift of Escheat, when a Party shall be denounced, is declared not to be valid, because this may oc∣casion
the person whose Escheat is so gifted, to be denounced viis & modis, and this proceeds upon the same reason that the Civil Law discharges such deeds, quae praebent votum captandae mortis alienae, and by the Canon Law a Benefice cannot be promised or bestowed when the same shall happen to vaik, nec confirmatur sequenti vacatio∣ne colatio, C. proposuit, de con. preb. Ca. 2. de preb. in 6. & argumento hujus legis, it seems that the survivances of Offices should be null by the same parity of reason, for these preclude the King from his free Gift, and are the occasion of snares: Likeas, such Gifts by our Law and Style should express modum vacandi, which cannot be done where there is no vacation; and though we have no express Statute, yetby our Practice, which observes Styles as Statutes, if a Gift ex∣press not modum vacandi, it will be null; so a Gift of Escheat not mentioning the Horning whereupon it proceeded, was not sustain∣ed, though a Horning year and day before the date of the Gift was Libell'd on in the Declarator, and though the Gift was past the King's own Hand at Court, where Hornings could not be got, 20 November 1628. Welston contra Stuart. For if this had been sustain'd no Horning had ever been exprest thereafter, but the Donatar had still choos'd out one of the meanest Debts, since he is bound to pay the Debt in the Horning by his Gift. THough this Act requires that Seasins within Burgh should be subscrived by the Clerk,ACT 27. and given by the Bailie of the Burgh, yet the Lords sustain'd a Seasine of Lands within Burgh gi∣ven by the Sheriff and Sheriff-Clerk, where there were no Magi∣strats or Town. Clerk in Office at the time that the Seasine was gi∣ven, 21 July, 1666. Thomson contra Mackitrick. This is one of the instances that, necessitas non habet legem, vid. 11 Act, 3 Par. Ch. 2. THis Act was but temporary, and so is useless now.ACT 28. THis Act is Ratified by the 15 Act, 2 Par. Ch. 2. and the rea∣son why Maltmen are discharg'd to have a Deacon, is,ACT 29. be∣cause at their meetings they might easily conspire to set a price upon the Victual, and upon the Ale and Beer at their pleasure, and force the Gentlemen to sell at any rates. IT may seem strange that this Act made by Q. Mary should be in∣sert here, but that Parliament holden upon the 19 day of April,ACT 31. 1567. is not at all Printed, and therefore it has been thought fit to insert this Act in favours of the reform'd Religion amongst her Sons Acts, and to let it continue in her name, because it might clear that her Majesty had consented thereto in her own Reign. This Act bears an acknowledgment of the Queens deriving her Authority Royal from God, which has been insert by our Reformers, to show their abhorrency of their opinion, who think that our Mo∣narchs derive their power from the people. THere is no such Parliament as that here mention'd to be held upon the 29 of December,ACT 33. 1567. and therefore the 33 Act is here renew'd, but it was needless to have made a special Act for
allowing this to be Printed; for both these Acts 32 and 33 might and should have been one, vid. obs. on this Act in my Crim. Tit. Treason. King JAMES the sixth, Parliament 2. ACT 34.BY this Act it is clear that Commissions for Regents of the Kingdom were then subscrived, whereas they are now su∣perscrived; and were then past under the Privy Seal (as all Factories, Assignations, or other private Rights grant∣ed by the King are as yet) but now all such publick Trusts are past under the Great Seal. Nota, What was then a Regent is now a Commissioner, which word is but late, and the Regent was then called Protector. The first Commissioner mention'd in our Laws is the Earl of Montrose, for the Parliament 1604. but that Inscription speaks nothing of a Commission under the Great Seal, as all subsequent Inscriptions do from the year 1607. and downwards. Many Acts in this and the ensuing Parliament bear, With advice of the Regent, three Estates, and hail Body of the Parliament, which words, the hail Parliament, seems superfluous, for the King and the three Estates are the hail Parliament. But this was probably in∣serted either to show the unanimity of the Parliament, or to include the Officers of State, because they are not comprehended under any of the three Estates, and this may be adduc'd to redargue their o∣pinion, who think that the Officers of State did not sit in Parlia∣ment till the Parliament 1633. nor do they yet sit as such in the Parliament of England. For I find them marked in the Sede∣runts very anciently, but differently, for though now they are called, and are also marked down in the Sederunts after the Lord Ba∣rons, and are therefore called Lords, yet sometimes the Sederunt adds, after the Burghs, Together with the Officers of State; and the Se∣derunt of the Par. 15 bear▪ That the Kings Majesty, and Officers of State declare the Parliament to run, and ordain the Articles to meet. ACT 36.IT is fit to know that all Alienations and Dispositions made by persons who were thereafter forfeited for Crimes of Treason, are null, if they be made post commissum crimen, though they be made before Sentence or Declarator, and that though it may be pretend∣ed that in some latent Crimes of Treason, such as where Treason is inferr'd for concealing and not revealing Treason, the Subjects could not know the Committers guilt, and so might bargain with them, or take rights from them; but yet such Heretable Rights are declar'd null because the King having Feued out his Lands, he is not obliged to acknowledge any singular Successors, except their Rights were confirm'd, & sibi imputent, who did not confirm. This Act is ratified by the 65 Act, 5 Par. Ja. 6. and all former practiques contrary thereto are rescinded, which clause in that Ra∣tification was necessary, because as Sinclair observes in his old
Practiques there had been several Decisions past in favours of the Earl of Mortouns Creditors, sustaining Rights made by the Earl of Mortoun, who was after 20 years latent guilt convict for concealing the design of murthering the Earl of Lennox Queen Maries Hus∣band. As these Acts strike against Heretable Rights made by for∣feited persons, so by the 202 Act, 14 Par. Ja. 6. all Bonds, Obliga∣tions, Factories, Pensions and Assignations granted by forfeited persons, are declared null, except these Rights be confirmed by the King, or authorized by a Decreet of the Judge before the citing of the persons forfeited; from which Act it may be inferr'd, Arg. le∣gis, that such Rights granted post commissum crimen, but before ci∣tation are valid, though not confirmed by a Decreet, if they were granted for true debts prior to the committing of the Crime, since this Act runs only against fraudulent Dispositions; as also, for the same reason it may be urg'd, that where such personal Rights are granted meerly to defraud the Fisk, they would be null, though con∣firmed as said is; for else a man being to commit the Crime of Trea∣son, might purposely dispone his Moveables to prejudge the Fisk. Nota, That such Moveable Rights Confirmed as said is, will only be a ground for diligence against the forefaulted persons Moveables, even as if the saids Moveables had fallen to the King by single Escheat, but they will not be a ground of diligence against a forefaulted persons real Estate. Nota, That as Gifts of forefaulted Lands can only be past un∣der the great Seal, so the forefaulted persons Moveables should be regularly Gifted under the Privy Seal, being as to the King, the same way of Transmission, that an Assignation is to a privat party, but in the Earl of Argil's case, it was found that the Moveables of the forefaulted person might be likewise transmitted under the Great Seals. THough by this Act the Superiors forefaulture does not pre∣judge the Vassals who are innocent,ACT 37. yet this Act is expres∣ly abrogated by the 201 Act 14 Par. Ja. 6. and by our Law the Vassals Rights are null, except they be Confirmed, or unless he has originally consented to them, or unless the Feus be set in the Terms of the Act 71 Par. 14 Ja. 2. From this Act it may be urg'd, that since by a special Law, Vassals of persons forefaulted in this Parliament, are secured, notwithstan∣ding of the forefaulting of their Superiors; yet therefore regulariter the Sub-vassals Right falls to the King by the forefaulture of his Su∣perior, or his own forefaulture, and that not as Caduciary for then it would only fall to him with the burden of all Rights granted by the Vassal: But it falls to the King qua superior, so that he is not obliged to acknowledge any Rights, except they be Confirmed by himself; this was debated in the case of General Dalʒel contra Lady Cald∣wall.
Nota, The said 201 Act 14 Par. Ja. 6. appoints this Act to be delet out of the Records of Parliament, and this has been design'd oft-times to pre∣vent our taking abrogated Acts, for Acts in force, but yet they are still Printed; and some think this necessary, because men argue oft from abrogated Acts, as from this Act in the said case of the Lady Cald∣wal. ACT 38.ALL Monks with us were called Friers from the French word, Frere, which signifies a Brother. The Religious Women were called, Nunnes, from the Latin word, Nonna, which signifies a sa∣cred Virgin. THe Lands holding of Friers or Nuns, are by this Act de∣clared to hold of the King, and all the Lands of Monks and Nuns are by the 29 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. annexed to the Crown, quoad their Temporality, and though thereafter many of these Be∣nefices were erected in favours of Laick persons; Yet by the 14 Act Par. 1 Ch. 1. The Superiority of all Lands belonging to Abbacies, Priories, and other Benefices belong to the King. THis Act is Explain'd in the Act 36. and is drawn back to all Rights made even prior to this Act,ACT 39. by the 65 Act 5 Par. Ja. 6. which is a singular Instance of drawing back Acts prior to the dates. THese Acts are Explain'd in the Observations upon the third Parliament of Queen Mary.ACTS 41, 42, 43. King JAMES the sixth, Parl. 3. ACTS 44, 45, and 46.THese Acts of this Parliament are Explain'd in my Criminal Treatise, tit. Heresie. Nota, That by the Act 45, Arch-bishops, &c. were to be punished, being found negligent by the General As∣sembly of the Kirk, the Bishops before the Year 1606. being but Titular Bishops, and subject to the General Assembly, and were to be deprived by them, as is clear also by the 46 Act of this Par∣liament. By the 46 Act it is also observable that all the Church-men were then only to give their Oath, for acknowledging and recognoscing His Majesty and His Authority; the Oath of Supremacy having come in only by the 1 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. By this Act also, non-residence is declared unlawful, and is yet a cause of Deprivation, except it be dispensed with, the habilis modus whereof is by a Letter from the King.
BY the 72 Act Par. 9 Q. Mary, the Minister was to have the Parson or Vicars Manse, or so much thereof as should be sufficient for him;ACT 48. and no Kirk mans Manse or Gleib could be feu'd, yet an Heretor to whom a Vicars Gleib was feu'd a year before that Act, was allow'd repetition, Feb. 12. 1635. Nota. This Decision is otherwise related by mistake in the observ. on the said Act. The Manse comes from the Latin Word, Manere, vid. Seldens History of Tithes, pag. 52. By it we understand the Ministers Dwelling-house, and if the Parson or Vicar had a Dwelling-house or Manse, it belonged to the Minister, but if there was none of these, no other House could be design'd, though it stood within the precincts of an Abbacy, February 11 1631. Minister of Inner∣keithing contra John Keir. If there be no such Parson or Vi∣cars Manse, the Heretors must build one by the 31 Act of Parliament 1644. but thereafter by the 21 Act 3 Sess. Par. 1 Ch. 2. The value is declar'd to be from 500 merks to 1000 pounds, so that the Minister may build a Manse to himself, and he or his Executors will get repetition of what he bestows in building, not exceeding 1000 pounds; but if the Minister build only to the va∣lue of 500 merks, he will not have action against the Parochion∣ers for more, though not exceeding 1000 pounds, upon pretence that he might have built to that value, January 8. 1670. Charters contra the Parochioners of Curry: Where it was also found, that the Reparation or Building of the Manse, affects not singular Suc∣cessors, and is not debitum sundi. By that Act likewise it was found, that since Manses are ordain∣ed to be built by the Heretors, that therefore Liferenters are not lyable, which Decision may be very dangerous to Ministers, since it may oftimes disappoint, or at least for many Years suspend their Relief; as for Instance, if a Father should denude himself of his Estate, in favours of his Son an Infant, reserving only his own Liferent, and it may be doubted whether such Liferenters per re∣servationem, may not be lookt upon as Heretors in this, as they are in some other cases; and yet though Liferenters were not bound to build Manses, yet they were found lyable to repair them, these being but minores impensae, which required to be presently done; but neither Heretors nor Liferenters will be oblig'd to pay what is to be bestow'd upon Building or Repairing, nor to stent them∣selves for that effect, if they have materials of their own. It has been also found that Manses are to be built and repaired where they were burnt or wasted casu fortuito. A Gleib is that portion of Land that is to belong to the Mini∣ster, Gleba terrae, or a little piece Land, and is by this Act to com∣prehend four Aikers of arable Land, or 16 soums Grass, where there is no arable Land, Act 7 Par. 18 Ja. 6. These four Aikers are to be design'd out of Lands formerly belonging to the Parson or Vi∣car; and if there be none such, they are to be design'd out of Abbots, Prioresses, Bishop, Friers, or any other Kirk-land lying within the Bounds of the Paroch, Act 161 Par. 13 Ja. 6. which
order is exactly to be observed in the way set down by this Act, as Dury observes, July 13 1636. Halyburton contra Paterson; yet I find that Bishops Lands were design'd before Abbots Lands, because that Bishops have greater interest in the Cure; and albeit it may seem that the designing the most ewest or nearest Lands to the Manse for a Gleib be in favours of the Minister, and for his ease; yet the Lordsfound a Designation null at the in∣stance of the Heretor, whose Lands were designed, because there were other Lands nearer to the Manse, for else any Heretors Lands within the Paroch might be designed for a Manse out of prejudice. By the 116 Act 12 Par. Ja. 6. It is ordained, that Ministers who are provided to Churchs, where there was no Parson or Vicar for∣merly, such as Cathedral Kirks, or Abbacies, shall have a suffici∣ent Manse within the precinct of the Cathedral or Abbay, except the Heretors of the precinct provide them to as good a Manse, and as commodious. These Designations are to be expede according to this Act, by the Arch-bishop, Bishop, Super-intendent, or Commissioner who shall give their Testimonial, how he and two of the Parochioners have design'd such four Aikers, presently possest by such a man; upon which Designation, with a Supplication from the Minister, the Lords of Session are ordain'd to grant Letters of Horning upon ten days, which is renew'd by the 21 Act 3 Sess. 1 Par. Ch. 2. By which it is also appointed, that such Designations of Manses shall be by such Ministers as the Bishop shall appoint, and two or three of the discreetest Heretors. ACT 49.BY this Act benefic'd persons being year and day at the Horn lose their Benefices, which fall under their Liferent-Escheat; but it may be doubted, whether these Benefices should fall to the Patrons of the Benefices, as other Lands fall to Superiors, to com∣pense their want of a Vassal, especialy seing where Kirks vaik through the Ordinars not accepting of a presentation, the vacand Stipends are declar'd to remain with the Patron; or whether these Benefices ought to belong to Universities, and such as have Right to vacand Stipends? Or whether they ought to belong to His Ma∣jesty, and to be Transmissable immediatly by Gifts in Exchequer, as other Liferenters are? And this last is most conform to our Law. ACT 51.THough it appears by this and other Acts, and by our pro∣gresses of Writs, that the Pope us'd to Confirm Rights made of Church Lands; yet that was never necessary by any positive Law with us, and Feus even of Kirk-lands, prior to the Reforma∣tion, were and are valid, without any such Confirmation; but be∣cause about the time of the Reformation, which was the 8. of March 1558. Benefic'd persons did dilapidat their Benefices; There∣fore
by the 7 Act Par. 1584. It was declar'd that all Feus not Confirmed by the King or Pope before that time were null. AT this time there were two opposit Parliaments sitting, one for the King at Striviling or Stirling by the Earl of ennox;ACT 52. as Re∣gent, and another for the Queen at Edinburgh, and therefore this Act ratifies all that was done by the Parliament for the King, and annuls all that was done by the other, vide Melvils Memoirs pag. 113. vid. observ. on 100 Act 7 Par. Ja. 6. BY this Act Excommunicat persons should be Denunc'd Rebels at the Instance of the Kings Advocat,ACT 53. or Procurators for the Kirk; but now the Kings Advocat is Procurator for the Kirk, af∣ter this Denunciation their Liferent-Escheat falls to the King, and all simulat Gifts of them are null, Act 197 Par. 14 Ja. 6. and the Excommunicat persons and their Tennents are lyable for the Rents in solidum, but the payment of the one frees the other; Nor will the Defence of fructus percepti & consumpti, for the maintaining of their lives, defend the excommunicat person, as to bygones, the reason whereof is, not because if this could defend quoad bygones, it should defend quoad the future, and so the Act of Parliament would be evacuat, as is alleadg'd in Dury, June 26. 1629. But the true reason is because the excommunicat person cannot be bonâ fide possessor, since he is so frequently cited. BY this Act the Arch-Bishop or Bishop may appoint persons for Taxing the Parochioners, for repairing of Churches,ACT 54. if the Parochioners Elected to Tax, refuse, upon which Act the Lords are ordain'd to grant Letters of Horning, which is extended to the Re∣pairing of Kirk-yard-dykes, by the 232 Act 15 Par. Ja. 6. But it may seem reasonable that the Patron should repair the Church, since the care of the Edifice belongs to him, & ejus est incommodum cujus est commodum, yet our Law burdens not the Patron, But the Parochioners because they get the advantage in it of the Word and Sacraments; for which reason also the Canon Law burdened them in the last place, if there were not a fund for that effect, or if fructus residui ex beneficio, were not sufficient, vid. Paul. de citad. de jur. patr. art. 5. But for this reason, all who are Parochion∣ers should be lyable to repair; and yet the Heretors are only lyable, and it would seem that these Heretors should be first lyable, who have bought in their own Teinds, since they have most advantage by the Benefice, the Rents of which Benefice were by the Canon Law burdened with these reparations. By this Act also, if any intromet with the Stones or Timber of a demolish'd Church, the Bishops Decreet is equivalent to a Decreet of the Lords of Session, but this is in Desuetude. By this Act also the parsons of the paroch should furnish Bread and Wine to the Communion, how oft the same shall be admini∣strated, and it seems that by the word, Parson, should be mean'd either Rector Ecclesiae, for he is called the Parson, or all the persons who are Parochioners, and which seems reasonable, because they
partake of the Sacraments; and yet Heretors are only lyable, 2. It is clear from these word, That what is due for Communion Elements should only be due when the Communion is given, but yet Heretors are lyable yearly, though the Communion be not given, but it should be then given to the poor in that case, and not to the Minister. King James the sixth, Parliament 4. ACT 55.FRom the Narrative of this Act it is observable that the Refor∣mation from Popery first authorized in Parliament in August 1560▪ which observation may conduce to clear many things, both in relation to dates and others which depend upon the Reformation. By the Canon Law there could be no Divorce upon Separation, because Marriage is a Sacrament, and so could not be dissolved but by death; but all Protestants allow a Divorce in case of wilful di∣version, and therefore by this Act if persons absent themselves, and will not cohabite for four years, they may be cited to adhere, and if Divorce follow, the Wife loses her Tocher, & donationes propter nuptias, and if the Husband be the person who diverts the Wife, will by the same parity of reason get her Conjunct-see, and every thing else to which she could have had right f her Husband had died, 21 March, 1637. Lady Manderstoun contra Rentoun; and by our Law the party injured has liberty to marry after such Divorces. The Canon Law requires ten years diversion, though this Act re∣quires only four years, c. 8. extrav. qui filii, vid. Ritors, de disser, Jur. Civ. & Canon. l. 2. c. 14. but even in that case they grant no Divorcement, but only separationem quoad thorum & mensam: As to the four years prescrived by this Act, it may be doubted whe∣ther they should run from the date of the citation only, or from the time of the withdrawing or desertion, and it would appear that since the Act of Parliament sayes, That if they remain in their malici∣ous obstinacy for the space of four years; therefore the four years should run only from the date of the refusal, either by citation, or at least by being required; and yet the Commissars ordinarly make them run from the date of the withdrawing and desertion simply, though neither cited nor required; and though it would seem by this Act that four years should interveen before the Decreet of Adherence, yet the Commissars will grant a Decreet of Adherence upon a years de∣sertion, or less, if it can be proven to be malicious, or design'd, for they think it is enough that four years run before the Decreet of Divorce. Since the Act of Parliament requires malicious desertion to pre∣ceed the Divorce, it may be doubted whether Citations at the Peer and Shore of Leith to those that are out of the Countrey, or at the dwelling house to these that are within the Countrey be sufficient, since they may be so cited without being malicious deserters; and it were hard that a man being taken with Pirats or Robbers, or ne∣cessarily absent without knowing of any such Citation, should for
4 years absence lose his Wife; and though in the Romish Church where there is no dissolution of the Marriage this might be suffici∣ent, since upon his return he might recover his own Wife, yet it is most dangerous with us, and though these Citations be sufficient in other cases, yet there is no parity of reason for their being suffici∣ent here, where malice is required, and where the loss is irreparable. It may be also doubted if a Wife remaining in her Husbands House, but refusing him all access to her, may be said to have diverted, and I conceive she may, for all the reasons in the one case conclude against the other. The form of Process here set down, seems to be borrowed from the Saxon Law, related by Sedvin. ad tit. Instit. de nupt. Par. 4. de divert. & Harprech. ad part. 11. de nupt. num. 131. & seq. and lest this Process may proceed from Collusion, by the Husbands being desirous to divert upon design to obtain a Divorce: therefore by our Law the Pursuer is obliged to swear that there is no such Collusion. In place of Letters in the four Forms mentioned in this Act, Letters of Horning are now summarly granted on all Commissars Decreets, Act 7. Par. 21. Ja. 6. as also on the Decreets of Sheriffs, Stewards Ats, Bailies, &c. Act 177.13 Par. and Act 10 Par. 18 Ja. 6. for of old Horning being under the Sessions Signet,  only granted on Decreets of the Lords. THis Act is in Desuetude,ACT 56. for Salt may now be lawfully trans∣ported, but then we had not enough to serve the Countrey. BY this Act every Cowper is to put his own mark upon his own Barrel; but by the 141 Act,ACT 57. 8 Par. Ja. 6. there are Staples ap∣pointed for Salmond▪ where a Gadge and mark is to be kept. THis Act relates to the time wherein Grange kept the Castle of Edinburgh for the Queen.ACT 58. King IAMES sixth, Parliament 5. BY this Act Ministers Gleibs are not to pay Teind,ACT 62. which is extended by the 162 Act Par. 13. Ja. 6. so far that Mini∣sters Gleibs are thereby to be free from all Impositions whatsoever, and it was found the 9 of June, 1676. Burnet contra Gib, that not only Glebs of Kirks establish'd by Law were to be free, but even Gleibs of Chappels where there was Divine Service or∣dinarily; and this priviledge of being free from Teinds was to be ex∣tended not only to Ministers Gleibs, whilst they were possess'd by the Ministers themselves, but that even the Gleibs of Vicars were to be free from Teinds, when come in the hands of Laicks, except it could be alleadg'd that within these 40 years bypast these Laicks had payed Teinds for these Gleibs, albeit this Act of Parliament be only conceived personally in favours of Ministers, but not really in favours of Parsons or Vicars Manses, 16 July, 1678. Earl of Queens∣berry contra Dowglass. This Act is conform to the reform'd Churches abroad, vid. Carpz. jus consist.
ACT 63.BY this Act the Lords are ordain'd to direct Letters of Horning at the Chancellors and Bishops instances, for charging the havers of Writs belonging to Hospitals summarly to produce them, and the Clerk of the Bills having refused to pass a Bill upon this Act, as being in Desuetude, and as having been at first but tempo∣rary, because it ordains a report to be made betwixt and Pasch next, yet the Lords ordain'd such Letters to be granted, and found the Act neither temporary, nor in Desuetude, January 1667. Ho∣spital of Northberwick. ACT 64.VId. observ. on the 111 Act, 14 Par. Ja. 3. and on the 119 Act, Par. 7 Jam. 6. ACT 65.THis Act is explain'd in the 36 and 39 Acts 2 Par. Ja. 6. ACT 66.THough by this Act it is declared only that in the competition betwixt such as have obtained Confirmations from the King, the last Right first Confirmed shall be preferr'd, yet this holds also in Rights, holden of other Superiors, because if the Right be given to be holden of the Superior, & a me, it is no compleat Right till it be confirmed, and the first compleat right is to be preferr'd. Nota, From this Act that the Lords of Exchequer ought not to refuse to grant Confirmations, & de praxi, if they refuse, the Kings Vassals protest that their refusal shall not prejudge his right. But I find that where many Creditors were confirmed in one day, the Lords preferr'd them according to their diligence, and there having taken Seasine, and not according to the date of presenting the Signatures, since neither were negligent, nor had used precipitation, for they shun'd to determine that the Exchequer had not preferr'd or brought in all justly, for that were to make the two Courts interfeer, 6 December, 1678. Mill contra Pasoules; But in the competition be∣twixt two Confirmations, the Lords found that the first who had past the Seals was to be preferr'd, and that the preference of the Confirmation was to be judged by the passing the Seals, and not by the date of the Signature, since it is not the Signature, but the Char∣ter that preferrs, because a Charter first past the Seals, though upon a posterior Signature, will be preferr'd as the more compleat dili∣gence, the Seal being in place of the King's Subscription, and con∣sequently the date of the Charter is not still to be looked to, since the Charter bears still the date of the Signature, and the date of the passing of the Seals is proven in our Law by an attestation under the hand of the Keeper of the Seal; for though that attestation may seem to be the testimony of only one Witness, yet it is actus officii, and the Minut-Book is a sufficient check upon his attestation, 26 Febru∣ary, 1680, Clackmannan contra Earl Wigtoun.
It is also observable from this Act that albeit the Keepers of the Seals are discharged to pass double Confirmations of Rights of the same Lands, yet de praxi the Exchequer and Seals pass very frequent∣ly such double Rights periculo petentis, and though where the ob∣tainer of the first Right cannot instantly exclude the second, as by clearing that the granter was denuded, and so the second Right was null. There may be some pretext for granting such double Rights, periculo petentis, the Exchequer not being Judges competent to the competi∣tion of double Rights, yet where the first can clearly and instantly exclude the second, there is no reason for passing the second, for by passing such double Rights, the first is put to the necessity of a Reduction, since no Right once passed under the Great Seal can be annulled by way of exception, but only by way of reduction; and since the second right, though null, may be the foundation of a Prescription, and will establish a full right in the obtainer, if he continue 40 years in possession. THis Act prohibiting Flesh to be transported in Ships, except in so far as is necessary for Victualing the Ships,ACT 67. is now in De∣suetude. King IAMES the sixth, Parliament 6. IT is observable that in this Act is said, that Our Soveraign Lord has declared and granted Jurisdiction to the Kirk,ACT 69. which consists in the Preaching of the Word, the correction of Manners, and the Administration of Sacraments, which inferrs that Ecclesiasticks have no temporal Jurisdiction save from the King, which the Ca∣nons have also acknowledged, as shall be clear'd in the Act concer∣ning the Supremacy: But they are acknowledg'd to have had an Ecclesiastick Jurisdiction, for the Act bears, Has declared, and this Ecclesiastick Jurisdiction is declar'd to consist in Preaching, Cor∣rection of Manners, and Administration of Sacraments. THis Act discharges Gaming and Drinking in Ale-houses on the Sabbath, and is considered in the Act 83. Par. 6. Ja. 4.ACT 70. THough such young Noblemen or Gentlemen as go abroad,ACT 71. need not now Licences from the Council, nor to make application to the Bishop or Superintendent within 40 dayes after their return, yet if the Council suspect that they are like to change their Religion, they use to cite the Parents, and to force them to bring home their Chil∣dren, or else to Imprison or Fine them as they see cause. This Act was renewed by a Proclamation of Council, January, 1679. BY this Act the Labourer is to require him who has right to the Teinds, to come and Teind within 8 dayes after the Shearing,ACT 72.
by making premonition on three Sabbath dayes after the Shearing, which is by the 48 Act, Par. 11. Ja. 6. restricted to two Sabbaths; and thereafter by the 5 Act, Par. 21. Ja. 6. It is appointed that the Teinding beat three several times, viz. the In-field at one time, the Bear at another time, and the Out-field Corn at a third time, and that 8 dayes interveen after each compleat Shearing; but all this is innovated by the form set down very fully, 9 Act, Par. 22. Ja. 6. Which last Act is now in observance, and being fully consi∣der'd needs no further explication. ACT 74.VId. crim. pract. tit. Idle Beggers, and observ. on the 16 Act 3 Sess 1 Par. Ch. 2. Where this Act is Ratifi'd and enlarg'd; In this Act excellent Overtures are set down for punishment of Va∣gabounds, and these who flee from their Masters Service, who by this Act are appointed to be burnt in the Ear, and Scourg'd for the first Fault, and to suffer Death for the second; so far can the repeating of a Crime highten its punishment, even in mean Crimes: analogical to this Act is the Tit. ff. de Fugitivis, where likewise ma∣ny excellent Overtures are propos'd. ACT 75·ALbeit by this Act, all the Hornings are to be Registrated in the Sheriff-Books of the Shire; where the Rebel lives: Yet by the 265 Act 15 Par. Ja. 6. In case the Sheriff refuse to Registrat the same, it is sufficient that they be Registrated in the general Register; but if the Horning be for a Criminal Cause, it must be Registrated in the Books of Adjournal, Act 140 Par. 8 Ja. 6. Observ. 2o. That Horning against Witnesses need not be Re∣gistrated at all, nor can Witnesses Escheats fall upon such Denuncia∣tions, because it were hard to put the pursuer to so much expenses, or to make an Escheat fall for a negligent Contumacy. Observ. 3o. That Denunciations at the Mercat Cross of the Shire where the Rebel Dwells, should only debar Rebels, ab agendo, and not Denunciations at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, as was found January 24. 1674. Blair contra Blair; and even these Defenders who are Denunced at the head Burgh of the Shire, can∣not be debarr'd from proponing that which requires their person∣al presence, nor are their Creditors or Assigneys debar'd from pur∣suing. Observ. 4o. Though by this Act the Thesaurer has power to in∣tromet with the Rebels Goods, and may raise Letters for that ef∣fect, which were call'd Letters of Intromission; yet now Escheats must be Gifted, and the Donatar must raise Summons of general Declarator thereupon, wherein it must be try'd, if the Rebel was lawfully Denunc'd; and after general Declarator, he must have a Decreet of special Declarator, which is in effect only a Decreet for payment, though it be abusively call'd a special Declarator; and the former Letters of Intromission are justly found not to be legal now.
The affixing a Roll of the Rebels Names here mentioned, is in Desuetude, except as to Fanaticks, and these who pay not the Kings publick Dues. Some doubts concerning this Act are Explain'd in the Act 142 Par. 8 Ja. 6. THis Act is Explain'd, Crim. pract. tit. Libels.ACTS 76, BY this Act the pains of breaking Law-burrows, is to be divid∣ed equally betwixt the King and the Party injur'd;ACT 77. and the reason of this is, because the King is injur'd by the breaking of the Law-burrows; The Charge of Law-burrows being in His Majesties Name; and though ordinarly the Party Charged finds Caution of Law-burrows; yet if after the Charge any prejudice be done, the party Charged is lyable, because the Charge is con∣temn'd, July 8. 1628. Semple contra Cuninghame. The civil Action whereby this breach of Law-burrows is pursu'd, is call'd An Action of Contravention, and must because of this Act of Parliament, be rais'd at the Kings Advocat's instance, as well as at the instance of the party injur'd, and the pursuers Title is the Charge, if no Caution be found, or the Extract of the Bond of Cautionry, if Caution be found; the ordinary Deeds whereby Contravention is infer'd, are beating or stricking the party to whom the Lawburrows is found, or his Servants, ex∣cept the Servants or Tennents were beat upon a special account, no ways relating to the Master; which speciality must be proven, or else its presum'd to have been on the Masters account; and for the same reason it is, that though the stile of Letters of Law-burrows bear, That the Complainer, his Men, Tennents and Ser∣vants, &c. shall be Skaithless in their persons, Lands, Heretages, Goods and Gear; Yet the taking of two Horse from the pursuers Tennents, was not sustained to be a Contravention, because that was not done on the Masters account, nor was the Tennent him∣self pursuer, January 28. 1632. Grant contra Grant. Nor was for the same cause, the breaking up the Tennents House, and taking some Goods out of his Chest, found a Contravention, February 9. 1633. Lindsay contra Denniston. But since it was not a Contra∣vention, because the Master was not concerned in the Injury as these Decisions bear, I see not how the Tennents concourse could have altered the case, quoad the Contravention, though in both cases the Tennent may pursue damnage and interest. All Lawyers are clear, that there must be clear grounds of In∣jury alleadg'd, and therefore feeding bestial upon controverted Lands, is not sufficient, December 20. 1592. But in mutual Con∣traventions upon that head; The Lords allow'd both parties to turn their Libel in a Molestation, and granted Commission to Exa∣mine
Witnesses hinc inde, January 24. 1663. Rouchlay contra Wood. Nor would the Lords find that pasturing upon waste High-land-ground, should infer contravention, except it had been done by the Masters Command, or frequent herding to his knowledge, July 8. 1664. Earl of Airly contra Mcintosh. But yet if Deeds of Violence be done, even upon debateable Lands, that will infer Contravention, such as the hoching of Oxen. This animus injuriandi is so necessary, that Deeds done by drun∣ken-men, are by many Lawyers thought not to infer a Contra∣vention, Christin. Tit. 4. Art. 8. and the adulterating the pursu∣ers Wife, will not infer a Contravention, because this is not done animo injuriandi, but animo libidinoso Christin. Art. 7. He likewise thinks, that threatning real injuries is sufficient, and threat∣ning is a great breach of the Peace, especially when it is by a man who uses minas prosequi, but verbal injuries, per se, are not thought sufficient by Lawyers, nor have we any Decision sustaining a Contravention on that head. Since by this Act the King and the Party have different inte∣rests, therefore Imprisonment or paying of a Fine to the King by prior Sentence, will not exclude a pursuit of Contravention at the parties instance, March 20. 1623. Futhie contra Carmichael, and January penult, 1622. Johnston contra Laird of Westnisbit. And certainly that Decision related by Hope tit. contravention Forrest contra Turnbul; Where it was found that the Kings Advocat could not insist alone in a Contravention, if the party injur'd discharged the Deed, though after the intenting of the Cause, is an illegal Decision; for seing the King is injur'd crimine fractae pacis, and that by this Act the King has right to the half of the penalty, and had formerly right to all by the 5 Act Par. 1 Ja. 3. The party cannot Discharge the Kings part. Contravention is a penal action, even at the privat parties instance; and therefore titulus coloratus, will defend against it, and thus a Contravention being libelled, as in∣fer'd from the casting of a Ditch, whereby the pursuers Land was overflow'd. The Lords found that a consent from the pursuers Fa∣ther, though he was but Liferenter, did defend against that acti∣on, January last 1633. L. Weyms contra L. Gairntilly, Without prejudice to pursue an Action of Damnage and Interest; to which the Lords turned this Libel, without necessity of a new Pro∣cess. And this action is likewise elided for the same reason, by sub∣sequent Dissimulation; and therefore a pursuit of Contravention, founded upon cutting of Trees in the pursuers Wood, was elided by the same pursuers granting Licence thereafter to the same De∣fenders to cut in the same Wood; which posterior Licence the Lords found did infer a presumptive Remission, January 11. 1633. Denniston contra Lindsay. Nor is this Contravention infer'd by Injuries, done upon provocation or self-defence, but though pro∣vocation seems to be good against the provocker, yet it seems not to be good against the King; and it may be doubted whether
the penalties of the Acts of Parliament may be sought, by and at∣tour the damnage and interest, or if the damnage is to be a part of the penalty. HOpe observes from the Narrative of this Act,ACT 79. that as only Landed men can be Judges in Perambulations, so Landed men ought only to be received Witnesses in Heretable Debates; but this Observation holds not in our Practique, which allows any ha∣bile Witnesses in perambulations, and all other Heretable De∣bates. BY this Act all Heretable Obligations, or Writs of importance,ACT 80. are to be subscriv'd, and seal'd before two famous Witnesses, if the parties can Write, or by two famous Notars, before four famous Witnesses, if they cannot write. Observ. 1o. That Sealing is not necessary, but Subscription is sufficient in parties, and is not necessary in witnesses by this Act, though it be requisit by the 5 Act 3 Par. Ch. 2. even in Witnesses also; and though the Sealing be only remitted in Papers to be Registrated by the 4 Act 9 Par. Ja. 6. Yet it is not necessary in any Writ by our present Custom. Observ. 2o. That in our practice; all Writs exceeding an hun∣dred pounds, are Interpreted to be Writs of importance, and so to need Witnesses, January ult, 1623. But if any sum be to be annually pay'd, that Writ whereby it is to be pay'd, requires Witnesses, though never so small, because yearly Prestations may arise to a considerable sum, July 4. 1632. and though sums above 100 pounds, require Writ; Yet Intromission with Victual or any thing else, probable by witnesses, as all other things con∣sisting in facto are; as also, intromission with uncoyn'd Money or Silver in mass, is probable by Witnesses, though exceeding 100 pounds: But promises & nuda emissio verborum, though for less sums than 100 pounds, are only probable by Writ, because By standers may mistake the position and force of Words, January 19. 1672. Douchar con. Brown. Observ. 3o. This Act is only to be extended to such things as require Writ, ex sua natura; and to which Writ uses to be ad∣hibit for Merchant-bargains made in Mercats, do not require Wt, and so are probable by Witnesses; for men use not, nor cannot adhibit Writ in such cases; nor are Witnesses requisit in Dis∣charges granted to Tennents by the Masters, because of their Ru∣sticity, and the smalness of the sums: Nor are Witnesses requi∣sit in Contracts of Marriage, upon which marriage has followed, nam notorietas facti habetur pro testibus, July 1. 1662. Breidie con∣tra Breidie. But it may be doubted whether this holds in Stran∣gers, such as are third parties; and I think they are not oblig'd to pay the Tocher, though it certainly holds in the Man and Wife themselves who Contract; and though it hold not in third par∣ties, who are meer Strangers; yet it should hold in the Father, when he obligeth himself to pay the Tocher, where there is a tri∣partite
Contract subscriv'd by many parties, they are in place of Witnesses to one another, all parties having subscriv'd, July 19. 1676. Forret contra Veitch. And a Writ having the Substantials filled up with the Granters own hand, is equivalent to its being Subscriv'd by Witnesses, January 23. 1675. Vans contra Mal∣loch. Observ. 4o. Though the sum exceed an hundred pounds; yet if the pursuer restrict his pursuit to an hundred pounds, it is probable by VVitnesses, July 7. 1629. Wallace con. Muir. VVhere the parties cannot write, two Notars and four VVit∣nesses are required by this Act; But yet a Merchants mark is su∣stained, if it can be prov'd, that he us'd to subscrive so, Februa∣ry 1. 1669. Brown contra Johnston. But this is only sustain'd amongst Merchants, and to facilitat Commerce: But it seems that in Law, no such mark should be sustain'd, except where the writ has witnesses also. Subscription also by the Initial Letters of the Subscrivers Name, is sustain'd, if the Subscrivers be prov'd to have still Subscrived so, these Instrumentary VVitnesses are pre∣sum'd to have been chosen by consent, and therefore Sons, Ser∣vants, &c. may be VVitnesses; and it may be doubted if VVo∣men may be VVitnesses in VVrits; but it is still sit to choose dis∣interrested VVitnesses, for if the Granters own Relations be wit∣nesses, and one of two of them deny his Subscription, the writ will be reduc'd as null, though not improven as false, as was found in Nimmo's case. These VVitnesses are by this Act to be design'd by their spe∣cial Dwelling, or some evident token, by which they may be known, as to which. Observ. 1o. That though Designation by the Dwelling-place, be declar'd sufficient by this Act, yet if that Designation be too gene∣ral, as that the witness is In-dweller in Edinburgh, and that there be many of that Name there: or the person cannot be known by that Designation. The Lords will ordain them to be more parti∣cularly condescended on, even by an Assigney, who may pretend that he is not oblig'd to know who the witnesses were, but that it was sufficient for him to see that the Bond had witnesses, but yet that the Witness was Servitor to the Earl of Southesk, though the Earl had more Servants of that Name, February 7. 1672. Observ. 2. That though the Act say that the Writ shall be null, if the Witnesses be not design'd in the Writ; yet the Lords will allow the Pursuer to design the Witnesses if they be insert, though the Witnesses so designed be dead, and many years have interveen∣ed since the Writing of the Paper, but in that case they will ordain the designation to be astructed per comparationem literarum, and an Oath in Supplement, 15 July, 1664. Colvil contra the Executors of the Lord Colvil; but if the Writ mention no Witnesses, the Lords will not allow the Pursuer to condescend who were Witnesses, and to design these Witnesses, 24 Jan. 1668. Magistrats of contra the Earl of Finlator. All which holds only in cases arising from Writs prior to the Act, 5 Par. 3. Ch. 2. By which Act Witnes∣ses must be subscriving and design'd, else the Writ is null.
I find this whole Act was verbatim made in France at Moulins, Anno 1556. and has been brought in here very shortly after, viz. 1579. There is a learned Commentary writ upon it by Bosellus, Borderius, which may be very useful in our practice. I find also that by the Edicts in Flanders, nothing can be proven by Witnesses above 300 pounds, vid. Stockman. Decis. 120. BY this Act, Spuilʒies, Ejections,ACT 81. and others of that nature pre∣scrive in 3 years. Os. 1. That though the action of Spuilʒie and Ejection prescrive quoad the specialities indulged by the Law to these actions, which are, that violent profits will be granted, and that if the Pursuer prove that the Spuilʒie or Ejection were committed, he may tax his own dam∣mages per juramentum in litem, yet if the Pursuer restrict his Action to wrongous intromission, or re-possession, he may pursue for the same at any time within 40 years, 16 March,, 1627. Inglis contra Kirkwood. Observ. 2. That from these words in the Act, And others of the like nature, The Lords have found that an Action of Intrusion prescrives within 3 years, 2 February, 1610. As also, that an Action for demolishing of a Miln, or an Action intented for the dammage and interest sustained in ryving out a common Moor, and generally all such Actions as arise from violence, and in∣ferr upon that account extraordinary dammages, do prescrive with∣in 3 years, quoad the extraordiness of the dammage. Observ. 3. That nothing but a formal pursuit of Spuilʒie inter∣rupts this prescription, and therefore an action of oppression and de∣predation intented before the Justices, was not found sufficient to interrupt this prescription, though that was a more exuberant conclu∣sion, and so included Spuilʒie as a lesser, and the Justices are Judges ordinar also; and by this Act it is enough to pursue before the Judge ordinar, 8 February, 1676. Master of Rae contra Dum∣beath. Actions of removing prescrive so (if not pursued within three years) that there must be a new Warning before any re∣moving can be intented,ACT 82. and the Lords have found that these three years are to be computed from the time to which the Warning is made, but not from the date of the Warning. BY this Act all actions for House-mails,ACT 83. Mens ordinar Servants Fees, Merchant Compts, and other like debts prescrive in three years. Observ. 1· That these actions are not absolutely extinguished by the prescription, but after three years they become probable only by Writ, or Oath of the Defender, whereas if they had been pur∣sued within three years, the debt was probable by Witnesses, and this Act is founded as I think upon the presumption that men would not suffer such debts to ly over for longer than three years, without
taking an obligation for them in Writ, and the presumption lyes for their being yearly pay'd, and that which was praesumptio hominis, is after the current of three years made here praesumptio juris & de jure & lex statuit super prasumpto. Observ. 2. These words, Or other the like debts, that are not foun∣ded upon written obligations are dangerous, as all such general clauses are, which make the people unsecure, and the Judges Ar∣bitrary; and though one would think that Maills and Duties of Lands ought to prescrive as soon as any of these, since it is not pre∣sumeable that these would be suffer'd to be unpay'd, yet it was found they did not prescrive in three years, 20 January, 1627. Ross contra Fleming. By this Act House-mails, &c. prescrive, if they be not pursu'd within 3 years, and therefore the Libel for such debts is not rele∣vant, except it be expresly Libell'd that such duties were owing, and are yet resting unpayed, and consequently the Tennent may de∣pone that he possest but that he payed, which quality is receivable, and yet if the Tennent depone simply that he possest and forgot to adject the quality, the Lords would not sustain it to be adjected ex intervallo, at the advising of the Cause; or in a Suspension or Re∣duction, unless the Tennent could prove that the Master would not suffer the quality to be receiv'd, or would offer to prove payment by the Masters Oath. Observ. 3. It may be doubted whether this Act ordaining Merchant Accompts to prescrive in 3 years, doth reach to Compts owing to Strangers, for they seem not oblig'd to know our Law, and this would ruin all Commerce & locus contractus semper attendendus. But it was found that this Act does extend to all Merchant Goods, as well when sold in gross as by retail. It may be doubted whether these two last Acts run against Mi∣nors, since it is provided expresly that Prescriptions against Spuil∣zies and Ejections shall not run against them, which shows that if this had been design'd in the other Prescriptions, the same Clause had been renew'd, since it was under consideration, and so seems not to have been forgot only, and there seems to be some reason for this, since Minors are prejudg'd by Spuilʒies and Ejections, and so Prescriptions in these should not run against them, but in remo∣vings the hazard is only that a new Warning must be used, and in other the like debts, the only loss is that the debt cannot be prov'd by Witnesses after three years, and so since these prescriptions did little hurt to Minors, it was not necessary to stop their course. It is also observable, that though all these Prescriptions run in 3 years▪ yet if actions be once intented, they stop the prescriptions, and there∣after Spuilʒies, Removings, or Aliments, &c. do not prescrive in less time than 40 years, as all other debts do; and till then vio∣lent profits are due, or the like debts may be prov'd, as if the action had been pursu'd within 3 years, 26 January, 1622. Herring contra Ramsay: As also by our late Decisions, if the Pursuer has continu∣ed to employ a Merchant the currency of that Compt, and trust will preclude the prescription, so that many former years preceed∣ing
the three last may be craved, though this Act ordains all Mer∣chant Compts to prescrive within that time, but if a Bond be ta∣ken for these posterior years, it is thought that cannot be called a current Compt, and it may be debated whether in Law one or two Articles will make a current Compt, and if it do, there may be many wayes taken to elude this Act, vid. 16 De∣cember, 1675. Somerel contra the Executors of Muirhead. This currency extends to Brewers Compts of furnishing, 13 November, 1677. Wilson contra Ferguson▪ (Vid. Sand. lib▪ 5. Decis. Tit. 6.) Though it was alleadg'd that albeit it should hold in Merchant Compts where there are Discharges taken, and where a Compt Book adminiculats the recept, yet it ought not to be consider'd in furnishing of Ale, where neither of these are observ'd; and yet this currency was not respected in Servants Fee, for these same reasons, and because a Servants Fee is alter'd at the Masters discretion, 12 February, 1680. Ross contra Mr. Salton. VId. Crim. Obs. Tit. Forestallers, and Tit. 32.ACT 87 88. IT may be doubted whether this Act that gives power to the Sheriffs and other Judges, to throw down Cruives and Yairs,ACT 89. ought to be extended to Dykes built over waters, or a part of the water, for making a Dam to a Miln. 2o. VVhether Sheriffs or Lords of Regality, &c. may exe∣cute this Commission for their own advantage, and where they themselves are the parties grieved, since that were sibi jus dicre, and they would probably be partial, whereas they may get others to execute the same. THis Act Discharging exportation of Coals is now in Desue∣tude.ACT 90. THis Act Fining such as propone unjust exceptions, or lose the Pley within Burgh, for the use of the poor,ACT 91. is con∣form to that Title in the Civil Law, instit. de panis temere litigan∣tium; For there can be nothing so absurd and unjust, as that men should not at least have their true expenses upon Oath▪ where∣as we use to modifie little or nothing, even where there is not the least colour for a pursuit, or defence, and this I think a great iniquity in all Judges who are guilty of it. Vid. instit. de paen▪ temere litigantium.
ACT 92.BY this Act the Lords of Session are ordain'd to distribute Ju∣stice without respect to any privat writing impetrat from His Majesty, and by this His Majesty is freed from importunity, and his people from unjustice. This was formerly statuted by King David 2. cap. 18. & cap. 41. and by the 2. cap. Statut. 1. Rob. 1. Judges are ordain'd to Judge secundum leges antiquas; and in the Civil Law, per l. 1. & 6. C. si contr. jus vel util. publ. & per novel. 82. cap. 13. and in the Canon Law, cap. 5. de Rescript. This same Law is also in France, and is Learnedly Treated by Rebuff. ad con∣stitut. Reg. tit. de rescript. and Plutarch commends Antiochus for having made a Law in these same terms; but though the former Statute of King David warrands the Judge not to respect that Com∣mand, but to indorse and send back the warrand, and not execute the unjust Command, which is by the 41. cap. of the same Sta∣tutes extended so, that they are not oblig'd to delay Justice upon any such privat warrand; Yet I find by §. 10. cap. 20. of these same Statutes, that the King may Discharge or Prohibite a Judge to proceed in the case of Perambulation, for certain Causes; for reconciling which Statutes, it must be answered, that the King cannot either simpliciter discharge a Perambulation; nor any other Process, but that he may discharge it for weighty Causes, relating to the publick, to which all privat interests must cede even as he may remit Crimes for such causes, though these be of greater con∣sequence, or rather that the King may discharge Perambulations, because the publick Peace is oftimes concerned in these, since there used to be ordinarly great Convocations at such Perambulations; and therefore the Justice General was of old only Judge compe∣tent to Perambulations. Upon March 4. 1553. The Queen Regent appears in the Session and declares that the Lords should proceed to do Justice, notwithstanding of any Letter or Order from her, which is marked in the Books of Sederunt. Observ. 2. That before this Act the Council us'd frequently to discharge the Lords of Session, to proceed in judging privat Causes, whereof many Examples are to be seen in Hopes larger Practiques, and an instance of it is to be found in the 94 Act of this Parliament; but that Custom is here discharg'd, and as yet the Council uses fre∣quently to discharge the Justices to proceed. And notwithstand∣ing of this Act, I find in the Registers of Council, 1581. King James Revocks in two several Cases, Gifts granted by himself, and Discharges the Lords of Session, to sustain Action upon them. Observ. 3o. That the Lords are also allowed to proceed, not only to decide, but also to cause Execute their Sentences, not∣withstanding of such privat writings, Charge or Command, so that the Privy Council cannot Suspend the Lords Sentences, neither by an Act of Council, nor yet by Letters under the Signet; But yet the Privy Council, by vertue of their late Commissions, are allow∣ed,
and do usually grant Protections, whereby the Executions of the Lords Sentences are oftimes stopt. IN so far as this Act Discharges the Lords of Session to take Buds or Bribes, I have Explain'd the same,ACT 93. crim. pract. pag. 248. Observ. 1o. That the Lords are allow'd to reject any person whom the King presents to them to be a Lord, if he be not quali∣fi'd and of good fame; and therefore the Lords usd when the King presented any person to be a Lord (which was by a Letter direct to the Session, wherein the King did nominat him a Lord) to name some of their number to Examine him. But now the Form of Tryal is more severe, and is set down in his Letter direct by His Majesty in anno 1674. whereby they are immediatly after Pleading to resume the Debate, and to give their Opinion first in a Cause Debated in praesentia, and to sit with the Ordinary in the Outter-house, and to report some Causes there Debated, and to give their own Opinion, with the Reasons thereof. Observ. 2o. That by the first Institution of the Session, the Pre∣sident was still an Ecclesiastick person, and of the Dignity of a Pre∣lat, as this Act says; and yet I see no such Article in the first In∣stitution; but however, that is here dispensed with for the fu∣ture; For by the 96 Act 5 Parl. Ja. 5. It is only said, that the Session shall consist of fourteen persons, the one half Spi∣ritual, and the other Temporal, with a President. BY this Act the Tenor of Letters of Horning,ACT 94. and of the Exe∣cutions thereof, cannot be proven by witnesses; The rea∣son whereof I conceive to be not only, because upon such Let∣ters, mens Escheat and Liferent may fall, and that were of too great Importance to be proven by witnesses, since our Law does not allow any Debt above an hundred pounds to be proven by witnesses; But because witnesses can neither know nor remember the exact Tenor of all the formalities of Executions and Stampings thereof; and so strict are the Lords in the Observation of this Act, that after the Horning and Executions were Registrat, they would not allow the Messenger to add the word, Three Oyesses, in his Executions, though he offered to prove that there were truly three Oyesses, and was content to bide by the Execution so amen∣ded, and that the Executions did bear the words, Thee Oyesses, which wanted but the Letter R, to make the Oyesses▪ three Oyesses, Vid. July 28. 1671. Sir John Keith contra Sir George Johnston; and July 11. 1676. Stevson contra Innes. It may be  whether the Tenor of such Letter may be proven, if there  other Adminicles in writ, since even Pa∣pers of the greatest mportance may be thus proven by witnesses, and there is no Paper whereof the Tenor may not be proven, nor is the proving of a Tenor here discharged, and if the Letters of
Horning and Executions be Registrat, the Registration takes both off the Suspicion of Falshood, and makes the witnesses who are to Depone know what Solemnities were used; but yet it will never appear by the Registrat Extract, whether the Executions were stamped, and yet this point being sacti, may likewise seem to be probable by witnesses who saw the same stamped. In the case be∣twixt Boyd and Malloch, December 19. 1677. The Lords inclined to think, that even Executions of Hornings being once perfected by writ, and thereafter lost, might have their Tenor proven, though by this Act it would not be originally proven, that Letters of Horning were execute, but they were all clear that this Act was siricti juris, and did not extend to Executions of Comprizings; and therefore they found that the Tenor of such Executions might be proven. Nota, That a Registrat Extract will not stop a Certification when a Horning and its Executions are call'd for, but the principal must be produc'd. The Parliament having ordain'd that the witnesses to be used for proving the Tenor of the Executions should be led in the Lords own presence. It may be urg'd argumento ujus legis, that witnesses for proving of all Tenors, should be led in praesentia, and which is ve∣ry reasonable, because proving of Tenors is nobilis officij, & altissimae in daginis. It is likewise observable in this Case, that though the Parlia∣ment made an Act for regulating that point for the future; yet they left the Decision of the Case depending to the Common Law. IT is fit to know that there being a Staple appointed where all Staple Goods to be brought from Scotland,ACT 95. are declared free of all Custome laid upon Imported Goods, which was a very great fa∣vour. It was therefore very just that no Merchant should have li∣berty to enjoy the priviledges of the said Staple, except he would give his Oath of obedience to the King, and pay his entry in that Incorporation. This and the subsequent Act are still in observance, and the Conservator uses to raise general Letters against such as break the same, by warrand from the Council who are the ordi∣nary Judges in these cases, except where matter of privat right falls in.
King JAMES the sixth, Parliament 7. BY the old Canons all ordinations were null wherein the per∣sons ordain'd was not intitled to a certain Church,ACT 100. Can-Sanctorum distinct. 70. and thence it was that all Ministeria vaga, wherein a man was ordain'd a Minister, without re∣spect to any particular Church or charge, were discharg'd by our Church, though in the Lateran Council thereafter the ordination was allow'd, but the Bishop who ordain'd was oblig'd to Aliment the Church-man ordain'd, without a suitable living. By this Act Paroches are to be design'd and circumscrib'd, and every Paroch to have its own Stipend and Pastor, but this quota was not determin'd till the Commission of surrender of Teinds in anno 1627. determin'd that the lowest proportion of a Ministers Stipend should be 8 Chalders of Victual, or 800 Merks, which Act is thereafter Ratified by the 8 Act of the Par. 1633. It is also provided by this Act, that all Kirks annext to Bishop∣ricks be provided to Ministers, and when the Title of any Prelacy is conferr'd on any, that the said Stipend be reserv'd, the reason whereof was, that the Pope us'd to unite Parochs and Benefices to Bishopricks, upon pretext of the meanness of Bishopricks; and there∣fore in the beginning of the Reformation, when Titular Bishops were made, it was thought just that these Parochs should be again provided with special Ministers. We call him a Titular who has the Title of a Benefice, & qui est in Titulo, and thus the Seculars who had right to the Teinds due formerly to the Church, are call'd the Titulars of the Teinds, and by the old Canons it is clear; that quaedam beneficia a titulo pendent quaedam a reditu, and these Tithes are in the Ecclesiastick History said to have had their Origine, either ab intitulatione in Codicem & matriculam cujuslibet Ecclesiae un de intitulari dicebantur in Canon. San∣ctorum, distinct. 70. or from the old custome of fixing upon the Altars or Churches the Titles of these who were presented to it: some also think that most Offices in the Church had their denominations from the Offices in the State and Army, there being an Analogy inter militiam armatam & Coelestem, and that there were Titulars allow'd in the one as in the other, vid. Bengaeum de titulis beneficiorum, cap. 1. It is clear by the said Canon. Sanctorum distinct. 70. that singula beneficia certo loco & Ministerio circumscripta erant, as in this Act of Parliament. BY this Act it is not lawful for any who are provided to Bene∣fices under Prelacies, to dilapidat their Benefices.ACT 101. That is
to say; to set them with diminution of the Rental which they pay∣ed at their entry; and if the Minister contraveen, he is to be de∣prived, and the right to be null. But by the 11 Act, Par. 10 Ja. 6. All Rights made by Prelats with diminution of the Rental, are null, and the conversion of Victual payable to them into Money, be∣low the worth, is by that Act declared a diminution; they are also thereby ordained to find Caution not to dilapidat the Benefices. Like∣as by the Act 3 Par. 18 Ja. 6. the dismembering any part of the Bene∣fice, is declared a species of diminution, and so null. It has been justly doubted whether a Bishop obtaining certification in an im∣probation whereby the Land returned to the Bishoprick might thereafter dispone these Lands by a new right; and it has been de∣cided that this was no dilapidation, if given for the same Rental or Feu Duty they payed before the Act 1606. for such certifications being frquent, and the design of these certifications being only to force the Feuers to produce, it were hard to extend them, espe∣cially since the design of these Acts is only to hinder the Bene∣ficed Persons to diminish the Rental and value of them the time of their entry, 27 January, 1676. Bishop of Caithness contra his Vas∣sals. It seems that there is eadem ratio for sustaining Rights by the Successor of that Beneficed Person who obtained the certification, though it may be alledg'd against him that he is oblidg'd to leave the Benefice in as good a condition as he found it: It may be al∣ledg'd that the same reason should sustain Rights made by Beneficed Persons who have obtained Reduction, ob non solutum Canonem. These Acts are so comprehensive, that the Act 5 Par. 22 Ja. 6, seems unnecessary. ACT 112.BY this Act if any man was rob'd by any of a Clan, he may kill or arrest any of that Clan, if it be found by a legal Tryal that the Clan'd man who did the injury, was harbour'd amongst the Clan, after the Injury was committed; But though this seems as just as Letters of Reprysal are, yet it is now in Desuetude just∣ly, for crimina suos tenent authores. ACTS 113, 114.THese two Sumptuary Laws are in Desuetude; But in the Act 113, a case is observable, wherein even the Kings Licence for Transporting wool is not to be respected, but is to be esteemed sur∣reptitious. ACT 115.THis Act seems strangely insert here, since Popery was abolisht long before this Act. ACT 117.VId. observ. on Act 77 Par. 6 Ja. 6.
BY this Act all actions of Deforcement, and breaking of Arrestment,ACT 118. are ordain'd to be summarly discust by the Lords without delay, and therefore they might have been excepted from the order of the Roll set down in the late Act of Regulati∣ons, but yet they are not, for they must abide the Order of the Roll, as other actions, and all the priviledge that they have quoad this, is that, they come in upon six days warning, and need not be continued, that is to say, they have but one Diet. It is fit to know that these Actions may be pursu'd Civi∣ly or Criminally, and the punishment is Confiscation of Move∣ables, and an arbitrary punishment of their person. Observ. 1. That the Creditors injur'd by the breaking of the arrestment, are to be prefer'd to the Fisk, the Reasons whereof was, that it seem'd unjust that a Creditor doing Diligence, for his own Debt should be disappointed by his own Diligence, as he would certainly be, if when he had pursu'd, and prevail'd in his Action for breaking of Arrestment, that the parties Escheat falling by this Diligence, the King should be prefer'd to the User of the Diligence, and we see likewise in all such cases the party offend∣ed is still prefer'd to the Fisk; and thus where parties are at the Horn for a Civil Debt, the Donatar of the Escheat is still lyable for the Debt: And in Theft by Act of Parliament, the party injured is prefer'd to the Fisk, but it seems strange, why by this Act the Gift of Escheat is declar'd null if it be not expresly bur∣dened with the Creditors Debt. It might seem more convenient that the Gift should rather have been burdened with it, as in other cases. Observ. 2. Though by this Act it be declar'd that the Debt shall be pay'd out of the Offenders Moveables, yet that does not hin∣der the party offended to do Diligence against the offenders real Estate, for what sums the Lords shall modifie. Observ. 3. That Arrestments may be made, not only in the hands of these who owe any thing to the Debitor; But Arrest∣ments may be even made in the Debitors own hands, which though it may seem strange, yet it is done to the effect, that if the Debitor shall be found to have alienated any of his Moveables so arrested after the arrestment is laid on, he may be pursu'd for breaking of Arrestment, and punished conform to this Act. These Arrestments are used in the same sence, and are execute in the same way that we use them, and all this Subject is very well treated by Christin. Tit. 3. ad leges Mechlin. Argent Tit. des ar∣rest. 8. BY the Civil Law prodigals (under which Name were com∣prehended all such as manag'd not well their affairs) gotACT 119▪
Curators only by a Judge; But with us they are Interdicted (and their Interdicters are their Curators) and that either judicially, or by consent, but though it may seem that if a man Interdict him∣self, he cannot Reduce that Interdiction, because he has consent∣ed; Nor yet should Obligations granted by him, be sustained, though he be thereafter found by the Lords to have been provident since the publication did put all in mala fide, to Contract with him; yet Papers granted by him will be sustain'd on that head, and even the Interdiction it self will be Reduc'd as contrary to na∣tural liberty, the Granter being mentis compos & rei suae satis pro∣vidus; And there having no precognition preceeded, December 4. 1623. Gerhan contra Hay. February 1. 1633. Forbes contra Forbes, which leaves the people in great uncertainty; and it seems much better that voluntar Interdictions were absolutely taken away; Though I believe voluntar Interdictions have been intro∣duc'd amongst us for preservation of ancient Families (for they extend not to secure Moveables, or against personal Execution) and it was found that many weak persons would consent to a vo∣luntar restraint, who would not compear Judicially to be restrain∣ed; and the Letters of Publication passing upon a Bill by De∣liverance of the Lords of Session, seems to be a kind of interpo∣sing of the Authority of a Judge, and so to make the voluntar In∣terdiction a Judicial Interdiction: But the Narrative of this Act confesses that Interdictions upon consent, are beyond the first de∣sign of the Law. It is observable, 1o. That Interdictions need not be Intimated to the party Interdicted, or execute against him, December 11. 1622. Seaton contra Elleis. Though Inhibitions must be execute against the person Inhibited; The reason of which difference is, because the person interdicted having consented, there needs no in∣timation be made to him. Obs. 2o. The Stile in all such Letters, is ordinarly the rule of all De∣cisions upon them; and yet interdictions were found not to an∣nul moveable Bonds, though the Letters did discharge the grant∣ing such Bonds, and that because Interdictions do naturally strick only against alienation of Heretage; Our Law thinking Moveables of lesser importance, or else because that would stop Commerce, and straiten too much the person Interdicted, July 11. 1634. Bruce contra Forbes. June 20. 1671. Cranford contra Hamilton. And though an inhibition did expresly discharge the granting of Renun∣ciations; Yet a Renunciation of a Wodset was not Reduc'd, as granted after Inhibition, since the Wodset was prior, and so the Re∣nunciation by the person Inhibited, depended upon a prior Obliga∣tion, July 16. 1667. Elleis contra Keith. But by a late Act of Se∣derunt, the 9 of February 1680. It is declar'd, that if the User of an Inhibition shall intimat to the person who has Right to the Re∣version, that the Wodsetter or Annualrenter stands Inhibited at their instance, and shall produce the said Inhibition, duly Regi∣strated at the time when he intimats, that then the Renunciation,
or grant of Redemption, though proceeding upon true payment, shall not be sustained without Citing the Inhibiter. There were no formal Inhibitions in the Civil Law, but the Doctors speak of a prohibitio alienationis equivalent thereto, Mvius de Arrest. c. 9. num. 25. Arrestari possunt res moiles immbilium supervacanum est ar∣restum cum loco moveri non possunt ejus tamen vice quoad illas obtinet pro∣hibitio alienationis quae impetrari solet a judice quoties justus metus est ne alienando debitor deteriorem reddat petitoris causam essicitque ut non iat alienatio ipsius rei & num. 29. Judex ob aequitatem talem Inhibi∣tionem decernere debet & num. 32. pro arresto habetur in immobilibus interdictio usus corum, so that Interdictions and Inhibitions are a re∣semblance, if not a species of Arrestments, and I think with Mae∣vius, that the word comes from the Greek  placitum incorruptum vel inviolatum, because by all these remedies the obtainers rights are preserv'd inviolable. Inhibitions have their Origine from the Ca∣non Law, whereby if the Secular Judge did interpose in any thing that was Ecclesiastick, the Ecclesiastick Judge did Inhibite him to proceed: And Inhibitions are mentioned, cap. causam Ext. qui sil. sint legit. cap. tuam Ext. de ord. cognit. and with us they were first used in the matter of Teinds in the same sense; but now the word is extended to Letters, whereby the Judge inhibits debitors to sell in prejudice of Creditors. The publication of Interdictions comes not from the Canon Law, but from the French, where it is necessary that they be published in Paraeciâ & Mercatu, as with us, Vid. Argent. tit. des Mineurs, Art. 492. where he likewise determines, that if a third party knew of the Interdiction, either by being a Witness, or by a privat Inti∣mation made to himself, that any right made to him would be null; with us also the raising of an Inhibition upon a Bond of Interdicti∣on was found equivalent to a publication; the design of the Let∣ters of Publication being only to put the Lieges in malâ side, 10 November, 1676. Stewart contra Hay of Gourdie, where it was like∣wie found that the person Interdicted might after Interdiction sell his Land notwithstanding thereof to a third party, if the Bargain was profitable, and that without the consent of the Interdicters: but in that case the Bond of Interdiction was many years kept up, and the Inhibition thereupon was never execute till about the very time the communing begun for sale of the Interdicted persons Lands. Observ. 3. That albeit all Inhibitions and Interdictions are to be Registrated by this Act within 40 days; yet Inhibitions for Teinds need not to be Registrat, for an Inhibitions for Teinds is but in effect a Summonds or Warrand discharging the Party to lead, but not discharging third Parties to buy, and so needs not be Regi∣strated. Obs. 4. That though by this Act they are to be null if they be not Registrat in the Sheriffs Register, yet by 264 Act Par. 15 Ja. 6. It is sufficient to Registrat them in the Registers of Stewards, or Lords of Regalitie within which they dwell; and now they may be Re∣gistrat
in the general Register at Edinburgh, which is not here men∣tion'd, because it was not extant the time of this Act and Registra∣tion in the general Register at Edinburgh, is allow'd by the 13 Act Par. 16. Ja, 6. Observ. 5. Whereas this Act appoints them to be Registrat with∣in 40 days after the publication; it is doubted whether the day whereupon the Letters were execute, or Registrat, is to be numbered amongst the 40 days. But by the late Decisions it is found sufficient that either of these days be free. Nota, Inhibitions prescrive from the last Execution, but not from the date of the Registration, for Actions might have been intented upon them before Registration, 19 February, 1680. Lutesoot contra Glencorse. ACT 119.THis Act appointing such as are absent from the Convention of Burrows to be fyn'd, and that upon their Acts the Lords of Session grant Letters of Horning, &c. is in observance, except in so far as these Letters are ordain'd to pass at the instance of the Burgh of Edinburgh, for by an unprinted Act of Parliament, 1607. Exe∣cution is allow'd to pass at the instance of the Agent of the Bur∣rows, and the Letters are now still raised in his name. This Act ordains the Burrows to be cited to their General Con∣vention by a Missive Bill, but this is now done by a Missive Letter, in which the chief Articles on which they are to treat, are exprest, to the end they may consult on them with their Constituents, and these are call'd the Heads of the Missive, but this excludes them not from consulting on new Emergents, which could not have been foreseen. ACT 120.THat part of this Act which discharges the conducting and fraughting any strangers to the Isles, under the pain of tinsel of Life, Lands, or Goods, is in Desuetude. ACT 121.BY this Act Lords of Regality, and Magistrats of Burrows are ap∣pointed to set prices upon all Stuffs, but that part of the Act appointing such Magistrats and Judges as are negligent herein to be punished at Justice Airs, or Courts, is not now observed; and yet that would not defend such as might be pannel'd upon this ac∣count; for the negligence of Judges should not defend them, see∣ing that would invite them to be negligent: ACT 123.THis Act appointing the shooters with Guns to be punished, is not in Desuetude, but is seldome put in execution; and it was thought that Fowlers had prescrived an exemption against it, shooting being their Trade, and their design is not lyable to these suspitions for which the carrying Guns is discharged by this Act, but yet since by a Proclamation 9 June, 1682. Fowlers are discharg∣ed to use Guns, and Setting Dogs, it seems this favourable con∣struction ceases, and the bearing such prohibited Weapons is still
sustained as the aggravation of other Crimes, but is not so sustain'd as that it takes off the strength of a defence that would be otherwise relevant; and thus Nicolson being Pannel'd for Murther, 24 June, 1673. alledg'd that whilst he was strugling his Gun went off, without any accession of his, which defence of his was sustain'd, though it was reply'd, that carrying of Guns was unlawful in a per∣son of his quality, and so versabatur in illicito & exillicito nunquam exculpatio. THough this Act prohibits the carrying Nolt and Sheep out of the Countrey, yet it is now allowed,ACT 124. and they pay Custome to his Majesty, for though before the Countrey was fully labou∣red and plenished with these, it was fit to keep them in the Countrey. yet now the Countrey would be too much burden'd with them if they were not exported. BY this Act whosoever renders the King's Castles for Money,ACT 125. are made lyable to repetition, and it is declared that their Heirs shall be lyable, which last is the speciality for which this Act was necessary, since the persons who received the Money were there∣by lyable to restore, and yet before this Act Heirs were not lyable by our Law, since the Crime was extinguished by Death, and thus in Crimine repetundarum repetitio ad Haeredes extendit, l. 2. ff. h. t. na turpe lucrum ab Haeredibus extorqueri debet licet crimina morte extin∣guantur, l. 5. ff. de Calum. THat mixing of Wines is justly by this Act made Criminal,ACT 126. and declared a point of Dittay, and this is by Carpzov, Tit. Fals. and other Lawyers declared to be a species of Falshood, and to be pu∣nishable as such. King James the sixth, Parliament 8. BY this Act as by all the Acts of this Parliament, King James endeavoured to curb the insolence of such Ministers as be∣ing dissatisfied with Episcopacy,ACT 129. became very seditious and turbulent; for at this time Spotswood's History tells us, that there being a Convention of Estates holden by King James, the Ministers of Edinburgh, and others desired that nothing might pass concerning the Church, till they were heard; and Mr. Pont, pro∣tested against the Proclamation of these Acts, and by this Act such as decline the Kings Council, and refuse to be judged by them in any matter whatsoever, of whatever degree or Function they be,
are declared guilty of Treason. This Act was occasioned by their frequent declining of the Council, upon pretext that the Council were not Judges competent in prima instantia, to what was preach∣ed by Ministers, and particularly by Mr. Andrew Meldrums De∣clinator; and upon this Act Mr. James Gutherie was Convict of Treason, for declining the King and his Council at Stirling in anno 1651. and was execute therefore in anno 1662. This Opinion the Presbyterians did borrow from the Romih Church, who make Ecclesiastick persons only Judges in the first in∣stance, to what is spoke or written by Church-men, and after they have found them guilty, then they deliver them over brachio secu∣lari; For understanding these Exemptions that are claim'd by Church-men from the Civil Jurisdiction of Laicks; it is fit to know that the King, Deut. chap. 17. vers. 18. is commanded to write the Law, and that David, Solomon, Joash and others did Reform the Priests and others serving at the Altar, and judg'd their misdemea∣nours, in imitation of whom Constantin the Great; Theodosiu, and the first Christian Emperours did regulat the Clergy, and judge Crimes till Arcudius and Honorius, did by an express Law, ordain quoties de religione agitur Episcopos judicare, caeteras vero causas qua ad ordinarios cognitores vel ad usum publici juris pertinent legibus oporlet audiri, which were just marches betwixt the Secular and Civil powers: But Justinian at the instance of Menna, Patriarch of Constantinople, did in the thirteenth year of his Reign, by his 123. Novel. ordain that Church-men should be only conveenable in Ci∣vil Cases before their Bishops; and as to Criminal Cases, that they should be only conveenable before their Bishops in Ecclesias∣tick Crimes, Civil Crimes being cognosced by the Judge as for∣merly. From these beginnings did arise the vast pretensions of Church-men, whereby they endeavoured to decline the Civil Judge in all Cases, as well Civil as Criminal, in the first Instance, and to that hight that Panor in. c. novit. 13. Decret. Greg. de Judiciis & in c. causam 4. Decret. Greg. qui filii sint legit, asserts that both the Jurisdictions Spiritual and Temporal belongs to the Pope, which was first check'd by Peter Cogniers, the Learn'd Advocat of Philip 4. King of France 1329. It is Declar'd by the 114. Act 12 Par. Ja. 6. That this Act shall not prejudge the Spiritual Office-bearers, as to the power of Excommunication, Collation, or other essential Church-Censures. ACT 130.THis Act declaring that such as shall impugn the Authority of the three Estates, or shall seek or procure the Innovations or Diminution of their Power or Authority, to be Treason, was occasioned by such as endeavoured at that time to exclude Bishops from the Parliament, of which they were, and are the third Estate, and it is observable, both by the Narrative and Statutory part of
this Act, that the designing to exclude one of the three Estates, was the chief design of the Act, though such as impugn the power of the Parliament in general, so far as relates to Cases Spiritual, do likewise commit Treason; and as in the former Act, the contro∣verting of the power of the Council, is declared Treason; so in this Act, the controverting the power of the Parliament, is much more Treasonable; and yet it is controverted, whether the deny∣ing any Branch of the Parliaments power be Treasonable, such as is the quarrelling the Power or Constitution of the Articles; or whether the Subjects may appeal from the Session to the Parlia∣ment? Or if the Parliament has power to Reduce their Sentences past in foro? In all which, the Parliaments Authority may be alleadg'd not to be controverted; but the question seems to reach only to the controverting, its fundamental powers, and if such Cases as these were Treasonable, the people might be discouraged to enquire even into what were otherways lawful; and whatever may be said against such Debaits, when they are meerly factious, and officiously mov'd, and prosecuted by such as have no interest; yet such Debates in Parliament may be alleadg∣ed not Treasonable by the 40 Act 11 Par. Ja. 6. and the votes of Parliament are likewise by this Act declar'd to be free Votes. As to all which, I shall only say that these and such cases, are to be deter∣termin'd by the respective Circumstances; and therefore it is still safer, not to approach too near those Rocks, on which we may splite. THis Act declares the Convocating all Councils, Conventions or Assemblies, Civil or Ecclesiastick,ACT 131. to be punishable by the pains enacted against such as Convocat the Kings Lieges, and it was occasioned by the unlawful Church-assemblies, holden at that time in opposition to Episcopacy, and by the 4 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. This Act is Ratified, and all such Convocations declared pu∣nishable, though it be pretended by such as hold them, that they design nothing but the good of King and Kingdom; which De∣claration was there made to condemn the false pretences of our late Rebellion. IT is observable from this Act, that the being once or twice drunk,ACT 132. is not a sufficient reason for deprivation of a Minister▪ for the Act requires common Drunkenness, and deprives ebriosum sed non ebrium. Observ. 2o. That though this Act say, That none residence for the space of four Sabbaths, without the allowance of the Ordinary shall be cause of Deprivation; Yet though there be no express allowance, the None-residence will be no reason of Deprivation, if the reason was sufficient, and the Ordinary could not be had, as the Common Law decides in this case.
None-residence is a Cause of Deprivation by the Canon Law, Decret. Greg. de Praeb. cap. 17. and Franciscus Forrensis has writ a Learn'd Treatise, proving the necessity of Residence to be juris divini. The Civil Law had formerly required Residence from Church-men, Nov. 6. cap. 2. & 123. cap. 9. except where they had liber∣ty from the Emperour, and thus with us the King only may dis∣pense with None-residence. Observ. 3o. That plurality of Benefices having Cure, is a suf∣ficient Reason of Deprivation, which is consonant to cap. adhaec. 13. de Praebend; But exception is made, where one is not able to entertain the Incumbent, vid. Alphons. Hoieda de compa∣tibilitate beneficiorum. The Pope might dispense, so now may the King. Observ. 4o. That by this Act Commissioners to be appointed by the King, are to have power of depriving Ministers, which is abro∣gated by the first Act 12 Par. Ja. 6. ACT 133.THough this Act declares that Ministers who exerce, or officiat as Notars, shall be depriv'd, yet it does not expresly annul the Writ; and therefore a Contract of Marriage Subscrived by a Minister in place of a Notar, was the 12 of July 1631. Hassington con, Bartilme Sustained, though it was found that the Ministers was thereby deprivable. This Act discharging Ministers to be Judges, was made to ex∣clude Mr. Pont, who was then Lord of the Session: for after the Reformation, Ministers came in place of the Ecclesiastick Lords, and though they pretend now that Bishops should not sit in Civil Judicatures, yet they desir'd to be there. ACT 134.BY this Act the uttering of slanderous and un-true Speeches, to the contempt of His Majesty, His Councils Proceedings, and Progenitors, is declar'd punishable, as Leasing-making; and Lea∣sing-making is punished with tinsel of Life and Goods, by the 43 Act Par. 2 Ja. 1. Vid. Act 83 Par. 6 Ja. 5. Vid. etiam tit. Cod. si quis imperatori maledixerit: For such slanderous Speeches, the party is sometimes only Banish'd or Scourg'd, as Tweedie was, March 13. 1612. But one Fleeming was hang'd for saying that he wish'd the King would shoot to dead, May 15. 1615. Spoeswood Re∣lates that this Act was occasioned by Pamphlets and Preachings af∣ter Gourie's Execution. Observ. 2o. That all the Subjects are Discharg'd to medle in His Highnesses Affairs, or in the Affairs of His Estate, that is to say, to make inquiry curiously into what His Majesty, or His Council does, for that is presum'd to be done malo animo: And in all ages such curiosity has been punish'd. Thus Augustus kill'd Panarus velti curiosum Sueton. cap. 27. and Plut. l. de curios. Observes that
the Locrenses fin'd such curious persons, Vid. Langl. l. 8 Semestr. c. 11. who Treats on these Crimes Learnedly. BY this Act, no Sentence of Forfalture for Treason,ACT 135▪ committed against the King and his Estate, can be quarrelled upon Nulli∣ty of Process, till the Crime for which the Forefalture was led be pardoned. Observ. 1. That since this Act speaks only of Crimes committed against the King and His Estate, it has been doubted, whether this Act can be extended to Treason, meerly committed against the Kings Person; for by the Kings Estate is ordinarly mean'd His Pre∣rogative and Majesty. Observ. 2. That that part of the Act which Discharges Advocats to plead, or consult for any person, who stands forefalted, is abro∣gated, Act 38, and Act 39 Par. 11 Ja. 6. But yet none use to plead for forefalted persons, till they get a Licence from the Judge before whom the Tryal is to be. There was a Commission granted to consider what nullities could be objected against Swintons Forfalture, and it was alleadg'd that the Decreet was null by intrinsick nullities, in substantial points, and so the Commissioners might proceed, since this Act was only to be in∣terpreted of Formalities, and alleadg'd nullities, which could not be instantly prov'd, or did not appear by the Decreet it self, yet they would not proceed, because the forefalture was not, nor could be purg'd, and the Crime was notour. THis Act declaring all Remissions for Slaughter, Fire raising,ACT 136. and other odious Crimes to be null, is suitable to Stat. Dav. 2. cap. 50. and Act 7. Par. 3. Ja. 5. But this Act is thought Tem∣porary, as is likewise Act 63 Par. 6 Ja. 4. and notwithstanding of these Acts, His Majesties Remissions for such Crimes has been oft sustain'd, vid. crim. pract. Tit. Remissions. THis Act is in Desuetude, for His Majesties Guards are paid out of the Excise;ACT 137. and I find this Act formerly establish'd by an Act of Council. THis Act is fully Explained, crim. tit. Murder.ACT 138. BY this Act Decreets of the Lords of Session are discharged to be Suspended without Consignation, but this being in Desuetude,ACT 139. it is by the Regulations, Article 19. appointed, that Decreets in foro shall not be Suspended without Consignation, or by the whole Lords in time of Session, or by three Lords in time of Vacance. It may be doubted what this Act means, in appointing Letters of Poynding, as well as Horning to pass, not only for liquid Sums, but where the execution consists in facto, since poynding can only be for a liquid Sum. To which it may be answer'd, that the meaning of the words are, that poynding may be allow'd, though the Obligation was not originally for a liquid Sum, but ad factum praestandum; but it is necessary in that case, that the effect should be thereafter liqui∣dat
by a Sentence, else there could be no commensuration, and so no poynding; and yet I cannot deny but the Clause is ill exprest. ACT 140.THis Act appointing that the Defender shall find Caution to en∣ter the Justice-Court, but in sober manner, is now in De∣suetude, there being no such Clause either in the Letters, or any such Caution found, but though the Justices allows some Friends to enter the Pannel with the Defender, yet these must be very few, and disarmed. ACT 141.THis Act appointing that Salmond, Herring, and White Fish shall be only sold at the Staple here related is in Desuetude, and though the Town of Aberdene has their own Gadges of Salmond conform to this Act, yet the Town of Edinburgh pretend a right to be the sole Gadgers of Salmond in all Scotland, by vertue of a Gift from King Charles the First, which Gift the Town of Aberdene have suspended upon this Act; and this Act in so far as it appoints Her∣ring and White Fish to be brought to Leith, and Crail, is expresly abrogated by the 14 Act, Par. 10 Ja. 6. ACT 142.THis Act is explained in the Observations upon the 75 Act, 6 Par. Ja. 6. King IAMES the sixth, Parliament 9. ACT 1.THis Act was introduced to correct an ill custome which had crept in at the Reformation, whereby the Popish Prelate finding that they were to be put out, did demit their Benefices in favours of these with whom they entered in a compact, and by vertue of which compact they reserved to them∣selves their own Liferents; Likeas, according to the Con Law, Si quis resignaverit beneficium retentis sibi fructibus pro per si ne non valet resignatio nam decet quod ipse qui Altari servit de Altari; vivat, cap. cum secundum 16 de prab. And in reason it must be concluded that the Be∣nefices must be ill served when these who resign reserve their own Liferent, for he who serves will have nothing in that case, and he who serves not ought to have nothing: Therefore by this Act all such compacts are declared null, and it is declared, that for the fu∣ture all Rights to be made to Prelacies shall be null, except the places be vacant by decease, forfalture, or simple dimission of him who pos∣sest the same formerly; nor doth the King now accept of any di∣mission or resignation in favours of any other party, for that is a real invasion upon His Royal Power, by which he dispones upon all Offices according to his free will. ACT 2▪WHen persons are forfeited, they or their Children use to ab∣stract the Evidents of their Land, and therefore by the first part of this Act, it is declared that the King or his Donatar
shall have right to all Lands, &c. peaceably possessed by the fore∣feited person, for the space of 5 years preceeding the forfeiture. Observ. 1. That this priviledge holds only in cases of Treason, but not where his Majesty comes to have right by any other Title, and it may be debated if this should hold where the forfeiture pro∣ceeds upon all the Laws whereby any Crime is ordained to be pu∣nished as Treason, but it is not declared to be Treason, such as Theft in Landed Men, &c. for it would appear that this priviledge was only granted where the Crime is declared to be Treason; but yet since these Crimes are punished as Treason, this Act should ex∣tend even to these, for the presumptions inductive of this Act, viz▪ that they will abstract their Evidents, holds even in this case, and it cannot be deny'd but these persons are forfeited as Traitors. Observ. 2. That this right introduced in favours of the King, seem to be only presumptive, so that if any Party should show a Back-band from the forfeited person who was 5 years in possession, the person to whom the same was granted, or any who could in∣struct a better right, might pretend to exclude the Donatar, even as a Church-man who was decennalis & triennalis possessor, might be ex∣cluded upon a better right, or by proving that the Church-man pos∣sessed only by a tolerance, but yet this presumption may be answe∣red to be juris & de jure, and so to exclude all better rights, & si∣bi imputent, who having such rights, suffered the forfeited person for 5 years to possess without any interruption, and if such competi∣tions were allow'd, the King's right might be eluded by an hundred contrivances; and though this Act may seem to be useless now, since the Registration of Writs, which hinders Writs to be abstracted, yet that was repelled 23 and last of July, 1666. Earl of Southesk against the Marquess of Huntley; but by the 4 Act, Par. 18. Ja. 6. It is de∣clared that Extracts of Rights, either disponed or confirmed by his Majesty shall be valid, though the principles cannot be produced, and yet if King and Parliament pleased, this Act might suffer some correction, because his Majesty is much better secur'd now by Regi∣strations than he was at the making of this Act. Observ. 3. That since this Act appoints this quinquennial possessi∣on to be proven only by the Retour of an Inquest, it was therefore well found that it could not be proven by exception, 13 June, 1666. Home contra Tennents of Kello and Home. Yet though there be not a Retour already made, the Lords will superceed extracting that betwixt and such a time the quinquennial possession may be re∣toured, as was found in that case. Observ. 4. That the possession condescended on in the Act is where the forfeited persons were 5 years in possession by labouring the same with their own Goods, setting the same to Tennents, or uplifting the Mails and Duties, so that it would seem that these kinds of possessions are requisite in this case, and that the Act of Parliament hath required them, because they are palpable; and therefore civil possession per constitutum, by reservation, receiving of Annualrent from Principal or Cautioners, not relative to the In∣feftment
of Annualrent, but to the Bond or otherwayes seen not sufficient by the words of this Act, Observ. 5. That since this Act is founded upon uninterrupted pos∣session of the forfeited person, that therefore where there are inter∣ruptions; this holds not, and thus it was found that the raising of an Inhibition was a sufficient interruption, 23 July, 1666. Earl of Southesk con, Morquess of Huntly. By the second part of this Act it is appointed that where the for∣feited person was in possession of Lands, Tacks, or Teinds, &c. the time of the forfeiture, albeit he had not been in possession 5 years preceeding the Process or Sentence of the Forfaulter, yet the Assize must retour what the Rebel did possess the very time of the Pro∣cess or Sentence, and the King or his Donatar, is to be entered there∣to summarly, and cannot be removed for the space of 5 years, that in the mean time he may search and seek after the Rebels Rights, for he cannot be presum'd to know quo jure the Rebel possest; and albeit it may seem both by reason and by this Act, that this should only hold where acks or previous possession, though somewhat shorter than 5 years, by vertue of a right, could be proven, yet the Lords found that this part of the Act holds even where no right could be shown, if the forfaulted person was in possession, though for never so short a time; and it being alledged that these 5 years in this last part of the Act should be counted from the time of the forfaulter, and not from the time that the Donatar en∣ters to possession, for else he might by lying out prejudge the Cre∣ditors. The Lords found that if the Rents were extant, he had right thereto from the date of the forfaulture, though prior to his possession, 24 January, 1667. Home contra the Tennents of Kello: But that case being a competition betwixt the Donatar and an Ap∣pryzer from the Rebel, the Lords found the Donatar might sum∣marly redeem the Appryzer, and enter in possession, ibidem. ACT 3.THe reason upon which this Act is founded, is, that when any person raises a multiple poynding, the party who is troubled by many who pretend Right, ought to be secur'd when he pays to that person who prevails nam res judicata pro veritate habetur, and he payes authore praetore, and though Minors have by the Ci∣vil Law and ours, a double remedy, if their Tutors and Curators suffer a Decreet to pass against them for not compearance, viz. That he may either reduce the Sentence, or pursue the Curators for damnage and interest, in suffering the Decreet for no compear∣ance to go against them; yet in this Act it is declar'd, that if a Ma∣jor who compeats with a Minor in a multiple poynding, be pre∣fer'd to the minor, because of the Minors not compearance in that case, the minor has only action against his Tutors and Curators, but cannot Reduce the Decreet of preference, but if the Minor have no Curators, it is declar'd he shall be restor'd as accords of the Law, that is to say, he may reduce the Decreet, since in this case he has no other remedy, but if the Decreet of preference be quar∣rellable for any error in the execution, or if the party absent can
show a necessary reason for his absence, then the Decreet is quar∣rellable, either by Majors or Minors; yet the Lords found that payment bona fide, conform to this Act, does secure the Payer, not only against the principal Competers, but against their As∣signeys, November 24. 1676 Weir contra the Earl of Callender; but it has been debated whether the party who has been prejudg'd by the Decreet of multiple poynding, may be Repon'd against the same, by way of Suspension; or if a Reduction be necessary, and it has been found, February 1 1670. Watson contra Sympson, that a De∣creet of multiple poynding, obtain'd against the party, could not be taken away without Reduction at the parties Instance; nor was a Suspension at the Tennents Instance sufficient, because the Narrative of this Act bears expresly That the parties used to crave to be reponed, by intenting Reduction; and that the party who ob∣tains the Decreet, is by the Statutory part only oblig'd to answer in the second Instance, which the Lords found to be by way of Reduction; and from that Decision it is very clear, that these words, The second Instance in all Statutes, are only Interpret by the Lords, to be mean'd of Reduction, and not of Suspen∣sion. Observ. 1o. That the party absent will not be prejudg'd, if he have a necessary cause of his absence; for it were unjust to punish a man for what was not in his power; and yet by this Reserva∣tion, he who gets payment is still unsecure; but he who pays by vertue of the Decreet before Reduction be intented, can never be call'd in question. Observ. 2o. That the party prefer'd in the multiple poynding, is only thereby secure, as to the bygone profits which are paid, and so in effect facit tantum fructus consumptos suos; and if the sums be extant, unpaid to the party so prefer'd, he who had the best Right before the Decreet of multiple poinding, will still be prefer'd; and it seems by the words of the Act, that if the profits themselves be extant, the best Right will be prefer'd; for the words are, Nor yet shall have any Right to the bygone profits intro∣metted with. This is by the 19 Act Par. 10 Ja. 6. Declared only to be extend∣ed to such actions of multiple poinding, as were intented after this Act was made. THe first part of this Act dispensing with the not Sealing of such Papers as are to be Registrat,ACT 4. is explain'd in the 117 Act Par. 7 Ja. 5. and whereas this Act declares, that a Seasine is sufficient, if Subscriv'd before one Notar, and a reasonable number of Wit∣nesses, that reasonable number is understood to be two, though by a vulgar error it is believed, that a Seasine requires four Wit∣nesses; and now by constant custom, four Witnesses are always adhibit in Seasines, and by the 5 Act 3 Par. Ch. 2. their Subscrip∣tions are necessary.
ACT 7.BY this Act it is appointed, that all Kirk-lands set in Feu-ferm should be confirmed by the King, else they are null by way of exception. Observ. 1o. That though the Narrative of this Act bears, That all Feus and long Tacks set since the Year 1558. should have been Confirmed; yet the body of the Act does not declare, that long Tacks need to be Confirm'd; Vid. manticam de ambig. convent. lib. 5. Tit. 10. And Balfour relates Decisions bearing, That Tacks for three nineteen years are esteem'd as alienations, and so should be Confirm'd. Observ. 2o. This Act Declares, that of old all Kirk-lands should have been Confirmed by King or Pope; Yet the 187 Act Par. 13 Ja. 6. seems to insinuat, that neither Confirmation of Pope or King was necessary, but that the Kings consent was sufficient; and that therefore the Act does Statute, That no right can be quarrel∣led for want of Confirmation, where the King has consented un∣der the Privy Seal; but that the Kings Confirmation was ne∣cessary of old, is clear, R. M. lib. 2. c. 23. and the reason there given is, quia corum terrae sunt de eleemosyna Domini Regis, and being presum'd to have been given by the Kings, for praying for them, they should not be appropriat to another use, without their consent. Observ. 3o. That only Feus of Kirk-lands are ordain'd to be Confirm'd; and therefore the Lords inclin'd to think that Feus of Salmond Fishings set by Church-men, were not null, though not Confirm'd, and January 20. 1666. Rentoun contra Feuers of Col∣dinghame. The Lords found that Gifts of an Office of Forrestry, granted by Kirkmen, needed not be Confirmed, these not being properly Feus of Kirk-lands, ibid. THis Act Appoints that all Money and Victual assign'd to the Cap∣tains of the Kings Castles,ACT 8. and whereof they have been in pos∣session for five years, shall remain with them unquestionably, and this is like the Quinquennial Possession given to the King in cases of Forefalture. Nota, That the King has a Duty paid to him in Exchequer, cal∣led The Castle Wards, so call'd, because they are paid in forward∣ing or keeping His Castles, and he has no Right to them, but con∣stant payment, conform to the Exchequer Rolls; and therefore yearly the Sheriffs are charg'd with them, and they get Letters of Relief, and it was found in a case betwixt the Sheriff of Hadding∣toun and Sir John Nisbet, January 11. 1678. That the said Sir John had not prescriv'd an exemption as to these Castle Wards, neither against the King, nor Sheriff, though he had paid none for four∣ty years, since there were Letters of Relief yearly granted. 2o. It was alleadg'd, that his Lands of Dirletoun having come once in the
Kings hands, by Forefalture, and His Majesty having of new given them out, that Servitude was thereby extinguish'd since res sua ne∣mini servit, but was repell'd; because the King did of new only Dispone the said Lands, as when they fall in his hands by the Fore∣falture. King IAMES sixth, Parliament 10. MR. Nicol Dalgleish,ACT 10. and some other Presbyterian Mini∣sters, having reproached the King and His Government, this Act declaring slanderous Speeches and Writs, punish∣able by Death, as Sedition was made, and is more fully explain'd in the Act 134 Par. 8 Ja. 6. and in my crim. pract. tit. In∣juries. Observ. 1o. Sedition is a Name that receives different punish∣ments, according to its different Degrees of guilt; and therefore where it is destructive of the Kings Authority immediatly and de∣signedly, it is punishable by Death, as here, though l. 3. C. de seditiosis; the punishment of these, qui ejusmodi voces emiserunt, is more moderat; and as that Law well observes words spoke in civitatibus & tumultuosis clamoribus, are more punishable than the same expressions would be, if spoken in private places, or with∣out tumult; but yet by this Act, such seditious Speeches, whe∣ther spoken privately, or publickly, are punishable by Death. Observ. 2o That when His Majesties Advocat designs not to pursue the Authors of such Speeches to the Death, he Libels on∣ly that the Pannel did speak or write what tends to Reproach or Slander His Majesties Person, or to misconstruct his Proceedings, but not that they actually did so, and in that case the guilt infers only an arbitrary punishment according to the circumstances that attend the same. Observ. 3o. That though by this Act the Depraving His Maje∣sties Laws and Acts of Parliament, is declared punishable by Death as Sedition; yet all misconstructing Acts of Parliament, is not so punishable; and thus, though a Sheriff or other Judge would misinterpret a Law, so as to make it infer a higher mulct or penal∣ty than the Law design'd, that could not infer Sedition or Death, though it be likewise punishable; but the design of this Act is, to declare the depraving and misconstructing of Laws, so as there∣by to reproach the King or Government to be Sedition, and Spots∣wood tells us, pag. 243. That this Act was made for punishing these Ministers who had declaim'd against the Acts of the former imme∣diat Parliament, as destructive to their Discipline. Upon this Act the Lord Balmerino was found guilty in December 1634. for hav∣ing
dispersed a Petition that reflected upon the Government; in which Process, it being fully Debated that dolus malus should be found in such cases, where the design of defaming makes only the Crime; this was repelled, because where the words may of their own nature, move dislike of, and Sedition against the Go∣vernment, the design needs not be proved; for if the people be irritate, the Author ought to be punished, and this Law consi∣ders the effect, and not the design, and he ought to blame him∣self, who meddles in matters of Government without his Sphere. It was likewise alledged in this Process, that a Petition to the King Himself, could not be interpret a misconstructing; but this was also repell'd, because both by the Common Law and ours, it has been found, that great affronts have been put upon the Go∣vernment, by way of Supplication. Upon this Act also, Francis Tennent was found guilty in anno 1680. and Mr. Thomas Ross, in anno 1618. and the Earl of Argile, both in the Year 1662. and 1681. Observ. 4o. That in this Act mention is made of raising dislike betwixt His Highness, His Nobility and loving Subjects; which word Nobility was expresly put in by the Lord Hamilton and other Noblemen, who then turned out Captain James Steuart, against whom this Act was partly designed, whereas in the Act 134 Par. 8 Ja. 6. made the year before, by the said Captain James's influ∣ence, against slanderers, there is no mention made of the No∣bility, as is observed by Mr. Robert Macgil, in Balmerino's Pro∣cess. ACT 11.THis Act discharging all Dilapidations of Benefices, runs only in the words of the Act, against such as dilapidat Benefices, that are at His Majesties presentation; but yet de praxi, no Bene∣fices that are even at the presentation of Laick Patrons, or Eccle∣siastick Subjects can be dilapidated. Dilapidations of Benefices were formerly discharg'd by the 101 Act Par. 7 Ja. 6. but to elude that Act, Benefic'd persons us'd not to give down any of the Bolls payable to the Benefice, but to convert these Bolls in Money, and to make these who were lyable in payment, only lyable in very small prices, and therefore such Conversions are discharg'd by this Act; But it may be alleadg'd, that where the Conversion is for less than the present price, as Victual now gives, it is unlawful since that Conversion was unne∣cessary, and the Benefic'd person is prejudg'd, because if no such Conversion had been made, he had got the Bolls presently, which could have maintained him better than the small prices, which these Bolls were worth the time of the Conversion; and yet by our Decisions, the price that the Bolls gave the time of the Con∣version, are only considered, because both parties took their ha∣zard, and the price mentioned in the Conversion, is presum'd to be the full price, except it could be proven that the Victual gave
then greater prices for in antiquis, there can be no other probation, Vid. observ. upon the said 101 Act 7 Par. Ja. 6. BY this Act all Leagues and Bonds made amongst His Majesties Subjects, without his consent, are discharg'd.ACT 12. Observ. 1o. That though the Rubrick bears, that all such Bonds and Leagues are null; yet they are not expresly annulled in the bo∣dy of this Act, but they are expresly annull'd by the 4 Act Sess. 1 Par. 1 Ch. 2. Observ. 2so. That the punishment is not here exprest, but in ge∣neral, under the pain of being holden as movers of Sedition, and punished with all rigour; nor is it more special in the foresaid 4 Act Ch. 2. which I admire; but yet I think that such Bonds and Leagues are punishable by Death from the Words, all rigour, which may be very well extended to Death, especially in subje∣cto capaci, as Sedition is, for certainly some Seditions may be pu∣nish'd with Death, as we see in the first Act of this Parliament, and by this same Act, such Leagues are declar'd to be against all Law and Allegiance. Likeas by the 7 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. The Subjects are discharg'd to take or renew the Covenant, which is a Bond or League, upon their highest peril, and I wish the Act had determined what was the highest peril, for generally Lawyers do not extend such Statutes to Death. I find that the Nobility and others having enter'd into Bonds amongst themselves, whereupon His Majesty was surpriz'd at Ruth∣ven, there are several Acts of Council, and particularly a Pro∣clamation, issu'd out in April 1582. discharging all such Bonds so enter'd into, and that none enter into such Bonds for the future, and that gave occasion to this Act, which says, that these Bonds have given occasion to a great part of the Troubles that have occurr'd since; The Certification in that Proclamation, is under the pain of being repute favourers and partakers with the Conspirators a∣gainst His Highness Majesty. The Act here related to is the 43 Act 6 Par. Queen Mary, but that Act properly extends only to Bonds of Man-rent, but not to Bonds of Combination, as this does, so that this Act should rather have been founded on the 30 Act 2 Par. Ja. 1. There is in that Proclamation, and this Act, exception made of Bonds enter'd into with the Kings consent, which was added, be∣cause the Nobility and Estates at the Kings desire, entered in a League and Bond for preservation of Religion, which is Registrat in the Council Book, June 8 1585. But this Bond is subscribed by very few of every Estate. BY this Act Charges super inquirendis are discharged,ACT 13. but it is a mistake to think that by that Act, the King or other Judges cannot examine men without a formal Process, for the design of that Act is only to discharge the denuncing men Rebels upon such
Charges without previous tryal, and yet if the Chief Officers of State, or at least four of them concur, it would seem that by that Act, even such Charges are yet lawful, and where the King or Magistrat has previous informations of Crimes latent, it were against the interest of the Common-wealth, that they should not be allowed to clear these by particular Interrogators. It was urg'd from this part of the Act, that no man could legal∣ly be Imprisoned, even by a warrand under the Kings own hand, and that this was very just in it self, since as Liberty is very preci∣ous, and the best part of Property, it was sit to secure it so, as that none could take it away, but these who will be answer∣able, and the King could not in Law be made answerable; and therefore it was justly by this Act appointed, that no man could be imprisoned by any Letter, even under the Kings own hand, ex∣cept it were subscrived by the Officers of State, who should be an∣swerable; to which it was answered by His Majesties Advocat, that this Act did not debar the King from granting such privat warrands under his own hand, for there might be some cases which he could impart to none of his Officers of State, as for instance, if all his Officers were upon a plot against him, or if the Crime were the being upon a Plot with a forraign State, which the King were not yet in a condition to resent, though he might justly apprehend his Subjects who were in accession to it; but the design of this part of the Act was only to discharge the passing ordinary Letters in common course under the Signet, except in this Method, and it might be much rather retorted, that since only Letters under the Signet, are discharged to be past, except in this method; there∣fore privat warrands from the King himself, are not discharged, for if the King and Parliament had designed any such thing, they would have expresly discharged all warrands under the Kings hand, which is not done in this Act, and it is clear by the 184 Act 13 Par. Ja. 6. That the King may give Warrands out of his own mouth, to apprehend Rebels, or others whom Magistrats are obliged to ap∣prehend. I find also that this Act was past formerly in the Privy Council the 23 of June, this year, 1585. and there the Act bears, To have been made to prevent the obtaining of unformal Letters at the importunity and malice of privat persons, which clearly evinces that it was not design'd to preclude the King from securing such persons who he had reason to believe were obnoxious to the Government. It is observed in the Acts of Sederunt, that the King 8 June, 1581. by his Letter ordain'd several Advocats to be imprison'd indicta causa. By the second part of this Act Writers to the Signet are ordain'd to keep the old Style unalter'd, for Arguments brought from Style are a great part of our Fundamental Law, and in all our Decisions Argumentum a Stylo is still very strong, as from the wills of Inhibiti∣ons, Interdictions, from the Forms of the Chancery, &c. and yet in some cases this Argument is not concluding, and thus Gifts of single Escheat bear all Moveables present and to come, and ye
they give only right to what Moveables the Rebels have or shall possess within a year after rebellion; and though by the Style of Gifts of Wards the relief is discharged, yet that discharge will not be valid. As also, the Style of Inhibitions and Interdictions bears a prohibiti∣on to alienat either Heretage or Moveables, and yet it extendeth only to Heretage. Stilus Curiae is by Justinian call'd forma & observantia, whence comes our word, Form of Process; Stilus & consuetudo fori vel judicii pro lege observari dbet, l. 1. §. in honorar. de var. & extraord. cog. vid. Vet. de Stat. Sect. 3. c. 3. Observ. That though by this Act every Writer should write his name upon the back of the Signature which he writes, which doubt∣less was introduced, to the end that every Writer might be answe∣rable for his errors in Style or otherwise; yet if at the passing of the Signature in Exchequer, the Writer subscribes his name, the Sig∣nature will be sustain'd, which was found necessary, though it was alledg'd that this Act was in Desuetude, as to this point, for it was found not to be in Desuetude. THis Act explains the 141 Act, 8 Par. Ja. 6. and dispenses with a part of it, and that is the Act to which this Act relates,ACT 14. though it be not expresly cited. THis Act appointing Licences to be null,ACT 15. except they be sub∣scrived by the Comptroller, is so far innovated, that they must now be subscrived by the Thesaurer and Thesaurer-Depute, who are come in place of the Comptroller. BY this Act, Sheriffs, Stewards, Magistrats of Burghs, and others,ACT 16. are ordain'd to apprehend notorious Thieves, and if they refuse they may be pursued Criminally, as partakers of their guilt▪ or Ci∣villy for the payment of their Debt, and generally all these are ly∣able if they refuse to apprehend any Rebel for Civil Debts: But it may be doubted, 1. If any Judge be oblig'd to apprehend a man at the desire of any person who cannot instruct the person whom he takes to be a Rebel, by producing Letters of Caption, as he must do in Civil cass, and what makes a Thief a notorious Thief to this ef∣fect, 2. If meer negligence in not apprehending these notorious Thieves be sufficient to found a Criminal pursuit against the re∣fuser, as partaker, nor have I seen this sustain'd; but if any person shall contribute actively to a Thiefs escape, he is punishable as Art and Part, but with a lesser punishment, vid. Clar. Quaest. 9. num. 7. & Bart· ad l. furti, ff. de furto ait spem datam ad evadendum dici au∣xilium ad committendum. Nota, By this Act all who are present and able to apprehend, are oblig'd to assist in taking Thieves, or if they refuse they are to be re∣pute partakers with them; and though they may be punish'd with some small Mulct, yet the certification here set down is in Desue∣tude as to them, vid. tit. Duels Crim. Observ. num 8. Idem est facere, & non prohibere cum possis; and as the Law presumes, every man guilty who wil not concur to punish what all men hate so much, and that they would concur if they favour'd not the guilt; so this assistance is so profitable for the Common-wealth, that such as deny it are Criminal,
but that which is considerable in this Act is, that if any Clann'd man rob any peaceable Subject, and if the Sheriff, or Steward, &c. re∣fuse to assist him, not only is the Sheriff, &c. lyable; but further, it is declared lawful to them who have their goods stollen and rest to apprehend and intromet with the Goods of the Offender, or any other of the said Clann, and retain them till compt and reckoning; and though it would seem that this taking or retaining by privat au∣thority, is not allowable till the Sheriff be required to give satisfa∣ction, and refuse; yet in the case Moor contra Mefadrick, 29 No∣vemb. 1678. It was found that these were separate Clauses, and that a person pursued for a Spuilʒie, might propone relevantly that the Pursuer being a notorious Robber, or holden and repute so, had rob'd him of as much, and so he might justly have seiz'd upon the like quantity of the Pursuers Goods, though he had not first required the Sheriff to repair him; nor was this Act found to be innovat by the 100 Act, Par. 11. Ja. 6. which appoints a new method for Goods taken away by Clann'd Men. ACT 17.HEre is a Revocation of the King's Property in general, but I find in the Registers of Council, that upon the 22 of March 1684. The King revocks all Rights made by him of the Abbacie of Dumfermling, which Revocation is made with the consent of the Privy Council, though ordinarly Revocations are made by the con∣sent of the Parliament. ACT 18.BY this Act the nearest Agnat, that is to say, the nearest of the Fathers side should be Curator to Fools, Idiots, and Furious Persons. Observ. 1. That this Act is extended to Deaf and Dumb Persons, to whom likewise the nearest Agnat is to be Tutor, and though their Tutors and Curators are to be served by this Act, yet if the nearest Agnat omit, or is uncapable to serve, there is place for a Dative; nor doth this Act exclude the Father from leaving Tutors in his Testament to such Idiots, and Furious Persons, as are with∣in the years of Tutory, as he may do to other Children: and Craig observes that if the Furious Person, or Idiot have Lands, the Su∣perior will be preferr'd to the nearest Agnat; but in this I differ from Craig, for the Agnat will be preferr'd to the Tutory of these, as he will be to the Tutory of Minors, and Superiors have by this Act dispens'd with their Feudal interest, if they had any. Observ. 2. This Act relates to the Common Law, by which the Curators are called Curatores Legitimi; but by that Law, as by ours, if there be no Agnats extant, the Judge gives a Dative, who is pre∣ferr'd to all other nearest of Kin, Vid. Tit. ff. de curat. Furios: And the Agnats by that Law, as by ours, are preferr'd according to the same degree as they would succeed, which is most just, since the Law does prefer them to the custody of the Estate, because of their hope of Succession, and therefore it may be doubted where there are three Brothers, whereof one is furious, if his Estate be
conquest, whether the elder Brother will be preferr'd to be his Tu∣tor, because Conquest ascends; but I incline to think that the Heir of Line is still to be Tutor of Law. Observ. 3. That this Law appointing the nearest Agnat to be Tu∣tor, holds only where there is not a Legal Administrator, and there∣fore if a Wife who is an Heretrix become Furious, the Husband and not the nearest Agnat will be her Tutor; and though Papinian thought the Husband should not be Tutor, l. 14. ff. de Curat. Furios. Yet the customs of other Nations agree with ours, Perez. num. 10. h. t. vid. Act 67. Par. 8. Jam. 3. Observ. 4. Though this Act equiparats the Tutors of Fools, Idiots, and Furious persons, to other Tutors of Law, allow'd to Minors, yet there seems this difference betwixt them, that Tutors of Law to Minors must serve within year and day from the time they are in ca∣pacity to serve, but the nearest Agnat may serve himself Tutor of Law to an Idiot or Furious Person at any time, and when he is so serv'd he will be preferr'd to a Tutor Dative, though the Lords will authorize that Tutor Dative to exerce till a Tutor of Law be served, the Exchequer being in use in the interim to grant Datives, as the Lords of Session are to grant Curators ad lites, 21 January, 1663. Stuart contra Spreul; and though in that case the Pupil was not then declared Idiot or Furious by an Inquest, and so there could not be a Tutor of Law; yet it seems that albeit there had been a previ∣ous Declarator, and so the Tutor of Law had been negligent, the Decision had been the same, and the reason is, because this Act pre∣fers the Agnats; and yet it decides not, quid juris, if they enter not; and what if the next Agnat require the nearest Agnat to enter, and he refuse quo casu, either it must be said that albeit the Exche∣quer make him Tutor Dative, yet he is not properly Tutor or Cu∣rator, but only a Curator ad lites, or else if he be once properly Tutor, the next Agnat cannot thereafter serve himself, nam Tutorem habenti Tutor non datur, vid. observ. on the 67 Act, 8 Par. I. 3. IT is to be observ'd from this Act,ACT 19. that Laws ought not to be ex∣tended ad praeterita, but only ad futura; and as the Act sayes most reasonably, Subjects cannot observe what is not yet made; and not only so, but Argumento hujus Legis, it may be concluded that Processes are to be decided according to the Laws that were made before the Process was intented, though the Law be made before the Decision in the Process, which is very observable: a notable in∣stance may be seen in Act 94. Par. 6. Ja. 6. where the Parliament makes an Act upon occasion of a Process depending before the Session, to be a rule in like cases for the future, but leaves the case depending to be decided as they think just. Vid. Observ. on 10 Act P. 3 Ch. 2. IT is by this Act appointed that no Signatures or other Writs shall be prsented to his Majesty but by his ordinary Officers,ACT 20. to whose Office the same properly belongs. And it appears by the Registers
of Council, that this Act was a part of the remedy of that complaint mentioned in the 13 Act of this Parliament. Observ. 1. That by Officers here are mean't Officers of State, for none else can present Signatures, and though a General Major or a President be his Majesties Officers, they cannot present Signatures, and yet any Officer of State may present promiscuously any Signa∣ture, though it would seem by these words, By his Majesties ordi∣nary Officers, and to whose Office the same properly belongs, that every Officer of State may not promiscuously offer, but that the Thesaurer or Thesaurer-Depute can only present Papers relative to the Thesau∣ry, the Justice-Clerk to the Justice Court, &c. Observ. 2. That though any Officer of State may present Signa∣tures, yet by the 60 Act 1 Sess. 1 Par. Ch. 2. any Officer who presents such Papers is obliged to send the Registrat Docket to the Secreta∣ry, to the end his Majesty be so informed as that he may not grant double Rights. King James the sixth, Parliament 11. BY this Act the King's lawful Age is declared to be 21 years compleat,ACT 22. which Act was made to prevent a debate that had fallen out in France a little before that time, where the Par∣liament of Paris had declared that the French King was not Major till he had compleated the last year of his Minority, whereas the Parliament of Rouen had declared him to be of lawful age, when he had begun the last year of his Minority, nam in favorabilibus an∣nus inceptus habetur pro completo; and though Minors may revocke deeds done at any time before the last moment of their Minority, and that Minoritas computatur de momento in momentum; yet it is advan∣tagious for a King to enter upon the Government of his Kingdom as soon as can be. And though this be the age for reducing of deeds done by them, they have another Majority in relation to the Government, for we find that Josias entered upon the Govern∣ment at 8 years, and Solomon at 11. Cicero Philip. 5. tells us, that the Kings of Macedon entered very early, and in Anno 1375. the Kings of France were declared to be Majors and capable of the Go∣vernment at 14. but by the Commission of Regency set down in the Act 1. Par. 1. Ja. 6. The Regency is declared to continue till 17. at which time the King is to take upon him the Government; but yet King James 6 took it upon him sooner; nor do I find any parti∣cular time limiting the King as to this point, and therefore there may be many doubts amongst us whether the King or the Gover∣nour should be obeyed betwixt the Kings ages of 14 and 21. but before 14 no Pupil is thought fit by Law for administration; and it may be strongly urg'd that 17 is the Legal age, for why was the Com∣missions insert, it being only a temporary right, and such use not to be insert amongst our Laws.
By our Law minority runs in all persons to the last moment of 21 years; whereas by the Civil Law, it runs till 25 years compleat; and in this our King differs not from others, but because by the 2 Act Par. 1 Ja. 2. Our Kings were declared to be in mi∣nority till 21 years, therefore by the 87 Act Par. 10 Q. Mary. 21 years of age compleat, was declared to be the perfect age of our Queens; and by this Act it is declar'd to be the perfect and lawful age of our Kings. It were to be wished, that for proving the age of all Minors, there were authentick Registers appointed, as in o∣ther Nations, and in some parts of our own, since for want of this, true probation of their birth perisheth, and false probation is adduc∣ed. OBserv. 1. That by this Act,ACT 24. the receipting persons of the Romish Religion, is not simply made Criminal, except they did reset them for three days together, or at three several times, knowing that they were such, which may be urg'd in all cases of Intercommuning, and resetting of Rebels, and yet in other cases once and short Intercommuning is sufficient to infer a Crime. Observ. 2. That by the 164 Act 13 Par. Ja. 6. The resetting excommunicat Papists, or Traffecting Jesuits for three nights together, or three nights at several times, is made sufficient to in∣fer that they knew they were such per presumptionem juris & de jure, nor could the knowledge of their being such be otherways proven, and if it had been necessary to prove their knowledge, the Law might have been easily eluded by industrious ignorance; and by that Act likewise, the third fault is declared punishable as reason; and be∣cause the punishment was so great, it was just the presumptions where∣by it was to be infer'd should be strong. THough by this Act only the Sellers and Dispersers of errone∣ous Books, are to be punished at our Soveraign Lords will,ACT 25. and such Books to be burnt; yet by our practise, the Bring∣ers home of Crucifixes, Popish-beads, &c. are to be used in the same way; and though there is only warrand here given to a Minister and Magistrats of Burgh to seize, and burn such Books; yet Ma∣gistrats use frequently to seize without a Minister, and Sheriffs and other Officers do likewise seize, but since burning seems to be an extraordinary power, and so not to be assum'd without a special Statute. I think that no Officers, save Magistrats of Burghs, with the concourse of a Minister can burn· THe reason why Ministers Benefices under Prelacies,ACT 26. are declar∣ed to be free of the first Fruits, and fifth penny of their Bene∣fices, is because in time of Popery, the first years Fruits of every Benefice were due to the Pope, and are call'd by the Canonists An∣nata, against which several Councils have made large, but ineffe∣ctual Representations, and the fifth penny was payable to the King,
and though this Act discharges only the exaction of these in Bene∣fices under Prelacies, yet now even Prelacies are free from these ex∣actions in Scotland, though in England the first Fruits belong still to the King. Though the Priests were free from Subsidies amongst the Ae∣gyptians, Genes. 47. vers. 22. and that l. placet C. de Sacr. Eccles. nihil extraordinarium abhinc superinductumve ab Ecclesia slagi∣tetur; Yet this was only as to Tiths, and things meerly Spiritual, but the Lands of the Church were lyable to Impositions, laid on for the common Defence of the Countrey, and therefore the Ca∣nonists, ad c. 1. de immun. Eccles. give as a Rule, that in bonis Ec∣clesiasticis ut Cleris in patrimonialibus ut laicos tractandos, and such was this fifth penny here mentioned; and with us Ministers sti∣pends, but not Bishops Lands, are now ordinarly freed from Impo∣sitions. ACT 27.OBserv. 1. That though such as invade Ministers for the Causes therein exprimed, viz. for seeking their Stipend; or because the Minister inflicted Church-censures upon them, or any other forged quarrel, are to be punished with all rigour; yet if they in∣vade them upon any account, that is not Ecclesiastick or preme∣ditat, as in an accidental scufle, they are only in these cases punish∣able as for wrongs done to other Subjects. Observ. 2. Since the Act appoints that they may be punished with all rigour, and the tinsel of their Moveables; It is clear that such Invaders may be punish'd likewise personally, besides the Confiscation of their Moveables; yet the words, with all rigour, should not be extended to death; but by the 4 Act Sess. 2 Par. 2 Ch. 2. The assaulting the lives of Ministers, or the robbing of their Houses, is declar'd punishable by death; and by the 5 Act 1 Sess. of the said 2 Par. The Parochioners are made lyable for the Out∣rages done to Ministers, if the Actors cannot be got. Observ. 3. From these words, That they may be punished at the In∣stance of the Minister, or any other that will pursue; This Crime is made so far crimen publicum, that it may be pursu'd per quemlibet ex populo, though he be not otherways interested. Observ. 4. That this Act being only against Invaders of Mini∣sters, it is extended to Invaders of Bishops, and all such as have power to administer the Sacraments, 7 Act Par. 1 Char. 1. In which Act there are many other Extensions of this Law. ACT 29.THe Popish Clergy had right to Lands that were mortifi'd to, or bought by them, and to Teinds which belonged to them as Church-men; The Teinds were call'd the Spirituality of their Benefices, because they belonged to them as Church-men, and the rest was all comprehended under the Designation of the Temporality of their Benefices, and upon the abrogation of Pope∣ry,
the King did begin to erect some of the Temporality of their Benefices in Lordships, which He Dispon'd to several Noblemen, who were most active in the Reformation; Or to these whom He resolv'd to oblige by their Interest, to be active in it, and these were called ords of Erection; but thereafter the Parliament re∣solving to fix a constant Rent to our Kings, thereby to preclude the necessity of Taxes, and to ingage future Kings not to return to Popery, they annext the Temporality of all the Church-lands, and Benefices to the Crown by this Act. Observ. 1. The reason whereupon this Act is founded, is, that the former Kings having mortifi'd a great part of their Revenue to Church-men, and having thereby impoverish'd themselves and their people, it was therefore just, that the ends for which these Mortifications were made, being declar'd unlawful, the Benefices should return; by this reason such Mortifications as were made by privat Families, should have returned to them; whereas here all returns to the King: But in Law these Religious Houses being demolish'd, all ought to have fallen in to the King; for qua nul∣lius sunt ea sunt domini Regis; and these were such, for they be∣longed not to the old Proprietars, since they were once Dispon'd; nor to these Houses, since they were extinguished, and that being found a false Religion, what belong'd to it, did by the Law fall under Confiscation. Observ. 2. Though all Benefices belonging to Arch-bishops or Bishops, are by this Act annexed, yet they are restored by the 2 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. And though all Benefices belonging to Chap∣ters are annexed, yet these are restored by the 2 Act Par. 22 Ja. 6. Observ. 3. From these words in the Clause of Annexation, viz. All and sundry Common-lands bruiked by Chapters of Cathedral Kirks, or whereof they have been in possession as Commonty; That Possessi∣on in Church-lands, is very often repute a sufficient Right, and to be loco tituli, For understanding whereof, it is fit to know, that both before and after the Reformation, a Churh-man being in possession by the space of seven years, though without a Title, has the benefit of a possessory Judgement, so that his Right cannot be quarrelled without Reduction; nor needs he produce a Title, as Laicks are oblig'd to do in possessory judge∣ments, July 18. 1671. Earl of Hume contra the Laird of Rislaw. And if he be thirteen years in possession, that possession is to him in place of a Title, for by a rule of the Chancery (as we believe) docennalis & triennalis possessio habetur protitulo; though I find no such Rule in the Roman Chancery, but yet these thirteen years induce only a presumptive Title, which does not exclude the true Proprietar, if he can instruct that the Benefic'd person possessed either by a redeemable Right, and produce the Reversion, as was found in the case of Francis Kinloch, contra the Bishop of Dum∣blane, July 11 1676. Or by a precarious Right, as was found in
the case of a Minister, who had casten Peits for thirteen years by tolerance from the Heretor, and though there be no difficulty where the Right mortifi'd does expresly bear, that it is Redeemable or Precarious; yet in absolute Rights, there is greater doubt whe∣ther after thirteen years they can be qualifi'd by correspective Ob∣ligations. The reason of this priviledge given to Church men, is, that they being imploy'd in Divine Matters, are ignorant and careless of their Right, especially since their Rights are not to descend to their own Heirs. It is fit here to take notice that by a vulgar error triennalis possessio was thought to give the benefit of a possessory judgement, 12 March, 1629. Marshal contra the Laird of Drumkilbo, and decennalis of a pe∣titory, and thus did they interpret the former rule. At the Refor∣mation also the Popish Clergy did either send their foundations to Rome, or did by collusion with the Laicks interested, or in hatred of the Reformed Clergy, destroy their Rights; and therefore by an Act of Sederunt 16 December 1612. It is declared that ten years possession before the Reformation, or 30 after the Reformation, should be a sufficient right either to Church-men, or to the King's coming in their place, by vertue of this Act, and conform thereto the Lords decided July 5 1626. Laird of Kerss against Reid. Observ. 4. That because the Romish Clergy were put from their Benefices, therefore they are by this Act freed from any warrandice they had given for Church Lands dispon'd by them; and by the 110 Act of the same Parliament, what is here Statuted as to the warran∣dice of Lands, is there extended to Tacks, Pensions, and Assigna∣tions, and so these two Acts are not absolutely co-incident, and the last unnecessary, as they would seem to be, and though this was done in majorem cautelam, yet by the common Law they would not have been liable in warrandice, since no man is liable in warrandice where the eviction proceeded upon a supervenient Statute, for no man can warrand against a supervenient Law. Observ. 5. That notwithstanding that the Church-Lands are an∣nexed, yet there is a dissolution in the same Act, warranding his Ma∣jesty to Feu any of the saids Church-Lands during his own time. Observ. 6. That though by this Act all prior Dispositions made of Church-Lands by his Majesty to Lords of Erection are excepted from the Annexation, yet the Superiority of all the Erections both be∣fore and after that Act, are annexed to the Crown, by the 10 Act Par. Ch. 1. Observ. 7. That the Spirituality of Benefices, viz. their right to the Teinds is expresly declared not to be annexed, but to remain with Church-men as formerly; for though by the 149 Act Par. 13 Ja. 6. it be said that the Teinds of Dumfermig are annexed to the Crown after the form of the Act of Annexation, 1587. by which all the Teinds of the remanent Kirk-Lands and Prelacies of the Kingdome are annexed; yet that Clause is only insert by mistake in my judge∣ment, for that is not the design of the Act.
Where Stock and Teind are promiscuously Feued, it is declared by this Act that his Majesty remains Superior both as to Stock and Teind, the Church-men having only right to the tenth penny of the Feu-duty, the other nine belonging to his Majesty for the temporality being only annex'd to the Crown, and the Teinds being reserv'd to the Church, it was very just that where a duty was payable out of Church-Lands, cum decimis inclusis, the King should only have right to a ninth part of that duty, and the tenth should belong to the Church-man or Titular, in contemplation of the Teinds; but still decimae inclusae are so fully exempted from all Ecclesiastick pay∣ments, that though there be not sufficiency of Teinds in the Paroch, yet decimae inclusae are never burden'd with the payment of Mini∣sters Stipends, though Ministers Stipends be the constant burden of all Teinds; and for the same reason it was found 21 January 1633. that no Valuation could be led of Land Feued, cum decimis inclusis, and not confirmed before this Act, and that Laicks might prescrive a right to them, but not to other Teinds, which shews that decimae inclusae are never lookt upon as Teinds. For understanding the origine and nature of decimae inclusae with us, it is fit to know that by the Canon Law the Parson or Incumbent and the Paroch Church were founded in the right of all the greater Tithes, called decimae praediales, and that it was not law∣ful for any man to abstract their Teinds from it, cap. de decimis 16. Quest. 1. And albeit the Popes did pretend that since the Bishops had the management of the Teinds, they as universal Bishops might by their supereminent transcendent right appropriat them to the use of Monastries, Monks being the best of the poor, and Teinds being naturally burden'd with the maintainance of the poor; yet our King's who in all the tract of our Parliaments own'd their own Regalia, and the Episcopal Order against the invasions of the Popes, did by the 7 Act, Par. 2. Ja. 4. declare it a point of Dittay, that is to say, Criminal for any man, to take a right of Teinds from any, save the Parson, Vicar, or their farmers, so far they acknowledg'd the Parochial Churches to be founded in their right to the Predial Teinds. Notwithstanding whereof, the Popes to get the Monks to de∣pend immediatly upon them, did grant to those Monks, exemp∣tions from payment of Tiths, for they as well as others paid to the Parson or Incumbent, till Pope Paschal the 2d granted those exempti∣ons, but these exemptions did thereafter so far diminish the provision of the Parson (very many Lands, being either mortifi'd to them, or bought in by them) that Theodosius and other Emperours were forc'd to make Laws against exorbitant Mortifications; and Pope Adrian was forc'd to limit the exemptions to four Religious Orders, Ci∣stertians, Hospitalers, Templars, and Knights of St. John; still al∣lowing all of them Exemptions for their Novalia or Lands, first cul∣tivated by themselves; But Pope Innocent the third, in the Late∣ran Council, thereafter ordain'd, that even these four Orders should pay Tiths for what Lands they should acquire after that time;
which I, the rather observe, because it has been decided by our Ses∣sion, July 15. 1664, Thomas Crawford contra Prestoun Grange; that Lords of Erection succeeding in place of the Cistertian Monks, should be free from Tiths, as the Monks were without adverting whether these Lands for which exemption was pleaded, were be∣stow'd on their Monastries, after the year 1120. and it seems that this Exemption should not be allow'd to these Monastries, since they were not allow'd to the Temple-lands with us, and that such priviledges are due to neither, because this was a personal privi∣ledge given to the Monks, as the Poor, and so should not de∣scend to the Lords of Erection. The Monks being thus Masters of many Tiths, feu'd out their Lands and Tiths promiscuously, for the encouragement of the Labourers, who have alwayes thought it a loss and a slavery to wait till their Tiths be drawn. Laicks also enjoy'd Tiths, and alienated them as their own He∣retage, for many ages together, it being generally believ'd, as Selden contends, that the Tiths were not due to Church-men, they having Right only to a Maintainance, jure divino; though others ascrive these Laical Infeudations to a corruption begun by Charles Martel King of France, who to gratifie and pay such as were to assist him in the Holy War, Dispon'd to them the Tiths consentientibus Episcopis, who knew that if the Saracens prevail'd, Religion would be destroy'd, and he promising to restore them; But after this time it is undenyable that de facto, Teinds were Dis∣pon'd to, and by Laicks, till the Lateran Council 1169. in which the Canon was made, prohibemus ne laici decimas cum animarum sua∣rum periculo detinentes in alios laicos possint aliquo modo transferre. Si quis vero perceperit & Ecclesiae non reddiderit Christiana Sepul∣tura privetur; But yet before that time, Laical Infeudations were Discharg'd, per Concilium Turon: 1096. Though we in this Nation consider only the Discharge, in the Lateran Coun∣cil. It remains clear from these Informations, that our decimae in∣clusae, are in effect the same with the decimae infeudatae in the Ca∣non Law, and these are call'd decimae inclusae, where the Stock and Teinds were never separated, but were feu'd joyntly before the Lateran Council; but yet it seems that all decimae infeudatae, are not esteem'd inclusae with us; for in a Case betwixt Monimusk and Pitfoddels, Teinds were found not to have the priviledge of decimae inclusae, though Transmitted by Infestments, and call'd de∣cimae inclusae, because there was separat a Reddendo, paid for the Teind and Stock, and so it could be known to be different from the Stock, albeit it was contended that decimae inclusae and infeu∣datae, were pares termini, and a different Reddendo did not evince that the Teinds had ever been separated from the Stock, but only that there was a different Duty, as is in Lands of the same hold∣ing oftimes, and it may in general seem strange, why we should add, since the Lateran Council, for that Council did find that
Laicks before that time were incapable of any Right to Teinds; and therefore all Feus of Teinds, whether before the Lateran Council or after, should be null, and this Error it seems has been occasion'd by our concluding, that because Laicks were declar'd uncapable of them by that Act, therefore they were capable of them before it; and yet with us a Laick cannot prescrive Teinds, because he is not capable of them; and Balsour tells us a Decision wherein not only alienations of Teinds, but even Tacks of Teinds for three nineteen years, were accounted alienations, and so null, for else Discharging alienations might have been eluded by setting long Tacks: But now Teinds pass by Infestments, as the Stocks does, since the Surrender, and His Majesties Decreet thereupon, wherein every man may buy his own Teinds, and so may set as long Tacks of them as he pleases, or Feu them out cum decimis inclusis. But it may be alledg'd this tenth part payable to the Ec∣clesiastick person for Teinds, may be made liable to Ministers Sti∣pends, since this tenth part must be constructed as Teinds, and so should be lyable to all the burdens of Teinds; but to this it is an∣swer'd, that these decimae inclusae are consider'd as a part of the Stock, and so no more liable to Ministers Stipends than the Stock is; this division of the Feu-Duty doth not alter the nature of the decimae inclusae, but is only insert to regulate the way of payment of the Feu-Duty, even as if after a Feu granted of Stock and Teind pro∣miscuously for a Feu-Duty, the Church-man should dispone nine parts of the Feu-Duty, and reserve only the tenth to himself, that tenth part could not be liable to Ministers Stipends. 2. Since this Act by the death of the Titular both Temporality and Spirituality came in his Majesties hands, and so were dispon'd to the Lords of Erection, and return'd to them without this distinction of nine or tenth parts. Though by this Act Teinds are declared the Spirituality of Bene∣fices, yet they may be sold, and are appointed now to be sold by the Parliament 1633. and the Heretors are to be infest in them as in their other Lands, which seems inconsistent with their being the Spirituality of Benefices, and the Patrimony of the Church; but it may be answer'd, that they are even in that case burden'd with pay∣ment of Ministers Stipends till they be competently provided. Observ. 8. By this Act all Lands and others mortified to Colledges, are excepted from the Annexation, and the reason is, because Kirk-Lands remain still to be such, albeit they be mortifi'd to Colledges, 12 Feb. 2635. Tock contra the Parochiners of Achtergoven, and there∣fore it was necessary to except them. Maisons Dieu, or Hospitals are also excepted, and Maisons Dieu are Hospitals dedicated to the ho∣nour of GOD, it is a French word signifying the House of God; the Canon Law calls them Domus Dei, and makes them Hospitals. Observ. 9. Pensions likewise out of Church-Benefices are ex∣cepted, if they be authorized either by Decreets, or Possession, but possession of a part is repute possession of the whole; and by
the 137 Act 12 Par. Ja. 6. this Act is ratified, and it is declared that all Pensions out of the Spirituality or Temporality, neither clad with Decreet nor Possession in the Prelats lifetime who dispon'd the same before this Act of Annnexation, shall be null, but if they be clad with possession in manner foresaid, they are valid against singular Successors, though Pensions granted by Laicks are not va∣lid, albeit they be clad with possession prior to the singular Suc∣cessors right, as was found the 11 of December, 1662. Clappertoun con. the Lady Ednem; but by the Act 140 Par. 12 Ja. 6. Pensions granted by Church-men should contain the particular names of Ten∣nents and Duties, vid. observ. on the 62 Act of this Parl. Observ. 10. By this Act it is declared that the Bailie or Steward of the Regality shall have the same power he had before to repledge from the Sheriff, or Justice-general, in case he hath prevented the Justice-general by apprehending or citing the person before he be apprehended or cited by the Justices, but if the Justices have pre∣vented, as said is, then the Bailie of the Regality, or Steward, shall not have power to repledge, but he may sit with the Justice-general if he pleases, so that in effect by this Act there is this difference be∣twixt the Ecclesiastick and Laick Regalities, that there is a right of re∣pledging competent to the Laick Regalities, whereas Ecclesiastick Re∣galities have not this priviledge except they prevent the Justices, but otherwise the Bailie of Regality may only sit with them; the reason of which difference is, that the Regalities having been only granted in favours of the Religious Houses, which were supprest, the Regalities became extinguish'd with them, and his Majesty having ex gratia only reserved their Offices to the Lords of Erection, he thought that they were abundantly gratified by this new Concession, without allowing them the power to exclude his own Justices, in case of pre∣vention; and this was also a favour to the Lieges in not troubling them with two Courts, nor were the Lords of Regality much pre∣judg'd, for by this same Act they retain the whole right to the Es∣cheats and Fines, even of these who are condemned by the Ju∣stices. Observ. 11. That the Parliament has been so careful of the Vassals and Feuers of Kirk-Lands, that because the King who is declared Superior by this Act of all these Lands was a more powerful oppo∣site: Therefore by a Clause in this Act it is provided that the King shall not quarrel their Rights to these Kirk-lands, save by Improba∣tion, or by a Reduction only for a diminution of the old Penny-mail, de liquido ad liquidum, that is to say, that though such rights may be quarrelled as granted with diminution of the Rental, or by un∣lawful conversion, yet no diminution shall reduce their Feus, ex∣cept where the diminution is of old Rentals, because about the time of the Reformation Feus were granted for high Feu-duties, and these being renewed again for less than were once payed, the Feu might have been question'd, because though the Feu-duty was less than was once payed, yet it was not below the old Rental, de liqui∣do in liquidum, as if five Merks were taken when ten was of old
payed, without consideration of Conversions, so that though ten Merks were taken in the Feu quarrelled in place of ten Bolls, that would be no relevant reason of Reduction, and since by the Act of Parliament, 1633. Erections are annex't to the Crown: The Lords found that the Lords of Erection cannot now pursue Reductions or Improbations of their Vassals Kirk-lands, and that his Majesties Ad∣vocat could not insist in any such actions, except he had an express warrand from the King, though it would appear that this Act is a sufficient warrand to pursue Improbations or Reductions for dimi∣nution in the terms of this Act, 24 of June, 1664. Laird of Prestoun contra Nathaniel Ebred. Observ. 12. That Lands belonging to the Benefices of Laick Pa∣tronages, are excepted also from this Annexation, by which are meant only such Laick Patronages, as were lawfully establisht be∣fore the Reformation, and not such as were Dispon'd by the King to Laicks, and to which he had Right, as coming in place of the Pope, who was Universal Patron in dubio, before the Reforma∣tion, for these are still accounted Ecclesiastick Patronages, since they were so originally, and so ought not to have been excepted from this Act, but whether all the other Patronages, which be∣longed formerly to Monasteries, were annexed to the Crown by this Act, was fully Debated, November 1677. in the Case of Steuart contra the Laird of Watertoun; and that they were annex∣ed, was urg'd, because by the first words of this Act, the Ab∣bacies, &c. and all Profits, Emoluments, whatsoever belonging to them were annexed, and there being nothing that the King and Parliament was more concerned in, than to have the Patronages depend upon the Crown, thereby to prevent the influence that Schismatick privat Patrons might have; It was most reasonable to think, that when all things belonging to Monasteries, were an∣nex'd, these should have been annex'd. Likeas, Sir Thomas Hope among other Rights crav'd to be reduc'd, crav'd likewise that all the Rights made to the Lords of Erection of the Patronages belonging formerly to Monasteries, should be reduc'd as contrary to this Act, upon which Reduction the Lords of Erection did sub∣mit their Rights to these Patronages, and in the Kings determi∣mination upon that Submission, His Majesty determined that the Lords of Erection should have only Right to the converted prices of their own feu Mails, and feu Ferms of their Superiorities, &c. It was likewise there contended, that the saids Patronages were like∣wise annexed by the 13 and 14 Acts of the first Parliament Ch. 1. To which it was answered, That Patronages were never annex∣ed as parts and pendicles, but where it was design'd they should be annexed, they were still annexed per expressum, as in the an∣nexation of the Abbacy of Dumfermling, Act 189 Par. 13 Ja. 6. and it were absurd to think, that since the foresaid general Clause did annex things of the meanest consequence, such as Service of Tennents, &c. that it would have omitted things of so great con∣sequence,
as were the Patronages of many Monasteries; nor did any of the Leiges who had Right to such Ecclesiastick Patronages from the King, crave ever a Dissolution of them in Parliament, which certainly they would have done, if they had looked upon them as annex'd, nor were they annexed by the 13 and 14 Acts Par. 1 Ch. 1. Because these Acts do not mention Patronages per expressum, nor can they be comprehended under the general word, pertinents, exprest in these Acts, for the reasons foresaids, and to evidence that His Majesty had determined nothing as to the Patronages belonging to the Lords of Erection, His Majesty does in the 1 Parliament 12 Act Ch. 2. express these words, Likeas, also the the remanent points of our said Commission anent the patronage of Kirks, &c. are not yet begun to be Treated; therefore, &c. This Debate came not to a Decision. What the condition of our Teinds is since this Act, shal be Treated fully in my Treatise of Teinds, as also whether the Ob∣ligation of paying Teinds proceeds from the Moral, Ju∣dicial or Common Law is not agreed to, but the most ordinary opinion is, that they are due to Church men, before any po∣sitive Law, and the quota. of Tenths proceeds from positive Law, and D. Thomas part. 3. Quaest. 6. makes the Tenth to be due, be∣cause as all Digits under ten, are imperfect, and do tend to ten as their perfection; so man being naturally lost, we pay our Tiths to these Ministers by whom our perfection comes; and thus some School-men conclude, that Tiths flow from the Moral Law, in so far as they are a necessary Maintainance for Ministers, from the Ju∣dicial Law, in so far as concerns the number of ten, and Ceri∣monial in so far as concerns the foresaid Typicals, nor can it be de∣ny'd that Abraham paid Teinds (before any positive Law (to Melchisedeck, though the Learned Selden Interprets this place only to be the Tenths of what was taken by the War, and that from Jo∣sephus and from Heb. cap. 7. v. 2. and the Greek word there us'd, does properly signifie spoils, call'd by Sulpitius Severus deci∣mam praedae but yet I see not why that alleadg'd Custom among the Jews, of giving the Tithes of their Spoils, could have proceeded from any other ground, than that which was common to all Tithes, nor can I believe Selden, who asserts that Tithes were not paid in the primitive Church, till the days of St. Augustin, and S. Ambrose, for if we do not controvert the Truth of all Authority, we will find the payment of Tithes much older. Teinds were likewise accounted Spirituality by the Canonists, vid. Rebuff. Quaest. 2. num. 9. How these Teinds came to belong to Monastries, may be doubted, since naturally the Curats of the respective Parochs, are founded in jure communi quoad the Right to their predial Teinds, so that they need not prove their Right thereto, and this was very just, because they having the Cure of Souls ought likewise to have had that which was given as an encouragement of that Cure; and though to this the ordina∣ry
answer be, that the Pope who had only Right to alienat such Teinds, did use to give them to Monastries, nam licet ille jus divinum tollere non potest tamen modificare potest, yet I conceive that our Kings, and even our Laicks, with the consent of our Kings, did think they could bestow the Teinds belonging to these Kirks, whereof they were Patrons upon Religious Houses, whereof I have seen very many Instances in our old Charters, one whereof, I shall set down for an Example, Alexander Dei gratia Rex Scotorum, &c. Sciant tam posteri quam praesentes nos concessisse, &c. Deo & Ecclesiae san∣ctae Mariae de Dryburgh Ecclesiam de Lanarch (now Lanerk) cum terris, & decimis & omnibus rebus juste ad illam pertinen∣tibus. Item, How the other Church-lands became first to belong to Monastries, I shall God-willing clear in an express Treatise con∣cerning Kirk-lands and Teinds. THis Act is Explain'd in the former Revocations,ACT 31. only here the Fees, and Pensions granted to the Officers of the Crown are excepted from this Revocation, and the Officers of the Crown are declar'd to be the Thesaurer, Secretary, the Collector (which Office is since joyn'd to the Thesaurer) the Justice, that is to say, the Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, Advocat, Master of Requests, Clerk of Register, and the Director of the Chancellary, the Di∣rector of the Rols is but his Deput: The Order wherein they are set down, makes the Advocat to preceed the Register, and though the Justice Clerk be named before the Advocat, yet that is only because in all this enumeration, these of one Court, are still set together, and therefore the Justice, Justice Clerk, and their Deputs, are still set together; but it would appear that the Justice-General should by this preceed both the Register and Advocat; But by Ch. 1. His Revocation, which is the 9 Act of his first Parliament, the Register and Advocat are rank'd be∣fore the Justice and Justice-Clerk, & posteriora derogant prio∣ribus. Nota, The Privy-Seal and Thesaurer-Deput, are not here mark∣ed, though they be both Officers of the Crown; The Preceden∣cy amongst the present Officers of State, was by Act of Coun∣cil, February 20. 1623. thus determined, Lord Chancellor, Lord Thesaurer, Lord Privy-Seal, Lord Secretary, Lord Register, Lord Advocat, Lord Justice-Clerk, Lord Thesaurer-Deput, by Act of Parliament, 1661. the President of Session was then, and not till then ordain'd to preceed the Register, Advocat and Thesau∣rer-Deput, and the Register and Advocat then were ordain'd to preceed the Thesaurer-Deput.
By this Act of Revocation, all the Exceptions in any former Acts are likewise Revocked; but under this part of the Revoca∣tion, do not fall the Exceptions in the former Act of Annexati∣on, for King James was then major, and though he had not been major, yet these Exceptions being made by a publick Law, it may be said that publick Laws cannot be taken away by a Revocati∣on; for the Revocation is but a privat Act of the Kings, where∣by His Majesty secures Himself against privat Deeds done by Him∣self in His Minority, but not against what He consented to as pub∣lick Laws. By the last Clause of this Act it is provided, that his Majesty shall not be prejudged by suffering any party to possess any Lands, or o∣thers fallen under the Revocation, but that his Majesty may put his hand thereto at any time, but any obstacle, by the first part of which Clause it is not meant that prescription shall not be valid a∣gainst the King, but only that the possessors shall not have the bene∣fit of a possessory judgement; and by the last Clause it appears that our King's having revock'd, they needed not intent Reducti∣ons ex capite minoritatis, but may brevi manu intromet with what falls under Revocation, even as they may do in their annex't pro∣perty; for this same Clause is like to that contain'd in the Annexa∣tion, Ja. 2. Par. 11. Cap. 41. and which is repeated in all the other Acts of Annexation: See Observ. upon that Act; but it is more rea∣sonable to think that the King needs no Reduction, because he must prove Lesion in case of Reductions ex capite minoritatis; but the King needs prove nothing in the case of Annexation, yet our King is still in use to pursue Reductions, and not summarly to dispossess these who have right. ACT 33.WHilst our Parliaments grew very factious in the time of Q. Mary, the Popish and Protestant Party contending who should prevail in Parliament, the Popish Clergy, who were very numerous in Parliament, since all the Bishops and Miter'd Abbots did sit there as Church-men, each of them who had Lands and He∣retage craved two Votes, one as Church-men, and another as Ba∣rons: To prevent which for the future, this Act was made, dis∣charging any of the three Estates to take upon him the Office of all the three Estates, or any two of them, but the following words are not so clear, viz. That every man shall only occupy the place of that self same estate wherein he lives, and of which he takes the style, which was designed to keep Barons who could not get themselves chosen to re∣present their Shires from being chosen as Burgesses of Parliament, though they were Provosts, or Magistrats, as they then ordinarily were; and by it also a Burgess who is ordinarily so design'd, may be debarr'd from being chosen as a Baron of a Shire: This Act was long in Desuetude, but of late by Acts of Burrows all Burgesses are discharged from electing Gentlemen, to represent them in Par∣liament, under the pains specified in these Acts; for they found that Gentlemen did not adhere to, nor understand the true interest of
Burghs; and the King found that none desired to be so elected, ex∣cept such as had private designs, albeit upon the other hand▪ it is represented that this is the way for Burgesses to have their interest maintain'd by Lawyers or able States-men, either of which they may choose; and the people of England, who are very jealous of their priviledges do choose such, by which likewayes their Parliament is so considerable, and their Laws are made by so judicious Lawyers. But by an Act of the 3 Par. Ch. 2. it is determin'd that only actual Trading Merchants can represent Burghs-Royal in Parliament; and that Act was founded upon an express Decision of the Session. THe unlaws for absents from Parliaments here set down are 300 pounds for every Earl, 200 pounds for every Lord,ACT 35. 100 pounds for every Prelat, and 100 Merks for every Burgh, but there is no penalty appointed for Barons, and I think that they are comprehended under the word Lords, for the Lords and Barons make but one State of Parliament, and Laird is but a corruption of the word Lord; of old 10 pounds only was the unlaw or amerciament, as is to be seen by the Preface of all the Acts of Parliament, which bears ordinarly these words, alii vero quasi per contumaciam se absenta∣verunt quorum nomina patent in rotulis sectarum quorum quisque adjudi∣cabitur in amerciamento decem librarum. THis Act appointing every State of Parliament to have three Apparels, conform to a pattern to be made,ACT 36. was not made that every man might have three several Habits, but to the end each distinct Estate might have a special Habit, and yet Barons nor Burgesses have as yet no distinct Habit for Parliament. FOr understanding this Act appointing the number of the Lords of Articles in every State to be equal,ACT 37. and that the most shall not exceed ten, nor the least be fewer nor six, it is fit to know that by the 1 Act, 3 Sess. Par. 1. Ch. 2. The Lords of the Articles are ordained to be elected and constitute in manner following, viz. the Clergy choose 8 of the Nobility, the Nobility 8 of the Clergy, and these sixteen so elected, or such of them as are present do choose 8 Barons, and 8 Burgesses, to whom are added the Officers of Estate, and the Chancellor Presides: And the Articles being so constitute, do prepare Laws, Acts, and Overtures, and orders all things re∣mitted to them by the Parliament. BY the 135 Act, Par. 7. Ja. 6. no Advocat could plead in Re∣ductions of Forfaulters without a licence,ACT 38. which is abrogated by this Act; but because this Act gave leave only to persons accused be∣fore the Parliament to have Advocats without licence, therefore by the 90 Act of this Parliament Advocats are ordained to plead in all Criminal Cases, and they do so upon Supplications. This craving a Licence was founded upon 98 Act, 14 Par. Ja. 3· vid. crim. ob∣serv. tit. Advocats.
ACT 39.THis Act is fully cleared, crim. observ. Tit. Jurisdiction of the Parliament. ACT 40.IN this Act the King promises to do nothing that may prejudge the liberty of Voting and reasoning, but yet if any person should offer to argue what is down-right Treason, this Act would not de∣fend him, for by voting and reasoning jointly may be inferred that that reasoning is only allowed, which relates to a stated case, and to be put to the Vote, and nothing that is treasonable will be allowed to be stated in order to a Vote. ACT 41.THis Act discharging all contention for priority of place, relates only to Parliament, and the disturbance thereof, but by a Decreet of Ranking, in anno 1606. his Majesty having ranked the Nobility, has commanded them to observe the Precedency there as∣signed in all places, and that under the pain of being punishable as contemners of his Authority. ACT 42.THough by this Act all actions of molestations are ordained to be pursued before inferiour Judges, as being naturally but actions for cognoscing of Marches, where the controversie being facti, can best be understood upon the place, yet now such actions are ordinarlie pursued before the Lords, because there is a Declara∣tor joyned with the molestation, for the Pursuer Libels, that though such Lands be his Property, yet he is molested in the possession there∣of; and the reason of this Invasion is, because Declarators of Pro∣perty, as all other actions concerning double Rights, can only be pursued before the Lords of Session. The form prescribed to molestations by this Act, is, that the Lords shall direct Letters to the inferiour Judges upon 15 dayes warning, who shall continue their Courts from 8 dayes to 8 dayes, and these inferiour Judges having discust the points of Law, they shall choose an Assize, the most part whereof shall have 4 Ploughs of Land, or 300 Merks of yearly Rent in the same or Neighbouring Parochs, if there be mutual pursuits, the Judge shall discuss both together, and choose an Assize out of the Assizes cited by either party equally, and the Odd-man to be choos'd by Cavil; if the Judge or∣dinar be suspect, the Lords shall grant Commission by their own Act, or by a Commission under the testimony of the Great Seal to unsuspect Judges. This form is still almost in observance, only the Lords in dubi∣ous cases grant Advocations to themselves where the Judge is suspect, and after the Cause is debated, the Lords ordain the Ground to be visited by some of their own number, or grant Commissions to o∣thers, if the Lands ly very remote, but these Commissions under the testimony of the Great Seal are absolutely in Desuetude.
If the most part of the Inquest be not clear, the Lords find that in that case the Cause should be Advocat to them as the Supream Court, and they will judge according to the probation already taken, or will grant warrand to cite new Witnesses, as they did 21 July, 1675. Walstoun contra Cheislie. Though this Act appoints the Inquest to be chosen of Landed-men, having 4 Ploughs, or 300 Merks, and that in or near the Paroch where the contraverted Land lies, yet the verdict will be sustained though they have not so much and though they dwell not in that Paroch, albeit there be such in the Paroch. This was formerly appointed §· 14. c. 74. lib. 2. R. M. where such cognitions are appointed to be per fideles homines de viceneto. And Skeen there observes, that Perambulati∣ons differ from Molestations, in that Perambulations are petitory Judgements, and concern Property, but Molestations are only pos∣sessory Judgements, though both tend to the tryal of Marches. Nota, That by the last Clause of this Act, the Members of the Colledge of Justice are exeemed from Tryal before Inferiour Courts, which was formerly granted in Removings, p. 6. c. 39. Queen M. and is here extended to all Causes according to old accustomed use; and though it was alleadg'd that thir last words were re∣strictive, and so the Members of the Colledge of Justice could not Advocat their Causes from Inferiour Courts, except in such Cases only as they could prove old use and wont; yet these words are found Exegetick, and to be equivalent, as if the Act had said, because of old accustomed use, granting them that priviledge, and this was very reasonable, for since they are oblig'd to attend the Lords, and their Clients, the Citing them before Inferiour Courts had been inconsistent with both. The Action of Molestation is the same with us, that finium re∣gundorum was by the Civil Law, and what can stop Perambula∣tions in our Law, are set down, Statut. David 2. cap. 20. where amongst other things, it is observ'd, that a Minor is not oblig'd to Defend in Perambulations, and this is the only place in our writ∣ten Law, where that old Maxime is to be found, minor non tene∣tur placitare de hareditate paternâ; and yet it seems that a Mole∣station being declar'd by this Act to be judicium possessorium, a Mi∣nor should be oblig'd to Defend in this, as he is in all other pos∣sessory Judgements; but the reason of this Exception in Molesta∣tions, seems to be, because ordinarly Molestations resolve in Decla∣rators of property, or are joyn'd with them. BY this Act the Defender is indefinitly to pay the Expence of the Obtainer of the Decreet, at the modification of the Judge,ACT 43. vid. Act 110 Par. 7. Ja. 5. But though this Act be general, yet statutum quod disponit simpliciter ut victus victori in expensas sit con∣demnandus, hunc sensum admittit, si non habuerit justam litigandi causam, hic quippe sensus juri communi est conformis & rationi conveni∣ens, Voet. de Statut. Sect. 7. cap. 2.116.
BY the first part of this Act the Lords of Session are made Judges to the Interpretation of the Act of Oblivion;ACT 44. whereas by the Act 67 Par. 9 Q. M. several particular persons were named for that effect. There is an unprinted Act, saying, that because seve∣ral of the Lords were dead, and that because many legal actions a∣rose upon the Indemnity, therefore this Act was necessary. By the second part of this Act, nine Lords of Session are suffici∣ent to be a Quorum, and which is now observ'd, though by the 57 Act 5 Par. Ja. 5. ten Lords with the Chancellor or Pre∣sident at the first Institution, were necessary to make a Quo∣rum. ACT 45.THis Act is fully Explain'd in the 78 Act 9 Par. Queen M. ex∣cept in so far as concerns the Obligation laid by this Act upon the Notars, to bring their Prothecals to the Lords of Session, and which are to be kept by the Clerk register and his Deputs; these Prothecals are the Book, wherein Notars set down the Breviats of what Instruments they take, & protocollum est memorialis tabellionis scriptura qua in codice aliquo gestus acti substantia breviter adnotatur vid. gloss. in Novel. 44. de tabel. the reason why they are ordain'd to be brought to the Register, is, that false Papers may be hereby try'd, and lost Papers may be made up, for if an Instrument be lost, the person in whose favours it was at first made, may raise an Action before the Lords, craving that it may be made up out of the Notars Prothecal, and this being nobilis officii, cannot be done before inferiour Courts, Vid. 22 Act 22 Par. Ja. 6. Upon the 19 of February 1680. The Lord Register con∣tra Sir William Primerose It was found that the Registers De∣put, called the Clerk for the Notars was Deprivable, for not calling in the Prothecals of Deceassed Notars, by the space of five years, to which the Lords found him actually oblig'd, though it was alleadg'd, that by these Acts he was only oblig'd to receive the Prothecals, when they were brought in, but not to call for them, nor was it possible for him to know when Notars dy'd, and therefore by this Act, Sheriffs, &c. are ordain'd to acquaint him of the Death of Notars, within their Jurisdictions, for it was urg'd that the Obligation to bring in the Prothecals, being committed to this Clerk, and he being only intrusted with it, the Act would be elusory, if he were not oblig'd to do Diligence, since none else could do it, and he might easily inform himself, at least once a year. It was also Debated, that by this Act the Clerk to the Notars was oblig'd to understand sufficiently the Office of Notary, though it was answer'd that he was no further oblig'd than to draw a Bill for their admission, and the Clerks of the Session are not oblig'd to understand the Civil Law, which they are oblig'd to Mi∣nut.
MEssengers being grown too numerous,ACT 46. therefore by this Act they are restricted to 200. comprehending the seventeen He∣raulds, Macers and Pursevants in that number; which number is here divided amongst the Shires, but the number is now increas'd contrary to this Act, and to the great loss of the people. The Lyon is Constituted by this Act sole Judge to the faults com∣mitted by Messengers, and to their Cautioners, whom they find for their good behaviour at their Entry; which power is Ratifi'd by the 125 Act 12 Par. Ja. 6. And the Lyon with his Brethren He∣raulds are declar'd Judges to all the Malversations of Messengers in their Offices by the 21 Act 3 Sess. 2 Par. Ch. 2. by which Act, though the Malversation of the Messenger be punishable by the Ly∣on; yet he has not power thereby to determine upon the Dam∣nages done to privat parties by Messengers, and to determine a∣gainst the Messenger or his Cautioner, for the sums for which the Messenger should have us'd Execution, albeit the Lyon has privat Ratifications from the Parliament, with this priviledge, vide June 27. 1673. Heriot contra Corbet. BY this Act all Supersederies are discharg'd,ACT 47. for Protections against Execution of the Law were so call'd then. This Act is renew'd, 13 Act 23 Par. Ja. 6. By which the Granter is declar∣ed lyable for the Debt, and by the 9 Act 3 Par. Ch. 2. These Acts are Ratifi'd; and because the last Act related only to the Session, therefore the Privy Council, Session, Commissioners of Justiciary, and Exchequer, are declar'd lyable, if they grant Protections, except to such as are Cited to answer before them; and so the Act protects not pursuers, for they are not Summon'd; and if pursuers were protected, any man might raise a summons and thereby grant himself a Protection; but yet if the interest of the Common-wealth require that a Crime be prosecuted; I think they may after inquiry, secure the pursuer during the dependence; for though His Majesties Advocat may pursue without an Informer, yet an Informer helps much. Albeit that Act Discharges the granting Protections, and makes the Granters lyable; yet the Contemners of the Protection are punish'd; and a Writer to the Signet was Suspended in November 1678. for causing apprehend a person, notwithstanding of the Lords Protection; albeit it was there alleadg'd, that though Pro∣tections might be granted by the Lords, upon depending Pro∣cesses, yet these Protections could not extend to secure them against delivering of Papers, which are in their own power; and though a Protection granted by the King for Debt, does not secure against things that are in the Receivers own power, as Exhibition of Pa∣pers, &c. yet if either the King or the Lords grant expresly Pro∣tections against all Cases whatsoever, then it will secure even a∣gainst such Exhibitions, until the same be expresly re-called,
though it seems that by that Act, Judicatures have only power to grant Protections to such as are Cited before them, during the time wherein they may come and return to obey the Judicature, in cases wherein their personal presence is necessary for the Administration of Justice, not exceeding a month in all. It is also clear, that even the Defender may be apprehended, if he get not a Protec∣tion, for this Act does not protect, but is only a warrand for granting one. And there is lately an Act appointing Protections that pass under the Kings Hand, to pass the Great Seal, per sal∣tum. The Council to prevent the granting of Protections, whereby the privat interest of the Subjects was so much destroy'd, and the execution of Law eluded, did by an Act in January 1678. and sign∣ed by all of them, declare that whoever voted to any such Protec∣tions, should be lyable to the Debt; to elide which, they there∣after changing the name of Protections, granted Licences to per∣sons to stay in the Countrey free from all Execution, and there∣fore the King by His Letter in July 1679. did Discharge the Coun∣cil to grant any Licences or Protections, except conform to these His Laws; and the 9 Act Par 3 Ch. 2. Ordains all such Licences, Protections, &c. to be sign'd, and the Signers to be lyable, &c. It may be likewise doubted, whether the Commission of the Kirk can grant Protections, since there is only allowance by this Act granted to the Privy Council, Session, Exchequer and Justice Court, but since the 61 Act 1 Par. Ch. 2 Declares that the Acts, Decreets and Ordinances of that Commission shall have the strength of the Acts and Decreets of Parliament, they are really a Commission of Parliament: And therefore as the Parliament can grant Pro∣tections, so can they, especially since without this they cannot ex∣erce well the Jurisdiction intrusted to them by the Parliament, and it seems inherent in all Courts, that they should be able to pro∣tect all whom they Cite; and it is clear by this Act, that the Su∣pream Courts of Scotland have power before this Act of Parliament to grant Protections: for this Act reserves only their former power, but grants them no new power. These Protections are thought the same with the induciae moratoriae, granted by the Civil Law l. 4. C. de precibus Imperator. &c. which are not valid by that Law, nisi idonea fideijussio super debiti solutione praebeatur. But I think these to be rather Suspensions, and that Cau∣tioners in Suspensions with us arose from this. ACT 48.THis Act anent Teinding of Corns is Explain'd fully in Act 73 Par. 6 Ja. 6. ACT 49.BY this Act he who accuses another for Treason, and proves not, commits Treason.
Observ. This is only in case of malicious accusation; for the Act says, That malicious accusers, &c. and therefore if the pursuer had probable grounds for his accusation, he seems not to incur the ha∣zard of this Act. Observ. 2. That though the Act says, Whoever accuses; yet the Kings Advocat runs no such hazard, for he accuses ratione officii; but to prevent this, he gets alwayes in Treason a warrand from the King or Council, upon Reading the Depositions of the Witnesses, taken by way of Precognition, or else he has an Informer, who finds Caution to insist, sub poena talionis. Observ. 3. That the pursuer is only lyable, if the party calum∣niat be call'd, accus'd, and acquit, therefore the Accuser repent∣ing and not insisting, it seems that he will not be lyable in this pain; but for not insisting, he will be only lyable in the sum under which he has found Caution, and possibly in poenam arbitrariam, if malice appear; and yet it may be urg'd that he should be lyable to the pain of Treason, since not insisting was the pursuers fault, and no man ought to have advantage by his own fault, nam qui dolo desiit pssidere pro possessore habetur. Dubatur, If this Act extends to such as pursue only Statutory Treason, and sure it does not, if they pursue not the same as Trea∣son, though upon the event it may prove so. It may also be doubted if a Witness who has Deponed against a man in a previous Tryal, as guilty of Treason, and thereafter Depons he knows nothing of it, commits Treason: for this wrongs the party as much as an accusation; yet if this Deposition was not emitted ultroneously, but on a Citation, it cannot be call'd an accusation, nor punisht as such; but it seems punishable by Death, by l 1. in prin. ff. ad L. Cor. de fals. LAnded men Convict of Theft, Reiff, or Reset, commit Trea∣son.ACT 50. It may be doubted if an appearand Heir be punishable in that case as a Landed man; or if a person once a Landed man, but de∣nuded, be lyable. Though Landed men may be thus punished as Traitors, yet they are ordinarly pursu'd for single Theft, and the Kings Ad∣vocat does restrict his Libel to ordinary Theft. But because it may be punishable as Treason, therefore the Lords Advo∣cate Thefts against Landed men, though the Libel bear only single Theft. THe murthering any person who is under the trust, power, or assurance of the slayer, commits Treason.ACT 51. Assurance is extended to such as we have invited to our house▪ or such as we are under trysting and capitulation with. This Act is likewayes extended to Husbands killing Wives, Bairns, Servants, & e contra.
ACT 52.THis Act determining what is Usury, is explained in my Crimi∣nal Pract. Tit. Usury, ACT 54.THis Act declares that such as exact other Customs from the peo∣ple than what is warranted by express Law, or express war∣rand, or immemorial possession, shall be punished as oppressors. It is thought that possession for 40 years is equivalent to imme∣morial possession, and warrands such exactions, by prescriptions. ACT 55.SHips transporting Victual are confiscated, and the Masters and Clerks imprisonable during pleasure. This is now abrogated, for it is lawful to transport Corn even without a warrand from the Exchequer, except where the same is discharged by special Procla∣mation because of Dearth. ACT 58.THis Act discharging the eating of Flesh in Lentron is in Desuetude, tho till of late eating of Flesh was discharged without a previous warrand under the hand of the Clerks of the Privy Council. ACT 59.THis Act appointing the slayers of Deer, Cunnings, &. to be punished as Thieves, is explained crim. pract. Tit. Theft, num. 15. ACT 60.BEcause the people were oft times mistaken in executing their Brieves Legally, through the difference arising from several Ju∣risdictions, therefore some places are here appointed to prevent mistake, and a General is subjoined, appointing Brieves to be exe∣cuted either at the head Burghs of Shires, or Stewartries, or where Brieves were most usually served. From which last words it may be observed, that Executions are sufficient, though they be not at the real head Burghs, if they be at the place where they used to be executed; and thus Executions at Dunce were sustained for the Shire of Berwick, though Greenlaw was really the head Burgh by the Erection; and Executions of a Warning were sustained though not at the right Paroch Church within which the Lands lay, since it was executed at the place at which Warnings used to be executed, 24 January, 1667. The Earl of Argile contra George Campbel; so far the presumption of ha∣bite and repute prevails even over truth. ACT 61.BY this Act the granter of a Woodset is declared not to be pre∣judged by his negligence, though he suffer an Ecclesiastick quietly to intrude, and to continue long, yea even 100 years in the possession of Laick Patronages to which he has right, because during the none-redemption the Woodsetter did not look upon him∣self as Heretor.
The reason of this Act has certainly been because Church-men possessing per decennalen▪ & triennalem possessonem prescrived a right, and the Act seems to imply, that because the granter of the Woodset was not valens agere whilst the Woodset stood, therefore his negli∣gence should not prejudge him; but I conceive that Church-men now prescriving a right by 40 years peaceable possession will exclude all the rights of Laick Heretors, as well when the Lands (to which the Laick Patronage is annext) are Woodset as other wayes. FOr understanding Ecclesiastical Pensions, it is fit to know, that of old when the present incumbent was sickly,ACT 62. the Synods al∣low'd him to resign his Benefice, reserving to himself a Pension or portion out of it, as is clear by Balsamon ad Synodum Ephesinam; but thereafter the Pope having reserv'd to himself the power of burden∣ing Benefices with Penesions, men did by Simony impetrat from the See of Rome immoderat and causless Pensions, though it was preten∣ded that there could regularly no Pension be granted but for one of three reasons: 1. The favour of the resigner of a Benefice, that he might after the resignation live suitably to the Character he once bore. 2. That when two Benefices were excamb'd, the greater Benefice might be burden'd with a Pension in favours of the lesser. 3. When there was any debate concerning the Benefice, it was law∣ful to burden the same with a Pension. But notwithstanding of this, Pensions increased so far as to be complain'd of as a Harvest without Sowing; and our Law did take very much pains to lessen Pensions, and by the 1 Act of K. Ja. 1. his first Parliament, in the Black Acts which is not now Re-printed, the King reserved to him∣self the cognition of Pensions obtain'd at Rome. And by the 4 Act of the 1 Par. K. Ja. 3. it is appointed that no Pension be purchased out of any Benefice without consent of the possessor, which was ve∣ry just in it self, and was made to exclude the Popes power, who pretended that he could Arbitrarily impose any Pension he pleas'd, as is clear by Gigas de pensionibus Ecclesiasticis, Quaest. 4. By this Act it is declar'd that the principal gift of Pension being improven, all Confirmations and Decreets following thereon shall fall in con∣sequence. By the 29 Act of this Parliament it is likewise appoin∣ted that Pensions shall not be prejudg'd by the Act of Annexation, they being lawfully authoriz'd by Decreets, or Possession, and there∣fore by the 137 Act, Par. 12. Ja. 6. It is ordain'd that all Pensions not authorized by Decreet, or Possession in the lifetime of the Pre∣lat, alledg'd disponer thereof, shall be null; and by the Canon Law Pensions imposed upon Benefices of Cure, extinguuntur morte gravantis; but the reason given by this Act is, because such Pensi∣ons not so confirmed in the granters lifetime, are null of the Law, and may be presum'd to be false. Another reason that may be gi∣ven is, because the Incumbent having no power over the Benefice but during his life, it were unjust that any burden granted by him should last longer than his life, and if it lasted longer it would
prejudge very much the care of Souls, because the burden of a Pension would discourage the Intrant; and the reason why it is presum'd to be forg'd is because it is very probable that if it had been a true Pension it had been own'd during the lifetime of the granter. By the 207 Act, Par. 14. Ja. 6. all Pensions and Dispo∣sitions out of the Temporalities of vacant Benefices since the Act of Annexation, are declar'd to be null, which shews that Pensions were never consider'd as solid and unquarrellable rights. ACT 63.OBserv. 1. Though this Act appoints the Exchequer to sit till the last of August, yet it sits sometimes no longer than the last of July; and it being doubted whether the King could notwith∣standing of this Act of Parliament ordain the Exchequer Compts to begin upon the first of March; it was resolv'd that could not be done, because by this Act of Parliament the not Compting till the first of July, was introduced in favours of the Subjects, who are by this Act liable to no Compt till July, and so the King could not anticipat the obligation, by making them Compt in March, this being rather matter of Property than of Govern∣ment. Observ. 2. That Denunciations at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh against such as do not Compt in Exchequer, they being thereto ly∣able, are equivalent, as if the Denunciation had been at the Head Burgh of the Shire; but yet I conceive Escheats would not fall upon such Denunciations, because no Escheats fall by Denunciations upon ge∣neral Letters; but it is alleadg'd that Escheats may now fall upon such Denunciattons by the 15 Act 3 Ses. Par. 1. Ch. 2. where this Act is renew'd, and such Denunciations are there declared to be equivalent to Charges and Denunciations personally, and at their dwelling house, and head Burgh of the Shire, and that as to all intents and purposes; and by that Act such Letters and Executions may be Registrated either in the general Register of Hornings, or in the Thesaurers Register, albeit generally all Letters of Horning ought to be Registrated in the particular Re∣gister of the Shire, Act 75 Par. 6. Ja. 6. or in the general Register. ACT 64.THis Act is explained in the 77 Act 6 Par. Ja. 5. ACT 65.EXecution by this Act may pass at the Kings instance against High. landers and Borderers, ubi non patet tutus accessus, upon Citation at the Head Burgh of the next quiet Shire. Though this Act was only in favours of Executions at the King's instance, which seems to be a priviledge ob bonum publicum, yet by a late custome Dispensations are granted upon common Bills by the Lords, to cite at any mans instance, though it was not proven that there was not tutus accessus, and therefore the Lords did by Act of
Sederunt discharge the granting of such priviledges upon common Bills, and ordained that something should be adduced for proving that there was not tutus accessus, and that such warrands should on∣ly be granted in praesentia, 29 June, 1666, Mepherson against Mc∣cleud. Per clem. 1. de Judic. & clem. 1. de sor. compet. citatio potest fieri per edictum ubi locus non est securus, vid. Marant. de jud. part. 6. num. 84. where he observes well that these edictal citations be∣ing so prejudicial, cannot be granted by inferiour Judges; and thus if any person be to be cited, as out of the Countrey, at the Peer of Leith, this cannot be done before inferiour Courts, without Letters of Supplement from the Lords. BY this Act the Comptroller is lyable for the Chamberlains whom himself nominats,ACT 67. but he is only lyable for diligence against He∣retable Chamberlains, because he names them not. The Thesaurer is lyable in the same manner as the Comptroller was, though the Thesaurer be not here nam'd, because the Thesaurer is now in place of the Comptroller. But it may be doubted if a person who is repute solvent, and was really so, were nominated, a Chamberlain proving afterwards insolvent, will make the Thesaurer lyable. BY this Act Rentals set by the King, not bearing Heirs, are not extended to Heirs, but resolve in naked Liferents,ACT 68. though regularly qui sibi providet & haeredibus providisse videtur. Nota, That our Law has thought that this needed an Act of Parliament; and therefore in other cases, where there is no Statute it would seem that Rights granted to a man, should regularly ex∣tend to his Heirs, arg. hujus legis. Observ. 1. Though this Act mention only Rentals set by the King, yet the Rentals set by Subjects, are not extended to Heirs, except Heirs be therein-mentioned; and though a Rental mention Heirs indefinitly, yet it will only extend to the first Heir, and will nei∣ther be accounted null for want of an Ish, nor be extended to all Heirs, for then it would be equivalent to an Heretable Right. THis Act Discharges the Disponing of the Kings Casualties in great, as the Casualties of a whole Countrey,ACT 69. which is most rea∣sonable; and therefore all Gifts of Regalities may be quarrell'd as null, because in them all the Escheats are Dispon'd; and though this Act Discharges the giving away of Casualties arising from any one Crime, yet this Objection was Repelled against the Gift of Usury in which were given away all the profits arising to the King by Usu∣ry.
ALL pecunial pains are ordain'd to be taken up according to the rate the Money gave when the Fine was impos'd,ACT 70. or else the Fine is to be augmented, according to the augmentation of the Money; and this Act was reasonable, because it was not just that Delinquents should get advantage by not payment; and it was ne∣cessary, because without this Act, Fines, as all other Debts, might be pay'd according to the current Money, at the time the same fell due. ACT 71.THe pain of negligent Sheriff-Clerks is tinsel of their Moveables, and the principal Sheriffs are to pay 100 pounds for them, be∣sides the damnages of parties. Observ. 1. That in the time of this Act, Sheriffs had the nomi∣nation of their own Clerks; but now since the Sheriff-Clerks are nominated by, and depend upon the Secretary, it is not just that the Sheriff should be Fineable for the fault of the Clerk. Observ. 2. That though by this Act the Sheriff-Clerk is ob∣lig'd to send an Inventar of all the Registrat Hornings yearly to the Thesaurer, yet this is in Desuetude. ACT 72.THis Act is in Desuetude as to the price to be taken by Messen∣gers, but they still find Caution to the Lyon at their ad∣mission, de fideli administratione. ACT 73.RElief is a Duty due by the Vassal to the Superiour at his En∣try, for relieving his Fee out of the Superiours hands. By this Act it is appointed, that when this Casualty arises to the King, it may not be compounded for, but that all that is due be taken; and the true avail is a years Retour-duty in Ward-lands, and the double of the Feu-duty in Feu-lands. Hope tells us, that though a Gift of Non-entry contain the Re∣lief, yet the Donatar will not have Right thereto, because such is the Custom of Exchequer, as he says; But I think that the true reason is, because this Act Discharges this Casualty to be gifted. When ere the Vassal takes out a Precept from the Exchequer, for Infesting himself, he is lyable for the Relief; and the Sheriff may be Charg'd therefore, conform to the Responde Book: or the par∣ty may be Summarly Charg'd for it by this Act, and the ground may be also poynded for it, as deitum fundi, when a party gets a Precept, the Servants of the Chancery write down respondebit Vicecomes de, &c▪ or Respondebit any Judge to whom the Pre∣cept is direct, and that is call'd the Responde here mention'd, by which Responde-book, the Sheriffs and their Deputes are Charg'd yearly in Exchequer.
BY this Act the Sheriff did count for all Escheats yearly, for then he might have intrometted summarly,ACT 74. and had Letters of In∣troission; but now he is not countable, nor oblig'd to intromet, but the Escheats are gifted to Donatars. BY this Act all Commissions for judging Crimes,ACT 75. are ordain'd to pass the Quarter-Seal: but now Commissions are granted by the Council without any Seal; and though this Act Discharges justly the granting Commissions for judging Slaughter, ordaining that Crime to be Judg'd only by the Justices; yet now the Council uses to grant Commissions even for Judging Slaughter, Murder, Witchcraft, and all such Crimes. But though the Council may grant such Commissions for Judging these Crimes, when they fall in under general Commissions, that are granted by the Council; yet I see not how they can grant Commissions contrary to this Act, for Judging Slaughter in special. Observ. 2. That all Commissions of the Justiciary should be un∣der the Quarter-seal, to the end as this Act of Parliament observes, there may be a Responde made thereupon; and yet the Council now uses to grant Commissions, which have no other warrand but a Paper subscriv'd by themselves, and not by way of Signature, as is here ordain'd, and the great fault that is committed in granting these Commissions, is that the Process is never ordain'd to be re∣turned to the Justice-Clerk, to the end that both it may be known, whether the Processes be legal, and that it may be known what is due to the King, for which the Responde mentioned in this Act was to be made, vid. observ. on 126 Act Par. 12 Ja. 6. Observ. 3. From these words of the Act, That no Commission be granted to proceed in Slaughter, but that the Justice-general and his Deputs proceed thereupon. It uses to be urged that a Council of War cannot be a sufficient Warrand for Souldiers to Judge Murders, and other Crimes committed by any of their Number against Countrey-men, these not being Military Crimes, but being Crimes that should be tryed by our fundamental Law in the Justice-Court, where the people have a double security, both by Learn'd Judges, and an Inquest of Neighbours, and a Kings Advocat to be careful of the probation; and it may as well be pretended that they may Judge their own Souldiers in civil Cases; and that they may judge a Coun∣trey man when he kills a Souldier, Vid. Crim. pract. Tit. Jurisdiction of Justices over Souldiers; and the Council ordain'd Burr a Drummer to be delivered up to the Justice Court for killing a Woman, though he had suffered two Councils of War, November 3. 1681. But to clear this, the King by His Letter to the Council, has declar'd that Souldiers are only to be be Try'd for Military Crimes by a Counsel of War, and that for ordinary Crimes they shall be judg'd by the Justices, &c.
ACT 76.AS parties may pursue Crimes without concourse of the Kings Advocat; so by this Act the King may pursue without an In∣former, ad vindictam publicam. ACT 78.THis Act ordains that no Rests be allow'd to the Thesaurer ex∣ceeding 20000 pounds a year, but that he shall compt for what is above this sum, so that he may do Diligence therefore as ac∣cords, but this is not observ'd. The second part of this Act ordains that the King be not pre∣judg'd by general Ratifications in Parliament; for though Ratifi∣cations cannot prejudge third parties; yet they might have pre∣judg'd the King who past them, if His Majesties Interest had not been secur'd by this Act. THough this Act Discharges all continuation of Justice-Courts, and Ordains the Justices to proceed,ACT 79. notwithstanding of such precepts; yet both King and Council use to Command the Justices to continue their Diets, though this Act was objected in the Process for William Halyburton's Murder, June 1676. But it is ne∣cessary that in such Cases the King should be inform'd by the Ju∣stices, what is to be said on both sides, before they continue such Diets in Process, at the instance of privat parties, for the King and the party having different Interests, and it being declar'd by Act of Parliament, that the party may pursue without the King. It seems very reasonable that the parties Process should not be stopt upon sur∣reptitious Warrands, without acquainting the King. I find in the Council Register, July 1582 That because His Majesty had been troubled by the importunity of such as desir'd not to be Try'd before the Justice-airs, but at particular Diets, whereby they eschewed ordinarly all punishment; that therefore His Majesty does in Council, Statute and Ordain (this is oftimes the Stile in Acts of Council, as well as in Acts of Parliament) That the Justices shall proceed, without respect to such Warrands; and it seems that that Act of Council has given occa∣sion to this Act of Parliament; and generally many Acts of Par∣liament have been at first Acts of Council, which shews like∣wise what power the King has in His Council of this Nation. ACT 80.THis Act appointing that Sheriffs should yearly give in the Names of their Deputs and Clerks to the Lords of Session, and find Caution in the Books of Council, is in Desuetude, as to both the parts, for they neither find Caution, nor give in the Names of their Deputs; But de jure, I think Letters of Horning may be direct upon this Act for both effects, it being most rea∣sonable that the Lords of Session should know whether the Deputs be able, and this Caution would keep them in awe and secure the
people, if they do injustice. The Caution requir'd by this Act is Burgesses, Indwellers in Edinburgh Caution Burgeoise, as the French call the best Caution. BY this Act the form of holding Justice-airs is set down, but it is to be found more fully in the Iter justiciarii,ACT 81. and upon the word Justice-air, de verb. signif. and so needs not be repeated; but there are some things fit to be observ'd, because innovated. Observ. 1. That Commissions of Justiciary are to be under the Testimonial of the Great-Seal by this Act, but now they are al∣ways under the Great-Seal, when granted by the King; but sel∣dom or never under the Quarter-Seal, which is call'd the Te∣stimonial of the Great-Seat, and when they are granted by the Council, they are only Sign'd by a Quorum, but under no Seal. Observ. 2. That albeit the Steuartries or Bailliries be here ap∣pointed to come to the head Burrows of the Shire, where Dittay is to be taken up; yet it has been found, that the Council may or∣dain them to come to other places for the publick conveniency, when the Diets are so short that the Justice Clerk cannot stay at every Shire, and thus the Constabulary of Hadingtoun was ordain'd to give up Dittay at Edinburgh. Obser. 3. That albeit by the old Form, Pannels were to be Cited to Justice-airs upon fourty dayes Iter. Just. num. 6. Yet now they use to Cite upon fifteen or more dayes, and then as now, they are not Cited peremptorly to one day, as in ordinary Justice-Courts, but to any one of the days in which the Court is to sit in that place, to which they are cited, and all the Pannels are called eve∣ry day at that place, and if they compear at any one of the dayes, they are not declar'd Fugitives. At the first day of Justice-airs, all who are call'd must find Cau∣tion to appear at all the Diets of the Justice-airs, which some com∣plain of. Albeit by the form of our old Brive, and the constant Practique, only Millers, Brewers, Smiths, and Officers of Courts were cited to give up Dittay upon Oath, because it was presum'd that the best intelligence is to be had from such publick persons; yet the Coucil did lately ordain that Noblemen and Gentlemen should likewise be oblig'd to give up Dittay, because the Crime being Treason, and art and part thereof; It was presum'd that they should understand the same better than mean people; and for detecting of so great a Crime, persons of all qualities should concur; and the former Custom was not exclusive of calling per∣sons of quality. Likeas by the 94. Act Par. 13 Ja. 3. The King is to call the Lords and Head-men of the parts of His Realm, and to take Dittay of them (id est by them) of notour Trespas∣sers.
ACT 82.BY this Act Hoghers or Slayers of Horse, destroyers of Plough-Graith, Growing Corns, &c. are punish'd as Thieves to the Death, Vid. crim. pract. Tit. Theft. Observ. 1. That this Act proves Theft to be Capital by our Law, though we have no express Law for making Theft Capital gene∣rally. Observ. 2. That it may well be doubted, whether cutting of Corn, &c. in Landed-men is Treason, since it would seem to be so; for by this Act it is declar'd punishable as Theft, and Theft in Landed-men is by the 50 Act of this Parliament declar'd to be Treason; but yet I conceive that these Statutory Thefts are not punishable as Treason, since that were but fictio fictionis & duae fictiones non cadunt in idem subjectum. Likeas the punishment is de∣determin'd here to be the punishment of simple Theft, viz. Death, whereas if the Law had design'd Forfalture, it would have nam'd Forfalture here, as in the former Act. It has been doubted upon this Act, whether the cutting of Corns Sowen by a Strang▪ who had no right, was a Crime in the Heretor, who may pretend that satum cedit solo; and it is thought that if the Heretor suffer'd a Stran∣ger to possess for any considerable time, he could not have cut them down summarly, no more than he could have removed that Stranger summarly from his Possession, though unjust. ACTS 83, 84.THese Acts are Explain'd crim. pract. Tit. Deforcement, Vid. Act 150 Par. 12 Ja. 6. and Statut. Will. cap. 4. v. 5. ACT 85.IT appears by this Act, that Letters of Lawburrows were of old granted by several Clerks; and by this all Caution for Law∣burrows is ordain'd to be found to the Justice-Clerk, which was in∣deed most reasonable, because bodily harm is there dreaded, and the preventing of that should belong to the Justice-Court; but now the Council, Session, and Criminal Court have the power of causing parties find Caution for Lawburrows, but the Act in so far as it discharges Lawburrows to be granted against Complices in the general, is yet in observance, and very justly, for it was not fit to leave it arbitrary to the parties to charge any they pleased. ACT 86.THough this Act appoints all Courts to be Fenc'd at eleven of of the Clock in the forenoon, yet it does not irritat and annul all Courts holden at any other hour, and Courts are ordinarly held at other hours, but it may be doubted, whether a party cited to a peremptory Diet, and staying till twelve of the Clock, and tak∣ing Instruments thereon, could be unlawed in the afternoon, for absence; but if the Court once sit, parties are obliged to at∣tend.
THough this Act appoints the Expences of parties accus'd and ac∣quitted to be modifi'd by the Justice-Clerk and his Deputs,ACT 87. yet they are now only modifiable in full Court by the Justices: but it is doubted, whether the Justices can modifie Expences, where the Defenders are absent, since the only Certification against ab∣sents, is that they shall be Denunc'd Rebels; But yet the modi∣fying Expences, seems to be the necessary result of all Processes, and that inest officio judicis; It is also doubted, whether the Justices can ex intervallo, modifie Expences, none having been sought the time that the Letters were brought back, and the par∣ty declar'd Fugitive, and the Justices are in use to do both, but the case has not been yet fully Debated. BY this Act the Roll of Assizers was to be given by the party ac∣cuser, or a Notar in his name;ACT 88. but now by the third Article of the Regulations, for the Justice-court, the Assizers are nam'd, and the List subscriv'd by the Justices, for it was thought too se∣vere that the Kings Advocat, or the party accuser should have the naming of the Assizers. BY this Act Customers passing Customable Goods for Gratitude, are to be Try'd Criminally,ACT 89. and their Moveables to be Escheat∣ed in case they be convicted. Observ. 2. That the Kings Servants are only to be punish'd in case they transgress for Money, so that negligence is not punish∣able except it be gross; but yet if Customers should wittingly and willingly pass Goods for Friends or Relations, I think it would be punishable by a Fine: And since the stealing of Cu∣stoms is Theft, this connivance in strict Law seems a Theft-bute, or accession to theft. Observ. 2. Though this Act declares this accession punishable in a Justice-air, yet the Exchequer and Council do also punish the same by arbitrary punishments. THis Act is Explain'd fully crim. pract. tit. Assizes; but it is fit to add that His Majesty having written a Letter in anno 1683. desiring the Justices to Examine Witnesses in Treason,ACT 90. when the Council requir'd them, at any time before insisting in the Process, to the end His Majesties Advocat might know how to Libel, and to prevent the absolving of Rebels, who were truly guilty by the mistake of citing the wrong Witnesses; it was alleadg'd that the desire of that Letter was contrary to this Act, ordaining all pro∣bation to be receiv'd only in presence of the Pannel. 2. That this would ingage Witnesses to adhere to the Depositi∣ons that might be Elicited from them by the too great zeal of His Majesties Servants, or the influence of others. To which it was answer'd, that as to the first, the Depositions to be taken in that
previous Tryal, were not to be made use of to the Assize, which was all that was discharg'd by this Statute. As to the second, It was not to be imagin'd that the Judges, to whom only this was to be intrusted, would prejudge any Pannel, or be corrupted by any influence; and before the Witnesses De∣pon'd these Depositions should be destroy'd, so that the Witnesses could be under no apprehensions upon that account, and the people were in a better condition by this Letter than formerly, for it was securer to trust previous examinations to the Judges than to the Kings Advocat who did alwayes Examine alone formerly, and this would prevent unjust trouble, when there were no Witnesses who could Depone against the persons accus'd through error or malice. THis Act is also Explain'd in the Title Assizes: But it is fit to add that Blair and others being Convict of Error for assoilʒying some Traitors wrongously,ACT 91. and their Escheats being gifted, they rais'd a Reduction of the Gift, as founded upon a Verdict that was null by this Act, in so far as the Kings Advocat had spoke with the Assyzers after they were inclos'd, which reason was repell'd, be∣cause the Justices had declar'd that the Advocat had only spoke to the Assyzers in their presence, when the Assyzers were desiring to be solv'd of some doubts which was ordinary and allowable, De∣cember 21. 1682. It may be also doubted whether such Verdicts can be reduceable, for though the Act declare that the Assizers may assoilʒe, if any speak to them, yet if they and the Justices proceed, it seems not quar∣rellable, or at least before the Session; for I remember that the Ju∣stices having declar'd a Bond of Glenkindies forefaulted, for not producing some Witnesses against himself; the Lords declar'd that the Justice-court being a Supream Court, their Acts and Sentences were not quarrellable before the Session, Queritur, if both these may not be quarrell'd before the Parliament; and I think they can not, except the Decreets of the Session can. ACT 92.THis and the following Acts to the end of this Parliament were made for quieting the Borders and Highlands, as to which the same courses are to be taken, though now the Borders are Govern∣ed by a Commission of both Kingdoms, so they are not put to find Caution as they were by these Acts; but the Acts here set down are generally observ'd as to the Highlands still, except in so far as I shall here observe upon the respective Acts. Observ. 1. Though this Act appoints that the first day of eve∣ry Moneth shall be appointed for hearing Complaints concern∣ing the Borders and Highlands, yet that is in Desuetude as to both. Observ. 2. That, that part of the Act ordaining a special Register to be made for Borders and Highlands, is in observance, quoad the Highlands by a late Act of His Majesties Privy Council.
BY this Act all the Lands-lords contain'd in this Roll, are or∣dain'd to find Caution,ACT 93. which Roll is subjoin'd to the Acts of this Parliament, but that Roll is now very much alter'd, for ma∣ny others are now ordain'd to find Caution, who are not therein specifi'd; but are now in the Proclamations of Council, March 17. 1681. &c. because the Heretors mention'd in the Acts of Parlia∣ment, are often extinct, and the Lands for which they were to be bound, are dispon'd to others. And whereas by these Acts, these Landlords and Chiefs of Clans were ordain'd to produce their De∣linquents before the Justice or his Deputs, they are now to produce them before the Council, or else to pay the Debt, which are great arguments to prove that in matters of Government de facto we con∣sider more the Reason, than the Letter of the Law. Though this and the 103 Act of this Parliament, which is co∣incident with this may seem severe, because the innocent is bound for the guilty, yet necessity and publick interest has introduc'd these Laws by the same reason that in England the Paroch is lyable for the Robberies committed therein betwixt Sun and Sun, and thus these who have power of Jurisdiction from the Emperour, are ly∣able, vias publicas a latronibus purgare Gail▪ observ. 64. lib. 2. vid. eti∣am, l. 3. l. congruit, ult. ff. de officio Praesidis. It has been doubted whether the Council could in other cases not warranted by express Acts of Parliament oblige the Subjects to give Bond to live peaceably conform to Law, and particulary that their Tennents should not keep Conventicles, but should go to Church, and pay 50 pound Sterling for every Conventicle kept upon their Ground, or should present their Delinquents; and it was alleadg'd that the Council cannot, because regularly one man is not lyable for another mans Crime, nor can this inversion of Pro∣perty and Natural Liberty be introduced by a lesse power than a Parliament, nor had Acts of Parliament in this case been necessary, if the King and Council could have done the same by their own authority; but yet since the King has by express Act of Parliament the same power here that any Prince or Potentat has in any other Kingdoms, and that Government belongs to him as Property does to us, nor can the peace be secured otherwayes than by allowing him to take all courses for securing the peace, and preventing dis∣orders, that therefore this joyned with the practice of the Council is a sufficient warrand for exacting such Bonds, the practice of our King and Council being the best interpreter of the prerogative, espe∣cially where the things for which Band is to be taken, are not contra∣ry to express Law; and it is implyed in the nature of alledgiance that Land-lords should entertain none but such as will live regularly, and if they transgressed, the Master could not in common Law thereafter recept them without being lyable, as we see in Spuilʒies; or if the King pleased he might denounce the transgressors Rebels, and so might put the Master in mala fide, and though there be no such par∣ticular Laws warranding the taking of such Bonds, yet it will ap∣pear
by many instances in this Book, that Laws are extended de ca∣su in casum, and thus this power seems inherent in the Crown; like∣as the matter of Property is sufficiently secured by the alternative foresaid, of either presenting or paying the damnage, which alter∣native seems to be founded upon the same principle of justice, with actiones noxales mentioned in the Civil Law, Domino damnato permit∣titur aut litis aestimationem sufferre aut ipsum servum noxae dedere, vid. Tit. 8. lib. 4. Institut. I find many instances in the Registers of Council, wherein the Subjects are charg'd to secure the peace, under the pain of Treason, as in the case of the Lord Yester. BOnds given by Cautioners for broken men, do oblige the Heirs and Successors of the Cautioners,ACT 98. though they be not men∣tioned in the Band. Observ. 1. In Law he who obligeth himself to pay a Sum, o∣bligeth his Heirs; for as in Law qui sibi providet & haeredibus provi∣det sic qui se obligat & haeredes obligat, and therefore a man having bound himself and his Heirs Male, it was found that the Creditor was not thereby excluded from pursuing the Heirs Female, or any other Heirs, but that he was only bound to discuss first the Heirs who were specially named in the Obligation, 18 February, 1663. Blair contra Anderson; but yet Obligations for performing a deed, such as to present a Thief, are of their own nature personal, and therefore this Act was necessary. THe taking of Surety from Chief of Clanns doth not loose the O∣bligation taken from Land-lords,ACT 99. & e contra, and the reason why this Act seemed necessary, was, because this seemed to be an Innovation, and it seemed not just that both the Chiefs and Land-lords should be lyable, since they could not both have absolute com∣mand over the person to be presented; but yet this Act was most suitable to Law, since novatio non praesumitur nisi ubi hoc expresse actum est, l. ult. Cod. de Nov. And the Tennents in the High-lands are influenced both by Chiefs and Land-lords; but to make this Law more just, the Council gives action of a relief against the Lands-lord, if the Lands-lord harbour, or to the Lands-lord against the Chief, if the Chief recept him. BY this Act if Goods be taken away by any Clann'd man and re∣cept in the Country of their Chief, for the space of 12 hours to his knowledge,ACT 100. the Chief shall be lyable in solidum for all the Goods taken away, though there were but very few of his men present, as was found in a case pursued by Francis Irwing against Glenurchie be∣fore the Council; all such Chiefs being lyable in solidum, and not pro ratâ only for the wrongs committed by their Clanns.
BY this Act no Magistrat may keep a Thief,ACT 101. or Malefactor in Arms with him, albeit he pretend he is his Prisoner, but he must deain him in a closs house, both because squalor carceris is a part of the punishment due to Malefactors, and because if this were allow'd, Magistrats might by collusion suffer Malefactors to en∣joy their liberty. IS explained Crim. pr. tit. Theft.ACT 102. THis Act ordaining Masters to present their Tennents upon the Kings closs Valentines (or Orders in little Papers like Valen∣tines) is observ'd in the whole Registers of Council.ACT 103. THese two Acts discharging the Borderers of Scotland to marry with the Borderers of England, or to labour their Lands,ACT 104, 105 are abro∣gated by the Union. BY this Act the Land-lord doing diligence by obtaining Decreet of removing, using Horning,ACT 107. and doing all other things that was in his power after the fact comes to his knowledge, is no further lyable. Nota, By this Act the Land-lord must be put in mala fide by inti∣mation of his Tennents Crime. 2. Dubitatur whether this privi∣ledge should not likewise extend to Chiefs of Clanns, since they have less interest in the Delinquents then the Land-lords. BY the 100 Act of this Parliament, such as committed Slaughter, Mutilation, or other hurt upon Thieves, are not lyable:ACT 108. But by this Act an Indemnity is likewise granted to such as raise fire a∣gainst them, that being there forgot. THis Act is explained in the Observations upon the 29 Act of this same Parliament.ACT 110. BY this Act the Burrows pay the sixth part of the Impositions of Scotland, which is yet in observance,ACT 111. and because of this bur∣den they have the only priviledge of Trading, and therefore they justly pretended that their priviledge of Trading could not be com∣municable to the Burghs of Barony and Regality, who bore no part in this burden. Nota, That though by this Act the Taxation of the Burrows is not to be altered, that is only mean't of the 6 part which is to be born by the Burrows in general; for notwithstanding of this Act the Convention of Burrows do alter the Taxation of any particular Burgh according as the number of Burghs increaseth, or according as any particular Burgh grows unable; and they divide this sixth part amongst themselves according to the total of 100 pound Scots,
which is the imaginary Standard or Assis, and each Burgh pay ac∣cordingly, some being valu'd at 6 ss. some at 12 ss. &c. And if any Burgh resign its priviledges, they must also resign in favours of the Burghs Royal their common Good, after which Resignation, and not otherwayes, their proportion is divided amongst the rest; for it were unjust that they should retain their common Good which was to pay the proportion of publick burden, and yet be free from the burden it self. ACT 112.BY this Act a Burgh selling any part of their freedom without consent of his Highness and his three Estates, loses their whole freedome. Observ. 1. That the reason given by this Act is, because they as Vassals cannot sell without consent of the King their Superiour, and so this seems to be a kind of recognition, and it would have ap∣peared reasonable that therefore the King's consent might have seem'd sufficient, because he is only Superior; but the reason why by this Act the Parliaments consent is declared necessary, seems to be, because Burghs-Royal bears a part of the Taxation of the King∣dom, and so alienating any part of their freedom, they seem to les∣sen the subject-matter out of which the Taxation is payed. Obseev. 2. It may be doubted whether a posterior Confirmation or Ratification by the Parliament will be a sufficient consent. Obsrrv. 3. That Magistrats and Council cannot alienat the pri∣viledges of a Burgh, and therefore Alienations made by them would not infer this forfaulture or recognition, and therefore all the Inhabitants behoved to be cited by Touck of Drum to such A∣lienations as they were per sonitum Campanae, in the Civil Law, tit. Cod. de venditione Bon. Civit. ACT 113.BY this Act the Parliament having referred to the King to de∣termine who should represent the Barons (which shews what great deference our Predecessors had to their King) His Majesty determines that none but such free Barons as are Free-holders, hold∣ing of the King, and residing within the Shire, shall represent the Shire; but by an Act of Parliamant, 1669. It was declared that such as are free Barons might elect or be elected, though they were not actual Residenters, and that notwithstanding of this Act which is thereby abrogated as to that point, and most reasonably, for their interest in the Shire ceases not by their not residence; and conform to this Act the Convention decided in all Elections, June 1678. Nota, All Elections are to be subscrived by six Barons at least, and though in controverted Elections these who have six will be preferr'd to these who have five, and if neither of the Competi∣tions have six, a new Election will be order'd, because both are unlawful; yet if all the Barons were cited, and fewer than five were only present, a Commission by these five may seem sufficient, because the absence of Barons should not prejudge the Shire; yet in
the Convention 1678. many inclin'd to think that a new Election should be order'd in that case, because of this Act, and that that Shire ought not to have a Vote who would not send legal Commis∣sions. Though by this Act the Missives for calling Parliaments or Con∣ventions (which are here called General Councils) should be di∣rected to such as were the last Commissioners, in place of the She∣riffs, yet now they are ordinarly directed to the Sheriffs, and some∣times to any the King pleases, as in the Parliament, 1661. By this Act the Commissioners are to be choos'd at Michaelmass Head Court, and failing thereof at any other time the Free-holders meet, or when his Majesty requires them; and therefore it may be doubted if every Shire are obliged to choose at Michaelmass, since that seems to be ordered here, and the other dyets are only order∣ed to be failing of that Head Court: But yet many Shires in Scot∣land use not to choose at Michaelmass, but delay Elections till they be required. Though by this Act the names of such as are elected are ordained to be notified in Writ to the Director of the Chancery by the Com∣missioners of the last year, yet that is not now in observance, since his Majesty uses no more to call Parliaments and Conventions by Precepts out of the Chancery, but by general Proclamations. It is to be remembred that where there are Elections at Michael∣mass, the Shire cannot choose of new, as was found in the Conven∣tion 1678. in the case of the Shire of Perth, and ordinarly the Pro∣clamations bear as it did there, that the Shire should choose where they had not formerly chosen at Michaelmass, and so these Electi∣ons were made without warrand; but it may be doubted whether such Elections would be invalid if the Proclamations mention'd no∣thing, as to this point it was there alledged that the Shire might make a new Election, because the Commissioners then chosen were denuded, and were become no Barons; to which it was answered, that this should have been represented to the Council, who would have ordered a new Election, but the Shire could not proceed to elect by their own Authority contrary to the Proclamation. THough this Act has adjusted the Weights and Measures of the whole Nation,ACT 114. and ordain'd the Linlithgow Furlot to be the Standart as to that measure; yet it is expresly provided by this Act that if any persons be founded by Infestment, Tack, or Contract, in a different Measure, that Measure contain'd in their private Right should stand, but should be proportioned to the Linlithgow Measure, without prejudice to either Party, that is to say, they should have right to the old Measure fully, but it should be payed according to the new Measures; as for instance, the Boll of Galloway being six Furlots, the Master should have six Furlots pay∣ed in to him, which exception was most just, because of the intrin∣sck value of the Lands to which the old Tacks, &c. were propor∣tion'd, but yet the Lords sustain'd in Milns a Moulter, though much
greater than the ordinary fourth part of a Peek, because of con∣stant possession, and found that this Act did not extend to Milns, since therein different Measures are used according to the proporti∣on of the service, nor was this Act ever observ'd in any part of Scot∣land as to Milns. In Conjunct-fees and Life-rents also, the Husband being oblig'd to provide the Wife to particular Lands, which he obliges himself to make worth so many Chalders of Victual, it has been found that he is oblig'd to make them worth so many Chalders, according to the measure of the Countrey where the Land lyes, because his own Rent is so payed; and Ministers in Galloway, and other places where great Measures are used, will get their Stipends according to these Measures; the reason of all which I conceive to be, that these mea∣sures were made greater at first, because of the insufficiency of the Victual of these Countreys, and so the greatness of the Measure does only equal the intrinsick value. This Act having fallen in Desuetude as to the Linlithgow Mea∣sure, is again renewed by the 16 Act, Par. 23 Ja. 6. And many wish that Corn were now sold by the weight, and not by measure, weight being the only sure rule of the intrinsick worth of Corn; but this being propon'd in the Par. 1681. the overture was reject∣ed by a Vote. Vide observ. on Act 96 Par. 6. K. Ja. 4. supra. King James the sixth, Parliament 12. FOr understanding this Act it is fit to know that upon the 22 of May 1592.ACT 114. The Presbyterian party taking advantage of the Kings being engag'd against Bothwel▪ and in other dif∣ficulties, they held a General Assembly at Edinburgh, where∣in they drew up several Articles to be presented to the King and Parliament, whereof Spotswood names only four: 1. That the Acts 1584. against the Discipline of the Church, should be abro∣gated, and the present Discipline establish'd. 2. That the Act of Annexation should be abrogated, and the Patrimony of the Church restor'd. 3. That Abbots and Priors, &c. nor none having Com∣mission from them should Vote in Parliament, as Representing the Church. 4. That the Land should be purg'd of Blood. The King rejected the second and third, but in complyance with the first Article he did, because of his present difficulties, as Spots∣wood observes, allow the present Church Discipline by General Assemblies, Synods, and Presbyteries; but yet he does not here expresly abrogat Episcopacy, only the Presentations are not or∣dain'd to be directed to them, but to Presbyteries; which Pre∣sentations are again restor'd to Arch-bishops and Bishops by the 1 Act Par. 21 Ja. 6. And Spotswood tells us, that severals of the
Bishops possest even then by their Titulars. Episcopacy war again restor'd, so that the Bishops did sit in Par∣liament, by the 231 Act Par. 15 Ja. 6. but they were not fully re∣stor'd to their Spiritual Jurisdiction, till the 2 Act 18 Par. Ja. 6. but in that Act, this Act is not abrogated, as it would certainly have been, if this Act had abrogated Episcopacy; but this Act is abro∣gated by the Act 1 Par. 21 Ja. 6. By this Act the Collation and Deprivation of Ministers is declar∣ed to belong to the Church jure divino; but these words, or any siklike essential Censures, having warrand from the Word of God, are too general and may be abused. This Act is now abrogated totally in all its Heads, Clauses and Articles, by the 1 Act 2 Sess. Par. 1 Ch. 2. which seems too general; for though this Act establishes Presbytery, yet there are many Clauses in it in favours of the Protestant Religion, and to which no answer can be made, but that, what this Act has establish'd in favours of the Protestant Religion, was formerly establish'd by other Acts, but the truth is, these Acts are not so full as this. PEttie in his History tells us, that by the seventh Article of the foresaid Assembly,ACT 115. it was desired that Tacks set by the Depos'd Ministers should not stand: But by this Act it is only declar'd that when Ministers are depriv'd, their deprivation excludes them, tam ab officio quam beneficio, which has been doubted, because Sus∣pensions are only ab officio. By this Act though the persons be depriv'd, yet it is declar'd that their deprivation shall not be prejudicial to Tacks lawfully set by them before their deprivation, and the Lords do expone the word lawfully so, as to extend to the Setter himself, so that his Successors can only quarrel these Rights upon such reasons as the Setter him∣self could have quarrelled them, Vid. Hopes Major Pract. Tit. Kirk. THis Act is explain'd by the 48 Act 3 Par. Ja. 6.ACT 116. BY this Act the Woman Divorc'd for the Crime of Adultery committed by her,ACT 117. cannot Dispone her Estate to her Adul∣terer, if she Marry him, or to the Children procreat of that pre∣tended Marriage, which has been introduc'd, not only as a punishment of the Adultery when committed, but to discourage any from committing Adultery, upon hopes that their Children might succeed to their Estates with whom they committed Adul∣tery, which is conform to the Canon Law, by which non licet eam ducere in uxorem quam quis polluit adulterio, and by the Civil Law, that woman could not Institute that Servant her Heir with whom she had committed Adultery, Inst. de haered. instit.
in princip. These Marriages are likewise declar'd null by the 20. Act 16 Par. Ja. 6. Vid. crim. pract. Tit. Adultery, pag. 12. THough regularly Liferent-Escheats do not fall while after year and day;ACT 118. yet such as commit Slaughter within Kirks, or Kirk-yards, and the Resetters of them, lose their Liferent-escheat immediatly after Declarator, and this Liferent falls to the King, though in other cases Liferents fall to the Superiour, of whom the respective Lands hold. ACT 119.IT was usual to mortifie to Abbacies, formal and established Pa∣tronages of Kirks, which were formally erected in Parsonages, and to these the Monks presented Parsons, and were only in place of Patrons; at other times Tiends were Mortified and given to them; and after the Reformation, though Tiends were declared the Patrimony of the Church by the Act of Annexation; yet thereafter the Lords of Erection did prevail, by their importunity with the King, to erect these Tiends in Rectories, or Parsonages, whereof the Patronage was given to the Lord of Erection; but there can be nothing so unjust or illegal as these Patronages were; and therefore by this Act, the Parliament finding this abuse was growing, did declare that all Erections of Kirk-lands, and Teinds in Temporal Lordships and Livings, to the prejudice of the Kirk, and hurt of His Majesties Estate, and priviledge of his Crown, were null, which is founded upon excellent Reason; for such Ere∣ctions of Tiends were extreamly to the prejudice of the Church; Tiends being clearly by former Laws, declared to be the Spiritua∣lity, and so the Patrimony of the Church; 2. Laicks having power to present whom they pleased, such Erections did much hurt the Church, since it gave to Laicks the power of presenting. 3. It is too well known that such as are presented by these Pa∣trons, do ordinarly grant Tacks in favours of the Patron, and to his behove, which has been always lookt upon, as not only Si∣mony, but as most prejudicial to the interest of the Church, ma∣king the Ministry despicable, and tempting them to ill shifts, and discouraging worthy and honest men from seeking such slavish Be∣nefices, and therefore the Church has been always an enemy to such Impropriations, even when made in favours of Religious Mo∣nasteries; for Pope Alexander anno 1170 cap. Avaritiae. extra. de Praebendis, says, Intelleximus quod in Ecclesiis vestris pensiones perci∣pere consuevistis & antiquos reditus Minorastis ideo mandamus ut an∣tiquos reditus cum consensu Archiepiscopi ad integritatem pristinam re∣vocetis: and therefore the same Pope Alexander in the Lateran Council, made a Canon against this abuse, which was seconded by Pope Clement the 2. cap. sicut extra▪ de suplen. neglig. Praelat. and by Clement the fourth, in anno 1240: cap. Suscepti d Praebend.
in 6. but this was perfected by Clement the fifth, cap. constitut. de jure patronatus in Clementin, where it is appointed that si certa por∣tio (called constantly in the Canon Law congrua portio) non fue∣t ssignata per presentantem tune in paenam praesentantium ad Dioce∣s ipsos potestas hujusmo assignationis devolvatur. And since there was so great hazard in putting these Presentations in the hands of Monastries, what may be expected from Laicks? These Erections likewise of new Patronages, are extreamly dis∣advantagious to the people, because one Gentleman has thereby right to force a Minister upon all the other ancient and great He∣retors of the Paroch. Likeas, by being Patron, he comes to have interest in all their Teinds; and since the great design of the sub∣mission and surrender, was, that every man might have right to his own Teinds, this could never have been fully done, except the Patronages had been surrendered, for the Patron still would be in effect Titular, by getting Tacks. Likeas, by the submission, as in the beginning of it, they submit, as having, or pretending right to the Parsonage, Vicarage, or Patronage of Kirks pertaining to the Erections, so in the words of the Submission, they submit how they may be Denuded in His Ma∣jesties favours omni halili modo, of all and sundry Tiends, which they have of any other mens Lands, by whatsoever Right or Title they possess the same; and because His Majesty will take into His Princely Consideration, what satisfaction they shall have for their Tacks, Rights, and Patronages, according as His Majesty shall find the validity thereof. Therefore they submit, and His Majesty considers in the Decreet-arbitral, all the Patronages as sub∣mitted; and the reason why he determines nothing, especially for the Patronages, is, because considering all the Erection together, he determines satisfaction for that which is the true pecuniary in∣terest, nor needed the Act of Parliament express Patronages, be∣cause it only expresses these things, for which a pecuniary interest was to be given; or these Rights which were to be salved, but Pa∣tronages was neither of these: But the Act having annexed all the Superiorities of Kirk-lands, and Pertinents thereof, pertaining to whatsoever Abbacy, &c. according to the Tenor of His Ma∣jesties general determination, and the conditions therein exprest, it has thereby annexed all the Patronages, and it is observable, that though reservations are made, yet there is no reservation of Patro∣nages. Nota, That the Kings Advocat in his Summonds of Reduction, calls for all Rights of Patronages per expressum, and then sayes, and true it is that the said Kirk-lands, and others Libelled were an∣next to the Crown by the Act of Parliament. THis Act is Explain'd Crim. pract. Tit. Heresie, num. 4.ACT 120.
THis Act regulating the Thirds of Benefices is now in Desue∣tude.ACT 121. ACT 122.OBserv. 1. That Mercats are by this Act only discharged on Sunday in the Countrey, and not in Burghs Royal, for this Act is declar'd to be without prejudice of the Liberties of Burghs Royal; but this Discharge is extended to all, Act 159 Par. 13 Ja. 6. Observ. 2. From the words, not being the Mercat day of the next Burgh, that even the Parliament would grant no Liberty to hold Fairs in prejudice of Fairs granted formerly to other Burghs; and upon this principle of common equity, & ne quid siat in aemulati∣onem vicini. The Lords Reduced a Fair granted to Glenbervie by the King, because it was upon the same day that His Majesty had granted a Fair formerly to Glensarquhar, and within a mile of the other: and another granted to the Earl of Aboyn, because upon the same day, and within a mile of an old Fair at Birse, though it was alleadged that the River of Dee was here interjected, which by its great Torrents about Michaelmass, stopt all the North from coming to the Fair, and Frits. de nundinis Treating this question, confesses that a Fair cannot be said to be in aemulationem vicini, where the reason why it was granted, could be attributed to any publick Good, or Utility. It was also urg'd, that the granting Fairs being a meer gratuitous concession, the King could not be bound up from granting a new Fair; and thus we see that the King erects new Burghs Royal within a mile of other Burghs, and erects the Suburbs of Towns to be Burghs of Barony, albeit these may be said to be in aemulationem alterius; and really they are very prejudicial, nor can that maxime hold any where, save in privat Deeds done by one Neighbour to another, principally in prejudice of another, but yet that Burghs cannot be erected in prejudice of other Burghs, and what may be said to be granted in prejudice of other Burghs, and how far this general may extend, is to be seen in Fritsius de nundinis. Observ. 3. It has been urg'd that as by this Act, these who had Mercats upon Sunday, may hold them upon a Week Day; so if any person indite a Court, and cite to a day then lawful, though that day be thereafter declared a Holy-day, yet the persons there∣to cited are bound to appear the next lawful day, even where the Diets are peremptory. BY this excellent Act Sheriffs and other Judges ordinar are com∣manded to search Rebels,ACT 124. not only within their own Jurisdicti∣on, but to advertise the Sheriffs of the four halfs about, and that under the same pains that the Traitors or Rebels themselves incur; and the recovering Decreets is not sufficient, but they must seek, follow, pursue and present them to Justice. This Act is but
ill observed, though most necessary and reasonable; and by the 15 Act Sess. 3 Par. 1 Ch. 2. It is declared, that not only by Law, but by  and duty of their Office, Sheriffs, Stuarts, and  of Regalities are obliged to put the Laws in execution against the contemners of His Majesties Authority, as his proper Officers. BY this Act the Lyon and his Brethren Heraulds, are ordain'd to  the whole Arms, and as to this part,ACT 125. I have Explain'd it in my Book of Herauldy. By this Act also Letters of Treason are ordain'd to be executed by Heraulds or Pursevants, bearing their Coats of Arms, or Macers; which Solemnities were found only necessary in execution of Let∣ters, that is to say, Summonds of Treason, but not in the execution of Inditements of Treason, December 5. 1666. And the reason of the dif∣ference seems to be, because cts of Parliament are stricti juris, nor can an Inditement be cll'd Letters of Treason. Likeas, the reason of these Solemnities in executing of Letters of Treason, is, that the people may take notice who are cited for Treason, as the weightin ss thereof requires, which are the words of the Act, but Inditemnts being only given to such as are in Prison, there needs no Solemny; and yet for the more security, Inditements of Trea∣son are also executed against Prisoners by a Herauld. That part of the Act which relates to the Deprivation of Mes∣sengers is formerly Explain'd, Act 46 Par. 11 Ja. 6. Only it may be observ'd, that though the Lyon by this Act is ordain'd to de∣prive Messengers by advice of the Lords of Session; yet he uses to Deprive them by his own Authority, and in his own Court, and though he publishes the Deprivation at the Mreat Cross; yet Executions after that Publication have been sustain'd, if the Mes∣senger, after that Publication was habite, and repute a Messen∣ger, November 10. 1676. Stenart contra Hay. And though it may be alleadged that this Publication should put the Lieges in mala side, as well as the Publication of Interdictions and Inhibitions; yet the answer is, that there are publick Registers in these cases which may in∣form these who are to Transact, which cannot clear them as to the Deprivation of Messengers. THough this Act appoints that the Justice-Clerk or his Deputs, shall within six days after Criminal Letters are returned,ACT 126. deliver the names of the persons Denunced, with a brief Note of the cause of their Denunciation to the Thesaurer; as also, the Names of such as are Unlawed for absence from Assizes; yet this is not now in ob∣servance, all that is observed now being only, that upon a Com∣mand from the Thesaury; these Lists are given in so, that this Act is rather forgot than in Desuetude. By the last part of this Act, all Commissions of Justiciary, for longer space than the particular affair for which it is granted, are Discharged; and therefore by this Act it would appear, that Com∣missions
for Justiciary, granted for a year, or any definite time, and not for a particular Business, are null. It is likewise appointed by this Clause, that such as procure Com∣missions of Justiciary, shall find Caution to Re-produce the Pro∣cess, and to pay that part of the Commodity, which by the Com∣mission is destinated for the Kings use, which is most rational, be∣cause this would likewise oblige these who get the Commission to do Justice, knowing that the Process may be revis'd, when it is lying in publica custodia, that is to say, in the Books of Adjournal, for such Processes ought to be brought back, and are usually Regi∣strated there; but this is oftimes neglected, and it was Debated in the Case, Turnbul against the Lord Cranstoun, July 1678. That the Tenor of a Decreet of Forfalture, pronunced upon a Com∣mission granted to the Earl of Dumbar, could not be proven, ex∣cept the Process were produced, whereupon it proceeded, con∣form to this Act, since all that the Witnesses could prove, was, that they had seen such a Decreet, which is not sufficient, for else an unjust Decreet of Forefalture might be pronunced and lost, to the end the Tenor thereof might be proven without any possi∣bility of quarrelling the VVarrands, whereupon it proceed∣ed. It may be doubted what is meant by that part of the Commodi∣ty which belongs to the King; and I conceive that when such Commissions of Justiciary are granted, the whole Escheat belongs to the King, and the Commissioners have only Right to their ne∣cessary Expence tanquam mandatarii, except a particular Quota be condescended on in their Commission, though some are of opi∣nion that these Commissioners have right to the same Quota's that Sheriffs have, since they are Sheriffs in that part, ACT 127.BY this Act the Comptrollers consent is requisit in all Infeft∣ments of Feu-ferm or Confirmations of the Kings proper Lands; and though there be no Comptroller now, yet the consent of the Commissioners of the Thesaury, or Thesaurer, if he were, supplies the same. Hence it is that this Act appoints all Feu-ferms and Confirmations to pass the Comptrollers Register, which is likewise Ratifi'd by the 171 Act 13 Par. Ja. 6. It is sit to know that the Thesaurer and Comptroller had different Registers, but now there is but one Clerk to all the Exchequer, who is called the Thesaurers Clerk, and he keeps but one Register, each Volumn whereof is divided in two parts, the one whereof contains only Gifts that pass the Exchequer, and the other, all other Signatures of Confirmati∣on, &c. BEasts found in His Majesties Forrests or Parks, may be brevi manu,ACT 128. intrometted with, Vid. Act 12 Par. 4 Ja. 5. But since Forrests are not now Fenc'd, it seems unreasonable that a
Beast straying should be Escheated, though where Beasts are de∣signedly driven into a Forrest, it deserves punishment, and this Act seems only to speak of Fenced Forrests, for it says, Parks, or Forrests; and it requires advertisement, before Beasts even found in these, can be Escheat, Vid. Argent. Tit. des Assize, where this matter is fully Treated. ALL English Goods may be searched for, and if they be not Sealed by the Customers, may be Confiscated,ACT 129. which Act be∣ing put in practice at Edinburgh, in anno 1664. occasioned a great Tumult, and the Act was alleadged to be in Desuetude. The word Selling in this Act is wrong Printed in the last Impression, for it should be Sealing. Nota, This Act Ratifies only an Act of Privy Council, which ordained formerly Confiscation; and this shews how great the Kings power was of old in the matter of Trade, Vide Act 24 Par. 16 Ja. 6. which renews again this Act. VId. last Act 1 Par. Ch. 1.ACT 130. THis Act is Temporary, but from it, it is observable, that as the King may, as Superiour,ACT 131. call for production of any Vassals Rights and Infeftments, in a Reduction or Improbation, and even by way of Exhibition, which is conform to the Feudal Law, and to c. 24. Quon. Attach. so the King may by Act of Par∣liament, sometime call for production of all the Rights of His Vas∣sals of Kirk-lands together, as in this Act, or of all the Rights of any par∣ticular place, as of the Isles Act 262 P. 15 I. 6. And I think the King might have call'd for them without this Act, by Proclamation, and albeit it be said, c. 25. Quon. Attach. That the Vassal shall only be oblig'd to shew his Evidents once in his Life to the King; this is not now observ'd, and the true meaning of it is only design'd against too frequent troubling of the Liedges, which as no Ca∣lumniousness, is never to be presumed in the King, or His Offi∣cers. THis Act appoints Lords of the Session not to be admitted till they be twenty five years of age,ACT 132. which agrees with the Law of France, Langlei Semstr: c. 10. and with that of Venice, Contar. L. 3. c. 3. Whereas of old, the Romans admitted no Se∣nators till thirty five, which Augustus retrenched till thirty, Swe∣ton. c. 32. Vid. 93. Act Par. 6 Ja. 6. But that part of the Act ap∣pointing that none shall be admitted Lords, but such as have a thousand Merks of Rent, or twenty Chalders of Victual, is not now strictly observ'd, though this was an Act to prevent the Tem∣ptation of Bribing, and that parties injur'd by them may have some∣what,
out of which they may expect Reparation, si judex litem suam secerit. ACT 133.THe antedating of Warrands of Signatures is here punished, by the punishment of Falshood and Treason, three parts to the King, and the fourth to the party griev'd; from which it may be argued, that where no party is grieved, the punishment can∣not be infer'd, especially seing in that case it is presumeable there was no dolus, or Fraud, vid. cap. 9. Statut. Robert 3. ACT 135.THough Reversions be strictissimi iuris (which was the ratio du∣bitandi in this Act) and albeit the Contract bear, That there shall be no Redemption, without payment of more than ten for every hundred, as annualrent: Yet it is here declared, That ten for the hundred shall be sufficient, and now six of the hundred will be suf∣ficient, though this Act does not generally say, that the Consigna∣tion of the ordinary Annualrent shall be sufficient. ACT 137.THis Act is Explained in the 62 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. BY this Act, generally all unlawful and impossible Conditions in Contracts,ACT 138. or Obligations amongst privat parties, are discharg'd in general, which is conform to the Civil Law; by which impossible Conditions adjected in Testaments, are held as not adjected, or mentioned, but annul not that part of the Testa∣ment, to which they are adjected, §. 10. Inst. de haerd Insit. But in Contracts, the adjecting of an impossible Clause dos annul the Obligation it self, l. 7. de verb. obliga. l. 31. de oblig. & Act. And the reason of this difference is, because the Law presumes, that where men adject impossible conditions in Contracts, they are not serious, and they resolve not to oblige themselves; but it is to be presumed, that all men being serious in their Testaments, the adjecting of such conditions did proceed from a mistake. Con∣ditio turpis, and unlawful conditions are judg'd in Law as im∣possible, l. 15. de cond. inst. and yet in this Act the Obligation sub∣sists in Contracts; and the impossible, or unlawful Conditions thereto adjected, and not the Contract it self, are irritated and declared null; but the particular that gave occasion to this general part of the Statute, was that some persons did declare by a Clause in the Bonds which they took, that it should be lawful to them to Charge their Debitor at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and not personally, and that too upon so short a time as the party Charg∣ed could not know, so that their Escheat fell, and they lost per∣sonam standi in judicio, without knowing, or bing able to know their danger; which Clause is declared unlawful and impossible: and yet it may be alleadged this is not unjust, for when a man lends his Money to one living in Zeatland, or the remote Isles,
and the Debitor suffers the day of payment to elapse; it seems un∣reasonable, that for Debts which may be very small, he should be oblig'd to send to these remote and dangerous parts, to Charge the Debitor personally, and the Debitor may constitute a Procura∣tor at Edinburgh to pay, & sibi imputet, that he did not pay, and it is presumed, that at Edinburgh, which is communis patria, every man hath a Procurator, else Citations at the Peer and Shore of Lieth upon sixty dayes, where the man is in the Indies, were as unlawful as this is, and the performance as impos∣sible. Notwithstanding of this Act, I find that a Charge of Horning upon six days, by a consent in the Clause of Registration, was sustained, though the person Denunced offered to prove that he could not obey the Charge, he living in so remote a place, Janu∣ary 1675. Meldrum contra Tolquhon: and though by this Act it be appointed▪ that the Denunciations upon such unlawful Ob∣ligations shall be null, and that the users shall be oblig'd to De∣nunce, and Charge of new, according to the custom of the Realm; yet I see not how this can be, for the Clause of Registration insert, being upon six dayes, or a shorter time, cannot be a sufficient war∣rand, to Charge upon more dayes, and so that new Charge would want a warrand, except this Act of Parliament shall be said to be the warrand thereof. NOtwithstanding of this Act, appointing all Executions to be subscribed; yet in inferiour Courts,ACT 139. verbal Executions are oft sustained. Though the word Executions is not derived from pure Latin, or Roman Custom; yet it seems founded on l. 2. ff. de re Jud. and is derived to us from the French, who have, and do always use it in the sense we do, Vid. Argent. Tit. des Executions. VId. Act 29 Par. 11 Ja. 6.ACT 140. BY this Act it is justly ordain'd that Compensation be received,ACT 141. if instantly verified by Writ, or Oath of party before Sen∣tence, but that it be not at all received after Sentence, by way of Suspension or Reduction, so that the only Remedy in that case, is to pursue the Debt as accords: Which Act is extended to Decreets of the Session, as well where the Decreets are in ab∣sence, as where they are in foro, July 25. 1676. Wright contra Sheil: such respect is given to the Decreet of the Lords; but yet if Contumacy be purg'd, it is thought that Compensation may be received by way of Reduction, Had▪ December 20. and ge∣nerally Compensation is received against Decreets in absence, be∣fore inferiour Courts: June 18. 1662. Earl Marischal contra Bray.
Though by the Civil Law compensatio tollit debitum ipso jure, and so that it may seem that this exception is still receivable any way, even as the exception of payment, which is receivable against De∣creets of the Session in absence; yet even by the Civil Law com∣pensatio debet opponi, because it is facti, and so sibi imputet, the Debitor that compeared not to propone it, I find this Act is in terminis, observed in Holland, vid. Neostad. decis. 95. THe intrometters with escheat Goods as well as the Donatar are oblig'd to pay the Debt contained in the Horning,ACT 143. whereupon the Gift proceeds. Observ. 1. That though generally the Donatar is only thought lyable in this case, yet all intrometters with any part, though never so small, are lyable, and this is a kind of vitious Intromission, which makes the intrometter lyable in solidum, and not in quantum lucratur. Observ. 2. That the Donatar will not be found lyable till af∣ter general Declarator, because it is only general Declarator that puts the Donatar in the Rebels place, as Spotswood observes, March 20▪ 1626. But if the Donatar delay to pursue a Declara∣tor, I think his negligence should not prejudge a Creditor, for the same reason also, a Donatar is not lyable if the Horning be null, except he has intrometted; but if he has intrometted, res non est integra, and so his offering to Renunce the Gift, will not be sufficient, March 15 1631. Fletcher contra Kid. It hath like∣wise been found that the Donatar will not be subject in payment of Annualrent, due after Denunciation, because the Act appoints him only to be lyable for the Debt contained in the Horning, and this Annualrent is due only after the Horning, March 15. 1631. Fletcher contra Kid, But this Decision may be doubted, since he being by the Act lyable for the Debt accessorium sequitur princi∣pale; and if the Debitor had got the Escheat himself, he had got∣ten payment of all. Observ. 3. That this Act appoints Letters to be direct against the Donatar, and Intrometters, for payment upon six dayes. ACT 144.BY this Act such as reset, supply, or intercommune with de∣clared Traitors or Rebels, are declared lyable in the same pains, for the which they are Forefalted, or put to the Horn; and it is ordained that all the Subjects are lyable to search, seek, take, or apprehend them, till they be out of the Shire where they live, and to intimat to the next Magistrat, to whose bounds they have chased them. Item, If any Vagabounds or suspect persons come to the Shire, every man is obliged to advertise some Magistrate.
Observ. 1. That here the Subjects are obliged, without be∣ing desired by the Magistrate, to search for, and apprehend Re∣bels, and so the Objection against the Bond appointed by the Council, January 1678. Wherein it was asserted, that no pre∣sent Subject was bound to take, or search for Rebels, was a most illegal Objection, expresly contrary, not only to this Act, but to the true interest of the Common-wealth, which obliges every man to do his utmost endeavour to keep the Countrey quiet: Nor can there be any thing more reasonable than that these who enter in a Society shall promote the good of the Society, by all possible means, and that these who have the protection of the Law, should persecute all such as oppose it; and this Duty to the King, in ta∣king such as are Rebels to him, seems to be implyed in the very nature of our Allegiance. But it may be argued, that this should only be extended to such as are Traitors, or at least to such as are Intercommuned, which is contrary to the express words of this Act, whereby all men are discharged to reset Traitors, or Rebels, contemnantly remaining at the Horn, so that the resetting all who remain at the Horn, is here punished; and this Act being de∣signed, as the Act bears, as a further addition to the former Law, must be extended against all Rebels, for the Common Law did formerly reach this far against the resetting of Traitors, and Inter∣communed persons, vid. Act 97 Par. 7 Ja. 5. And whereas it may be pretended, that this Act obliges only the Lieges to assist Magi∣strats in taking such persons. It is answered, that that was suffici∣ently secured by former Laws, and this Act obliges all the Lieges simply. BY this excellent Act,ACT 145. it is provided that all Gifts of Escheat taken simulatly, either by the Rebel himself, or by others, to the behove of the Rebel, shall be null, for else the falling of their Escheat would be no punishment to Rebels, nor discouragement from Rebellion. This simulation may be prov'd, either directly by the Oath of the Donatar, or may be inferred from presumptions, as all other Frauds and Simulations are, since the design of Fraud and Dissimu∣lation, being to pallit and cover a Cheat, if presumptions were not sustained to astruct the Simulation, it could never be discover∣ed. The first Presumption is, that the Gift is granted to the Children of the Rebel, and if the Children be unforis familiat, it is concluded to be a simulat Gift presumptione juris; and yet if a Child in familia, have a pe∣culium of his own. It may be alleadg'd that his Father as Administrator, being Debitor to him, he has taken his Escheat in his Sons Name for his security, but though the Children be forisfamiliat; yet by this Act of Parliament, there lyes presumptio juris against them, if this Re∣bel continue in Possession; and therefore the Children must prove that they have it for an onerous Cause, and thus is to be under∣stood that Decision of Dury, March 20. 1623. Lord Keith con∣tra
Denbolm; Where it was found that no Contingency of Blood, no not the being a Son, was sufficient to infer Simulation; but if this were sustained simply, as ordinarly it is, then Creditors may be easily cheated, and the Donatar might still continue to have the advantage of the Escheat, though not the possession of the Goods. Likas, by this Act of Parliament, it is expresly provided that the Thesaurer may intromet with the Goods, if they be in the pos∣session of the Rebel, his Wife, or Bairns, which shews that the Parliament lookt upon this as a presumption to infer Fraud. The second Presumption is, that the Gift was exped upon the Expence of the Rebel, though the Donatar was Creditor, ex∣cept in so far as the Donatar made use of the Gift, being Creditor for his own security, March 11. 1624. And if yet the Creditor was only Creditor, by buying of Land from the Rebel, and knew that there was a prior Right granted to another person. The Lords Declared that his Gift should not prejudge that prior Right, June 22 1669. And if the Rebel did once take the Gift blank, though he thereafter filled up a lawful Creditors Name therein, the Rebel procuring the Gift so upon his own expence, this will infer it to be simulat, and extinguish the Right, though the Donatar was truely a lawful Creditor, December 17. 1670. Lantoun contra Scot. By which it may be concluded, that though originally the Rebel may exped a Gift upon his own expences, for the behove of a lawful Creditor, where the Rebel takes the Gift himself, and thereafter fills up a lawful Creditors Name, that will not make it reconvalesce, nam quod ab initio vitiosum est tractu temporis non po∣test convalescere. That the Gift was past upon the Rebels expence, is probable per membra Curiae (viz.) The Servants of Exchequer, and Keepers of the Seals, except the Donatar has made Faith at the passing of the Gift, that it was truely to his own behove, the simulation having been then suspected, because he who sought the Gift was the Rebels Son, December 4. 1669. And generally, if the Donatar in fortification of his Gift and Debt, offer to make Faith that the Gift is truly to his own behove, this would be sustained to purge any Presumptions of Simulation, December 12. 1673. The third Presumption is the Rebels retaining Possession, but how long Possession would be sufficient to infer this Simulation, is in arbitrio judicis, for the suffering the Rebel to remain some time in possession is no presumption, even against a Son, since the Donatar must have some time to pursue, and recover Decreets, but if the Donatar suffer him to continue very long, this is pre∣sumptio juris & de jure, for though there were no Simulation in the the case; yet the negligence of the first Donatar would make place for a second, and even the Donators suffering the Rebel to possess three years, has been found to be presumptio juris, for infer∣ring Simulation, June 1666. Oliphant contra Oliphant.
There is a Title in the Civil Law de collusione detegenda, which though it run there only against Collusion inter dominos & servos, yet the whole matter of Collusion is there Treated by the Do∣ctors, and it is defin'd to be sub specie litis lusus, Vide Barthol. Caoll. de simulationibus, where this Subject is fully Treat∣ed. By the last Clause in this Act, it is provided that the Thesaurer, or his Deputs, may cause secure the Houses of the Committers of the Crimes, upon the expences of the readiest of the Escheat Goods, that is like that annotatio bonorum, allow'd by the Civil Law, in Criminals against absents; and though the Act of Parliament spe∣cifies only that this may be done in Crimes, yet I conceive that all Rebellion is comprehended under the word Crimes; for in all cases, even for civil Rebellion, not only may the Thesaurer Seal till Caution be found, but even the Lords of Session will, upon a Bill, allow the Sealing of the Rebels Goods at the Donatars instance, till Caution be found. WIlful setting of Fire in Coal-heghs is Treason,ACT 146. vid. crim. pract. Tit. Fire-raising. THis Act is Explain'd crim. pract. Tit. Beggars and Vaga∣bonds.ACT 147. THis Act against Forestalling, is fully Explain'd,ACT 148. crim. pract. tit. Forestallers. TAis Act punishing the Carriers of Wool, Nolt, and Sheep into England, by Escheating the Transgressors Moveables,ACT 149. is not abrogated by the Union of the Crowns, the Nations being still distinct. THis Act against Deforcers is Explain'd,ACT 150. crim. pract. tit. De∣forcement. THis Act is Explain'd, crim. pract, tit. Art and Part,ACT 151. num. 2. THis Act declaring that none but actual Burgesses shall Traffick,ACT 152. is fully Explain'd, 5 Act 3 Sess. 2 Par. Ch. 2. BY this Act all manner of persons, Inhabitants of Burghs, ex∣ercing any manner of Traffick, or having Change therin,ACT 153. shall bear Stent; Which Act was found not to extend to Indwellers, though they have the benefit of the Mercats, and had never any other Residence but within Burgh, and have the benefit of Seats in the Kirks, and so should at least pay Contribution for the Mini∣sters
Stipend, January 11. 1678. Town of Alerdene contra Lesk. And by the 275 Act 15 Par. Ja. 6. All such as have an hundred pounds of yearly Rent, may be Stented; but by 276 Act of that Parliament, they are only to be Stented according to the value of what Rent they have within that Burgh, and not according to what they are worth else-where; but it may seem that by the 275 Act, all who have an hundred pound to spend, ought to be Stented; that therefore Indwellers are to be Stented, though they have not an hundred pound of Rent in House-mail, or Trade, for the Act sayes, if they may spend, and not if they have; and there∣fore that the persons who come in accidentally to live in Town, should not pay; yet if they have no other constant Dwelling, save in Burgh, that in that case they ought to pay, because it is just, all Subjects should bear some burden, and they bear none else-where, to which nothing can be answered, but that the Act ordains only such to be Stented, as have Rents and Livings copu∣lative. Observ. That by this Act one of every Craft is to be exeemed, as His Majesties Servant, from all Taxation, Watching, and War∣ding, such as the Kings Tailʒour, His Smith, &c. And yet this Act does not exeem them actually, but only allows His Majesty to exeem, if He pleases, so that except these be actually exeemed by their Gift, this Act will not exeem them. This priviledge is renew'd, Act 275 Par. 15 Ja. 6. And His Majesty by His Gifts to His Work-men, declares them to be exeem'd, conform to these Acts, whereupon the Council in anno 1680. did find they should not be stented; and all these priviledges are again Ratifi'd in the Parliament, 1681. But there being a Declarator rais'd of these priviledges before the Lords of Session in anno 1684. It was objected, first, That because these Acts being made in favours of the Kings Servants, whilst our Kings liv'd in Scotland, and they actually ty'd to Service, the saids Acts should not now take place, but should cease with the Service, whereupon they are sound∣ed. 2. Though Wrights, Masons, &c. Who are actually at present ty'd to serve, may plead this priviledge, yet the same cannot be crav'd by the Kings Barbers, Shoe-makers, &c. who never serve. 3. The said Exemption could extend no further than to the va∣lue of the imployment they had from the King; but if the Kings Smith, &c. have from the people, the imployment that other poor Smiths should have, it were not just that he should be exeem'd, which were to make them pay the value of the Imposi∣tions that should be put upon him. 4. That these Laws could not exeem from paying, for their other Trades; So that if the Kings Mason be likewise a Vintner, he should pay for his gain in that Trade. 5. These Acts of Parliament could only free from Watching, and Warding, which are inconsistent with personal attendence,
but should not be extended to Stents and Impositions, which were not usual before these Acts, since the general words of Laws are ordinarly restricted to what ordinarly happens in the time 6. Though these Exemptions could secure against Impositions laid on by the Town, yet they cannot secure against Impositions laid on in Parliament by voluntar offers, made by the Subjects themselves, in which those Trads-men must be considered as volun∣tary Offerers, as well as others, since they are re-presented in Parliament as well as others: And in which Act, Colledges and Hospitals are only exeem'd, and not they; this Debate is as yet come to no Decision. BY this Act the Crafts-men living in Suburbs of Free and Royal burrows, are discharg'd to work,ACT 154. and their work declared conable; but this Act is not extended to Suburbs, that are erected in a Burgh of Barony, for these are priviledged by their erection, and are not meer Suburbs, but distinct Jurisdictions, Ju∣ly 21. 1629. and there is a Decreet arbitral betwixt Edinburgh and the Suburbs, wherein there is a Liberty allow'd to these who live in their Suburbs, to work to Strangers, but not to Towns-men. This Act of Parliament has likewise been extended, not only to Suburbs, but to all who were within the Liberties and Priviledges of Burrows Royal, though the saids places be not properly Sub∣urbs, and that the Act of Parliament discharges only the exercise of such Crafts in Suburbs adjacent to the saids Burrows, July 7. 1671. Town of Stirling contra Polmais, whose Tennents and Trads-men in Saint Ninians lived a mile from the Town of Stirling, vid. etiam, Durie March 21. 1628. and the reason of this Decision was, because such Un-free men as live within the Priviledges, do as well abstract the Trade of the Inhabitants, as those who live within the Sub∣urbs. It may be doubted whether, since this Act of Parliament allows only the Provost and Bailies, or the Officers to intromet with, and Escheat the materials so wrought, if therefore the Crafts-men with∣in Towns may intromet, they being neither named in this allow∣ance; and because they are too interested to have had this power committed to them. It may be also doubted whether, though they may Escheat the Goods, when they are actually taken, if they may by vertue of this Act, pursue the Un-free-men; for though there be no such warrand in this Act; yet it seems that without they have this allowance, the Privi∣ledge granted by the Act, would be useless, since it would put them to keep more Servants to catch the Inbringers, then the Priviledge deserves. VId. Nota's on Act 74 Par. 14. Ja. 2. & crim. pract. Tit. Re∣missions.ACT 155.
ACT 155.THis Act discharging the Transporting of Skins forth of the Realm, under pain of Confiscation, is still in force, and was introduc'd to encourage our own Manufactors; these Skins when carry'd out, being wrought by strangers into several useful Com∣modities, and sold back to our selves at great rates; though this Act discharges only the carrying out of Calf-Skins, Hudrons, and Kid-Skins, yet by the 178 Act 13 Par. Ja. 6. This is extended to all other Skins; and though by this Act, the Confiscation is to be for His Majesties use, yet by that Act, the half belongs to the Appre∣hender. Observ. 2. Not only the Transporting, but even the packing and pielling is found to be a sufficient ground of Confiscation; for pack∣ing and pielling is presumptione juris, concluded to be in order to Trans∣portation; but it is not presumptio juris & de jure, since to elide the Confiscation, it is sufficient to alleadge that the Skins were pack∣ed and pielled, in order only to an inward Transportation from one place of the Kingdom to another. Observ. 3. That by the 45 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. The Exportation of all wild Beasts Skins, and Shorlings, are expresly discharg'd; and by Shorlings are meant, Skins which have the Wool pluckt off, and comes from the word Shearing; but by that Act, power is given to the Exchequer to give Licences for Exporting of Skins as they shall find cause; and though the power to grant such Li∣cences, may seem to cast loose all these Acts, it being very pre∣sumable that they would be purchast for Money; yet that was thought necessary, because if our Trades-men knew that no Skins could be Exported, they would lessen the price as they pleas'd, and sometimes the Trads-men cannot make use of all the Skins in the Nation, and Skins are a considerable part of some mens Rent; nor should the Exchequer give Licences in any other case. THis Act renews the 54 Act 6 Par. Queen Mary, Discharging all persons to stop the way to Free-burrows,ACT 156. or Sea ports, un∣der the pain of being pursu'd as Oppressors, and allows the Lords of Session to pursue the Contraveeners summarly without any Assize; which Act was necessary, because all actions of Molestations, such as this, was formerly ordain'd to be try'd by Assizes, and before inferiour Judges, 11 Act Par. 42 Ja. 6. From which Act these Tryals are excepted, because of their great importance, and that they require present expedition; for which cause the Civil Law allow'd several Interdicts against stopers of High-ways, Vid. tit. 10. l. 3. ff. 6. By the 38 Act 1 Par. Ch. 2. All High-wayes to Mer∣cat Towns are ordain'd to be twenty Foot of Measure, and the Justices of Peace are ordered to see the High-wayes made to have that Latitude at least: and by the Civil Law, via privata debet esse octo pedum in porrectum & 16. pedum in ansractum l. viae latitudo ff. de servit. prae. rusticorum via autem publica seu consularis tam lata esse debet ut currus obvii sibi invicem cedere possint Coepol. de servit.
rusticis, cap. 3. I find this Law for securing the High-wayes to oyal Burrows was very old in France, Argentorat, pag. 201. where he very well observes that Ita fit ut itinera quae ab agris paroe∣cii aut pagis inhoantur let in mercatum ducant publica dici non de∣bea cum a mercatu ad meratum non ducant ut hoc textu sed esi ab uribus inciiunt nec tamen in urbes aut alios mercatus ducant publica hac quidem lege non sunt. I find always that Ways leading to Burghs had a particular priviledge, by the Civil Law. THis Act allows the Admiral no more Jurisdiction than he ex∣ercised before the death of King Ja. 5.ACT 157. Notwithstanding of any Specialities contained in their Infeftments, and it may be doubted whether the Admiral is to prove when he is challenged, that that for which he is challenged, was exercised by his Predecessors in the time of King Ja. 5. Or if such as Challenge the Admiral, are to prove what was the custom then. But the Admirals Juris∣diction is now fully clear'd by the 16 Act Par. 3. Ch. 2. THis Act is Explain'd, Act concerning Provestries. Ch. 2 Par. 1 Sess. 1 Act 54.ACT 158. King James the sixth, Parliament 13. THis Act discharging Mercats and Fairs on the Sabbath-day,ACT 159. was made at the desire of the General Assembly, as our History observes, Vid. Spotswoods History of the Reforma∣tion. THis Act appointing such as contemn the Decreets of the Kirk,ACT 160. to be Denunced Rebels, is still in force, though it relates on∣ly to the Decreets of Presbyteries, and Presbyterian Judicatures, and though these be now abrogated. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the Act 48 Par. 3 Ja. 6.ACT 161. IT may be doubted whether this priviledge granted to Ministers,ACT 162. freeing their Stipends of all Impositions can be taken from them by Conventions of States, since Conventions cannot derogat from Acts of Parliament, and they can only offer their own Money, but cannot make Laws; and yet the Convention 1666. did burden Ministers Stipends with the Imposition then laid on.
ACT 164.IT is observable from this Act, that some Crimes which are not Capital of their own Nature, become Capital by reiteration, though many Civilians doubt of this point, and yet crescente malitia crescere debet paena, l. 4. C. de servis fugit & plus punitur qui saepius deliquit, l. 8. §. 2. C. ad l. Jul. de vi pub. ACT 166.BY this Act the pains of such as find Caution to answer in Criminal Dyets, and report Criminal Letters, for Law borrows are hightned, every Earl or Lord two thousand Pounds; every great Baron a thousand pounds; every Free-holder a thousand merks; every Feuar five hundred merks, and these are called in our present stile, the pains of the new Act of Parliament. Observ. 1. That it has been debated from this Act, whether this Caution should be found according to the quality of the Pursuer or the Defender; as for instance, if an Earl were pursuing a Feuar, should he find Caution according to the sum specifi'd for an Earl, or for a Feuar, and it was found that Caution should be found for five hundred merks only, according to the condition of the Defender. Observ. 2. The quality of a Burges is not here specifi'd, and if he hold Land Burgage, he is de praxi considered as a Free holder, else he is considered as an Un-landed Gentleman, and if he holds feu of the Burgh, he is considered as a Feuar. Observ. 3. The Unlaw of such as compear not at the first Ju∣stice air, is to be twenty pounds, that is to say, the Master who presents not his Tennents, is to pay twenty pounds over and above all other punishments, which is relative to the 6 Act 5 Par. Ja. 6. and is there Explain'd. Vid. supra obs. on Ja. 1 Par. 11 Act 129. Ja. 3 Par. 1 Act 5. Ja. 4 Par. 3 Act 27. ACT 167.THis Act annexing all annualrents payable to Prelacies, to the Crown, is abrogated, in so far as concerns Bishops, by the Act restoring Bishops in anno 1606. ACT 168.NOta, That such Customers and Searchers as cheat the Customs, are only punishable by Deprivation, and escheat of their Moveables; and therefore it seems that they are mistaken who think that such may be punished by Death, this being an extraordinary Theft, both as to the value, the preparative, and the ordinary punish∣ment not excluded. It may be likewise doubted, whether such as enter in Compacts with Customers and Searchers, to defraud the Customs, may be punished by the same punishment, because they are art and part. ACT 169.REmissions are, notwithstanding of this Act, past without pre∣vious Letters of Slayns, or consents from the parties, but the party may get an assythment, albeit the Remission be past, all
Remissions are at present Registrated in the Thesaurers Register, conform to this Act, and in the Secretaries Register also, as all Pa∣pers are that pass His Majesties Hand. THough this includes the Members of the Colledge of Justice in the priviledges granted to the Colledge of Justice with the Senators▪ yet of late by the 8 Act 2 Sess. 2 Par. Ch. 2.ACT 170. Free∣dom from Impositions is renew'd to the Senators only, vid. obs. on that Act, where it is Debated, that though Advocats be not there mention'd, yet they are not thereby excluded. IT would seem by the Narrative of this Act,ACT 172. that all Patronages Gifted after this Act, should be discharged; and yet the Act discharges only such as are granted without the consent of the Be∣nefic'd persons; nor can I see how these Patronages should have been declar'd null, for want of the Benefic'd persons consent, since the Benefi'd person being once provided, the Kings Disponing the Right of Patronage, could not prejudge them who were already entered; though the Act says, That these Rights were granted to the great hazard of the persons provided, for they being once enter∣ed, no posterior Right could prejudge them, and Declarators up∣on prior Rights might have prejudg'd them however; but it seems that the reason why the consent of the living Incumbent is requi∣site, is, because it is presumable that he would, and could inform truly to whom the Patronage belong'd, and in all Church Benefices, when Dispon'd, either the Demission, Resignation, or consent of Church-men, has been thought requisite. The Statutory part of this Act was wrong Printed in Skeens Impressi∣on, for whereas it sayes, That all such Rights, where the Beneficod person was alive, and their consent had, and obtained thereto, shall be null: It should have said, Not had and obtained thereto; but this is helped in the last Impression. VId. Crim. Pract. Tit. Murder. But it is fit to add,ACT 173. that this Act ordaining such as strick, or hurt a man within the Kings Palace, to be punished with Death, is consonant to praetor cum l. sequen. ff. de injuriis. vide etiam l. 23. §. 2. ad leg. juliam de adulteriis; and to the Law of Nations, Fritz. de palatiis principum cap. 12. Where he cites as the Law of Scotland, cap. 6. Stat. Will. By which, he who draws a Knife in the Kings Court, is to be struck through the Hand, and he that draws Blood is to lose the Hand, and he that kills any man is to pay twenty nine Cows to the King, and to assyth the party; which certain∣ly is meant of a Slaughter committed, where the Killer should not die, as in accidental Slaughters, or Slaughter committed in self-defence, for otherwise that Statute had been ridiculous, as it is now obsolet and innovated by this Act of Parliament; and yet I
think, that even by this Act of Parliament, he who stricks any man in self-defence, would not die; and if the King be absent, some think that Statuts punishing Offenders within the Palace, extend not to such cases, as Placa. l. 1. pit. delict. cap. 8. Though Menochius does extend those Statutes, even to that case; but to prevent this Debate, this Act 173, bears expresly The King's Palace where His Highness makes His Residence for the time, and it expresses the Inner-gate, to cut off the ordinary Debates, de consiniis palatii. Though this Crime may be pursu'd Criminally, yet the Lords may take a Precognition of it, to the end it may be known how far they will remit the same to be punished by the Criminal Judges, in so far as concerns the stricking any man in their presence, as in Sir John Hay's ease and Sibbalds. VId. Crim, Pract. Tit. Remissions Vid. supra observ. on Act 74 Par. 14 Ja. 2.ACT 174. IT would seem by the Narrative, that only such Writs as were not Written by Notars and common Clerks,ACT 175. who are notourly known, should have been declar'd null for want of the Writers Name; and yet the Statutory part declares all Writs to be null, without exception, which want the Writers Name. Observ. 1. This Act is not by the Lords found to annul Seasines, and other Acts of Office, Written by Common-clerks and Notars, though the Writers Name be not design'd in them, but only Writs amongst privat parties, June 6. 1634. Observ. 2. That though the Writers Name be not condescended on, yet the Lords will allow the User of the Writ to condescend who was the Writer; and though this Act of Parliament appoints that, before the inserting of the Witnesses; yet if it be insert in any place, it is sufficient: and though the Act appoints that it shall condescend upon the VVriters Name, particular remaining place, and Diocy; yet Diocies are now only condescended on, in Instru∣ments of Notars; but still there must be some Designation beside the Name and Sir-name, such as A. B. Servitor to such a man, which is sufficient; and if there be moe of one Sir-name, who where Servitors at that time, yet is not the User of the VVrit ob∣lig'd to condescend which of the Servants it was, but he who of∣fers to improve the said VVrit, must relevantly alleadge that of the Date of that Bond, he whose Servant the VVriter is Design'd to be, had no Servant at that time who did write such a hand; and for proving of this, must produce the Hand-writs of all these Servants at that time, February 7. 1672. Kirk-hill contra Ketle∣stoun.
IT was Debated upon this Act, whether the Lands of Duncow,ACT 176. though here annexed by a publick Law, were sufficiently an∣nexed, so as to exclude the Earl of Nithisdale, who pretended that a year before this Act he had a valid Right, under the Great-Seal from the King, and so could not be prejudg'd by a posterior an∣nexation, which behov'd to be salvo jure quoad him: To which it was Reply'd, that this annexation being by a publick Law, was not of the nature of Ratifications, which were salvo jure; and such Acts of annexation were in effect the Kings Charter, and be∣ing granted by a publick Act of Parliament, in favours both of King and People, they could not be taken away, but by another Act of Parliament, & sibi imputet, he who had the prior Right, and compeared not at the time of this publick Law, and objected it; but now after so many years, the King had at least prescriv∣ed a Right, by vertue of this Act, this case was not decided, but the Lords inclined to think that there was a great difference be∣twixt original annexations, where special Lands were annexed, as falling in the Kings Hands by a special Forefalture, or other cause which they thought could not be quarrelled by the Session, or other Inferiour Judicatory; and general Acts where Lands for∣merly annext, are only repeated, such as this is, in which Lands be∣longing to privat parties, may be by mistake repeated. Nota, The Lands of Duncow, annexed by this Act, came to the King upon Forefalture of Robert Lord Boyd, anno 1477. BEfore this Act,ACT 177. Decreets pronunced by Magistrates within Towns could not be the ground of a Charge of Horning, till a Decreet conform had been first obtained before the Lords; but by this Act, Letters of Horning are summarly appointed to be granted upon such Decreets. It is observable, that though this Act says, That Letters of Horn∣ing shall be granted upon the Decreets of Burrows in the same way as upon the Commissars Precepts; yet it would seem that Commissars had no such priviledge at the time of granting this Act; for that priviledge is only granted them by the 7 Act 21 Par. Ja. 6. To which nothing can be answered, but that Commissars had that pri∣viledge, even at the time of this Act de praxi, though de jure it was only granted them by that Act for their further Security. VId. Act 155. 12 Par. Ja. 6.ACT 178. THis Act giving the King twenty shilling of Custom of every Tunn of imported Beer,ACT 179. is Explained in the Observations up∣on the 2 Act 4 Sess. Par. 2 Ch. 2.
ACT 180.IT is observable, that by this Act the Dean of Gild is founded in the power of judging all Cases betwixt Merchant and Mer∣chant, and is here declar'd to be the most competent Judge, be∣cause the most knowing Judge in such cases, and declar'd to have the same power that the like Judges have in France and Flanders, and in France such Cases are Judg'd by these who are call'd les consuls des marchants. The Lords have found that according to this Act, the Dean of Gilds Court is a Soveraign Court in suo genere, and not subordinat to the Towns Court, July 21. 1631. and they use to Advocat Causes from the Admiral, to the Dean of Gild's Court, upon this Act, it being declar'd that he is Judge to all acti∣ons betwixt Merchant and Mariner, though it be alleadg'd by the Admiral, that these general words should be restricted by the na∣ture of the respective Jurisdictions, and so the Dean of Gild should be only Judge competent betwixt Merchant and Mariner, in cases which fall out at Land, but not at Sea. ACT 181.THe Act related to here is the 36 Act 3 Parl. Ja. 4. IT is observable from this Act, that it is there declar'd in gene∣neral,ACT 182. that Acts of Parliament should only in reason and equity extend ad futura, for regulating future cases; for though De∣claratory Acts may oft-times extend ad praeterita; yet Statutory Acts should only extend ad futura. ACT 183.THis Act differs not one word from the 170 Act of this same Parliament, and has been only repeated here by mistake. ACT 184.BEfore this Act, such as were at seid with one another, us'd or∣dinarly to fight together upon the Street of Edinburgh, and us'd to beat the Magistrates, or their Officers when they came to red them, and that truly gave rise to this Act, though the Nar∣rative here bears only, that several persons used to Deforce the Magi∣strates in their Execution of their own, or the Councils Decreets. By the Act it is declar'd, That whosoever disobeys, or opposes the Command of the Provost and Baillies of Edinburgh, when they are Executing the Kings Commands, or Letters from the Secret Council, or Session, or the Ordinances of their own Burgh, shall be punished as Committers of Deforcement, as Seditious and Perturbers of the Common well. It has been found that naked assistance at such Tumults, with∣out Arms, is not punishable by Death, though a person be killed in the Tumult, December 1666. But Convocation at all such Tu∣mults with Arms, is punishable by Death, if a person be Murder∣ed,
as was found, September 11. 1678. And the acting any thing, either by word or deed, was found to infer Death. Observ. That the using Fire-weapons within Town is discharg∣ed by this Act; and long weapons, that is to say, Halbards, Picks &c. are only allow'd, lest innocent persons passing on the Street might be kill'd, but yet if Souldiers shoot in defence of their Prisoners on the Streets, they are not punishable; and this Act was found not to militat against the Kings granting Commissions to the Ma∣gistrates of Edinburgh, to raise a Company with Fire-locks within Town; for the Act discharges only Fire-locks without the Kings consent, and a Commission implys his consent. THe Act here related to is the 159 Act 12 Par. Ja. 6.ACT 185. THis Act is Explain'd in the 7 Act 9 Par. Ja. 6.ACT 187. VId. Obs. on the 29 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6.ACT 189. THe Abbacy of Dumsermling was Dispon'd by Ja. 6. in a morning Gift to Queen Ann.ACTs 190, & 191. This Lawyers call Morga∣neticum; and King Charles the First was Infeft in these Lands, as heir to His Mother. Observ. That this Confirmation was under the Great Seal, and under the Seals and Subscriptions of the States. King IAMES the sixth, Parl. 14. THis Act seems very ill conceived, for it appears that wil∣ful hearers of Mass shall be executed to the death,ACT 193. how soon they shall be found guilty, or declared Fugitive, since no man by our Law dies upon his being Denunced Fugitive, except in the case of Treason; and wilful hearing of Mass is not Treason, even by this Act. Observ. 2. That as this Act is conceiv'd, the wilful hearing, or concealing, is punishable by death, either by Conviction, or being denunced Fugitive before the Justice-General, or the Lords of Pri∣vy Council. Observ. 3. That wilful hearers are only punishable, and the word wilful was added, because many go to the Mass out of curio∣sity, or may be present by accident, and in all things that con∣cern Religion, special Heresie owning and continuing, makes the
Crime ubi haerent dogmatibus suis; and therefore the Defender may purge himself by his Oath as to his intention, which cannot be otherwayes proven; and a fortiori, I think this should hold with these that are present at Conventicles, either in Fields or Houses, since these are less Crimes; for they being men of known good Principles, may go to get intelligence, or from curiosity, but it is safer to intimat this previously to some of the Kings Ser∣vants. Observ. 4. It is generally observ'd, that all these Acts concern∣ing the Mass, were of Design ill conceiv'd by Chancellors Setons in∣fluence, as is reported, and that by them this Crime can never be prov'd, since it can only be prov'd, per socios criminis, and these cannot be admitted Witnesses; but this is a mistake, for there may be many present out of curiosity, or the apprehenders may be Witnesses, and even such as were present upon design in crimi∣nibus occultis, may be received; since when Law allows any thing, it must allow the means by which it can be prov'd; and in Here∣sie, less probation is sufficient, than in other Crimes, Clarus § He∣resie, num. 20. ACT 194.BY this Act the Liferent-escheats of Papists being denunced, are declar'd to belong to the King, though ordinarly the Liferents fall to the respective Superiours; this is again renew'd to the King, Act 197 the same Parliament. ACT 195.ALL Erections of annexed Property of the Temporalities of Benefices, are here declared null, except as to the Lands excepted in the Act of Annexation, 1587. which it seems must be understood, even though Dissolution proceeded; for other∣wayes there needed not an Act of Parliament, since all Dispo∣sitions of annexed Property without Dissolution, are ipso jure null; but thereafter all such Erections are for quieting the minds of His Majesties good Subjects secured and confirm'd at the Restauration of Bishops, Act 2 Par. 18 Ja. 6. ACT 196.COmmon Kirks are such as belong in Common to all the Dig∣nities of a Chapter, and whereof each of them had a part of the Stipend; to which common Kirks the Chapter did not pre∣sent as Patron, but did nominat and collate; upon the first suppres∣sion of Popery they were to be conferr'd to Ministers as ordinary Benefices; and the King, or such as had Right from him, became Patron, as coming in place of the Popish Clergy: and by this Act they are ordain'd to be presented by the ordinary Patrons to Ministers who shall serve the Cure; and the reason is, because there was not then Chapters: But by the 2 Act 22 Par. Ja. 6. the saids Chapters are likewise restor'd to whatsoever Teinds, &c. which pertain'd of old to the Chapters in common.
THis Act ordaining the Escheats and Liferents of Excommunicated persons to be null, if granted to their near relations,ACT 197. seems su∣persuous, because the same was formerly Statuted in general by the 145 Act 12 Par. Ja. 6. Nor find I any difference betwixt the two Acts, save that the Escheats of other Rebels are by that Act declared null, if purchas'd by their Friends, or well-willers; and this Act declares only the Escheats of Excommunicated persons null, if granted to their Bairns, or conjunct persons, so that it seems the Escheat of an Excommunicated person could not be declared null, though Gifted to a confident person, since a confident per∣son and a conjunct are different, for Blood only makes conjunct persons, but trust makes confident persons. VId. observ. on 83 Act 6 Par. Ja. 4.ACT 198. THough by this Act, when Manses and Gleibs are design'd out of Church-Lands only,ACT 199. the rest of the Heretors of Kirk-lands are to contribute for the relief of him, out of whose Lands the De∣signation is made; yet this was extended in anno 1644. by Act of Parliament, for the relief of these, out of whose Temporal Lands Designations were made, who were therein to be reliev'd by the Heretors of other Temporal Lands. I find that Lands mortifi'd to Colledges cease not thereby to be Kirk-lands; and therefore were found lyable to relief as other Kirk-lands by this Act, February 12. 1635. But Dury observes there, as the reason of the Decisi∣on, that these Kirk-lands were Feu'd by the Colledge for a small Feu-Duty; and therefore it was more just that they should have been lyable to relief, as other Kirk-lands; and so it may be yet doubted, it Kirk lands mortifi'd to Colledges, and remaining with them, would be lyable to this relief. BY this Act no enesie'd person under a Prelat,ACT 200. may set longer Tacks than for 3 years, and a Bishop is allow'd to set Tacks of his Tiends for 19 years, and an inferiour Prelat for his Life-time, and 5 years thereafter, Act 4 Par. 22 Ja. 6. But because some thought that that Act did abrogat this Act, as if Prelats needed not the consent of the Patron to such Tacks for nineteen years, or five years respe∣ctive; therefore it is expresly declar'd by 15 Act 23 Par. Ja. 6. and even these and all other Tacks shall be null, if they be set for longer than three years, without consent of the Patron, and that the 4 Act Par. 22. did still presuppose the consent of the Patron, though it was not there exprest, which was most just, for since it is the Patrons interest▪ that the Cure be well administrat, and that he may get an able man after the Incumbents Death; it was just that nothing should have been done without his consent, and for
that reason, Clericus nee resignare nec permutare nec pensione onerare potest invito patrono; as is by the Canon Law, for by that Law, the administration belongs to the Patron, nec ab ejus dispo∣sitione anferri possunt, Can. rationis, 16. q. 7. and by that Law he was to be alimented out of the Rents of the Benefice, if he fell poor, and the person presented was to give his Oath to the Patron, for preservation of the Temporals. This consent may be adhibite by the Patron, either before, or after the setting of the Tacks, c. 20. de jur patron▪ dubitatur; whether a Patron may lawfully authorise a Tack set in his own favours, since his accepting is equivalent to a consent, and he can∣not be author in rem suam. Though Tacks set for longer space than three years be null by this Act; yet if they be set for longer time, they will be sustain∣ed, if the Tacks-men restrict them to three years allanerly, July 18. 1668. Johnstoun contrà Howdoun, even as though a Bond want∣ing Witnesses be null, if the same exceed an hundred pounds, yet it will be valid if restricted to an hundred pounds, and this seems to be received with us as a general principle in the interpre∣tation of all Statutes, both as to time and sums; and therefore though by the 36 Act Par. 3 Ja. 4. Tacks of the Rents of Burghs be declar'd null, if set for longer space than three years, yet by the same reason, they should be sustained, if restricted to three years. ACTS 201, & 202.THese Acts are Explain'd in the 36 Act 2 Par. Ja. 6. THe design of this Act has been, as I conceive, to secure such as had intrometted with the Kings annex'd Property sum∣marly,ACT 203. by vertue of the 41 Act 11 Par. Ja. 2. Because it is pro∣bable the Warrand granted by that Act; was thought dubious, and somewhat severe in the Analogy of Law, vid. observ. upon that Act. A Provost is in our Law no Prelat; and therefore Tacks sett by him are null, without consent of the Patron, Hope Tit. Kirks. ACT 204.THis Dissolution of the Kings annex'd Property has several specialities in it, as that it shall not extend to the setting in Feu-ferm of Castles, Forrests, Coal-heughs, and Offices, &c. But that these shall remain inseparably annex'd to the Crown; and from this it may be observ'd, that to this day, all Castles, Palaces, Woods, Parks, Forrests, Pastures, Coal-heughs, and Offices, are to remain inseparably with the Crown; and therefore except they be expresly dissolved, they fall not under Dissolution: This part of the Act is renewed by the 235 Act 15 Par. Ja. 6. This Dis∣solution is likewise only in favours of kindly Tennents, and an∣cient
Possessors, and of such as should pay their Composition betwixt and the first of August, 1595. THis Act is Explain'd, Crim. Pract. Tit. Injuries, num. 6.ACT 205. BY this Act the Duty granted by the States to the King upon Wines, is to be charg'd for by Letters of Horning;ACT 206. and I find by Act of Council, February 21. 1581. That a Commission is granted to the Kings Master-housholds, to break up the Doors of such Merchants, as refus'd to let the Kings Servants Taste their Wines, to the end they might chuse the best for the Kings own use, but this certainly presupposed that the King would pay for the Wines. FRom this and many other Acts,ACT 207. it is observable that the Par∣liament may, and does by a general Law, annul Rights gran∣ted to privat persons, without calling them, and without the ha∣zard of the Act salvo, though any one privat mans Right cannot be declar'd null by the Parliament, without citing him. BY this excellent Act,ACT 209. a Horning or Escheat following thereup∣on, cannot be taken away, and declar'd null upon acquittan∣ces and Discharges, which were alleadg'd to be prior to the Horn∣ing, so that the Escheat could not fall, the Debt being pay'd, ex∣cept the producer of the Discharge make Faith that it is of a true Date, because such Discharges with ante Dates, use to be grant∣ed by the Creditor when himself is paid. It has been doubted whether Assigneys be bound to swear in this case, but since this is factum alienum, which they are not oblig'd to know; and if this be necessary, the Cedent by refusing to swear, may destroy the Assigney; but yet the Act of Parliament obliges indefinitly the producer of the Discharge to swear, and so it seems whether he be Cedent or Assigney, he is still bound, since his Oath is solemnly requir'd by Act of Parliament, Quaeritur, whe∣ther it can be remitted to Quakers, Anabaptists, &c. who think swearing unlawful. THis Act giving many priviledges to the Kings Forrests,ACT 210. seems not communicable to all Forrests, though it be pretended that all Forrests are the Kings Forrests, it having been very or∣dinary to erect Forrests in privat mens Lands, in imitation of the Kings Forrests; but because these Erections of Forrests were ve∣ry prejudicial to Neighbours, since they might fine their Neigh∣bours, and poind their Beasts; therefore the Lords of the Sessi∣on did in July 1680. give their opinion to the Lords of Exchequer, that all such new Erections should be stopt; and it appears to me
very clearly, that all Forrests are not the Kings Forrests, by com∣paring cap. 17. leges forrestarum, which Treats of Crimes commit∣ted in the Kings Forrest, with cap. 21. which Treats of the De∣licts committed in the Forrests of Barons, and wherein they are In∣feft, cum libera forresta. Observ. 2. That that part of the Act which ordains all that Hunt within six miles to His Majesties Castles, VVoods, Parks, or Palaces, to be fin'd in an hundred pounds, is in Desuetude; and it seems then only to be observ'd, when the King Himself Dwells in his Castles, and uses actually to Hunt in His VVoods or For∣rests; this Act bearing, To be made for His own Royal Pastime, or at least this priviledge should not be continued to Castles, or For∣rests, which the King has Dispon'd to privat Subjects. ACT 212.VId. observ. on the 13 Act Par. 3 Ch. 2. ACT 213.THough this Act say, That the Lords of Session were not oblig'd to sit down till nine a Clock; yet it appears clearly, that they were oblig'd to sit down at eight by the 49 Act 5 Par. Ja. 5. ACT 214.IT is observable from this excellent Act, that where Evidents are not thought necessary to be kept, there is no reason to grant Certification against them, after many years; and therefore the Lords refuse oft times to grant Certification against the Grounds and VVarrands of Appryzings, such as Executions, though they cannot be produc'd after twenty or thirty years, ex paritate ra∣tionis, though the Act secures only against the not producing of Procuratories, and Instruments of Resignation, and Precepts of Seasnes; and July 1680. Strowan contra Earl of Athol: This Act was extended to secure against the production of the Decreet of Compryzing, and Decreet whereupon it was led, albeit this extension seems dangerous, since thereby great Estates may be car∣ryed away by null Compryzings, and small Debts, which might be satisfi'd by less than a years intromission, whereas none or small prejudice can be infer'd from not producing Instruments of Resig∣nations, &c. It is observable that this priviledge  ot being ob∣lig'd to produce such Papers, is only allow'd to such as are, and were in Possession for fourty years. There is likewise in this Act a presumptio juris founded, that these from whom Lands are Appryz'd, will industriously abstract their Evidents, and therefore the Lords use to be very favourable in granting Certification against Compryzers. ACT 215.THe Act salvo jure is still subjoyn'd to Parliaments, except here where it is insert in the midst of the Acts of this Parlia∣ment.
BY this Act, Lords of the Session, Advocats, Clerks, Writers,ACT 216. and their Servants, nor no other Member of the Colledge of Ju∣stice, nor no Judges, Clerks, &c. of inferiour Courts, may take Assignations to Pleys, which is conform to the Civil Law, lib. 2. cod. tit. 14. ne liceat potentioribus patrocinium litigantibus praestare vel actiones in se transferre. Nota, The Right taken by them is not declar'd null, but them∣selves only punishable, and the reason seems to be, because when they are depriv'd from being Members, the advantage they had over others, is taken away, and which advantage was the reason inductive of this Act, nor should the punishment be extended be∣yond the Cause, which is also conform to the opinion of the Civi∣lians, vid. vin select Quest. jur. cap. 1. But it may be doubted if he who takes such Assignations, should not be lyable to resound the dam∣nages which are occasion'd by taking such an Assignation, since it is a principle, that Damnage is still due where the injury is done to any man against a positive Law, though that Law ordain not Damnage and Interest to be repay'd; and in this case the taking such Assignations is declar'd unlawful, and so an injury is done against a positive Law. 2. Without this the party injur'd is not repair'd; for though the publick Interest, vel vindicta publica, be repair'd by the Depri∣vation; yet the interest of the person les'd, which is chiefly to be considered is not. 3. Deprivation is oft-times no punishment, and seldom a Com∣mensurable Punishment; for many Members of the Colledge of Justice lose nothing by Deprivation, and a Plea may be worth a great sum, and their Imployment worth nothing; whereas Dam∣nage as it is a natural, so it is a most Commensurable Punishment. Be∣cause this Act Discharges only Members of the Colledge of Justice to buy Plea's; Therefore it is still lawful for them to take Assignati∣ons to Plea's gratis, as a Donation, July 30. 1678. for as this falls not under the express prohibition of the Act; so it is no presumable that they will be as keen in pursuing such Processes, as these for which they have pay'd out Money; nor were it just to make the Members of the Colledge of Justice incapable of their Friends and Relations Liberality. By this Act Advocats Servants do pretend they are Members of the Colledge of Justice, because this Act says, their Servants, and other Members. Though this Act and the Rubrick Discharges only the buying Debateable Lands, Teinds, or Possessions, and speaks nothing of Moveables, nor even Heretable Bonds, mobilia, being ordinarly accounted vilioris naturae; yet the Lords do now ob paritatem rationis, extend this Act to such as take Assignations to Moveable Debts, or any other debateable Rights. This Act uses to be so Interpreted, as to be extended only to the
Members of the respective Courts, who take Assignation, to Plead before the Court where they serve; and thus if an Advocat should take an assignation to a Plea, depending before an Inferiour Court, it may be urg'd that this Act should not reach them, because he has not influence before that Court; but if he should go and Plead before that Court, as an Advocat may before any Court, then the Act would reach him also. Item, Though this Act does not speak of Procurators before In∣feriour Courts, yet the word Advocats, seems to comprehend them. ACT 217.BY this Act Caution is to be found in actions of Ejections, for the violent profits; and though cautio juratoria, be ordinar∣ly sustain'd, where persons cannot find other Cautioners, yet it is not sustain'd in this case, July 17. 1630. Because this Act says, that by the proponing of these Defences against Ejections, delays are granted; therefore the Defender, either in Removings, or Ejecti∣ons, is not oblig'd to find Caution, where the Defence can be instantly verifi'd; and although it has been doubted, whether this Caution is to be found at the proponing of the Defence, or at the first Term assign'd by the Act; yet it is clear that the Caution should be found at the first Term assigned by the Act, both because this Act says, that the Caution shall be found at the first Dyet of i∣tis contestation; and because there must be some time given to find Caution. Nota, That in the Brieves of Dissasine, which was the same thing of old, that Ejection is now, Caution was to be found as here by the Defender, Quon. Attach. cap. 53. num. 2. For clearing some mistake in the Printing of my Criminals, pag. 294. my meaning was, that there may be Perjury in cautione ju∣ratoria, as for instance, if a person should Depone that he could not find Caution for the violent Profits; and yet it could be prov'd, that such a person who was very responsal, offer'd to be Caution, this I think would infer Perjury BY this Act it is appointed, that twenty dayes after the Parlia∣ment is proclaim'd,ACT 218. and before it meet, four of every Estate should meet to receive Articles to be presented to the Parliament, but this is now in Desuetude; for no State can now meet, except the Burrows, and yet sometimes the King writs down to call whom He pleases to name to meet and consult previously, what Laws are fit to be made in the future Parliament. By this Act also it seems that nothing can be presented in plain Parliament, by any of the Members of Parliament, but that eve∣ry thing must be first presented in the Articles for eviting confusi∣on, and this Act was made use of to that purpose in the Parliament, 1674. against a proposal made then for having a Commitee of grivances. To which it was then answered, that the Articles be∣ing but a Committee of Parliament, they could not restrict their
own Constituents, and this Act was rather directive than re∣strictive. THis Act is fully Explain'd,ACT 219. crim. pract. tit. Jurisdiction of the Lords, num. 7. THis Act is explain'd, crim. pract. tit. Paricide.ACT 220. THis Act is formerly Explain'd,ACT 226. 15 Act 4 Par. Ja. 5. where Life∣renters are to find Caution. By this Act also, a power is granted to the Magistrats of Burghs, to cause repair Burnt and Waste Lands; but yet ordinarly the Magistrats of Burrows use to give in Petitions to the Council, craving liberty to force the Heretors of such Burnt Lands, to re∣pair their Burnt Lands themselves, or else to sell their part, and when there are many small Heretors concern'd, the Council grants Warrand to the Magistrats to regulat their Venditions, though I know it hath been alleadg'd that the Council could not do this, be∣cause it was an Inversion of Property, and that this was only com∣petent to the Parliament; and yet the Council have still been in use to do so for the common good of the people, nor is any man a loser, since he may repair by himself, and if he will not, he gets his just price. This was granted to the Magistrats of Edinburgh in anno 1678. publice enim interest ne civitatis aspectus deforme∣tur & ideo constitutum est, l. 4. C. de jur. reipub. aream col∣lapsam posse a fisco distrahi si proprietarius monitus eam reficere non curaverit, vid. l. 46. ff. de dam. insect. I have seen a Decreet in anno 1636. at the Town of Edinburghs instance, against several Heretors, before the Lords of Session, for ordain∣ing the Heretors of these Houses (upon which the Trone-Church now stands) to denude themselves of their Right in favours of the Town, ob utilitatem publicam, and to appoint four for them, and four for the Town, for valuing the Lands, that the price may be pay'd accordingly. But to prevent all such Debates, it is appointed by the 6 Act 3 Sess. Par. 1 Ch. 2. That the Magistrats of Burghs Royal shall cause cite all such as pretend Right to any such Waste or Ruinous Lands, as have not been inhabited for three years, or shall be waste and not inhabited for other three years, to Repair the saids Lands, with Certifica∣tion to them that if they do not, the Magistrats will cause value the same by certain persons to be chosen for that effect, and to sell the same; which sale shall never thereafter be quarrelled: So that it appears that after this Act, the Privy Council can grant no Warrand to sell, except in the Terms of this Act, at the least they cannot grant any such warrand to build or sell upon any privat account, or
even for beautifying the Town, but the Privy Council has since this Act, granted a Warrand to force privat Heretors to sell and accept their price, for making the Entry to the Parliament-House more large and convenient, though it it was alleadg'd that this could not otherwise be done than after three years, and in the way prescriv'd by the Act of Parliament, which has made no ex∣ception of any such case as this, and if the Council could do this, they might as well have made the Act of Parliament it self; for the power granted to Magistrats by Act of Parliament proceeds upon the same motive of publick Good. It might likewise have been alleadged that whatever the Coun∣cil might have done in cases of absolute necessity, as if the Parlia∣ment-House had wanted an Entry altogether; yet they could not invert Property meerly for the conveniency of enlarging the Entry, beyond what formerly serv'd in our Predecessors time. ACT 227.BY this Act Chiefs of Clans are not made lyable, but all Land-lords and Bailies are oblig'd to make their Men-tennents and Servants answerable to Justice, and to redress the party skaithed; which Obligation is not alternative: and therefore the Council in the case of Leith and Grant, August 1680. did find that the Land-lord was lyable for the Skaith, though he should present his men. King JAMES the sixth, Parliament 15. BY this Act Bishops are in effect restored to sit in Parliament, though the Act is cautiously conceived in favours of Mi∣nisters,ACT 231. who shall be provided to Bishopricks by the King; but yet the Bishops themselves were not restored to their Jurisdictions in spiritualibus, till the 2 Act 18 Par. Ja. 6. in anno 1606. This Act gave occasion of calling a General Assembly at Dundee, to whom the King proposed several Overtures, and it was condescended on, that fifteen Ministers should sit in Parlia∣ment, because so many Re-presented the Church in time of Po∣pery, but remitted to a Committee to consider what Revenue each Church-man should have for defraying that expence, and who should be elected. In this Act likewise it is declar'd, That this Restitution shall be without prejudice to the General and Provincial Assemblies, and Pres∣byteries; and the Act of Parliament here related to Establishing these, is the 114 Act 12 Par Ja. 6.
IT is observable that Kirk-yeards have in many things in our Law the same priviledge as Kirks; and therefore the killing,ACT 232. or wound∣ing of men within Kirks, and Kirk-yeards, are punishable in the same way, 118 Act 12 Par. Ja. 6. and the Raisers of Frays in Kirks and Kirk-yards, are punished in the same way, 27 Act 11 Par. Ja. 6. and by the 83 Act 6 Par. Ja. 4. Fairs and Mercats are prohibited to be kept within Kirk-yards, as well as within the Kirk: as al∣so by the 86 Act, Quon. Attach. Courts Civil or Criminal within Kirks, or Kirk-yards, are forbidden; all which is conform to the Canon Law, cap. 5. de immunitate ecclesiarum & cap. 2 h. t. in sex∣to decretal. By this Act Letters of Horning are to be direct∣ed by the Lords of the Session, for bigging of Kirk-yard-dykes, and for making Stiles and Entries to Kirks and Kirk-yards. By which last Clause, it would seem also that Heretors would get Letters of Horning against any Heretor who lyes betwixt him and the Kirk, to give him a sufficient way to the Kirk through his Land, albeit the words bear only, That there shall be sufficient Stiles and Entries in the saids Kirk-yard-dykes: But when any thing is allow∣ed in Law, all is understood to be allowed, without which, that which is expresly allow'd cannot be useful: Yet I find by a De∣cision, June 27. 1623. betwixt Neilsn of Carcassi and the She∣riff of Gallwy, that the Lords refus'd to grant a Servitude through a privat Mans Lands, even for a way to the Church, ex∣cept the Pursuer could prove immemorial Possession; and to recon∣cile this Difference, it seems that every man must have some way to the Church, but that he will not have Right to any special way, if he seek the same upon the account of nearness, except he can prove immemorial Possession, Mornatius ad l. penult. ss. de just. & jur. shews that this Law is observ'd in France, Quaeritur, to whom a Coal found in a Church-yard, or Trees growing there, will belong, whether to the Heretor, the Poor, or the Pa∣tron, or if the Trees will belong to the Minister. THis Act declares all Alienations of the annexed Property to be null,ACT 233. except where they are set with augmentation of the Rental; and therefore to this day, there is still some small aug∣mentation made; but it has been doubted, whether if the Char∣ter bear an augmentation; but yet it can be proven by the Exche∣quer Rolls, that the Lands pay'd more formerly than is exprest in the new Charter; if in that case the alienation will be null, and I conceive it should; for though the Feuer may alleadge that he was in bona fide, because of the former Charters; yet seeing the hazard by this Act of Parliament, he ought to have looked to the Exchequer Rolls. I find the 233 and the following Acts till 240. of this 15 Parli∣ament of King Ja. 6, were at first Statutes of Session inserted in the Books of Sederunt, upon the 14 of March 1594. and here in 1597.
they are turn'd in Acts of Parliament, without mentioning that they had been Acts of Sederunt formerly, as uses to be done when the Parliament Ratifies such Acts; it seems that it was rather the Exchequers part than the Sessions, to have Regulated the Kings Revenue and Property, whereunto all the above cited Acts relate; but about this time, I find in the Sederunt Book, several Acts ingrossed, bearing to have been made by the Lords of Secret Coun∣cil, Session, and Exchequer, met together, which is like the several Chambers whereof the Parliaments of France consist, who con∣veen all together when any solemn arrest, or Decision is to be pro∣nunced in purpuris, as they call it; and these Acts being Decla∣rations of what was Law in relation to the Kings Property: It was more proper for the Session to have made such Acts, than for the Exchequer, who raise the Kings Rents conform to Law, but declare not what is so. ACT 234.THis Act declares that all alienations of the annext Property are null, if they be set otherwise than in Feu-ferm; and therefore if any part of the annext Property be Dispon'd to be hol∣den Blench, or Ward, the alienation is null: and I conceive the true reason to be, because originally the annext Property was allow'd to be Dispon'd; for improving His Majesties Rent, which cannot be, except where there is a yearly Rent pay'd; and albe∣it sometimes the King and Parliament may dissolve the annext Property in order to a Disposition to be made to a person who has deserv'd well of the King and Estates, in which, the improving His Majesties Revenue is not design'd; yet the general nature of Annexations ought not to be altered upon such accidental ac∣compts. THis Act annulling all Rights of the Kings Castles, Parks, Coal-heughs,ACT 235. &c. being annext, was formerly Statuted, 204 Act 14 Par. Ja. 6. ACT 236.THis Act is fully Explain'd in the 41 Act 11 Parliament, Ja. 2. ACT 237.THis Act declares that the Assize Herring is a part of the annext Property, and so cannot be set in Tack, nor Dispon'd; As∣size Herring is a certain measure of Herring due to the King out of every Boat; and the meaning of this Act is, that it cannot be set in Tack without a competent Duty, for it is set in Tack for a just avail, and could not be well otherways Collected; but this being a Casuality, it is jactus retis, and so except the Duty be almost elusory, it is hard to quarrel it; ex hoc capite, they were formerly annext by the 176 Act, 13 Par. Ja. 6.
THis Act Discharges all Offices of Heretable Chamberlainries,ACT 238. and all free Gifts and Discharges of the Kings Property; but to cheat this Act, the Feuars suffer the bygones to ly unpay'd, and then obtain Discharges, or else they obtain Tacks of their own Feu-duties for payment of a small and simulat Tack-duty, call'd by the Romans as. Cassianus. BEcause the annext Property could not be Dispon'd without Dissolution; therefore some to cheat these excellent Laws,ACT 239. obtain'd Dispositions of the Feu-ferms payable to the King, for pay∣ment of a Feu-duty; and therefore these feudisirmae feudisirmarum are here discharg'd and annull'd. THese Acts are formerly Explain'd in the Act concerning the thirds of Benefices, viz. Ja. 6 Par. 1 Act 10. which are now obsolet,ACTS 240, 241 & 242. Ministers being otherways provided. OBserv. That Acts of Parliament are to be observ'd by the Lords of the Session,ACT 243. except they be particularly abrogated in express terms, vid. Gen. obs. THis Act is now useless,ACT 244. Ministers being otherways pro∣vided. ALL Vassals are oblig'd to Exhibit their Evidents to their Supe∣riour, not only by Improbations, but in Exhibitions;ACT 245. though in Law nemo tenetur edere instrumenta contra se; and the reason of this Speciality is, because the Superiour is dominus dire∣ctus, and so has a true interest in the Land; and if the Vassal pretend any interest, he is oblig'd docere de titulo, to shew his in∣terest, and to instruct the Superiour in what is due to him; and the King in our Law is presum'd to be Universal Superiour of all Lands; and therefore may by a Proclamation, or by way of Action, or by a Statute, as here, ordain all Evidents to be pro∣duc'd betwixt and such a day; but nothing save a Statute or Im∣probation can declare the Evidents to be null, if not produc'd as here; and since an Improbation could not be universal, this Sta∣tute was necessary in these times, when His Majesties Revenue was not established, nor known. FEus are declar'd null for not payment of the Feu-duty,ACT 246. either by the Clause irritant contain'd in the Infestments, declaring that if two Terms run, the Feu shall be null; or by this Statute declaring that if the Feu-duty be unpay'd for two years together, the Feu shall be null: But there is this difference betwixt Irri∣tancies upon this Act, and these contained in the Infestment, that the Irritancy upon this Act may be purg'd at the Bar, but Irritancies
upon Clauses in Infestments cannot be purg'd at the Bar, because they are incurr'd by paction betwixt parties, which the Lords can∣not alter; for the Superiour having given out the Feu upon that express condition, it is not just to alter what was expresly Treat∣ed amongst parties, December 1. 1664. Laird of Pourie contra Hun∣ter. But yet I see no reason for this distinction, since this Act ap∣points expresly that they shall be null, in the same manner as if there were a Clause irritant contained in the Infestment, nor do I see how the Lords can alter what is so expresly introduced by a clear Statute. If offer was made of the Feu-duty, but refus'd, yet this will not be sustain'd when Reduction is pursu'd ex hoc capite, except it be instantly offered of new at the Bar; nor will a Term be al∣lowed for purging, as was found in the former case, in which the Lords also inclin'd to think that compensation will not be sustain'd to take off this irritancy; for though Compensation tollit debitum, yet there is a reverence due by the Vassal, and which is considered more than the value of the Feu-duty it self; but yet if the Vassal come and offer humbly to his Superiour, before the Term of payment, Compensation of as much as is due to him in payment of the Feu-duty, Quaeritur, if this will not be sufficient, it may be doubted whether a minor will be restored against the not payment of his Feu-duty, since it is not just that the Superiour should be prejudg∣ed by the minority of his Vassal, or that the nature of the Feu should be thereby inverted; and it may be also doubted whether this irritancy will be incurr'd by him who was hindred vi majori from payment, as by being taken and detained Prisoner, or carry∣ed to remote Countreys, since by the Feudal Law in other cases, this does excuse a mora, and from all the inconeniencies that fol∣low upon it. 4. It may be doubted if this legal irritancy will be incurr'd where the Charter bears another special penalty and Certification, in case of the Vassals failʒie in payment of his Feu-duty, without substituting the same in the room of the Legal one, or expresly re∣nuncing it. 5. Quid juris, Where there are more Heirs-portioners, if the failʒie of one of them will prejudge the rest, seing quoad the Supe∣riority, he is oblig'd to own none but the eldest Daughter. 6. If an offer made of the Feu-duty, not by the Vassal but by a third party, will stop this caducity, seing the Feudal Obli∣gation on the Vassals part is a personal Recognizance, and ought to be perform'd personally: and on the other hand these irritan∣cies are unfavourable, and ought not to be extended. 7. Quaeritur, If the Vassals offering Feu-duties for years yet to run, if that offer will hinder the incurring the irritancy for these years, seing a Debitor may in Law pay before his day come; and what if it be such a Prestation as must be performed yearly. 8. If the Vassal will amit his Feu, for not offering where he had a
pretext to doubt who was his true Superiour, and what he is to do in that case. So much use the Lords to favour the Vassal against such severe irritancies, that a Retour bearing in the first part of it, an irritan∣cy for not payment of the Feu-duty si petatur tantum, they allow∣ed the Vassal to purge, though in the posterior part of the Retour, these words were omitted in the Clause irritant it self, February 18. 1680. Earl of Mar contra his Vassals. Like to this irritancy was that of the Civil Law, whereby non solutio pensionis per biennium in civill Emphiteusi & per triennium in Emphiteusi Ecclesiastica efficiebat ut Emphiteuta a jure suo caderet; by the Civil Law the irritancy & mora in not payment, was not purgeable, but by the Canon Law it was. In Tacks also with us, the not payment of a Tack-duty for two years or terms infers an irritancy, November 23. 1609. Murray contra Nisbit. March 9. 1611. Seton of Baro contra Seton of Pitmedden, which is also conform to the Civil Law, l. 56. ff. locati. THis Act is Explain'd crim. pract, tit. Usury.ACT 247. BY the 18 Act 1 Par. Ja. 6.ACT 248. The bearing and shooting with Culve∣rings or Daggs, without the Kings Licence, is forbidden under the pain of losing the Right Hand; and that Act is here Ratifi'd, and thereto is added Confiscation of Moveables: and by the Act 6 Par. 16 Ja. 6. It is appointed that the Contraveeners of these Acts, may be pursu'd, either before the Council or the Criminal Court, and when they are pursu'd before the Council, it is pro∣vided that they shall not lose the Right Hand. It may be argu'd from this Act, that where there are two punish∣ments appointed by two different Laws, the last is not added to the first; but either it antiquats the first, or else either of the two can be only regularly inflicted, for else this Act need∣ed not say, sa that the ane pain shall not stop nor stay the o∣ther. From that 6 Act 16 Par. It may likewise be observ'd, that the Secret Council are not Judges competent to Life and Limb, such as the amputation of the Right Hand. By the Lex Julia It was lawful to carry Arms without Rome, but not in the Town, but they were every where thereafter Discharg'd, Tit. 46. lib. 11. C. ut armorum usus inscio principe interdictus sit. BY this Act is Ratifi'd an Act made at Dundee, by the King,ACT 249. His Nobility, Council and Estates, which was an Act of the Convention of Estates, for the Convention of Estates ordinar∣ly considered the matter of Coinage; nor needed that a Parlia∣ment, because Coinage is a part of the Prerogative; and by the E∣states there were mean'd some of every Estate, taken by the King for advice.
From this Act it was urg'd in the Lord Hattons case, That 1. By this Act it is clear that we had a different Standard from England, which is to be eleven pennie fine. 2. That it was lawful to melt down current forraign Coyn, because this Act allows it to be us'd as Bullion. Nota, This is the first Act that mentions the General of the Mints Office, as different from the rest. BY this Act it is clear that the Convention of Estates made Acts also discharging the Transportation of Wool and the like;ACT 250. and this Act as to Wool is again Ratifi'd, but a power is allow'd to the Exchequer to Transport Wool (contrary to this Act) Act 40 Par. 1 Sess. 1 Ch. 2. But even this Act discharges only bypast Licences, but not Licence for the future, for these are allow'd even for Wool by the 254 Act of this same Parliament. ACT 251.BY this Act Customs are declar'd to be due to His Majesty of all that is brought in from forraign Nations; and by the 27 Act Sess. 3 Par. 1 Ch. 2. The ordering and disposal of Trade with forraigners, is declared to be His Majesties sole Prerogative; and therefore some think His Majesty may impose upon forraign Com∣modities what he thinks convenient; for since he may discharge the Trade, if He pleases; it seems to follow, that He may burden it as He pleases. By this Act an a, b, c. of the Customs is to be put upon all Com∣modities, that is to say, a particular index of the several Customs imposed upon every several Commodity, is ordain'd to be made ac∣cording to the Letters of the Alphabet, and this has varied in several ages; the present a, b, c. being made by order of the Parlia∣ment 1661. vid. statut. David. 2. cap. 12. num. 3. where this pri∣viledge as to paying of Customs, is formerly declar'd; and by the Canon Law this was likewise declar'd lawful to Princes, vid. perez. ad lib. 10. C. tit. 18. num. 13. & l, 5. C. de jure fisci, where it is said, officialibus vlentibus ea capere debet acquiescere. From these words of this Act, Albeit it cannot be deny'd that His Majesty is a free Prince of a Soveraign power, havand als great Li∣berties and Prerogatives be the Laws of this Realm, and priviledge of His Crown and Diadem as any other King, Prince, or Potentat whatsoever: It is observable, that our Kings are here acknowledg∣ed to be absolute and Soveraign Monarchs, as is likewise more ful∣ly declar'd by the 1 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. In which it is said, Whom the hail Estates of their bounden duty, with maist hearty and faith∣ful affection, humbly and truly acknowledges to be Soveraign Monarch, absolute Prince, Judge and Governor over all Persons, Estates and Causes, both Spiritual and Temporal within His said Realm: By nei∣ther of which Acts, I conceive our Kings are so absolute, as that they have a Tyrrannick, or Despotick power, but that they are so absolute, as that they have power to do every thing that is just
and reasonable, though they be not thereto empowered by par∣ticular Acts of Parliament, and therefore they are ill Subjects, and worse Lawyers, who allow the King to do nothing but that for which he can shew an Act of Parliament; since his being an abso∣lute Monarch implyes this innate Power; and therefore it follows by a better consequence, when any thing is contraverted, that the King may do the thing in controversie being reasonable, if his power be not as to that point restrained by a particular Act of Parliament. It is likwise very observable that this power of absolute Monar∣chy does not flow from the people, but is his own Right, for no Act of Parliament grants the King any Prerogative, but only declares by way of humble acknowledgement what his Preroga∣tives were, principibus, says Tacitus, summum rerum judicium dii de∣derunt, subditis obsequii gloria relicta est, lib. 4. Armal. vid. observa∣tions on the 15 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. where our Parliament acknow∣ledges that our Kings hold their Crowns from God immediatly, Vid. Act 31. Par. 5 Ja. 3. I know some pretend that the Kings power is here declar'd to be absolute only in opposition to the Pope, and implyes no more but that he did not depend upon the Pope; but this is very groundless, for he is here declared absolute in relation to his laying on of Customs, in which the Pope is no way concern'd; and generally the Kings power in relation to Ecclesiastick Rights, is said, to be supream not absolute; and in Civil Rights, is said to be absolute, and not supream. BY this Act English Cloath,ACT 252. and all other English Commodities made of Wool, are forbidden, for the incouragement of our own Manufactures; but since the Union this prohibition is taken off, and a great Custom is only impos'd by the 13 Act Par. 1. Sess. 3 Ch. 2. but are thereafter upon the erecting of our Manufactures, absolutely discharg'd by the 12 Act Par. 3 Ch. 2. THese Acts ordaining all Ships to have special Cocquets,ACTS 255, 256, & 257. contain∣ing an Inventar of the Goods which they bear, and the names of the Merchants and Owners, are yet in observance; but the Merchants do not still make Faith upon these points, as is appoint∣ed by this 257 Act: and if the Keepers of the Cocquet absent themselves to the prejudice of the Merchant, or take more for the Cocquet than the sum of fourty shilling, they are to lose their place, and repair the Merchants damnage by the 50 Act Par. 1. Ch. 2. THis Act and the seven following Acts,ACT 253, till the 61. are very clear and need no Observation; only by lossing of Goods in these Acts is meant breaking of Bulk. THis Act is but a Branch of the 245 Act.ACT 262.
ACT 263.THis Act appointing three Burghs-Royal to be made, one in Kintire, one in Lochaber, and one in the Lews, is not only not in observance, but the Erection of a Burgh-Royal in the Lews was unjustly oppos'd by the Burrows in anno 1636. upon pretext that it would communicat their priviledges to Forraigners and Strangers, viz. Hollanders who offer'd to come and settle there; whereas it would only have dilated and improv'd our Trade, and these Forraigners had presently become Scottishmen. ACT 264.BY the 119 Act Par. 7 Ja. 6. Inhibitions and Interdictions are to be Registrated in the Sheriff-Clerks Registers: but by this Act all Letters of Horning, Inhibitions, Interdictions, and their Executions are to be Registrated in the Registers of the respective Bailliaries, Stewartries, or Regalities, within which the persons dwell, against whom these Executions are; but if these persons be out of the Countrey, they must be Denunc'd at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and Peer and Shore of Lieth, and not at the Head Burgh of the Stewartry, Bailliary, or Regality, July 4. 1666. Cun∣ninghame contra Cunninghame; and that because this Act of Parlia∣ment speaks only of persons dwelland within the Kingdom: but it may be yet doubted, whether the single Escheats of persons out of the Countrey may fall upon Denunciations at the Mercat Cros of Edinburgh, and Peer and Shore of Lieth? or whether Liferent-Escheats will fall, except the Rebel be Denunced at the Head Burgh of the Shire, Regality, or Stewartry wherein his Lands lyes? since if he had been within the Countrey, he ought to have been Denunced in the Respective Jurisdictions within which the Lands ly. Albeit this Act appoints all Letters to be executed within Re∣galities and Stewartries; yet if these Jurisdictions have no known Head Burgh, the Escheat will be sustained upon a Denunciati∣on at the Head Burgh of the Shire, January 7. 1677. Scot contra Dalmahoy. ACT 265.BY this Act all Hornings, Relaxations, Inhibitions, and Interdi∣ctions that were to be Registrated in inferiour Registers, are ordain'd to be presented Judicially before a Notar and four Witnes∣ses; which formality is thereafter found not to be necessary, and is abrogated by the 13 Act Par. 16 Ja. 6. ACT 266.VId. crim. pract. tit. Theft. ACT 267.BEcause the Money had risen at this time to a great value, so that the same piece of Money which passed formerly for one penny, was worth ten the time of this Act; therefore it is justly appointed by this Act, that all the Unlaws shall be raised, so that the same Delict which was Fined only in twelve pennies before the first
of March 1542. (that is to say, before the first Parliament of Queen Mary) should be Fineable in ten shilling of the Money cur∣rent the time of this Act, Gel. lib 20. c. 1. tells us that the Romans were in this same manner forc'd to augment the penalties of the twelve Tables, because Lucius Veracius, took pleasure to beat all that past him, because he was only to pay twenty five Asses for every blow, according to that Law. THis Act is Explain'd crim pract. tit. Beggars.ACT 268. FRom this Act it is observable that he that is charg'd with Lawborrows, shall be as lyable in the Contravention,ACT 269. as if he had found Caution, though he has not found Caution; it be∣ing unjust that by his contempt he should put himself in a better condition; and it is by the same reason that an appearand Heirs Liferent escheat falls to his Superiour in the same way, as if he had entred; since it is unjust that the Superiour should be prejudg'd by th appearand Heirs lying out. Observ. 2. That by this Act when any man finds Caution, be∣ing charged with Law-borrows, he who raises Lawbor∣rows has action against either principal or Cautioner at his option, as in other pecunial Obligations; which words, viz. as in all other pecunial Obligations, are added, because by our Law, he who is a Cautione ad factum praestandum (such as they are who become Cautioners, for Executors, Messengers, or Tutors, &c.) is only lyable after the Principal is discuss'd, because they being only Cautioners for the Principals performance: It must be first known, whether the Principal has performed, and thus the beneficium discussionis; that was of old competent by the Civil Law to all Cautioners, is only competent by our Law to such Cautioners only as become Cautioner ad factum praestandum. THis Act appointing that the pains of the general Bond,ACT 270. shall be divided betwixt the King and the party, is to be under∣stood of the general Bond of Lawborrows, which is appointed by the 3 Act Par. 2. and 12 Act Par. 6 Ja. 2. even as the pain of spe∣cial Lawborrows, is to be divided betwixt the King and the par∣ty, by the 77 Act Par. 6. Ja. 6. for that Act 77 related only to privat Lawborrows, at the instance of privat parties; and there∣fore this Act was necessary in the case of general Lawborrows, ex∣acted at the Kings instance, for the security of all His Subjects, from such as he thinks lyable to suspition. It was and is ordinary for the King and Council, to Charge He∣retors who are at feid to give Bonds of assurance to one another, and that upon six hours advertisement, under the pain of Rebel∣lion, vid. the Council Registers, July 26 1582. and which is a great instance of the Kings power allow'd him by Law, against those whom he has reason to suspect.
ACT 271.THe Rubrick of this Act is wrong, for Sheriff Clerk bring not their Books to the Exchequer, but to the Lord Regi∣ster. ACT 272.BY this Act it is appointed that all such as are Commissioners for Parliament shall be authoriz'd by the Subscription of a great number of the Barons then present, and the Subscription of the Clerk of the Convention, else to be null, which Act was found not to be in Desuetude, by a Decision in the Convention, July 1678. where it was found likwise that this Act extended to Commissi∣ons for Conventions, as well as to Parliaments; for though this Act speaks only of Parliaments; yet Parliaments and Conventions being called the same way, the Commissions should have the same Solemnities, and the reason why the Sheriff-Clerks Subscription is requisit, is, because he is the publick Servant of the Shire, and so it is presumable that he will mark exactly all that was done, and will not suffer counterfited Subscriptions to be put to Commissions, being to be lyable himself, whereas otherwise Commissions may be obtruded upon the Convention with false Subscriptions, as was done in that same Meeting; and which dangerous falshood can∣not otherwise be well fastened upon any other, since the Com∣missioner may justly alleadge that the Commission was so granted to him, and one may be chosen a Commissioner who is absent, in which case he cannot know who sign'd. ACT 273.BUrrows having great Freedoms and Priviledges from the King, are therefore oblig'd to have sufficient Prisons, for receiving such as are attached for Crimes and Debts; which Act was found to oblige Baillies of Burghs of Regality, as well as Burghs Royal, Ju∣ly 7. 1668. and Stewarts of Stewartries, June 18. 1670. and these words of this Act, By the Sheriffs to Stewarts and Baillies of Regali∣ty, are wrong Printed, for the word to should be or; But this Act was not found to oblige Baillies of a Burgh of Barony, March 13. 1623. Nor Bishops Baillies, March 21. 1627. But the Bail∣lies of the Head Burghs of Stewartries were thought to be oblig'd by this Act of Parliament to receive Prisoners; albeit the Act of Parliament appoints them to be presented only to Stewarts and Bail∣lies of Regality; but speaks not of Baillies of the Head Burgh of the Stewartry, June 18. 1670. Cheap contra the Baillies of Falkland: Where it vvas likevvise found, that the Baillies keeping a Rebel eight or ten dayes in a privat House, and thereafter Imprisoning him, vvere not lyable super hoc medio, except he escaped by their negligence, or the insufficiency of the Prison; and it seems by the Act of Parliament, that these Burghs are only oblig'd to have Pri∣sons, vvhich have Provosts and Baillies; for the Act appoints the Prison to be upholden by the Provost, Baillies, &c. though the Ru∣brick sayes, that Prisons should be Bigged within all Burghs, and it may be doubted from the vvords of the Act, vvhether Burghs
vvhich have no Common-good should be lyable, especially seing Magistrats are oblig'd to keep Prisons for the Kings use, because they have a Common-good from Him. If the Magistrats do not receive Rebels, or have not sufficient Prisons, they are lyable for the Debt, and that vvithout calling the principal Debitor, since the Magistrats are lyable ex suo delicto, and these Jails are found not to be sufficient vvhich vvant Cat-bands, and outward Chains, because the Prisoner cannot force those from vvithin, but the Prison being sufficient, and sufficiently Guarded, vis major, is a sufficient Defence: and though this Act says only, That they shall secure persons presented to them; yet they are found to be oblig'd to search any House vvhere the Rebel is said to be, Ju∣ly 2. 1669. Farquhar contra Magistrates of Elgin; and though this Act bears, That they shall detain all such Prisoners upon their own Expence, yet this is only extended to Prisoners taken ob vindictam publicam, but it is indulg'd to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, That they shall not be oblig'd to receive any who are offered to Prison by privat parties, till the presenters find Caution to aliment them. This Act appoints those Prisons to be made for sure Imprisoning, Keeping, and detaining of such Prisoners as are presented, and therefore the Magistrats cannot let them out, either to Church, or to go about any of their Affairs, hovv important soever, though vvith a Keeper, since squalor carceris is thus eluded; and there∣fore in such cases the Magistrats must be authorized by a Warrand from the Secret Council, or Lords of the Session, and that by an Act of Sederunt in anno 1671. and if the Rebel be suffered to escape or go abroad, the Magistrats vvill not only be lyable, but they vvill get no relief from the Cautioner, though they take Assignation to the Debt, since tenentur ex proprio delicto, and the Cautioner is pre∣judg'd of his relief by that their Delict, January 24. 1668. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 1 Act Par. 9 Ja. 6.ACT 274. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 153 Act Par. 12 Ja. 6.ACT 275. SInce by this Act all Burgesses are to be Stented according to their Rents, and holding within Burgh:ACT 276. it may be doubted if a Burges have no actual Trade, but only Money owing him, by per∣sons without the Burgh, if he may be Stented according to that E∣state, since it is no Rent, nor holding in Burgh; but the answer is, that mobilia semper sequuntur personam; and therefore he may be Stented according to that Money: it may be doubted if Gentle∣men who never had any Trade, but dwell in the Town very long, may be Stented, though they be honorary Burgesses only. Item, If they can Stent for Ministers Stipends, Strangers within Burgh, who are not at all Burgesses; and this Act seems to imply, that Inha∣bitants as well as Burgesses, may be Stented according to their Estates within Burgh, and that all who have advantage by the Mi∣nistry should pay Ministers.
ACT 277.THere are two ways of Levying Subsidies in Scotland; the one is by Taxation, which was the old way, and which Taxation was uplifted according to the Retour: The other is by way of Cess, in which the Subsidie is uplifted according to the late Valua∣tions, wherein every mans Land Rent was given up, as presently possess'd. The Subsidie granted by this Act, is by way of Taxation, and the old way of uplifting Subsidies by Taxations, may be fully here∣in seen, and which is very fit to be Read upon that accompt; and in which it is evident that the Clergy pay'd the one half, inclu∣ding the Erections; but in anno 1666. a proposal being made that the Subsidie then offered, should be uplifted by way of Cess, and not by way of Taxation. These ensuing Reasons were represented against that proposal, and which I have here insert, because they tend very much to the clearing many of our old Laws and Customs. The Reasons were, 1. That the Rule and Way for uplifting Taxations has in all ages been according to Retours, and the Tax∣ed Rolls until these late unhappy and irregular times; from which it is humbly conceiv'd a Rule and Presedent ought not to be taken. It is beyond all question, this being the good old way, though it were upon no other account, ought not to be chang∣ed, the danger and inconveniency of the alteration of ancient Laws and Customs, being so great and obvious from the late experience of these Kingdoms, that this age needeth not to be put in mind of the same, but may be a sad remembrance to poste∣rity. 2. The foresaid way is only now the legal way wherein Taxa∣tions can be uplifted at this time, seing the same is determined and authoriz'd by ancient and uncontroverted Customs in all ages, and beyond memory, and by the Law of Nations, and the funda∣mental Law of this Kingdom; ancient National Custom is Law, and of as great force as Statute, and is the great Basis and foun∣dation of the Power, and Rights, and Property of the Prince and People, which for the most part are warranted and secured by the Common Law and Custom, and not by express Act of Parliament and Statute. 3. This way of uplifting Taxations and the proportions of the same, payable by the respective Estates, is designed and establish∣ed by express Laws and Acts of Parliament, so that the same cannot be altered but by a Parliament, which only has power to repeal as appears by the 56 Act Ja. 3 Par. 7. intituled, These Retours should contain the Old and New Extent; and the Act 229. Ja. 6 Par. 14. Ordaining all Feu-lands annex'd, and other Feu-lands vvhatsomever to be retour'd, and vvhen any Taxation or Im∣post is to be rais'd, that the Feuers shall be charged according to the Retour; and by the 229 Act Ja. 6 Par. 14. Ordaining His Ma∣jesties Property to be Retour'd, and such Lands as are dissolv'd
and dismembered from Baronies to be Retour'd, and charged ac∣cording to the Retours, in order to the payment of Taxation, and divers others, and in special all the Acts of Parliament concerning the granting and uplifting Taxations. 4. Whereas it is pretended by the Heritors of the Western Shires, that their Retoures are higher than in other Shires, and that it should be a more equal way that the Taxation should be uplifted as Csses, according to the Valuation, without respect to Retours; these Gentlemen have no reason to complain, being their own Deeds, procured by them, upon the verdict of their own Friends and Neighbours per fideles homines patriae, and according to which they have pay'd not only Taxations, according to the old extent; but His Majesties Casualities of None-entry, Relief, and siklike, ac∣cording to the New Extent contain'd in the said Retours, and has been also in use to uplift the like Casualities from their own Vas∣sals, according to the said Retoure; That the Retours should be al∣together taken away, both as to Old and New Extent, it is con∣ceiv'd that they will not desire, seeing if their Retour should be lessened, as to the New Extent, it would be an irrepairable preju∣dice to His Majesty, as to his ordinary Benefite and Casualities of None-entry, Relief; and siklike a prejudice to themselves, as to the same Casualities due, and payable to themselves by their Vas∣sals, and what incongruity should it be, that the same Retour should be altered as to the Old Extent, and should be stated as to the New, and that it should be still a Rule, as to their own inte∣rest and benefite, and not as to the payment of the Taxation to his Majesty, as it has been in all ages, it being also considered, that they cannot say that the Lands are valued unjustly by their Retours, and extend to more than the true value, the time of the Retouring of the same, and since that time they cannot deny that they are improven for the most part above any proportion. 5. The interest, and consequently the way of proceeding of Lawful Princes; and Usurpers being so different and opposite, that as Princes are patres patriae, and do cherish and intend the flou∣rishing of their Subjects; so by the contrary, it is the interest and practice of Usurpers deglubere, to squize and oppress the people, that they should not be in a capacity to shake off the Yoke: it is neither the honour nor interest of the Countrey to take a pattern and rise from the Usurpers to overturn the ancient Law of the King∣dom, especially in the matter of Taxations, seeing the necessity and fatal course of these times, in order to maintaining of War a∣gainst his gracious Majesty, and his blessed Father did not only require a Taxation, which was an easie burden to the people, and were chearfully granted, and oftimes offered to his Majesties Royal Predecessors as an aid and subsidie, when their occasions did call for the same, but the Usurpers were driven to exact a considerable part of every persons Estate, as a constant Tribute, under the no∣tion of Taxt and Loan Maintainance, Cess and such like burdens, which cannot be remembred without horrour; and in order to
the same, to introduce a new way by Valuation, whereas his Ma∣jesty is to have an ordinary Taxation; and therefore there is no reason but that the same should be rais'd in that good old and or∣dinary way, that has ever been used in the time of his Majesties Fa∣ther, and his Royal Predecessour. 6. The way of Cess, both as to the manner and thing is so hateful to the Body of the people of this Kingdom, that though exhausted in a low condition, they did offer, and chearfully grant to His Majesty a constant yearly Taxation and Annuity, during His Majesties Life, of 40000 pound Sterling, upon consideration expresly mentioned in the said Act, that His Majesty had signified His Royal Resolution, not to raise any more Cess, it cannot be expressed how great dissatisfaction and apprehension it would be∣get in the hearts of the people, if that unhappy way of Cess should be reviv'd, under what name or notion soever, now after His Majesties Restitution, and that the people had just reason to think themselves secur'd by the ancient Laws and Custom of the King∣dom, and His Majesties gracious Resolution so recently and solemn∣ly expressed by His Majesties late Commissioner in Parliament, and recorded in a Printed Act, being the 14 of His Majesties late Par∣liament, and first Session thereof. 7. The Western Shires, being only five, and the remnant Shires who plead for the good old Way, according to the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, being five times more, it is humbly repre∣sented, that the interest and number of so many other Shires should weigh down the pretences and desires of so few Shires, for a No∣vation contrary to the Law and Liberty of the Kingdom; it be∣ing also considered, that though the Loyalty of some Noblemen and Gentlemen within the said Western Shires, be above all excep∣tion, and be more eminent, that there are so few of sound Prin∣ciples there, yet to speak modestly, the generality of the Inhabi∣tants of these Shires has not been so forward to desire or promote His Majesties Restitution and Interest, that now after His Majesties happy Re-establishment, they should obtain what they could never effectuate in any time, and should be gratifi'd to the prejudice of other Shires of undoubted and constant Loyalty, and the overturning the ancient Law, and Way of the Kingdom. 8. As to the pretence of inequality in the old Way, it is to be considered, that though an Arithmetical proportion and exactness is not to be expected in any Way; Yet there is more reason to pre∣sume for the justice and equity of a legal way, venerable for an∣tiquity, warranted by express Laws and immemorial Custom, which for any thing known, had its beginning in the time of Free∣dom, and has been continued in the best, most peaceable and pure∣est times, notwithstanding any endeavours to the contrary, than for a way contriv'd and hatch'd in the Heart and fury of Trouble and Distempers, and brought forth and obtruded upon the Coun∣trey with so much partiality and factiousness, that it is well known that the Shires, and persons who were in opposition to His Maje∣sty,
had so great and prevalent interest for the time, that the va∣luations, both as to the Quota of Shires, and proportions and Rents of private persons were carry'd on by the instruments and Commis∣sioners, most inequally to the advantage of their party, and the e∣vident prejudice and pressure of whole Shires, and all per∣sons who were sincere, or had the least Affection for the Royal Interest. 9. By the Common and Feudal Law and Law of the Kingdom, where the Heir of the Vassal Dieth, not Entered, the Superiour during the None-entry, has right to the Duties of the Land holden of him, and when the Heir of Ward-lands doth Enter, the Superiour hath Right to the Duties for a year, under the notion of Relief, which in both these Cases of Relief and Non-entry, are payable accor∣ding to Retoures and the New Extent; if the old way of Retoures should be altered in relation to the payment of Taxations, why not in order to None-entries and Relief, so that they should be payed, not according to Retour but Valuations, there being no reason that the saids Casualities are not exacted in rigour: but the ancient Law and Custom for Retoures. How dangerous the prepa∣rative may be, if the way of Retoures should be altered, even to those who are for Novations, and what Combustion and Disorder it may occasion in the contrary, it is so apparent, that it needs not to be represented. 10. Whereas it is pretended that the Lords and others of the Clergy, will have prejudice by the Old Way, both as to their own proportion, and the proportion of the Vassals, and that they are in another condition than formerly, by reason that their Rents are impaired by Valuations and Ministers Stipends, it is humbly conceived with all tenderness and respect to the reverend Clergy, that whatever others for their own interest, do suggest under pre∣tence of theirs. The Lords of the Clergy and others, will not de∣cline to contribute, and be Taxt for His Majesties Service, as the other Estates, and as to the pretended way of paying Taxation according to the Valuations in these late times, they cannot be Taxed in that way, because the Rents of the Bishops being for the most part in these times of Usurpation, mortified to Universities and other pious uses, they were not valued, nor lyable to Cess and such like burdens; it must then follow, that either they must be Taxed in the old Way, or else not at all as to the proportion of the Clergie, it is designed by all the Laws concerning Taxations, and it is not higher than it was at any time, since Taxations were granted to His Majesties Predecessors; and it is to be observ'd in all Acts of Parliament concerning Taxations. The Lords of the Clergie do in the first place, before the rest of the Estates, make a chearful offer of the same proportion without any grudging, and though there needs no reason to be given for clear Law and Pra∣ctice; yet that the said proportion is Defin'd, and settled upon good Reason, it is obvious, seing the same is impos'd in order, both to their Spirituality, consisting in Tiths, and their Temporality
consisting in Lands and others; and it is known that the Tiths are more than the fourth part of the Rent of Scotland: and Tempo∣ralities and Church-lands will extend to a considerable part of Scot∣land, at least to a fourth part. The Clergie having their Benefices and Living, not in Proper∣ty, as the other Estates, but of His Majesties immediat favour and grant, and for their lifetime; so that it is not strange, that upon the considerations foresaid they pay'd such a proportion of the Taxa∣tion; the case is not altered upon the account of Valuations and Ministers Stipends, that course for Valuation of Tiends, and aug∣mentation of Stipends being procured, and taken at the earnest desire of the Reverend Bishops and Clergy; so that it ought not to be represented, as being to their prejudice; and de facto, the Reverend Bishops and Mnisters, have no prejudice by that course, by reason the Bishops and Ministers, and Benefic'd persons (who ought only to be looked upon as Clergie) are secur'd by divers provisions contained in the Acts of Parliament anent the Valuati∣on of Tiths, and in special, that what they were in possession of actually and really the time of the Submission, made by them, should remain with them in quantitate & qualitate, unprjudged by any Valuation, so that the Valuation and augmentation of Stipends being only in Relation to, and affecting the Spirituality and Tiends; the case neither is, nor can be altered as to the Clergie, they be∣ing secured by the saids Provisions, and the burden of augmentati∣on of Stipends, and prejudice by Valuations, doth only ly upon the Lords; and Titulars of Erection, and Tacks-men of Tiths, as the case is not altered in relation to Benefic'd persons; so Sti∣pendiary Ministers cannot be prejudg'd by the good old Way, seing by an Act of Parliament 162 Ja. 6 Par. 13. They are freed and exempted of all Taxations and Impositions, the burden of the pro∣portion of the Clergie doth not ly upon them, but for the most part upon the Vassals, and Tacks-men against which they have by the Law a present and summar way of Relief, as to the Lands and Temporality of the Clergie, they are the same, and in the same case as in time of former Taxations; and that the Vassals of Erection, or of Church-men, should be in better case than formerly, as to the payment of Taxation, It is contrary to Law and Reason, se∣ing res transit cum onere & causa; and that Lay-men acquir∣ing Lands from Church-men, should have more case of Taxa∣tion, as to such Lands, than other Church-men had, when they possessed the same, is inconsistent with Law, and with the Respect and Priviledges belonging to that Sacred Order. 11. Whereas it is pretended, that since His Majesties Restituti∣on, and the said Act of Parliament containing His Promise and Re∣solution, not to raise any more Cess: A Taxation hath been pay'd to the Lords of Session in the way of Cess, that pretence is of no weight, it being considered that the said Taxation is granted, not to His Majesty, but for an honorary allowance to the Lords of Session; and by an Act of the same Parliament, wherein His Ma∣jesty
Declar'd that no more Cess should be rais'd; so that the said Act being in the same Parliament, and it being an exception from the said Act, firmat regulam in non exceptis, and shuts the Door as to the future, upon that manner of Raising of Impositi∣ons. 12. Whatever a Parliament may do as to the repelling of for∣mer Laws and Customes, a Convention of Estates (though a meet∣ting most eminent) has not that Legislative Power: And albeit the Commissioners from Shires has power by their Commission, to offer and condescend to a Taxation; Yet they have not power to alter and take away the fundamental Laws and Customs of the King∣dom, as to the manner of uplifting of Taxations, being the Birth∣right of the people, and which cannot be taken away but by a Law made in Parliament. King James the sixth, Parliament 16. THe Earl of Gowrie having endeavoured Treasonably to Murder King James the sixth,ACT 1. he was Forefaulted in the beginning of this Parliament; and after his Death, his Bro∣ther and Posterity were disabled to succeed, and the Name of Ruthn aolished; as is to be seen in the first three Un-printed Acts of this Parliament, and a publick day of Thanksgiving is ap∣pointed by this Act, which is yet constantly Celebrated upon the 5 of August, which was the Day upon which the Murder was to be com∣mitted. The malice of the Fanaticks in those times is most remark∣able, who pretend that he was unjustly Forefaulted, albeit the Depositions of the Witnesses are yet extant, whereby the Traite∣rous Dsign of having contriv'd, and accordingly attempted to kill that excellent King, is prov'd by his own relations, and ma∣ny eminent Witnesses of intire Reputation. It is also observable, that Witnesses of old, in Processes before the Parliament, were only led before the Articles, and repeated in Par∣liament. Item, That the Summons was still in Latin, & sub testimonio magni sigilli, they were at the Instance of the Justices, and of the Kings Advocat; and the Summons in all such cases were still rais'd before the Parliament did sit, for our Parliaments sat very short time, and so they err who think that such Processes can only be rais'd by a Warrand from the Articles, though that be ordinary now. And now likewise the Summons is in Scots, and under the Signet only. THe Earl of Gowrie being Forefaulted,ACT 2. his Lands are by this Act annex'd to the Crown; and though by the former Acts of Annexation, Lordships and Baronies were only in general an∣nexed;
yet here all the particular Baronies of the Lordship, and all Tenements of the Lordship are expressed, with all the Pertinents thereto belonging, which are here specially enumerated, and amongst the Pertinents, Patronages are enumerated, which shews that Pa∣tronages in our Law, are comprehended under the word Perti∣nents, which is also clear by the Author of the Book, call'd The Parsons Law. See more of this in the Notes on Act 29 Par. 11 Ja. 6. The Regalities and Heretable Offices belonging to Gowrie, are likewise supprest expresly, and the saids Lands erected in a Stewartry; for a Regality is properly the Erection of Lands hold∣ing of Subjects; and a Stewartry is only in Lands, which are the Kings Property. ACT 3.THis Act is Explain'd in the 37 Act Par. 2 Ja. 6. and that is the Act related to in this Statute. ACT 4.BY this Act, Invading or pursuing any of His Highness Session, Secret Council, or Officers, it being verifi'd that they were pursu'd, or Invaded for doing His Highness Service, is Declar'd punishable by Death, and upon this Act Mr. James Mitchel was Hang'd for Invading the Bishop of Saint Andrews; in which Pro∣cess it was upon debate found, that the Pursuing and Invading for doing His Highness Service, was sufficiently proven by presumpti∣ons, except the Pannel could have condescended upon another reason which provockt him to the attempt, arising from private quarrel or grudge, and that because it is impossible to imagine that the Design of the Invader can be otherwise prov'n, that being an occult and latent Act of the mind. By the Civil Law, the Invading a Counsellor was Treason, for sayes the Emperour, sunt pars corporis nostri, l. 5. C. ad l. Jul. Maj. It may be questioned from this Act, 1: Who are to be call'd the Kings officers? 2. If the Invading them when they are out of the Kingdom, or Suspended, or when they are only nam'd, and not yet admitted to their place, will infer the punishment of this Act. 3. If these words in the Narrative of this Statute, that they are oft quarrelled without any just cause, will excuse the Invader, if he can show that he was truly wrong'd by that party, either in Voting, or deciding against him, or otherwayes, Scipio Gentilis in his Books, de conjurationibus adversus principes explains the l. 5. cod. ad l. jul. Majest. and shews how far the Invading of the Kings Counsellours is Treason. Sir Francis Bacons observes that an Act of this Tenour was made at the suggestion of the Chancellor, in the Reign of Henry 7. be∣cause of the danger the Chancellour was then in from the Courti∣ours, drowning the envy of it in a general Law; and I am sure that was also our case, for our Chancellour was in ill Terms then
with our Nobility, but their Conspiring was made a Crime; where∣as with us Invading is necessary. THis Act is Explained in the 80 Act Par. 10 Ja. 3.ACT 5. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 248 Act Par. 15 Ja. 6.ACT 6. THis Act Discharging Herring to be carried abroad before Mi∣chaelmas, under the pain of Confiscation,ACT 10. is now innovated by the Priviledges granted to the Fishing Company, and that ve∣ry justly, for the sooner Herring be carryed abroad, they give the better price: And though there were not Herring enough taken to serve the Countrey the time of this Act, which was the reason of the Prohibition; yet now there are, sufficiently for serving both the Countrey and Strangers. THough the slaying Salmond in forbidden times, be Theft by this Act,ACT 11. yet none has ever been pursu'd capitally there∣fore, but the same is only punish'd as a penal Statute by an arbitra∣ry punishment. The reason why the Rivers of Tweed and Annand are excepted from this Act, is, because the killing Fish upon them prejudges on∣ly the English Fishing: but after the Union of the two Kingdoms, this exception as to these two Rivers, is also taken away by the 5 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. THis Act declaring the Provocker and Provocked in Duels to be punishable by Death, is Explain'd,ACT 12. Crim. pract. tit. Du∣els: and since fighting Duels is only declared Death by this Act, it appears that naked Provocation is not Capital; but yet even the sending of Cartals may be arbitrarly punished by the Privy Council: but Fighting is Capital, though no killing follow: and fighting by Rencounter may be punished as a Duel, though there was no formal Cartal; for by this Law all single Combats are de∣clared punishable by Death, vid. crim. pract. tit. Duels: This Act was renewed by a strict Act of Secret Council, in anno 1674. THis Act is Explained in the Act 265. Par. 15 Ja. 6.ACT 13. BY this Act it is Declared that the negligence of the Kings Offi∣cers, in Pursuing or Defending a Cause,ACT 14. shall not prejudge the King: and therefor competent and omitted, is never receiv∣ed against the King, though it be against private parties; and by this Act it would appear that the King may propone a Nullity of a Decreet obtained against him, even in foro before the Lords of Session, by way of Exception or Suspension, without a formal Re∣duction;
but yet Prescription runs against the King, notwith∣standing that it may be alleadged, that by this Act he cannot be prejudged by the negligence of His Officers, in not pursuing, since Prescription is a general Remedy introduced for the final quiet, both of King and People; and as to Heretage it is introduced by an Act posteriour to this Act, wherein there is no exception made in favours of the King; but the Act introducing Prescription of Moveables is prior to this Act, and so it may be the more doubted, whether Prescription of Moveables runs against the King, since by this posteriour Act it is Declared, that the negligence of His Offi∣cers in not pursuing, shall not prejudge him, nor is there so great hazard to the Lieges in their Moveables, as in their Heritage. ACT 15.THe Transporting or In-bringing of forbidden or Un▪ custom∣ed Goods, that is to say, Goods that should pay Custom, without paying Custom is punishable, not only by Forefaulture of the Goods, but by Confiscation of the In-bringers whole Goods moveable; albeit by the Civil Law, ea res tantum in commissum cadit quam quis non est professus; by which Law the naked En∣try, or sola possessio, was sufficient to Defend against the Forefaul∣ture & imputandum est publicano qui non exegerit, Perez. tit. C. de vect. num. 10. both by that Law and ours, the Customers may recover the Goods un-entered, even from singular Successors who have bought the same, bona fide, for a competent price; and in that Law, Error ex∣cus'd from Confiscation: but in that case it exacted double Custom, Perez, ibid. I have not observed any mans Moveables Escheated upon this Act. THis Act fining such as will not Communicat once a Year, when he is thereto desired by his Pastor,ACT 17. is ill observed, but not in Desuetude, and therefore was renewed by Proclamation in January 1679. Observ. That the having Rancour against their Neigh∣bour, is Declar'd no relevant excuse; and justly, because it is a fault, and so should be no Defence, & argumento hujus legis, a Fanatick having prejudice at his Minister, even though reasonable, is no legal Defence, for he should still hear. Observ. 2. Though this Act say, That no other excuse whatsoever shall Defend; yet certainly inability to Travel, madness, &c. will Defend, and general words are still to be understood, in subjecto capaci. ACT 18.THis Act is Explain'd, crim. pract. tit. Heresie. ACT 19.THis Act is Explained, crim. pract. tit. Beggars and Vaga∣bonds.
THis Act is Explained, crim. pract. tit. Adultery.ACT 20. THis Act is but a Temporary Commission.ACT 22. THis Act against slaughter of Wild-fowl,ACT 23. is renewed by an Act of Privy Council, June 9. 1682. years, whereby Masters of the Game are appointed for putting these Acts in Execution; though by this Act the Sheriffs, Stewarts, and the Kings ordinary Magistrats, have a particular Commission of Justiciary for this effect; and it was questioned in the time, how the Council could take away a Right establisht in them by the Parliament? By this Act, the killing of Mure Pouts is Discharg'd before the third of July, and Partridge Pouts before the eight of September; and by that Proclamation, Mure Pouts are allow'd to be kill'd after the first of July, and Heath Pouts after the first of Au∣gust, and Partridge and Quail after the first of September; and whereas by the 109 Act Par. 7 Ja. 1. No Partridges, Plovers, Black-cocks, &c. are to be kill'd till August; this Proclamation al∣lows them to be killed from the first of July. THis Act ordaining all English Cloath to be Seal'd by a Seal,ACT 24. the Form whereof is here condescended on, was thought to have been in Desuetude: but now found not to be so in anno 1666. at which time it was found, that the Customers might enter the Shops, and Seal or Confiscat what was not so Seal'd. This Sealing was formerly appointed by the 129 Act Par. 12 Ja. 6. THis Act appoints,ACT 25. that no Letters of Horning shall be Direct against persons Dwelling on the other side of Dee, upon shor∣ter space than fifteen Dayes; which Act was found only to be ex∣tended to Actions before the Privy Council, but not to Charges be∣fore any other Court; because the Narrative of this Act sayes, That severals of the Lieges were drawn in inconveniencies by Charges before His Majesty and His Council; though the Rubrick and Statutory part be General; and though the reason, whereupon this is inferred, extends to all Charges, as well as Charges before the Council. SUch as Invade any of His Majesties Subjects within a Mile to the place of His Highness Residence,ACT 26. or whoever resort there∣to, Armed with Jacks, or Corslets under their Coats, are to be Imprisoned for a Year, and punishable by an arbitrary fine. Observ. That the attrocity of the Crime is much hightned from the circumstance of place, as well as time; as is likewise clear by the 173 Act Par. 13 Ja. 6.
It may be doubted, whether this Act can be extended against such as Invade Strangers? since the Act sayes only, such as invade Subjects; since the Invading of Strangers is more attrocious in it self, than the Invading of Subjects, the Crime being there aggredg∣ed by the breach of Hospitality. It may be likewise doubted, how long a time of Residence by the King makes the Invaders punishable? and it would appear that if the Invasion be not within a mile of that which is known to be the place of the Kings ordinary Residence, that then it must be pro∣ven, that the Invader did reside there for the time. ACT 27.BY this Act Sheriff-Courts should be kept in the middle of the Shire, for the ease of the people; but this is not observ'd. ACT 28.OF old Pledges were taken in the Borders, that is to say, one man entered himself Prisoner for another, and bound him∣self for his appearance, person for person; but now the Peace is secured by Sureties or Cautioners, who, if they present not the person for whom they are bound, that very hour they Fore∣fault their Bonds, nor is the presenting the Prisoner afterwards sufficient; which speciality has been found necessary in Border Sure∣ties. These Pledges were Distributed of old amongst the Nobility and Gentry, who were to be answerable for them, because we wanted then many and sure Prisons; and because they were un∣willing to receive these Pledges; therefore this Act obliges them to receive, and keep such Pledges, under the pain of two thousand merks. It may be doubted; if Pledges may not be taken in other Crimes as well, as these relating to the Borders and High∣lands, argumento hujus legis, since this may tend much to the quiet∣ing of the Countrey; and if the Nobility may not be forc'd to keep these, for Prisons may be often so full, that Prisoners cannot otherwayes be kept; and by many Acts of Secret Council, the Nobility was before this Statute oblig'd to keep Pledges. By the Common Law, Obsides or Pledges could only be grant∣ed, ex causa publica, sed non ex privata, Bald. in l. ob aes, C. de obl. & act, But it seems that Pledges, though for Criminal Causes, could not bind themselves to corporal punishment, quia nemo est dominus suorum membrorum licet aliter obtineat de consuetudine, ob bonum publicum, Bald. in tit. de pace Constant. §. damna in finè.
King JAMES the sixth, Parliament 17. THere have been two Commissions granted for considering of an Union betwixt this Kingdom and England, one in this year 1604. and another in anno 1670. Betwixt which there are only these two differences; that in this Act the Names of the Commissioners are set down, and they had no other Commission but the Act of Parliament; but in the other Com∣mission 1670. the persons were nominated by his Majesty, under His Great Seal; the nomination being refer'd to the King by that Act of Parliament. The second difference is, that in this Commission 1604. their power is limited with this provision, viz. not derogating any wayes from any Fundamental Laws, ancient Priviledges, Offices, Rights, Dignities, and Liberties of this Kingdom: but the other has no such exception; and yet it may be doubted, whether by vertue of the last Commission, those who were Commissionated, could have derogated by their Treaty, from any of our Funda∣mental Laws, ancient Priviledges, Offices and Dignities? That the Parliament of Scotland could not consent to an Union of Parliaments, though all its Members were admitted, without at least Consulting the Shires and Burghs, which the respective Mem∣bers of Parliament represent, may be thus urg'd; all Nations con∣sidering the frailty of their Representatives, and that some ages and generations do too easily quite, what is fit and necessary for secu∣ring their Liberty; have therefore thought fit to declare some Fundamentals to be above the reach of their power; and that Parliaments cannot overturn Fundamentals, seems clear, not only, because these were not Fundamentals, if they could be over∣turn'd, that being the true difference betwixt Fundamental and other Laws; But if a Parliament should enslave their King∣dom to a Forraigner, the people might by a subsequent Electi∣on disown the Perfidie; or if two of three Estates should by plurality exclude the third, surely their Exclusion would be null; and that the Constitution of a Parliament is a Fundamental, ap∣pears not only from the Nature and Weight of that Priviledge; but likewise from this Commission, anno 1604. wherein it is call'd Fundamental, and looked upon as unalterable; nor is it imagi∣nable, how the Parliament cannot invert the Constitution of one Estate, and yet can invert and alter the Constitution of the whole: and by our Statutes it is Declared Treason, to endeavour to lessen the power of the three Estates of Parliament; and it cannot be said, that their power is not lessened, when they cannot make one Act or Statute by their own authority, or when others have more in∣terest in, and influence upon their Determinations, than they them∣selves have; and when, from being absolute, they become sub∣ject
to another; and a Parliament has but some such power over the people, as the Magistrats and Council have over a Burgh; for the Parliament is but the great Council of the people and King∣dom; and it is most certain, that the Magistrats and Council of a City or Town, could not consent to Incorporat with another Town, and consent to the eversion of their own, without the full consent of their people whom they Govern. Commissioners for Shires and Burghs, are the same with us that procuratores universitatis are in the Civil Law; and Procurators eti∣am cum libera, could not alienat the Rights of their Constituents, without a special Mandat for that effect, l. procuratori ff. de procu∣rat. nor can they exchange nor transact upon what belongs to their Constituents (which is our case exactly) l. mandato generali ff. de procurat. and if we consider the Commission whereby they sit in Parliament, we will find it does only empower them to Repre∣sent in Parliament their Constituents in every thing, which shall be advantagious for them: From which Commissions I argue, first, That this is but mandatum generale; for it empowers them only in general Terms and bears no Warrand to Treat with England, of an Union of Monarchies or Parliaments, & generali mandato etiam cum libera ea veniunt quae sunt de consuetudine, l. quod sno l. §. qui assidua ff. de aedidit. edict. & non comprehendit ea quae sunt usui re∣gionis repugnantia; it empowers not such as have it to do things extraordinary, and which, it is probable, the Constituents would not allow, l. ut si filius ff. de donationibus, l. indebitum ff. decon∣dict indebit & cap. generali de reg. jur. in sexto; but in such cases, as Lawyers observe, and Reason Teaches, the Constituent is to be Consulted, and a special Mandat is required; as is clear by the Laws above-cited. Our Commissioners for Shires and Burghs, sit by vertue of Commissions, and as they need a Warrand to sit, so cannot they exceed it when they sit, and are not arbitrary; Nor could the Parliament of Scotland, as now Constituted, resign their Parliamentary power over to the Council; Nor does their Commis∣sion empower them to ordain, that there shall be no future Parlia∣ments; and when they exceed their Commissions, they are no more Members of Parliament, and therefore what they do, is null. 3. By these Commissions, the Commissioners for Shires and Burghs, are only empowered to Represent them in the Parliament of Scotland; which presupposeth that there must be a Parliament, and consequently that they cannot exstinguish, or innovat the Constitution of the Parliament of Scotland; for how can they Re∣present the Shires and Burghs in a Parliament, which is not; and certainly the Parliament of Scotland can be said to be no more, when they make but a part of the Parliament of Great-Britain; for Scotland cannot be called Britain, nor a part of a Parliament can∣not be called a Parliament, no more than the Commissioners for the North of Scotland, can be called the Parliament of Scotland; but how our Commissioners could sit in the Parliament of Great-Britain, by vertue of their former Commissions, I see not? and
therefore it seems to be both fit and just, that the Commissioners of Shires and Burrows should be sent home to their respective Con∣stituents, to crave their advice and consent, in so weighty and com∣prehensive an Affair, nam quod omnes tangit ab omnibus debet ap∣probari. It may be likewise contended that this Great Determination of Uniting both Parliaments, requires at least the full assent of the Members of both Parliaments; and that though the Parliament had power to alter its own Fundamentals; yet if any one dissent, the Union of both Parliaments must stop; for both in Law and Reason, the power of making Laws, and the Right to retain or resign Priviledges, are two different things; the one is a Legislative Power, which is regulated by plurality of Voices; the other is founded upon Dominion or Property, and is not subject to Suf∣frage, no more than other Properties are; for as every Member has Right, so his Right cannot be taken away from him with∣out his own consent; though all these who are in the Society with him should renounce what is theirs, in re pari melior est conditio prohibentis, & in re communi nemo dominorum jure quicquam sacere potest invito altero L. Sabinus, ait 28. ff. com. divid. thus if the Mem∣bers of a Society were by Law free from Impositions, though all the Society, save one, should submit to pay, yet plurality would not in that case oblige the Refuser, and if all who had interest in a Commonty, should condescend to Resign their Right therein in favours of another, yet if one were refractory, that one would not be prejudged by the consent of all the remanent partners; whence it seems consequential, that as the Parliament cannot Debar any Member from sitting in Parliament, so that if one Member by advice from his Constituents, oppose the Union of Parliaments, it could not be carry'd by plurality; for what ever Reason militats why plurality should not oversway in the one, does likewise mili∣tat in the other; and if the right of every Member is given as the cause why, he cannot be debar'd from sitting; Why should not the same Right empower him much more to stop the total alterati∣on of the Parliament? even as a man cannot be Debar'd from using a Commonty. It will likewise operat, that the Commonty cannot be altered in its Nature, without his consent; and the Right of these who sit in Parliament, is as much prejudg'd, by extinguish∣ing the being of a Parliament, as by debarring them from sitting, or Voicing in it. Our Shires and Burghs have Right to be Re∣presented in no Parliament, save that of Scotland; and therefore if the Commissioners had power to overturn the being of the Par∣liament of Scotland, they could have debar'd our Shires and Burghs from being Re-presented in the Parliament of Great-Britain, seing they could pretend no Right to sit there; so that it seems, either plurality of Voices may exclude any particular Member, and may retrinch that Member: Or else by the same Reason, no plurality can establish an Vnion of both Parliaments; and if our Parliament could by plurality of Voices, overturn the Fundamentals, and de∣stroy
the very being of our Parliament; How shall it be possible to secure our Parliament, when it is joyn'd in with the Parliament of England, into one Parliament of Great-Britain, so as that the Parliament of Great-Britain, may not by the plurality of Voices, likewise overturn any Fundamentals that shall be condescended on; but that the Fundamental Constitution, and priviledges of Parli∣ament, are not subject to Suffrage, and cannot be abrogated, nor innovated, without the universal consent of all its Members and Commissioners, may be clear likewise from many Instances, for it is most certain that the Parliament, as now Constitute, could not by any Statute Ordain, that there should be no more Parliaments, or resign over their Parliamentary power in the hands of the Council; nor could they Transmit the Power they possess, in favours of their own Heirs, or exclude any of the Three Estates; and sure if Fundamentals be not subject to plurality of Voices; the power of Uniting of Parliaments, and suppressing of Monarchies is not, for these comprehend all other Priviledges and Fundamentals; and if the priviledges of one of the Three Estates cannot be altered by plurality; I see not how the priviledges of all the Three can be; and we have seen Parliaments in the last age do such irregular things, that the succeeding Parliaments have been forc'd, not on∣ly to abrogat their Laws, but even to find that they had exceeded their power, which implyes that it was not arbitrary. King IAMES the sixth, Parl. 18. ACT 1.THis Act Declares His Majesties Royal Prerogative by way of acknowledgement, without any new Concession in these words, They all in a voluntar, humble, faithful, and unit∣ed heart, acknowledge His Majesties Soveraign Authority, Princely Power, Royal Prerogative, and priviledge of His Crown, o∣ver all Estates, Persons and Causes; and Confirms to His Maje∣sty His Imperial Power, and whatever Soveraign Authority any of His Predecessors had, and Casses annuls and abrogates all, any way done to the prejudice of His Authority any manner o way; so that it seems that all former Acts of Parliament, lessening any way the Royal Power, are hereby abrogated. By this Act likewise, the Estates of Parliament promise to main∣tain, defend, and advance the Life, Honour, Soveraign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and priviledge of His Crown, with their Lives, Lands and Goods, to the outmost of their power: But because this Act was too general; therefore by the 2, 3, 4, and 5. Acts of the first Parliament, Charles the Second, His Majesties Royal Prero∣gatives in the choice of the Officers of State, Counsellours and Judges, in Calling and Dissolving of Parliaments, and making of Laws, in
making of Peace and War, and ordering the Militia, &c. are expresly acknowledged and Ratified: and by the second Act of the second Session, of the first Parliament, All endeavours to restrain His Royal Person, to Depose or Suspend Him, and all endeavours tending thereto, are Declared Treasonable; and all stirring up of the People, to the hatred or disike of His Royal Prerogative, are punish∣able in manner therein mentioned: and by the 27 Act of the 3 Sess. of the 1 Par. Ch. 2. His Majesty is Declared by His Prero∣gative Royal, To have the only Power of Ordering all Trade with Forraigners. Nota, This is the first Act that mentions the word Preroga∣tive, which was formerly call'd the Priviledge of the Crown; and therefore this Act mentions both the Old and the New Words, by asserting His Majesties Prerogative, and Priviledge of the Crown. BY this Act Bishops are not so much restored to their Offices,ACT 2. as it is Declar'd that it was never mean'd by His Majesty, that the Estate of Bishops was to be suppressed: Their sitting in Par∣liament, being by this Act Declar'd, to be one of the Fundamen∣tals of the Nation: But by this Act, their Benefices are only Re∣stored to them, which were much impaired: And though by the 114 Act, Par. 12 Ja. 6. General and Synodal Assemblies, and Presbytries, are thereby Ratifi'd; yet Episcopacy is not thereby abrogated expresly. By this Act, the King is Declar'd to be Soveraign Monarch, ab∣solute Prince, Judge, and Governour, over all Persons, Estates, and Causes, both Spiritual and Temporal, within this Realm: And by the 1 Act, Par. 2 Ch. 2. It is asserted and Declared, That His Majesty hath the Supream Authority, and Supremacy over all Persons and in all Causes Ecclesiastical within this His Kingdom, and that by vertue thereof, the Ordering and Disposal of the External Govern∣ment and Policy of the Church, doth properly belong to His Majesty, and His Successors, as an inherent Right to the Crown: and that His Majesty and His Successors, may Settle, Enact, and Emit such Constitutions, Acts, and Orders, concerning the Administration of the external Government of the Church, and the persons employed in the same, and concerning all Ecclesiastical Meetings therein, as they in their Royal Wisdom shall think fit. There having been great Debates about the wording this part of the Act; some Members of Parliament, pressing to have it without any Restriction, and others, though very Loy∣al, pressing it might be Restricted to the Calling and Dissol∣ving of Ecclesiastick Meetings, and External Government only: Lightoun Bishop of Dumblane, was at last trusted by the Commis∣sioner, who has drawn it very Cautiously for the Church; though our blinded Fanaticks think otherwise; For, First, It is Founded upon the former Old Statute; and after repeating that Statute, it
is said, It is therefore Enacted, to shew that it was not Design'd, that this Act should exceed the former and old Supremacy. 2. The Prerogative is restricted to Government; and not only so, but to the External Government; and even as to this External Go∣vernment, the King has only the Ordering, and Dsposal of it; and the Administration of it by the next Clause; so that the Do∣ctrine of the Church, nor the internal part of the Government falls not at all under the Kings power, by vertue of his Supremacy; that is to say, He can neither Admit, nor Depose, nor Administrat Sacraments; though He may Discharge a Bishop or Minister to Preach; and this is that which was allow'd by the Primitive Church to their Emperours: Thus Constantine, that Great and first Christian Emperour, is approv'd by all the Fathers, for set∣ling thus the Marches, betwixt the Ecclesiastick and Civil Juris∣diction, Euseb. lib. 4. de vit. Constant. vos quidem ; eorum quae intus in ecclesia sunt agenda ego vero  eorum quae extra sunt episcopus sum a Deo constitutus; and that the Administration of the Sacraments, and these other things quae in∣tus sunt, belong not to the Civil Magistrat, is acknowledg'd by the 69 Act Par. 6 Ja. 6. Wherein it is acknowledg'd, that the Juris∣diction of the Kirk consists in the Preaching of the Word, the Cor∣rection of Manners, and the Administration of the Sacraments: In which Act, three things are observable; 1. That the Act tells they derive their Jurisdiction from the King, which is as to the exter∣nal part; for no man can think they Derive their power of Ad∣ministrating the Sacraments from the King; though from Him they Derive the Faculty of having the External Face of a Church, without which, that could not be enjoy'd. 2. Though the Church has the Correction of Manners, yet the King may regulat these, as we see in the very next Act, for keep∣ing the Sabbath; and which seems to have been made the next Act to this, for to clear the meaning of that part of this Act. 3. Though the Preaching of the Word is Declar'd to be a part of the Ecclesiastick Jurisdiction; yet that relates only to the Mat∣ters of Faith, to be Preach'd; as to which, Ministers are to be judg'd by Church Judicatures; but if they Preach what encroach∣es on the Secular power, they are to be judg'd by the King, and those Deriving Power from Him, conform to the 129 Act Par. 8 Ja. 6. This Supremacy in cases Ecclesiastick seems to have been ever the proper Right of Secular Princes; and Haedeus the Great Canonist. repet. in cap. novit. de jud. num 145. Though a Roman Catholick does acknowledge, That nemini dubium est quin▪ in primitiva Ecclesia de rebus & personis ecclesiasticis jus dixerint; which will very clearly appear to any who will Read the first thirteen Titles, of the first Book of Justinians Codex; in which he ordains amongst other things, vim legum obtinere Ecclesiasticos canones a quatuor synodis Nicena Con∣stantinopolitana prima Ephesina prima & Chalcedonensi expositos &
confirmatos; and I find that the Supremacy is in England thus E∣stablished, under the Reign of Henry the eighth, That the King and His Heirs and Successors, should be taken and accepted as the only Supream Head on Earth, of the Church of England, and should have and enjoy, annexed to the Imperial Crown of that Realm, as well the Title and Stile thereof, as all Honours, Dignities, Preheminen∣cies, Jurisdictions, &c. to the said Dignity of Supream Head belong∣ing. In this Act the Bishops are not restored to Benefices, that are not of Cure, but to these which have a particular Cure; and therefore His Majesty Confirms all Dispositions, or other Rights made of Abbacies, Priories, or other Benefices, not being Bishop∣ricks made or Confimed at, or before July 1587. they paying the Greslum appointed by that Act, to the Bishop within Year and Day. There is likewise reserved by this Act, all Feus lawfully set and Confirmed before the Act of Annexation, which was in the year foresaid; and all Patronages of Kirks (pertaining formerly to them) Disponed by the lawful Titular; and the Kings Majesty, and Ratifi'd in Parliament, which extends, as well to the Patro∣nages of Mensal Kirks, as of Kirks which are of the Bishops presen∣tation, March 25. 1631. and albeit regulariter confirmatio nihil no∣vi juris tribuit; yet hoc casu supplet omnes alios desectus; for by the former Practique it is found, that alienations of Patronages, even of Mensal Kirks, are valide, if made as said is, by the law∣ful Titular; though not made by him, with the consent of the most part of the Chapter; for this Act requires that it be made by the lawful Titular, but there is no mention therein of the consent of the Chapter. By the Act of Annexation in anno 1587. the whole Superiorities of all Kirk-lands being annexed to the Crown, it was therefore necessary that by this Act, they should have been Restored, but they are not Restored expresly to these; but it is alleadged that they have Right to them by the 14 Act Par. 1 Ch. 1. But yet in that Act it is only said, that what is Statute anent the Kings being Superior to Vassals of Erections, shall be but prejudice to Bishops and their Chapters, of their Rights to their Superiorities, which is only a Reservation, but is no express Restitution of them to these Superiorities. THis Act anent the Dilapidation of Bishopricks,ACT 3. is formerly Explained in the general nature of Dilapidations, in the Act 101 Par. 7 Ja. 6. and Act 11 Par. 10 Ja. 6. and as to what con∣cerns Chapters, it shall be Explained in the Act 2 Parliament 22 Ja. 6.
ACT 4.WHen a person is Forefaulted, he may be in Law Restor∣ed two wayes, viz. either by way of Justice, when the Sentence of Forefaulture is found to be unjust: or by way of Grace, when the Sentence is just; but the person Forefaulted, or his posterity is restored; which distinction we have from the Civil Law, that allows a distinction, inter restitutionem per modum justitiae & per modum gratiae. The difference betwixt these Restitutions by this Act of Parlia∣ment, is, that the person that is restored by way of Grace, has not by his Restitution, Right to any part of the Forefaulted Lands, and others Disponed in favours of third parties: but such as are Restored by way of Justice, will thereby have Right to their own Lands, though Dispon'd to third parties, for onerous Causes, as was found in the Disposition of the Lands of Mugdock, formerly belonging to the Marquess of Montrose, and Disponed by the Par∣liament for onerous Causes to Argile: as also, these who are re∣stored by way of Justice, will have Right even to repeat the sums of Money, which formerly belonged to them, though assigned to third parties for onerous Causes: and albeit those sums were first ordained to be pay'd in to the Thesaurie, and precepts only drawn upon the Thesaurie, in favours of these third parties, as was found in the Earl of Branfords case against the Earl of Callen∣der and others; though this Restitution of Money seems much har∣der than that of Lands, since Money is res sungibilis: and sin∣gular Successors are not oblig'd to know to whom the same belong∣ed. A Process having also been intented against the Earl of Argile in the Parliament 1681. for reducing his Heretable Offices, as granted since the 44 Act Par. 11 Ja. 2. It was answered, that these Heretable Offices were Dispon'd to the Family before that Act; and it being Reply'd, that the first Right was extinguished by the Forefaulture, and the Restitution being only by way of Grace, was to take effect only from the date; nor was it more suffici∣ent against the King, than if the King had granted them origi∣nally at that time; in which case they would have been quarrallable on that Act; and yet de praxi, the King restores to Titles of Ho∣nour, as of the first date. By the 2 Act Par. 9. Ja. 6. The King succeeding to Lands by Forefaulture, has right to whatever the Forefaulted person was five years in possession of before the Forefaulture, because it is presumed, that the Forefaulted per∣son will abstract the Evidents; and therefore upon the same pre∣sumption, it is likewise appointed by this Act, that the producti∣on of Extracts out of the Register, shall satisfie the production in Improbations against the King in Forefaulted Lands; Whereas other singular Successors Rights will be improven, if the Originals be not produced, vide notata upon the said Act 2. The excellent Narrative of this Act is Copied out of l. 1. §. 1. ff. de justitia & jure.
THis Act is Explained in the 11 Act Par. 16 Ja. 6. Which is that Act that is here Rescinded,ACT 5. though it be not here cited. BY this Act it is appointed,ACT 7. that where there is no arrable Ground in the Paroch, the Minister shall have sixteen Soums Grass in place of the four Aikers, which are allow'd to him for his Gleib: and by the 21 Act Par. 1 Sess. 3 Ch. 2. It is ordain'd, That the Mi∣nister shall have Grass for one Horse and two Kine, over and above his Gleib; and therefore it was doubted, if where the former Gleib did extend to more than would be Grass for two Kine and an Horse, above the four Aikers, the Ministers might seek that Grass, and the Lords found they might; albeit it seems that if this were just, the Minister might also seek Grass for a Horse, and two Kine, even where he had sixteen soums Grass, by this Act, February 16. 1675. Parochioners of Banchry contra their Minister. THis Act is but Temporary.ACT 9. THis Act appointing Letters of Horning to pass upon Sheriff,ACT 10. Stewart, and Baillies Decreet, without a Decreet conform, before the Lords, is Explain'd in the 177 Act. Par. 13 Ja. 6. and because these Acts gave only warrand for Raising Letters of Horn∣ing upon such Decreets; Therefore warrand is likewise given for raising Letters of poynding upon all such Decreets, by the 29 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. which shews that express Acts are us'd even where there is paritas rationis; and they are useful, ob majorem evidentiam. BY this Act all persons are Discharg'd from receiving any Col∣ziars,ACT 11. Salters, or Coal-bearers, without sufficient Testimoni∣als from their Masters; but though this Act appoints the Coalʒi∣ars, Coal-bearers, and Salters, to be punished as Thieves; yet none ever Died upon this Act: but the ordinary Action, both against them and their Resetters, is before the Privy Council; and the Act only says, They shall be repute as Thieves, and punished in their bodies. This Act is extended to Drawers of Water in Coal-heughs: and the Fees of Coalʒiars are Discharged to exceed twenty Merks by the 56 Act 1 Sess. Par. 1 Ch. 2. though this Act only Discharges all persons within the Kingdom to hire other mens Coalʒiars, &c. yet it was justly thought, that the prohibition of it extended to all such as had Right to Coal or Salt here by Tack or otherwise, though themselves dwell not within the Kingdom, and it seems that the Council might hinder Forraigners to carry a∣way our Coalʒiars, and Salters, though they cannot punish them for so doing.
By this Act likewise, a Power and Commission is given to all Masters and Owners of Coal-heughs and Panns, to apprehend all Vagabonds and sturdie Beggars, and put them to Labour; and it has been resolved, that Tacks-men of Coal-heughs and Pans, has the same priviledge, though they cannot properly be call'd Ma∣sters and Owners, except the words be allow'd to be extended to Temporary Rights: but since this priviledge is chiefly real, and not personal, & in rem scriptum; therefore it seem reasonable, that whoever have the power of the Coal-heughs, should like∣wise have this priviledge, which is granted upon their ac∣count. The Council thought argumento hujus legis, that Masters of one Manufactory, could not have Action against others of the same Manufactory, for resetting their Servant, who had run away from them, and to whom they had learn'd their Trade: and yet I have seen action granted in the Council against Heretors, who had entized away other mens Fishers, and the parity of Reason seems to reach to such as work in Lead-mines. This condition of Coalʒiars and Salters by our Law, makes them to be like to the addicti glebae & adscriptitii, mentioned in the Common Law. ACT 12.THis Act is Explain'd formerly in the 72 Act Par. 14 Ja. 2. ACT 13.BY this Act men are Discharg'd to lay Lint in their own Lochs, since thereby Fish is destroy'd, and the Water becomes Noxi∣ous to Neighbours; and thus property is in many things restrict∣ed, for the good of the Common-wealth; there being nothing more consequential to property than that, quilibet potest jure suo uti modo principaliter hoc non faciat in aemulationem alterius: But it seems that only the Parliament can restrain this exercise of pro∣perty, else this Act had been needless: and therefore when the Laird of Haining offered to Drain his own Loch; it was justly Debated, whether the Fishers upon Tweed could hinder him, be∣cause the Water that run in from the Loch to Tweed, prejudged their Fishings: But that which made the case there more Debate∣able, was, that publick Rivers and Salmond Fishings, are of their own Nature priviledg'd. It may be likewise Debated, whether paritas rationis should extend this Act, against such as lay stinking Hides, or other such noysom things in their Loches or Burns; and the laying any such things in the Loch of Lochlevin, is specially Declar'd punishable by the 29 Act Par. 1 Ch. 1. Vide quaestiones medico legales Pauli Zacchej, lib. 3. Tit. 3. where he condemns what is here Discharg'd as noxious, both to Man and Beast. ACT 14.BY this Act the Vassals who hold Blench of His Majesty, are only lyable in their Blench-duties, if they be required allaner∣ly; and these Blench-duties cannot be converted into Money by the Exchequer.
Observ. 1. It is declared by this Act that Blench-duties are not to be any Burden, or yearly Duty, by their own Nature, but only an acknowledgement, or recognizance, if they be requir'd allanerly: and yet by our Law, in Lands holding blench of a Subject, we thus distinguish, viz. either the Charter bears, si petatur tantum, and then the Blench-duty cannot be required be∣yond the year, in which it was due: Or else the Blench-Char∣ter bears not this Clause; and then either the Blench duties are such as are of a yearly growth, as Wax, Pepper, &c. and these can only be crav'd within the year: Or else they are things of some intrinsick value, and not of an annual growth; such as Sil∣ver, Spurs, &c. and they may be pursued for at any time with∣in fourty years: Nor can any annual Prestations, such as Car∣riages, be acclaimed, after elapsing of the respective years, where∣in they were due by the Tack, or otherwayes, January penult 1624. But though a Vassals Charter, who holds of the King, bear, si petatur tantum; Yet the Exchequer by an Act, does Tax the price, and pursue for these, and for annual growths, al∣beit they have not been crav'd within the year, for which I can give no other reason, but that the negligence of the Kings Offi∣cers cannot prejudge the King: But how can the Act of Exche∣quer alter the Nature of the holding, which is an express Con∣tract betwixt the King and His Vassals; and it may be alleadg∣ed, that by Act of Exchequer, it may be as well Declar'd that prescription shall not run against the King, for this is a species of prescription; but especially since it is Declar'd by this Act, that they shall not pay, notwithstanding of any Act of Exchequer past, or to come: nor does the Act anent the negligence of the Kings Officers, abrogat this Act, as it ought to have done. The Ad∣vocats Protestation in the end of this Act seems to be in-intelligible; for how can Blench-duties be conform to the Kings Estate and Dignity: Some Interpret this Act, as if it only prohibited the Conversion of the Blench-duty into Money, in the body of the Charter; but does not hinder the Exchequers valuing of it: O∣thers to reconcile the present practice with this Act, make a distin∣ction betwixt holdings in blanco, and in alba firma; as if the first being an inconsiderable Duty, as a Rose, or a Penny, may not be converted to Money; but the other affording some profit, such as Gilt-spurs, Gloves, a pound of Pepper, &c. may be valued by the Exchequer. This Act quadrats with Tit. 2. lib. 11. Cod. Theodos. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 77 Act Par. 6. Ja. 5.ACT 15. BY this Act, all such as Convocat▪ACT 17. or Assemble themselves within Burgh, without Licence of the Provost and Baillies, are declar'd to be guilty of Faction and Sedition; and it has been doubted, whether Keepers of Conventicles within Burgh may
be punishable by this Act; for though there be a specifick punish∣ment appointed for Conventicles; yet since this and oher Laws, by which Conventicles may be punished, in specifick and particu∣lar cases, are not abrogated expresly: It is therefore alleadged that they are not abrogated, conform to the general Rule set down in the 243 Act Par. 15. Ja. 6. Observ. 2. It may be doubted whether, since this Act runs in the general against Convocations within Burgh, if this Act should not as well extend to Burghs of Barony, and Burghs of Regality, as to Burghs Royal, since the word Burgh comprehends all; and the Reason inductive of this Act, viz. the quenching Convocations extends likewise to all; and when the Parliament designed to extend their Acts only to Burghs Royal, they were particularly exprest, as is to be seen in the immediat foregoing Act: and albeit it may be urg'd, that this Act speaks of Provost and Baillies, yet this must be Interpreted applicando singula singulis; for there are many Burghs Royal, as well as Burghs of Regality and Barony, that want Provosts. Observ. 3. That though this Act ordains only such as obey not their Magistrates and Officers, to be fined; yet if the Inhabitants of any Town refuse to obey any Officers in the Kings Name, such as Captains, &c. they may be fined. Observ. 4. This Act appoints that it shall be proclaim'd at all the Mercat Crosses of the saids Burghs; albeit by the 128 Act Par. 7 Ja. 6. all Acts of Parliament are only to be published at the Mer∣cat Cross of Edinburgh; but this Act being posterior, and speci∣al, derogats from that general Law; and this was specially appoint∣ed, because of the special interest of the Burrows. Observ. 5. It is observable that this Act proposes no punishment for Towns, where the Magistrats do not their duty to oppose Tu∣mults against the Government; yet the Town of Lanerk was fin'd for not pursuing those who burnt the Test at their Cross, anno 1681. and privat Burgesses pay a proportion of such fines, though they were not required by their Magistrates, because it is their duty to concur when they see such Tumults; and Magistrats are oftimes unable to require concurrence. ACT 18.THe Lands of Huntingtoun and Strabrand are dissolved to be set in Blench Farm, in favours of the Earl of Montrose; and it was necessary that there should be a particular Warrand for setting the Lands in Blench-farms; because by the 234 Act Par. 15. Ja. 6. The annext property can only be dissolved, for setting Lands in Feu-farm, vid. observ. on that Act. It is likewise observable by this Act, that because this Dissolution was to be made in favours of the Earl of Montrose, then Commissio∣ner. It is mentioned that there is a particular Warrand for dissolving the same.
King James the sixth, Parliament 19. THis Act against Sayers and wilful Hearers of Mass, is Ex∣plain'd, crim. pract. tit. Heresie.ACT 1. Nota, By this Act the Resetters of such are fineable, as Non-communicants; and the Act by which these are fined, is not here cited, but it is the 17 Act Par. 16 Ja. 6. THis Act against the users of false Weights and Measures, whose whole Goods are to be Confiscated; is Explain'd,ACT 2. crim. pract. tit. Falshood. THis Act is Explain'd, crim. pract. tit. Theft.ACT 3. THis Act empowers the Bishop of Saint-andrews to choose se∣ven within his Diocie, to be his constant Chapter;ACT 8. which was formerly resolved upon by the 3 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. Though the power of choosing them was not given to that Bishop expres∣ly: But thereafter by the 2 Act Par. 22 Ja. 6. The Benefices whose Incumbents are to make up that Chapter, are particularly conde∣scended on in that Act. King JAMES sixth, Parliament 20. SUch as sent Pedagogues abroad with their Children, without a Testificat from the Bishop of the Diocie,ACT 1. where the Pe∣dagogue lately made his Residence, are fineable by this Act; and though this Act is thought only to strick against Chil∣dren of Popish Parents; Yet it is general, and stricks against all His Majesties Subjects, of what Religion or Opinion soever; and though they use to call these Governours, and not Pedagogues: yet that will not defend against this Act, for Pedagogue was the only Term then in use. THis Act stricks only against the Children of Popish Parents,ACT 2. who are hereby ordain'd to find Caution to the Lords of Privy Council, that they shall not intertain their Chil∣dren abroad, when they know them to be Popishly inclined; and by vertue of this Act, the Lord Semple and others, were oblig'd in anno 1667. to recal their Children out of Doway; and this Act was renewed by Proclamation of Council, January 1679.
BY this Act it is Ordain'd that such as are Excommunicated, for not professing the true Religion,ACT 3. shall neither directly, nor indirectly possess their Estates; and by vertue of this Act, it was found upon the 16 of June 1629. That those Excommunicated persons, are not so much as bona fide possessores; but that by ver∣tue of this Act, they are oblig'd to refound all their own bygone Rents, possessed by them before Citation or Sentence, they only getting Defalcation of Seed, Tends, and Servants Fees: Which are ordinarly defalked in the Computation of Multures, and all other intromissions. ACT 6.IN time of Popery, every Bishop had his own Official, or Com∣missar; but in the year 1563. Queen Mary by a Signature, Su∣perscrived with her own Hand, did institute this Court at Edin∣burgh, appointing four Commissars to sit there, and to judge in Divorces, and to Reduce the Decreets of Inferiour Commissars, which is Ratified in Parliament. 1567. by which also they are ap∣pointed to Judge in all Actions concerning Benefices gran∣ted by the Queen. They were at first nominated by the Queen, and were called, Judices Regi; but after Her Demission, they were nominated by the Lords of Session, as is clear by the Books of Sederunt: and even in this Act, the present Commissars were to continue, they getting Testimonials of their sufficiency from the Lords of the Session, and severals of them were at once Lords of the Session and Commissars, as appears by the Books of Sederunt; upon the Restitution of Bishops, the Commissars who then were, did submit; and this Act seems to have proceeded upon a Submission betwixt the Bishops and Com∣missars, the 23 of June, the day before the Parliament sat down, whereupon Decreet was pronounced the 29 of June, containing the foresaid Reservation of the Commissars Offices, and in the case of the new Provisions, the Commissars are the only submit∣ters; and yet there are Annuities Decerned to the Clerk, to the for∣mer of Testaments, Quot-masters and others; and there is a form prescrived anent the procedure in Divorcements, betwixt the par∣ties in other Commissariots, who are not worth a certain sum, which hath no foundation in the Act, nor seems to be second∣ed by practice; the Decreet is Registrated, January 19. 1610. Re∣lative to the Decreet, wherein the Arch-bishops and Bishops of Gal∣loway and Orknay are subscrivers for themselves, and taking bur∣den for the remnant Bishops, and their Successors, there is a Con∣tract the 15 of November 1609. and March 5. 1610. entered into amongst the Bishops▪ for the relief of the Arch-bishops, or either of them, for payment of their respective proportions to the Arch-bishop, who shall happen to be distressed for the Sallary, the Arch-bishops by the Contract, being bound conjunctly and seve∣rally to the Commissars, the whole proportion of Relief due by Glasgow to Saint-andrews, is the double of the Contribution
to the Lords, and Sallary due to the two youngest Commissars, and the Relief due by Saint-Andrews to Glasgow, is the double of his Contribution, and the Sallary due by him to the two eldest Commissars: By which it appears, that before this Decreet, the Commissars had Sallaries; the obligement in favours of the Mem∣bers of Court, of the Commissariot of Edinburgh, whereby the Bishops are obliged to compel the Members of their Court, to pay certain Sums to the Members of the Court of Edinburgh, during their lifetime, is not renewed in the Contract: In this Contract the obligements upon the part of the Commissars; are general, re∣lative to their Duty to their Superiours, and fidelity in admini∣stration of Justice, according to the Practique and Injunctions, the Observation of the Decreet Arbitral, and Articles, by which it is ruled, subscriv'd by Arbiters and Overs-men, which is not ex∣tant; there is no penalty adjected, neither are the Commissars sub∣scriving. The Commissars and many of the Bishops being dead, who were alive the time of the Decreet Arbitral, the Bishops especially; the succeeding Bishops refused to pay the Sallary to the succeeding Com∣missars; whereupon they pursued John, then Arch-bishop of Saint Andrews, who▪ the time of the Decreet and Contract, was Arch-bishop of Glasgow, and James Arch-bishop of Glasgow, who then was Bishop of Orknay, as the only two alive, who were burden-takers by the Submission for the rest, and Decreet followed, Fe∣bruary 12. 1630. against the Arch-bishop of Saint-andrews, who, the time of the Contract, was Arch-bishop of Glasgow, and was bound conjunctly and severally with Saint-Andrews; The Arch-bishop for his Relief upon the Contract, being Distressed upon the Decreet, pursued Adam Bishop of Dumblain, who was created Bishop since the Contract, and thereupon defended himself, as free of the Obligement of Relief: as likewise, that the Sallary was not due to the then Commissars, it being due to their Prede∣cessors, the Submitters allanerly, which was repell'd, and the Bi∣shop Decerned, February 18. eodem. In respect the Charge and Pains was perpetual upon the Commissars part, and the benefite perpetual to the Bishops, and they having the Confirmation of the great Testaments; and the word allanerly was found only to exclude the Heirs of the then Commissars, but not their Successors in Office; the point being clear'd as said is, the Commissars thought it more just that every Bishop should be ly∣able for his own part; and therefore all the Bishops are pursu∣ed, wherein the same Defences are again repell'd, and they De∣cerned, March 27. eodem: and the 24. of July 1634. there is a new Decreet obtained in favours of the Commissars and their Suc∣cessors against the Bishops and their Successors, containing a De∣clarator, that it was a constant Fee, payable in all time coming, this was in absence; the Decreet against Saint-Andrews, dated the 12 of February 1630. is not extant, unless in the Register; but it is Narrated, and Founded upon in the Decreet, at the Instance of Saint-Andrews against Dumblain; upon the Decreet in March
against the Bishops, there are Letters rais'd, dated the last of March, Givand warrand to Charge the Bishops, to pay their proportion of the Sallary, and to find Burgesses of Edinburgh Cautioners, within fifteen dayes; That in all time coming, they shall pay their proportions, conform to a Deliverance of the Lords, shown to them, founded upon the damnage that the Commissars would sustain in evacuat∣ing their Sallaries, by Charging and Denuncing the Bishops year∣ly, in the several remotest corners of the Kingdom; the Delive∣rance is not extant. There are other Letters directed against them the first of April 1630. for payment only; so that both the Re∣medies are used: There are likewise Letters directed for find∣ing a sufficient Burges Cautioner, Dated the sixteenth of Febru∣ary 1637. The ninth of July 1661. There is an Ratification in Parliament, in favours of the Commissars, declaring the Rent, Patrimony, and Estates of the Bishops to be lyable to them for their Sallaries; and there is a Reservation in favours of the Commissars; in the Restitution of the Bishops, there is a Decreet against the Represen∣tatives of Arch-bishop Fairfowl, wherein the whole Defences a∣gainst the Commissars Right are repell'd: but by the said Decreet, the disparity betwixt the Provision of a Sallary, in favours of the Commissars, and in favours of the other Members of Court, by the Decreet Arbitral, is not sufficiently clear'd; for the Decreet, as to the Members of Court, was null, it being beyond the Terms of the Submission, which was only in favours of the Commissars: and as to the Members of Court, the Decreet infers no special di∣rect Obligement upon the Bishops; but only that they are oblig'd to compel their Members of Court to pay these certain sums to the Members of Edinburgh, without any penalty, and which hath ne∣ver taken effect by the Decreet, or Contract, the Commissars had no action against the whole Bishops, but only against the whole burden takers, and the Arch-bishop: but by the subsequent De∣creets, and Acts of Parliament, the whole Bishops, and the Intro∣metters with their Rents, are directly lyable unto them, and so their Executors intrometting with the Ann, or the subsequent Bishops are lyable; and that is but prejudice of the obligement in solidum, a∣gainst the Arch-bishop, contain'd in the Contract; by vertue whereof, Saint-andrews was Decern'd, and by vertue of a Submission, betwixt Saint-andrews and Edinburgh; Edinburgh is Decerned to relieve Saint-andrews in the half; and Saint-andrews hath Ratifi'd to him in Parliament, the nomination of the whole Commissars, against which, Edinburgh did protest. It doth not appear how Glasgow los'd his Right to the nomination of two established to him by the Act of Parliament. There was an Act for regulation of the Commissariots, which took no effect; neither is there any thing done by the Lords, by vertue of the Act of Parliament 1661. as to the Regu∣lation of the Commissariot of Edinburgh, or setling a course for the pun∣ctual and secure payment of the Commissars Sallary; the whole Instru∣ctions above-mentioned, related to, are to be found with the Com∣missars of Edinburgh.
It is observable by this Act, That the Commissars of Edinburgh have a twofold power; an Diocesian, whereby they Confirm the Testaments within the Diocy of Edinburgh, and exerce all power that is competent to other Commissars: and another universal and transcendent, whereby they may Reduce the Decreets of all the other Commissars in Scotland: and this Act founds them so abso∣lutely in this Jurisdiction▪ that it is exclusive of the Lords of the Sessions power so far, that the Lords cannot Reduce in prima in∣stantia, a Decreet past by any inferiour Commissar; and the Lords themselves did so decde, after full Debate, Dury July 23 1624. Though it was there alleadged, that the Parliament could not diminish the power of the Session, without calling them thereto; and yet now the Lords does ordinarly Reduce in prima instantia, the Decreets of the inferiour Commissars; which proceeds rather from the in∣advertancy of the Advocats, who are careless to Plead it, to with∣draw Actions from the Jdicature whereof they are Members, than that the Lords do concern themselves to claim it; but both then and now, the Lords may Reduce the Decreets of the Commissars of Edin∣burgh, if they decde not rightly in thse Reductions. In this Act also, Bishops are empower'd to Creat Clerks, and Procurator-fiscals; and though in the Commission, which the Bi∣shops give to Commissars, they give them power to admit Procu∣rators; yet cannot the Commissars by that power, Creat Procura∣tor-fiscals, but only ordinary Procurators; the Fiscal remaining still at the Bishops nomination, July 12. 1627. The Commissars Books bear sedebant, where the Lords Books bear Sederunt. KING James finding that the Nobility did ordinarly get their Children, Friends,ACT 8. or Servants to be Elected Magistrates of Burghs, whereby they carry'd all Nominations in Parliament at their pleasure; Did therefore in this Act, which is intituled, Act for the Apparel of Judges, Magistrates, and Kirk-men, Ordain, That no man should in time coming be capable of Provestrie, or other Ma∣gistracie, but Merchants and actual Traffiquers, and Habiters within the said Burgh allanerly, and no others: By vertue of which Act, Chancellour Seaton was oblig'd to demit his Provestry of Edin∣burgh: and this Act is renew'd by Proclamation in anno 1626. How soon King Charles came to the Crown. Some think, that though Noblemen cannot be Elected since this Act; yet the Privy Council may name them: and some think that this Act is in De∣suetude: but I believe neither; for where the Council names jure dvoluto, because Magistrates accept not, they come only in place of the old Magistrates and Council; and therefore they can only do what these could have done, ex regula surro∣gatorum; and this Act having been made in favours of the King and Monarchy, it cannot run in Desuetude, without their consent; and it is thought▪ that by vertue of it, none who are Lords of the Session can be Provosts, these being incompatible Employments, and inconsistent with the design of this Act, which bears to be made to hinder the dissipation of their Common Good, and perverting
of their Priviledges, which is much more easie for Lords of the Ses∣sion, and persons in publck Employment, than for others; beside, that publick Traffique and Merchandising, is inconsistent with that exact distribution of Justice, which is necessary in His Majesties Judges, vide Lampridium in vita Severi, as to the distinction of Habits amongst Magistrates. ACT 9.THis Act is Explain'd, crim. pract. tit. Injuries. To which I shall only now add, that not only what is destructive to the Government, but what may tend to the prejudice of the Govern∣ment, is here punished: and this I have thought fit to observe; because tending has been oftimes Debated not to be Relevant. It may be also doubted, whether speaking against the House of Com∣mons, or their Resolutions, is punishable by this Act, since it pu∣nishes all reproachful Speeches of the People, or Countrey of Eng∣land; and they are the Representatives of the People; and since these are punishable who speak against a Councellour of England, much more ought they to be punish'd who speak against the House of Commons. But in my opinion, this Act reaches only such as speak reproachfully of their Nation, Countrey, and Counsellours; but the whole Act ought to be abrogated by our Parliament, as being past by us, in expectation that England would make such an Act in their Parliament, which they never did; and upon which account it was never in observance with us. It is likewise observ∣able, that though in our Law, Concealing and not Revealing, is only punishable in Treason; yet by this Statute, the hearing any thing spoke against the people of England, or any Privy Counsel∣lour in that Nation, and the not Revealing, is declared to be equal∣ly punishable, with inventing such Calumnies. THis Act is Temporary as to many things; but it is observable from it,ACT 10. that the using false Testimonials, is punishable by death, as Falshood. And the power given to the Commissioners of the Borders, to apprehend Fugitives, and to send them, or their marks and tokens to the Kings Commissioner, is founded on l 4. ff. de Fugitivis; Where Limenarcha, which is our Commissio∣ners of the Borders, debent inquirere in fugitivos; and to send them with their notae (which is our Tokens) to the next Magi∣strats. THe Customs being annex'd to the Crown, by the 8 Act Par. 1 Ja. 1.ACT 11. They are by this Act dissolved from the Crown, in so far as concerns 10000 pounds yearly, to be pay'd to the Lords of Session, in place of Quots of Testaments; and therefore the Lords of the Session do, conform to this Act, Decern summarly the Tacks-men and Collectors, to pay this 10000. pounds, and ordains them to be Charged with Horning.
BY the 4 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. It is Declar'd,ACT 12. That Restitutions by way of Grace shall not prejudge those who acquired the Forefaulted persons Lands, either by a Lucrative, or an onerous Cause; but because, both by an inference from that, and by the Principles of the Common Law, these who are restored by way of Justice, might pretend to quarrel those, who during their Fore∣faulture were presented to Benefices, to which they were Patrons, upon pretext that they were to be restor'd intirely. Therefore it seems that this Act has been made; whereby it is declar'd, that such as are presented to Benefices, which were at the Presentation of Forefaulted persons, shall not be prejudg'd by their Restituti∣on; and which was very just, since Patrons are not prejudg'd; because it is presum'd, that the Ordinary would not Collate per∣sons that were insufficient; nor were Patrons allow'd to make any advantage by the Presentations; and upon the same principle, it seems reasonable to conclude, that a Minor cannot Revock a pre∣sentation granted by him, with the consent of his Curators, during his Minority. THis Act Ratifies an Act of Privy Council, whereby Aegyptians were commanded to depart the Kingdom betwixt and the first of August thereafter, under the pain of Death:ACT 13. but it may be justly doubted, how the Council had power to make Acts inferring the pain of Death? Since it is a received Principle in our Law, as is clear by Craig and others, that the Secret Council can make no Act which may infer forefaulture of Life or Estate: and though by the Acts 124, and 147. Par. 12 Ja. 6. Judges be ordain'd to pu∣nish Aegyptians; and that by the 268 Act Par. 15 Ja. 6. Vaga∣bonds and Aegyptians are to be employ'd in Common Works: yet by neither of these Acts, is the pain of Death to be inflicted: and therefore it was lately Debated, that this Act was but at best, a Temporary Act; and so Aegyptians could not be impannelled for their Life: but yet this Act has been still repute a sufficient War∣rand for punishing by Death, such as were known, holden and repute to be Aegyptians. And I find, that upon the last of July 1611. Moses Schaw and others were Hang'd as Aegyptians; and it is notour, that immediatly after this Act Sheriffs and others did Hang very many, by warrand thereof; and the Act is not Tem∣porary, for it appoints them to be Executed in time coming, after the first of August; and the Act has ordain'd Aegyptians to be pro∣ceeded against as Sorners and common Thieves, who are by our Law to be punish'd with Death, as is clear by the Narrative of this Act, which bears that the Council had Commanded, That the Sor∣ners and common Thieves, commonly call'd Aegyptians, &c: should depart forth of the Kingdom; So that the Council has not inflicted the pain of Death upon a new Crime, but has only declared, That Aegyptians fell under the old Crime, that was punishable by Death: Nor can it be deny'd, but that from this and many other Acts it is
clear, that the Council has a power to extend and interpret Statutes, even relating to Life and Forefaulture; since the Act appoints on∣ly such to be punishable by Death, as are known, holden and repute to be Aegyptians: It may be doubted, what can prove that the Ae∣gyptians pannell'd, are known, holden and repute to be such? For which, beside the common Inferences of notoriety adduc'd by Mascardus and others, in probatione notorij. Our Law allows that such as call themselves Aegyptians, or go up and down the Coun∣trey, bleaking their Faces, telling Fortunes, and speaking the Gebrish peculiar to those people, shall be punished as Aegyptians: and ordinarly His Majesties Advocat chooses such Assizers as know the persons impannelled, to be commonly repute to be Aegypti∣ans. These who are call'd Aegyptians in Scotland, are call'd Zigeni, Tartari, Bohemij, all which are remarked as idle Beggars, going about oppressing the people, and cheating them by vain Supersti∣tions, and Fortune tellings: of which sort of people Fritschius has written a Treatise, call'd, de origine Zygenorum & eorum coercitio∣ne; where are to be found, upon what pretext they were first suf∣fered in several Nations, which was, because they did assist several Princes in their great difficulties, having from being Vagabonds, gathered themselves under Captains for that effect, but continuing after Peace made, to grow insolent, they were ordain'd to be ba∣nish'd in Germany, by an Imperial Constitution, anno 1500. and in France, by the Act of Orleance, anno. 1561. and thereafter anno 1612. which is about the time of this Act; and in Spain. 1492. ACT 14.THe time of this Act, the Secret Council had a Commission from the King, to receive Resignations, and all the Procuratories of Resignations then, did still bear a Power to Resign in the Hands of the Secret Council: But now Resignations can only be made in His Majesties own Hands, or in the hands of His Exchequer. THis Act extends to the Decreets of the Admiral and his Deputs, the priviledge of having Letters of Horning granted upon them,ACT 15. without the necessity of a Decreet conform, as was the old Cu∣stom, and in this it equals the Decreets of that Court, with the Decreets of Sheriffs, and Baillies of Burghs: But by the 29 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. Whereby poinding is ordain'd to be granted upon their Decreets; the Parliament has forgot to extend that priviledge to the Decreets of the Admiral. Observ. 1. That this Act declares the Admiral to be a Supream Judge; and therefore it has been decided, that he may reduce the Decreets of inferiour, or Admiral-deputs, and that he may re∣duce his own Decreets upon just Reasons, such as noviter proveni∣entes ad notitiam, &c. And which kind of Jurisdiction is compe∣tent to no Inferiour Judge: and yet the Lords of Session do sus∣pend and reduce his Decreets also, and Advocat Causes from that Court.
Observ. 2. That by this Act the Admiral is declar'd to have power of summar Execution; because Strangers and Sea-faring men cannot attend as others may; and therefore it is, that such as ob∣tain Decreets before that Court, may use Execution thereupon with∣in three Tides. Vid. Observ. on the 16 Act Par. 3. Ch. 2. King JAMES the sixth, Parliament 21. HIs Majesty held a General Assembly at Glasgow; and in anno 1610. drew up some Articles to be presented to the Parliament, which are set down by Spoteswood,ACT 1. and many whereof are here confirm'd. By this Act His Majesties Power to call Assemblies, is declar'd a part of His Royal Prerogative, Vid. 114 Act Par. 12 Ja. 6. The Bishop is to be Moderator, and in his absence any whom he shall Name. The Bishop only can Excommunicat, and with such Ministers as he associats to himself, He only can Depose. In this Act likewise is set down a formula of the Oath of Supre∣macy. As to the manner of presenting Ministers, it is formerly fully Treat∣ed in the Observations upon the 7 Act of the 1 Par. Ja. 6. AFter King James the sixth came to the Crown of England, it was necessary that the Laws concerning the Borders should have been alter'd by both Kingdoms; and by this Act,ACT 2. there is a power granted to His Majesties Officers in England, to remand from the Courts of Scotland, that is to say, to require His Majesties Offi∣cers in Scotland, to deliver up English Malefactors, who had fled into Scotland: and another Act of the same Tenor verbatim, was past in England about the same time. In place of the old Wardens of the Borders, there is now a Com∣mission granted under the Great Seals of both Kingdoms, to an equal number of Scots and English, who have in effect a Commis∣sion of Justiciary; and it was found by the Council of Scotland, that they could not quarrel the Decreets of the Borders, because they proceeded by a Warrand under the Seal of both Kingdoms; but the Laird of Haining having Charged Elliot for payment of a sum, for not presenting of a Thief to the Commissioners of the Bor∣ders, conform to a Decreet of the Commissioners, finding that he had Forefaulted the Bond, there was a Bill given in to the Coun∣cil, craving that this case might be remitted to the Commissioners of the Borders, and not Suspended by the Session; because, First, These Decreets being pronounced by the English, as well as the Scots Commissioners; the Session could not be Judges to what was
done, by vertue of an English Commission, and because they could not cite the English Commissioners; therefore they could not Re∣duce their Sentences. 2. The Commission of the Border is a Criminal Court, and the Lords of the Session are only Supream Judges in Civils. 3. The Border is judg'd by a Law unknown to us; and there∣fore since the Lords of the Session behov'd to Consult them, though they were Judges, it but multiplies Processes and Expences, to al∣low the Lords to be Judges in prima instantia. 4. If the Lords were Judges, all Thieves, or their Cautioners would offer to Suspend, or Reduce, which would much hinder that expeditness of Tryal, which is requisit to stop Thieving in the Borders. 5. If the Lords here review'd such Decreets, the Judges at Westminster would do the like, which would be very trouble∣some and expensive to us: The Council upon this Debate recom∣mended to the Lords to remit the Tryal▪ in so far as it was Cri∣minal to the saids Commissioners. By this Act, Remanding is only to be granted after full proba∣tion of the offences of the persons, Remanded in open Court but this is now antiquated, and in Desuetude; because it was found by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, to be unpracticable; if either the Names or proofs were published in open Court, the persons to be Remanded would flee, and the Witnesses might be corrupted: Therefore it was ordered by common consent, that the Commissioners of either Kingdom might Remand privatly from the Commissioners of the other Kingdom; and that the person so delated, might be immediatly seiz'd upon. ACT 4.THis Act is fully Explain'd, crim. pract. tit. Rapt. THis Act is Explain'd in the Observations upon the 73 Act Par. 6. Ja. 6.ACT 5. THis Act Discharging all Actions of Spuilʒie committed upon the Borders,ACT 6. prior to His Majesties coming to the Crown of Eng∣land, is but Temporary; But from it, it may be observed, First, That the King and Parliament may dispense with the privat interest of parties upon a publick account: nor does the Act salvo jure, sub∣joyn'd to the several Parliaments, prejudge or derogat from this Act, upon pretext that the parties, whose interest was remitted and discharg'd, were not call'd. 2. In all such Discharges of privat interest, and Acts of Grace, discharging penal Statutes; exception is still made of Decreets al∣ready
obtain'd; for by the obtaining of the Decreet, before that Discharge, the Debt becomes innovated; and a private Debt, of the nature of other private Rights. By this and many other, the like observations we may see, that the reading Temporary, and even abrogated Acts, is not useless, since material Observations may be made thereupon. THis Act is Explained in the 177 Act Par. 13 Ja. 6.ACT 7. THis Act ordains Arch-bishops and Bishops,ACT 8. to build and repair their Houses and Manses, and that the Successor shall have acti∣on against the Predecessors Executors, who suffered them to decay, which was very just upon the same Reason, that all Liferenters are oblig'd praestare hanc cautionem ususructuariam: and where the Houses are in decay, and Repair'd by the Predecessor, the next Successor is to satisfie therefore, at the sight of two or three of the Bishops, within the Province; providing that the satisfaction ex∣ceed not 1000 pound, if they be Prelats: and 500 merks, if they be other inferiour Ministers: and by the 21 Act Sess. 3 Par. 1 Ch. 2. This is renewed as to the Maintaining of the Manse; but the Heretors of the Paroch, where there are no Manse, are oblig'd to build Manses, for Ministers at the sight of the Bishop, or such Mini∣sters as he shall appoint, not exceeding 1000 pounds, and not un∣der 500 merks; so that in effect, a Ministers Manse may be as dear by that Act, as a Bishops Manse is by this, which seems unreasonable; but their interveening more than 50 years betwixt the two Acts, the price of things, and Fees of Work-men, was much increased the time of the last Act. Vide Papon Arrest. lib. 1. num. 15. & additiones num. 6. King IAMES the sixth, Parl. 22. THe Presentation of Bishops by Kings, begun in the Reign of Lewes King of France,ACT 1. about the Year 821. and was re∣sign'd to the Popes by Philip the first; and thereafter, by the Canon Law, the nomination of Arch-bishops and Bishops, did belong to the Pope only, as the Canonists affirm; but he transfer'd this power to the Chapters of Cathedral Churches, C. omnes. 22. dist. &c. fin- quaest. 7. and at last in France by agree∣ment betwixt Pope Leo the Tenth, and Francis the First of France; the nomination of Prelacies was after much Debate, granted to
the Kings of France; though it be pretended to be a priviledge be∣longing to Kings, in Synodo Aurel. quinta, as the Learned Pithus has proven; and after that Concordat made in favours of Francis the first. It appears that King James the Fifth, who lived in the same age, and Married Francis the First's Daughter, did with His Parlia∣ment Declare, that the Nomination of Bishops did belong to the King of Scotland, and the Provision only to the Pope, Act 125 Par. 7 Ja. 5. But by this Act it is declar'd, That Arch bishops and Bishops shall be by His Majesties Licence Elected by the Dean and Chapter of their own Cathedral-kirk, to which they are to be pre∣fer'd, who being assembled by His Majesties Warrand, shall proceed to the Election of the Person named by His Majesty; and the E∣lection being Testified under their Seals and Subscriptions, he is to get a right to his Benefice under the Kings Great Seal, and to be Consecrated. It is fit to know that this Warrand for meeting, is call'd with us, a conge d'eslire, which is a French word, signifying a liberty to Elect. It is fit to know likewise, that with the conge d'eslire, there comes a Letter from His Majesty, recommending such a Person, whom the Dean and Chapter are oblig'd to Elect, by the words of this Act; and being Elected, the Election is Recorded in the Re∣gister of the Chapter: in which Register, all Deeds done by the Bishop, either for Entering Vassals, or granting Tacks of Teinds, are inserted. An Extract of this Election is returned to the Arch-bishop of the Province, and inserted in his Register; and by him Transmitted to the King, who thereupon grants a Patent to the Person so Elected, who after this is call'd Bishop Elect of such a See, which passes through all the Seals, and by which he has right both to Spirituality and Temporality; though this Act says, It shall only give right to the Spirituality; This being signifi'd to His Majesty by the said Arch-bishop; the King grants His Royal Mandat to a competent number of Bishops within the Province, (which cannot be under three, by the 3 Canon. 1 Concil. Nicen.) after which there is no new Gift to the Temporality, as this Act provides: only before his actual Possession, he makes his ho∣mage either to the King personally, or to one Commissionated to receive it; of which Oath and Homage, no mention is made in Ecclesiastick Story, till the fourth Counsel of Toledo, anno 633. Nota, The Mandat for Consecration, passes only the Great Seal, per saltum.. It is natural to all Benefices that they should be vacant before they be fill'd; and the Right should express a modus vacandi; and therefore His Majesty having sent down two Conge d'eslires in January 1679. one in favours of the Bishop of Edinburgh to be Bishop of Ross: and another in favours of the Bishop of Galloway, to be Bishop of Edinburgh; It was advis'd that the Conge d'eslire, in fa∣vours
of Edinburgh, should not be presented till Edinburgh was vacant, by his being Elected by the Chapter of Ross. It is observable likewise from this Act, that a Bishop has not right to the Temporalities, till after Consecration: For the Act sayes, That after the Consecration, His Majesty is to Dispone to the Person elected the Temporality; and the same being past under the Great Seal, the Bishop shall do Homage, and swear Obedience; neither shall it be lawful for him who is admitted to intromet with any of the Benefices, or Rents of the Bishoprick, until he have ta∣ken the said Oath, and done the said Homage. And thus the Eng∣lish Lawyers, following, as I conceive, that notion of the Common Law, that Episcopus est maritus Ecclesiae: They say, that Electi∣on is as the Sollicitation; the Confirmation is the Contract; and the Consecration is the Consummation of the Marriage: but where a Bishop is Translated, there needs no Consecration, either by the Canon Law, or ours. The old Forms of Election was, that the King sent a Visitor to oversee the Election, and he return'd to the King the Decree of the Election, who Confirm'd it by giving investiture; and the Metrapolitan was oblig'd to Ordain the Person Elected, the Inve∣stitue of the Spirituality, was by giving a Bible; and the Tempo∣rality by a Ring and Baton, Vid. sirmund. form. lib. 2. formul. 6. and the Conge d'eslire succeeded in place of these Visitors. BY this Act the Dean and Members of the Chapters of the Ca∣thedral-kirks within this Kingdom, are restor'd to their Manses,ACT 2. Gleibs, and other Patrimonies belonging to them. The Chapter is to the Bishop, what Convents were to other Pre∣lats; that is to say, their Council, of which the Dean, or Decanus was the Head, under the Bishop. By the Civil Law, decanus erat ille qui defunctorum lectos seu feretrum gestabant, vid. Tit. de Deca∣nis, lib. 12. Cod. tit. 17. But by the Canon Law, Decanus comes from the Greek word  because the Dean proceeded over ten Ca∣nons or Prebends; and their decani especially in the Cathedral Churches succeeded in place of the Archipresbyter; and therefore these two are taken in the same sense, cap. ad haec 7. de off. Ar∣chid. vide Bengeum de beneficiis, pag. 29. And with us, Deans are Created by the King, He being only Patron of that Bene∣fice. The Chapter is call'd Capitulum by the Canon Law; because it is the little, or inferiour Head of the Diocy, and is defin∣ed to be Clericorum congregatio sub uno Decano in Ecclesia Cathe∣drali. A Bishop in our Law, nor no other Dignifi'd Person who hath a Convent, can alienat without the consent of their Convent, or the greatest part of them, beside himself, who is the Disponer, in which number, Minors nor absents, are not counted; March 14. 1622.
If one of the Chapter have two Benefices, he will have two Votes; and albeit the Law Ordains them to be capitulariter congre∣gati; yet now sufficiunt eorum suffragia licet emendicata vel sevara∣tim impetrata, which is not only by meer custom, as Craig ob∣serves; but by Law likewise, Act 3 Par. 18. Ja. 6. and thus an Instrument of Resignation of a Benefice, was found suffici∣ent, though some of the Convent subscriv'd not before the Date of the Instrument, November 16. 1624. Providing alwise that none of their subscriptions be obtained after the Death of the Granter; for then they cannot be said to consent, seing they are not all a∣live together: from which it follows likewise, that the aliena∣tion is not valid, if any of the Convent, or Subscrivers be Dead before the rest subscrive; where many subscrive separatly, the consent of the last is drawn back to the consent of the first, Craig. pag. 91. and albeit Craig be clear, that the consent of the Chap∣ter is requisite, tam in renovatione quam in alienatione feudi: yet by this Act it is for the Vassals case ordain'd, that the Bishops or Chapters consent is not necessary to the receiving of Vassals up∣on Composition, or otherwise; but that the direct Superiour may receive them by himself. Nota, By that part of the Act it seems, that though regulariter, Superiours are not bound to receive singular Successours: yet Kirk-men being Superiours are. If there be no Chapter, or Convent, the appending of the Seal of the Convent, with the Kings Confirma∣tion, is sufficient, Craig Ibid. The Arch-bishop of Saint-andrews had of old, the Conventual Brethren of the Priory of Saint-andrews to be his Chapter: but by the 8 Act Par. 19 Ja. 6. power is given him (that Priory being supprest) to choose seven to be his Convent; and ordains, that the appending of the common Seal of the Convent, shall be sufficient to declare their consent, without their Subscription; which Act is innovat by this 2 Act, Wherein a Convent is particularly set down to him, but nothing spoke of the Seal: and therefore the appending of the Seal is yet suffici∣ent; for this Chapter comes only in place of the seven prescriv∣ed by the first Act; and the Subscriptions of these seven were not necessary, ergo, neither is the subscription of this Chap∣ter. As the consent of the Chapter, or most part thereof is requisite to an alienation made by the Titular, as the Bishop, Abbot, &c. so reciprocally the consent of the Titular, and most part of the Chapter is requisite to the perfiting of all Rights made by any Mem∣ber of the said Chapter, of his particular Benefices, or of any Bene∣fice belonging to them in communi, which rule holds in all Con∣ventual Benefices, except that of the Arch-bishop of Saint-andrews; for it has been decided, that by this Act, any Member of that Chap∣ter therein Entered, may set Tacks, &c. without consent of the Arch-bishop of Saint-andrews, Novemb. 19. 1624. where these Con∣ventual
Benefices have Patrons; the consent of the Patron is like∣wise required, Craig. Nota, That the Bishop of Edinburgh is by the Erection of that See, in anno 1633. made Chancellour and Vicar to the Arch-bishop of Saint-andrews, and so is the first Ordinary, or single Bi∣shop; which priviledges belong'd to the See of Dunkeld; and so the Bishop of Caithness has not now any suffrage in that Election, be∣cause they must be but eight in this Act. AFter the Arch-bishops and Bishops were restor'd, the thirds of Benefices,ACT 3. out of which Ministers were provided for∣merly, came to be an unfit and unproportional Stock, for provid∣ing the whole Ministry of the Kingdom; and therefore by this Act, there is a Commission granted for planting and providing of Churches; and this is the first of the many Commissions which were granted by Parliaments afterwards to this effect, and their Decreets are to this day call'd Decreets of Pla in our pra∣ctice. Observ. 1. The lowest Stipend allow'd by the Parliament here, is five Chalders of Victual, or five hundred merks: but by the 19 Act Par. 1 Ch. 1. The lowest Stipend is appointed to be eight hundred merks, or eight Chalders of Victual; and the Decreet whereby this is appointed, is call'd, The Decreet of Modification; Whereas, if the Stipend be divided, and proportioned as well as modifi'd, the Decreet is call'd, a Decreet of Locality: and this proportion is so far observ'd, that the Victual so modifi'd, was found by the Lords to be payable, according to the measure of the Shire, where the Paroch was, and not according to the measure of Linlithgow, where the modifi'd Stipend would not have come the length of the quantity allow'd by the Act of Parliament, according to the measure of Linlithgow, June 27. 1667. Minister of Dalrymple contra the Earl of Cassils. Observ. 2. By this Act power is granted by the Parliament to the Commissioners, to unite, or dis-unite Kirks; which Union was likewise allow'd by the Canon Law, and is defin'd to be duo∣rum vel plurium benefiiorum cum causae cognitione a superiore & ordinaro in perpetuum Canonice sacta connexio, cap. exposuisti de Praeb. So that of old, the Ordinary only could unite Benefices; but now the King, as having come in place of the Pope, grants this Commission to unite, with the consent of Parliament, but the Bishop who is Ordinary, and the Patrons, if any be interested▪ must be likewise call'd; and the 5 Act Par. 23 Ja. 6. Ordains, that all persons interested in the Union be consenting: By which I understand the Ordinary, the Patron, the Incumbent, and the Parochioners; and this Act appoints, that if there be moe Patrons, they shall present, alter∣nis vicibus; and because it may be doubted who should be the first Presenter; in that case it is fit to know, that the lesser Benefice is alwise to be united to the greater; and so the greater remains still the Mother, Superiour, and principal Church, cap. recolentes de stat.
Monach. and therefore it would seem that the Patron of the Su∣periour Benefice, is to be the first Presenter. The reason given by the Canon Law for uniting of Benefices, are, that the Rector, or Parson may be the better enabled to re∣lieve the Poor, and maintain Hospitality, the Churches being so near other, that one Person may conveniently serve the Cure in both: The great poverty of the Benefices united, and the few∣ness of the Parochioners. But with us Benefices are never united, but where the Stipends are small, the Parochs near, and the Charge little, or no Waters interjected; which qualifications are left by our Law to the Arbitriment of the Commissioners for planta∣tion of Kirks; for none else can unite with us: but by the Law of England, 17. Car. 2 cap. 3. It is lawful for the Bishop of the Diocess, Major of any Town, and the Patron to unite Churches, provided the Churches so united, exceed not the va∣lue of a hundred pound Sterling, vide Petrum de perusio in tractatu unionum. Observ. 3. That there is power granted by this Commission to prorogat the Tacks of Tiends, when the Tacks-men are burdened with augmentations. Observ. 4. That the Sentences of their Commissioners are to have by this Act, the authority and force of a Decreet and Sentence of Parliament; and therefore it is, that in our practice, the De∣creets of this Commission can neither be Reduced, nor Suspend∣ed by the Lords of the Session, and that because of the 39 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. ACT 4.BY this Act no Arch-bishop, Bishop, or other Prelat can set any Tacks of their Patrimony for longer space than nineteen years; nor no inferiour benefic'd person for longer space than their own life∣time, and five years thereafter, but the Tacks otherwayes set, are not declar'd null, the Act it self not being conceiv'd irritanter, but only the benefic'd persons, who set the Tack for longer time than is express'd in this Statute, are thereupon deprivable, for ha∣ving contraveen'd the same; for the Parliament having declar'd that the Contraveeners are deprivable, but not the Tacks null. The Lords conceiv'd that the punishment being under the conside∣ration of the Parliament, at the time of the making of this Act; and they having determined the punishment to be Deprivation; but not having annull'd the Tacks: They thereupon concluded, that the Tack could not be declared null, though set for longer time than is declar'd by this Act, November 9. 1624. Hope contra Kinnaird. Observ▪ 2. That by this Act it is declar'd, that all Tacks set for longer space than the time foresaid, shall be Registrated in a Book to be keep'd by the Clerk-Register for that effect, else to be null; and therefore Tacks, though for longer years, if they be Regi∣strated, are sufficient, Hop. tit. Tiends. Likeas, it has been found that Registration in the Books of Council and Session, is sufficient,
though it be prescriv'd here, that they be Registrated in a Register to be made for that peculiar use, since the Clerk-Register had not made such a specifick Register: all which was found in the foresaid Decision, Novemb. 9 1624. Observ. 3. The persons allow'd to set Tacks for nineteen years, are Arch-bishops, Bishops, and Prelats: and though by the Canon Law, omnis honor qui aliui tribuitur propter administratio∣nem est praelatura: Yet by our Law, he is only a Prelat who has a Chapter; and therefore a Tack set by a Provost, is null, if it want the consent of the Patron; since Prelats can on∣ly set without the consent of the Patron, July 12. 1616. Hop. tit. Kirk-men. Observ. 4. That exception is justly made in this Act of Tacks, set by Order from the Commission of the Kirk; for in effect these are not set voluntarly, but by Order from a Committee of Parliament, who when they grant augmentations, which bur∣den the Tacks-men, or Titulars of Tiends, do in recompence of that burden, prorogat their Tacks, for as many years as they think fit. Observ. 5. That even Tacks for these years, are null, if they have not the consent of the Patron, by the 15 Act Par, 23 Ja. 6. Observ. 6. That though Prelates may set Tacks of their Pa∣trimony for nineteen years; yet they cannot set Tacks of their Casualities for longer than their Life; such as Quots of Te∣staments, &c. as is provided by the immediat Subsequent Act, viz. Act. 5. Observ. 7. That a Bishop cannot set a new Tack before the old Tack be expir'd, as was decided in favours of the Bishop of the Isles against Ascog; for else the present Incumbent might make the Benefice useless to the Successor; and it being against the nature of Benefices, that they should be set for longer time than the Incumbent has Right, it were most unjust to extend this. Observ. 8. It may be doubted, if a Bishop may set a Tack, af∣ter he knows he is recommended to another See; for that seems fraudulent, though it be ordinary; and if it were allow'd, the In∣trant Bishop would certainly find all his Patrimony exhausted by such Tacks; and Laicks would get very easie Tacks; for the Set∣ter knowing that he were to be remov'd, would set Tacks for any Duty. Observ. 9. It may be doubted if a Bishop who consented to such a Tack, when himself was a Member of the Chapter, can quarrel such when he comes to be Bishop of that same See; for though he may pretend that he is only to consent, and not debate, or inquire; yet this seems inconsistent with reason; for the Chap∣ter is appointed to be quasi Tutor; and so every Member is oblig'd to inquire; and therefore as he should not have consented, if he had not conceiv'd the Deed to be legal in it self, and fit for the See;
so ought he not to quarrel what he has already acknowledged to be fit. ACT 5.THis Act is formerly Explain'd, Act 11 Par. 10 Ja. 6. ACT 6.THis Act empowers the Lords of the Session to grant Letters for Charging the Parochioners to meet and Stent themselves, for furnishing Basons and Lavers for Administration of the Sacra∣ment of Baptism; and Cups, Tables, and Table-cloaths, for Admi∣nistration of the Communion, and which is accordingly observ'd; but though the Rubrick does generally bear, Furnishing of necessa∣ries for administration of the Sacraments; yet the Communion Ele∣ments fall not under this Act; but when Stipends are modifi'd by the Commission for Plantation of Kirks; there is likewise a parti∣cular sum modifi'd for the Communion Elements, which the Mini∣ster was once found to have right to, though he do not Admini∣strat the Sacrament yearly, but now it is design'd that this should be al∣tered, and that that Money should be ordain'd to be put in the poors Box. ACT 7.BY this Act the Nobility, or Prelats are allow'd to Vote by Proxies, if they be lawfully excus'd. Observ. 1. This is not allow'd to Barons, nor Burgesses; be∣cause the allowance is only specifickly given to Dukes, Marques∣ses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, or Prelats; and yet I see no reason for the Distinction; but on the contrary, it seems more reasonable that to the end a whole Shire may be represented; that therefore they may be allow'd to deput some to Vote, in case others be absent; for though it may be answer'd that the power of Proxies is unne∣cessary in Shires, because if their members be necessarly absent, they may choose others: For to this it may be reply'd, that they cannot choose new Commissioners, except in case of Deth; whereas the Shire may be much concern'd to have their Proxies at any one Dyet. Likeas, by the 52 Act Par. 3 Ja. 1. All Free-holders are allow'd to have Proxies in case of lawful ab∣sence from Parliaments. It is ordinary also for the chief Bur∣rows to choose, and send an Assistant to attend their Commissi∣oner. Observ. 2. By the said 52 Act Par. 3 Ja. 1. absents seem only to be allow'd to send their Procurators for excusing their absence; but by this Act they are allow'd to Reason and Vote; and there∣fore it may be doubted, whether a Brother who cannot Vote in his own Brothers Cause, may notwithstanding be admitted to Vote for his Brother as Proxie for another, to whom his Brother is a stranger; since here sustinent personam extranei; but seing the affection is the same, I think they would not be allow'd; nor does the Parliament now allow Proxies in any case.
It may be liewise doubted, if this Act may be extended to Conventions, since the Act speaks only of Parliaments; and does not add, or other General Councils, as the Act 113 Par. 11 Ja. 6. and other Acts do; but yet the Act 52 Par. 3 Ja. 1. allowing Proxies in absence, speaks of Parliaments and General Councils. Obs. 3. It is the Kings advantage and interest that Proxies should be allow'd; for they are only to be allow'd by this Act, where the reason of absence is warranted by the King, His Commissionr, or Council; and so the King may allow Proxies, or not, as He pleases, and needs never allow any to those whom He sus∣pects; which is also the present Custom of England, as to the Peers. Observ. 4. That though Letters of Actourney out of the Chan∣cery, be sufficient for absence in other Courts; yet by this Act, the absents must give a written warrand under their own hand. THis Act gives instructions to Justices of Peace and Constables, which i renew'd,ACT 8. and somewhat altered by the 38 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. But by this Act, their Decreets are ordain'd to receive Execution by Letters of Horning and Poynding; and that no Suspension shall be granted, but on Consignation; which Consig∣nation is neither appointed by the foresaid Act 38. nor is it now in viridi observantia: and though by both the Acts, they are or∣dain'd to proceed against Cutters of green Wood, Slayers of red and black Fish, &c. yet they are not in use to proceed in such cases; because the Act appoints, that Commissions shall be grant∣ed to them for that effect; but these Commissions have never as yet been granted: Though by our Customes, no person can be hol∣den as confest, except they be personally cited; because else men might be drawn in snares, by Citations at Dwelling-houses; yet here they are allow'd to be holden as confest upon the second Ci∣tation at their Dwelling-houses because the subject is small in Justice of Peace Courts. This Act is likewise Explain'd, crim. pract. tit. Justices of Peace; and is Ratifi'd by the 38 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. Where the Council is allow'd to grant them, what further instructions they shall think fit. The Council uses to name Justices of Peace, in place of such as dy; and it being alleadg'd that all Commissions for Justices of Peace should slow from the King immediatly, this was refu∣sed by the King, as being contrary to the constant Custome of Council, whom the King allows to name Justices of Peace. BY this excellent Act, such as have peaceably possessed their Lands for fourty years, are secured by Prescription.ACT 12. As to this Act it is observable; First, That Prescription is on∣ly competent to such as have bruiked by vertue of Heretable In∣feftments;
and therefore he who alleadges Prescription, must alleadge an Heretable Title; but though the Possessor be not ex∣presly Infest; yet if he has possessed the subject, as part and perti∣nent, it will be sufficient; and therefore a Salmond-fishing was found to be prescriv'd, though it was alleadg'd to be inter regalia, since the Prescriver was Infest cum piscationibus in general, Febru∣ary 7. 1672. But if the Prescriver be Infest upon a bounded Evi∣dent, it will not furnish him a valid Title for prescriving, as part and Pertinent, any Land that is without the bounding, November 14. 1671. This Act is also extended to Heretable Offices, as to Patronages, Pensions, and all Servitudes, though not expresly mention'd; and though Heretors and Wodsetters are enumerated, sometimes as different from one another, Act 6 Sess. 2 Par. 1 Ch. 2. yet Heretage in this Act comprehends Wodsets, and it is even ex∣tended to long Tacks; so that it was found, that after fourty years they could not be quarrel'd, as granted without consent of the Pa∣tron, July 7. 1677. This want of a Title likewise, and of bona fides, hinders a Vas∣sal to prescrive against his Superiour, since the reddendo of that same Charter, whereupon he founds his prescription, ob∣liges him still to know his Superiours Right; and by this Act for the same cause, a Wodset cannot prescrive, where the Reversion was incorporat, in the body of his own Infeft∣ment. Since this Act appoints that His Majesties Lieges bruiking for 40. years, shall have Right by prescription; it may be doubted, whether prescription can run in favours of strangers, who have not been Na∣turalized? Observ. 2. That these fourty years are only to run from the date of their Infestments by this Act; and yet in warrandice, it is on∣ly to run from the date of the Distress: but from both it is clear, that the reason is, because till then, they who have such Rights, non valent agere; and therefore the exception allow'd by the Ci∣vil Law of non valens agere, is allowable in ours, though it be not expressed in this Act, as minority is, whereby it seems that ex∣ceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis. Likeas, it was found in the Earl of Lauderdail's case, against the Earl of Tweddel, that Lau∣derdail being Forefaulted by the Usurpers, prescription could not run against him during that Forefaulture; but where there is a Title, prescription may run, albeit the Defender was absens rei∣publicae causa, at the least, durst not come home in the Usurpers time, for alleadg'd Crimes committed against them, as was found in White-foords case, the 24 of July 1678. He having kill'd in Holland Dorislaus, one of the Kings Murderers, for the Lords thought that he might have Transferr'd his Title to another, and if this reason hold it seems that absens reipublicae causa in general, is not sustainable as Mino∣rity is, since these who are absent may leave Procuratories to pursue their Rights.
It may be likewise debated, that such as are vi majore hin∣dred from coming to pursue, as being taken by Robbers, or Pi∣rats, should have the priviledge of non valentes agere, though no exception be made of them here, for though the chief design of the Act be, to establish Heretable Rights in the persons of singular Successors, who cannot know such accidents, and are secure if they find a fourty years progress: Yet prescription was at first introduced, for punishing the slouth of the Proprietars, amongst other Rea∣sons; and therefore non valens agere, was allow'd by the Civil Law and ours. It may be also doubted, whether prescription should run a∣gainst a furious, or mad Man, since they are minors in the con∣struction of Law, and so are to have Curators, and are less ju∣dicious oftimes than Minors are; but yet since they are not ex∣prest here, when the Law secur'd priviledg'd Minors, it is pre∣sum'd they were designedly omitted; and it were hard to know who are Furious, and Furiosity might continue eigh∣ty or ninety years; or a man might feign himself mad, &c. Observ. 3. That this Act makes a difference betwixt such as are singular Successors (who must produce for the Title of their Pre∣scription, not only a Seasine, but a Charter) and Heirs who need produce no Chater, but Seasines, one or moe, proceeding upon Retoures, or Precepts of clare constat; But because the Act sayes, That they shall produce Seasines, one or moe continued, or standing together for the space of fourty years; therefore the Lords found; that Seasines must be produc'd by the Heir, by vertue whreof, he and his Predecessours have bruiked for fourty years, during their being Infest; and so where the Father was Infest, and lived thirty nine years; yet the Son not having been Infest, though he and his Grand-child possessed for above 100. years: This Sea∣sine was not found a sufficient Title for prescription, February 15 1671. Earl of Argile contra Menauchtan, and the reason is, be∣cause a Seasine is but assertio notarii; and therefore it was too lax a foundation for an Heretable Right; and one Seasine may be ea∣silier forg'd than moe Seasines can, and one Seasine being forg'd, may be laid up in the Charter-Chist, so that the true Proprietar could not, before the Registration of Seasines, know how to im∣prove the same: and since this Act requir'd no Charter from Heirs, it was just that it should require more Seasines, to secure against Falshood: But since the Act appointing Seasines to be Regi∣strated, the argument of easie Forging is much taken off; Because the Act of Parliament sayes, That it is necessary to produce a Charter, grant∣ed to them by their Superiours and Authors: It may be doubted whe∣ther the Superiour is oblig'd to receive a Vassal, though fourty years in Possession, except he or his Predecessors can shew a Char∣ter from him; and that because, not only does the Act of Parlia∣ment
say Copulative Superiours and Authors; but without this, there is no Title against the Superiour: and some rather think the Su∣periour would b excluded by this fourty years Possession from his Right of Supeiority. Observ. 4. Though the Act require Charter and Seasins, yet a Disposiion, or Precept of Seasin would be sufficient▪ for many com∣pleat Rights have no Charter. Observ. 5. These fourty years run, de momento in momentum; and therefore the Prescription wanting a day, was not sustain'd, July 6. 1671. Though it was alleadg'd that de minimis non rat prtor: and it would be severe to take away the old Heretage of a Family, for want of one day, or hour. These fourty years are tempus continuum, and not utile; and there∣fore the Law subduces not from the Compt, those years in which Ju∣dicatures were not patent; or in which, War and Pestilence hin∣dered the Proprietar to pursue, the 30 of June 1671. but it may be here doubted, quid juris, if Judicatures were not open through War, or Pestilence, for the greatest part of the whole fourty years. Observ. 6. This Prescription runs against His Majesty, as well as Subjects, for the Act sayes expresly, that these who have posses∣sed fourty years, shall not be troubled by His Majesty, or any other, which was exprest, least  it might have been alleadg'd that the negli∣gence of His Majesties Officers, should not prejudge him in not pursuing, &c. Which are the express words of the 14 Act 16 Par. Ja. 6. Observ. 7. That by this Act the Prescription was drawn back in favours of these who had possessed fourty years, prior to the Act; for drawing back whereof, nothing can be answered, but that this Remedy was previously allow'd by the Civil Law; but least the Subjects might have been hereby prejudg'd, thirteen years are allow'd to run from the date of this Act, so that though they had possessed fourty years before the Act, they could not prescrive, except they had likewise possessed 13 years after this Act; and though in this Clause the priviledge of Minority be not repeated; and that it seems that the Parliament design'd not to deduce mi∣nority out of so short a time, as 13. years, since having had it un∣der consideration in the Act, they excepted it not in this Clause; yet it was found that Minority was to be discounted even in this case, Ju∣ly 5 1666. Observ. 8. That by this Act it is declar'd, that except the Sum∣mons be Call'd and Continu'd, it shall not interrupt Prescription; and it is declar'd, That the Raisers of Summons shall not be oblig'd to insist, except where the Summons is called and continued, and the
Defenders of new Summoned thereby: and yet the 3 of July 1647. El∣les contra Scot. It was found, that upon a single Summons, one may be forc'd to insist, which I cannot reconcile with this Clause, except by restricing this Clause meerly to the Course of thirteen years here specifi'd, and generally a first Summons Executed, in∣terrupts Prescription, January 26. 1622. And of old, the Exe∣cution of a first Summons did interrupt, though they bare no ex∣press relation to the Summons, upon which the Interruption was founded: but because there were several Summons at the same parties instance; so that the Execution of one Summons might be obtruded for the Execution of another. It is appointed that the Execution of Summons shall bear express relation to the Names of the Pursuers, and Defenders; and it shall not be sufficient that the Execution does generally relate to the Summons by the 6 Act Sess. 3 Par. 2 Ch. 2. and it had been fit, that the Act had added, that the Execution should bear the nature of the Action deduced in the Summons; for else, where the Pursuers and Defen∣ders are the same, one Execution may be still obtruded for ano∣ther. Observ. 9. Albeit this Act appoints all Rights to prescrive; yet it was found, that Heretors cannot prescrive a Right of their Tnds against Titulars, except the Lands were Feued, cum de∣cimis inclusis; but that they might prescrive Liberation for by∣gones preceeding fourty years, as in Customs and Feu-duties, which prescrive not▪ quoad the Right, though neglected four∣ty years, February 7. 1666. Earl Panmuire contra the Parochi∣oners of Inverness: Vid. Observations upon Act 57 Par. 5 Ja. 4. Observ. 10. That Falshood never prescrives by our Law: but whether this be in our Law peculiar to that Crime; I have De∣bated crim. pract. tit. Prescription. Observe also from the Narrative of this Act, that the Regi∣stration of a Paper in the publick Register, is a great Adminicle of Approbation, for the Paper must be left there: Though Falshood prescrives not, when the Paper is produced, and the Pursuer of∣fers to improve the same: yet it may be doubted, whether when Papers are only call'd for in an Improbation, in order to a Certi∣fication, and for trying of the Defenders Rights; Prescription may not be receiv'd against that presumptive Falshood, wherein the Writs are only Declar'd to be false, fictione juris, and the true in∣tent of such Improbations, is in effect but to try the Rights civi∣ly; and so it resolves properly, but in a Reduction, though that dangerous Certification of presumptive Falshood is adjected, ob ter∣rorem.
ACT 13.BY the 57 Act Par. 5 Ja. 4. Summons of Error prescrive with∣in three years, in so far as concerns the punishment against these who have committed the Error, who cannot be punished af∣ter three years: But yet by this Act, the Retour it self may be Reduced at any time within twenty years: which Prescription of twenty years, militats only in cases of Competition, betwixt the several kinds of Heirs amongst▪ themselves; as whether the Heir of Line should be prefer'd to the Heir of Tailʒie; But it does not exclude the clear interest of Blood; for jura sanguinis nullo jure civili dirimi ps∣sunt l. 8. ss. de Reg. Jur. and therefore an lder Brother was found to have good interest to Reduce a second Brothers Retour, Janua∣ry 11. 1673. By this Act, though such Retures may be Redu∣ced in prejudice of persons so served: yet if the person so served have Dispon'd their Right to singular Successors, having bona fide acquired Rights, as said is, they cannot be prejudg'd▪ And in our Law this is still introduced, for the good of Commerce, in favours of singular Successors; for how should they know that the Retour was Reduceable, Vid, Act 18 Par. 23 Ja. 6. Where the like priviledge is granted to singular Successors of Bank∣rupts. ACT 14.BY this Act we find that Executors Nominat had formerly by vertue of their Office, the whole Dfuncts part of the Execu∣try, that is to say, the whole Executry, if there was no Wife or Bairns; the half where there was only a Wife and no Bairns; Or only Bairns, and no Wife: and the third, where there was a Wife and Bairns: But by this just Act, they are only ordain'd to have a third of the Defuncts part; and there was good reason for abrogating the former Custom, where∣by the Executor was in effect universal Legatar, where there was no other Legatars. Albeit in reason the Executor should only have had some small acknowledgement for Executing the Defuncts Will. Observ. 1. That albeit the Narrative of this Act mention only the case of strangers, who are Executors nominat; yet where a Wife is nominat, she has the same Interest, viz. a third of Deds part, to which she will have Right, beside her own half, or third of the Moveables, as Relict; so that all are understood to be strangers in this Act, except the nearest of Kin, who would fall to be Executors by Law; But if one of moe nearest of Kin were nominat, it might be doubted what share of the Moveables such an Executor would have, whether he might claim a third of Deads part, as Executors nominat, and a separat Interest as one of the nearest of Kin? It seems probable, that if there were only two nearest of Kin, where∣by the Benefite as nearest of Kin would be greater than as Execu∣tors, he would only have the half, and nothing as Executor; be∣cause by this Act, if the Executors have a third of Deads part by any
other Title, he is not allow'd another third by vertue of the Act; and albeit a Wife have both a half, or third as Relict, and a separat third as Executor; yet the Relicts part is not by Successi∣on, but is her own proper Interest, arising upon the Dissoluti∣on of the Marriage: Whereas the question is here only as to Deads part: But if there were moe in the same Degree to the Defunct than three Persons, whereby the Executors Interest, as nearest of Kin, would be less than a third; In that case he might claim the benefit of this Act; Because though the main and or∣dinary Case considered, is of Executor Strangers: Yet the Statu∣tory part of the Act is general: and it were against Reason that the nearest of Kin should be in a worse condition than a Stran∣ger. Observ. 2. That this Act relates only to Executors nominat; and therefore Executors Dative have no more for Executing the Office, than their Expences, which is very reasonable: for other∣wayes Sangers would frequently ingire themselves to the pre∣judice of the nearest of Kin November 28. 1676.  Ker contra Ker. Observ. 3. That notwithstanding of this Act, where there is an universal Legatar, the Executor gets no part of the Defuncts part, January 15. 1674. Patoun contra Leishman. November 29 1626. Forsyth contra Forsyth. Observ. 4. That by the Confirmation of the Defuncts Testa∣ment, the interest of the nearest of Kin is ipso jure Established, so that albeit the nearest of Kin should immediatly Decease before Executing of the Testament, the interest that was competent to him, is Trasmitted to his Children, or nearest of Kin, as was found, February 12. 1662. Bells contra Wilkie, Where the three Sisters of Patrick ell being Confirm'd as Executors, whereof one Deceasing before Executing the Testament, her Son did  in his Mothers Testament, the third part that belonged to his Deceased Mother, for which the two surviving Executors were found countable to him; but where the nearest of Kin Di∣ed before the Testament of the Defunct was Confirm'd; It was found that the Interest which would have been competent to that nearest of Kin Confirming was not Transmitted to his Execu∣tor; but that there was place for the nearest of Kin, of the first Defunct, February 17. 1663. Forsyths contra Paton: Where it was also found, that a Child having survived his Mother, did not Transmit her third to his Father as a legittim; But that the Father was lyable for the third of his Moveables to his Wifes Brother, who was her Executor, and nearest of Kin.
ACT 15.THere are two cases provided for in this Act; First, That Liferent Tacks of Lands and Tiends, shall not fall under single Escheat, but under the Liferent Escheat; and yet if the Superiour, to whom that Life-rent-escheat falls, go to the Horn, that same Liferent-escheat of the Vassal will fall under the Superi∣ours single Escheat; for it is no Liferent in the Superiours person, for he has only Right to it during his Vassals Lifetime, but not du∣ring his own: as also, for the same reason, if the King Git the Liferent Escheat to a Donatar, it will fall under the Donatars single Escheat; and if the Donatar assign the same, it will fall un∣der the Assigneys single Escheat, not because Assignations makes that moveable which was Heretable, for Assignations alter not the Na∣ture of the thing assign'd; but because the Assigney has not these Rights for his Lifetime. The second part of this Statute provides, that in case any Tacks of Lands or Tiends, contain more Liferets; The First Liferent only shall fall under the Liferent Escheat by the first Life∣renters Rebellon: But the remnant Liferenters, or Heirs, shall not be pre∣judged. It is fit here to observe, that if a Tack be set for fifty or sixty years, yet it falls under the single Escheat, for all that falls not under Liferent-escheat, falls under single-escheat; and this, nor no such number of years is a Liferent, but quid juris, if a Tack be set for a hundred years, which is a Lifetime by express Law. And since Tacks were the only habile way of Transmitting Tiends of old, and are yet the ordinary way, it is hard that all our Rights to Tiends shall fall under single-escheat. ACT 16.BY this Act, all Reversions, Regresses, or Bonds for making Reversions or Regresses, or Assignations thereto, and all Sea∣sines are to be Registrated within sixty dayes, after the date of the same; and I find that Sand. decis. Fris. lib. 3. tit. 12. def. 15. shews that they have the same Registration of Hypotheques in immobili∣bus. Observ. 1. This necessity of Registration is only introduc'd in favours of singular Successors, acquiring posterior Rights; and therefore the nullity of not Registration, was not sustain'd at the Instance of one who had no standing Right in his Person, March 25. 1633. Nor is this Nullity sustain'd in favours of the Disponer, or his Heirs, for quoad them, these Rights are valid without Re∣gistration; nor was it sustained at the instance of the Son▪ who got the Estate Dispon'd to him by his Father, with power to the Father to burden it with a Sum, since this Son was found to be no third party, February 27. 1667. And for the same reason it was found, that the Superiours Seasine was not quarrellable by the
Vassal: This necessity of Registration being only introduc'd in favours of such as have posteriour, Heretable Rights, June 12. 1673. Observ. 2. It is thought that the sixty dayes, within which Seasins are to be Registrated, are so to be counted only, that either the day upon which the Writs are dated, or the day on which they are Registrated, must be free. Observ. 3. That since the Act sayes, That these Seasins and others shall be Registrated in the places designed in this Act; That there∣fore it may be doubted, whether when Lands ly within different Shires, but are united, if in that case they are to be Registrated in the Shire where the place lyes, at which Seasine is to be ta∣ken by the Charter of Union, or at all the places where the Lands ly. Observ. 4. Though this Act appoints Renunciations, and grants of Redemption to be Registrated: Yet the Lords found, that Or∣ders of Redemption fall not under this Act, and need not be Re∣gistrated, July 29. 1623. But yet they found, that an Infest∣ment of Annualrent could not be taken away by Discharges grant∣ed by the Debitor, nor by Compensation of his Debts, in prejudice of a singular Successor, who had Right to the said Annualrent; and that because, First, The design of this Act appears by the Narrative, to be made for security of Buyers; and buyers could not be secured, if such latent wayes of extinction were allow∣ed. 2. An Infeftment of Annualrent is Constituted by a Seasine, which must be Registrated; and therefore it cannot be taken a∣way, but by a Renunciation, or some Paper which must be Regi∣strated. 3. By the 3 Act Par. 2. Ch. 2. Instruments of Resignation, ad remanentiam, whereby Rights are taken away, are by the same Ar∣gument ordained to be Registrated in the same way that Seasins are. 4. Though by this Act there be not express mention of Rights of Annualrents; yet they are comprehended under the word Wod∣sets; for an Infeftment of Annualrent is but in effect a Wodset of the Rents; and though this Act is only urg'd against such as an∣nalʒie their Lands; and that it was urg'd, that an Infeftment of Annualrent was not an alienation of Lands, but rather a Ser∣vitude upon them; yet this is a mistake, for an Infeftment of Annualrent is an alienation, else it could not infer Re∣cognition, as without doubt it does. As also they found, that Renunciations of Annualrents, which were holden of the Disponer, are sufficient without any Resignation, ad remanen∣tiam; though it was alleadg'd, that as a Charter without a Sea∣sine cannot Constitute an Annualrent; so neither can a personal
Renunciation, without an Instrument of Resignation extinguish it; But because this Act ordains these Renunciations to be Re∣gistrated; therefore they are valid against singular Successrs, else why should they be Registrated, January 7. 1680. Mcclelland con∣tra Mushat. Since this Act of Parliament requires that all Seasines, Renunciation; of Wodsets, &c. shall be Registrated, I think the Booking of them is necessary: nor is it sufficient (as some pretend) that they are produ'd, and maked by the Clerk; because (as they say) the Lieges can do no more, and they ought not to be punish'd for the Clerks negligence; for if this were sufficient, no singular Succes∣sor could be secure, and the producer may pursue the Clerk if he book them not, since the Act of Parliament requires actual Regi∣stration. By this Act all grants of Redemption are to be Registrated, for securing singular Successors; but seing the using an Order of Re∣demption, with a Declarator thereupon, will evacuat the Wod∣set, even as to a singular Successor; and yet he cannot know whether there be such an Order used, and Declarator obtain'd, it not being requisite that either of these should be Registrated; it seems that singular Successors are yet unsecure: As also, since if a person obtain a Decreet against him to whom he sold his Land, decerning him to grant him a Reversion, conform to his promise, this will be valid against a singular Successor (though the pro∣mise was not) and yet the singular Successor cannot know this Decreet, nor needs it be Registrated; and therefore this Register seems yet no sufficient, and adequat Remedy in Wod∣sets. Observ. 5. That by this Act it is provided, that Seasins and Reversions therein contained, given by Provost and Baillies of Burgage Lands needs not be Registrated, neither in Burgh nor Shire, as was decided July 21. 1666. And that Seasins of Lands in Leith need not be Registrated, though it be no Burgh Royal, July 10. 1623. The reason of which Exception was founded upon the ex∣actness of Town Clerks, and the constant Custom thereof, Book∣ing how soon the Seasin is granted; and so far are Seasins with∣in Burgh exeem'd from such Solemnities, that the Lords sustain'd a Seasin within Town, being subscribed by the Town Clerk, though there was no Vestige of it in the Towns Register, nor the No∣tars Protocal, and was Latent for many years, June 30. 1668. and thus singular Successors were not sufficiently secur'd by this Sta∣tute within Burghs, for though Town Clerks use to Registrat, yet there being no necessity upon them to Registrat, and the Seasin not being annulled for not Registration; it follows clearly that there is no security; and therefore by the 11 Act Par. 3 Ch. 2. This is alter'd, and the necessity of Registration is thereby ex∣tended to Seasins within Burgh, and to all other Writs, which by this Act must be Registrated.
THe Form us'd in loosing Arrestments of old,ACT 17. was by the Mes∣sengers giving a Testificat under his Hand, that the Arrest∣ment laid on by him was loos'd; this being too great a Trust for a Messenger, and they receiving oftimes irresponsal Cautioners. By this Act it is ordain'd, that Arrestments shall be loos'd only by Let∣ters on Bills past by the Lords, which is now observ'd, and Cau∣tion is found to a particular Servant in the Bill-Chamber, to whom the Trying that the Caution is sufficient, is referr'd, and the or∣dinary way to hinder an unsufficient Cautioner, is by getting a Warrand in praesentia from the Lords of Session, for that Effect, af∣ter presenting whereof to that Servant, if insufficient Caution be receiv'd: The Lords will give Warrand to Arrest de novo; but if the Caution be once found, and the Letters exped; The Lords will not allow upon a Bill, Arrestment to be made de novo, nor recal their Letters, though the Caution be insufficient, the Clerk of the Bills being answerable by his Office for the sufficiency of the Caution. THis Act grants power to all who are Infeft in oesties to Judge such as shoot and kill Vennison,ACT 18. and Wild-fowl there∣in, and that by an Inquest, which seems to exclude all other wayes of Tryal; for inclusio unius est exclusio arius; and this Inquest was ordain'd to prevent the partiality, and passion of the He∣retor. THis Act punishing Drunkards by sining,ACT 20. is not well enough observ'd, though it be renew'd Act 19 Par. 1 Ch. 2. It seems by this Act that the Kirk is regulariter, founded in the judgeing and sining of Drunkards, though it may be alleadg'd that this were to secularize too much Kirk Sessions, which is properly an Ecclesi∣astick Judicature, and by the Commission granted to the Justices of Peace; The Justices seem to be made the only Judges, as appears not only by the Instructions given to them, but by the said 19 Act Sess. 1 Par. 1 Ch. 2. Though it be alleadg'd that Kirk-sessi∣ons have likewise a cumulative Jurisdiction for punishment of all Scandals; for which the 22 Act 3 Sess. Par. 2 Ch 2. is alleadg'd, and the constant practice of the whole Nation; and it was found by the Council, May 1681. The Kings Advocat contra the Justices of Peace of Dumfermling; that the Kirk-sessions might uplift such fines as were voluntarly pay'd to them for such Scandals, without being countable to the Justices of Peace for them. THe difference betwixt a Caulp and Hereʒeld,ACT 21. is that a Caulp is is the best aught, or Beast that a man has, which is due to the Chief, or Master, after his Death for protecting his Bairns, given by express paction; whereas a Hereʒeld is the best Beast due to the Master only by Law, after his Tennents Death:
Caulps are here Discharg'd, but Hereʒelds were allow'd, Quon: Attach. cap. 23. But it would seem that Hereʒelds, and all taking of the best Beast is discharg'd by this Act, albeit indeed they are not. ACT 22.THis Act is Explain'd in the 45 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. To which is to be added, that by this Act, the Relicts and Bairns of No∣tars being oblig'd to bring in their Protocals to the Clerk-register within fifteen dayes, after any Notars decease; the Register uses to appoint a Deput, call'd now, the Clerk of the Notars, who draws their Bill, and receives Caution from them; and is by his admission oblig'd to do Diligence to mark the Books of Notars, and to receive Band for their returning their Books; and therefore Sir William Primrose, for not doing Diligence, was Depos'd upon a Bill to the Lords, February 19 1680. Though he alleadg'd that the Wives and Bairns only of the Notars, were oblig'd to bring in their Protocals, but not he, and he was content for the future, to follow what Instructions should be given him. King IAMES the sixth, Parl. 23, THere being a General-Assembly held at Pearth in August 1618. by Hadingtoun, Southesk, and Scoon, as His Ma∣jesties Commissioners;ACT 1. there were five Articles therein past, in order to uniformity with England, viz. Kneel∣ing at the Sacrament, Privat Communion, Privat Baptism, Confir∣mation of Children, and the observing some Festival Dayes, for confor∣mity with the Church of England, as far as was possible; Which Ar∣ticles are here Ratifi'd in Parliament; nor is there any standing Law made since to abrogat them; albeit for Peaces sake, they have not been much observ'd. ACT 5.VId. observ. on Act 3 Par. 22 Ja. 6. Supra. ACT 6.IN this Act it is warranted, that such as Compris'd great Estates for small sums, did notwithstanding, possess the whole Rents for payment of their small Annualrent; and therefore to Correct this, it is ordain'd by this Act, that the Comprizer shall impute in pay∣ment of his principal sum, the superplus of the Rents of the Lands intrometted with by him, and the true reason of the former Cu∣stom was, because by the 37 Act Par. 5. Ja. 3. The Lands Com∣prized were to be adjusted by the Sheriff, with the sums Com∣prized for, and so the Rent was at first but answerable to the
Annualrent, though thereafter all being Comprised, the Com∣priser appropriated all the Rents, without imputing, as said is. Observ. 2. That this Act makes only the Compriser lyable for his actual intromission; and it has been found that the Compriser is not bound to intromet: But yet this is so severe to the poor Debitor, and the other Comprisers, all whom the first Compris∣er may debar, and so suffer the Tennents to Bankrupt, and the Lands to become waste; that therefore if a Compriser once intro∣met, he is bound to continue his intromission; and where there are Tacks standing, he is bound to do Diligence, February 9. 1639. or where there are moe Comprisers, the Lords may force the first Compriser to do Diligence, or if he do not betwixt and such a time yearly, they may allow access for the second to enter to the Possession, February 11. 1636. July 1662. Or if the first Com∣priser exclude any Diligence that the second is using, he will eo ipso be lyable thereafter to do exact Diligence. Observ. 3. By this Act it is Declar'd, that upon payment of the principal Sum and Annualrent, and the Expence bestow'd by the Compriser, in passing and obtaining Infestment together with the Annualrent of the said sums, and the necessary Expences bestow'd in leading the Comprising, that then the Comprising shall expire ipso facto▪ that is to say, by way of exception, without Declara∣tor, though ordinarly an order of Redemption be us'd; and not only does payment, or intromission with the Mails extinguish the Comprising, and prove against singular Successors, but even any acknowledgement of payment by the Leader of the Comprising will extinguish the Comprising against those singular Successors, July 23 1662. Observ. 4. That the Comprizer is to get allowance of a years Duty, as due to the Superiour by this Act, and though he get himself entered for less by the Superiour than the years Duty, yet he will get allowance of the full years Duty that was due to the Superi∣our, whose gratuity will be of no advantage to the Debitor, July 2. 1625. Observ. 5. That by this Act, what is pay'd to the Superiour bears Annualrent, as do the necessary Expences; but it may be doubted, if Annualrent be due for Sheriff-fees. Observ. 6. That Comprisings are not to run against Minors, but that it is lawful for the Minor at any time within the age of twen∣ty five years to Redeem, which priviledge was found not only to be due to Minors when the Comprising is led against themselves; but even when a Minor has right to the legal Reversion, he being himself a second Compriser; for even in that case, a Minor ha∣ving led a Comprising may be prejudged as well as the Minor against whom the Comprising is led, there being the same parity of reason in both; and though this be not clear by the first words of the
Exception: Yet it is clear by these words, And that notwith∣standing of the preceeding Laws and Practiques of this Kingdom, by the which, the Legal Reversion of the Comprised Lands expired within seven years after the leading of the Comprising, from the which His Majestie and Estates hath by this present Act and Statute ex∣cepted Minors in all time coming, declaring the same no wayes to run against them. Observ. 7. That because this Act appointed only the superplus of the Mails and Duties, which exceeded the annualrent to be imputed in the payment of the principal sum, during the seven years of the Legal, but did not expresly extend this to the case of Minority; Therefore it was found that Minors not Redeeming within the seven years, the Compriser had from the expiring of the seven years, the whole Rent of the Land for payment of his Annualrent, without imputing the superplus in payment of the principal sum, because the Act Corrected only that Custom, quo∣ad the Legal, & leges correcti non extendi debent ultra verba di∣recta & expressa, February 22 1639. and therefore by the 10 Act Par. 1 Sess. 3 Ch. 2. This Decision was Corrected, and it was by that Act ordain'd, that Comprisers should impute the superplus of the Rent, beyond the Annualrent, for payment of the Principal sum, not only during the Legal, but during the whole course of the Minority. THis Act extends all the priviledges granted to Minors in Comprisings to Minors against whom Adjudications are led:ACT 7. And from this it would seem to follow argumento hujus legis, that whatsoever is competent in Adjudications, is not Competent in Comprisings, for else this Act had been needless; and the Lords would not extend the priviledges of the one to the other in many other cases, and so would not allow the Superiour to get a years Du∣ty, because the immediat preceeding Act did allow Comprisd Lands to be Redeemable upon the payment of the sums Compris'd for, and a years Rent for their Entry: But in this Act of Adju∣dication, there is no mention of a years Duty, and which there∣fore was thought to be of purpose omited, and so needed a new Law, notwithstanding of the parity of Reason, whereupon a new Law was made, viz. the Act 18 Par. 2 Ch. 2. Whereby not on∣ly the Superiour is ordain'd to have a years Duty; but its expresly Declar'd, That in all Cases relating to Superiours, Adjudications shall be in the same condition with Comprisings, and consequentially to this last Act, it was found that the Superiour might at his op∣tion, either Enter the Adjudger, or pay the Sums for which the Adjudication was led, since the Act of Par. Ja. 3 Par. 5 and Act 37. Appoints this in Comprisings, June 10. 1671. Scot of Thirlestoun contra the Lord Drumlanrig: As also upon the same Reason, the Lords found that the Superiour was bound to receive the Adjudg∣er, though he could not produce his Authors Rights, Debitors ab∣stracting
their Writs, because Comprisers are not bound to pro∣duce, February 9. 1667. Ramsay contra Ker. Nota, That Comprisers intrometting, are lyable for their intro∣missions with the Victual, according to the Sheriffs Fiars, and not according to the Commissars; not only because the Commis∣sars Fiars are made only to Regulat Prices betwixt Tutors and Pu∣pils, and in other Consistorial Cases; but because this Act sayes, as the samine were commonly Sold between Yuil and Candlmas, in the Sheriffdom where the Lands ly. THough regularly Infeftments upon Comprisings and Adju∣dications, ought to be perfected by appending the Great-Seal,ACT 8. yet an Extract of the Debitors Infeftment under the Privy-seal, is here Declar'd equivalent in so far as concerns the Debitors Heirs, because it is presumable that the Debitor has destroy'd or Abstracted the Writs of the Lands Compris'd from him. Quaritur, Whether this Act should be extended to Adjudications, since they are not mention'd here in the very next Act to the Act anent Adjudications. THis Act allowing Bishops to Feu out their Ward-Lands,ACT 9. is but Temporary for three years, and so is expir'd, because not renew'd, and consequently Bishops have not leave to Feu out their Ward-lands now. AS Ministers Gleibs were to be Tiend-free, so ought the Soums Grass that is allow'd to Ministers in place of Gleibs,ACT 10. be Tiend-free. The Reason given by this Act, is, because the same is dedicat∣ed and appointed ad pios usus, which is no adequat, and suffici∣ent Reason, since Lands mortifi'd to Hospitals, are destinat ad pios usus, and yet are not Tiend-free, that being a special privi∣ledge only granted by the Pope to the Coelestines, or Cisterti∣ans, and some few other Orders; but ordinarly Hospitals and others are free from Taxations, as Act 1 and Act 15 Par. 1 Ch. 1. BY the 2 Act Par. 22 Ja. 6. Deans and Chapters were Restor∣ed;ACT 11. but by this Act all the Offices and Dignities of the Chap∣ter are likewise Restor'd, and it is declar'd, That all Deeds done since the date of that Act, or to be done thereafter, whereby any Member of a Cathedral Kirk, being an Office or Dignitie, hath, or shall be supprest, or any Land Parsonage, Vicarage, or other Li∣ving, belonging to the said Dignity, dissolved from the same with∣out express Warrand from His Majesty and Parliament, shall be null.
For understanding this Act, it is fit to know that in every Bi∣shoprick there are several Dignities, allow'd by the Canon Law; by which Law, the Word Dignity is either taken largely, so as to comprehend all Ecclesiastical Dignities, as in cap. denique dist 4. But properly it imports administrationem Ecclesiasticam cum honore vel jurisdictione conjunctam, Glss. in cap. 1. de consuetud. in 6. and generally, all such to whom the Cognition of Causes could be de∣legated, were accounted Ecclesiastick Dignities, cap. cum olim de offic. legat. There are in every Chapter, and Bishoprick with us some of those Dignities, but of a different Rank and Jurisdiction, not on∣ly from those in the Canon Law, but the Dignities in our own Bishopricks differ from one another, though all of them agree in this, that those Dignities which were appointed at the foundation of the Bishopricks continue to this day, and the foundations are the Rule, and are very different. The ordinary Dignities common to all, are the Dean, the Arch-dean, the Chanter, the Chancellour, and the Thesaurer. The Office of the Dean has been fully Explain'd in the Act 2 Par. 22 Ja. 6. The Arch-deacon (call'd improperly by us Arch-dean) is the Archidiaconus of the Canon Law, who though they be inferiour to Deans, yet they are in effect the Bishops Vicar, and have the Chief Jurisdiction next to him; being in the Canon Law oculus Episcopi, their Office in that Law was to examine such as were pre∣sented to the Bishop, and to put them in possession of their Bene∣fice after their admission; as also, to visit the Diocy every three year, if the Bishop be not present, and to oversee the Manners and Living of the Clergy. The Chanter is in the Canon Law called Primicerius, because he is first of the Order of the Singers; and by the Greek Church  his employment was to oversee such as sung and read in the Church; and with us the Sub-chanter is a dignity called Succentor in the Canon Law, and that likewise he was allow'd a dignity by the Canon Law is clear, Innocent cap. 3. inter dilectos de excess. prael. The Chancellor was so called, because he kept the Seal of the Church, Cujac. ad tit. ut Eccles. bon. sine diminut. conserv. he was likewise Superviser of the Bibliotheck of Schools, and of these who taught the Clergy, cap. penult. & ult. de translat. Epis. & cap. veniens de reg. & trans. ad monast. In England the Chancellor is in effect a Church-Lawyer, who judges for the Bishop through the whole Diocy, and is universal Commissary; whereas these only are called Commissars by that Law to whom the judging in particular Places or Cases is commit∣ted: But with us the Chancellor is still a Church-man, and the Province of Saint Andrews has its Chancellor as well as the special
Bishopricks, the Bishop of Edinburgh being the Chancellor of the Province of Saint Andrews. The Thesaurer is he who did oversee the Thesaury, and all things else belonging to the Church, who in the forecited cap. cum olim, is accounted to have Ecclesiastick Dignity. It is observ'd by Bengeus, de beneficiis Ecclesiasticis, Renat. Chopin. and other Canonists, that both the Jurisdiction and Precedency amongst those Dignities, is now consuetudinary, and alter'd much according to the custom of the several Places; and it is so with us where they are regulated according to the special Foundations or Custom, if these be wanting or lost. THis Act is Explain'd in many other Acts concerning the pri∣viledge of Burghs Royal.ACT 12. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in Act 47. Parl. 11. Ja. 6.ACT 13. BY this Act all playing at Cards or Dice in any Inn or Ale-house is discharg'd under the pain of fourty Pounds,ACT 14. and all playing at Cards or Dice even in privat Houses is forbidden, except where the Masters of the Families play; and all playing at Cards and Dice, even though the Master play; and all Horse-Races are so far restrain'd, that the Gainer cannot have Action for any thing he wins above an hundred Merks: But yet it was found that the Loser is still lyable in payment, and therefore the Kings Advocat was found to have interest to compear, and crave the Money to be consign'd, November 12. 1668. Park contra Somervel. Where it was debated if this was vitium reale, and might be taken from an Assigney, though he knew not how the Money was dew, for else this Act might be eluded, by filling up the name of an Assigney. By the Civil Law, Tit. 43. lib. 3. l. 1. Cod. de aleatoribus, he that is over∣come at such Games is not oblig'd to pay, and though he pay, he, or his heirs have repetition; and by the Canon Law, Church-men who use such Games cannot be promoted to Benefices, cap. 11. de excess prelat. but yet wagering seu sponsio was by that Law allowed, l. 17. §. ult. ff. de prescript. verb. and so our Horse-races were not condemn'd by that Law, though they are by ours; for that Law did think that, nullam turpitudinem continet in se spo sio; nam inde rixae oriri non solent; but our Law did condemn Horse-Races, because they occasion'd great Idleness and Expence: This Act is still exactly ob∣serv'd, but is not extended to other Wagers, such as that Ships will arrive at such a day, or in such a place, which was not found to fall under this Act, which speaks only of Cards, Dice, and Horse-Races; it seems that this Act would not be extended to any other Game ex paritate rationis; but yet I find that by the late Decisions of most Nations, these are not sustain'd tanquam otiosi & aleatorii
contractus qui nihil in se continent praeter inanem animorum con∣certationem, Stockman. decis. 134. Molin. tract. de usur. quest. 3. num. 97. By the Civil Law likewise, though wagering was allow'd, yet where either of the Parties did certainly know the thing whereupon he wa∣gered, but conceal'd his knowledge; as for instance, if a man should wager that such a man should be dead before a year elapsed, and that he knew him to be already dead, the Law would not allow Action up∣on that Wager, because in effect that were to cheat, and accordingly our Courts in Scotland have most justly decided. Wagers likewise upon the deaths of Princes are discharg'd as giving occasion of jealousie; as also Wagers concerning the event of Publick Undertakings for the good of the Countrey, such as the success of Arms, &c. and that, lest men should be tempted, either to wish the Armies of their native Country not to prosper, or to reveal their Secrets to the end they may not prosper, vid. Zipeum in not. juris belli, lib. 3. in fin. there is such an Act as ours made by Lewis 13. of France amongst his Statutes, cap. 138. & seq. ACT 15.THis Act is fully Explain'd in Act 200. Parl. 14. Ja. 6. ACT 16.THis Act is fully Explain'd in the 114 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. THis Act Discharging that a Peck should be taken to the Boll, though with consent of Parties,ACT 17. was made to prevent extorti∣on, upon the same Ground that Usury is Discharg'd; but yet it not having been observ'd for a long time, the Council stopt a Gift that was granted thereof, as to bygones, till His Majesty should be acquainted. THis Act concerning Dispositions made by Bankrupts, is fully Ex∣plained by me,ACT 18. in a Treatise a-part already Printed upon this single Act. THis Act Regulating the Prices of all Writs and Seals, is for the most part either in Desuetude,ACT 19. or is innovated by the 16 Act Sess. 3 Par. 2 Ch. 2. Wherein new Regulations are set down; and from this Act it is observable, that the Secret Council may make prices in all such Cases; for this Act Ratifies only their Act; and though the Act Ratifi'd bear, this Act to have been made by the Secret Council and Session; yet the Act of Parliament which does Ratifie that Act, Ratifies it only as an Act of Pri∣vy Council, and so insinuats that the Privy Council hath power to Regulate both the price of Session, and Exche∣quer.
These Regulations of Prices in our Law, are like to the notiti mentioned, Cod. de ann. & cap. lib. 1. Tit. 52. quae singulis offiiis delegabantur quibus continebatur quantum singuli pro dignitate & fficio pro libellis mandatis codicillis accipiendis vel insinuandis pen∣dere quantum pro annona & capite accipere deberent. FOr understanding this Act, it is fit to know that Annual∣rents are only due by our Law, either by Statute,ACT 20. or Paction, so that regularly they are not due other∣wise. They are due by Statute, either by the Act of Sederunt▪ 1613. appointing, That where Cautioners are distressed, and forced to pay, they shall have Annualrent from the Term that they pay, though the Bond wherein they are Cautioners bear none; yet this is in effect ex pacto, because it arises from the Clause of Relief, this being a Damnage incur'd by them, or by this Act of Parliament, by which Annualrents are due, after the Party is Denunc'd, though the Bond whereupon he is Denunc'd, bear no Annual∣rent, upon the same ground that in the Civil Law usurae debentur ex mora in bonae fidei contractibus, l. 32. §. 2. ss. de usuris: So that as by the Civil Law they were due ex pacto vel ex mora; they are due only with us ex pacto vel ex lege, which is the same thing almost, since lex in hoc casu apud nos sundatur in mora; for though there may be mora sine usuris, yet by this Act there are never usurae sine mora: But this Denun∣ciation must be at the Head Burgh of the Shire where the Debitor lives: Denunciations at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, being a Warrand only for Caption, but not inferring Annualrent, which may seem strange, since Annualrents are by this Act infer'd after Denunciation, because of the Debitors negli∣gence; but the reason of the Decision is, that the Lords thought the Debitors did not know exactly when they were Denunc'd at Edinburgh; but it has been found that the Debitor is lyable in Annualrent, after he is Denunced at the Head Burgh of the Shire, though the Horning be not Registrated, since the Act only appointed Denunciation; and yet there can be no Caption till the Horning and Executions be Registrated; and thus it is clear that Caption, and Payment of Annualrents are very diffe∣rent effects of a Horning, since sometimes Caption will fol∣low where Annualrent cannot, and sometimes Annualrent will follow, where Caption cannot, February 11. 1673. Smith contra Wauch. Annualrents are sometimes due, without either express Law, or Paction, because of the tacite, and presumable consent of the Party; as if a Party pay Annualrent for one Term, or if he promise to pay bygone Annualrents, though he promise not for the future; yet January 13. 1669. Hume contra Seaton The Lords found that he ought to pay constantly Annualrent for the future, though the ob∣ligation
did bear no Annualrent: or from the Principles of Na∣tural Equity, as in the price of Lands, which pay Annualrent, though none be pactioned, because the Buyer has the Rents of the Lands: Or in Tochers, because they are given ad sustinen∣da onera matrimonii, and the Husband intertains the Wife: Or where the sum is ordain'd to bear Annualrent after her Mar∣riage, to whom it is left quo casu, before Marriage the Lords found that Annualrent was due, since matrimonia debent es∣se libera; but yet regulariter, annualrent is not due in cases ali∣mentary. And a Father providing his Daughter to a Sum for her Portion, without mentioning any thing of annualrent; the Lords would not decern annualrent, though annualrent was only said to be omitted there, through the igno∣rance of the Notar; but because of the presum'd will of the Fa∣ther, they modifi'd the aliment equal to the annualrent: But so unfavourable are usurae usurarum, call'd usurae ju∣daicae by the Doctors of the Civil Law, that an obligation to pay annualrent for annualrent, if it were not pay'd at the Term, was not sustain'd, though it was alleadg'd that here pactum & mo∣ra, were joyn'd with Equity, the Woman to whom they were due, being a poor Widow, who behov'd to borrow Mo∣ney to live upon, if her annualrent were not pay'd, and to pay annualrent for that Money, which she so borrow'd, Ja∣nuary 26. 1669. Lady Braid contra the Earl of Kinghorn. It is fit to know that the Statute 2. Robert 3. appointing annual∣rents not to run against Minors, is now in Desuetude, though it would seem reasonable, that their mora should not prejudge them; but Minors Money do still bear annualrent by our Law. The King uses to pay Annualrents for the ballance of his accounts de facto, but is not oblig'd thereto by Law. ACT 22.THis Act is Explain'd, Crim. pract. tit. Falshood. ACT 23.NOta, That Usury is excepted from this Commission to uplift Money, due by penal Statutes, &c. Ergo, Acts against Usu∣ry seem penal Statutes. It is observable, that though by this Act it be Declar'd, That Commissions for penal Statutes be not put to Execu∣tion, till they be authoriz'd by the Lords of Secret Council; yet this is too much in Desuetude; but the Lords of Secret Council do use to Discharge them, till they acquaint the King. ACT 25.THe Laws of the twelve Tables, contain'd several Sumptuary Laws, though there was then little Luxury, and particular∣ly at Burials: and Saint Chrisostom condemns feign'd Mourners,
whom we call Saulies, because they pray for the Souls of the Dead. Vid. 14 Act Par. 3 Ch. 2. THis Act appointing Houses in Edinburgh to be Sklated, and Let∣ters of Horning to be direct to that effect;ACT 26. shews that the Parliament may Dispose upon privat Estates, ob bonum publicum, vid. Act 6 Par. 1 Sess. 3 Ch. 2. It may be argu'd from this Act, That if the Town of Edinburgh could have made such Acts by their own authority, this Act had been needless. THis Act is Explain'd in the 106 Act Par. 7 Ja. 5.ACT 27. THis Act is Explain'd, crim. pract. tit. Usury.ACT 28. THis Act discharges any man to Hunt or Hauk at any time,ACT 31. who hath not a Plough of Land in Heretage, under the pain of an hundred pounds, but it is now in Desuetude.
K. CHARLES I. Parliament I. KING CHARLES the First having come to Scotland to be Crown'd,ACT 1. in anno 1633. The Parliament does by this Act, grant Him, not only a Sub∣sidie upon the Land-rent; bu likewise the sixteen penny of all Annualrents, the Annualrent being then at ten in the hun∣dred; but because the Annual∣rent was thereafter brought down from ten to six: There∣fore by the 49 Act Par 1 Ch. 2. It is Declar'd, that the said six of the hundred, shall be free of all Retention, and other publick Bur∣dens whatsoever. There is no Immunity allow'd by this Act, to any from this Taxation, save the ordinary Lords of the Session, and Mortifica∣tions to Universities, Colledges, and Hospitals; and this was the first time the Lords were separated from the Advocats, and other Members of the Colledge of Justice: and yet by the 23 Act of this Parliament, all the Immunities and Priviledges that ever were granted to the Colledge of Justice, are Ratifi'd; and though it may seem that this Act being posterior, derogats from the former, yet specialia semper derogant a generalibus. By this Act likewise, the Lords of Erection are to be Taxed in the same way that they were before the Erection.
ACT 2.THis Act is but a continuation of the first Act, and shews the way of uplifting the Taxation thereby given. ACT 3.THe Parliament having granted by the 8 Act Par 20 Ja. 6. Power to the King to appoint Apparel for Judges and others, because that Act was but Temporary; they by this Act continue the same to Our Soveraign Lord and His Successors, who now is; which cer∣tainly is wrong Printed, and Reads ill, for the words should run, Our Soveraign Lord that now is and His Successors. Observ. 1. That Acts referring any thing to the Kings Majesty, and not mentioning His Successors, are but Temporary, else this Act had been needless. Obs. 2. That these erre who think the Parliament cannot delegat their Power; for in the former Act and this, it is clear that the Parliament did delegat this Power; and it is Declar'd that the Kings Letter, Regu∣lating this affair, shall be equivalent to an Act of Parliament; and this same Parliament 1633. did grant a Commission to Revise the Laws, and did Declare, that what they did should have the force of Laws without Reporting to the Parliament: and the Lords of Articles, anno 1681. Did grant a Commission, with a Parliamentary Power to some to Revise the Earl of Argiles Rights, and the Commission of Teinds is of the same Nature. ACT 4.THere having been great Debates in anno 1633. concerning the securing the Protestant Religion, it was at last agreed, that the old Acts made by King James, were in themselves sufficient; and the best that could be fallen on, as being made when there were greatest fears of Popery, and by the help of which, the Prote∣stant Religion grew to the consistency it is now at; and therefore the Parliament acquiesced in this short Act, Ratifying in general the former Acts made for securing the Religion, Vid. Act 1 Par. 3 Ch. 2. ACT 5.THe former Parliaments which had determined Ministers Sti∣pends, forgot to provide School-masters; and therefore the Privy Council did provide them by an Act of Council; and though it may seem strange, that the Privy Council could impose a burden, though for a just Cause, yet that their Act is here ap∣prov'd, and the Secret Council are made Judges to all Processes concerning School-masters dues, though now the Lords of the Session are the only Judges; nor are there any such Processes intented be∣fore the Privy Council. Since by this Act the Planting of Schools is refer'd to the Bishop with the consent of the Heretors, and most part of the Paroch, it would appear that they, and not the Kirk-session where they live, should have the placing of them: and albeit it be alleadg'd that the School-master of the Paroch is by the 17 Act Par. 3 Sess. 5 Ch.  To be Clerk to the Kirk-session, and therefore they should have
the chief interest; Yet this consequence is not sufficient, and the Act whereupon it is founded, is likewise abrogated: This is con∣form to the Reform'd Church of Saxonie, wherein cura scola∣rum pastoribus, ac superintendenti commissa est Carpz, lib. 1. tit. def. 77. BY this Act all Mortifications by Gift, Legacy, or otherwise, are declar'd not to be alterable to any other use,ACT 6. than the special use to which they were Destinated by the Mortifier; but yet if that use become unlawful ex post facto, so that the persons in whose favours they were Mortifi'd, be dissabled to Possess, I think they should fall to the King, as Caduciary, if the Property has been once Transfer'd, and the person upon whom it was Transfer'd, be∣came thereafter uncapable, for quae sunt nullius sunt Domini Regis, and thus the Mortifications made to Monastries, fell not back to the first Proprietars, or their Heirs, but to the King; But if the Property was never Transfer'd, but before the first acquisition, the person to whom the same was left, was incapable to receive the Right Mortifi'd; as if a Man should leave a Legacy to his Brother, who were a Capushian, whose Monastry, and not him∣self are only capable of Legacies; it seems that if the Mortifier knew, that his Brother was uncapable, and that it would fall to the Monastry, that in that case also, the Mortification should belong to the King, and should not be retained by his Heirs, as a due pu∣nishment of his Fault: But if the Mortifier knew not the same, it were more reasonable to determine, that the Mortifiers Heirs should retain the Right, Vid. Tit. Cod. de caduc. tollend. Thomas Mudie having left a sum to be employ'd on the build∣ing a Church in the Grass-Mercat of Edinburgh, The Magistrats thereof were upon their Supplication, allow'd to build a Steeple, and buy a Pale of Bells with the Money, because a Church was use∣less wanting a Stipend, though this Act against inverting Pious Do∣nations was objected; for the Parliament thought, that if a Mor∣tification be left, which cannot take place, either because it is against Law, or is useless, the Parliament may allow the same to be ful∣filled by an equipollency, that being more suitable to the design of the Mortifier, and better for the Common-wealth, than if the Mortification should become extinct, which is consonant to the Ci∣vil Law. George Heriot, having appointed by one of the Statutes of his Hospital, that nothing should be altered, though for the better; and one of the Statutes bearing, none should lodge within the Hos∣pital, save Students; it was doubted, if some un-furnisht Rooms which the Overseers could not furnish for want of Money, might be set out to such as undertook to furnish them, for some few years Tacks! And it was thought that they might, since that was no case which any wise man could think to exclude, if he had had
it under his consideration, and these Rooms might be separated from the Hospital for that time by a VVall. ACT 7.THe Act here Ratifi'd is the 27 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. Whereby all such as trouble Ministers for seeking of their Livings, or siklike quarrels, and put violent hand in them, are to be punish'd with the tinsel of their Moveables, albeit no slaughter or mutilation follow; Which Act is here extended to Arch-bishops, Bishops, and all others having power to Preach, and Administrat the Sacraments; From which it is observable, that Acts in favours of Ministers, can not be regu∣larly extended to Bishops, though a Bishop may seem to be a Mi∣nister and more; and because the former Act mentioned only sik∣like quarrels, as for seeking their Stipends, &c. and that this might have been eluded by forg'd pretexts; therefore this Act extends the same to all Invasions: and from both these Cases, it may be urg'd, That Acts of Parliament are stricti juris, and cannot be ex∣tended de casu in casum; else this Act had been unnecessary. Observe likewise from this Act, a case wherein all Land-lords, Heretors, and Chiefs of Clans, upon whose bounds the Invaders of Ministers stay for ten dayes, the same being intimat to them, are to be punish'd as Connivers; This Act is Ratifi'd by the 5 Act Par. 2 Ch. 2. By which it is further appointed, That if any invade Ministers, either in their Persons, or Goods, not only within their Houses, but Parochs, the Parochioners shall be lyable to pay his Damnage, if they cannot apprehend the Malefactors. The Parlia∣ment there likewise Ratifies two Proclamations of Privy Council, which ordain'd the same thing formerly; and which Ratification is a great proof of the Councils Power, in things relating to the Government. TEinds are declar'd to be the Patrimony of the Kirk; and there∣fore were not annex'd to the Crown by the 29 Act Par. 11. Ja. 6. But because the leading of other mens Teinds,ACT 8. occasion'd great confusion; therefore in anno 1628. There were three seve∣ral Submissions made, one by the Laick Heretors, a second by the Church-men, and a third by the Burrows, wherein they refer to His Majesty what should be pay'd by every Heretor for his Teinds, to the Titular or Tacks-man; and accordingly His Majesty pronun∣ced three several Decreets, dated in September 1629. Wherein he appointed, that the rate of all Tiends should be the fifth part of the constant Rent of what each Land pay'd in Stock and Tiend, where the same are valu'd joyntly, and where they are valu'd a-part, the rate is according as the same were valu'd by the particular Commission∣ers for Valuation of Teinds, with deduction of a fifth part, call'd, the Kings Ease; and that all Teinds should be bought at nine years pur∣chase, where they consisted in Money; and if they consisted in Victual, that they be first liquidat into Money, and then they should be bought at nine years purchase: And if there were but Temporary Rights, then the price is to be abated; or hight∣ned
proportionally; and the said Teinds being so bought, the He∣tors are to relieve the Titulars of His Majesties Annuity, and Mi∣nisters Stipends pro rata, and in case of wrong done by the Commis∣sion, there is place for appeals left to the Parliament. The Submission made by the Bishops, did only relate to Teinds, payable to them, whereof they were not presently in Possession; and therefore where any Church-men were presently in Possession of any Tiends, His Majesty by His Decreet Arbitral, did not or∣dain them to sell the same; but they are ordain'd to sell such Tiends as belong to them, that were not in their present Possession, which they were ordain'd to sell at nine years purchase, with deduction always of His Majesties Annuity, forth of the exress of the Bolls and Rents, arising to the Submitters, after the expyring of their present Tacks. The determination upon the Submission of the Burrows, differs nothing from the former two; but that the saids Burrows are to pay the Annuity forth of the superplus of their Tiends, if they should be found to exceed what is due for intertainment of their Ministers, Colledges, Schools, and Hospitals, and the Terms of payment, of what is to be pay'd for these Tiends, is declar'd in all the three Decreets Arbitral, to be betwixt Yule and Candlemass; such likewise as had Church-lands and Tiends, Erected in their fa∣vours, in Temporal Lordships, did grant Commission to surrender their Rights in His Majesties Hand, upon the condition therein ex∣press'd; and therefore by this Act, the Commission granted by His Majesty for providing the Ministers serving the Cure with com∣petent Stipends, is here Ratifi'd, and it is declar'd, That the lowest Stipend shall be eight Chalders of Victual, or proportionally in Silver, except such particular Kirks occur, wherein there shall be good reason to go beneath the same; But it seems that by this Act, they can only go beneath the said quota, where there have already Valuations been led; the reason whereof seems to be, because till a Valua∣tion be led, it cannot be known whether there be more free Tiends in the Paroch, then will amount to eight Chalders Victual: As al∣so, because this High quota was granted to the Minister, in respect of the power granted to the Heretors, to value their own Tiends; therefore, where the Heretors had not taken the benefite of the Valuation, the Minister ought not to have the high Stipend: But yet the Commission for Plantation of Kirks, do use to modi∣fie less Stipends, where it is notour, that the Paroch is not able to bear the same; and that albeit that quota was condescended on in the Commission of Surrenders, and is renew'd in the 19 Act of this Parliament. By this Act it is likewise declar'd, that where Valuations are lawfuly led against all persons having interest, that the samin shall not be drawn in que∣stion upon the pretence of enorme laesion, at the instance of the Incumbent, not being Titular, or His Majesties Advocat, except in the case of Collusi∣on, which is declar'd to be presumptione juris & de jure, where the
Valuation is led with diminution of the third of the real Rent pre∣sently pay'd, as is clear by the last Paragraph of the ninteenth Act. ACT 9.THis Act contains that Revocation drawn by Sir Thomas Hope His Majesties Advocat, which is said to be of the things which gave the first rise to our late Troubles; for therein His Majesty, not only Revocks all Alienations of Lands formerly annex'd, and all Rights made to His Castles, Meadows, Woods, and Parks; but His Majesty likewise Revocks all Rights made to any Church-lands, and all Infestments of Erections of Abbacies, Prelacies, &c. Spirituality, or Temporality; and a Reduction of these Rights, was thereupon rais'd: Notwithstanding that by the 2 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. His Majesty to remove all mistrust, does for Him and His Successors, perpetually Confirm all Erections, Confirmations, Patronages of the saids whole Benefices, and promises in verbo prin∣cipis, never to quarrel the same. But what was done afterwards be∣ing voluntar, and upon the submission of all parties concern'd, did not at all impinge upon the former Statute. It is likewise declar'd in the end of this Act, that the possession of any thing hereby Revocked, shall not prejudge His Majesty; and therefore it may be urg'd, that fourty years possession of any Lands, or others falling under this Revocation, would not debar the King by Prescription; and yet it was found, That if the King be Denuded in favours of a Donatar: This Revocation does not in∣terrupt Prescription without a Reduction. ACT 10.THis Act is wrong plac'd, for it should be after the 14 Act; for the Superiorities of Kirk-lands, being by the said 14 Act, Declared to belong to the King; The saids Superiorities are by this Act annex'd to the Crown; but they could not have been annex'd to the Crown, till they were first declar'd to belong to it. THere is here a Dissolution of the Annexation, made in the for∣mer Act,ACT 11. in which it is Declared, That this Dissolution shall not warrand the Alienation of His Majesties Castles, Woods, Parks, Meadows, and Offices; which is conform to the 235 Act Par. 15 Ja. 6. Whereby all Dispositions of these are declar'd null; and though the Lomonts of Falkland be Dissolv'd particularly by the 19 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. Yet it is Declar'd particularly in this Act, that they shall remain inseparably with the Crown. BEcause by the Act of Prescription 1617. It is appointed that such as might be prejudg'd by that Prescription of fourty years run before that Act 1617. might intent Actions within thirteen years after the Date of that Act;ACT 12. and because the King could not intent particular Summons against every person, whose Rights he might challenge; Therefore it is allow'd by this Act, that His Majesty might interrupt the said Prescription by open Proclamati∣on,
at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other particular Mer∣cat Crosses, where the Lands lye; and at the Mercat Cross of Edin∣burgh, Peer, and Shore of Leith, against such as are out of the Kingdom. But least this interruption might have too much alarm'd the Subjects: It is upon the Kings own Concession declar'd, that the said interruption should be Restric'd to the annulling of Rights of the annext Property of the Crown, and the un-annex'd; whereof account hath been made in the Exchequer, and of the principality unlawfully Dispon'd by His Majesties Predecessors, against the Laws and Acts then standing, and to the annulling of Erections, and other Dispositions of whatsoever Lands, Tiends, Patronages, and Benefices, formerly belonging to the Kirk, and since annex'd to the Crown, and of any other Lands, or Patro∣nages, which should any way justly belong to the Kirk, or Crown, and of whatsoever Lands and Benefices mortifi'd, and devouted to pious Uses; and of Regalities; and Heretable Offices; and of the change of holdings, from the ancient holding of Ward and Relief, to blench and Taxt Ward, since the year of God 1540. years. The Earl of Southesk having Right to the Muire of Montromant, as Heretable Forrester, intented a Declarator against the adjacent Heretors, concluding that they should be debar'd from Pasturing therein. Against which it being alleadg'd, 1. That they had pre∣scriv'd the right of Pasturage. It was Reply'd, that the Prescription was interrupted by this Act. To which it being Duply'd, that this edictal Interruption was introduc'd without a Warrant, the Act 1617. having allow'd thirteen years for the Subjects to interrupt, without any Reservation in favours of the King. 2. This is neither His Majesties annext Property, nor is it a part of that un-annext Property, whereof the Ferms, or Feu-duties have been counted for in Exchequer, since the year 1455. and so the interruption which is restricted to these, reaches not to this case. 3. This Pasturage is but a Servitude, and this Interruption ex∣tends only to Alienations, but not to Servitudes, or things of so small moment. To which it was Triply'd, that as to the first, there was no necessity that there should have been a Reservation in favours of the King, by the Act 1617. since the King not being mention'd in the Act, which was the Rule; There was no necessity to re∣serve His Right by way of exception; but this Act of Parliament has supply'd that want, though there had been an omission in that Act. To the second, it was Triply'd, That the interruption 1633. being to secure His Majesty against Prescriptions, upon the Act 1617. It was just that it should extend as far as the Act 1617. And these words, Whereof the Ferms have been Compted for in Ex∣chequer, are only Demonstrative, and not Taxative; the compt∣ing in Exchequer being only a publick Evidence of His Majesties Right; and therefore, where there were other publick Eviden∣ces of His Majesties Right, as strong as this His Majesties interrupti∣on
by this Act, behov'd to take place, else it should not extend to secure His Majesty, as to any thing, for which there were blench, or Ward-hol∣dings; This Act mentioning only Feu-ferms; it should not extend to His Majesties Castles, or other things, for which he gets no advantage. 3. This has been compted for, in so far as the Sheriff compts for the Blench-duties; and Southesk payes Blench-duties for his Forrest. 4. By an Act of Parliament in King Davids time, 1357. and another 1367. All the Kings Forrestries are ordain'd not to be Dis∣pon'd without consent of Parliament, and so are to be lookt upon as a part of the annext Property. To the third it was Duply'd, That this Act, as the Act 1617. was to be extended to Prescripti∣ons; and there were things of less consequence than Servitudes secur'd against by this Act, such as change of holdings, Patronages, &c. This case is not decided. The reason why this Act restricts it self in this Clause to the year 1455. is, because in that year was the first Act for annexing any Property to the Crown, viz. The 41 Act Par. 11 Ja. 2. It being alleadg'd upon this Act, that the King behov'd to pro∣duce the Letters of Publication at the several Mercat Crosses, and the Executions thereof, else His Majesty could not have the bene∣fite of the Interruption. It was answered, That the Act of Se∣derunt of the Session, did indeed appoint Letters of Publication; but two years after that Act, this Act of Parliament was made, allowing the King this Interruption, wherein the Parliament did certainly consider the Publication, as having preceeded, & statuit lex hoc casu super praesumpto, and so the Letters of Publication and Extentions, need not now be produc'd; Which Answer the Lords found Relevant, November 1682. Sir William Ker contra Grubet and others. Interruption being thus made by the King, does last for fourty years, so that no Prescription can run against the King, till four∣ty years after the date of this Act; and that though the Executions and publication required by this Act of Parliament, cannot be found, for every particular Shire: It may be likewise doubted, whether Prescription should run against the King, whilst he was out of the Countrey: For which, vid. observ. on the Act of Pre∣scription 1617. ACT 13:BY this Act, the Parliament Rescinds all Rights of Regality made by King Charles, King James, or Queen Mary, belonging to Abbots, Priors, or any Benefic'd person; re∣serving alwise to the Heretable Baillies, and Stewarts of the saids Regalities and Stewartries; their Rights granted to them, prior to the saids Erections; for ordinarly even when these Regalities were in Benefic'd persons own hands, they made Heretable Bail∣lies;
but I confess, I understand not what is mean'd by the Stew∣art of a Regality; for Stewartries and Regalities are distinct and inconsistent Jurisdictions; a Stewart being a Judge in the Kings Property only, having the same power that a Lord of Regality has of the Lands Erected in the Regality holding of himself, and the Lands holding of him: But this Act has in this follow'd the words of the Act of Annexation 1587. By the Act of Annexation 1587. Act 29. All Regalities belong∣ing to Arch-bishops, and Bishops, were thereby Annex'd, because their whole Lands and Temporalities were then Annex'd; but being restor'd in anno 1606. their Regalities are hereby reserv'd to them. UPon the Submission and Surrender made by the Lords of Erection, and other Titulars,ACT 14. it is condescended to by this Act, That His Majesty shall remain, not only Superiour to the Lords of Erection, but even to all the Vassals, who held for∣merly of any Abbacy, Priory, or other Benefice Erected; and therefore, by vertue of this Act, they may hold of the King, if they please, but according to an express condition in the surren∣der it self; there is by this Act reserv'd to the Lords and Titulars of Erection, who subscrived this Surrender, the Feu-mails and Feu-ferms due by their Vassals, ay and till the King pay to the saids Lords and Titulars of Erection, a thousand merks for ilk Chalder, or an hundreth merks of Feu-duty, payable to them, for there is no∣thing allow'd to them for the Service of Tennents; Though the Lords of Erection did not expresly reserve to themselves the Casu∣alities that might fall to them by their Vassals, during the not Re∣demption, for they reserv'd only their Feu-mails, and Feu-ferms; since inclusio unus seems to be exclusio alterius; and the Superiority being by this Act declar'd to belong to the King, the Casuality should follow the Superiority; yet by a Decision, the 24 of July 1632. The Lords found, that the Lords and Titu∣lars of Erection, had Right to the Casualities of these Superiori∣ties, ay and till they be Redeem'd; but by the 30 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. It is declared, That the Feuars shall be bound to make payment of their Feu-ferms and Duties contained in their Infestments, to the Lords of Erection, ay and till they be Redeemed; but it is not clear whether Escheat and Non-entry will belong to the King, or Feuars, except it be comprehended under the general word Duties. Though the Feu-mails and Feu-ferms be reserv'd to such Lords and Titulars of Erection, as subscriv'd the Surrender, so that it may seem necessary to prove that these who seek Feu-duties, did sub∣scrive, or else that these should belong to the King: yet be∣cause the Surrender cannot be found, the Lords found it suffici∣ent, that the Titular acknowledg'd the Kings Right, conform to
this Act: But they found that they had not Right to the Arrages and Carrages of these Kirk-lands, because by this Act, all the Rents and Duties are Declar'd to belong to the King, and the Reservation in favours of the Superiour, is only of Feu-duties, if they found no abatement of the Feu-duty, in respect of Vastations, since the Feu-duties were small, and the Feuar might have gain'd by prior and subsequent years, June 27. 1662. Watson contra Elleis. Because the Superiorities of these Kirk-lands, is by Act declar'd to belong to the King; therefore the Lords of Erection cannot pursue a Reduction of these Feus; nor is the concourse of His Majesties Advocat sufficient, except there be an express Warrand under the Kings Hand for that effect. Albeit it be uncontroverted by this Act, that the King has no right to the Feu-mails, and Feu-ferms, due by the Vassals of Erecti∣on, until he redeem the same, as said is; yet it may be doubted, whether the King has Right to the Feu-mails, and Feu-ferms of the Lands, which pertain'd in property to the Lords of Erection, be∣fore the said Surrender, and which were mentioned in the old In∣festments, before the date of the Erection, and that without pay∣ing for the saids Feu-ferms, and redeeming them as said is, as he is oblig'd to do in the case of the Feu-ferms, due by the Vassals of Erection: and it may be urg'd for the Lords of Erection, that the King has not right to the Feu-ferms of their proper Lands, ex∣cept he Redeem them; And that because, 1. The Act of Parlia∣ment is relative to the Submission made by the Lords of Erection, whereupon the Act proceeds; but so it is, that by the Submissi∣on, they resign the Superiorities, reserving only to themselves the Feu-duties, till they receive satisfaction; but it is expresly provid∣ed, that under this Resignation, their proper Lands should not be comprehended, but that they should hold the same of His Majesty, as the same was holden before the date of the Erection; and so the meaning is, that though they should hold the same in Feu, yet they should not be oblig'd to pay the Feu-duties, till they receive satisfaction. 2. It were absurd that the Lords of Erection should not quite the Feu-duties of their Vassals, till they receiv'd satisfaction; and yet they should be oblig'd to quite the Feu-duties of their own pro∣portion, in which they had far more interest, than in the Lands of their Vassals, without any satisfaction. 3. Custom is the best Interpreter of Law, and by the general Custom of the Nation, the Lords of Erection have never counted for the Feu-duties of their proper Lands. 4. There being a Reservation made in the first part of the Act, of the Feu-duties only in case of payment; The Reservation in the second part of the Act, must in Annalogie of Law be construct∣ed to be burden'd with the same quality, except the contrary were expresly declar'd in the Act. but on the other side it may be more
strongly urg'd for the King, that he has Right to the Feu-ferms of these their proper Lands immediatly, without any satisfaction, and that for these reasons; 1. Because by the Act of Parliament, they are expresly to hold their proper Lands of the King, and to pay him the Feu-duties mentioned in the old Infestments, without any Clause obliging the King to make satisfaction; Ergo, The King is not oblig'd. 2. The Parliament having had that Reservation, of making satisfaction under their view, in the case of the Vassals, they had certainly renew'd it in the immediat subsequent case of the proper∣ty, if they had not expresly design'd the contrary. 3. By the Charters granted under the Great Seal, to the saids Lords of Erection, since the Surrender, and this Act of Parliament, they are expresly by different reddendo's made lyable, both to the general blench Duty, due for the whole Lands of the Erection, both Property and Superiority, and for the Feu-dutie of their own proper Lands: Ergo, This Feu-duty of their proper Lands, is due by their Charter, which is a Feudal Contract, and that without any Reservation of payment. 4. The blench-duty of the Erection, and this Feu-duty is due upon different accounts: Ergo, The payment of the Blench-duty is not sufficient; for the Blench-duty is due by the Lords of Ere∣ction, for the interest that they have in the Vassals Lands, and for the Tiends, and for the property that was Feu'd the time of the Erection: Whereas this Feu-duty is due only for their own pro∣per Lands Feu'd out before the Erection. And to the contrary Objections it may be answered, That Acts of Parliament are not to be extended de casu in casum, especially in such favourable Cases as this, which tends most ungrately to take from the King a part of that which himself gave freely. 2. There was very good Reason why they should be lyable to pay the Feu-duties of their proper Lands, without any satisfacti∣on; because the King having rais'd a Reduction of all the saids Erecti∣ons; The Lords of Erection did Redeem themselves from the hazard of this Plea, by this surrender; and the reason why the quality of satisfaction was adjected, as to the Vassals, and not as to the pro∣perty, was, because the Lords of Erection had no interest in their Vassals Lands, but the Feu-duties; and so it was fit they should get a satisfaction for these; though the satisfaction was made easie for the King: But as to their proper Lands, it was just, be∣cause of the great advantage they had by them; and that they were by this Act secur'd in the property of them. It was just that the King should get the Feu-duties without any acknowledgement; and without this the King had got nothing for securing them, when he might have with Success quarrell'd their Rights; And the pretence of the Vassals, not having pay'd these Feu-duties, for their pro∣per
Lands formerly, is of no import, since the negligence of the Kings Officers cannot prejudge him; and the Times were Rebelli∣ous, since the year 1633. Nor is this true, though it were Rele∣vant; for the Earls of Roxburgh, and others have pay'd. Because these Arguments and Difficulties gave some Colour to the Lords of Erection, to think that they were not lyable, therefore they us'd to get ease as to bygones; but they are made lyable still for the future, in the payment of these Feu-duties. The Superiorities belonging to Bishops and their Chapters, is re∣serv'd to secure them against the Annexation, 1597. and their Su∣periorities, are likewise reserv'd from the Annexation mention'd in the tenth Act of this Parliament. Some think it fit for His Majesties Interest, that these Superiori∣ties should be Redeem'd; for he might thereby have a great and sure Revenue, and a great dependence of Vassals; and it seems also fit for the interest of the poor Vassals. ACT 15.HIs Majesty having oblig'd so far the Heretors, as to get them the leading of their own Teinds, It was thought fit by this Act, to give him some small interest in the Teinds, viz. Out of every Teind-boll of the best Wheat, ten shilling; of the best Tiend-bear, eight shilling; of the Teind-meal, Oats, Pease, and Ry, six shilling; and where the Oats will not render half Meal, three shil∣ling. Where the Victual was of inferiour goodness, power is granted to the Commissioners to modifie accordingly, and in order thereto, they did proportion the price on the several Shires, which stands as a rule in the payment of Annuity to this day: Though it be said in this Act, that the Annuities shall be pay'd out of all Teinds, ex∣cept the Teinds pay'd to Bishops, Ministers, Colledges, Hospitals, and other pious uses; yet it was thought, January 3 1632. Ren∣ton contra Ker. Though there was no formal Decision, that de∣cimae inclusae, are lyable in payment of no Annuity, for they did not belong to the Titular, nor needed the Heretor buy them, in contemplation of which Liberty, this Annuity is granted, and in effect they are likewise lookt upon as incorporat with the Stock, and participating of its Nature. This Annuity was found to be made debitum fundi by this Act of Parliament, and so to oblige all singular Successors; because the Act says generally, that the King shall have Right to all the Annuity bypast, and to come, though it be not expresly declar∣ed, that singular Successors shall be obliged, as our Law ordi∣narly uses to do, when it resolves to make any thing debitum fundi.
It is Declar'd by this Act, That Annuity shall not be annex'd to the Crown, whereby the Crown got a great prejudice, since thereby the King would have oblig'd every man to a Dependance upon him; whereas Commissions having been granted to sell to every man his own Annuity, the King made no advantage thereby. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in Act 71 Par. 14 Ja. 2.ACT 16. BY this Act it is Declar'd, That every man shall have the leading of his own Teind, the Teinds being first valued;ACT 17. and all Teinds in Scotland may be valu'd, except 1. Where the Lands are Feu'd, cumdecimis inclu∣sis and Confirm'd before the year 1589. as was found, January 21. 1631 2. Teinds belonging to Ecclesiastick Persons, and whereof they were in possession the time of the Submission, as is clear by the foresaid Determination upon their Submission, conform to which by the 9 Act 2 Sess. 1 Par. Ch. 2. All Valuations led against the Bishops, or Benefic'd Persons, being Ministers, since the year 1637. of any Teinds, Parsonage, and Viccarage, wherein they were in pos∣session by Leading, or drawing of Rental-bolls, are declar'd null; but by a Letter the 13. of May 1634. It is declar'd, that where such Teinds are set by Bishops, or Benefic'd persons to Tacks-men, that eo casu the Heretors shall have the buying of their own Teinds, but prejudice to the Bishop, &c. to enjoy the same after expira∣tion of the Tacks, as they were accustomed; the benefic'd per∣sons always having the prerogative of buying, if he pleas'd, and this to be extended to the Heretors, and Tacks-man of the Teinds of Laick-patrons. And conform to this, the Lords of the Commission decided, February 1679. Hamilton contra Earl of Rox∣burgh; though it was there alleadg'd, that this would prejudge Church-men, since it would discourage Laicks to take Tacks from them at due Rates: but Teinds holden of Collegiat Kirks, are subject to buying and selling, as other Teinds, the 3. of Febru∣ary 1632. Though it would appear by this Act, that every man shall on∣ly have the Leading, and Drawing of his own Teind, after the same is valu'd, since the Act sayes, the same being first truly and lawfully valued: Yet if the Heretor intent a Pursuit for Valuati∣on, he will, during the Dependence, get liberty to lead his own Teinds, if he offer Caution to pay his Teinds, conform to the Va∣luation that shall be led, July 14. 1630. But this benefit of leading is only granted to Heretors, by the the foresaid Act; and therefore no Liferent Tacks-man hath this be∣nefit, except the Liferent be Constitute, by Infestment of Conjunct-fee, or the like, November 30. 1631.
Neither can Rentallers, or Tennents crave this benefit, ex eodem capie, March 8. 1630. It is only granted likewise to such He∣retors, whose Teinds were drawn before, but not to these who pay'd Rental-bolls, July 24. 1635. And yet the contrary is found the 3. of July 1643, But the Heretor may have the leading of his own Teinds, though he does not instruct a publick Infeftment, if he shew that he is not in mora, to be Infest, and that he is the person who should be Infest, July 6. 1642. But the Teinds be∣longing to Church-men, whereof they were in possession the time of the Submission, are not to be led upon Caution; and yet by a Missive the 9. of May 1634. His Majesty declares His Favour not to be extended to their Tacks-men, being Laicks; but that du∣ring these Tacks, the Heretor may lead, he finding Caution, as said is. By the Submission, the Decreets following thereupon, and the express words of this Act, Ministers are to be provided before the He∣retors have liberty to buy, or value; and therefore the Titular may allocat what Teinds he pleases, towards the Maintainance of the Minister; and the Heretor eo casu cannot force the Titular to sell, February 17. 1645. But though the Kirk be not provided, yet the Heretor may buy his Teinds, if he be content to undergo his part of the augmentation when it shall be granted, the 20. of Ja∣nuary 1645. Earl of Hadington contra the Laird of Bairfuird. So that it appears, that albeit a Titular may assign any one mans whole Teinds towards the Ministers Maintainance, when there is no pre∣sent provision; yet if there be any, though it be small, he may not; but the same should burthen proportionally, the whole free Teinds of the Paroch, where there is a present provision, and where the Teinds are once bought, the Heretor will not be bur∣dened, as long as there is any Tack-duties free in the Titulars hands, February 15. 1643. But the Tacks-man will not be found lyable in the said Relief, January 27. 1635. But if there be no free Teinds in his hand, then the Buyers, and all the He∣retors must be burdened with the augmentation, January 16. 1635. It seems that the Titular cannot assign the Teinds of one Paroch for paying the Stipend of another; For by this Act it is said, That the Teinds shall be burdened with the Stipend of the Minister serving the Cure of the Kirk: But the Commission allocats sometimes the Teinds of one Paroch, to make up a Stipend to the adjacent Pa∣roch, if the Minister of the Paroch, out of which the free Teinds are allocated, be competently provided; for the Commission thinks the Teinds, as the Spirituality of the Church, to be burdenable in ge∣neral; and yet if this argument prove any thing, it will prove there can be no free Teinds as long as there is any Minister in Scot∣land unprovided competently.
BY this Act the Exchequer is Declar'd a Soveraign Court, and power is given them to pass, and discuss Suspensions,ACT 18. and to Decern in all things concerning His Majesties Property, and all things concerning the Annuities of Teind, which was the particular reason of making this Act at this time; but because of this Act giving them power to decide every thing relating to the Proper∣ty; therefore by the 59 Act Par. 1 Sess. Ch. 2. It is declared, that the deciding concerning the validity, and invalidity of Infestments, shall only belong to the Session. And whereas this Act allows the Ex∣chequer only to proceed in things relating to His Majesties Pro∣perty and others depending thereon, that Act declares they have liberty to judge in all things relating to His Majesties Rents and Ca∣sualities, as they might have done before the year 1633. And it being doubted, whether the Lords of the Session were Judges competent to the Discussing Suspensions, rais'd against the Custom∣ers, by the Masters of Manufactories, who pretended, that as to goods imported for the use of their Manufactories, they were free from Custom; the Lords did justly determine, that thogh the Exchequer were only Judges Competent to Discuss Suspensions, as to Customs, or any part of His Majesties Revenue, where the same were due by a clear Law, or constant use of payment; yet the Lords of the Session were Judges Competent to clear what was due by Law, and to interpret Acts of Parliament. Nota, The Act of Parliament alleadg'd to be made upon the 22. of May 1584. Concerning the Exchequer, Ratifi'd by this Act, can neither be found amongst the Printed, nor the Un-print∣ed Acts. Though by vertue of this Clause, and a Letter from His Maje∣sty, It is declar'd That the Exchequer are Judges competent to liqui∣dat Wards and Marriages, and that the Exchequer has decided in some such cases; Yet regulariter, the Session are only Judges Com∣petent to such Actions; and albeit the Session be only Judges Competent to Contravention of Law-borrows; yet after the Con∣travention is Decided in His Majesties favours, if the party, against whom the Decreet is obtain'd, Suspend the same, the Charge be∣ing at His Majesties Instance, it ought only to be Judg'd by the Exchequer, that being a Casuality already stated, and the point of Law being already determin'd; although it be alleadg'd, that this being a Suspension of the Lords of the Sessions Decreet, it should only be Discuss'd before them ob continentiam causae. Though by the 25. Act Par. 16. Ja. 6. It is appointed, that all Hornings henorth Dee, shall be upon no less than fifteen Dayes; Yet that is to be restricted, as has been there observ'd in Cases before the Council; for by this Act, all Charges of Execution before the Exchequer, are to be upon twenty dayes upon the North-side of Dee, and ten days upon the South-side of Dee.
THis Act is the first Commission granted for valuing of Teinds, conform to the Surrender,ACT 19. and Decreets Arbitral pronunc∣ed thereupon; which Commission is renew'd in several subsequent Parliaments: And for clearing somewhat of The Form of Process before that Court; it is fit to know, that all Dyets before the Com∣mission, are with Continuation; and because of their uncertain sit∣ting, there needs no Wakening; all Procurators appearing before them, should have Written Warrands, but this is not in obser∣vance; but consents by Advocats must be subscribed by Advocats, else Decreets given thereupon are null, July 20. 1664. And Exe∣cutions are sufficient by a Sheriff in that part, July 10. 1643. and there∣upon the Defender will be holden pro confesso. The Commissioners did of old, appoint Sub-commissioners in every Presbytry, who were to be chosen by the Presbytry it self, and five to be a quorum, for trying the Valuation of every mans Teinds, and before them Process were intented at the instance of the Procurator-fiscal, or the Heretors; and their Reports being return'd to the Commission, were allow'd. The Injunctions given to them, then were, That none should be Witnesses before them who were not worth an hundred Pounds of free Gear; that such as dwell within the Presbytry should be Cited upon ten days; and such as were without it, upon twenty; that the Depositions should be Subscriv'd by the most part of the Sub-commissioners, and the Clerk; and when any man would make use of anothers Servant, as a Witness, that the Master should produce him upon his hazard; that where both used Probation, not the greatest number, but the clearest Deponers should be prefer'd; and no Witnesses to be receiv'd but only ten for each Party, which was thereafter Expon'd to be ten for each Room, July 18. 1634. The Probation is oft-times allow'd to both Parties in this Court, and where it is single, it is call'd The Prerogative of Probation, and is much contended for; Wherefore it is thus regulated, viz. ei∣ther the Teinds are drawn ipsa corpora, by Titular, or Tacks-man, and then they have the sole Probation allow'd them, to prove what the Teinds were worth, they proving that they led seven years of fifteen before the year 1628. And though after so long a time, this can∣not be proven; Yet the proving immemorial Possession is found equivalent; or else they have Rental-bolls pay'd them, & eo casu they have the sole probation likewise, they proving twenty years possession, of uplifting Rental-bolls, condescending upon the quan∣tity, and quality: Or in the third case, the Heretor has Tacks of their own Teinds, for payment of Silver-Duty: and then there is joynt Probation allow'd, both to Heretor and Titular; albeit the Heretor have the benefit of a Conjunct Probation; Yet he may refer the worth to the Titulars Oath, before Witnesses be receiv'd, but not after, February 21. 1623. but where the Titu∣lar
has the sole Probation, the Heretor cannot eo casu lead any Pro∣bation of the Stock, except it be for certification, id est, except where the Heretor summons the Titular, who was in possession of Drawing of the Teind, to prove the worth thereof, with Certifi∣cation to him, if he appear not, the Heretor will prove the worth of the Stock, quo casu the fourth part is Declar'd to be Teind, February 19. 1634. and February 24. 1643. Where the Stock and Teind are valu'd joyntly, the Teinds are made the fifth part; but where the Titular and Tacks-man has the sole Probation, the Heretor has the fifth part down, as the Kings Ease; and there∣fore where the Titular takes a Dyet for proving of the Teind by it self, the Heretor may take the same Dyet to prove the Stock, that in case the Heretor fail, he may have the Kings Ease, July 8 1642. Where there is joynt probation of Stock and Teind, the present Rent should be proven, as well as the Rent in all time coming, else the same is null, January 19. 1631. There are two Dyets granted for probation in this Court; and if the first be not made use of, the Term may be circumduc'd, and the second will not be granted, February 2. 1643. and though Diligence be Extracted after the Dyet; yet if it be Extracted be∣fore the other party crave the Term to be circumduc'd, the same will be sustain'd, November 22. 1634. By this Act also it is Declar'd, That where Valuations are law∣fully led against all Parties having interest, and allow'd, they shall not be call'd in question at the Instance of the Minister, not be∣ing Titular; nor at the instance of His Majesties Advocat, for His Annuity, except the Collusion be proven, to have been to the Diminution of the third of the just Rent presently pay'd; and therefore all Reductions upon this head, are at the instance of His Majesties Advocat; but it may be doubted, whether His Majesty has any interest, where the party has bought his own Annuity; though it may be alleadg'd, that even in that case, the Decreet is Reduceable, together with the Alienation founded thereupon, if subsequent to the Decreet, because the Exchequer has sold upon a mistake, occasioned by the Collusion, albeit regulariter with us, Venditions are not quarrellable, as in the Civil Law, though made infra dimidium. By this Clause it is likewise Declar'd, that this Collusion shall be probable by the parties Oaths, and thereupon it has been doubted, whether this Clause be Exclusive of other probation, and in Mel∣drums case against Tolquhon, before the Commission in January 1672. It was found, that a Decreet of Valuation might be Reduced upon this Clause, if it were proven by Witnesses that the valuation was led far within the third of what the Teinds were then worth. THese Acts are but Temporary.ACT 20 & 21.
ACT 23.BY this Act the Liberties of the Colledge of Justice are restricted to the Senators of the Colledge of Justice; and this is the first time that the Senators of the Colledge of Justice were divided from the other Mem∣bers; but thereafter the priviledges of the Senators are Communi∣cated to Advocats, Writers, and others, by the 23 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. vid. observ. on that Act. ACT 24.THis Act anent the priviledges of Royal Burrows, is innovated by, and therefore shall be Explain'd in the 5 Act 3 Sess. 2 Par. Ch. 2. ACT 25.THis Act gives a very large Commission to the Lords of Secret Council, to grant to the Justices of Peace, and Constables, what∣ever power the Parliament could have granted them; but this be∣ing in effect but a Commission, may be alleadg'd to expire with the King and Parliament who gave it, as all Mandats last no longer than the Mandator; and the power being given to the Privy Council inde∣finitly, without adding, for the time being; it may be urg'd, that it could last no longer than that Commission of Council; and from this many new doubts may be started, which shall be elsewhere consi∣dered; but however the Council does still grant Instructions by vertue of this Act. ACT 26.THis Act impowering the Lords of Session to exact 12 pennies of the pound of all sums decern'd by them is now obsolet. ACT 28.THis Act concerning the priviledges of Baronets, is fully Ex∣plain'd in my Treatise of Precedency; but from this Act it is observable that the Convention of Estates have been in use to Ratifie and approve general Orders granted concerning Honours; though it be generally believ'd, that the Convention of Estates can only grant voluntary Taxations, and nothing else; and I formerly ob∣serv'd that they were in use to regulate the Mint also. ACT 29.VId. observ. on Act 13 Par. 18 Ja. 6. THough by this Act the Clangrigor were abolish'd, and they ordain'd to alter their sirname,ACT 30. because of their bangstry; yet because of their good Services done to His Majesty, during the late Rebellion, they were restor'd in anno 1661. It has been always believ'd, that no Clan or Family can change its sir∣name in Scotland, without express Act of Parliament, or Act of Council; for that might occasion great confusion, and might be a ground of cheating the people in their Evidents and securities. But any privat man may, as we see daily in Tailies; and it does not follow, that be∣cause the Parliament only can force men to change their sirname, that therefore they cannot do it voluntarly themselves. ACT 31.BY this Act it is expresly declar'd, that because particular Acts of Parliament, and Acts of Ratification, are made without hearing
of Parties, that therefore the Lords of Session shall Judge in these cases, without respect to those Acts, according to the privat interests of parties. The immediat occasion of making this Act, was the case betwixt John Stuart of Coldinghame and the Earl of Hume, which was this. The Earl of Bothwel having been Forefaulted, the Priory of Col∣dinghame was Dispon'd by the King to the Earl of Hume, which Earl of Hume, set in Tack a-part of the Teinds of the said Priory, to the Laird of Wedderburn, but thereafter the Earl of Hume having entred in a Transaction with John Stuart, Son to the Earl of Bothwel, he suffers by Collusion, a Decreet of Parliament to pass in anno 1621. whereby John Stuart was not only re-habilitat as to his Blood, but the Forefaulture Rescinded, in so far as concerned his Right to the Pri∣ory of Coldinghame, upon a pretext that he had a commendam of it settled in his person, before his Father was Forefaulted, whereup∣on Dowglass of Evelaw, pursuing the Laird of Wedderburn for a Spuil∣zie of Teinds in anno 1627. he obtains a Decreet, notwithstanding of very unanswerable grounds, then alleadg'd; because the Lords of the Session would not call in question the Act of Parliament 1621. Notwithstanding of the Act salvo subjoyn'd to the Acts of that Par∣liament; for the Lords found, that the Session as an inferiour Judi∣cature, could not canvass special Acts of Parliament; but because the Subjects might be extreamly prejudg'd in their privat Rights by such Acts of Parliament; therefore the foresaid Claus was inserted in this Act, and that it might extend to this Case, though anterior it is expresly declar'd in this Act, that this was the meaning of all for∣mer Acts Salvo; and accordingly the Lords of the Session did in February 1679. Repone the Laird of Wedderburn to Debate upon his just Rights, notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament 1621. By this Act several privat Rights and Ratifications, are except∣ed from this Act salvo; But since the Act salvo proceeds upon the principal of natural Reason and Justice, it seems that even these Excep∣tions are questionable, for else the Act salvo should signifie nothing; For these who had the interest to obtain privat Acts of Parliament, would likewise have the interest to get them excepted from the Act salvo; and upon this Reason it was doubted, and not Decided, whether Exceptions from the Act salvo, made in privat Rights, though not repeated in the Act salvo, were sufficient to secure these Rights against the Act salvo; for though it might be alleadg'd, that in these there is a speciality from this case, since the Act salvo being posteri∣or, and simple, Annuls and Derogats from the former Reservati∣on; yet even there it may be alleadg'd, that it cannot derogat, since in the former special Act, the Parliament Declar'd their spe∣cial Inclination, that it should not Derogat. Nota, The Act salvo jure is never Voted in Parliament, because it is but an Act in Course; and for the same Reason, Ratifica∣tions are not Voted now, since no man can be concern'd in either; albeit of old, I find that Ratifications were past in Parliament
in the form of decreets, and so must have been voted; but it seems strange, why Acts for granting of Mercats, and Imposing Customs for the maintaining of Bridges, should not be Voted: And in the Parliament 1681. The Reports of the Articles thereof, as to these, past the last Dy, without being Voted, which was oppos'd by some as irregular; because there the consent of some parts of the Nation was requi∣site. But I conceive, that this likewise proceeded from the nu∣merousness of the things that were brought in, and the general acquiescence of the Members, and the time they were to sit being so short, and it seems securer to settle these by a vote.
K. CHARLES II. Parliament I. Session first. ALbeit KING CHARLES the Second did hold a Parlia∣ment at Saint-Iohnstoun, in anno 1650. yet this Parliament, being the first after His Majesties hap∣py Restauration, is by the Inscription, Intituled, The First Parliament of KING CHARLES the Second; though that Parliament 1650. is not Rescinded by the general Act Rescissory, which is the fifteenth Act of this Parliament; Nor by any other special Act: And so that Parliament stands still in force, so that this Inscription seems unwarrantable. THe Rebellious Parliaments in the former age,ACT 1. did choose their own President, though the Chancellour ought to have presided in all Courts, as is insinuated by the 40 Act Par. 5 Ja. 5. but this they did, to have the President of Parliament Depend upon Them, and not upon the King; and therefore by this Act it is Declar'd that the Chancellour is ratione officii, to preside in all publick Judicatures where he is present.
Observ. 1. That this Act says, That the Lord Chancellour, and such as shall be nominated by His Majesty, shall preside; and there∣fore if the King please, He may Nominat another President, though the Chancellour be present: And I find that His Majesty has Nominated others to preside where the Chancellour was pre∣sent. Obser. 2. That though (when the Chancellour is absent) His Majesty can only Nominat another President; Yet this does not exclude His Majesties High Commissioner from the power of Nominating a President, since he has mandatum cum libera; and Middleton did Nominat the Earl of Crawfurd to preside in this Parliament, when Glencairn, then Chancellour, went to London. Observ. 3. That the Chancellour is to preside, not only in the Parliament, but in all other publick Judicatures; and therefore though it was pretended by the Thesaurer, that notwithstanding of this Act, the Chancellour could not preside in Exchequer, though he was named in the Commission; Because the Exchequer was rather the Kings Chamberlains Court, than a publick Judicature, in which the Thesaurer was chiefly intrusted, because he was chiefly to be answerable; yet this pretence was groundless, since the Exche∣quer is a Judicature which Hears, and Discusses Causes, relating to the Revenue, and is Declar'd a Judicature by the 18 Act Par. 1 Ch. 1. But by a Letter in anno 1663. The Chancellour is Dis∣charg'd to preside in Exchequer; and this shws his innate power to dispense with Acts of Parliament, which relate only to Govern∣ment, and His own Service. Observ. 4. That though by vertue of this Act, it may be pre∣tended that the Chancellour may preside in the Justice, or Admi∣ral Court, if he pleases to be present; Yet I conceive he cannot come to any of these Courts, without a special Nomination: and even this Act says, That the Chancellour, and such as shall be nomi∣nat by His Majesty, shall preside. This Act likewise sets down the Oath of Allegiance, wherein the King is acknowledg'd to be Supream over all Persons, and in all Causes; which is founded upon the 2 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. and is the foundation of the Act of Supremacy; which is the first Act of the 2 Par. Ch. 2. ACT 2.THe Parliament 1641. had taken from the King, the Nomi∣nation of the Officers of State, Counsellours and Judges; and therefore by this Act, the power of Nominating these, Is de∣clar'd to be a part of the Kings Royal Prerogative, which is conform to the Law of all Nations, l. unica. ff. ad l. Jul. de ambitu▪ haec Lex ho∣die in urbe cessat quia ad curam Principis Magistratuum creatio pertinet non ad populi favorem: By this Act also, It is Declar'd that our Kings hold their Royal Power over this Kingdom from God; which was exprest here, to condemn that fundamental Treason of the last age, which Taught, That the King was subject to His People, be∣cause,
He Deriv'd His Power from Them: And from that they infer'd their power of Reforming; and at last, of Deposing the King. But lest it might have been obtruded, that though by this Act it be Declar'd, That the King holds His Power from God alone; Yet the holding it from God, did not exclude the Interest of the People; for all Men hold of God, whatever they hold of others: Therefore by the 5 Act of this Parliament, It is Declar'd, that our Kings hold their Crowns from God Almighty alone: and lest it might still have been said, That though the King holds His Power of God, yet he Derives His Power from His People; Therefore the Convention of Estates in their Letter to the King, 1678. and the Estates of Parliament, in the 2 Act 3 Par. Ch. 2. anno 1681. Acknowledge, That He Derives His Power from God alone: And though Conventions of Estates cannot make Laws; yet it may be said, that they may Declare and Acknow∣ledge their Obedience as fully as Parliaments may. Observ. That these words, To hold the Crown from God, is ill exprest; For by our Law, He that Holds from Me, Holds not of Me; for a me & de me are Diametrically opposit in matters of Holdings. THe former Rebellious Parliaments,ACT 3. especially the Conventi∣on of Estates, 1643. Did Sit without a special Warrand from His Majesty; and therefore by this Act, The Power of Cal∣ling, Holding, Proroging, and Dissolving of Parliaments, is Declar'd to be Inherent only in His Majestie, as a part of His Royal Prerogative; and therefore the 6 Act of this Parliament, annulling in special Terms the said Convention, 1643. was unnecessary. I conceive that the word Proroguing here, is us'd for Adjourn∣ment only, though the Word in its property signifies only to Ad∣journ, so as to make all the Overtures past in that Session, to be null, which distinction is unknown to, and unnecessary with us. The Impungers, or Contraveeners of this Act, are Declar'd by this Act guilty of Treason. BY this the former Acts against Convocations, and Leagues,ACT 4. or Bonds, are Ratifi'd, and Discharg'd under the pain of Sediti∣on; and the keeping of all Assemblies and Meetings, upon pre∣tence of preserving the Kings Majesty, or for the publick good, are declar'd unlawful, notwithstanding of these Glosses, except in the ordinary Judicatures. The Design of which Act was occasioned by, and levelled against such Meetings, as the Green Tables in anno 1637. Whereat the Nobility and Gentry did formally meet in great numbers, though their Papers did alwise begin; We the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others occasionally met at Edin∣burgh.
ACT 5.THe former Rebellious Parliaments having rais'd Armies, For∣tifi'd Garisons, and Treated with the French King, with∣out the Authority of their own King; It is therefore declar'd by this Act, That the Power of making Peace and War Resides solly in His Majesty; and that to Rise, or Continue in Arms, or to make any Treaties, or Leagues with Forraign Princes, or amongst themselves, shall be Treason. Observ. 1. That by this Act the King is Declar'd to have the on∣ly power of Raising Armies, and making Garrisons, the Subjects alwayes being free of the Provision, and Maintainance of these Forts and Armies; and therefore it was asserted, that free Quar∣ter, except in the Case of actual Rebellion▪ was unlawful, and that even then it behov'd to be warranted by a Parliament, or Convention, though it seems, that Rebellions may be so sudden, or Parliaments and Conventions so dangerous, that free Quarter may be warranted by the Kings own Authority in cases of necessity; and if any part of Scotland should rise in Rebellion, it is not imaginable that they will either give Quarter for Pay, or deserve to be pay'd; and so to refuse the King the Power of free Quar∣tering, without Parliament, or Convention, in that case were to deny Him the Power of raising an Army, without which it cannot be maintain'd. But free Quarter is expresly Discharg'd by the 3 Act Par. 3 Ch. 2. Observ. 2. Some likewise think by this Clause, that though the King may force Towns, and adjacent Countreys, to carry Baggage and Ammunition of His Souldiers, the publick Good so requiring; yet He must pay them for it; since by this Act, the King is to pay for the Provisions, as well as Maintainance of the Army, and to take away Countrey-mens-horses without pay, is as great a Tax upon them, as Free-quarter: But yet our Kings have still been in use, by immemorial Possession, to exact such Carriage without pay∣ment; and so the only Doubt remains, Whether this Act Inno∣vats the former Custom? And whether the Subjects, not seeking payment, being merae facultatis, prescrives against them, jus non petendi? Observ. 3. It has been controverted, Whether though by this Act the King may Dispose upon all Forts, Strengths, and Gari∣sons, if He can thereby make any privat Mans House a Garison? that was not so Originally, it being pretended, that if this were allow'd, no man can be sure of his Dwelling-house, which is the chief part of his Property; but it cannot be deny'd, but that all Houses with Battlements, or turres pinnatae, as Craig observes, are inter regalia; and of old could not be Built, without the Kings special Licence: and as to these, the King may Garrison them; for since He has the absolute power of making Peace and War, it were absurd to deny Him the power of Garisoning convenient places, without which the War cannot be mannag'd.
It having been controverted whether the Earl of Caithness might Garison one of his Castles, without express Warrand from the Council; they found he could not, though it was alleadg'd that he was a stranger in Caithness, and the Countrey was broken: For this Act of Parlia∣ment having Discharg'd all Garisoning of Houses, upon any pre∣text whatsomever, if it should be allow'd upon such pretexts as this, not only would the express Letter of the Law be overturn'd; but all persons dissaffected might Garison upon this pretext; whereas on the other hand, there can be no inconveniency, since the Coun∣cil will allow liberty to Garison; and if present danger do press the Heretor, he may Garison his House for his own Defence, till he obtain that Order. THis Act annulling the Convention of Estates 1643. was un∣necessary,ACT 6. it being formerly annull'd by the third Act of this Parliament. THis Act Declaring the League and Covenant null,ACT 7. and the Discharging the Renewing thereof, under the Highest per∣ril, seems unclear, because of the indeterminatness of the punish∣ment, and seems unnecessary, because by the fourth Act of this Par∣liament, Subjects making Leagues amongst themselves, or with For∣raigners, are guilty of Treason. THis Act does in the first part Command all Jesuits, Priest and Traffiquing Papists, not to say Mass,ACT 8. and to remove forth of the Kingdom within a Month, under the pain of Death, whereupon it was doubted, whether within that Month, they could be pu∣nished with Death, else this Month had not only been elusory, but might have prov'd a snare, since they might have thought that this Month was allow'd for preparing for their Departure, and so they might have appear'd, and gone about their Business in order thereto. By the second part of this Act, Children are ordain'd to be taken from Parents, Tutors, or Curators, Popishly affected, that they may be bred with well affected Protestants, at the sight of His Ma∣jesties Privy Council, which Act is renew'd by a Proclamation of Council, in January 1679. THough the Parliament 1648. be here Ratifi'd; yet it is there∣after abrogated by the general Act Rescissory,ACT 9. which is the fifteenth Act of this Parliament, that not having been resolv'd up∣on till after this was past. The Parliament 1649. is by this Act absolutely Rescinded, and that without a general salvo, and though by the Act Rescissory, there is a general salvo in favours of the Rights, and privat Se∣curities past in other Parliaments, as is clear by the last words of the 15 Act, yet there is none subjoyn'd to this Parliament.
That Parliament 1649. had taken from Patrons the power of presenting, they having conceiv'd it most Antchristian, that the Minister who was to care for Souls, should be chosen by one man, and oftimes by one who would never hear him; but they reserv'd to the Patron the Right of Teinds, without prejudice to the present Stipend; and therefore that Act is hereby Re∣scinded, and Patrons restor'd to the power of Presentation: and though it cannot be deny'd, but that the people had a share in the Elections, as is clear by Saint Cyprians Epistles, yet this was when they pay'd them, and were themselves very judicious, and dis-interested in the infancy of Christianity; and before; Patrons had by founding Churches, the interest they have now; and now the people are by an Edict cited to Declare what they know why such a man should not be chosen: And in the Reform'd Churches of Germany, as Carpz. in his jus Consist. Relates, the people have vocationem; from which the Presbyterians borrow'd their Word Call. By this Act it is Declar'd, That such Parsons, and Ministers, as are in present possession of Kirks belonging to Laick Patrons, shall claim no Right, nor Possession, but what they had before the making of this Act, they being otherwise sufficiently provided. ACT 10.THis Act was unnecessary, because these Parliaments are taken away in the general Act Rescissory. ACT 11.THis Act appoints all Officers of State to take the Oath of Al∣legeance, and to assert under their Hands, all the for∣mer Royal Prerogatives; but now the Council do put the same to all who are suspected; and Fine or Banish such as refuse to take it, be∣cause the Act having left to the Council to put this Oath to any, and having nam'd no penalty, the penalty is to be understood arbitrary. But now all who are in publick Trust, take the Test appointed by the 6 Act 3 Par. Ch. 2. ACT 12.THis Act Confirms all Judicial proceedings, under the Usur∣pers, except when they were quarrel'd within a year; and this Act having appointed, that within that time, the Sentences of the Usurpers might be quarrell'd, without Suspension, or Re∣duction; and the Writ by which they were quarrel'd, was call'd a Review, which was in effect a Reduction, and was like both in the Name and Matter, to that revisio allow'd by the Civil Law.
THe Usurpers having by the Example of our Rebellious Parliaments laid on an Excise upon Bear and Ale,ACTs 13 & 14 this Loyal Parliament did grant His Majesty 40000 pounds Sterling, to be uplifted year∣ly out of the Custome and Excise, in manner mentioned in the 14 Act: But it has been much doubted, whether it had not been better to have continued the Excise upon the Bear and Ale, than to have laid it upon the Malt; for now Brewers endeavour to take as many Pints out of the Boll of Malt, as they can, which hinders much the consumption of the Malt, by making the Drink weak; whereas if it had been laid upon the Drink, they would have endeavoured to make the Drink strong. And for which Excise, the Commissioners of the respective Shires, are ly∣able personally, and they have their Relief off the Deficients, the Goods of which Deficients, are hereby to be poinded, without carrying them to the Mercat Cross, they being apprised at the next Paroch Church Door, which is like the priviledge given to Mi∣nisters Stipends, by the 21 Act of the 3 Sess. of this Parlia∣ment. Though by this Act the Excise is laid upon the Retailer of Com∣modities; yet by the 12 Act Par. 2 Ch. 2. The Importers are declar'd to be lyable for the same Excise. AFter this Parliament had Rescinded some privat Parliaments, they considered that all the Parliaments from the year 1640. till the year 1650. were but Branches of one and the same Rebel∣lion; and therefore they did annul them all by this Act,ACT 15: which is call'd The Act Rescissory: But privat parties Rights, obtain'd in these Parliaments are salved. In this Act it is acknowledg'd by the Parliament, That our Kings hold their Crowns immediatly from God Almighty, which was done to exclude that Rebellious Repub∣lican, and Sectarian Principle, That our Kings deriv'd their Power from the People; for if so, then the people might call them to an accompt, Depose, or Suspend them: and our very Stiles, which acknowledge our Kings to be by the Grace of God, does convince us, that they are not Kings by the people; and therefore Ar∣gentorat pag. 206. Observes well, that formula illa quae est in titulis Dei gratia, utuntur illi soli qui nulli mortalium imperium suum debent vid. obs. on the 251 Act Par. 15 Ja. 6. THis Act allowing the Government by Synods, Presbytries,ACT 16. and Sessions, is Rescinded by the 1 Act of the 2 Sess. of this Parliament. THis Act appointing a Solemn Aniversary Thanksgiving for His Majesties happy Restauration, was scrupled at,ACT 17. because this Act did appoint it to be set a-part as a Holy-day; and therefore it was thought fit by the 12 Act of the 3 Sess. Par. 2 Ch. 2. To renew
it as an Anniversary Thanksgiving, leaving out the words Holy-Day. THis Act against Cursing and Beating of Parents, is fully Ex∣plain'd,ACT 20. crim. pract. tit. Paricide. ACT 21.THis Act is Explain'd crim. pract. tit. Blasphemy. ACT 22.THis Act concerning casual Homicide, is Explain'd crim. pract. tit. Homicide; but it is fit to add here, that the Rubrick of this Act of Parliament bearing, Act concerning the several Degrees of casual Homicide, is very rediculous, for the degrees mentioned in the Act, are casual Homicide, Homicide in lawful Defence, and Homicide committed upon Thieves; and no sober Lawyer can think, that either Homicide in Defence, or Homicide committed upon Thieves, are degrees of casual Homicide. ACT 23.BY this Act the whole priviledges belonging to the Colledge of Justice, that is to say, Senators, Advocats, Clerks, Writers, and remanent Members, or whereof they have been in use, or in possessi∣on at any time bygone, are expresly Ratifi'd, and that notwith∣standing of whatsoever Act, Custom, or Practice to the contra∣ry, Vid. Act 8 Par. 2 Sess. 2 Ch. 2. Where the priviledge of Im∣munity from Taxes, is only given to the Lords of Session. Upon which Act it was Debated in December 1678. Whether Advocats should not be free from the Annuity impos'd by the Town of Edinburgh, since they were by this Act freed from all Impositions, and though by a special Act of this same Parliament, Ch. 2. The Col∣ledge of Justice was made lyable to the Annuity; Yet they being free by this Act, and the other Act being but an un-printed Act, and an Act to which they were not call'd, their priviledge could not be thereby taken away; albeit it was contended, that the being free from Annuity was no priviledge, ever expresly Declar∣ed in their favours: But on the contrary, was a Debt upon them, as Hearers of the Word of God; and so the Parliament might ve∣ry well by a general Law, declare this Priviledge, not to prejudge the Annuities; nor was that Law concerning Annuities a speci∣al, but a general Law, binding all the people who came to live in Edinburgh; and therefore there needed no party be cited, nor was it necessary to the Essence of an Act of Parliament, that it should be printed. ACT 24.BY this Act the Creditors of the Defunct are prefer'd to the Creditors of the appearand Heir, as to all Execution against the Defuncts Estate, they doing Diligence within three years after the Defuncts Death, which three years was found to be tempus
continuum, and not utile, and that these three Years did run even contra non valentem agere, December 19 1678. Paterson contra Bruce. The reason of which Act of Parliament is, that it is just that every mans Estate should pay his own Debt, though upon the other hand it is likewise just, that in the next place, the appearand Heirs Cre∣ditors may likewise do Diligence, even against that Estate, to which their Creditor may succed: Nor ought his voluntary ly∣ing out to prejudge them; for which cause likewise it is, that they may Charge the appearand Heir to Enter, and Comprise, or adjudge the Predecessors Estate. BY this Act it is ordain'd,ACT 25. that fourty dayes after the Sentence of Excommunication, Letters may be rais'd at His Majesties Advo∣cats instance, for Denuncing the persons Excommunicat Rebels; the Process being first revis'd by the Lords of the Session; but this power of the Lords of the Session, being made before the Bishops were Restor'd, is abrogated by the 23 Act of the 3 Sess. of this Par∣liament. BY this Act the person from whom Goods were Stollen, is to have his Goods,ACT 26. or the value thereof restor'd to him out of the readiest of the Thiefs Goods, he alwise pursuing the Thief to Sen∣tence. Observ. 1. Since this Act reserves to the Sheriff, or Takers of the Thief, the expence war'd out by them in taking the Thief, and putting him to xecution. It seems that they ought to be prefer'd to the Owners of the Goods, though the Act sayes, that he is to be pay'd out of the readiest. Observ. 2. It may be doubted whether the Justices, or the Judge ordinary should Restore? and though the Justices have no civil Jurisdiction, yet I have seen them Restore in such Cases; and this is in effect an incident Jurisdiction, b continentiam causae. Observ. 3. That it has been doubted, whether third parties buy∣ing the Goods, though in a publick Mercat, are oblig'd to re∣store. THis Act pardoning penal Statutes, seems by a mistake, to except Usury;ACT 27. for Usury is properly a Crime punishable by all Law, at all times: Whereas a penal Statute is properly a Sta∣tute, which punishes a Delinquency, that is only punishable upon some occasions by an arbitrary punishment; and therefore Acts of Grace, or general Indemnities, Discharging the Execution of penal Statutes, should no more be extended to Usury, than it should be extended to Murther, or Adultery; and Usury is by the Act of Indemnity, which is the 29 Act 3 Sess. of this Parliament, ex∣cepted from that Indemnity, amongst Murderers, Thefts, and other Crimes of that Nature, and it was excepted only in this Act, ad ma∣jorem cautelam, because the Chancellour had then the Gift of Usury.
What are properly counted penal Statutes, may be seen Act 9 Par. 21 Ja. 6. Where amongst other Crimes, Usury is ordain'd to be punish'd, and not to be pardon'd as a penal Statute; and if Usu∣ry fell under penal Statutes, it would very much encourage Usury; for men would still expect a Discharge of it, because penal Sta∣tutes are frequently Discharg'd: But yet the Lords in the case be∣twixt the Laird of Haining and Cruick, found that Usury was Dis∣charg'd by the Act of Grace 1674. because of the special conception of that Act. ACT 28.BY this Act the Quots of Testaments are taken from the Commis∣sars; but upon the Restoring of Bishops, this Act is abrogated by the 1 Act and 2 Sess. of this Parliament. ACT 29.THis Act is formerly Explain'd Act 77 Par. 13 & Act 10 Par. 18 Ja. 6. ACT 30.THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 14 Act Par. 1 Ch. 1. ACT 31.BY this Act all Comprisings are to be allow'd within sixty dayes after the date thereof, with Certification, that if they be not allow'd, and Recorded within that space, a posterior Comprising first Recorded, shall be prefer'd thereto; and upon the 8 of June 1665. The Lords upon a Supplication, ordain'd a Comprising to be allow'd, though the person against whom the Comprising was led, was dead, and the sixty dayes were expir'd; and found that notwithstanding thereof, it should be prefer'd to a Com∣prising, whereof the allowance was Registrated after its Regi∣stration. Observ. 2. That by this Act a Comprysing is not declar'd null, for not being allow'd, and so was not excluded by a posterior ap∣prysing, first allow'd; but both were brought in pari passu; which last part of the Decision may seem strange, since it is ex∣presly declar'd by this Act, that the not allowance shall be with Certification, that a posterior Comprising, first allow'd, shall be pre∣fer'd according to the date of the allowance, November 29. 1672. Max∣ton contra Cunninghame; and so they could not come in pari pas∣su. But the reason of this Decision must be, that by the posteri∣or Act 62. of this same Parliament, all Comprysings led within year and day of others, are ordain'd to be brought in pari passu: and these Comprisings have been led within year and day, though the Decision mention not this. And this I find decided, July 17. 1668. Stuart contra Murray. Observ. 3. That if the Appryser has obtain'd Infeftment without allowance, he will be prefer'd; because (as I think) his Infeft∣ment being Registrated in that case, supplies the not Registrati∣on
of his allowance, and Certiorats singular Successors suffici∣ently. Observ. 4 This Act Narrats, that it was ordain'd former∣ly by Act of Secret Council, that the whole Comprisings, and not a Breviat, should be Registrated: Which not being authoriz'd by any Law, or Act of Parliament, is therefore Discharg'd; from which it appears, that the Secret Council use not only to make Acts relating to Government, or to regular prices of Writs, as appears by the 19 Act 23 Par. Ja. 6. Or to discharge Bakers, and Candle-makers to keep their Broom-stacks, or Melting-houses within Towns, as in the 29 Act 23 Par. Ja. 6. But even to make Acts relating to Registration, and Competition of Writs; which though the Parliament does here openly condemn; yet tacitly this Act declares their Act was no Law; and they could less have made such an Act, than the Lords could have made an Act of Se∣derunt, ordaining Seasins within Burgh to be Registrated, which they found only the Parliament could do; and it is observable also, that this Act of Council did therefore soon run in Desuetude; and the Parliament confirms the contrary Custom. Observ. 5. This Act Narrats that by a Custom, allowances of Apprysings did contain, and express the Names, and De∣signations of the Apprysers, the Names of the Defenders, (whereas it should have said Debitors, though the Debitor be a Defen∣der in the Comprysing, which is a Decreet) the Debts for which the Comprising is Deduc'd, the Messengers, and the Clerks names, the Date of the Executions, the Witnesses names thereto, and the Superiours names; which Custom being authoriz'd by this Act, it may be doubted, if the omiting any of these particulars in the Registrated allowance, would annul the same, since the Act does not subjoyn an irritancy. THe difference concerning Heretable and Moveable Bonds,ACT 32. is fully Explain'd in my Institut. Part 2. tit. 2. BY this Act, these who Marry themselves Clandestinly,ACT 34. or inor∣derly, are to be imprison'd for three Moneths, and beside to pay, each Nobleman a Thousand Pounds; each Baron, and Land∣ed Gentleman, a Thousand Merks; each Gentleman, and Bur∣ges, five hundred Pounds; each other person, an hundred merks. Observ. 1. The want of the Parents consent, or of the consent of others having interest, seems by the Narrative, to infer the Clan∣destinness of the Marriage: But yet by our practique, Children Marrying without the consent of their Parents, if they be of age, and the Marriage otherwise regular, they are not punishable▪ wherein we seem to agree rather with the Counsel of Trent▪ than either with the Law of God, Exod. 22. and 17. Numb. 30▪
Deut. 7.3. Or the Civil Law, Institut. de nuptiis & l. 2. ff. de Ritu. nupt. Observ. 2. That it may be doubted, whether since this Act ap∣points no punishment to Women; if a Noble-woman being an Heretrix, Marry a Gentleman Disorderly, she may be punish'd as a Noble-woman, or he only as a Gentleman; and I think she should be punisht as a Noble-woman, having precedency as such. Observ. 3. That it has been doubted, if an Expectant having power to Preach, and being appointed a Presbyter, but having no settled Kirk, and Marrying persons, the Marriage can be pu∣nished: Or if such as Marry by a lawful Minister of another Paroch, without Warrand, either from the Bishop, or the Minister of their own Paroch, may be punished by this Act. Observ. 4. By the 9 Act Sess. 3 Par. 2. Ch. 2. Such as en∣ter into these Disorderly Marriages, lose their jus mariti, or jus relictae, by and attour the penalties here express'd. Observ. 5. That the Marrying in England, or Ireland, without proclamation of Bonds in Scotland, and against the Order observ'd in this Church, infers the former Fines; but the Marrying with∣out proclamation of Bonds, is not per se sufficient; and therefore if there be a Dispensation from the Bishop, Quaer. if the Marriage is not Clandestine, and it seems it is not, for the Bishop may be mis-inform'd, as if the Woman wanted parents: And by the Nar∣rative of this Act, the want of the parents consent is made an impe∣diment, as well as the having granted a prior promise to another; and therefore, as the Bishops Warrand should not defend in the one case, so neither should it in the other; but it is still periulo petentis, else Bishops should innocently become the Instruments of Robbing us of our Children, and Estates, and of taking them away in such manner, as that parents can neither see their Daugh∣ters provided to competent Jointures by the Husband, nor the Husbands who Marry them, sufficiently provided by the Father in Law. Quaer. 2. Whether is the consent of the Mother necessary when the Father is Dead; and I conceive it is, especially when she is intrusted by the Father, and the Child stays with her; for though the Daughter be not in potestate materna; yet she is a Pa∣rent; and this Act requires the consent of Parents; and the In∣stituts tell us, that naturalis & civilis ratio requirit consensum pa∣rentum: nor can it be deny'd, but the Mother has an equal na∣tural Relation; and by this Interest, Law incourages, and re∣wards the Mothers pains. Quaer. 3. What if the parents refuse rea∣sonable offers, and yet the Child is Marriageable. To which it is answer'd, That the consent should be first askt, and why they refuse, that the Judge may, when the parent thereafter complains, consider if the parent was culpable in refusing his consent. Quaer. 4. If the being Married by their own Minister, without proclamation, or Dispensation from the Bishop be sufficient, and though the Mi∣nister
have a Warrand from the Bishop; Yet by Act of Synod, he is discharged to Marry in a privat House, except the Warrand dispense therewith expresly. THis Act shall be Explain'd in my Observations on the 21 Act Par. 3 Ch. 2.ACT 35. BY this Act it is ordain'd,ACT 36. that none shall have Right to any Bene∣fies, till they take the Oath of Allegeance; and if the patron omits this, not only is the presentation to be null; but the Right of Patronage as to that Vacancy, belongs to the King. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 8 Act Par. 22 Ja. 6.ACT 38. BY this Act,ACT 39. His Majesty and Parliament having Erected Fishing Companies, Do declare, that Salt, Cordage, Hemp, &c. im∣ported for the Trade of Fishing, shall be free of any Custom or Impo∣sition: But yet by the 12 Act of the 2 Par. Ch. 2. The Importers of Forraign Salt, are to give Security for payment of the Excise, whe∣ther the Salt be employ'd for salting of Fishes, or not; but there is allowance to be given to the Exporters, for what shall be prov'd to have been imploy'd upon Fishing. It is observable likewise from this Act, that His Majesty by His Soveraign Authority, and prerogative Royal, without speaking any thing of the consent of Parliament, in this Clause, Dclares that the Ships, and Furniture imploy'd in Fishing, shall not be arrest∣able by Creditors, nor the persons pursu'd before any Judicature: and it may be doubted how this is consistent with the property of the Subject? Or whether this would Defend against Criminal Pur∣suits. The word attatchments here exprest, properly includes Criminal actions, sed nulla excusatio prodest adversus pracepta ei qui cum leges invocat adversus eas committit l. auxilium, ff. de minor in in: and though it may be answer'd to the other Doubt, that the Parliament con∣sented to this lessening of property; Yet it is clear, that the Pre∣rogative, and not their Consent, is only mention'd, except we con∣struct their not opposing it to infer a consent: and it may be ra∣ther urg'd, that the Parliament has acknowledg'd, that this is the Kings Prerogative; But if this be, the King may Discharge Judges to proceed in any civil action. THis Act incouraging Manufactories,ACT 40. by Discharging the Cu∣stom, or Excise, due upon the Materials, to be therein employ'd, is much lessened by an Act of Exchequer, whereby it is Declar'd, that these Materials are only to be free, which the Masters of the Manufactory bring home upon their own Risk; because this Act, and the 48 Act, in favours of Sope-work, does say, That shall be imported for the use of Manufactories; and ano∣ther
Decision of Exchequer, whereby it is Declar'd, that these are only to be accounted priviledg'd Manufactories, where the species of the thing Manufactored is altered; and therefore it was pretended that the Suggar works were no Manufactory, because they only Refine Suggar that is brought in. It has been likewise Debated, whether Materials Imported for Manufactories, are by this Act free from paying Custom, or Ex∣cise; since the Act only says, That Oyl, Dying Stuffs, Pottashes, or any other Materials usual for Manufactories, shall be free of Custom, Excise, and other publick Dues, and that all Cloaths, Stuffs, Stock∣ings, and other Commodities to be Exported by them, shall be free of Custom, and Excise for nineteen years, must be subjoyn'd, both to the Export and Import, both these being in one Sentence, and not divided by a punctum, but by a Semi colon; By which we are to observe, that not only the right Wording, but the right Pointing of Acts of Parliament are to be observ'd: But in my opinion, the Materials are ever to be free; and the Export is only to be free for nineteen years; which is clear, not only from the wording of this Act, but likewise from the 48 Act of this same Parliament. ACT 41.BY this Act any person inclosing his Ground at the sight of the Sheriffs, Stewarts, &c. may cast about the High∣way, two hundred Ells; and where Inclosurs fall to be upon the Borders of any persons Inheritance, the next adjacent Heretor is to be at equal pains in Building, Ditching, and Planting that Dike, which divideth their Inheritance; which last Clause was found to be only conceiv'd in favours of those who had required the Neighbouring Heretor, because he might have imploy'd his own Servants, or Materials, but yet the Lords, in the case of Garle∣toun against George Seaton, February 1679. found that if the Neigh∣bouring Heretor was not required, they would abate to him in the Mo∣dification, what he might have saved by using his own Servants and Materials, by the 17 Act Par. 2 Ch. 2. It is added, That the She∣riffs, and Justices of Peace, may force the Neighbouring Heretor to sell as much of his Lands as may cause the Dike, or Ditch to run upon even Ground, or as may be capable of a Dike▪ or Ditch, where the Builders own Ground is incapable of either Dike, or Ditch. Bacons History Hen. 7. observes, that that King restricted the frequency of Inclosures, because much Grass could be mannag'd by a few Herds-men, which occasion'd a great Decay of Infantry, Towns, Taxes, Tiths, vid. pag. 73. of that History. ACT 46.BY this Act broken Copper, and Brass, are discharg'd to be Ex∣ported; and the Reason truly is, because it hinders the Manu∣factory of making things of Brass, or Copper within the Kingdom; but yet because there was so much allow'd to be taken for broken Brass and Copper, Exported by the Book of Rates; which seem'd
to imply, that Exporting was allow'd, and that this Act had not been in observance; therefore the Council Discharg'd the Con∣fiscation quoad bygones, preceeding 1684. But Discharg'd Exporta∣tion for the future. And it must be notic'd, that Custom is m∣pos'd by the Books of Rates upon many things that cannot be Ex∣ported. THis Act Discharging Trades-men to Import made Work,ACT 47. and declaring the one half to elong to His Majesty, is not so well ob∣serv'd as in reason it ought to be, since it makes them lazie in im∣proving the Manufactorable Commodities of our own Nation▪ But it may be doubted, whether this Act does not also Discharge the importation of all such made Work, by Merchants as well as Trades-men, since this discourages Manufactories more than the other; for it is less probable they who can make such Work, will bring it home; and why should ill Work be Confiscated, when made by our own Trades-men? whilst any ill Work may be brought from abroad; and the words of the Act being the Parlia∣ment hibits and Discharges all Trades-men to Import made Work, or any such Ware brought home by Merchants The prohibition may by the particle or, be extended to made Work, brought home by Merchants; To which nothing can be answered, but that the Ru∣brick bears, Act Discharging Trades-men to import; This selling was discharg'd formerly to Crafts-men only, Ja. 2. Par. 14. Act 67. Ja. 3. Par. 2. Act 12. and Par. 14. Act 107. But it is alleadg'd, that some VVork cannot be so well made; and that our own Trades-men would extortion us, if we were not in a capacity to over∣awe them by bringing home made Work: and yet to encourage our own Work-men, there is double Custom laid upon all For∣raign made Work by the Book of Rates, and ten per cent by a late Proclamation, which being joyn'd with the Sea-risk that those run who bring home made Work, and the Exchange pay'd for the price of it, is a sufficient encouragement to our own Trades-men; who, because they may live cheaper, may likewise work cheaper than those abroad, even beside these other Encourage∣ments. THis Act in favours of Sope-work, seems needless,ACT 48. because it was comprehended under the general Act concerning Manufacto∣ries, being the 40 Act of this Parliament; but probably it has been thought necessary for clearing the time, for which the privi∣ledge of Manufactories was to endure, as has been observ'd upon that Act. THough by this Act it be Declar'd, that upon the bringing down the annualrent to six of the hundred;ACT 49. that six is de∣clar'd to be free of all Retention, or other publick Burdens; Yet subsequent Parliaments have Burdened, even the annualrents with Retention, and otherwise, expresly contrary to this Act, upon
pretext that the Impositions were voluntar offers, and not formally Impositions. Nota. It may be doubted, if the Kings Officers may not law∣fully ingage for more than six per cent, to get Money for publick use. ACT 51.BY this Act it is Declar'd, that all sums whereupon no Infeft∣ments have follow'd, may be arrested, though they be He∣retable otherwise of their own Nature; and because regulariter He∣retable sums are not arrestable, therefore this Dispensation was ne∣cessary. Albeit this Act bear only, that sums whereupon no Infeftments have follow'd, be arrestable, and determines not, if arrestments may be us'd at his instance, to whom such sums are due; Yet a paritate ratio∣nis, this may follow. ACT 52.THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the Act 7 Par. 1 Ja. 6. ACT 53.THis Act is only a Ratification of the 10 Act of the 1 Par. of Ch. 1. Save only that it is here declar'd, That notwithstanding of this Act, any who have gotten, or shall get any new Infeftment of Superiority of Kirk-lands, the same shall stand good, as to such Vassals who have given their consent to the said Right of Superiority▪ In re∣gard that such a consent, as to His Majesty, is of the Nature of a Resignation of their property, in favours of the said Superiour, to be holden of the King; But prejudice nevertheless to His Majesty, of His Highness Right of Reversion, of the Feu-ferm-duties, and Casua∣lities, conform to the foresaid Act of Parliament 1633. The design of which Clause was, to secure such Lords of Erection, as had got Bonds from their Vassals, holding Kirk-lands of them, to con∣tinue their Vassals, and not to hold of the King, notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament 1633. Declaring the King to be the Supe∣riour of all Kirk-lands: and albeit the Lords did not think that the single taking of an Infeftment from a Lord of Erection, did infer the consent mentioned in this Act; after giving of which consent, the Vassal could not return to be the Kings Vassal; Yet upon the 28. of July 1669. in a case betwixt the Duke of Ha∣milton and Weir of Blackwood. The Lords found, that such a con∣sent as this might be infer'd by presumptions, shewing that the Vassal design'd to oblige himself to hold of the Lord of Erection, and not of the King; and in that case they found, that Black∣woods Father having granted a Bond, that so soon as the Duke should obtain the Superiority, his Son should become his Vassal; and though the Duke had not then obtain'd it, yet he has since; the Lands being lately dissolv'd from the Crown; and though the Father was but a Tutor, yet he was the person who was instru∣mental to settle his Son in the Right; and the rest of the Vassals of that Abbacy, did take their Lands expresly, holden of the Duke
only: But in my Opinion, no consent can be founded upon by this Clause of the Act of Parliament, except it be a clear and ex∣press consent, to hold only of the Lords of Erection, and not of the King, it being so much the Interest, both of King and Peo∣ple, that the Subjects should hold of the King; and the Parliament, 1633. having so clearly introduc'd in the favours of Vassals of Erect∣ed Church-lands, that they may hold of the King, it were hard to take that benefit from them without their express consent. FOr understanding this Act, it is fit to know,ACT 54. that because Ti∣lars of Prebendaries, Chaplanries, and Alterages cannot be Infest, and that there is nothing standing in any Register, to shew who is Titular; therefore singular Successors who are Vassals, could not know by whom to enter; to supply which, this Act pro∣vides that the Vassals of the saids Provestries, Chaplanries, and Alte∣rages, and others of that nature, may be Infeft by the Laick Patrons, holding immediatly of the King; because it is easie to discover by the Registers, who is Laick Patron of the Benefice, since it passes by Infeftment, but yet the Laick Patron is to have no advantage; and so the Liferent-escheat will not fall to him as Superiour, but will belong to the Titular, who is true Superiour; nor can the Laick Patron pursue Reduction: But yet it seems that since the Vassal did Enter by him, that therefore he is bound, both to pro∣duce to him, and that he will have right to the Emoluments of the Superiority, except the Vassal can show who is the true Superi∣our. Nota. That when the Patron presents in such Cases, he needs not the consent of the Chapter, or Convent of the saids Prebenda∣ries; and the Provost and Baillies are Declar'd the only undoubted Superiours, where such Benefices ly within their Towns, they having formerly been Patrons of these Chaplanries, which ablativi absolute positi seem to import a condition, and so they must prove that they were formerly Patrons. ALbeit by this Act it be appointed,ACT 55. that there shall be a Cocquet for every Ship, and that there shall be fourty shilling pay'd for it; Yet it was alleadg'd that a general Cocquet, for a Ship, was not sufficient; but that every Merchant should have a special Cocquet, containing specially his Goods, and enu∣merating particularly all the kinds of these Goods; Because, First; The design of Cocquets was, to know whether the Goods belong∣ed to Free-Traders; which could not be done, if the Goods and Merchants Names were not condescended on particularly; Nor could it be known, if His Majesties Dues were pay'd for the Goods, for which the Cocquets were granted. 2. It were unjust that a great Ship with Rich Wares should pay no more than a small one with courser Goods. 3. By the Customs of England, and other Countreys, there were for these Reasons, special Cocquets given for
proportional Dues. 4. By the 255, 256, & 257 Acts of the 15 Par Ja. 6. The Cocquets are to contain the particular quantities of the Goods; vid. observ. on these Acts. ACT 56.THis Act is Explain'd in the 11 Act Par. 18 Ja. 6. ACT 57.THis Act Discharges the Custom of two and a half per cent, and all raising of His Majesties Customs, directly, or indirect∣ly, without consent of Parliament: and so though by the 27 Act of the 3 Sess. of this Parliament, asserting His Majesties Royal Pre∣rogative in the Ordering of Trade with Forraigners. It seems that His Majesty may lay what Restraints and Impositions He pleases up∣on Forraign Imported Commodities, and as He pleases; yet it seems the Customs by this Act cannot be rais'd: for though that Act be posteriour, yet this is special, and is not particularly abrogated; albeit by that Act, all Acts and Statutes contrary to that Act, are abrogated. By this Act likewise, His Majesty Discharges the taking Masters, Merchants, and Mariners Oaths in the matters of Customs; but since their Oaths are taken in the matters of Excise, this privi∣ledge signifies nothing, Vide Observations on the Act 12 Par. 2. Ch. 2. THis Act is Explain'd in the Observations upon the 18 Act Par. 1. Ch. 1.ACT 59. THis Act allows any of His Majesties ordinary Officers, to whose Charge the same belongs to Docquet signatures;ACT 60. and by ordi∣nary Officers, I think are only mean'd, Officers of State; and this was formerly Established by the 20 Act Par. 10. Ja. 6. But by this Act is added, That these who do Docquet, shall send a double of the Docquet to the Secretary to be Registrated; But yet the Deed is not annull'd, though this be omitted: and therefore the Deed I think would subsist; but the Omitters would be punish'd. The Rea∣son why a double is to be Registrated, is, because by this His Ma∣jesty may know what is formerly granted, which will prevent double Gifts of the same thing. ACT 61.THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the former Commissions for Plantation of Kirks, viz. Ja. 6 P. 22 Act 3 Ch. 1 P. 1 Acts 8 & 19. ACT 62.THis Act for the most part is but Temporary, and was made to give some ease to the poor Debitor, whose Lands had been so wasted and burdened in the late Rebellion, that he could neither pay Annualrent, nor Redeem Comprisings, or Wodsets, as formerly, being founded upon the same Reason, by which the
novae tabula were Introduced in Rome by Julius Caesar, after the Civil Wars betwixt Pompey and him: But the chief things observ∣able in it, are first, That the Legal Reversion of all Comprisings to be led, or that were led since January 1652. whereof the Le∣gals are Expired, and all Comprisings whereof the Legals were not expired before that Moneth, shall endure for ten years; and though it might have been pretended, that▪ this Act does not prorogat the Reversion, but only makes the Lands to be Redeemable, and so the Rents of the last three years above the seven, which was the ordinary Legal, was not to be Restored, but that the Compriser had Right to them, as fructus bona fide percepti & consumpti: Yet the Lords found that the Compriser was countable for his Intro∣mission, even for these three years, since in effect these three years are added to the Reversion, and so the Compryser is lyable for these three years, as he would have been for the other seven, January 20. 1666. Clapperton contra Torsonce. Albeit by our former Law, the Compriser could have possess'd the whole ents of the Comprised Lands during the Legal; Yet in respect the Rents do often exceed very far the Annualrents; Therefore by this Law, allowance is given to the Lords of Session, to Restrict the Compriser to such part of the Land as will pay him the annualrent of his Sum and Expense: The Debitor from whom the Lands were Comprised, Ratifying the Apprysers Possession of the rest; but it is still to be remembred, that after the Legal is expired, the Compryser has undoubted Right, and cannot be limited. Upon this Clause of the Act, the Lords upon the 27 of June 1662. Restricted Wilson who had Comprised Sir William Murays Estate, to medle with any part of the Estate Comprys'd that he pleas'd, essering to eight per cent, he counting for the superplus above this annualrent, and for the publick burdens; but there∣after in February 1684. in a case betwixt Wilson and Sir Alexan∣der Hume. It was contended, that this Clause was a part of the Temporary Regulation past in favours only of such Debitors as had taken the benefit of this Act, by payment of their annual∣rents, and was only ill plac'd here amongst the Clauses, relating in general to Comprysings, for it was against the whole current of our Laws, that during the Legal, the Creditor who was forc'd to want his Money,, should be forc'd during the long legal of ten years, to accept of naked annualrent; especially seing oft-times they got Land at last, that they could not, nor car'd not for the Posses∣sion of it; Nor would this ever spur, and excite Creditors to pay the sums Comprys'd for, and this was a very universal prejudice; most part of Rights being now founded on Comprysings; and the Practique being single, and not upon Debate, was not to be re∣spected. To which it was answered, That the Clause was oppon'd, and it was dangerous to alleadge that Clauses were Transplac'd by mis∣take; nor could any thing Gloss a Law better than a Decision past so
Recently, after the Act made: at the making of which Decision, many eminent persons were present who had been the very Penners of the Act, and the Restriction was most reasonable; for since great Estates were to be carry'd away by Comprisings for small sums, it wast just that till the Comprising expir'd, the poor Debitor should be favour'd: Nor was the Creditor a loser, since a Com∣prysing being a legal Pledge only for his Money, he got the An∣nualrent duly pay'd him, and a Ratification of his Possession, even during the Legal: and if his Money was not pay'd cum om∣ni causa, with annualrent, for his very Expense he got the whole Land, though the sum were never so small; upon which Debate, the Lord adher'd to the former Decision, though it seems very strange to the best Lawyers. The Lords likewise found upon the 28 of July, 1671. That this Power granted to them, was only in favours of the Debitor, from whom the Lands were Comprysed, and could not be extended in favours of posteriour Comprysers, who could not upon this Clause crave, that the first Compryser should be re∣stricted to his Annualrent; for the priviledge is granted to the first Compryser in contemplation of his being oblig'd to Ratifie: Nor are the second Comprysers prejudged by the first Comprysers Possession, since it will extinguish his Comprysing pro tanto, and make way for them. By this Act also, all Comprysings led since the first of January 1652. before the first effectual Compryser, or after, but within year and day of the same, shall come in pari passu, as if one Com∣prysing had been led for all the Sums: Upon which Clause it is observable, 1. That Comprysings led since 1652. come not in with Comprysings led before that year, though within year and day thereof, December 12. 1666. Hume contra Hume. For clearing this and all other Acts of Parliament, which ap∣point Diligences to be done within year and day; It is fit to know that the year is the time design'd by these Acts, and the day is ad∣jected only ad majorem evidentiam; and therefore dies ille inceptus pro completo habetur February 25 1680. Weddel contra Salmond; Where the Husband was found to have the Tocher▪ though the Wife liv'd not the intire day following the year, but died in the morning of that adjected day. Observ. 2. That the first effectual Comprysing is interpreted to be a Decreet of Apprysing, whereupon Infeftment follows; and therefore if the second Comprysing be led within year and day, after Infeftment was taken upon the first, it will not come in pari passu with it, except it be within year and day of the Decreet of Apprysing, for the first Comprysing was expir'd, and so the next Creditor could Comprise nothing, so that his Comprising could not come in pari passu; Which was so decided. Albeit it was alleadg'd, that by this Act, all Com∣prysings led within year and day, are fictione juris, to be repute as if one and
the same Comprysing had been led for all the sums contained in all these Comprysings, quo casu, one of the Creditors Rights could not have expired in prejudice of another, and in effect this year is a new Pro∣rogation of the Legal quoad that Con-creditor who has led his Comprysing within year and day of the other, July 4. 1671. Laird of Balsour contra Dowglas. Upon this Clause it was also Debated very subtilly, whether an Infeftment of Annualrent having interveen'd betwixt a prior Com∣prysing, and other posterior Apprysings, could be prefer'd to the posterior Apprysings; for all these Comprysings having been led within year and day; It was alleadg'd that by this Statute, they behoved to come in pari passu, as if one Comprysing had been led for all; and therefore since the first was preferable to the Infeft∣ment of Annualrent, so should the rest, though posterior to it. But to this it being answered, that the meaning of the Act was, That Comprysings led within year and day, should come in pari passu, only in competition with one another; but that Infeftments of Annualrents, or other Rights could not be postpon'd to posterior Rights, for which Annualrents, if the Creditor had Compris'd, he had been prefer'd. The Lords brought them all in pari passu; the matter being dubious, and the doubt arising on the unclearness of a new Statute, February 6. 1673 Brown of Colstoun contra Nicolas; which shews what  The Lords have, and what is done for clearing of new Statutes. Observ. 3. That this Computation is only to be made with re∣spect to the first effectual Comprising; and therefore though it be extinguished by Discharge, or Intromission; Yet the third Compriser will not, upon this Act of Parliament, come in pari passu with the second, upon pretence that the second becomes first, by extinguishing the first Comprysing, Decemb. 13. 1672. Street con∣tra the Earl of Northesk. Obser. 4. That this Act of Parliament being Correctory of a for∣mer Law, was found not to be drawn back, so as to make such as intrometted prior to that Act, oblig'd to Communicat their In∣tromissions before the Act; though their Comprysings were led within year and day, the Intrometter having been bona fide posses∣sor, January 7. 1665. Grahame contra Brown. But yet some think▪ that after the Act,  first Compryser will be lyable for his Intromissions, and to Communicat them with a second Com∣pryser, Comprysing within year and day from the very date of the second Comprysing, and not from the Date of a Citation only; for though it may be alleadg'd, that before a Citation, a second Compryser is bona fide possessor, and is not oblig'd to know that there was a second Comprising; or whether he was pay'd aliunde: Yet to this it may be answered, that by this Act the first Compryser is to count, as if the same Comprysing had been led for both the Debts, quo casu Intromissions would have been Communicated even before Citation; and by the foresaid Decision, The Lords
found that bona fides Defended only, as to Intromissions prior to the Act; Ergo it did not Defend, as to Intromissions subsequent to the Act. Observ. 5. That this Clause of the Act is somewhat innovated by the 22 Act Sess. 3. of this Parliament, whereby in favours of those posterior Comprisers, who bought in the first Comprising, to pre∣vent its expiration; It is Declar'd, That the first Comprising so stan∣ding in their person, shall not be brought in pari passu with other Com∣prysings, though led within year and day: But it being doubted, whether that Act of Parliament should only secure such as were necessitated to buy in the first Comprysing, Because that seems to be the Design of the Legislator: Yet the Lords extended it to all Comprisings so bought in, the Statutory words being general, De∣cember 9. 1664. Veatch contra Williamson. Observ. 6. That since posterior Comprysers were brought in pa∣ri passu with the first Compryser; It was justly ordered by this Act, That the first Compryser should be pay'd of his Expenses by the po∣sterior Comprysers; which was found to extend to all the Expenses laid out by the first Compryser, who is to contribute no part there∣of himself, that being all he has in recompense of their coming in pari passu. But quaritur, whether if one of these Comprysers were only pursuing to come in, if he would be oblig'd to pay all the Ex∣pence, or pro rata off his sums? And I think he would be oblig'd to pay all, reserving his Relief. It is likewise doubted, whether one of many Comprysers, coming so in, will have Right to any, more than proportionally to his sums, all the rest remaining with the first Compryser, till the rest of the Comprysers seek to come in; or if that Compryser will force the first compryser to divide with him, according to the proportion of their two sums only, without respect to the other Comprysers, till they come in. Observ. 7. That Comprysings led for real Debts, and debita fun∣di, remain as formerly; so that Comprysings led within year and day, come not in pari passu with Comprysings led upon these real Debts, such as Ground-annuals, Annualrents due upon Infeftments, or sums whereupon Inhibition was rais'd; for clearing whereof, it is fit to know that debita fundi, are either when Lands are burdened by an express Act of Parliament, which makes the bur∣den real, and to affect the Ground against singular Successors: Or 2. What is pay'd to a Superior as a part of his Reddendo, are like∣wise debita fundi; and do in like manner affect the Land. Observ. 8. That though Adjudications and Comprysings, have generally the same priviledges: Yet where Adjudications are not led for liquid sums, but are granted by the Lords, for compleating Dis∣positions and Rights made by the Party, where the Granter refuses to compleat the Right himself; in that case, such Adjudications come not in pari passu upon this Clause, July 16 1675. Campbel of Riddoch contra Stuart. December 2. 1676. Lady Frazer contra Creditors of the Lord Frazer.
BY this Act also it is Declared, That if the appearand Heir, or any person to his behove, shall buy in any expyred Comprysings, the said Comprysings shall be Redeemable by posterior Comprisers from the appearand Heir, or his Confident, for payment of the true sums pay'd out by them, and that within ten years after the said Right was ac∣quired. Observ. 1. That though this be a correctory Law, and so ought not to be extended; Yet it is so favourable, that the Lords ex∣tended the same to Rights bought in by Eldest Sons, whilst their Father lives, though the eldest Son cannot be properly call'd in that case an appearand Heir, since an appearand Heir is only he who can succeed in haereditatem jacenem; but the Lords would not extend it to the Right of an Apprising, bought by the Husband, where his Wife was appearand Heir: For though the Lords found this reasonable, yet they found the Act to be stricti juris; and so would not extend it to this Case, except it could be alleadg∣ed that the sums were truly pay'd for the Wifes behove, and the Lands provided to her Heirs: and some doubt, whether Com∣prisings bought in by the Tutors and Curators of appearand Heirs, be Redeemable upon this Act: and since their Pupils may oblige them to Dispone the saids Rights to them, though the Comprisings were bought in, in the Tutors and Curators own name, if they had as much of the Pupils means in their hands. It seems that by the same Reason, the Pupils Creditors who Comprise omne jus, that was standing in their person, should have the same privi∣ledge. Observ. 2. Though this Clause runs only in favours of Apprysers, from which it may seem, that they are only allow'd to Redeem; Yet the Lords Decided January 9. 1677. Hay contra Gregory; That a Creditor having an Infeftment of Annualrent, might Redeem from a Compryser who excluded him; and it seems by that De∣cision, that any Creditor may have this Benefit as well as Com∣prisers, since they may Comprise: Nor are the strict words of the Act to be considered; for else Adjudgers could not Redeem, since they are not nam'd in the Act. By this Act also, not only the Apprising is Redeemable, but even Bonds granted for the Sum thereafter Comprised for, are null, if the Apprising be satisfi'd as said is, so that appearand Heirs cannot make use of the Bond, or Inhibition upon it, and though a Disposition was bought in by the appear∣and Heir, before the Act of Parliament; yet if the Infeftment was taken after the Act, the Comprising was found Redeemable by the Act; for it is the Infestment, and not the Disposition, which gives the Right; because if a third party had been first Infest, he had been preferr'd to the appearand Heir, notwithstanding of this Disposition: July 21. 1671. Maxwel contra Maxwel. In which case it was also found, that thogh the Act bears, that expired Comprisings bought
in by the appearand Heir, should be redeemable; Yet if the appearand Heir buy in a Comprising in cursu, the same will be Redeemable if it expire whilst he had Right to it; so that upon the whole matter, it is observable, that even Correctory Laws with us, are to be ex∣tended in favourable cases, so far as to make them answer the De∣sign of the Legislator, which is to help the ill that was to be Cor∣rected. Observ. 3. That this Priviledge is allowed to the second Com∣priser, not only by way of Order of Redemption, but even by raising an ordinary Action; so that if he raise that Action within ten years, the Lords will find the same sufficient; providing he has rais'd a Declarator, concluding Compt and Reckoning within the ten years, which the Lords will sustain by way of Reply, being propon'd upon incidenter in the ordinary action for payment, June 26. 1677. Kincaid contra Laird Abergeldie. Observ. 4. That these ten years run from the Infeftment taken by the appearand Heir, or some other publick Deed, as De∣creets, &c. Done upon the Right so bought in, else the appear∣and Heir might keep his Rights latent for ten years, and consequent∣ly the Creditors could not Redeem, because they could not know them. It is fit to know that by our Law, Wodsets are either proper, or improper. A proper Wodset is, where Lands being impigno∣rated for a sum, the Rents of the Land are accepted in satisfaction of the Annualrents of the Money, and that without any Restricti∣on upon either side: and as to these Wodsets, it is by this Act or∣dain'd, that the Wodsetter shall be oblig'd upon offer of sufficient surety by the Lender, either to quite his Possession, or Restrict himself in his Possession to his Annualrent, counting for the super∣plus: But this Act innovating the privat Paction of Parties, was found only to oblige the Wodsetter, to be countable from the Date of the Offer of Surety, and not from the Date of the Act of Parliament, February 21. 1666 Lord Borthwick contra his Wodsetters. But in this Computation the Wodsetter is to get Defalcation of what he hath depursed upon Repara∣tions, or hath lost by Quarterings, or any other manner of way. Improper Wodsets are these, whereby it is expresly Declar'd, That the Wodsetter shall not be lyable to any hazard of the Fruits, Ten∣nents, Wars, or Troubles; so that the Wodsetter is to have Re-pay∣ment of these, by and attour the Rents of the Lands, which are Declared to be Usurary in time coming, and the Wodsetter in all such Wodsets taken since the year 1649. is obliged to count for the superplus, more than pays his Annualrent, and to impute the same pro tanto, in payment of his principal Sum.
NOta. This Act of Adjournment,ACT 64. is the first that I find in all the present Impression of the Acts of Parliament; For Parlia∣ments were of old Dissolv'd, but now they are ordinarly Adjourn∣ed, and the Act of Adjournment is neither touched with the Scep∣ter, because it is an Act of the Kings, and He needs not touch His own Acts; nor is it Read in Parliament; because by the very Ad∣journment the Parliament is dissolv'd, and it being no more a Judi∣cature, nothing can be Read in it. But by the 12 Par. Ja. 1. By the black Acts, I find that de manda∣to domini Regis Parliamentum suit continuatum usque ad sestum beati Joannis Babtistae sub praemonitione, 15. dierum: Whereas though our Adjournments bear now no dayes, upon which Premonition is to be made; yet when the King Adjourns Parliaments by Procla∣mations, beyond the days to which it was Adjourned by Act of Par∣liament, He uses to Adjourn them upon the Premonition of fourty dayes, and fifteen was too short. It was doubted, whether if the Day to which the Parliament was Adjourned by Proclamation was elapsed, a new Parliament behoved to be called, Or if the current Parliament ought to be Adjourned by a new Proclamation, notwithstanding the Day was elaps'd, and it was found that it might be Adjourned; since the power of Cal∣ling and Dissolving Parliaments is the Kings Prerogative, and a Letter to this purpose from the King, is Registrated in the Council Books in July 1683. King CHARLES 2. Parliament 1. Session 2. EPiscopacy having been Restor'd in anno 1606.ACT 1. Bishops were by the Rebellious Parliaments abolish'd; and therefore are by this Act Restor'd to their undoubted Priviledge in Parliament (that is to say, to be a third Estate) their Function, Dignities, and Estates; but before this Act of Parlia∣ment, the Secret Council by their Act in June 1662. Discharg'd any Person to meddle with their Estates, or Revenues, in Obedi∣ence to a Letter, directed by His Majesty, which gave the first rise, both to that Act of Council, and this Act of Parliament. By the first Act Par. 12. Ja. 6. King James had permitted the Church to be Govern'd by General-assemblies, Synods, and Pres∣bytries; Which Act was not expresly abrogated by the 2 Act Par. 18. Ja. 6. and therefore it is by this Act expresly abrogated; They are also Restor'd to their Commissariots, and Quots of Te∣staments; but the present Commissars Rights are reserv'd; and
albeit they be Restored to the Superiorities; Yet Vassals having Entered by, or having pay'd to the Superiors for the Interval, are secur'd. ACT 2.BY this Act, taking up Arms (though in Defence of Religion) is Declar'd Treason; and conform to this Clause, all going to Field-conventicles in Arms, was Declar'd Treasonable; though it was alleadg'd that this was not a Rising in Arms, since every man went without knowing of his Neighbour; for the Council and Ju∣stices thought, that at this rate, a multitude of Arm'd men might easily assemble; and the Levying War, or taking up Arms, be∣ing impersonally Discharg'd, it reaches every single man; and though there were only one single man in Arms, yet he would be guilty of Treason, especially after that Proclamation, for he knew not but others might be there, & versabatur in illicito. By this Act also, all accession to the Suspending His Majesty, or His Successors, or to the Restraining their Persons, or inviting For∣raigners to Invade their Dominions, is declar'd Treason. There is one Branch of this Clause which may seem hard, but was necessary, viz. Or put limitations upon their due Obedience; for the former age and this having invented new Treasons, in assert∣ing, they would own the King, in as far as He would keep the Co∣venant, or own Jesus Christ; But reserving still to themselves to judge, how far the King did so, they did by a necessary conse∣quence conclude, that they were no further oblig'd than they pleas'd; and so made themselves in effect Judges above the King; than both which, nothing can be more Treasonable: And I remember that Sir Francis Bacon in his History of King Henry 7. Tells us, That the Judges of England found Sir Robert Clifford guilty of Treason; because he said, that if he knew Perkin Werbeck were King Ed∣ward's Son, he would never bear Arms against him, though the Words were alleadg'd to be only conditional; for they thought it a dangerous thing to admit ands and ifs to qualifie words of Trea∣son, whereby any man might express his malice, and blanch his dan∣ger. The denying His Majesties Supremacy, as it was then Establish∣ed, is declar'd punishable by in-capacity, and such other punish∣ment as is thereto due by Law; But it had been fitter to Deter∣mine that punishment, and from the words as it is now Establisht; It may be doubted, whether the Impugning the Supremacy abso∣lutely be punishable by this Act, since the Supremacy is extended by a posterior Act, viz. The 1 Act 2 Par. Ch. 2. But that Act being only an Explication of this; all such as Impugn the Kings Su∣premacy absolutely, are punishable. From these words also, That they shall be punishable by such other pains as are due by Law in such cases: It may be doubted, what pu∣nishment is due to such as Impugn the Kings Supremacy, besides
incapacity; and it seems they may be pannal'd upon the 129 and 130 Acts 8 Par. Ja. 6. It has been urg'd, That all speaking against the Kings Prerogative, is only punishable by incapacity and arbitrary punishments, because this Clause sayes, That if they Speak, Print, &c. against the Kings Su∣premacy in Causes Ecclesiastick, or to justifie any of the actings, or pra∣ctices abovementioned, they shall be so punished; But so it is, that all rising in Arms to Depose the King, &c. are above-mentioned, Er∣go, say they, The speaking, or Preaching in Defence of these, is only to be so punished; and they urge this from the Principles of Reason, and the practice of other Nations; and that excellent Law, si quis impe∣ratori maledixerit; lib 9. tit. 7. C. but this were a most absur'd Gloss: For certainly, if this Objection prov'd any thing, it would prove, that no words could infer Treason, which is expresly contrary to the very Act, whereby all these Positions are Declar'd Treason, and consequently all words whatsoever, which express these Positions, are punishable as reason; and it is fit to know that it is not that very formula, or words, which are condemn'd, but these Positions are condemn'd, for else it were easie to make the Act elusory, and to evade it, by using other words, than the words here set down, and the Analysis of that part of the Act is, that first the Positions are Declar'd Treasonable. 2. The speaking against the Kings Suprema∣cy, and the Ecclesiastical Government, as now Establish'd, &c. is forbidden. 3. The Plotting or Contriving any thing against the King, consequentially to these Positions, is Declar'd punishable by Forefaul∣ture. 4. That the speaking, &c. against the Supremacy, and the E∣stablish'd Government of the Church, is to be punish'd arbitrarly; and the words, Or to justifie any of the Deeds declar'd againstly this present Act, are to be restricted to words relative to the Suprema∣cy, &c. mention'd in that Clause only. It is also observable, That the Impugning the Government by Bishops, or the Kings Supremacy, are only punishable, if they be pursu'd within eight Moneths, and Sentenc'd within four Moneths thereafter, and are only punishable by this Act, if it was done by malicious, and advis'd Speaking; and therefore it appears, that such as were Drunk, when they spoke these words, are not punish∣able by this Act; nor such as are reputed fatuus and Fools, though they be not declared Idiots, or Furious: and yet it seems that all Writing, Preaching, and Prayers, and such malicious Expressions, to stir up the people to a dislike of His Majesties Royal Prerogative and Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastick, are punishable indefinitly, and that because either the Law presumes they are premeditated; or because of the great danger arising therefrom, and therefore it will have them punish'd as such; for the Act runs disjunctively, Writing, Preaching, Praying, or advis'd and malicious Speaking. THis is the first Act whereby Conventicles are Discharg'd,ACT and in it they are call'd, Nurseries of Sedition; But yet there is no penal Sanction against them in this Act; but by the 2 Act of the 3 Sess. of this Parliament, they are Declar'd to be fineable in
a fourth part of the yearly Rent, every Burgess being to lose the priviledge of his Burges-ship, and Merchandizing, beside the payment of a fourth part of his Moveables. Observ. 1. I see by this Act no Fine impos'd upon such as live within Burgh, and are not Burgesses. Observ. 2. By this Act it is requir'd, That before with-drawers from publick Ordinances be punish'd, they must be first admonisht by the Minister, before two Witnesses, which is not observ'd. Observ. 3. The Council are empower'd by this Act to impose such arbitrary punishment as they please upon With-drawers; But it is thought that such general powers cannot extend to Life, nor Limb. Observ. 4. That these Acts are only to last for three years, and are by the 5 Act of the 2 Sess. of the next Parliament, continu'd for other three years, and further if His Majesty pleases; so that it is in His Majesties Power to Discharge these Acts, when He pleases. By the Laws of the twelve Tables, privat and clandestine Meet∣ings, under pretext of Religion, were Discharg'd; and the word Conventicul,▪ is oft mention'd in the Civil Law, l. 1. & 3. ff. de collegiis illicitis Plin. lib. 10. Complains of them as the Pest of the Empire. In these Words, Haec tempora serio docent magna monstra talibus parentibus alii, nec quicquam in tota re-publica magis esse perniio∣sum vid. de crimine conventicula Farin. quaest. 113. inspect. 4. There is a Proclamation extant in the Registers of Council, in King James the sixths Reign, Declaring all privat Convocations, without the King's consent, and particularly Conventicles (which is the first time I see them nam'd in our Law) to be punishable as Treason; For col∣legia & conventicula permittere valde quidem est regale. Argen. art. 56. num. 37. THis Act appoints the Declaration thereto subjoyn'd, acknow∣ledging the League and Covenant to have been unlawfully im∣pos'd,ACT 5. and not to have been Obligator, &c. To be taken by all persons in publick Trust, or Office under His Majesty; and which seems to be very strange, all Members of the Colledge of Justice are declar'd to fall under this general; and such as offer to exerce before they take the Declaration, are Declared to be punishable as Vsurpers of His Ma∣jesties Authority; and this punishment is de facto arbitrary, and is im∣pos'd by the Privy Council. This Act is extended to Baillies of Regality, by the second Act of the 3 Sess. of this Parliament, and by a Decision of the Coun∣cil; both these Acts are extended to Baillies in Burghs of Barony, though they be exprest in neither of these Acts, and that because of these words in this Act, and all who enjoy any other publick Charge, Office, or Trust within the Kingdom; which is (as all general Clauses, ought to be) extended to particulars, that are of the same nature with these, to which the general Clause is subjoyn'd, and there was as great reason to extend this to Baillies of Burghs of Barony, as to Baillies of Burghs of Regality.
By that Act also▪ such as refuse to accept Offices within Burgh, are punish∣able by losing their Burgesship, and they may be also▪ compell'd to accept, though the Act mentions not this expresly; for by the Common Law, cives cogi possunt ad suscipiendum munera reipublicae l. ss. de de∣curio: But with us they cannot be oblig'd to continue longer than a year, January 2. 1668. Wilson contra Magistrats of Queensferry. Though this Act of Parliament obliges all who are Privy Coun∣sellors, &c. to take the Oath of Allegiance and this Declaration; Yet His Majesty by a Letter to the Council in November 1679. Declares that the lawful Sons and Brothers of the present King, are oblig'd to take no Oathes, because of their presumed Fidelity, and that Loyalty is their Interest, as well as Duty; and upon this Ground it seems to be, that His Royal Higness had not formerly taken these Oaths as Ad∣miral. We see likewise, that both the Sons and Brothers of Kings are Serv'd, not as Subjects, but as the King Himself; and though they be Dukes or Earls, yet they take not place, as other Subjects, but as the Sons and Brothers of the Royal Family: and thus the Sons of Kings were call'd adminicula augusti, subsidia dominationis, and in St. Matthew, St. Peter affirms, that the Sons of Kings are exempt from Tribt; nor are they in France ever Subjected to any corporal punishment, or put to Death, vid. Le Bret. Tit. des en∣fans & freres du Roy, & leur Praerogatives. And they are exempt∣ed by the Parliament 1681. from taking the Test. THis excellent Act does appoint all Sheriffs and Justices of Peace, to assist such as are Robbed,ACT 6. or Opprest in taking back their Goods immediatly upon intimation, and to restore them within fifteen days; or otherwise to be lyable: but the word immediatly does restrict the Act so, as that Sheriffs are not thereby empowered after a long interval, to bring back Goods, or make such Intimations, or raise the people for concurrence; and therefore the Gentlemen of Caithness were found lyable in a Spuil∣zie, for Robbing, and away taking an Heirship out of Strathnaver; though they alleadg'd that they were Convocated, and Com∣manded by the Earl Caithness so to do, he being Sheriff, and Ju∣stice General; and they conceiv'd that they might have been pu∣nishable if they had disobey'd; which Defence was Repell'd; be∣cause though that Convocation was since this Act, yet so long a time having interveen'd, the Sheriff could only have proceeded via ordinaria. It may be doubted from this Act, whether when any man com∣plains of Oppression, as that a Robber, or Neighbour sits violent∣ly down upon his Land? The Sheriff and Countrey are not ob∣lig'd to concur by this Act, since the Act seems to be restricted to the way of taking of Goods, though it speaks generally of oppres∣sion, and I think they are lyable in the one case, as well as in the other; and this case being a permanent Act, is more easily re∣dress'd.
By this Act likewise, the Heretors, Wodsetters and Feuars with∣in the Paroch where the Goods are found to have been Disposed, or sparpelled, are declar'd lyable for the value of the Goods; but from the context of the Act it is clear, that they are only lyable subsidiarly, in case the Goods cannot be otherwise recover'd. The words Wodsetters, and Feuars, needed not to have been subjoyn'd to Heretors, for both these are Heretors: But it seems to have been more necessary to have added Liferenters; since it was just that men who are Liferenters should be lyable; for a Father may put his Son who is minor in Fee, and reserve the whole Life∣rent to himself, or a person of quality may Marry one who Life∣rents the whole Paroch, and so this Remedy becomes ineffectual; because the Act mentions not Liferenters, and in such cases, Life∣renters are found not to be comprehended, November 14. 1679. Mi∣nister of Morum contra the Lady Beanstoun. By this Act such as Kill, Slay, Hurt, or Mutilat the away-takers, or their associats in prosecution of their Goods, are Indemnified. Observ. That all who kill in such pursuits, are not Indemnifi'd; but such only whose Goods are taken, or who are oblig'd to rise, for else such as had privat Grudge, might upon that Grudge follow and kill; but yet it seems just that if men were desir'd, though not oblig'd; or if Gentle-men being in the House when Rob∣bed, should pursue and kill, that they should also be indem∣nifi'd. This Act is generally so well conceiv'd, that if it were well pro∣secuted, as that it alone might settle the Highlands. ACT 8.THis Revocation seems to be very ill conceiv'd, for it had for∣got the Lands of the Principality, which are still compre∣hended under all other Revocations; and therefore the Parlia∣ment thought fit to add this to the Revocation; and if this be va∣lid, there needs no Revocation under the Kings Hand; but an Act of Parliament shall be sufficient without a Revocation. It is likewise observable from this Act, that the Parliament qua∣lifies the Kings Revocation, in sua far at His Majestie Revocks all Deeds done by His Father, by Declaring, that such only are Revock∣ed, as were made against the Laws standing in force, before the Year 1637. For otherwise all Deeds done by the late King, might have been challeng'd upon that Head of vis & metus exprest in this Revocation; but however, Acts extorted, vi majori, either from King or Subject, are null ipso jure by the Common Law, without
any special Revocation; but Revocations are naturally only ex∣tended to Deeds done in Minority, but not to Deeds extorted vi majore, though this Revocation comprehends both. WHen the Clergy submitted their Rights to the King,ACT 9. both the Submission and Decreet Arbitral provides, that the Bishops and others of the Clergie, should enjoy the Fruits and Rents of their Benefices, as they were Possessed by them the time of the Submissi∣on; and therefore by this Act it is Ordain'd, That any Valuations of einds, whereof the Bishops and other Benefic'd Persons were in Possession, either by Leading, Drawing, or Rental-bolls since the year 1637. should be null: and yet this Priviledge is meerly personal in favours of Church-men; for by a Missive Letter from King Charles the First, the 9 of May 1634. It is Declar'd that this Favour shall not be extended to the Tacks-men of Bishops, and other Church-men, they being Laicks, but that during these Tacks the Heretor may lead, he finding Caution; and accordingly a Valuation was sustain'd to James Hamilton of the Lands of Hetherwick against the Earl of Roxburgh, the Bishops Tacks-man of the Tiends of these Lands; though it was alleadg'd there, that the Submission and Decreet Arbitral having no such quality; but the Tiends whereof they were in possession, being absolutely reserv'd, no posterior Letter could have prejudg'd them, and it was a great prejudice to them to have their Tiends valu'd during the Tacks, for this could not but lessen the Tack-duty and the Grassoums. In this Cause it was likewise doubted, what way these Tiends should be valued during the Tack. GOvernment belongs to the King, and Property to the People;ACT 10. Yet since the publick Interest must over-rule the privat, all be∣ing still preferable to any one: Therefore Government does so far Influence Property, that all Lawyers are of opinion, that the Prince may, for a just Cause, invert or take away Property res pri∣vatorum auferre & jus alteri quaesitum tollere: and thus we see that the King may make a Cittadale upon any mans Ground, paying the just price, &c. And sometimes he may throw down the Houses of Suburbs, when there is either actual War, or fear of War, in which Towns may be besieg'd, so that He is the sole Judge of this justa causa, by which Property may be inverted; and amongst other just Causes, one is the procuring of Peace amongst the Sub∣jects; for procuring whereof, the Prince may remit both the Ci∣vil and Criminal Reparations, due to Subjects that are wrong'd during the time of the War, Gail. lib. 2. observ. 56, & 57. But with us, general Indemnities are ordinarly granted in Parliaments, wherein certainly all privat interests may be Discharg'd, because every privat man is presum'd therein to be represented: and this Act of Indemnity is one of the most full and formal that ever we had, and in it, all such are Indemnifi'd, as acted by vertue of the pub∣lick
pretended authority of these times; and though an order be necessary to be produc'd, in cases where Orders use to be given; yet the benefit of this Indemnity was extended to such as were in Arms, though they could prove no Orders, since Souldiers use to get no written Orders, except it were offered to be proven by their Oaths, that they had no Order, or that they converted the Goods pursu'd for to their own privat use, February 15. 1666. Murask contra Gordon: and that any promises made to restore such Goods, did not bind after the Act of Indemnity; though it was alleadg'd that the promise did Innovat the Debt, from a military, to an ordinary Debt; because the Lords thought that that promise might have been given, and emitted upon the Supposition, that the Souldier thought himself lyable before the Indemnity▪ and therefore the Lords found him not lyable, notwithstanding of the promise, except it could have been prov'n, that he apply'd the Goods to his own use, or that he wanted a warrant. Sometimes also the King does by His Proclamation, grant gene∣ral Indemnities, as He did in 1666, and 1679. to the Western Re∣bels; but in this case it was controverted, whether such as had Robbed privat mens Horses, were lyable in Restitution, notwith∣standing of that Indemnity; and it was urg'd that they were: Because 1. What ever might be alleadg'd, where the King had once ac∣knowledg'd Rebellion to be a pretended Authority & speiem bel∣li, by exchanging of Prisoners, and making of Truces with them, &c. Yet here there was not even those pretexts, and so they were only to be considered as a Company of privat Robbers. 2. Even this Act Indemnifies only such as acted by vertue of pre∣tended authority; Therefore since even the Parliament did not Indemnifie such privat Robbers, much less should they be secur'd by Proclamations. 3. Whatever an Act of Parliament might do, because all persons injur'd were therein represented; Yet those Proclamations were but general Remissions, and no Remission could prejudge the Party injur'd of his Reparation, and Assythment. 4. This would incourage all Rogues to be Rebels, that they might robb, and thereafter be enriched by an Indemnity: Whereas on the other hand, it would discourage them both from Rebellion and Robbery, if they knew they behov'd to be still lyable in Restitu∣tion; and though the King did remit vindictam publicam & priva∣tam, by this Proclamation; yet that vindicta privata was not to be interpret damnage and interest; but that Revenge and Crimi∣nal Action, which any privat party might pursue without the King, and vindicta is still contra-distinguished from damnum & interesse. 5. When the Law allows to the Prince a power to remit and dis∣charge the Damnage done to privat parties, in contemplation of a publick Peace: Lawyers acknowledge that this can only be done, if Peace cannot otherwise be procur'd; for otherwise publick Peace is none of these just Causes, for which Property can be in∣verted;
and therefore any such Indemnity after the Peace is Esta∣blished, cannot prejudge privat Subjects, as to their Restitution as Gail expresly Declares, observ 56. num. 6. King CHARLES 2. Parliament 1. Sess. 3. BIshops being restored in the former Session of Parliament, the King does in this Act Declare,ACT 2. That He will maintain and preserve that Government in the Church, and not give any Connivance to the prejudice thereof in the least; and so all Indulgences are from this still urg'd to be contrary to the Royal Promise, and the publick Faith. By this Act Ministers absenting themselves without a lawful ex∣cuse from the Diocesian meeting, or not concurring in the Church-discipline, when required by the Arch-bishop, are to be Suspen∣ded till the next Diocesian meeting, and if they conform not then, to be Depos'd; and though this be design'd chiefly against the Non-conforming Ministers; Yet it has been repin'd at by some of the Episcopal Clergy, because the Bishops have by it a power to Suspend by themselves; and by the present Discipline of the Church, the Bishop may Depose by himself, without the concourse of the Clergy, even in the Diocesian meetings, though he usually takes alongs with him the advice of the Ministry. In this Act with-drawing from publick Worship, as well as keep∣ing of Conventicles, is Declared to be Seditious; and therefore each Heretor with-drawing, loses the fourth part of his years Rent; each Yeoman, or Tennent may be fin'd, not exceeding a fourth of his free Moveables; every Burges is to lose his Freedom, and may be fin'd in a fourth part of his Moveables: and the Council have by this Act a very full and undetermin'd power, to inflict Corporal, beside the former punishments; But it seems that  those Punishments can be inflicted upon With-drawers, ex∣cept where they have first been admonished by their Minister in presence of two Witnesses; But since the Minister of the Paroch is not here specifi'd, it was thought that persons might be fin'd af∣ter an Admonition, given by any Minister appointed by the Privy Council, or Presbytry. This part of the Act is not expresly abrogated; but the Fines are altered by the 7 Act of the 2 Sess. Par. 2 Ch. 2. By which every Pro∣testant With-drawer (whereas this Act extends both to Papists and Protestants) is to be Fin'd thus, viz. an Heritor in the eight part of his valu'd Rent; a Tennent in six Pounds Scots; a Cot∣tar in fourty shilling Scots; every person above the De∣gree of a Tennent, but having no real Estate, in twelve Pounds; Every considerable Merchant in twelve Pounds; Every in∣feriour
Merchant, and considerable Trades-man in six pounds; and the other Inhabitants within Burgh in fourty shilling; and His Majesties Privy Council is by this last Act allow'd to force all who shall with-draw from their Paroch Churches for a year together, to give bond that they shall not rise against the King, nor His Au∣thority, and to banish or secure them in case of refusal: Whereas by this first Act, there is a general power given to the Council by the Parliament, to do every thing that they shall find necessary for pro∣curing obedience to this Act, and putting the same to punctual Execu∣tion; upon which Clause was founded the Councils putting Here∣tors to give Bond for their Wives, Tennents, and Servants keep∣ing the Church; for since the Parliament might have exacted such a Bond for that effect, it was thought the Council might, since they have by this Clause a Parliamentary power. By the other Act also it is appointed, That the same shall conti∣nue for three years, except His Majesty shall think fit it continue longer, and it was thought, that this power of Fining might be continued by the Council, without any new express Order from the King, since His Majesty did not Command the contrary: as also upon this Clause was founded the Indulgence 1679. The Parliament ha∣ving put it in His Majesties power to punish With-drawers, or not, as he thought fit, after three years were elapsed. ACT 3.THis Act is Explained in the 5 Act of the former Session. THis Act against Protections is Explained fully in the Act 47 Par. 11 Ja. 6.ACT 4. ACT 5.THis Act declares the King to have the only Power of Calling or Dissolving Synods; and that His Majesty has not only a Negative Voice in stopping Acts to be made in such Synods, but even a Negative, in not suffering any thing to be Treated or De∣bated there, except what is contained in his Proclamation, or In∣structions. This meeting of the Church, is with us call'd a Convocation, though it be here only call'd a Synod; Nor can it be deny'd, but that the Emperors did of old call the Synods, and the formula was Visum est mihi & jussi. Thus Euzeb. Speaking of Constantine, sayes, Cum per varia loca exorirentur inter Episcopos dissentiones, ipse, seu communis Episcopus a Deo constitutus Synodos ministrorum Dei indicebat. And thus Leo writing to the Emperor Theodosius, si pietas vestra suggestioni ac supplicationi dignaur annuere; ut intra Italiam haberi jubeatis Episcopale Concilium cito poterunt omnia scandala, quae in perturbationem totius Ecclesia sunt commota, resecari.
THis Act is Explain'd in the 10 Act Par. 4 Queen Mary, and and in the Observations upon the 226 Act Par. 14 Ja. 6.ACT 6. BY this Act all Strong-waters are Discharg'd to be imported, un∣der the pain of Escheating thereof,ACT 7. because it prejudged the Sale of Barley, which is the great Native Commodity of this King∣dom: But yet by the second Act of the 4 Session of the 2 Par. Ch. 2. All these Acts against strong-waters are Rescinded, and an Im∣position thereon is imposed; but yet it was thought by the Coun∣cil, that notwithstanding of that last Act, His Majesty might by His Prrogative in the Ordering and Disposal of Trade with Forraign∣ers, asserted by the 27 Act of this Session of Parliament, Discharge again the Importation of Brandy, and other strong-waters, and accordingly a Proclamation was issued out, Discharging them in March 1680. and it was urg'd that the Parliament thought that the King might Dispose upon these, against an express Act of Parlia∣ment; for though by this Act the Importation of them be absolute∣ly Discharged; Yet the King had before the other Act allowed the Importation of them, and the Parliament in the Narrative of this Act, Declares That the King had done this upon good Conside∣rations. THis Act for preventing the fraudulent mixture of the Finer sort of Tinn with baser Mettle,ACT 8. has ordained the Peutherers to put their Name, with the Thile, and the Deacons Mark upon their Work, and that the same be as fine as the Peuther of England, marked with the Rose. It may be argu'd that this Act does not hinder all mixture of Lead and Tinn, for one pound of Lead must necessarly be mixt with two pound of Tinn to make it work. The Peutherers and Plumbers are with us under one Deacon, we had no Plumbers till of late; our Peutherers of old hav∣ing been our only Plumbers; but now it is pretended from this Act, and upon other grounds, that the Peutherers should not work in Lead. THis Act Discharging Advocations from inferiour Courts,ACT 9. for sums within 200 merks, did not except the members of the Colledge of Justice; and therefore by the 16 Article of the Act for Regulating the Session, Causes belonging to the Members, and sums due to Merchants, Cooks, Vintners, and others in Burgh, for Furniture taken off from them, by such as dwell not within the Shire where the Furniture was taken off, are expresly excepted from this Act; and because this Act wanted a Sanction or Penal∣ty; therefore by that seventeenth article, the Clerk of the Bills is or∣dained not to present, pass, or write on any such Bill at his peril,
because this Act of Parliament sayes, That the Lords shall not pass any such Advocations for Causes which may competently be decided by inferi∣our Judges; Therefore it is ordained by the 16 Article foresaid, That when the Lords pass any such Advocations for sums within two hundred merks, they shall write upon the back of the Bill, that the Lords have found sufficient ground why the Cause should not be pursu'd in the first Instance, before the Inferiour Judge; and this was done to prevent any mistake, and to cause this Act be carefully Ob∣serv'd. ACT 10.THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 6 Act of the 23 Par. Ja. 6. ACT 11.THe Exportation of Money being Discharg'd by many Acts, as Ja▪ 3 Par. 1 Act 8. Ja 1 Par. 6 Act 84. For making these Acts effectu∣al. By this Act every Skipper and Merchant is oblig'd upon Oath to Declare before the Thesaurer, Thesaurer-depute, or such as are appointed by them, that they shall not carry abroad any more Money than is able to make their Expence to the next Port, and to reveal, either before, or after the Voyage, any who does, and that a Book shall be keeped in Exchequer for that effect; but this Act is not exactly observ'd. BEcause by the 40 Act Par. 6 Q Mary, The carrying of Victuals, Tallow,ACT 12. or Flesh out of the Countrey, was then Discharg'd under the pain of Escheating the same, Victuals having been then scarce; Therefore by this Act it is Declared lawful to Export Corns, when the Wheat is under twelve pounds, the Bear and Barly under eight pounds, Oats and Pease under eight merks the Boll; and also, to Export all sorts of barrell'd Flesh for nineteen years, free from Custom and Bul∣lion, but the Custom and Bullion here impos'd upon Corns Exported, is absolutely discharg'd by the 14 Act Par. 2 Ch. 2. It may be observ'd from the former Act of Q. Mary. That Skip∣pers are not regularly lyable for Transporting Merchandise, for∣bidden by Acts of Parliament, except the Sanction of the Act do expresly strick against them; since that Act is appointed to be ex∣tended to Masters and Skippers, as well as Owners of the Goods; for beside that the Parliament thought fit to express them, which they needed not have done, if the Act had imported it, these words, this Act to be extended, seem to imply that the Act naturally did not import it; for to extend an Act, or any thing else, is to carry it be∣yond its natural import. THis Act Imposing great Impositions upon English Commodities, for the advantage of our own Manufactories is in force,ACT 13. but not in observance; and one of the great dis-advantages of Setting the Kings Customs in Tacks is, that it is the Tacks-mens interest,
that all Prohibited Commodities be brought in for the advantage they get by their paying Custom, and for conniving at the bringing them in. BY this Act there is a great Custom Imposed upon Victual brought from Ireland; But thereafter by the 3 Act 3 Sess. Par. 2 Ch. 2.ACT 14. Importing of Irish Victual is totally discharged. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 63 Act Par. 11. Ja. 6. But it is further observable,ACT 15. that by this Act it is Declared the Duty of all Seriffs, Steuarts, and Baillies of Regality, to cause apprehend all Rebels, and to count for their Escheats, and to punish all the Contem∣ners of His Majesties Authority, and this is Declar'd to be, both by Law and the nature of their Office, a Duty incumbent to them; and therefore it is fit that Sheriffs and others advert to this. THis Act Ratifies by mistake the 4 Act Par. 6 Ja. 6.ACT 16. But the Act that should have been cited, is the 74 Act of that Parliament; This Act Ratifies also the 168 Act of this 15 Parliament, but it should have cited the 268. The Act it self provides for the maintainance of Beggars and Ma∣nufactures, by putting the one in the other; but the Act was never observ'd, though in it self it be a very excellent Act. THese Acts are Explain'd in the 96 Act Par. 6 Ja. 4.ACTS 17 & 18 But for fur∣ther clearing of the Act 16, It is sit to know, that though Coals were forbidden of old to be Exported by the 84 Act Par. 9 Q. Mary; Yet when they grew more frequent, they were allow∣ed to be Transported, and Custom and Bullion is put upon them, viz. Two ounces of Bullion for every four Chalders Coals, as is clear by the 37 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. and by this Act the Culross Chal∣der is Declared to be the measure by which the Custom and Bullion is to be Exacted; because as I conceive, that was the least of all Chal∣ders: The Lothian Chalder of Coals being generally a third more; but thereafter Bullion being only Impos'd upon Goods Imported; Coals do now pay no Bullion, for Exporters pay no Bullion, and there are no Coals Imported to this Nation. THe keeping Mercats upon Sunday was Discharged,ACT 19▪ 122 Act Par. 12 Ja. 6. and by this Act they are Discharg'd to be kept upon Munday, or Saturday, lest people might be oblig'd to Tra∣vel to, and from Mercats on the Sabbath: But by that Act it was appointed, that they should keep them upon any other Day, not being the Mercat-Day of the next Burgh; which provision in favours of the next Burghs was ill forgot here, vide the Observations upon that Act.
THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the Observations upon the Act 48 Par. 3 Ja. 6. and the 7 Act 3 Sess. 1 Par. Ch. 2.ACT 21. ACT 22.THis Act is Explain'd in the 62 Act Par. 1 Sess. 1 Ch. 2. ACT 23.THis Act is Explain'd in the 25 Act of the 1 Sess. Par. 1 Ch. 2. THe Bishops having consented by this Act to the Imposition up∣on themselves,ACT 24. in favour of Universities, it is Declar'd, That this Act shall be no preparative for laying on any burden upon the Clergy hereafter▪ without their own consent; From which it may be argu'd, that though all the rest of the Parliament should consent to an Imposition upon the Clergy, yet that would not be valid, except they themselves consented to it, though the Imposition were carry'd by plurality of Votes; but this Inference is not conclu∣ding; for the Parliament is a Collective Body, Compos'd of the King, and three Estates, in which the major part determines the rest; and if this were granted to the Clergy, they being but a third Estate; every one of the other two Estates might pretend the like; and so each Estate should have a Negative as well as the King: Whereas not only Craig has Determined that the Parlia∣ment may make an Act, without the consent of any one of the States, having stated this question expresly; But we see that the Burrows having unanimously dissented from the 5 Act of the 3 Ses∣sion of the second Parliament, concerning the Priviledges of Burghs-Royal, the same was notwithstanding past in Parliament, and we all remember the memorable story of the Burrows, rising and leav∣ing the Rebellious Parliaments 1649. before the Parliament pas∣sed the Act for allowing the value of Annualrents, whereupon a wor∣thy Peer said, that since they had sitten so long without the Head, they might well enough sit without the Tail. BY the 14 Act of the 1 Sess. of this Parl. the Annuity of 40000 pounds Sterling being granted to His Majesty,ACT 25. to be uplifted out of the Excise in manner mentioned in the said Act; by this Act the proportion of the said Excise is Regulated, and laid on upon the seve∣ral Shires and Burghs accordingly. Nota. This is the only Act wherein I find the word Grievances. ACT 26.BY this Act the Militia of 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse is Esta∣blish'd, which was found not to take off the Obligation of rising betwixt 60 and 16 according to the ancient Laws, for at∣tending the Kings Host, when called for; This Act Declares, That if His Majesty have further use for their service, they will be ready every man betwixt sixty and sixteen, to joyn and hazard their Lives and Fortunes, as they shall be call'd for by His Majesty: and though it be pretended, that at least they cannot be called betwixt sixty and sixteen by this Act, without an express Order from the King: The words running, When call'd for by His Majesty, without adding, or the Council in this Clause, as it did in the former immediat Clause
of this same Act, and which shews that this was designedly omited in this Clause; yet we see that the Council does call to the Host all betwixt sixty and sixteen, without express Warrand from the King, and that the Justices fine such as are absent upon these Proclamati∣ons; and which is very just, because the King is still presumed to be in the Council sictione juris, they Re-presenting by their Com∣mission His Royal Person; and we see by many Instances, that Rebellions may rise before any such Warrand can come from the King. By this Act it is Declar'd, That these Forces shall be in readiness, as they sall be call'd fr by His Majesty, to march to any part of His Dominions of Scotland, England, or Ireland, for suppressing of any Forraign Invasion, Intestine Trouble, or Insurrection, or for any other service, wherein His Majesties Honour, Authority, or Gretness may be concerned, Which Clause was much excepted against by some in the Parliament of England, as if Scotland had thereby design'd to Authorize the Invading of them; but it cannot be properly said to be an Invading of them, if we be call'd by the King; and the Calling of Subjects etiam extra territorium is inter reservata principi, and a just Right of all Kings, as is clear by Castal. de Imperatore quaest▪ 57. num. 57▪ And the Subjects of this Kingdom have been oft-times fined, and Foefaulted, for not attending the Kings Host, when they were called to Invade England; nor could any War be mannaged, or Rebellion supprest, even in the justest Cases, with∣out this. BY this Act,ACT 27. the Ordering and Disposing of Trade with Forraign Counts▪ is Declared to be His Majesties Prerogative; and though it be alleadged that this Act was only Design'd as a power to His Majesty, for the better Debarring English Commodities, whereby to bring both the Nations to an equal ballance of Trade; which Design was said to have been then represented to the Parliament, as the only Motive for making this Act, and that if this were allow∣ed in its full extent, our Kings might by Debarring us from Iron, Copper, Timber, Spices, and other necessars, force us to any Con∣descendencies, or might by this Prerogative, grant Monopolies at their pleasure: Yet I see not how this Gloss is consistent with the general words of the Act, or with our Declaring that this by the Law of Nations, belongs to all free Princes: Or with subse∣quent Parliaments, allowing the priviledges granted to the Fishing Company, the prohibiting of Brandy, and other strong Waters, and several other things, which are founded solely upon this Act. It may be Debated, whether under the word Forraigners, the English may be comprehended, since we are not Treated by them as Forraigners in the point of Succession, it being frequently decided amongst them, that the Scots may succeed to Heretage in England, notwithstanding of their Statute, debarring alibi natos; and why
then should they be repute as Forraigners to us in the matter of Trade; and this were indeed solid Reason for both Nations; but since the English debar us from their Plantations, and look upon us as Forraigners in the point of Trade, it is just that we should give them the same measure. King CHARLES 2. Parliament 2. Session 1. IT is observable, that in all the Sessions of this Parliament, the particular day of the Month whereupon the respective Acts were past, is set down, and yet since the Acts are to take effect, not from the passing, but from the publication, as is clear by the 3 Act of this Parliament, it would have seem'd more rational to have set down the day of the Publication; To which nothing can be answered, but that the Laws are presum'd to be publish'd the day they were past in. In no former Parliament the day is set down, but the whole Parliament is said to be held upon such a day, and the old use was, that the Articles prepar'd all the Acts, and they were all past in one day. ACT 1▪THis Act Declaring the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastick Causes, is formerly explain'd in the Observations upon the 2 Act Par. 18. Ja. 6. ACT 2.IT is observable from this Act, that the Militia is come in place of the old Weapon-showings, and that there being 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse granted as a Militia, by the 26 Act 3 Session of the first Parliament, which does specifie the particular proportion of Horse and Foot, to be given by every Shire; It might have been thought, that these proportions could not have been altered but by the Parliament; and yet the King and Coun∣cil having Converted the Foot of some Shires unto Horse, seems to be founded upon the last Clause of the former Act, where∣by His Majesty is intreated to give Directions to His Privy Council for mannaging of that whole affair, as His Majesty shall think fit: which Acts of Council, and the said alteration of the proporti∣ons, are hereby Ratifi'd as having been Legal; and in the last Clause of this Act, His Majesties Subjects are Commanded to obey whate∣ver Orders and Directions they shall receive from the Privy Coun∣cil, relating to the Militia, and upon these Clauses was founded the overtures of the late Conversion of the said 22000 to 5000, aug∣menting the number of the days, wherein the said 5000 are to serve, according to what might have been exacted from the whole 22000, so that the 5000 are to meet▪ the number of 176 dayes, because
the 22000 were oblig'd to meet fourty dayes; though this last mo∣del was by some objected to be a standing Force: and all Laws are stricti juris, and to be fulfill'd in forma specisica; but especially Taxations, which are a Gratuity, founded upon the free Offer of the people, as this is, to allow Conversions in such Cases, would discourage the Subjects from future offers. This Act likewise did Ratifie the Acts of Council, which appoint∣ed the Shires to provide at their own Charge, Colours, Standarts, Drums, and Trumpets, though that might seem an Imposition; but these being necessars, and the natural Consequents of the first Grant; and the Parliament having granted to the Council the former power, as said is, these Acts of Council are therefore hereby approven as Legal. Both this and the former Act doe ordain the Militia to be fur∣nished with fourty Dayes Provision, which was the old provision, that was ordinarly to be made by such as came to the Host; al∣beit sometimes twenty dayes provision be only appointed, as in the 90 Act 13 Par. Ja. 3. And of late the Council has ordain'd this pro∣vision to be made in Money, though it was contended that the Par∣liament having appointed only provision to be made, it was in the power of the persons obliged to furnish their own men according to their conveniency; But Money being thought fitter for expe∣dite Marches, the Council thought they were authorized by the for∣mer Clauses, to make this Conversion; and some have thought that by the same power, the Council could ordain the Shires from whom no proportions of Militia was sought to advance free Quarter to such of the Militia, as could not furnish themselves, or at least, might force them to be the first advancers in Cases of necessity. This Act concerning the Militia is further clear'd by the first Act of the third Session of this Parliament, appointing such as  serve either as Officers, or Souldiers in the Militia, to accept and to take the Oath of alleadgeance; and that those who are set a-part for the Militia, be not altered, &c. NOtwithstanding of all our former excellent Acts, for securing singular Successors, yet they were still un-secure,ACT 3. because they could not know, if the Vassal had Resigned his Feu ad rema∣nentiam, in his own Superiours hand; for in that case there was no Seasin requisite, which is the only Register whereby singular Successors know, if Lands were formerly Dispon'd; and therefore by this Act it is appointed, that these Instruments of Resignation ad remanentiam, (which are equivalent to Seasins,) be Registrated in the Register of Seasins, within sixty dayes, which is the time appoint∣ed for Registrating of Seasins by the 16 Act Par. 22 Ja. 6.
By this Act likewise as in that Act, Instruments of Resignation of Lands, holding Burgage, are excepted; but it seems that they must be Registrated within the Town-Court-Books within the same sixty dayes; for the Act sayes only, That such Instruments being Registrat∣ed there, shall not fall within the Certification. ACT 4.BY this Act it is Declared unlawful to poind Moveables upon Regi∣strat Bonds or Decreets, for personal debts, till the parties be first Charged, and the dayes of the Charge expire; The reason of which Act was, because Noblemen and persons of quality were oft-times poinded, and so affronted, and Merchants surprized, and thereby Ruined, before they knew that a Decreet was recovered against them, or their Bond was Registrated: But this Act was found not to extend to other Diligences ex paritate rationis; this being an Act restrictive of former Laws and Customs. From this Act are expresly excepted poindings used against Vassals for their Feu-duties: But this Exception was very unnecessary and unproper; for such poindings did not at all fall under the prohi∣bition of the Statutory part of the Act, which only prohibits the poinding Moveables for personal Debts; Exception is likewise made of Decreets obtained by Heretors against their own Tennents in their own Courts only; and therefore it has been doubted, whe∣ther Tennents may be Remov'd and Ejected, without a previous Charge; and though upon Decreets before the Lords, previous Charges are necessary; Yet upon Decreets of Removing before inferiour Courts, it is the Custom to eject immediatly; and though this may seem hard, yet it is necessary, because the intrant Ten∣nent must Remove immediatly, and so must have a place, to which he may remove, & sibi imputet, the Tennent who being warned did not provide himself timeously. ACT 5.IT is fit to observe from the Narrative of this Act, that the Par∣liament thought the King and Council had power to emit Pro∣clamations, Commanding the Parochs to Protect and Defend their Ministers, and to be lyable to such Fines as the Council should think fit, besides the Ministers Reparation, if the Offenders were not brought to condign punishment, which shows what great power the King has in the like Cases; and the Council are hereby autho∣rized to proceed in taking such courses for the future, which gene∣ral power may go very far, especially where these courses are other∣wise satisfied by necessity. This Act is more fully Explain'd in the observations upon the 27 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6. FRom this Act Discharging Suspensions against Bishops, Ministers, and other Benefic'd persons without Consignation:ACT 6. It is observ∣able from comparing the Narrative and Statutory part of the Act,
that Vniversities and Colledges are still accounted a part of the Clergy, and have still the same priviledges with them. SInce we find that the Parliament grants Acts for Naturalization of Strangers, as is clear by this and by the 65 Act Par. 8 Q Mary.ACT 7. It may be doubted, if the King can Naturalize Strangers by a Deed of His, for else those Acts were unnecessary: and in England, though the King can grant a Charter of Denization, which lasts only for Life; and though it enables a man to Transact his Heritage to his Children; Yet His Majesty cannot there Naturalize without Act of Parliament; and it may be urg'd, that since third parties, who would otherwise succeed, are prejudg'd by the Naturalization; that therefore this cannot be done without an Act of Parliament; especially if there be once jus quaesitum to any party: But by the Civil Law, the Prince could Naturalize, l. 1▪ ff. de jur. aur. annul. Of old Strangers acquired only usum toga; and at last were receiv∣ed inter cives, l. 31. & 32. ff. de jur. Fisci. And with us Craig ob∣serves, that bona immobilia nemini ablata memini ex eo quod extraneus esset: And I find it decided that Strangers may succeed with us, Janu∣ary 13. 1675. And that Strangers doing Diligence for their Debts, may enjoy and affect Lands in Scotland, seems more favourable, for else there could be no Commerce, for without this none would trust our Merchants or Countrey-men. The Design of proving Trade, by Naturalizing Strangers, has been very ordinary; for as Plinius Remarks nunc factum est ut gens altera alterius suppleret inopiam & ut quodam modo quod genitum esset uspiam apud omnes natum esse videretur in France Lewis the 11. Did upon the same Design Naturalize those who Traded in the Hansea∣tick Towns. TO encourage the Exportation of Commmodities, the Bullion which was formerly payable by the Exporters,ACT 8. by the 37 Act 1 Par. Ch. 2. Is by this Act imposed upon the Importers. BY this Act all Arrestments on Registrated Bonds, or Contracts,ACT 9. or Decreets not pursu'd and insisted on within five years after the Date: and all Arrestments upon Dependences shall prescrive, if not insisted on within five years after Sentence; so that there is here a new visible difference betwixt Arrestments on Dependences, and Arrestments upon Decreets, but upon the matter that comes to be the same; For all Arrestments upon Dependences, are likewise by this Act to prescrive within five years from the Sentence, that is to say, from the Decreet; so that utrobi{que} the prescription begins from the Decreet. By this Act likewise, Ministers Stipends, Multures, Bargains con∣cerning Moveables and Sums of Money, that are probable by Wit∣nesses, are after this Act declared only probable by Writ, or Oath of party after five years; and all actions upon Warnings,
Spuilʒies, Ejections, Arrestments, or Ministers Stipends, are to prescrive within ten years, except they be Wakened every five years, but prejudice alwise of any of the saids actions, which by former Acts of Parliament, are appointed to prescrive in a shorter time; Which Exception is here added, because of the Acts 81, 82, and 83. Par. 6 Ja. 6. By which Spuilʒies, Ejections and Re∣movings, did prescrive within three years; Yet if any action was intented upon them, it did not prescrive otherwise than in fourty years: Therefore by this Act, these Actions are Ordained to prescrive in ten years, except the action be Wakened; that is to say, a new Summonds raised and executed; for the raising of a Summonds is not sufficient in any case to stop Prescription, vide Observations upon these Acts. It was sound, Hamilton contra Herreis, March 20. 1683. That this Act was not to be extended to the Teind-duties due to Bishops, or other Titulars, being only a Correctory Law: and in the Case pursued by Sir William Purves contra It was Debated that a part of what was due to the Minister, could not prescrive, because it was Mortified Money, and Mortifications are not appointed to prescrive by this Act; But the Lords found that if a Mortification became a part of a Stipend, they did pre∣scrive by this Act, though of their own nature they do not pre∣scrive: Holograph missive Letters, and Holograph Bonds and Sub∣scriptions in Compt Books, without Witnesses, not pursu'd on with∣in twenty years, are only to be proven by the Oath of the Sub∣scriver, so that if the Subscriver die, these Debts die with him. I remember the Parliament expresly refused to limit Bills of Exchange to this time; though these be Holograph Papers, because these be∣ng the Vehicles and Supports of Trade betwixt us and Forraigners, hat were to limit them by too narrow Statutes. These Prescriptions are ordain'd not to run against minors; and from this and the next Act it may be argu'd, that Prescriptions regularly run against Minors, except they be secured by a positive Statute. BEcause Citations do interrupt the current of a Prescription; therefore this Act does appoint that only Executions by Mes∣sengers shall interrupt,ACT 10. which was done to Exclude Sheriffs; In that part Messengers being persons of publick Trust, and who find Cau∣tion; But though this Act mentions only Messengers, and that it is correctorie of a former Custom, and consequently ought to be strict∣ly Interpreted: Yet Citations by Heraulds or Pursevants will In∣terrupt; nam majori inest minus: It was alleadged that this Act should extend to all Interruptions, so that if an Interruption had been made in anno 1660. It should be renew'd after this Act; for the Act says, That all Interrupions shall be Renewed evrey seven years: But it was found, February 5 1680. Colstoun contra Barefoot. That only such Interruptions should be renewed as were made since the Act of Par∣liament;
for the first part of the Act bears, That all Interruptions as to Rights of Lands, shall in all time hereafter be Executed by Mes∣sengers: and the last part of the Act must be Interpreted accor∣ding to the first, and agrees with the general Nature of Laws, quae futuris tantum dant formam negotiis. Since this Act is only to ex∣tend to Interruptions, concerning the Rights of Lands, some have doubted, whether it should extend to Heretable Bonds and Servitudes. BY our former Law Explain'd in my crim. prac. tit. Treason; It appears clearly, that no man could be forefaulted in absence,ACT 11. ex∣cept before the Parliament; But this being thought a great incou∣ragement to Rebellion, the Justices did, upon an advice from the Lords of the Session, alter the Conclusion of Criminal Libels for Treason, making the Certification to be, that probation should be led against them, and they should be Forefaulted, as if they were pre∣sent; and therefore by this Act, these Decreets of the Justices are Ratified, and for the future, It is Ordained, that such as rise in Arms in open and manifest Rebellion against the King, may be Fore∣faulted before the Justice Court: So that this method can only be taken against such as are guilty of Perduellion, but not in Statutory or other Treasons, such as the raising a fray in the Kings Host, drawing Treason∣able Papers, &c. For these can yet only be forefaulted before the Parliament, though they may be declared Rebels before the Ju∣stices: and it has been doubted, whether the hounding out to open Rebellions, or the Resetting those who were at them, be punishable by the Justices in absence; for Art and Part is by the 114 Act Par. 12 Ja. 6. To be punishable as the Crime, whereof it is an accession, and it really deserves oft-times a severe and speedier animadversion: and thus a Noble-man of great interest Plotting, o Hounding out, is more dangerous than a Tennent who actually Rises in Arms: But on the other side it is urg'd, That Rising in Arms is to be pur∣su'd so in absence, because the Probation is so notour, that it can hardly be deny'd, but the probation of secret Treasons may be more dangerous, if taken in absence. It has been doubted, whether such whose Forefaultures were Ratifi'd by this Act, could be thereafter admitted to propone an Exculpation, since the Justices could not Rescind Sentences of Par∣liament? and whether such as are Forefaulted before the Justice-Court, can be admitted to propone any such Exculpation upon their being alibi? (or else where) Or that there was two of the same Name, or to object against the Witnesses, for the persons Fore∣faulted being cited, sibi imputent, that they appeared not? and if this were allow'd, Forefaultures might be easily Evacuated; and whatever might be said as to alibi in the first Instance, yet it were
hard to Reduce a Decreet upon it, and except the person Forefault∣ed could prove an invincible necessity, why he could not come, or send, certainly none of these Dfences can have the least shadow of Justice; nor is it sufficient to say, That they were either afraid, or out of the Countrey; for these are the ordinary Defences of such as are guilty, and any guilty person might go out of the Countrey pur∣posely to have this Defence. The method now observ'd in Forefaultures in absence, before the Justice-Court, is, that the Advocat Raises a Libel of Treason with the former Certification, he sends a Herauld with a Display∣ed Coat, to give the Citation, and sends Witnesses alongs, who at their Return, swear that they saw the Execution truly Executed; be∣cause that was found to be the Form before the Parliament. Then the Witnesses are adduc'd, after the Relevancy is cleared by Inter∣locutors, who are Examined whether they knew the party who is to be Forefaulted, which excludes the Defence, that there were more of one Name, as the purging them of partial Council does all objections against the Witnesses, that can be thereafter found∣ed upon, since it was their own fault, who compeared not to ob∣ject. The Advocat uses ordinarly to cause Cite the Pannals upon six∣ty dayes, and at the Mercat Cross, and at their Dwelling-House, lest they be out of the Countrey; at all which places, Copies of the Libel, the Names of the Assizers, and Witnesses are left. Though ordinarly the Advocat, for further Terror, causes Renverse, and Tear the Coat of the Persons Forefaulted, in the Justice-Court, with sound of Trumpet, after the Doom of Fore∣falture, and Proclaim them Traitors over the Cross with sound of Trumpet; Because that Solemnity is observed in Forefaul∣tures before the Parliament; yet this is not thought absolutely ne∣cessary. It is observable, That in the Process against the Earl of Mar and others, for taking away King James the Sixth from Stirling: and the Earl of Gowries Forefaulture, the Summons were before the King, Parliament, and His Justices, and the Doom is, the King with the advice of His Parliament, and His Justices: Some think the Ju∣stices sit only in Parliament, as the Judges sit in England; But the Summons having been before them, insinuats that they were conjunct Judges, and not Assessors. The probation in that case is led before the Lords of Articles, and not before the Parliament; but in anno 1661. The probation was led in plain Parliament, and this is juster, because the Parliament is the Grand Inquest. The last words in the Act, viz. If the said summons be found Rele∣vant, and proven by the Verdict of an Inquest, are wrong Pointed; For the summons cannot be found Relevant by the Verdict of an In∣quest.
BY the 39 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2.ACT 12. Forraign Salt to be employed up∣on Fishing, was to be free of Custom and Excize; but by se∣veral Acts of Exchequer thereafter, all Fishes spent within the Countrey, lost that priviledge, and by this Act the Importer is or∣dain'd once to pay all the Excize on forraign Salt, which is to be Re-pay'd by the Customers, to such as can by Certificats prove, that the same was employ'd upon Fishes; and though it was pretended, that this could not prejudge the Importer, since he was to be Re∣pay'd, if the Salt was imploy'd upon Fishes; whilst on the other hand, it would secure the Kings Customs, and would keep out much Forraign Salt, whereof very much was now brought in, up∣on pretext of being employ'd upon Fishing: Yet to this it was an∣swered, that this would destroy the Design of Fishing Companies, and shew too much the Inconstancy of our Parliaments. 2. Many poor Families were employ'd in Fishing, who would get credit for Salt, and yet would not get Money to pay the Excize thereof per advance. 3. Fishers were sometimes forced to bring in great quantities of Salt, being uncertain what quantities of Fish would be taken; and oftimes they would lose their Salt altogether. 4. This and all such Methods, which subjected the Merchant to the Customer, de∣stroyed Trade, and in this case they had but a personal action a∣gainst publick Servants for their advanced Money, and probably these publick Servants would not have so much Money at once in Lews, Lchsine, &c. as would pay back the Excize of Fishes ex∣ported out of these Places, and beside that, the Customer might Retard the Merchant at his pleasure. 5. The poor Merchant be∣hov'd still to make two unnecessary Voyages, one to pay the Ex∣cize, and another to seek payment. By this Act likewise, the Merchant is ordained to give his Oath upon the Custom and Excize, though by the 57 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2. Their Oaths are discharged in matters of Custom. THis Act annexing Orknay and Zeatland to the Crown,ACT 13. is Ex∣plain'd in the Observations upon the 41 Act Par. 11 Ja. 2. BY this Act it is Declared lawful to Export Corns,ACT 14. except when the same is Discharged by the Council, upon the account of Dearth, and to encourage Exportation, Corns are to pay no Cu∣stom, Bullion, or other Duty, except one Merk Scots for ilk Chalder, Vid Observations upon the 11 Act Sess. 3 Par. 1 Ch. 2. BY this Act the Lords of the Privy Council are Empowered to Regulate the prices of Ale and Drinking Bear,ACT 15. and to settle a proportion betwixt the weight of the Bread and the Boll of Wheat, and the price of the Ale, and the Boll of Bear; upon which War∣rand, the Privy Council do not pretend that they can settle a price
upon Victual, but that they may thereby only proportion the price of the one with the other, so that they may Discharge Malt-men or Baxters to give less than such respective prices, when they sell their Bread and Ale at such and such Rates, as they did by their Proclamation in the years 1677. and 1680. By this Act Malt-men are likewise discharged▪ to have a Deacon, and least this Act should be eluded, it is appointed, That no Malt-man shall keep Correspondence, nor meet upon any pretext whatsoever; and therefore I conceive, that such Towns as appoint, that none shall brew except Gild-brothers; and in meettings of the Gildry, Treat of, and settle the Prices of Malt, Seed, and Bear, do thereby con∣traveen this Statute, vid. Act 29 Par. 1 Ja. 6. THis Act having appointed, That Sheriffs and others, may con∣veen all Tennents,ACT 16. and Cottars, &c. for Repairing High-ways, and Bridges, at any time betwixt Seed-time and Harvest; and that being found too short a time, It is therefore appointed by the 9 Act of the second Session of this Parliament, that they may be called the same number of dayes, in any Season of the Year, Seed-time and Har∣vest excepted. THis Act is Explain'd in the Observations upon the 41 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2.ACT 17. THis Act is Explain'd in the Observations upon the 7 Act Par. 23 Ja. 6.ACT 18. THis Act is Explain'd in the Observations upon the 6 Act Par. 20 Ja. 6.ACT 19. BY this Act the Shires of Ross, Sutherland, Caithness, Argile, and Inverness,ACT 20. are Declared to be lyable in the double of the Excize, and of the Taxation then current, laid on by the Convention, in case of their being Deficient; against which Act, it was alleadg∣ed at the passing thereof, that this seem'd very unjust, since as to both these, one Shire could not be put in a different Condition from the rest, in a common concern; but that the legal way was, to use stricter Execution against them; and whatever might be done at the first laying on of an Imposition; yet after it is laid on, this seems hard, for probably these Shires would not have Consented, if they had foreseen any singularity, nor did they consent to the Ex∣cize, but upon equal Terms with other Shires, and this was yet much harder, because both these Taxations were voluntar Offers, and consequently should not be otherwise exacted, than in the Terms in which they were offered. Likeas, this would discou∣rage any Shire for the Future, to offer, or consent to Taxations, because they could not know but a prevailing party, or the passi∣on of some leading men, might raise to the double what they con∣sented
to; which Reasons were so convincing, that this Act was never put in Execution; nor do I think it could, without a pre∣vious Declarator, finding that these Shires had incured the Dupli∣cation, by failing to pay their Shares; for otherwise, His Maje∣sties Collectors, and Cash-keeper might exact the double, when it was not incurred; and we see that all other Irritancies, even Imposed by the Parliament, such as ob non solutum canonem, require a previous Declarator, and are purgeable at the Bar. King CHARLES 2. Parliament 2. Sess. 2. THis Act is Explained in the Observations upon the only Act of the Par. 17 Ja. 6.ACT 1. SOme Phanaticks having,ACT 2. against the Laws and Customs of Na∣tions, Refused to Depone, when they are call'd as Witnesses against those of their own Opinion; It is Declared by this Act, That such as refuse, shall be banished and fined. Qui testimonium dicere recusant pae∣nalibus mandatis compelli possunt, l. si quando & auth. seq. C. de Testi∣bus, Vid. Ruland. de Commiss. part 2. lib. 2. c. 7. & mortaliter pec∣cant. c. quisquis 11 quaest. 3. cap. 1. X de Test, cogend. It may be Doubted, whether such as refuse to Depone in mat∣ters of Treason, may not be punished as concealers of Treason; for this is in effect the worst kind of concealing; for others may conceal, because they fear want of Probation, or upon other Designs, with∣out any malice, but this still proceeds from Design; and it seems that in all other Crimes, he who refuses to Depone against a De∣linquent, is as guilty as he who Rescues him by force from the hand of Justice; for the contempt of Authority is equally great in both, and the prejudice arising to the Common-wealth, is the same. It is Declared by this Act, That nothing that any man Depones against another, shall operat against himself, as to the loss of Life, or member, or Banishment, which seems to be ill conceiv'd; for nothing that a man Depons as a witness, can operat against himself de jure, as to any effect; but it seems the Design of the Parliament has been, that parties should be obliged to Depone upon Conventicles, and Resetting off, and Intercommuning with Rebels, not only as Witnesses, but as Parties; and in the words immediatly before, it is said, that they should be forced to Depone in those things, for the more speedy Execu∣tion of Justice: But to take off all scruple in this, the King by His Letter in anno 1674: allowed His Advocat to Declare, that He
did insist only, ad paenam pcuniariam & arbitrariam; and that thereupon they might be forced to Depone in these Cases; but it being alleadged that this Declaration was not sufficient to force peo∣ple to Depone: Because 1. Resetting of Rebels imported Infamy, because it was Treason, & nemo tenetur jurare in suam turpitudi∣nem. 2. No Declaration without a Remission past the Great Seal, can secure a man in such Cases; yet both these Defences were Repelled by the Privy Council in the case, Kings Advocat contra Laird of Duntreath, June 30. 1681. For as to the first, It was answered, That some Crimes did defame omni jure, as Incest, Adultery, &c. and in these a man could not be oblig'd to Depone against himself, because the Kings Declaration could not take away the Stigma impressed by the Laws of God and Nature: But in Crimes Introduc'd only by the Municipal Laws, in favours of the King and His Government, the Infamy may be taken away by the Declaration; and where the Kings Advocat Declares, he insists not in it as a Crime, but as an irregular Transgression; The Con∣fession does not Defame, because no Crime is acknowledged. To the Second, it was answered, That there needed no Remission, where the irregularity was not pursued by way of Crime: Re∣missions being only of Crimes, and there was nothing more ordi∣nary, than for His Majesties Advocat in all Courts, to restrict his pursuits to arbitrary punishments, as in the Cases of Mutilations, Hamsucken, &c. ACT 4.SUch as assault the Lives of Ministers, or Rob their Houses, or actually attempt the same, are to be punished with Death, and Con∣fiscation of Goods; By actually attempting, I understand not nu∣dum conatum, but what the Law calls actum proximum, as the shooting a Pistol, which misgave; and this further Justifies the pro∣cedure against Mr. James Mitchel, who shot actually at the Bishop of St. Andrews; for though this Act was posterior to that Deed, though not to the Process, yet it shews what was the Thoughts of of our Parliament, as to attempts, and so was sufficient to inform Judges, how to Explain the dubious word, Invade or Pursue, us'd in the 4 Act Par. 16 Ja. 6. ACT 5.BY this Act, the Fines appointed for House-Conventicles, are for every Man and Woman having Land and Heretage, Liferent, or proper Wodset, a fourth part of their valued yearly Rent; each Tennent, twenty five Pounds; each Cottar, twelve Pounds; each Serving-man, a fourth part of their Fee; each Merchant, or chief Trades-man, to be Fin'd as a Tennent; and each inferiour Trades-man as a Cottar; if their Wives or Children be present at House-Conventicles, they are to pay the half of the respective Fines; and if themselves be present at Field-Conventicles, they are to be Fin'd in the double of these Respective Fines; so that though the Act do not specifie Wives and Children, yet they are to be com∣prehended under the word others.
Field Conventicles are by this Act Declared to be Meetings where any shall without Licence or Authority, Preach, Expone Scripture, or Pray in the Fields, or in any House where there are more persons than the House contains, so that some of them are without Doors; which last alternative was added; because some, to shun the double avail, Preached within a little House, many thousands being with∣out. It has been doubted whether those who were within, and knew not that any were without, can be punished as a Field-Conventicle; for though versabantur in re illicita; yet it was such, a res illicita, as had a determined and different punishment, and it were hard that where the punishment is Death, as it is for the Minister Preach∣ing at a Field-Conventicle, that he could be overtaken, where he could not know his Guilt. It seems by this Act, that if the House could hold more, though some were known to be without Doors, yet that Meeting could not be call'd a Field-Conventicle, since the Act sayes, or in any House where there be more persons than the House contains, and the Reason inductive of the Act ceases in this case. By this Act Magistrats of Burghs-Royal are Fineable at the Coun∣cils Pleasure, for each Conventicle keeped within their Burgh; but that which was thought somewhat severe by the Burrows, was, that they should have been Fin'd, where they discover∣ed the Conventicles themselves, since in Law, Diligence can only be requir'd in Magistrats; and in Policy it seems, that this would discourage Magistrats from doing Diligence to discover; Nor is it sufficient that by this Act they have Relief from those who were present at the Conventicle, since these oft-times are neither known, nor able to Relieve. The Master and Mistres of the House likewise where the Con∣venticle was kept, are lyable to relieve the Magistrats, upon which ground, an Act of Council was made, making the Heretor lyable for the Fines; against which it was objected, that the Parliament  not the Heretor lyable, but the Master, which is the Lands-lord, who because he is present, may hinder the Keeping of Conventicles in his House, which the innocent Heretor, who may be very remote∣ly absent, cannot. By this Act the Minister who Preaches at Field-Conventicles is punishable by Death; but the Minister who keeps House-Conven∣ticles, cannot be so much as Fin'd, for he is only ordain'd to find Caution not to do the like thereafter, under the pain of five thousand Merks, or to enact himself to go out of the Kingdom, and not to re∣turn. By this Act the half of the fines are declared to belong to Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords of Regality: and therefore by the 17 Act of the 3 Sess. Par. 2. They are ordained yearly to give an account of their Pro∣ceedings to His Majesties Privy Council, under the pain of five hun∣dred
merks: In which Act this Act is Explained as to some other points. ACT 6▪BY this Act, such as offer their Children to be baptized by any but their own Ministers, or by such as are authorized by the Council, in absence of their own Minister, upon a Certificat from their own Mini∣ster, or in his absence, from one of the Neighbouing Ministers, are to be fin'd, i an Heretor, in a fourth part of His valued Rent; Every person above the degree of a Tennent, having only a personal Estate in an hundred pounds Scots; Every inferiour Merchant, considerable Trades-man, and every Tennent labouring Land in fifty pounds Scots; Every meaner Burges, Trades-man, and Inhabitant within Burgh, and every Cottar in twenty pounds Scots; and every Servant in half a years Fee: But because upon this Act, these who would not con∣form, did, to shun these fines, delay to Baptize their Children; Therefore by the 11 Act Sess. 3 of this Parliament, the same fines are Impos'd upon such as keep their Children unbaptized for thirty dayes. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 1 Act Sess. 3 of the 1 Par. Ch. 2.ACT 7. But for further clearing thereof it may be observ'd that since by this Act Husbands are not made lyable for their fines, as by the 5 Act of this Parliament; It was urg'd, that therefore they could not be fin'd for them; since it was presumeable they were design∣edly left out here, because tho a man may hinder his Wife to go to a Conventicle; and therefore was justly punished by that, for her going, whereas no man can force his Wife to go to Church; and therefore he was not to be punish'd for her in this Act: it was al∣so urg'd, that Laws should not be extended de casu in casum, where it was probable, that the ommission was design'd; and so tho Adjudications and Comprisings were equipollent Diligences by our Law, yet it was found that an Adjudger was not lyable to pay a years Rent for his Entry, as a Compryzer was, because the Statute appoint∣ing the one, had not exprest the other; and therefore an express Statute was made, for extending this to adjudications, which is the 18 Act Par. 2. Ch. 2. and this extension was less favourable, because it was a penal Statute, and it was against the principles of Law, that one person should be punished for another; To which it was answered, That the Parliament had refer'd the Regulation of Conventicles to the Council, and had invested them for this end, with their own full power to prevent the Cheats that might be invented, and the dan∣gers that might ensue. 2. This being a matter of Government, must be interpreted so, as to preserve the Government; and if Wives who were the half, and the more humorous half of Scotland, were allow'd to abstract, all the other Remedies would be ridi∣culous, and they would debauch their Children, Tennents, and Servants, as well as influence their Husbands. 3. In all other Cases they were lyable for their Wives, for Conventicles, by the said 5 Act for Popish withdrawing and Superstitions by the 104
Act 7 Pa. Ja. 6. For their VVives swearing and cursing, by the 3 Act Pa. 1 Sess. 1 Ch. 2. In all which Acts, the Parliament consi∣dered more the good of the Kingdom, than the advantage of pri∣vate parties; and extensions are allow'd in favourable Cases; and there is none more favourable than this, especially since the VVo∣men began the last Rebellion, and since the Council has ordained Men to be lyable, the Countrey was become much quieter. 4. There being a communion of Goods betwixt Man and VVife, it was just that the Husband should be lyable for his VVife, and so he should pay her Debts, whereof this withdrawing was one; and if he of∣fer her to the Magistrats, and do not converse with her, he is to be free, and so he can only blame himself. The Council having Trans∣mitted thse Reasons to the King. His Majesty found that Husbands should be lyable for their Wives; but Declared that Husbands who were loyal, and would take the Oaths of Allegiance and Test, should be favoured in the exacting of such Fines. THis Act is Explain'd in the 23 Act Par. 1 Ch. 1. and 23 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2.ACT 8. And the exemption from Taxes here grant∣ed to the Senators of the Colledge of Justice is also al∣low'd to the Counsellours of the Empire, Bocer. de Regal.. c. 2. and to the Counsellours of France, Papon. l. 2. c. 11. and is ex∣tended in both these Kingdoms to their Widows, arg. l. 29. C. ad. l. ul. de adult. vid. Jac. Benium. privil. Juriscon. part. 3. nm. 1. THis Act is Explain'd in the 16 Act Par. 2. Ch. 2.ACT 9. King CHARLES 2. Par. 2. Sess. 3. THis Act is Explain'd in Observations upon the 2 Act Par▪ 2 Ch. 2.ACT 1. THis Act ordains that no Tutors or Curators to be named or de∣signed to any Pupil, Minor, Idiot, or furious person,ACT 2. shall exer∣cise their Office, till they first make Inventar of the Pupils Writes, Evi∣dents, Means, or Estate, with the consent of the nearest of Kin, of the Fathers side, and of the Mothers side, in manner specifi'd in the Act, and if the nearest of Kin refuse to concur, for making Inventars, they are to be summoned by the Tutor for that effect, with certification that if they be absent, the Tutor is to make an Inventar before the Judge or∣dinary, to the end it might be known what the Tutor or Curator might be Charged with.
Observ. 1. That since the Act only says, That no Tutor, or Cu∣rator of any Pupil, Minor, Idiot, or Furious-person, shall Exercise; It may be doubted, whether a Curator bonis datus, should be com∣prehended under this Act, because he may fall under none of these Denominations, though the Reason of the Law extend to him; as for instance, if a man should Tailʒie his Estate to A. and failing of him to the second Son of B. which failing, to the second Son of C. If A. died, B. being alive, but having no second Son, the King might nominat a Tutor to mannage the Estate, till it were known whether B. would have a second Son; and therefore it had been clearer to have said in the Act, That no Tutor nor Curator should Exercise, &c. Observ. 2. That the words, no Tutor or Curator nam'd, or design'd, might have been better expressed, by suppressing these words, nam'd or design'd, for that is not the proper words of Stile. Observ. 3. That since the Act requires only the consent of the nearest of Kin of the Father and the Mothers side indefinitly; This is found by Decisions to be so Interpreted, as that two of the Fathers side, and two of the Mothers side are only requisite, conform to the 35 Act Par. 6 Queen M. And though Tutor Datives were formerly granted summarly by the King in Exchequer; yet by this Act it is appointed, That the Craver of such Gifts shall cite the nearest of Kin upon both sides, that is to say, two of each, as has been also decided. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the 14 Act Par. 1 Sess. 3 Ch. 2.ACT 3. ACT 6.ALL Law having thought fit to use more Citations than one in matters of Importance. By our Forms before this Act, he who Raised a Summons, caused Execute the same by any person he pleased, who is call'd a Sheriff in that part; after which he did get an Act of continuation from one of the Clerks, and a second Summons; both which were called Act and Letters, and were Sign'd by the Clerk; but because that was expensive and troublesome; There∣fore by this Act, these Act and Letters are taken away, and two citations upon the first Summons are declared to be sufficient: as al∣so, because of old, the Execution of Summons did only bear, That the Messenger cited the parties within exprest, without mentioning the par∣ticular parties; therefore sometimes the Execution of another Summons at the same parties Instance, was cast on upon a Summons, which it may be, was never Execute; as for Instance, if I had rais'd a summons of Reduction against B. and another against C. the Executions against B. would have been sufficient against C. though C. had never been Cited, and so would have Interrupted a Prescription, or would have produced any other effect against him, which being alleadg∣ed in a Case of Rowallans; It is by this Act appointed in times com∣ing, That all Executions of Summons shall bear expresly, The Names
and Designations of the parties, pursuers and defenders, and that it shall not be sufficient, that the same do relate generally to the Summons, otherwise the Execution shall not be sustained. And though it was al∣leadg'd, that this was only to hold in Cases of Prescription, but in no other Case; yet it was found to extend to all Citations in∣definitly; and therefore a Citation against Mr. James Alexander, having no Designation, but Husband to such a Woman, and bear∣ing only relation to the Letters within-written, was not sustain'd; but yet the Lords thereafter upon the helping the Execution, allow'd the same, the Messenger having abidden by the Execution. IT is fit to know that there are three Seals in Scotland,ACT 7. the Great-Seal, Privy-Seal, and Quarter-seal; The Great-Seal is pro∣perly design'd to be appended to Heretable Rights, and the Pri∣vy-Seal for Moveables, and the Quarter-Seal is but the Testimoni∣al of the Great-Seal, and generally it is appended to Papers that are subservient to Heretable Rights, such as Precepts of Seasin, Presentations to Forefaultries, &c. The Chancellour keeps the Great-Seal, The Lord Privy-Seal keeps the Privy-Seal, and the Di∣rector of the Chancery keeps the Quarter-Seal; for as the Quarter-Seal is but a Seal subservient to the Great-Seal, so the Director of the Chancery, is an Office depending upon the Chancel∣lour. The Servants of the Chancery, and Privy-seal Office, having been in use to give out the Papers that were to pass their Registers, before they put them in a Minut-book; so that such as desired to know what passed those Seals, could not know the same; there∣fore they are by this Act ordain'd to Registrat all Writs that pass their Office, before they give them out, and to make a Minut-Book. Nota, That in the Chancery-Chamber there are two kinds of Re∣gisters, one of Parchment, for Charters, and such Heretable Rights, and other two in Paper, one for Temporary Rights, such as Gifts, Pensions, &c. In which likewise, Adjudications, and Comprisings are included; For though these be Heretable, yet they are but Temporary Rights, being Redeemable; there is another Paper Re∣gister likewise for Retours. Of old, the precept of Seasin did pass the Quarter-Seal, But be∣cause that was expensive and troublesome, therefore they are now ordain'd to be ingrossed in the Charter, and so pass the Great Seal only. By this Act likewise; Charters which were formerly in a large Skin of Parchment, are by this Act ordain'd to be Written by way of a Book, that they may thereby be the more commodiously Read, the Line being very much shorter in the one than in the other.
ACT 8.BY an old Custom in Scotland, Burgesses might have arrested Strangers, if they found them within their Burgh, till they faud Caution to pay them what was due; But by this Act, this is Restricted to Horse or Mans Meat, Abuilʒiments, or other Mer∣chandise, for which they have no security; which Act was found not to extend to such as lived upon the Borders of either Kingdoms. The Custom having been amongst the Borderers of each side, to cause one another find Caution, judicio sisti & judicatum solvi, lest otherwise the English might have drawn the Scots to London, or the Scots the English to our Session, Laws unknown to either; and therefore since the English continued this Custom after this Act of Parliament, it was fit that the Scots should have the like priviledge of arresting such as dwell in England, January 13. 1676. Bell con∣tra Robertson; and it was found by the Council, that the same Cu∣stom had been, and therefore should be allow'd to Sheriffs, and o∣ther Magistrates without Burgh, so that the Sheriff upon the bor∣ders may arrest any English-man till he find Caution judicio sisti & judicatum solvi. By this Act Burghs of Regality and Barony, are discharged to arrest, or Incarcerat any person who are not Burgesses, or Inhabi∣tants in their Burghs for any manner of Debt, which seems to im∣ply that they may arrest their own Burgesses, who are Inhabitants: Likeas de facto, they use to arrest such. This Act having Discharg'd all such arrestments, except for Horse or Mans Meat, Abuilʒi∣ments, or other Merchandize; The Lords February 22. 1677. Found that a Merchant could not arrest a stranger within Burgh, until he should find Caution to answer as Law will, for payment of the price of a Bargain of Victual, which had fallen to the said Burges as a part of his Fathers Stipend, and consequently was of the nature of other Ferms, though it was alleadged, that this did fall under the word Merchandise; and that Corn so falling to be due, might as well fall under this Act, as a Merchands Shop falling under Executry or Legacy. THis Act Ordains that no person shall Ordain, or be Ordain∣ed Ministers,ACT 9. except in the way prescriv'd by the present Government of the Church, under the pain of Banishment and Con∣fiscation, and whosoever shall be married within this Kingdom, by the foresaid persons; or any not authorized, they shall amit and lose any Right or Interest they may have by that Marriage, jure mariti vel jure relicti, and that by and attour the penalty contained in the Act 1661 which is the 34 Act Par. 1 Ch. 2.
Upon this Act His Majesty having Gifted the jus mariti of Hume of Kimmorghame, who had Maried the young Lady Aiton, and a Decla∣rator being pursu'd at the Donatars Instance· It was alleadg'd, That first, The person who Married them had a Licence from the Arch-bishop of St. Andrews to Preach. 2. That the jus mariti was not declared by this Act to fall to the King, but only that the Husband had amitted the same; and that the King can have Right to no Con∣fiscation, except where the same is expresly declared to belong to Him by the Statute, which inflicts the Confiscation. To which it was answered, That as to the first, no man could Marry any with∣in the Paroch of any Minister, without leave from that Minister, who could only understand whether the parties might be Married lawfully; nor is the being ordained a Presbyter sufficient, since that gives only power to Preach, but not to Baptize, or Marry; Marriage especially requiring Proclamation of Bonds, which is de officio Parochi. To the second it was answered, that by Law all Confiscations cedunt fisco, whether the Act appoint so or not, this being the very nature of Confiscation, as is clear by Peregrin. de jur. fi. lib. 4. cap 8. num. 9. For cui competit accusatio, ei desertur poena; nam poena est effectus tantum accusationis; and Penalties being introduc'd in solium ejus cui fi injuria, that should belong to the King, to whom the Injury was done. 2. The design of the Act was to pu∣nish such as Transgressed, and contemned the Government of the Church, whereas it were no punishment for the Husband to lose his jus mariti, if the same fell to the Wife. 3. If it fell to the Wife, she was uncapable of it, being in the same Delict. 4. Nothing by our Law can subsist in the person of the Wife; and therefore if the Husband do Renounce his jus mariti in favours of the Wife; it does by our Law return to the Husband. 5. If this were allow'd, not only might the Wife in other Cases, and particularly in this be Re∣warded for Transgressing the Law, since for Marrying irregularly, she would have ight to the jus mariti of her Husband; but this would prompt all humorous Women to Marry irregularly, that they might get a jus mariti, and Administration of their Husbands Estate, and Dominion over him. 6. If this were allow'd, the Husbands Creditors might be easily cheated, for they might Marry disorder∣ly, and so their Creditors could have no Right to the jus mariti, and this would open a Door to those Frauds, against which our Law has so seriously guarded. It may be doubted from these words of the Act, Whosoever shall be married within this Kingdom, that such as are Married without the Kingdom, incur not this Penalty, though they should go up∣on Design, which if it were allow'd, would frustrat absolutly the Act, for the Transgressors might still go over the Border and be Married: and by the said 34 Act Par. 1. All persons having their Residence in Scotland, are discharged to get themselves married in Eng∣land or Ireland, without Proclamation in Scotland; and since the Law looks upon actus elusorios, as inefficaces; so that if a man
should go out of Scotland to shun a Citation, to the end another Compriser may be prefer'd, coming back after he is Cited by the first upon sixty Dayes, to the end the second may Cite him upon a shorter time, and so be able to lead the first Comprising, the first Citation would be preferr'd, and consequently it were unjust that this which is a greater Collusion should be allow'd. ACT 10.THis Sumptuary Law against Apparrel is restricted, and Ex∣plained by the 3 Act Sess. 4. of this Parliament, and the whole Act is now in Desuetude. ACT 11.THis Act is Explain'd in the 6 Act Sess. 2. of this Parliament. ACT 12.THis Act is Explain'd in the 17 Act Par. 1 Sess. 1 Ch. 2. ACT 13.THis Act is Explain'd Act 4 Par. 3. Q. Mary. ACT 14.IN all Retoures it is usually exprest, whether or how the Lands are in his Majesties Hands, as if they be in his Majesties Hands, by vertue of Ward, the Retour bears it, but since the Retour did not use to bear the Taxt of the Marriage, or of the Feu cum maritagio; Therefore this Act appoints these to be exprest, and the reason why I think these were not exprest formerly, was because Taxt-Ward was a very late invention, and Lands holding feu cum maritagio is a very extraordinary thing, and so the inquest took no notice of either. ACT 15.THis Commission for Plantation of Kirks differs nothing from the Commissions given by the other Parliaments, but only in that the Power whereby Titulars were forced to sell to each Heretor his respective Teinds is only to last for three years after this Act, so that all that great design ends here, except it be reviv'd by the next Commission; but if the impediment during that time, flow from the Titular by reason of his Minority, or other inability, in that case the Heretor who offered to buy his own Teind, is to have place to buy his Teind as soon as the impediment is remov'd; but the Act does not express within what time: and therefore it would seem, that except the Heretor offer to buy during the Minority, and did really renew the offer to buy, immediatly after the Minority, or inability was over, he cannot have place to buy. It is also declared, that if the Heretor be Minor, and his Tutors neglect to buy his Teinds, the Minor shall have action for 2 years after his minority to compel the Titular to sell them; but the Act is ill con∣ceived, not mentioning Curators; but the giving power to buy af∣ter minority, includes both; but it may be doubted whether this
should extend to Idiots and fatuous persons; or where there is tu∣tor bonis datus ob non existentiam haeredis: and it seems the liberty to buy, should be extended to their Heirs for two years after they succeed, or two years after furious persons Reconvalesce. THe King in anno 1669. by a Commission under the Great-Seal,ACT 16. did impower Noblemen and others to Regulat the Ju∣dicatures; and these Regulations set down by them, are here Ra∣tifi'd: But it was objected, that this could not have been done in Law, because by the Institution of the Colledge of Justice, and particularly by the 93 Act Par. 7 Ja. 5. The Session has power to make sick Acts, Statutes and Ordinances, as they shall think expedi∣ent for ordering of Processes, and hasty expedition of Justice: And it was thought strange how Noblemen and Gentlemen, who under∣stood not Forms of Process, could Regulat incident Diligences, and the ordinary Terms in Reductions and Improbation, which with many other things specified in these Regulations, were so much mat∣ter of Form, and were so little to be known by the strongest Rea∣son that the greatest Lawyers did oft-times understand less of them, than the ordinary Leaders of Processes. The first thing in these Regulations is, the Roll in which all Causes are to be taken up, and are Ordain'd to be Discuss'd according to the Dates of the Returning of Processes; which Roll was former∣ly in use, though by the 12 Article it was here added, That if any Cause should be call'd by anticipation out of its due place, the Pursuers Advocat might refuse to insist, or the Defenders Advocat to answer; and upon this Article it was, that the Lord Almond appeal'd to the Parliament; because in the Action at Dumsermlings Instance against him, there having been a Debate in the Outter-house, Reported to the Lords, they had ordain'd the Cause to be summarly heard before themselves in praesentia; Whereas by the 5 Article, where the Lords upon intricacy, Ordains a Cause to be heard in praesentia; the Process should have been insert in the Roll of the Inner-house, ac∣cording to the Date of that Deliverance; which Article being con∣troverted: It was alleadg'd that by this Article, Almonds Procu∣rators were not oblig'd to Debate. To which it was answered, that though where a Cause is Ordain'd to be Inroll'd, it must be heard according to that Date; yet that did not hinder the Lords to call in any Cause for clearing the Terms of a Debate in the Outter-house, Reported to them, before they give their Interlocutor there∣in, which, as needing no Inrolment, falls not under this Article▪ and this Course of Calling in Advocats summarly, for clearing some Points, is ordinarly us'd without Inrolling Causes in the Inner-house, Roll; but after a Cause is once Inrol'd in the Inner-house Roll, it must be heard according to its Date. The Council sometimes likewise when they sustain themselves Judges Competent to Ryots, do, if any Defence be propon'd be∣fore them in point of Right, remit the matter of Right to the Lords
of Session; but ordain it to be discussed summarly, without at∣tending this Enrolment, to the end, that when the matter of Right is Discuss'd▪ they may know how to Judge the Ryot. As to the 16 and 17 Articles, Vide Observations upon the 9 Act Sess. 3 Par. 1 Ch. 2. By the 22 Article, it is appointed, That the Advocat who Returns the Process shall give out all the Papers, whereupon he resolves to found his Defences; which was done to prevent the Pursuers being forc'd to take a time to see those Papers, upon which the Defence was founded; but this was found unpracticable, because the Defenders Advocats knew not what would be found Relevant, or not; and therefore the Defenders Advocat does now propone his Defence, and if it be found Relevant, he takes a Day to prove it as for∣merly. The Difference betwixt Outter-house and Inner-house Advocats, which was appointed by the Regulations is omitted in this Act, which Confirms the Regulations without that distinction. Before this Act in Incident Diligences, four Terms were allowed for producing the Writs, which were accidental∣ly crav'd to be produc'd: The first was Letters, with Certifica∣tion, that if the Havers produc'd not, other Letters would be direct a∣gainst them, Charging them thereto simpliciter. 2. That Letters of Horning would be direct. The third was Horning. The fourth was Caption. But by this Act, the first Diligence is appointed to be Horning. The second Caption, which may seem too short; for it is hard that third Parties should, without any previous advertise∣ment be Charged with Horning; for though no Escheat will fall on this Denunciation; yet the Rebel will upon this Denunciation be debarr'd, ab agendo, beside other inconveniencies. As to the Regulations concerning the Justice-Court, it has been doubted, whether they extended to Justice-airs, or Circuit-Courts; and therefore it was doubted, whether a Citation given to a Pan∣nal who is in Prison, might be given upon fewer than fifteen dayes in a Justice-air, and the Judges inclined to think, that these Regula∣tions extend to Justice-airs, as well as Justice-Courts, as to all the Articles here exprest, since Orders are given by the Parliament for regulating Justice in these Regulations, which shew the Parliament design'd to extend them to both. From these words in the ninth Article, That the Chancellour of the As∣size mark how every individual Assizer shall Vote whether he Condemns or Asseilʒies, it clearly follows, that no Assyzer in Criminals may be non li∣quet: and if this were allow'd in one, it might be in all; & because this was not necessary formerly; Therefore by the 63 Act Par. 8. Ja. 3. It was or∣dain'd that when a Summons of Error was rais'd, each Assizer was to set down who assoilʒed, and who Condemned; but because they might forget, or for fear of punishment, might be unfaithful in this;
Therefore this Act appoints, That in the first Verdict it shall be mark∣ed who Condemned, and who assoilʒed. Albeit this Act appoints that the Chancellor shall mark whether e∣very man assoilʒes or Condemns: Yet it is thought the omission of this would not annul a Verdict in favours of the King, that being only introduc'd in favours of the King, to the end that His Maje∣sties Advocat may be instructed whom to pursue in a Summons of Error, when a party is wrongously assoilʒed. By the 11 Article it is appointed, That when any Summons of Ex∣culpation is Executed against any party, that at the same time the Names of the Witnesses and Inquest should be given, to the end the party may know what to object against the Witnesses: Upon which Article it was alleadged that when an Exculpation was rais'd against the King, the Witnesses Names should be given to his Advocat likewise; and which the Justices found to be necessary in March 1680. For the Act being general as to all; and there being as great reason that the King should know those who are to be led against Him, as any pri∣vat party, He ought to have the same measure: and whereas it was objected, that it were a very severe thing, that a poor Pannal might not lead any Witness, even during the Debate, though his Name had not been given in List; yet this has no weight, since the Act is so clear in general Terms as to all: and it may seem as unreasonable that the King should not be allow'd to lead any Wit∣ness to prove a Crime, if he find him in the Court the time of the Debate; for the Pannal may much better, know who can prove his Defence, since he behov'd to know them, if they were present, than the Kings Advocat can know who were present when the Crime was committed; and though there may be some inconvenience in this, for one particular Pannal, yet in the general there is great advantage in this to Pannals, the King being thereby forc'd to give in the Names of his Witnesses, so that the Pannal may not only know how to object against them, but even how to practise them: and whereas it may be objected, that by this procedure there be∣hov'd to be progressus in infinitum, since the King might Cite Wit∣nesses to cast the Pannals Witnesses; and the Pannal behov'd there∣fore to be allow'd to cast the Kings Witnesses, and to have Cita∣tion for that effect. It is answered, that this might as well be urg'd against all Reprobators; nor does this hold here, for the Judge should not allow such Citations, save one to each party. Because Messengers in Executing Criminal Letters, gave sometimes only copies of the Libel it self, and yet returned Executions to His Majesties Ad∣vocat; that they had likwise given Lists of Assizers and Witnesses▪ Therefore the Justices declar'd in February 1681. by an Act of their Sederunt, that if the Pannal should produce a Copy under the Mes∣sengers hand of the Libel, except the List of the Assizers and Wit∣nesses Names were upon the same Paper with it, they would not sustain the Execution, though bearing That Lists of Witnesses and As∣sizers were given.
THis Act is Explain'd in the 1 Act 1 Par. Sess. 3. and 7 Act Sess. 2 Par. 2 Ch. 2.ACT 17. COmprisings were at first Invented to pay Debt with a suitable proportion of Land,ACT 19. and the Sheriff was to adjust the sums due with the Lands Comprised; but thereafter great Estates being Comprised for small Debts, the Parliament thought fit by this Act to Ordain, that for the future, not a Messenger who was Judge in Comprisings; but the Lords of Session should by a Process be∣fore them, Adjudge as much of the Debitors Lands to the Creditor as would satisfie his principal Sum and Annualrent, with a fifth part more, because the Creditor was forc'd to take Land for Money, where∣as by the Common Law, aliud pro alio invito creditore solvi nequit. And albeit this Act expresses only that this fifth part shall be beside the Composition to the Superiour, and Expenses of Infeftment; yet certainly the Creditor must likewise have all the Expenses bestow'd upon the Process; for as this is reasonable in it self, so that expenses tends to the procuring of the Infeftment. Observ. 1. This Act came in to the Parliament simply in these Terms, and the equity of it was prest from the Custom of other Na∣tions, and particularly the Common Law, where the Praetor did ad∣judge the Debitors Land proportionally to the Debt; but it being strongly urg'd by the Lawyers, Burgesses and other Members who were Moneyed Men, that it was most unreasonable to force the Creditor to take Land, except the Debitor should produce to him a good Progress and Security; for both, to be forced to take Land, and yet to want a sufficient Right thereto, was altogether unrea∣sonable: Therefore the Parliament ordain'd, that if the Debitor did not compear and produce a sufficient progress, and Renunce the Possession, the Debitor might Adjudge the whole Estate as formerly he Comprised it; and this has almost Evacuated the whole Act; for the most of Debitors are unwilling to produce a Progres, and renunce Possession; and therefore most Lands are now ad∣judg'd as they were formerly apprised; and in December 6. 1681. It was found that an Adjudication led for a fifth part more in absence of the Debitor, was null; since the fifth part more was only to be given, where the Creditor compeared, produced a Progress, and Renunced; albeit it seems that this alternative being introduced in favours of the Creditor, it ought to be optional to him to choose either. Observ. 2. That the Legal in these Adjudications is only five years, whereas it was seven in Comprisings, for the danger being less▪ because of the said Commensuration, it was just that the time for Redemption should be shorter; and though it be not exprest that the foresaid five year shall not run against Minors, and that it may seem it should not run against them, in respect of the short commensuration, and that it seems unreasonable, that a Creditor be∣ing
forc'd to take so little Land, and should yet be forced to be unsecure during a whole Minority, yet the said Legal in Adjudications will not run against Minors, for Adjudications having come in place of Apprisings, are to be regulated by the same Rules, except where it is otherwise provided by express Law; and therefore Adjudica∣tions cannot be led upon Bonds, bearing Requisition, except Re∣quisition be first used, this being formerly necessary in Compri∣sing, February 11. 1680. Gordon contra Hunter: albeit it was there alleadg'd, that an Adjudication was a more solemn Action, (requiring previous Citation of Parties) than a Comprising, and so there needed no Requisition in Adjudications, as in Appris∣ings. Observ. 3. That where Land is Decern'd proportionally to the sum, with a fifth part more, the Creditor is to possess the Land in satisfaction of his annualrent, during the not Redemption, without being lyable to Restitution, or Compt and Reckoning; and there∣fore when the Act does thereafter say, that he shall be pay'd of his principal sum and annualrent, that must be understood in the Terms foresaid, viz. that the Rent of the Land shall be allowed for his an∣nualrent, without Restriction. Observ. 4. If the Creditor acquire once Possession, he cannot thereafter use personal Execution; which I think should be under∣stood only where the Debitor compears, both because this Clause is adjected to that part of the Act which presupposeth Compear∣ance; and before the Clause punishing his absence; and because it were unjust that a Debitor should have advantage, when he will not consent. It may be also doubted, whether though the Debitor compear, he may be free of Personal Execution, when the Land adjudged is not able to pay the sum, according to the Terms of the Act; for the reason of the Law ceaseth, viz. That a man should not use Execution, when he has attain'd payment: and thus albeit of old in Comprisings, the Compriser could not use personal Execution, where he was in possession, except he Re∣nunced the same, July 23. 1633. yet where he had not attained the possession, albeit the Comprising was expir'd, he might have us'd personal Execution by Horning and Caption, though not by arrest∣ment and poinding, December 7. 1631. Observ. 5. That since this Act Declares, that neither the Su∣periour nor Adjudger shall be prejudged by this Act; it clearly follows, that the Superiour may in this case, as in Comprisings, Redeem the Adjudger by payment of the sum, it being unjust that a stranger Vassal, should be forced upon him, when he is content to pay what is due. Quaritur, Whether albeit by this Act, no Comprisings can be led of Lands, not already Comprised; if yet Adjudicati∣ons may not be led, even where Lands are formerly Comprised; for this is not expresly discharg'd: and this seems to have been intro∣duc'd,
in favours of the Creditors, who may make their own Ele∣ction, and I think they may. Whereas it is Declar'd, That the Superiour and Ad∣judger, shall be in the same case after Citation in the Process of Ad∣judication, as if Apprising were led, and a Charge given. It may be doubted, how a simple Summons can be equivalent to an Appri∣sing and Charge; for if that were sustained, he who had rais'd the first Summons would be preferr'd to him, who having rais'd a po∣sterior Summons, had got the first Decreet; because the first Sum∣mons would be equivalent to an apprising; and consequently to a Decreet of Adjudication: But the Lords have very justly found that the meaning of this Clause is, That the first step in an Adjudica∣tion shall be preferable to the second step in a Comprising, and so forth: But not that the first step in an Adjudication shall be equiva∣lent to a compleat Comprising: and yet it still remains, that a Sum∣mons in an Adjudication is equal to a Denunciation in an Apprising; for tho a Denunciation be the more solemn Act, yet a Summons publickly call'd in the House, does likewise make the Diligence ve∣ry notour. King CHARLES 2. Parliament 2. Sess. 4. ACT 1.THE King having Designed to improve Salt made in Scot∣land, whereby poor people were maintained, and the Money kept in the Countrey, did buy the Salt made in Scotland, and ordain it to be sold out at reasonable Rates, which was called the pre-emption of Salt; but the Servants and Officers imployed in venting the Salt, having taken exorbitant prices, as was alleadg'd, and remote places, such as Galloway and the Highlands being ill furnisht, since it was difficult to keep Store-houses every where, and many fearing, that this might be a prepa∣rative for the pre-emption of Coal, Corn, &c. His Majesty was therefore pleased, for removing all such jealousies and prejudices, to condescend by this Act, to discharge the said pre-emption, and all pre-emption of Salt in time coming, but to give some advan∣tage to our own Salt above forraign Salt, our own Salt is declared free of all Excise, and imported Salt is to pay fourty shilling upon every Boll. ACT 2.THis Act is Explain'd in the Observations upon the 7 Act 3 Sess. Par. 1 Ch. 2. Nota, That before this Act the King had right to twenty shilling of Custom for every Tunn of imported Beer, by the 179 Act Par. 13 Ja. 6.
MAny Noblemen and Gentlemen having been ingaged for Debts contracted by our late Rebellious Parliaments and Commit∣tees, and not being able to shun these Debts,ACT 4. because they had given their privat Security for the same; the Parliament 1661. and posterior Parliaments suspended Execution upon them, but could not in Justice take away the Debt; Therefore for payment of this Debt, an Imposition was granted upon Tobacco to be imployed for payment thereof, as being the most unnecessary Commodity that was imported; and yet this being complained of as a Monopo∣ly, or at least a great Imposition upon a Commodity, which though at first useless, was now by Custom necessary; His Majesty did therefore Discharge the said Imposition, and allow the importing of Tobacco in all time coming, free of all Custom and Imposition, ex∣cept the ordinary Custom. King CHARLES 2. Parliament 3. AFter many Draughts of an Act to secure the Protestant Religion,ACT 1. wherein His Royal Highness allow'd all Li∣berty and Encouragement, many of them were found great snares to the Subjects; and thereupon it was remem∣bred, that in anno 1633. King Charles who was a very zealous Protestant, and dyed a Martyr for our Church, resolv'd to make new Laws for its Defence; but it was found that the Laws made by King James Sixth, were so full that nothing could be ad∣ded; and that was very probable, for that King be∣ing a most Learned and Zealous Protestant, and the dan∣gers arising to the Protestant Religion, being then so Recent and urgent, it cannot be thought that any thing would have been omitted; and therefore as that Parliament satisfied themselves with a general Ratification of all former Acts, so did this Parlia∣ment; but to shew their earnestness, this Act appoints the old Laws against Popery, and for securing the Protestant Religion, to be put to Execution, according to the Tenor and proport of these Acts; which Clause is here added to this Act, and is not in the 4 Act 1 Par. Ch. 1. THis Act is Explained in the Observation on the 8 Act 1 Par. Ja. 6. but more fully in my Jus Regium,ACT 2. Cap. The Right of Succession Defended: and it is remarkable, that it was past with∣out a contrary Vote, or the least Objection; only most thought it so just, that it was unnecessary, and really it had been so, if some in England had not controverted it.
ACT 3.THis Act Discharges ree-quarter and Localities; but because some pretended, that by this Act they were free from all ne∣cessity of carying Corn, or Strae, or Grass; whereas, if this were true, the Souldiers Horses had been made unfit for Service, by such Carriages, and the Troopers and Dragoons might have been easily Murther'd, whilest they went out singly to bring it in, there∣fore by Act of Council, this is fully regulated. ACT 4.THere having been a full Debate before His Majesty, how far Masters were answerable for their Tennents, the Parliament to prevent the like for the future, made this Act, being fully con∣vinc'd, that Masters in Scotland could command their Tennents and Servants; suitable whereto, there are many old Statutes, Command∣ing Masters to present them, and finding that without this, the Peace could not be secured; and upon the event it is found, that this has secur'd the Peace for Tennents and Servants, knowing that their Masters would find out their Crimes, which Sheriffs and others could not know; and that they could not get Service, or Land any where; If they were disorderly, they have conformed, and this hath Restor'd Masters to the just Influence which our Predecessors had over their Tennents and Servants, and which they lost by their Fanaticism, by which they came to depend only on their Ministers; and minding more Conventicles than their Work: and in which extravagancy, they were so far advanc'd, that they would not see themselves till they were secur'd, that they should be allow'd to go to these: nor is the Master ty'd by this Act to any hard thing, since by presenting them to Justice, or by putting them out of his Land, or out of his service, he is free from all danger, and this is in his power; as also to secure him yet further, it is Declar'd, that he may break their Tacks; and that if any Master take them who are put away, he shall be lyable unto three years Duty. It having been also Debated before the King, that there could be no Deputs nam'd, for putting the Laws against Ecclesiastick Dis∣orders to execution, within the bounds of Heretable Judges; therefore His Majesties Power is Declar'd as to this Point, by the Clause of this Act; but this is now unnecessary, because by the 18 Act of this Parliament, His Majesties cumulative Power is Declar'd as to all points. IT is very observable that the longer the World lasts, Probation by Witnesses-lessens alwise in esteem,ACT 5. because men grow alwise more Wicked. In our Saviours time, out of the mouth of two or three Witnesses, every word was to be established: Thereafter by our Law, and by the Laws of other Nations, nothing above an hundred pounds could be proven by Witnesses. And albeit of old the affixing of a Seal was probative without a Subscription or Witnesses:
but as by former Acts, the Subscriptions of Parties is Declar'd re∣quisit: So though formerly the Designing the Witnesses, was suf∣ficient, although they did not Subscrive: Yet by this Act no Writ is Declar'd Probative, except the Witnesses Subscrive; and with∣out their Subscriving, the Writ is Declared null: But the Act of Parliament does not condescend, whether this nullity shall be receiv∣able, by way of exception, Or if it must require a Reduction: But I conceive it must be null by way of exception, since the Law hath Declar'd such Papers null, and the want of Witnesses ap∣pears by production of the Paper it self. The second thing Established by this Act is, that no Witnesse shall sign as a Witness to any Parties Subscription, except he know the Party, and saw him subscrive, or saw, or heard him give war∣rand to the Nottar, or touch the Pen; The occasion of which part of the Act was, among other remarkable Cases, that a Gentle∣woman pretending that she could not Write before so many Com∣pany, desir'd to sign the Paper in her own Chamber, whereupon she got the Paper with her, and at her return brought it back sub∣scriv'd, and she thereafter rais'd a Reduction of the same Paper, as not truly sign'd by her; and though this should hardly have been sustainable at her own instance, because she was heard to own it by▪ the subscriving witnesses, and the whole company: yet this exception of dole could not have secluded her Heirs or Executors from reducing it as said is. If witnesses without seeing a party subscrive, or giving war∣rand to subscrive, shal subscrive as witnesses, they are declared to be pu∣nishable as accessory to Forgery; which quality some think was added to seclude the punishment of Death, it being, as may be pretended, too severe to punish by Death, that which is the effect of meer negligence, and unto which very many fall through negligence; yet our Law knows no difference betwixt accessories and principals further than ex gratia; accessories may sometimes find a mitigation of the pu∣nishment. I conceive also, that a party signing as Witness, with∣out seeing the Paper subscriv'd, should be lyable to a third party who got assignation to that Paper in Damnage and Interest, if it be Reduced ex eo capite, since he was a loser by his negligence: But quid juris? 1. If the party himself, to whom the Paper was granted, were pursuing such an action for Damnage and Interest, since he should have considered his own security, and the Witnes∣ses might have trusted to his exactness. 2. Quid juris? if the Wit∣ness heard Command given to one of the Nottars, since the Act says, That unless they heard him give Warrand to a Notar, or Notars, and touch the Notars Pen; and yet even in that case, the Paper may be null, because there was not a Command given to both the Notars; and a third party may thereby lose his Right▪ 3. It may be doubted if upon a Notars asking, if the party will warrand him to subscrive, the party do give a Nod, whether that Nod will be equivalent to a Warrand, and free the Witness, who thereupon subscrived as Witness? And it seems it should; for the Act says, ex∣cept
he saw or heard him give Command: and a man cannot see a Warrand otherways than by a Nod; and nutus was sufficient by the Civil Law to infer a Mandat. The third point in the Act is, that albeit in all Forraign Nati∣ons, the Subscription of a Notar proves in all Obligations; (for there the Notar keeps the Paper sign'd by the Party, and gives on∣ly a Duplicat sign'd by him) and albeit in our Law, a Notars Sub∣scription did prove in all Instruments, such as Seasins, Intimati∣ons, &c. If the Witnesses were insert, and design'd, though they did not at all subscrive; yet by this Act the Witnesses must likewise subscrive, which is another argument to prove, how much the Faith to be given to men is now lessen'd: But it is fit to ob∣serve, that other Instruments taken by Notars, continue in the for∣mer condition, and need no subscriving Witnesses; though for cautiousness, all Witnesses in any Instrument do now Sub∣scrive. Nota, That the Civil Law call'd all Obligations Instruments; but we call only Acts of Notars Instruments. The fourth Point in this Act is, That all Executions of Messen∣gers upon Inhibitions, Interdictions, Hornings, or Arrestments, shall be null, if they be not subscriv'd by Witnesses; and these were exprest, because they are Executions of great Impor∣tance; and yet it seems that Executions of Comprisings and Adjudications are of as great Importance as any of these; and yet it is not requir'd by this Act, that Executions of Com∣prisings and Adjudications should have subscriving Witnesses; and a Reduction being raised of the Execution of a Comprising, because there being but two Witnesses exprest in the Execution; one whereof did expresly deny, that ever he was witness in such an Execution, and so the same became null, as wanting two Wit∣nesses: To this it was answered, that the Deposition of a Wit∣ness, denying that he was present upon the Land the time of the Exe∣cution, was not sufficient to destroy an Heretable Right of so great importance, as this Comprising was; for this Deposition af∣ter so long a time, could amount to no more than a non memini; and the reason whereupon this Statute is founded, appears by the Narrative to be, because the Witnesses may by their forgetfulness easily disown their being Witnesses; and many men are apt to forget such Circumstances, and to deny that ever they have been in such a Place or House, until the same be brought back to their memory, by other very remarkable Circumstances, which could not be done here, because the Messenger and the other Wit∣nesses were both Dead. 2. The Deposition of one Witness deny∣ing his being present, should not infer a nullity of the Compris∣sing, since the loss of the whole Executions would not infer the same, after so long a time as has been frequently decided. 3. If
this were allow'd, it should be in the power of every single Wit∣ness in an Execution of a Comprising, or Adjudication, which are now the Foundations of the most of our Rights, to destroy and overturn the same for Money or Prejudice. 4. No singular Suc∣cessor buying a Comprising, could be secur'd; and if these Exe∣cutions had been thought of such importance, this Statute had required subscriving Witnesses. For a Comprising is of far more consequence than an Arrestment; The one relating to an Here∣tabl, the other to an Moveable, and very Temporary Right. 5. No man could with a sufficient causa scientiae, Depone that he was not upon the Ground of the Lands of such a Barony, except he knew every bit of the March of the Barony, for that Executi∣on might have been used upon the very remotest corner of it. The last Branch of this Act is, that no Execution whatsoever shall be sufficient to interrupt the Prescription of Heretable Rights, unless the same have subscriving Witnesses; and by this, we see what Care our Law has taken to preserve Prescriptions: and for the same reason it is appointed by the 10 Act 2 Par. Ch. 2. That all Ci∣tations that shall be made use of, for Interruptions shall be renew'd every seven year; and because of this Clause in the Act, it is advisable, that all Executions in Adjudications, Comprisings, Molestations, and generally in all Actions, relating to real Rights, have Subscriving Witnesses, though these be not Exprest, because they may be made use of as interruptions in other cases. vid. observ. on the said Act. THis Act concerning the Test, is so exactly and universally known, and all objections against it have been so fully clear'd,ACT 6. that it is unnecessary to Write any Observation upon it: BY the 2 Act of the 1 Par. Ch. 2.ACT 7. It is Declar'd that the nomi∣nation of the Senators of the Colledge of Justice did ever belong to the King. And His Majesty and His Predecessors have ever been in use of appointing the times in which they should sit, and Judge for him; and therefore His Majesties Royal Brother, finding, that many Members of Parliament inclin'd to want the Summer Sessi∣on, he allow'd the Overture to be brought into the Articles. It was likewise propos'd, That there might be one Moneth allow'd for the Summer, and four only for the Winter; for which it was urg'd, that this would save all the inconveniencies that could be adduc'd against the Summer Session; since therein Causes that could not well admit of delay, such as Suspensions, Removings, Actions upon Bills of Exchange, &c. might be discuss'd; but this was Rejected by Vote of both Articles and Parliament, as tending to as much Trouble and Expense as the Summer Session it self, without any considerable advantage. For the Leiges behov'd to attend from the remotest parts of the Nation, and yet the whole time would
be spent in useless preparations for Business the first fourthnight; and in a dangerous hurry the last fourthnight; by this Act then there is only one Session to be in the whole year, which is to last from the first of November, to the last of March inclusive. The Arguments adduc'd for this Model were first, That two meetings of the Session did encourage our Countrey-men too much to litigiousness, who were naturally too much addicted thereto; whereas one Session might well enough end all our Affairs: and it was indeed observable, that to recommend this Overture, all possible dispatch had been made in the former Session. 2. That these two Sessions occasioned great Expense, since people behov'd to come twice a year from the remotest parts of the Nation, most unnecessarly; for the Summer Session was spent in Preparation, or Hurry, as said is. 3. The Summer being the only time wherein Scots-men could have any pleasure, or could make any improve∣ment by Building, Imparking, &c. The Summer Session did, without making us any Recompense, destroy both our own Plea∣sure, and the adorning of our Countrey. The Arguments for continuing the Summer Session as former∣ly, were 1. The Session not sitting for seven Moneths, His Majesties Authority during all that time, wants the support and assistance which otherwise it uses to have from the frequent attendance of the Nobility, the Kings Officers, and others do meet frequently during the Session, because of the conveniency they have in at∣tending their private Business. Whereas in this long Vacation of seven Moneths, they can hardly be brought together, and so want that Correspondence, Intelligence and mutual assistance which they have in time of the Session; and our Rebellions being ordinarly in the Summer time, because of the conveniency which Rebels have of lying in the open Fields, and of getting provision for their Horses, it would be much easier to suppress the same, when His Majesties Authority is fully represented, and His Nobility and Ser∣vants fully conveen'd; a great instance whereof appear'd in the late Rebellion of Bothwel-bridge. 2. The Summer Session was very well contriv'd for the admi∣nistration of Justice, because in the Moneths of June and July, such as have affairs in dependence before the Session, had then no La∣bouring at Home, those two Moneths falling very conveniently in betwixt Seed-time and Harvest, and we having formerly had the Moneth of March adjected to the Winter Session, that Moneth was taken from it, because it was a part of our Seed-time, and consequently to have it now a part of our Session, must be very inconvenient. 2. In those two Moneths, His Majesties Subjects in the Isles, and remote Countreys, can only come to get Justice administrated to them in the Summer, there being no passage from
these places to the Session in the Winter time; or at least if they do come, they must stay the whole Winter; and in some years the storms are such, that there is no Travelling, even from nearer Countreys, nor is the winter fit for old men Bishops, Clergy-men, and such as are infirm to travel in. 3. The Season in these two Moneths, being very moderat with us, and the dayes long, much more Bussiness is dispatched, than in the Winter time: and there is far more conveniency of Informing, than in the cold and rigid Winter Nights, which puts men to great expense, and occasions many Diseases. 4. Though his Majesties Subjects now procure Decreets, or get Bonds; yet the same being Suspended, they cannot be discuss'd for nine or ten Moneths; during which time also widows and Orphans starve; Masters cannot remove Tennents, because they Advocat the Cause; and Debitors become Insolvent; Creditors likewise being forc'd to use Adjudiions within year and day of one another, are al∣together by the said long Vacation excluded. 5. Not only Busi∣ness before the Session by this means, but even before inferiour Courts are stopt; for such as are conscious to the injustice of their own cause, stop procedure there likewise by Advocations, which cannot be discuss'd for nine or ten Moneths. 6. Not only in these particulars; but in general, the course of Justice is stopt here: far contrary, not only to our conveniency, but to the Custom of all Nations, who allow in place of one, four or five Sessions. There being no Vacation in the world longer than two Moneths, except in Scotland, who now allow seven; during which time, honest men are Defrauded, Bankrupt, and violent Possessors are Indulg'd; Probation by Witnesses, and otherwise perish: and to be short, there is no face of Justice during that time. 7. As the Vacation is too long for the conveniency of the People, so is the Winter Ses∣sion too long for the conveniency of the Judges, Advocats and other Members of the Colledge of Justice, who must either destroy themselves by toiling too much, or the Peoples Business by their languid and negligent mannadgement thereof, it being undenyable that before the four Moneths used to expire formerly, all persons concerned did languish, weary, and wish for a Vacation. 8. The shortness of the time now allow'd, forces the Judges to give shorter au∣dience and to frequent the Side-Bars more than is fit. 3. The want of the Summer Session destroys Trade and Com∣merce; Because 1. Merchants cannot get in their Money, with which they should Trade, wanting the Execution of Law for so long a time. 2. There is now no Whitsunday Term, so that the Course of Money is stopt; and it is undenyable, that there are no payments now at Whitsunday; whereas we having had two Terms formerly, Whitsunday and Martinmas, there were very wisely two Sessions appointed, one in the Summer for those who did not pay at Whitsunday; and another in the Winter, for those who did not pay at Martinmass. 3. There being no concourse and meetings of the People for seven Moneths, there can be little Commerce: For all Traffique arises, and Bargains are made upon such occasi∣ons.
4. It is undenyable, that twice more Merchants have broke in those two years that we wanted a Summer Session, than in any six formerly; from which decay of Trade also arises a great loss to His Majesty in His Customs and Revenue. 4. This want of the Summer Session is very prejudicial to the private Estates and Interests of almost all sorts of People: For, 1. There is alwise greatest consumption of Corn, Cattle, and all Products of the Nation, in more frequent and numerous concourse of People; and the greater the Consumption be, the prices rises so much the higher. 2. The Victual of the Northern Shires not being Transportable till April, because of the Storms, it was on∣ly vented during the Summer Session; and now the price of the Victual there is much faln, and His Majesties  in those Shires much prejudg'd. 3. The Heritors of Store-rooms in the South and West are very much prejudg'd, since a great part of their Cattle, especially of the younger, was only vented in the Summer Sessi∣on. 4. The Heretors in the Shires about Edinburgh are prejudg'd in every thing that is pay'd to them. 5. The half of the Town of Edinburgh it self is almost laid waste; Landlords having almost lost half their Rent, and the best Trades-men running away to other Nations, because they are idle for seven Moneths here. By which also His Majesty is a great loser in His Revenue, that Town paying him more alone, than a sixth part of what is pay'd by all the Burghs-Royal in the Kingdom; and Trade by this extraordinary Pover∣ty decaying in Edinburgh, which is the Fountain of Commerce, and the Staple Port of the Nation, it must proportionally decay in all the other Towns, since their Trade and Commerce depends upon it. 6. His Majesties ordinary and additional Excise in Edinburgh, has very much decreased, and the Brewers are almost all broken with∣in these two years, as the Tacks-men and Customers too well know: The Ministers Stipends likewise being pay'd out of the Annuities on House-Meals, they must likewise decrease as the House-meals do. Nor is the Town able to keep up the Company, nor to fur∣nish His Majesty such assistance, as formerly it gave in the Rebellions at Pentland and Bothwel. As to the contrary Arguments, it was answered, that as to the first, Business did increase daily in all Nations, with the improve∣ment of Land and of Trade, and the multiplying of Diligences, so that Processes could not be sooner ended than formerly, without deciding them more carefully. To the second, no man now need∣ed to come till his Cause was call'd, because all Causes were decid∣ed in their course by a Roll, and so it was no matter whether he came Summer or Winter. To the third it was answer'd, there was more Planting and improvement in the Moneth of March, which is now lost than in both the Moneths of June and July.
It may be doubted if the King can recal the Summer Session with∣out an express Act of Parliament; and it may be urg'd that He may, since the Session is his own Court, wherein He does Justice to His People by His Judges; and therefore as any of His Majesties Vassals may hold their Courts when they please, much more may His Majesty hold His. Likeas His Majesty has oft-times by His Council, order'd the Session to sit when and where He pleas'd: And whereas it is pretended, that if this were true, Acts of Parliament in his case were unnecessary; and that such alterations have ne∣ver been made without the Parliament. To this it is answered, That at first the Session was a Committee of Parliament; and so the Diets of Session behov'd to be appointed by Parliament: and now likewise it is fit, that the Inclinations of the Subjects be gratifi'd by such Acts, taking along their consent in a Case of so general a concern; but it does not necessarly follow, that all things that have been Establshed by an Act of Parliament at some times, can at no other time be order'd by His Majesty alone; for we see that there are several Acts of Parliament, Regulating Trade and Coyn∣age; and yet it cannot be deny'd, but that Trade and Coynage are inter Regalia. ALbeit by the fourteenth Act 1 Par. Ch. 2.ACT 8. The Excise is to be taken up by the Commissioners of the Excise, or Collectors appointed by them, and for whom the Commissioners are answer∣ab and may be quartered upon for their Deficiency: By this Act, the grant of the Excise, which is to Commense from the Kings Death, gives His Royal Successors only a Right to what the Drink Exciseable it self can yield, and so the Shires will not be ob∣lig'd to burden their Land with Cess, for Deficiency of the Ex∣cise, as now they do. THis Act is formerly Explain'd in the Observations on the 47 Act Par. 11 Ja. 6.ACT 9. BY our former Law, it was generally believ'd that all Widows had Right to a third of their Husbands Estates,ACT 10. call'd with us a Terce, except the Wife had been expresly secluded by her Contract of Marriage, and that she had Right to her Joynture, and to a third of the superplus of any Land, wherein her Husband died In∣feft: But in a Case betwixt Prestongrange and the Lady Craigleith, Debated in the Session immediatly before this Parliament; It was alleadg'd, that the said Lady, being competently provided by her Contract of Marriage to a great Joynture, she could not likewise have Right to a Terce, because primo, provisio hominis tollit provisio∣nem legis; and therefore where a Wife is provided by express agree∣ment, and the Provision acquiesced in by the Wife and her Friends, it is in the construction of Law reputed to be in full satisfaction of all she can crave, if the same amount to a third of all the Lands,
which the Defunct had at his Decease. 2. This is Declar'd to be our Law, by the 16. cap. lib. 2. Reg. Maj. N. 6, & 10. And by Balfour in his Title of the Wises Dowry and Terce: And by Craig lib. 2. Cap. 22. 3. By the Laws of other Nations it is clear, that where a Wife is secured by a Conventional Provision, she can have no Right to any legal Provision; This the French expresly deter∣mine, when they say, that a Wife having dotarium praesixum, can∣not claim dotarium ex lege & consuetudinarium. 4. This Terce is the same in the Analogy of Law, that a Legitim, or an Aliment is to Children; but so it is that neither of these are due, when the Chil∣dren are provided; and therefore the most that can be due in ei∣ther Case is supplementum legittimae; the Law having only design∣ed the rationabilis tertia: And there is no more due to our Queens by the 2 Act 1 Par. Ja. 3. Albeit these Reasons were thought ve∣ry pungent, and tending much to the support of old Families, and to secure Men against the importunity of their Wives; yet because some positive Decisions had run in favours of the Wives, though abundantly provided; therefore the case was referr'd by the Ses∣sion to the Parliament, and they by this Act ordain'd that in time coming, if the Wife be provided, tho her Provision were never so small, she shall be excluded from a Terce, unless her Right to a Terce be secur'd to her, by and attour her particular Provision: But because this Act was not thought a Declaratory Statute, but a Regulation; therefore the Case depending was remitted back to the Session. ACT 11.THis is fully Explain'd in the Observ. upon the 16 Act 22 Par. Ja. 6. HIs Majesty having, by vertue of His Prerogative Royal, De∣clar'd by the 27 Act 3 Sess. Par. 1 Ch. 2.ACT 12. The Sole order∣ing, and disposing of Trade with Forraigners; He did by Act of Coun∣cil Anno 1681. Regulate the matter of Trade and Manufactories; which Proclamations are here Ratifi'd, for a security to such as shall undertake Manufactories; and therefore it may be doubted, if His Majesty can dispense with any thing relating to Manufactory, since in this, third Parties have followed the Faith of his Majesties Acts and Proclamations; so that His Majesty seems to be bound to them ex quasi contractu. It is declared by the last Clause of this Act, That no persons contraveening this Act, shall be lyable to the Penalties, un∣less they be found guilty within three Moneths after the delation: Upon which Clause it was found, that the Offenders were free, though they had confess'd their Contravention by their Oath within the three Moneths; because there was not a formal Sentence against them; albeit it was alleadg'd that in confitentem nullae sunt partes ju∣dicis; and the King had done sufficient diligence; and the reason of the Act did only militat in favours of those, who where not ob∣lig'd to Depone after so long a time; and the King could not be prejudg'd, where his Officers had done sufficient Diligence, for
this in effect was a Prescription, which runs only against the negli∣gent. Likeas in this Case, the want of a Decreet could not be oppon'd, since it was occasioned by a Petition, given by the Defenders craving a delay, with which the King gratifi'd them: But yet the Council thought the words of the Act so positive, that they would not go over them; especially since the Clause did resolve in an Indemnity to People who might have, and did ordinar∣ly contraveen by mistake, or through necessity, and all such In∣demnifying Clauses should be favourably Interpreted. BY the 212 Act 14 Par. Ja. 6.ACT 13. The Lords of Session can only be declined to Vote, or Judge in Causes belonging to their Fathers, Brothers, or Sons: But because the prohibition of that Act, was too narrow, and that the reason thereof did equally militat against all Judges; Therefore by this Act the Prohibition of the former Act is extended to degrees of Affinity as well as Consanguinity: As also to Uncles and Nephews, so that now no Lord of Session, or other Judge whatsomever is Capable to Vote where either the Pur∣suer or Defender is Father, Brother, or Son in Law to him, which is most just, since these may have an equal influence upon him, and sometimes greater then those formerly Discharged. It may be doubted whether this Act should extend to Cases cary∣ed on in the Names of Confidents and Trusties, for the behove of the Persons Comprehended in this Act; and it seems rational to ex∣tend it; for a Cause cannot so much be said to be his, in whose name it is pursued, as the persons to whose behove it is pursued: and if this were otherwise, the design of this excellent Act might be altogether evacuated: But yet I remember that the Earl of Rothes in Exchequer, gave by his vote the gift of Non-entry of the Estate of Levin to Sir William Bruce, though it was alleaged that it being to his own behove, he could not jus sibi dicere. To which it was an∣swered, that he did not Vote for himself, but that he was necessi∣tat to sit to make up a quorum, because there behoved still to be such a number of Commissioners of the Thesaury present in Exche∣quer, as sine quibus non. AS Laws do ordinarly show the Genius of the Nation;ACT 15. so do they likewise show the Genius of the Time wherein they are made; and this Law was occasion'd by a dreadful Principle, where∣by the Fanaticks had declar'd, That it was lawful to Kill all who Serv'd the King; and though none were punish'd in Scotland for meer principles of Religion: Yet it is very lawful to punish those who maintain Principles which tend necessarly and naturally to the raising of Rebellion, or committing of Crimes: Whereof this and the 2 Act 2 Sess. Par. 1 Ch. 2. are just Instances.
It may be doubted, whether Judges may be declined, where their Relation is equal to the Pursuer and Defender, or in Cases of Affinity, where the Affinity has ceased by the Dissolution of the Mariage. Item, It may be doubted, if a Judge can be declined where he is related only to one who is a Member of a Society, which is Pursu∣er or Defender; as for instance, if the Process be against a Col∣ledge, and the Judge be Brother to one of the Masters of the Col∣ledge. Observ. From these words, The Exchequer and other Judicatures, That the Exchequer is a Judicature in our Law, BY this Act It is declared, That the high Court of Admirality is a Soveraign Judicature in it self,ACT 16. and imports summar Execu∣tion, by which last words is meant only, that execution of Horning may pass upon their Decreets immediatly, without seeking a De∣creet conform before the Lords, as of old, conform to the 15 Act Par. 20. Ja. 6. which is here wrong cited, and call'd the 12 Par. But this summar execution is no mark of its being a Soveraign Court; for Sheriff and Bailiff Courts have the same priviledge. But that which makes this Court a Soveraign Court is, that by this Act it is declar'd, that they may not only review the Decreets of inferiour Admirals, but their own; and the reason why they are allow'd to review their own is, because it is their custom to grant oft-times Decreets summarly, for not finding Caution; and it were hard not to allow the persons concern'd to be heard upon an offer to find Cau∣tion: as also, It is declar'd by this Act, that no Advocations shall be granted from them to the Session; but even this is not observ'd, tho it was the great design of this Act, for this Act restricting this Privi∣ledge to maritim and Sea-affairs, the Lords Advocat Causes from that Court, as not maritim, it not being determin'd what Cases are mari∣tim, and so can be comprehended under that Term. The Lords are still allow'd to Suspend the Decreets of the Ad∣miral in praesentia, or by three Lords in the Vacance, which is hard∣ly to be reconciled with its being a Soveraign Court: And yet in some Cases, the Lords Suspend the Decreets of the Justice-Court, and of the Commission of the Kirk, which are certainly Soveraign Courts. The Admiral Court has got also power by this Act to ap∣ply the Fines and Amerciaments of their own Courts, to their own use, which formerly belong'd to the King; and they have also the sole power to grant Passes and safe Conducts to Ships, which by a special priviledge was granted immediatly before this Act, very ir∣regularly to Magistrats of Burghs Royal, and in the time of the late Dutch War, it was granted to a particular person, named by His Majesty, who was called Surveyer-general; and was bound by his Instructions, not to grant a Pass to any Ship till he was aboard,
and Surveyed all that was in it; only he had power to make a De∣put for Aerdeen, and beyond it. BY this Act because common things are neglected, and Creditors are disappointed of all the Rents where the same are controverted amongst them;ACT 17. therefore they are allow'd to roup the Lands of the common Creditors, when become Bankrupts, which is now done by Summons, Narrating this Statute, in which all the real Creditors are Cit∣ed, and thereupon the Lords grant a Commission for trying the value of the Estate, and then they determine what shall be the least price, and they name a Lord before whom the Roup is to be made, and Let∣ters are raised, Charging Creditors to appear on twenty one dayes, at such an hour at the New-Session-House, to offer before such a Lord, at which Day he comes to the Outter-House, and the Clerk Reads the Acts, and Commission to that Lord, and the Macer of∣fers the Lands at the price put on them by the Lords three several times, and if none offer more, he who raised the Summons gets them at that price. After all this, the Creditors go on in their multiple poinding, and being rank'd according to their due preference, the price is distri∣buted amongst them accordingly, tho it may be Debated that this preference should be first determined, since till then Creditors will not willingly offer. It seems more reasonable that Roups should be in the Shires where the Lands to be sold do ly, for there will be more buyers found there than at Edinburgh: I could likewise wish, that where any of the Lords of the Session are Pursuers, they would name Commis∣sioners in the Countrey to make the Roup, for Societies should shun sibi jus dicere, where the same can be supply'd by others. I think also that it were fit that Roups were made three several dayes, and not all at one time, as is required by the Doctors; for this would give all persons concerned time and opportunity to appear, and consider what is fit to be offered, for men may be surprised, or be sick, or busie at one hour, or time. I conceive also, that the Lord who makes the Roup, should stay all the two hours allow'd, not only to the last moment, but from the first, as we see the Judges do in Roups abroad, and before our Admirals, where the Roups are therefore appointed to be made ad candelam, or clepsidram, and in Orders of Redemption, we see that the Redeemer must wait from Sun to Sun; and tho where the Common Good is to be Rouped in Towns, or the Customs in Exchequer, the same use to be done in half an hour or so, yet it is a different thing where Creditors are to of∣fer for getting payment of their own just Debts: and for the same reason it seems, though a just Creditor come somewhat late; yet if he offer more, he ought to be preferred, nam de minimis non curat praetor, and the interest of lawful Creditors ought to have greater favour.
It is doubted, if a part of the Bankrupts Lands may be Rouped, since the Act ordains in general his Estate to be Roupt, and a part of the Estate cannot be call'd the Estate; and it were hard to choose out the Mannor-place, and some little part of the Land, by the want whereof, the rest would become of little value: The Act al∣so by ordaining the price to be distributed among the Creditors, in∣sinuats that one Creditor cannot choose a part to be Roupt for pay∣ment of his particular Debt. Whether the Lords may stop offers when they grow exorbitant in prejudice of offers of a just price, made by lawful Creditors; and whether a Creditor should be preferr'd to a stranger, both offering the same price, tho the stranger made the first offer; and if a Cre∣ditor in passion may be allow'd to repent, and if he should get Deductions in case of supervenient War, Pestilence, or vis major, may be seen with many other intricat questions, fully discust by Ma∣theus de auctionibus, and Postillus de sub-hastationibus, where all the matter of Roups are excellently Treated. ACT 18.WHen Field Conventicles, and other Insolencies grew insup∣portable, the Privy Council required the Sheriffs, Baillies of Regalities, and other Magistrats to call together these within their Jurisdictions, for repressing the same; but they answered, that this was not possible; whereupon the Council being justly jealous, that the Sheriffs did not their Duty, gave Commissions to the Com∣manding Officers, and other Gentlemen to be Conjunct-Sheriffs, as to all Ecclesiastick Disorders, and found that these contributed much to quiet the Countrey; but this being complained of, as a streach of the Prerogative, This Act was made, Declaring That His Majesty may by Himself, or others Commissionated by Him, take Cognizance and Decision of any Causes He pleases, notwithstanding of any Jurisdiction bestowed by Him and His Predecessors; For under∣standing whereof, it is fit to know that all Jurisdictions granted by absolute Princes, are cumulative, and not privative; for tho they empower others to distribute Justice to their people, for their and their Peoples greater Conveniency; yet they never thereby denude and debar themselves from judging or appointing others; for the King may see, and the People may find Judges very unfit, and that the Government is ruined by them; and yet a Crime cannot be prov'd, whereby Deprivation may be infer'd: whereas there is no inconveniency on the other hand. 2. This is clear by Craig to be our Law, lib. 2. diag. 8. Illud tamen generaliter observandum, quod jurisdictio nunquam privative, sed cumulative delegari potest: non est enim quasi translatio juris ex una persona in aliam, sed tantum man∣data jurisdictio, quae non obstante delegatione adhuc remanet in dele∣gante. 3. This is no more than what was allow'd to the King by the 27 Act Par. 5 Ja. 3. Whereby it is Declared, That it shall be lawful to the King at his empleasance (or pleasure) To take Decision
of any matter that comes before him, likeas it was wont to be as of before. 4. This keeps Heretable Officers in a just aw, and secures People; for if they will be partial or remiss, they know that others may be nam'd to supply their Defects. THe occasion of this Act was a Solemn Debate betwixt Provost Curry and Charles Oliphant in December 1677.ACT 19. In which the said Provost rais'd a Reduction of a Right made by the Mr. of Mor∣dingtoun to the said Charles of the Lands of Nether Mordingtoun, and Edringtoun, as made by a Minor; and though an Oath was adje∣cted by the Minor, to Ratifie at his majority: Yet that was like∣wise null, since by the same facility that Minors will Contract to their Laesion▪ they will likewise swear to their Laesion; and there∣fore it is the publick interest, as well as the interest of the Minor, that such Oaths should not bind. To which it was answered, that though the World, whilest Pa∣gan, did Rescind such Oaths; yet by the famous Law sacramenta puberum, such Oaths were to be observ'd: and though Oaths gi∣ven against a publick Law, were not to be observ'd; yet in such a Case as this, where the publick was not concerned; and where there was no Statute against the interposing such an Oath, the Oath ought to be observed, as being a matter of far greater consequence than the Contract: Nor should Judges favour Perjury, or en∣snare people who trusted Oaths; and even in Countreys where Statutes were made against the validity of such Oaths, they ordain∣ed the Minor to be first absolved by a Church-man; and since we had no such Absolutions, we could admit of no Restitution. To which it was Reply'd, that the Laws Restoring Minors were found∣ed upon publick Good and Interest; and therefore it were absurd to suffer the Contravention of them to be secured by an Oath, and that an Oath adjected by a Minor, should no more bind than an Oath adjected by a Wife, which has been by many Decisions found not to be binding, and even in these Countreys where the Canon Law takes place, this authentick Constitution is not observ'd, viz. in France, Flanders, &c. as is observed by Guidilinus de jure novis∣simo, lib. 3. cap. 12. It was 2ly alleadged, That such Oaths ought not to secure where the Deed is in it self invalid and illegal, as here where the Father authorizes the Son to Confirm a Deed to the Fa∣thers own advantage, nam nemo potest esse author in rem suam. 3. It ought not to be respected even by the opinion of the Civilians, where there is aenorm laesion; which aenorm laesion is dolus praesumptus: and no oath can secure against fraud or dole. 4. Though the Mi∣nor might have prejudged himself by that oath, and thereby have secluded himself from craving Restitution; yet he could not pre∣judge the Provost who was a third Party, and was his Creditor; for the effect of the oath being only personal, could not reach him. The Lords upon this Debate sustained the Contract, and Repelled the Reason of Reduction, though rais'd by a singular Successor.
But they caused draw this Act of Parliament, Discharging for the fu∣ture, the exacting of such oaths: annulling likewise the Contract, and Declaring the Elicitor of the Oath to be infamous. Nota, These words in the Act, That it shall be competent to any person related to the minor, to obtain the Writs to be declared null, were adjected, because some minors might scruple to pursue a Re∣duction of a Writ, that they themselves had granted upon Oath; and albeit this Act Declares only such Contracts to be null, yet it will certainly extend to Bands, Dispositions, and other Writs; for as the Reason is the same, so both the Narrative and the last words of the Act, has the word Writs, which comprehends all these; and I conceive the Remedy of this Act will extend likewise to pro∣mises, though these be not comprehended under the word Writs; for if it were otherwise, the Act might be eluded by taking of Promises upon Oath from Minors: As also, albeit the Narrative Relates only to Writs of Importance, by which are only mean'd in our Law, such wherein the sum exceeds an hundred pounds Scots: yet since the Statutory part is general, and that an hundred pounds may ruine poor people, nor should men of Substance Lasle an Oath by interposing it, to mean matters; therefore I think that this Re∣medy should be extended to all cases whatsoever. ACT 20.BY this Act for facilitating the course of Trade, Bills of Exchange are ordain'd to be Registrated within six moneths after they are due, and tho the Bill bear no consent to the Registration as Bands do; yet they are registrated by vertue of this Act, which is Nar∣rated in the beginning of the Paper that is Registrated; but this is of no great use; and therefore Merchants choose rather to pursue summarly before the Dean of Gilds Court, who is with us, le con∣sul des Merchans, and even these Pursuits are disappointed by Ad∣vocations; nor have they so much as the priviledge of being Discust summarly, without attending the course of the Roll, as was crav'd by the draught of the Act that was first under consideration. It was also crav'd, that Compensation should not be receiv'd against Bills of Ex∣change, as is Customary abroad; and a Bill is in effect, in the constru∣ction of Law, a bagg of Money trusted by the Drawer, and to be re∣delivered in another place; and Compensation is not even by the Common Law received against Depositations. The reason why this Act was only extended to Bills drawn from abroad, or in favours of persons abroad; and not to Bills drawn from one place within the Kingdom to another, was, because if that had been allow'd, all Debts had still been constituted by Bills, and not by Bands, and so had been priviledged by too summar execution.
BEfore Parliaments can proceed to publick Affairs,ACT 21. all the con∣troverted Elections must first be cleared and determined, which being the occasion of great delayes in the dispatch of business gave the rise to this Act, whereby it is ordain'd, that none shall have vote in the Elections of Commissioners for Shires or Stewartries, except those who are publickly Infeft in Property or Superiority, Life-rent or proper Wodset, and in possession of a 40 shilling Land of old Extent, holden of the King or Prince, or in Lands of 400 Pounds Valuation, whether Kirk-lands, or other Blench, Few or Ward-lands, and that appearand Heirs being in possession by vertue of their Predecessors Rights, and Husbands for the free-holds of their Wives, or as Life-renters by the courtesie of Scotland, of the Extent and Valuation foresaid, have right to Vote. The Shire of Berwick having made cross Elections of Commissio∣ners to the late Parliament, the Committee for controverted Electi∣ons decided these points for clearing this Act, which report was ap∣proven in Parliament. 1. That a Charter confirmed by the King of a 40 shilling Land, does not give a party right to vote, except his Seasin thereupon be produced, and that the Confirmation be of the Seasin, since the Confirmation of a Charter, imports no more but the Confirmation of a personal obligment. 2. Vassals of Kirk-lands of the Extent and Valuation foresaid, have no vote unless they hold their Lands of the King as their im∣mediat Superiour; for since it is optional to them, either to hold of the King, or Lord of Erection, by the 53 Act, 1 Parl. Ch. 2. it is presumed they still hold of the Lord of Erection, unless they instruct that they hold of His Majesty. 3. Where Vassals produce Rights to a part of a Barony, that will give them no right to vote, except they can instruct that their Lands are Retour'd to such a proportion as put them in the terms of the Act of Parliament. 4. Life-rents not constitute by Infeftments, but by personal o∣bligments, give not the Life-renters right to vote. 5. Persons Interdicted seem to be debarr'd from voting, since they who were not fit for managing their own affairs, ought not to be trusted to vote for Commissioners to Parliaments; but this I think should only hold in Interdictions, causa cognita, very judi∣cious men consenting to voluntar Interdictions. 6. If the King be only Superiour supplendo vices of the immediat Superior, by his not entering to the Superiority: this will not give the Vassal a vote, since the immediat Superior retains all the ca∣sualities, and consequently remains still Superiour, albeit pro hac vice the King supplies the defect of the Immediat Superiours lying out, by infefting the Vassal. 7. Appearand Heirs, albeit in the terms of this Act have no right to vote, if they have renounced, or if their Predecessors were de∣nuded,
albeit they were in possession, the famine being only by a tollerance from the Party in whose favours the Predecessor was denuded. 8. Appearand Heirs by the Mothers side, gives not a Title to vote, except they be actually entered Heirs, since it is presumed there are Heirs Male, except the contrair be proven by a Service. 9. Vassals who have expired Apprisings, or Adjudications, have liberty to vote, albeit by an Act of the Lords of Session, the Lands are declared to be redeemable for the Sums truly due, since by this Act Apprisings, Adjudications, and proper Wodsetts, are not to be questioned upon pretence of any order of redemption, payment, or satisfaction, unless a Decreet of Declarator, voluntar Redem∣ption, Resignation, or Renunciation be produced. 10. It was found in the Election of the Commissioners of East-Lothian, that no votes are sustained, but these who voted and sign∣ed before the Meeting was dissolved; and the votes of those who came immediatly after, were not sustain'd, tho the Preses return'd with some of the number. But in the Elections for the Mers, it was found that a person was capable to vote, albeit he was detain∣ed Prisoner by a mis-information from one of the Competitors; he having given an account of the way and manner of his Imprison∣ment to the Meeting, and declared his vote to them, and after his enlargement did immediatly take the Test, and sign the Commission. FINIS.
Several Additions and Supplements to the Obser∣vations on the Acts of Parliament. BY this Act the Wardens are discharged to judge, which is here called very odly to intromet with,Obser∣vation on ACT 42. Par. 11. Ja. 5. pag. 47. any thing that pertains to the Dittay of the Justice-Air, saving the points that are needful for conservation of the Trews (or Truce) that is to say, the Juris∣diction of the Wardens by this Act is prorogated to the cognition of all Crimes which were necessary to be judged by them, for preservation of the peace betwixt the Kingdoms; and so the first part of the Act specifying Treason, was unnecessary, for it was com∣prehended under the general: but now the Commissioners of the Borders, who are come in place of the Wardens, have power di∣rectly, and so not only incidenter to judge Thefts, and many other points of Dittay. TO add after these words,Act 114▪ Par. 6. K. Ja. 4 The King may make any man a Lord of Parliament; yet by the constant course of posterior Acts of Parliament concerning elections and representatives of Shires in Parliament, and by the constant custome acknowledg'd both by King and Parliament, none can represent Shires in Parliament, but such as are actually chosen by the Shires whom they represent. AFter these words, That a Registrat Extract will not stop a Cer∣tification, when a Horning and its Executions are called for,Act 94. Par. 6. Ja. 6. p. 200. but the Principal must be produced. It is fit to add, That though this hold against the User of the Horning, yet the Kings Donator is not oblig'd to produce the Principal Horning, for else by col∣lusion betwixt the Debitor and the Creditor, the Kings Donator might be easily prejudg'd. WHereas it is said,Act 29. Par. 11. K. Ja. 6 p. 29. that decimae inclusae are to be burdened with no part of the Ministers Stipend; for clearing whereof it may be added, that this was so decided before the Commission in Ja∣nuary 26. 1675. Heretors of Tulliallan contra Colvill; but afterwards in March 1684. the same Case being heard in Praesentia before the Lords, by a reference from the High Commission; it was found that conform to this Clause in the Act of Annexation, reserving the tenth penny to the Ecclesiastick person, that therefore the Heretor having right to his Lands, cum decimis inclusis, should be lyable to the Minister for the tenth part of his Feu-duty, with relief to him against the Titular pro tanto. AFter these words, The Earl Marshal contra Brae, add,Act 141 Par. 12 Ja. 6. p. 269. this De∣creet was in foro: And Stairs asserts, that competent and o∣mitted before Baron-Courts, is not considered.
THe answer to this doubt is, that the Act of the Convention Anno 1665. doth not make either Stipendiary Ministers,Act 162 Par. 12 Ja. 6. p. 227. or Ministers having modified Stipends lyable to Impositions, but only ordains Beneficed Persons to be Taxt: And the Conven∣tion 1667. having ordained the Impositions then laid on, to be Levied according to the Valuation led in Anno 1660. and not ac∣cording to the retoured Duty (which was the old way) did or∣dain, that Benefices should be valued, and pay, in so far as these Benefices exceeded the modified Stipend, and so they are burden∣ed in both these Acts as Beneficed persons, and not as Stipendiary Ministers, of whom this Act only speaks. IN the second Observation upon the said Act, it is said, that the Lords will allow the user of a Writ to condescend who was the Writer,Act 175 Par. 13 Ja 6. p. 280. albeit his name be not insert, nor condescended on in the Writ. But now by the 5th Act, Parl. 3. Ch. 2. all Writs not condescending upon the Writers in the Body, are absolutely null▪ and not suppliable by a condescendence, ex post facto. THis Observation should be thus worded, The Act here rela∣ted to,Act 80. Par. 9. Q. M. p. 168. is the 34. Act, Par. 6. Q. Mary; and the Acts di∣spensed with both in this and the said 34. Act, is the 77. Act, Par. 6. Ja. 5. WE have this custome of Morning-gift from the Germans, which is called in their Language,Acts 190, & 191. Par. 13 K. Ja. 6. p. 283 Morgengab, and is lear∣nedly treated by Milerus, in his Gamologia personarum illustrium, cap. 6. Where he defines Morgennatica to be donum matutinale quod olim apud Germanos & Francos una cum doe proprium patrimonium erat uxoris, vid. pag. 160. WHereas it is said there, that a Band wanting Witnesses is null, if the same exceed an hundred pounds,Act 200 Par. 14 K. Ja. 6. p. 286. and is valid, if restricted to 100 pounds: It is fit to add, that this seems to be some∣what dubious, in respect of the 175 Act, Par. 13. K. Ja. 6. and 5. Act, Par. 3. Ch. 2. which declare all Writts, without exception, null, that are not subscribed before Witnesses. IT being asserted in the Observations upon this Act, that the re∣servation of the Act extends as well to the Patronage of Mensal Kirks,Act 2 Par. 18 K. Ja. 6. p. 321 as those that are of the Bishops representation; this Cauti∣on should be subjoyned, that notwithstanding of the Decision there mentioned, March 25. 1631. It may be contended that Mensal Kirks are not contained in the said exception, and that because that exception mentions only Patronage of Kirks pertaining to Bishop∣ricks, whereas a Mensal Kirk is not Patronate, being a part of the Benefice, and the disponing a Mensal Kirk is a formal Dilapidation of the Benefice, and so contrary to other Acts of Parliament.
NOtwithstanding of the decision I have there cited, it sees that this Act of Parliament is designed to make all Retours,Act 13. Par. 22 K. Ja. 6 p. 350. even at the instance of the nearest of Kin irreduceable after 20 years, and that even where competition is betwixt Heirs of the same kind; as if a second Brother had served himself Heir to his Fa∣ther during the life of the elder Brother, or his Descendents in lineà recta; and it seems this has been the opinion of the Lords in the case Younger contra Johnstoun, 22. Novemb. 1665. Likeas the Act of Parliament makes no distinction, but on the contrary, having extended the Prescription of Retours from 3. year to 20. and that only in favours of the righteous Heir, and nearest of Kin, it de∣clares generally, that after the said 20 years, no party shall be heard; but yet it seems very hard, that if a second Brother him∣self, who knew he had an elder Brother; or yet more, if he were keeping daily correspondence with him whilst he wre abroad, should serve himself Heir to their Father, that thereafter this Service might not be reduced, notwithstanding of this Prescription of 20 years; but it would likewise seem that there might be a speciality in this case, because the Dole, or it may be the knowledge of the second Brother, without any Dole, in some cases might hinder Prescription, which requires in Law bona fides, as one of its essen∣tial requisits; and yet if a third party bought or comprised that E∣state, the Prescription might be valid, because the impediment be∣ing personal, could not prejudge him▪ and it is fit to observe, that what I said in general in my Observations upon that Act concern∣ing singular Successors, was only mean of singular Successors ac∣quiring Rights before that Act, for they having bought bona fide before that Act, a supervenient Law could not prejudge them. FOr clearing the 4. Observation upon the said Act, it is fit to take notice, that albeit it be there insinuated,Act 14 Par. 1. Ch. 1. p. 377. that Lords of Erection pay only a Blench Duty for the Lands Feued out to them the time of the Erection; yet it appears both by the Surrender and Decreet Arbitral following theron, that they still pay a Feu-duty for the Lands Feued out to them since the Erecti∣on. Nota, After a solemn debate before the Exchequer, upon the 22. of January, 1686. It was decided in a Case betwixt Bellhaven and the Cash-keeper, that the King has right to the Feu-duties which anciently were due to Abbots, or Church-men, before the An∣nexation, or to K. Ja. 6. before the Erection; and that these Feu-du∣ties need not be redeemed as the Feu-duties of the Superiorities, which were holden of the Lords and Titulars of Erection, and whereof they had not acquired the Property before the Surrender; and that notwithstanding that for 5. years together, there was a Blench-duty payed for the saids Lands and Aeques made n Exche∣quer conform.
THe diligence mentioned in the said Act of Parliament, must be a compleat,Act 24 Par. 1. Ch. 2. p. 395. not an Inchoat diligence, for else it would run not for three years, as it is designed, but for fourty. ALbeit by the 10. Act, Par. 1. Ch. 1. It was declared, that all Rights and Deeds made prior to that Act,Act 53. Par. 1. Ch. 2. p. 402. which might pre∣judge his Majesty, as to the Superiorities and Feu-farms of Kirk-lands should be null, yet to elude that Act, there were Commis∣sions procured from the King, to serve the Kings Vassals in Kirk-lands Heirs, and to receive Resignations, &c. with right to apply the Compositions and Casualities to their own behove; as also, they procured long Tacks, both of the Feu-duties and Casualities of the Superiorities, for payment of inconsiderable Tack-duties, to furnish a pretext that the King was still kept in possession, that they might not seem to contraveen the Act; as also, others than the proper Vassals of Kirk-lands procur'd from the King Rights of the Feu-duties after the King had redeem'd the same from the Titulars of Erection, or procur'd a Right from his Majesty to re∣deem them, and so did in effect interpose themselves betwixt the King and his Vassals of Kirk-lands; therefore by this Act all these indirect courses are discharg'd; and the Earl of Dumfermling having procur'd a long Tack of the casualities of the Vassals of the Abbacie of Dumfermling, containing a Commission to enter the Vassals ut supra, the Exchequer would not allow the same, albeit he had procured a Ratification of that Right in Parliament, and a Letter from King Charles the 2d. declaring that it fell not under his Revocation.
