M2695 R24400 8164119 40995
More Brave, and Good NEWES FROM IRELAND. BEING A TRVE RELATION OF THE Victorious Battell, fought by Collonel Lesly, and four Regiments of English, against 000. of the Rebels neer to the City of Cork. Mar. 3. wherein the Earl of Mackair, and a Spanish Collonel were taken Prisoners, and 1500. of them slain of our Party Sir Thomas Loppinger, and 200 of his Regiment, were slain. Also another famous Battell fought by Col. Douglas and his Forces, against the L. Deloms Regiments, neer the City of Yoghall, Mar. 1. with the number that were slain on each side. Likewise the Confession of four Po∣pish Priests at Dublin, Febr. 28. With a Relation how a Spanish Ship was taken by a Bristoll ship, being bound for Ireland, with the names of the Commanders, having many Letters about them, con∣cerning the principall affairs of both Kingdomes, England and Ireland. London, Printed for John Tompson. 1641.
Brave and good Newes from Ireland, by the last Post, Mar. 8. 1641. Worthie Sir, YOu have often solicited me for the know∣ledge of the Occurrences of our distressed Kingdome of Ireland: I shall now endea∣vour to satisfie your desire, and I hope your expe∣ctation. The News I hope will be acceptable, wel∣come I am sure it is unto our selves. Vpon the 7. of Feb. Collonel Lesly assisted with some other Protestant forces, had Battell with the Rebels, which encourter was very fierce and doubt∣full; in which battell Sir Thomas Loppinger a man of most deserving Memory lost his life, and the grea∣test part of his Company (which were not above 300 and threescore men) lost their lives in this En∣counter, the Generall of the Rebels were taken, and with him a Spanish Collonel, Ferdinando Fiaco. Since that time, upon the 22. of the same month, there arose a mutiny in Dublin, occasioned by some Catholicks, who are of the Rebels factions, but hath lived there very privately, untill they took occasion to discover themselves. Some of them are impriso∣ned,
in which List these are the principall, and all of any note or quality. Sir Thomas Throgmorton, and Sir Ambrose Hoverlie, Sergeant Major Humphrey, and Captain Iohnson, all which are taken, and now remain in fast custody within the Castle of Dublin, where the Earl of Mackair, and the Spanish Collo∣nel are at this time prisoners. Our City which by the enemy hath bin in danger and hazzard, hath some respite for their relief, by the most happy overthrow which lately was given unto the Rebels by the States. They having lost their Head and Ringleader, many of them have betaken themselves into the woods, and have shunned the publique passage a∣broad, which is suspected, and hoped to be for want of strength, not will, to proceed in their insolent and tyrannicall rages. Knockvergus and London Derrie have obtained their Liberties of Trade, which was strengthened by the inulting enemy, and we hope that Trading will every day be improved amongst us, I doubt not but you understand how Sir Wil. Sellingers Forces were cut off most unfortunately in Munster, where wee lost himself and 800. of his men, to the great discou∣ragement of all our Countrie. Vpon the 26. of Feb. it pleased Almighty God to give us some comfortable Newes after our losse of that noble Cavalier; for upon that day there was Sayling upon the Seas, a stately Spanish Bottome, not so glorious in her outward appearance, as able in her inward provision; which ship with all her strength, both of men and ammunition were bound
for the Relief and Assistance of the Rebellious for∣ces in Ireland: but their reach was prevented, and their Design was cut short, for a Bristoll ship did cut her off in her passage, and being under Sail, gave her so hot an Encounter, that your Spanish Pride were constrained to yeeld unto them, and rather yeeld unto them then to stand the hot encounter of her Enemy. There was taken in that ship many Commanders of note and quality: neither was the ship lesse furnished with warlike provision then with men, that had they had so good successe as pro∣vision, they might have won the day: there were al∣so taken about those in the ship many Letters of great weight and consequence: wherein were con∣tained the sum and Masters of all the Plots, and Conspirators of the Popish Faction, against the peace and prosperity of both the Kingdomes of England and Ireland. In Waterford were taken seven Priests upon the 19. day of February: upon whose Examination was Discovered a most Divellish Design against our Land, to be put in Execution in the time of Divine Service at Dublin, of vvhich Design this is the Re∣lation. It was confessed by them, that they had of their Confederacie within the limits of that City, per∣sons to the number of 400. able and sufficient for service, well provided with all kind of Armour both for defence and offence, and that they had a Design, that in the time of Divine Service, at the solemnitie
of Common Prayers, some few of that Confede∣racy should raise a tumult about the Church of St. Maries, the rest with their powers would employ their strength in the body of the City, and surprize the most ablest buildings and houses, in plundering and carrying away their goods, and destroying the persons which they there should have found harbo∣red, within those houses. This Execution was to have bin put in practise upon the 6. of March, but was most happily discovered by the Mercy of God. These are the greatest Occurrences I can certifie you of for this present: by the next Post, I will give you further intelligence; and for this present I rest, CORK the 1. of March, 1641. Your most faithfull Friend AMBROSE TVRNER.
A true Relation how a Spanish ship was taken by a Bristoll ship, Feb. 28. THere were discovered about the 10. of Febru∣ary some Bottomes, hovering about the Seas, consisting of Spanish and French Bottoms, which wanting their expected opportunity for Lan∣ding, being bound for the Relief of the Rebels of Ireland, and being very narrowly attended on by the Hollander, durst not put in, but betook themselves to Dunkirk, and there have ever since sheltred them∣selves, and now within these few dayes desiring to perform their wishes to the Rebels in Ireland, mar∣ched forth from Dunkirk, but were prevented of their purposes, and so chased by the Hollander, that they were constrained to flye for Harbour to Pli∣mouth, they were so hardly prosecuted, that they were enforced to discover their intentions, and were immediatly committed to the Majors custody, and by him sent up to London: where they were con∣ducted in by the Sheriffes of this City, and by Or∣der from the Parliament House committed to se∣verall Prisons, the number of them being 18 besides tvvo youths, all of them being Spanish and French Commanders, only one Englishman amongst them. The Names of the 18. Captain Butler. Cap. Iohn Ryant. Cap Dan. Ryant. Adam Gould, Marchant. Thomas Levalen, Marchant, Daniel Dally
Master. Morgan Quirk. Garret Foy. Iohn Riaut. Servants Nich. Faggot. Darby Ryaut. David Galloway. Iohn Williams. Patrick Furlong. Iohn Dym. Rich. Galloway. Tho. Mattach. Iohn Butler. Upon the 1. of March, Collonel Douglas took Youghall from the Rebels, and slew 300. of them, and took prisoner Captain Smith, M. Willet, and Lieutenant Johnson: of our Party were slain 65. FINIS.
