M3093A 99834607 39109
Murther will Out: OR, AN UNRIGHTEOUS DISCHARGE, No Security to the MURTHERER. DEMONSTRATING, That notwithstanding those great Endeavours, which Sir HARBOTLE GRIMSTONE, (with the rest of his Brethren) used in the Second Tryal of Mr. CROSBY, to secure him from the stroke of Justice: and to repair the Ruines of their own decayed Reputations; Yet these two grand Designs have altogether failed under their hands; and their Projects in this respect have sustained a great frustration and disappointment. Presented to the serious Consideration of the said Sir Harbotle, and the rest of the Justices who sat with him at the said Tryal, Octob. 10. 1662. Quasi sorex suo indicio perit. Much like a Rat, before he is aware, He squeaks himself into a trapping snare. . Such wages alwayes let such workmen have. He disappointeth the devices of the Crafty, so that their hands can∣not perform their enterprize. He taketh the Wise in their own craftiness: and the Counsel of the Froward is carried headlong. Job 5.12, 13. When the Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoyce: but when the Wicked bear rule, the People mourn. Prov. 29.2. Printed in the Year, 1662.
TO THE READER. READER, THere was lately presented to thy view, A brief Relation of the killing of John Townsend, by Mr. Crosby, at St. Albans; with some hints of the almost incredible unworthy deportment of Sir Harbotle Grimstone in the Tryal of the said Crosby: And we well hoped there would never have been occasion to trouble thee with any thing further relating thereunto; especially con∣cerning the said Sir H. G. he having such an open and manifest Item or Warning A little Paper sent him, enti∣tuled, Law Un∣known, &c. 2 Tim. 3.13. (as it were) ordered and disposed by a hand of Providence for his Re∣proof, Admonition, and Reformation: But we see the Scriptures verified, Evil men wax worse and worse. For, when the unclean Spirit shall return the second time into any man,Mat. 12.43, &c. he brings with him other spirits more wicked than himself, and so that man is worse than before. This latter Act of Sir H. in the Second Tryal of Crosby, seems to be produced by the inspiration of some such conjunction of unclean spirits returning, and taking possession within him, if we consider, first, What a shew of Righteousness and Justice his former actions and deport∣ments seemed to carry in them, as though he had been no Lover, nor would ever have been a Countenancer of Cruelty, Oppression and Mur∣der. Secondly, That Item or Warning from God (as he might reason∣ably judge it) lately mentioned. Thirdly, His great endeavours (not∣withstanding) at the Second Tryal, to turn the Sun into Sackcloth, and the Moon into Darkness; by labouring to corrupt the Law it self; and under pretence thereof, to justifie such broad-fac'd illegal proceedings. Fourth∣ly, The proper tendency of that Maxime contained in his Speech at the said Tryal; the native inference, and proper import whereof, as it could any wayes reasonably be compelled to relate to the case in hand, was this,
The man that Crosby kill'd, was at an unlawful Assembly; therefore it was no Murder. This Inference, if received and admitted for good Law, will deprive a great number of the People of England of that secu∣rity, even of Life it self, which the Law affords them: for, not only all that shall dare to Obey GOD, in meeting together to Pray, Reade the Scriptures Act. 4.19. & 5.29., and Preach the Gospel, (though in so doing they should disobey Man) will hereby be obnoxious to be killed and murdered, without benefit of Law; but likewise all Drunken Companies at Alehouse or Tavern, at unlawful times; and all Riotous, Disturbers of the Peace, (with multi∣tudes of other Cases) though the Crimes be never so small, yet if the Meetings be unlawful, they may, by the said Rule, be knock'd on the head, Pistol'd, or cut in pieces, without benefit of Law. And fifthly, if we add, That by this means the whole course of Justice, in many cases, may be obstructed: What need the fetching of Warrants, and calling of Constables? &c. If the Assembly be unlawful, it is no more ado (by the said Inference) but Knock them down. All the Laws that provide lesser penelties for Drunkards, Swearers, and Disturbers of the Peace; with many petty Offenders more, (if the Meetings are unlawful) will seem as so many impertinencies; there is a nearer way to the Wood, than to trouble our selves, and be at charges to proceed against them regularly; A Pistol, or a Sword, or a good Fowling-Piece may do the deed.— As for that false glosse, or pretence of the Execution of an Office, with which Sir H. seemed in his Speech to colour the unworthiness of this Fact, the Reader may find it washed away in the ensuing Discourse. These, with several other Considerations of like demerit in Sin and Ini∣quity with them (some of which are taken notice of in the following Papers) seem to demonstrate this latter act of Sir H. many degrees worse than the former: And consequently the more like unto the fruit of the unclean Spi∣rit's returning with seven worse than himself; and we heartily wish he may bethink himself, and repent before it be too late, left his last state be worse than his first; which we beseech the God of Grace and Mercy to prevent; in which Prayer, if Sir H. himself shall cordially joyn with us, and desire indeed to recover himself out of the snare of the Devil;2 Tim. 2.26. let him give ear unto the Counsel of the Spirit of God, to separate from the unclean thing, and cast in his lot with the righteous, and not be afraid to obey God rather than man:2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Heb. 10.25. but adventure him∣self into such Assemblies where God dwelleth, though the Laws of men should prohibit, or make them unlaw∣ful:
And before the Decree being forth,Dan. 3.12. & 6.7. Zeph. 2.2, 3. befoe the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce Anger of the Lord come upon him; Seek the Lord in meekness; seek Righteousness and work his Judgements; it may be he shall be hid in the day of the Lord's an∣ger. But if he shall alwayes forsake the Lord, and his Saints, and continue to frame mischief by a Law;Psal. 94.20. 2 Chron. 13.18. Dan. 9.3. 2 Tim. 4.2. persecuting the Servants of God, because they rely up∣on the Lord God of their Fathers, and seek his face by Prayer and Supplication; and because they Preach the Word in Season, and out of Season; Let him know, that he to whom all Judgment is commited (Joh. 5.22.) will make good that dreadful word, Mark 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous and sin∣ful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. And whether Sir Harbotle believe it, or not, yet the day is approaching when the Kings of the Earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men; as well as bondmen, and freemen, &c. shall hide themselves in Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. and shall call unto the Mountains and Rocks to fall on them, and hide them from the face of him that sit∣teth on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath shall come, and who shall be able to stand? Then Kings, and Princes, and Potentates of the Earth, and all those who now persecute the Saints for Righteousness sake, would rejoyce to shelter them∣selves amongst such of the Servants of God whom they persecuted, but it will not be admitted; they must bear that irrevocable Sentence, Depart ye Cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his An∣gels. For I was, &c. Matth. 25. vers. 41. to the end. VALE.
For Sir. Harbotle Grimstone, with the rest of the Justices who sat with him at the Tryal of Mr. Crosby; THESE. SIRS, VVE make little question but that in the secret of your hearts and consciences, you will give the right hand of fellowship to that Supposition, so generally received for truth up and down the Country, namely, That your proceedings in the first Tryal of Mr. Crosby, were irregular and illegal: A demonstrative proof not only of the thing it self, but of your conviction thereof, you gave unto the world, in that you brought him to Tryal the Second time: for (as the Apostle reasoneth in another case, Heb. 8.7.) if the First had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the Second. But, hath your latter Tryal relieved the imperfection of the former? If not, let us prevail with you to make a third attempt; possibly, though the first and second Arrow may fly at rovers, yet the third may hit the mark; but, if that shall miscarry in your hands also, We shall then desire you to yeeld up the Bucklers of Judgement, and Seat of Judicature unto some more skilfull hands, and persons more ac∣quainted with, or more ready to yeeld Obedience, to the Mind of God in such Affairs. But, to press our Motion by an Argument, take it thus: If in your Second Tryal of Crosby, you have miscarried in two main Designs, wherewith you (manifestly) travelled, as in birth to be delivered: then will the Motion now made appear reasonable. Sed verum prius, Ergo & posterius. The Consequence in the first Proposition, we suppose is not like to meet with opposition from your Consciences: The demonstration of the latter we fear will disturb your Passions; but however, we are Commissioned from God, the Great King of Heaven, so to trouble men, rather than to indulge them in wayes of Sin; Levit. 19.17. For the proof therefore of this Assertion, it is to be considered in the first place, what these two main Designs are, mentioned in the Argument; which, partly from several words and passages that have slipt the tongue: and partly, from the whole series of action relating hereunto, appear to be these two; 1. The safety and security of
of Crosby. 2. The preservation and vindicaon of your own Cre∣dits and Reputation in so doing. But have you prospered in these Designs by your latter Tryal? No surely! Non est in Medico semper relevetur ut aeger: Interdum docta plus valet arte malum. i. The Doctor cannot alwayes help the ill: The sickness sometimes is beyond his skill. This Project or Device, instead of blessing you in these two, hath cursed you altogether; So that it may well be said in this case, as sometimes Jethro said, (Exod. 18.11.) In the things wherein they dealt proudly, and subtilly, God was above them. Behold all ye Judges of the World, and wonder; Stand amazed ye Rulers of men, and ad∣mire the Wisdom and Justice of God, who taketh the Wise in their own Craftiness: and confoundeth the Counsel of the Mighty; when enga∣ged in promoting that which his Soul hates: for, lo, these men de∣clining the path of Righteousness, the only way to true honour and safety; are fallen into the pit of deserved Reproach, Ignominy, and Danger. For, 1. It is manifest, that Crosby is not legally discharged or acquitted from the Bill of Indictment for Wilful Murder, preferred against him both at the first and second Tryal: This is evident from hence, Be∣cause the said Bill preferred against him at the second Tryal, was stifled in the birth, and lies dormant to this day, unexamined and un∣determined: And consequently waits for a Tryal, when God shall stir up the heart of any man that loves Justice and Righteousness, to prosecute him; and open the ears of Magistrates impartially to hear, and faithfully to judge in the case. In the mean time it hideth it self under this Maxime (conveyed unto us by way of Proverb) Murder will out; and sooner, or later, bring the Murderer to condign punish∣ment. Nescia mens hominis Fati, sortisque futurae. i. Weak is the mind of man, this day to see What his to morrow's lot, or Fate will be. 2. For the other Design mentioned, viz. the preservation, or vindication of your own Credit and Reputations: That herein also you have suffered, and not gained by the latter Tryal, shines with a Noon-day light: for, 1. when you had (after the first Tryal) bound the Widow to prosecute him the Sessions following, because she could
not be prevailed with to desist from her Bill for Wilful Murder, and to indict him for Manslaughter; the Clerk of the Peace (it seems) drew up another Bill for Manslaughter; [whether by your, or any of the Justices order, or whether of his own head, we leave either for you to determine, or the people to conjecture, as you and they shall find cause] Both these Bills being preferred against Crosby, the Grand Jury take no notice of the Bill for Wilful Murder, preferred by the Widow who was bound to prosecute; but they found the Bill for Manslaughter, upon which you proceeded. Wherein, in the first place, there seems to be an eye (at least) of hypocritical deceit in your proceedings; to bind the Widow to prosecute, and yet to reject or stifle her Bill of Indictment; or however, to wink or connive at the smothering of it. And secondly, there seems also to be in it, a great betraying of your trust, in as much as Justice ought to know no faces, nor to stifle any legal proceedings. Therefore, were there no more but this, it were enough to demonstrate that your decayed Credits, or the ruines made upon your Reputations by the former Tryal, were no wayes relieved or repaired by the latter. But 2ly, The Consideration of the quality of the persons impan∣nelled upon the Jury of Life and Death, in the Second Tryal, adds to the stain, rather than purgeth your besmeared Reputations: for, Were they all capable by the Law of England to be of such a Jury? Had they all forty shillings per annum (at the least) of freehold Estate? Or, what rank or quality were they of? The Answer is ready; there was Nicholas Goulding, and Joshua Carpenter, Inkeepers: Ed∣ward Campfield, a Grocer: Ralph Bradbury, the Chandler: Richard Martin, the Blacksmith: Roger Napkin, the Barber: Thomas Radram, James Rambridge, Gowen Crosfield, and James Totnum, Alehouse-keepers: James Hopkins, the Fidler: and Griffin Jones, the Tapster at the Lion-Inn. Amongst all which Sir Harbotle himself, with all his Art, Skill, Learning, Logick, Rhethorick, far fetch'd Circumlo∣cutions, and Law-querks; with what other tricks and evasions soever he shall please to set on work for the Design, will notwithstanding be too hard put to it to find out three Freeholders; and we presume he will be foiled in the undertaking, unless he claim a priviledge above all other mortals, and assume to himself the Prerogative Royal, which is altogether incompetent to him, viz. to call things that are not, as if they were. Neither, 2ly, will the excellent qualifications of these Jury-men for such a service, any whit relieve their Legal-incapacity in point of quality, nor befriend the decayed Reputations we speak of; For,
are not the most knowing, sober, honest and considerate men, only fit for such a work? But for these men, What were they? Were they not a company of ignorant, inconsiderate, heady, wicked, ungodly, vicious, debauched, prophane, drunken, and swearing fellows? Nay, were not many of them, Companions in sin and iniquity with the Delinquent under Tryal, and such who were resolved (right or wrong) to clear him? It were easie for him who can con∣descend to rake into the Dunghil of other mens noisom and stinking miscarriages, to make a great pile of quotations under this head; but we leave that work to them who take pleasure therein. But may we not lament in this case, Oh miserable Town, where no better Jury-men can be found, in a Case of Life and Death for Wilfull Murder! By what hath been thus far hinted, we presume you see, that the Se∣cond Tryal of Crosby mended your Reputations, much like as a hot Sum∣mers day mends sowr Ale. But, 4ly. Though this be more than enough, yet to allude to that of the Prophet, Ezek. 8.6. Turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater Abominations: for, Behold, a Master (of Israel shall we say? nay, but rather) of the Bench, to set a fair glosse upon an evil action, gives such a definition of Murder, the like whereunto (being applyed to the case before you) we believe was never before given by any sober man in his right wits; much lesse by a man that knew the Law; least of all by one read in the Law of God: For to affirm, That if a man be found in an unlawful Assembly, and shall be kill'd by another man in the execution of his Office to suppress that Assembly, this is not Murder; and the person kill'd in this case, hath his mends in his own hands: But that Murder is, when a man shall be kill'd being in his lawful imploy∣ment, &c. We say, to plead thus, being applied to the case before you, Is it not either abominably absurd, or notoriously impertinent, or both? For, 1. The bare, or simple unlawfulness of any Meeting, doth not render the persons worthy of Death by the Law; for, if so, then every man found guilty of a Riot, must die for it; and every company of Drunkards, found at an Alehouse or Tavern at unlawful times, ought to die for it; which you know would be Durus Sermo, a hard saying, not to Mr. Crosby onely, but to many others of your Be∣loved Complices and Confederates; and well were it if profound Dr. Arris could escape in such a case. Such instances of unlawful As∣semblies might be numerous, wherein the Law hath provided lesser penalties than Death: therefore every Offender in unlawful Assem∣blies is not by the Law guilty of Death; and consequently ought not
to have this punishment inflicted on him for it. And we know no reason why a man's being present at a Funeral, hearing a Sermon in the Schoolwhite, should be any wayes a more criminal fact deserving death, rather than Drunkenness; especially considering, that God approves the one, 2 Tim. 4.2. but threatneth the other with eternal wrath, 2 Cor. 6.10. 2dly. Neither is it lawful for a Constable, or other Officer, to kill any man simply for being found in such unlawful acts, which by the Law do deserve death: but all such Offenders are to be apprehended, and imprisoned, in order to a legal Tryal and Conviction; but not to be kill'd by inferiour Officers. Especially, In the third place, Where there is no manner of Resistance or Opposition; in this case, though the Meeting be unlawful, and the Fact notoriously criminal; yet, if the Officer wilfully kill a man, he is guilty of Murder: For, the utmost that can be said soberly, and with truth, to justifie an Officer in this kind, is, That when a Con∣stable, or other lawful Officer, shall be resisted with force of Arms, and opposed in the Execution of his Office, if in this case he kill a man, he will be found excusable by the Law: but where no such Re∣sistance is made, if he wilfully kill any man, though at an unlawful Assembly, either he must die as a Murderer; or else the Law must be violated for his preservation. But in the case of Crosby there was not the least Resistance given to any Officer, nor shadow of Opposi∣tion to any man; unless it were the opposition of the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, which fought against the sinful lusts and cor∣ruptions of men, in the preaching of the Gospel; Mens attendance upon which is so far from deserving death, as that it is their absolute duty, imposed upon them by the supream Law of Heaven. Nay, fourthly, This Assembly was so far from resisting an Officer, that they publickly asserted the contrary; for, Mr. Heaward who was preaching, openly declared unto Crosby himself, when he came first unto them, That if he had any Authority to command him, he would obey it; after which publick Testimony of their peaceable disposition, Crosby first threatened; then went away and fetch'd his Pistol; cock'd it, and presented it to John Townsend's throat; gave fire, and kill'd him. So that if Crosby had been a lawful Officer, and the Meeting unlawful; yea, though the man kill'd had been deeply criminal in point of Fact, yet inasmuch as he met with no Resist∣ance, he must have died as a Murderer, or the Law be violated for his sake. Again, Fifthly, By what was last hinted, and might easily be further de∣monstrated,
it appears to be a contrived piece of Villany, which had deliberate malice in it: which is further evident from hence; partly, because after he had killed one, he pursued another: and partly also, because he had no remorse when he saw he had killed him; but when one of the Constables laid hold of him, and asked him, Do you know what you have done? you have Murdered a Man. Crosby replied, What care I? So that from what hath been hitherto declared, it fully appeareth, that if Crosby had been a lawful Officer, yet that could not legally have exempted him from suffering as a Murderer for this Fact. But how much lesse, when we consider, Sixthly, That Crosby was no Officer, authorized by the Law to sup∣press unlawful Assemblies: for his Commission to be a Lieutenant to a Troop of Horse (suppose he have such a Commission, which we know not) yet this only impowers him to act under the Command of his superiour Officers, and that in a warlike capacity; but gives him no power to disturb, shoot, and kill peaceable men, for hearing the Word of God preached, and no other cause. That which is pleaded to relieve him in this case, is but a Fig∣leaf, instead of a Covering; namely, That Crosby was commanded by the Constable to assist him in the Suppression of this Meeting. For, First, If that were true, yet there being no resistance, the Law de∣termines his Fact of killing the Man, to be Wilful Murder; and he ought by Law to suffer accordingly. But, secondly, That Crosby was not commanded by the Constable, but that he commanded one of the Constables, and threatned to pistol him if he would not go with him: This is too evident to be denied by any, who have not hardened their hearts, and brazened their faces to contend against the Truth. As for what was procured to be affirmed in Court by one of the Constables in seeming con∣tradiction hereunto; there is nothing at all in it wherewith to com∣mend it self to the Judgment and Conscience of, or to gain credit and belief amongst any sober men; but it savoureth much more of somewhat that is worse than of the Truth: For, 1. The contrary might evidently be proved, if the ears of the Justices were not stopt against Justice and Truth; and if he that departeth from evil [and speaketh the Truth faithfully] did not make himself a prey, (Isa. 59.15.) But, 2ly. The Constable who was prevailed with to affirm the same, was himself accessory to the Fact; as is demonstrated in print alrea∣dy, and might easily be further proved; and therefore his Oath, much less his bare word, ought not to be admitted in Judgment.
3ly. That Crosby was not commanded by the Constable, appears beyond all rational contradiction, from hence, Because at his first coming, when he denounced his Threatning against them, with an Oath, he had then no Constable with him; But when he returned to execute his Threatning, he brought a Constable with a Fowling-Piece in his hand: which plainly demonstrates, that the Constable was brought by Crosby, and not he by the Constable. From all which Considerations it appears as clear as the Sun when he shineth in his brightest lustre, That the definition of Murder be∣fore specified, at least so far as it could be forced to relate to this Case, was altogether impertinent, and most abominably absurd and unworthy; tending to no other end at best, but to darken counsel by words without wisdom; (Job 38.2.) and to delude an ignorant Jury. And consequently that great design intended by you in the Second Tryal of Crosby, namely, of repairing those Ruines of Re∣putation which his former Tryal had brought upon you, altogether fails in your hand in thss latter also: for, lo, your Credit and Repu∣tations still lie in the dust, notwithstanding what you have thus done to relieve them. And together, therewith, that which is an hundred-fold more sad, through your means Blood-guiltiness remains upon the Town of St. Albans; and there will remain until it shall be purged away by the Blood of the Murderer. Reade and consider deligently, Numb. 35. ver. 31, and 33. compared together. By this time (we presume) we have demonstrated unto you, (more clearly and sufficiently than you were willing or desirous to hear) That your two grand Designs, aimed at in your Second Tryal of Crosby, have notoriously miscarried under your hand; and consequently our advice unto you, to review your handy-work, and amend it; may be neither unreasonable nor unseasonable counsel: There being no reason why a man should not amend that which is amiss, nor no time unseasonable for Reformation. Dura quidem praecepta voces mea: dura fatemur Esse: Sed ut valeas, multa dolenda feres. My Rules are harsh (you'l say) I say so too: But for your health, harsh things you'l gladly do. Currat poenitentia, ne prae-currat sententia. Unless amendment runs with speed, Judgment may seize an evil deed.
But Sir Harbotle, to close up all, we have an odd reckoning or two, to set streight with your self, and we shall conclude at present: You were pleased to inform your Auditory in open Court, that there was a libellous Pamphlet dispersed up and down the Country; put out by some railing Rabshakeh, who durst not put his name to it; full of lies and scandalous reproaches; which, though it reflected upon your self, yet you valued it no more than the dirt under your feet; having the peace of Conscience within, you were no wayes disturbed in your sleep by that, &c. Sir, leaving the Author thereof, whoever he was, to his own further vindication, or future silence, as he shall think meet: We shall on∣ly say, 1. That for the substance of that Paper, so far as it concerns the story of Crosby, it is too well known to be contradicted; And besides, it hath already past the tryal of many sober and honest men (both Friends and Enemies) who were eye and ear-witnesses of the things contained therein, and hath received a sentence of justification from them all, with a Nemine Contradicente, as to matter of the truth of it. 2. It hath past the like scrutiny, with the like good success in re∣spect of the sobriety of the language and stile of it. Only this we confess, that if to call a Hare, a Hare; or a Botle, a Botle, and that too in the softest words that could easily be found; if this be a false accusation, or scandalous reproach, then is that Paper guilty; but otherwise it is free. And consequently it will appear, that in this you were of counsel for the Devil, endeavouring to promote his work, who makes it one great part of his business, falsly to accuse the In∣nocent. Rev. 12.10. But Sir, if when you have sifted the said Paper to the bran, and ground it to powder, in the Mill of your strictest search, and nar∣rowest scrutiny into it, you can find ground to make good your said Charge against it, then we challenge you, as you will vindicate your Honour and Reputation, to justifie your self therein in print. But for the reason why he that writ it, (whoever he was) put not his name to it; (leaving him to the reason of his own actions, yet) this we shall say to it, That you cannot be so ignorant, or weak, as not to know, (you, with others, having taught us to understand by woful Arguments of sence and feeling) that these are times where∣in Truth faileth, and he that departeth from evil, maketh himself a prey: because Justice and Righteousness are compelled to give way, to Cruelty and Oppression; therefore it seems neither Wisdom nor
Christianity, for a man to expose himself to your Rage and Malice, when he may innocently avoid it: especially, having such a lively Instance and Example of your promptness and skill to make a Nose of Wax of the Law, and by cunning devices, and subtil stratagems and agents, to pervert the course of Justice, he could not reasonably expect any fair quarter from you: For, Impedit Irae animum, ne possit cernere Verum; i. e. By Wrath so hindred is the mind, That Truth it cannot see, or find. As for your high pretences of Peace of Conscience in what you have done, and that you are no wayes disturbed in your sleep by the said Pa∣per, &c. We reply, 1. That the Spirit of God informs us, that, as on the one hand, it is joy to the Just to do Judgement, Prov. 21.15. So on the other hand, that the Wicked sleep not except they have done mischief, Prov. 4.16. 2. The Apostle gives us to understand that some men in the world were like so far to corrupt their minds, as to suppose that Gain is Godliness. (1 Tim. 6.5.) So that it is no great wonder to see wicked and ungodly men, to deceive themselves, and their own hearts, as well as others. 3. For a man to live in wayes of sin and unrighteousness, and Conscience not check or controul him for the same, is a great Argu∣ment that such a man is under the bewitching of the Devil, and de∣ceived by a corrupt mind. 4. For a man to pretend the Peace of Conscience within, to colour over foul and horrid acts of ungodliness without, argues a seared Conscience, (1 Tim. 4.2.) the very worst of estates and condi∣tions, and nearest unto perdition. 5. Christ himself hath foretold of such a generation of men, who should not only persecute his People, but even think they did God service in killing his faithful Servants and Followers, (Joh. 16.2.) which we see verified this day, when men pretend the Peace of Conscience in condemning the Innocent, and discharging the Guilty; persecuting the Servants of Jesus, and making them Offenders for no other cause, but because they obey their Lord and Master JE∣SUS CHRIST, and observe the Rules which by his Apostles
and Servants he hath given them. 2 Tim. 4.1, 2. Hebr. 10.25. 6. And lastly, Whether in these boastings of the Peace of Consci∣ence within, your lips did not bely the secret of your soul? and whe∣ther your rejoying in this kind, were not in face onely, and not in heart, (2 Co.12.) concerns your self to examine: We shall only add, that we once knew of a man, in a case not unlike to this, who bore up himself as high in confidence before the People, and pretended his inward peace and satisfaction, as much as you do; and how little he was molested or troubled; and yet, notwithstanding, more privately, offered a considerable sum of money to find out the person that had disturbed him, that he might have vented his rage and malice upon him: and it is not rational to think that a man will bid high for an Object to execute his revenge upon, where he hath not met with great disturbance of mind. Manifesta rotae vertigia cernas. The prints made by his wheels do plainly tell, That gone he is a way, which doth not well. FINIS.
