n1086 12498556 199550
Published with Allowance.
The Dissenters JUBILEE: As it was Sounded in the Audience of A SOLEMN ASSEMBLY AT The Publick Meeting-Place in Spittle-Fields near London, on Tuesday May 17. 1687. BEING A Day of Thanks-giving to praise the Lord for his VVonderful Appearance and Over-ruling Providence, in the Present Dispensation of Liberty of Conscience, By Charles Nicholets, Preacher of the Gospel, and Pastor of a Congregation there. Judg. 10.16.— And his Soul was Grieved for the Misery of sIrael. Psalm 12.5.— For the Oppression of the Poor, for the Sighing of the Needy, now will I arise saith the Lord; I will set him in safety from him that Puffeth at him. LONDON, Printed by G. Larkin, without Bishopsgate; and are to be Sold by most Book-Sellers. 1687.
To the most August And Justly-Renowned-Monarch, James the Second, By the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, &c. Dread Soveraign! AMongst the Numerous Re∣turns of Gratitude, that flow from great Bodies of Your People in all Parts of Your Dominions; for Your Majesties Gracious and most Healing Declaration for Li∣berty of Conscience; Vouchsafe to admit this mean Discourse to be humbly De∣dicated to Your Immortal Name.
For which, if any censure me as highly presumptuous, I must (with Submission) alledge that it was Your Gracious Clemency that not only Encouraged, but in a manner Enforced me thereunto: For since Your Majesty has been the Glorious Instrument in the Hand of God, of Delivering us from those Shackles upon Conscience, and the many Insupportable Ri∣gors whereunto the Penal Laws, and their severe Prosecution, had long expos'd us; I could not think we should fully discharge our Duty to the Almighty in that respect, without some particular Expression of Thankful∣ness to Your Majesty his Vicegerent: And withal, to Evidence the Sincerity of our Hearts, I was not un∣willing to declare publickly what Doctrine and Senti∣ments we Endeavour to Impress upon our Hearers on this happy Occasion. For however Dissenters may have been Mis∣represented, It has always been my Principle unfeigned∣ly to Obey that Precept of our Blessed Saviour, To give unto God, and unto Caesar each their due. Thus as I Preach'd the following Sermon to demonstrate that I fear God, and desire to improve all his Pro∣vidences to the great Ends of Christianity; so I offer these poor Papers as a standing Testimony that I sin∣cerely Honour the King. In which Application, I forget not your Majesties Grandeur, nor my own Groveling Condition: Yet I
cannot induce my self to apprehend a Frown from that Face which has spread such Irradiating Smiles through∣out more than three Kingdoms; or that Your Majesty can be Angry, tho the meanest of your Subjects thank you for those Favours they can never be enough sensible of. He that would not a Beggar should bow to him, must with-hold his Hands from giving Alms. Had Your Majesty restrain'd your Goodness, Your Throne had been too Dreadful for the Ap∣proach of such a Shrub as I. But now that You have dilated Your Clemency in so extraordinary a manner to every Corner of Your Territories, whilst the Lofty Hills are Ecchoing Your Just Praises, You cannot (for the Harmony's sake) be offend∣ed that the Humble Valleys bear a part in the joyful Chore. 'Tis (Great Sir!) on these Considerations that I humbly beg leave by this Dedication to Express my own Thankful Acknowledgments, together with those of that Little Flock whereunto I am more peculiarly elated, for the Invaluable Happiness we enjoy through Your Majesties Benignity. Now that that Great GOD (who enclin'd Your Royal Heart to this Blessed Work) may be a Glorious Canopy of Protection over You, and bless You with the Dew of Heaven, and Fatness of the Earth And that as He has given You (to the
Joy of Great Britain) a Crown here, He may fit You (by His Grace) for a Better, an Immar∣cessible Crown hereafter; Is and shall always be the dayly and most Fervent Prayer of Your Majesties most Dutiful, most, Obe∣dient, and most Thankful Subject, CHARLES NICHOLETS.
THE Dissenters Iubilee, PSAL. CXXVI. 3. The LORD hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad. WHat our blessed Lord said to his Hearers concerning another Text relating to Himself, I may say to you, with respect to the first Verse of this Psalm—When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Sion, we were like them that dreamed— This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears: God has strangely, won∣derfully, unexpectedly, turned back our Captivity, and we verily are even as those that dream: Our hearts (like the Babe in Elizabeths Womb) leaping for joy, and skipping like the young Ʋnicorns on Lebanon, or dancing like David before the Ark, in the sence of this amazing and stupen∣dious Providence. Now is the time that our Mouths are
filled with Laughter, and our Tongues with Singing; for those that wish not well to us, are forced to say among themselves—The Lord hath done great things for them; And if they say so, much more reason have we to answer with the Church here by way of Concession—The Lord indeed hath done great things for us, whereof we are Gald. The words are very plain, and without much help of Logick or Grammar, we may easily see through them, as containing an Historical account of GOD's Acting in way of Mercy, and his Peoples Rejoycing in way of Gratitude and exultation of Spirit. My work is (with respect to the occasion of our Meeting here this day) to show you how obvious the one is, and how congruous the other would be: There can be no such stranger in our Israel, as to be unac∣quainted with what great things the Lord hath done for us: Oh! that there were never a Son or Daughter in our Zion, backward in their Humble thankful and joyfull ac∣knowledgment of it, crying out from the very bottom of their Hearts—Whereof we are glad. Gaudia, quae multo parta dolore, placent. Method obliges me to speak in order unto Four Things, which lie before us in the Text. 1. The Agent, or Person acting, and that is the Eternal God,—The Lord hath done. 2. The Object for whom he acts,—for us. 3. The Predicate, with its Amplification concerning his acting,—He hath done great things. 4. The Influential Operation that this has upon all that fear the Lord,—Whereof we are Glad. I begin with the first of these: 1. The Lord, Jehovah the Great and Powerful God, the Creator of the ends of the Earth, who can, and does all things in Heaven above, and on earth below, accord∣ing to the good pleasure of his own will; That God, who
by his all-commanding Power, brought Light out of Darkness, extracted Order out of Confusion, and dasht back the Waters from the naked Land. That God who made Almonds flourish upon Aarons sapless Rod; That God, who supplied his People with Water, out of the hard Rock: In a word; that God who is glorious in Holiness, Fearful in Praises, and one that worketh Wonders, in and among the Children of Men; he it is, that hath done great things for us, that in the Ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his Power, in his kindness towards us, in rescu∣ing us from the jaws of Death, and keeping us, from go∣ing down into the Pit; and by his glorious Omnipotence, turning our Captivity as the streams of the South. And this Almighty Power of his, has been of old exerted for the deliverance of his poor distressed People, as we may see in the Churches appeal to it, upon her Invocation, in time of trouble. Isa. 51.9, 10, 11. Awake, Awake! put on strength, O Arm of the Lord; as in the Antient days, in the Generations of Old: Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon; art thou not it which hath dried the Sea, the Waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the Sea a way for the Ransomed to pass over; therefore the Redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with Singing unto Zion, and everlasting Joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain Gladness and Joy, and Sorrow and Mourning shall flee away. As if she had said, Thou hast formerly shined forth in the Glory of thy Power, in cutting Rahab, that is, in plaguing Egypt; in wounding the Dragon, that is, in destroying Pharoah, and in drying up the Waters of the Red-Sea: Oh put forth that power now, in Freeing and redeeming us from our present troubles, that we with them may sing those Hosannahs of Joy on Earth, which will be perfected in Hallelujahs when we come to Heaven. Tantum gaudebimus quam tum amabimus, tantum amabimus quantum
cognoscemus, says the devout Austin, We shall Rejoyce as much as we shall Love, and we shall Love, as much as we shall know. Our knowledge of the glorious Attribute of Gods Power, will then be perfect, and our rejoycing at it will be in perfection also; we find the Prophet in a dark and gloomy day, when things lookt black upon the Peo∣ple of God, had recourse to this great Power of God, for his support and bearing up under the pressures of those sad and heavy things he saw a coming upon Jerusalem; as you may see in that solemn and serious Prayer of his, Jeri∣miah 32. verse 17, &c. Ah! Lord God, behold thou hast made the Heaven and the Earth by thy great Power, and stretched∣out Arm; and there is nothing too hard for thee; Thou shew∣est Loving kindness unto Thousands, and recompensest the Ini∣quity of the Fathers, into the bosome of their Children after them: the Great the Mighty God, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, great in Councel, and mighty in Work, (for thine Eyes are open upon all the ways of the Sons of Men, to give every one according to his wayes, and every one according to the fruit of his doings) which hast set Signs and Wonders, in the Land of Egypt, even unto this day, and in Israel, and a∣mongst other men, and hast made thee a name, as at this day, and hast brought forth thy People Israel out of the Land of Egypt, with Signs, and with Wonders and with a strong hand, and with a stretched-out Arm, and with great terror. This prayer is very argumentative and conclusive concern∣ing the Power of God, that it is able to effect all things, since by it the vast globe of the World was made out of nothing, the Lords Might anb his Mercy are the good Soul's Jachin & Boaz, the names of the two main Pillars in Solomons Temple, the one signifying Stabllity, the other Strength, to note the Saints are safe and established in the the Power and Mercy of God. Thus the great Lord hath done great things for us.
Secondly, The Lord, the good and gracious God, the Ten∣der and Merciful God, who hath proclaimed himself before Heaven and Earth, before Angels and Men.—The Lord, The Lord God, Mercifull and Gracious, Long-suffering, abun∣dant in goodness, and Truth; the Lord who is good, yea exceeding good, whose Mercy endures for ever. The Lord, whose thoughts concercing Mercy, are not as our thoughts; nor his ways (with respect to doing good) as our wayes, but as the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are his Thoughts higher than our Thoughts, & his Ways than our Ways: The Lord, that is as ready to Grant, as his People can be to Ask; who is nigh to all that call upon him in sincerity, when Troubles and Calamities do Sur∣round them, as you may see in his most tender affectionate answer, to bemoaning Ephraim, as soon as he came upon his knees before him; Jeremiah, 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? For since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my Bowels are Troubled for him, and I will surely have Mercy upon him, saith the Lord. God may seem a great while as one unconcern∣ed at the troubles of his People, but when they are so high, as to overwhelm their Spirits, and their Hearts are bowing and bending, yea breaking under them; he then hath Pity and Compassion upon them in their Distresses: As Croesus's dumb Son, who never spoke in his Life before, when he saw one attempting to Assassinate his Father, violently cryed out— .—O Man! Do not kill Croesus: So the blessed God cannot hold coming in with supplyes of Mercy, when his People are ready to be swallowed up in the gulf of Misery. Mercy is his Name, and Mercy is his Nature, there is nothing he delights in so much, for Mercy pleases him, as much as it pleasures us; and as he is great in Mercy, so he is rich in it, and free in it, without any previous condition or qualification in the
Creature: He is a most free Agent in the distribution of Mercy, Romans 9.15. for he saith to Moses, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy, and I will have Compassi∣on on on whom I will have Compassion. No other reason can be assigned, no other motive (by the Wisdom of Men and Angels) could be produced, why God should shew any Mercy to any of the Sons of Adam, but his own free-will to it, and his gracious Complacency in it. When he is angry with his People, and visiting them with some Judgments, as Tokens of his Displeasure, he is said to come out of his place; importing that when he is doing good and shewing mercy, he is then in his own proper place, the place he would for ever be in, did not our Sins too often occasion his removal: We likewise read of his delighting in mercy, Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee! That pardonest iniqui∣ty, and passest by the transgressions of the Remnant of his Heri∣tage; he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy: O Admiration! Admiration! That a dishonour∣ed, provoked, and highly-incensed God should keep in the Vials of his wrath, and shew so much Love, and so much Mercy to his distressed ones; yea in his Love, and in his Mercy, to do such great things for them: Indeed when God strikes, he strikes to purpose, and that wound cannot be small, which is of his making: A Jove percussus non leve vulnus habet. He may (and many time does) lay his Hand on his People, and that hand must needs be heavy, and the blows very terrible, such as will make the stoutest heart to quake, and the most couragious Spirit to faint away. When thou (saith David) with rebukes dost correct man for Ini∣quity thou makest his beauty to consume away like a Moth. God in his Anger doth great and dreadful things to a sin∣ning, a provoking People: Oh! but when he ariseth to have Mercy upon Zion, he will do greater things for them,
than ever he did against them; and such are the great things the Church speaks of here in the Text. The Lord, the Merciful Lord hath done great things for us, whereof (as we have great reason for it) we are glad. Thirdly, the Lord, The true and faithful God, keeping Covenant with his People, and will do according to eve∣ry Promise of his; and this is the thing he hath promi∣sed in his Covenant, Joel 2.21. Fear not, O Land! rejoyce and be glad, for the Lord will do great things. And this Promise he hath, doth, and will make good to his Peo∣ple even unto the End of the World. Our Miseries are our Advocate to Plead the Truth and Faithfulness of his Covenant with him. So we find it, Exodus 2.24. And God heard their Groaning, and God remembred his Cove∣nant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. Which was to bring them out of that place. They had been there a great while under cruel Bondage and Oppression. God was ingaged in his Covenant to their Fathers, to deliver them. And their Sighs, their Sobbs, their Groans, through their hard Usage (to speak by an Anthropopathie) did put him in remembrance of his Covenant. Oh! 'tis a great advantage then to belong to the Covenant. Externa foe∣deris gratiae Communio est, qua Vocati pro foederatis, & Dei populo censentur, saith a Judicious Author; and upon how much higher ground do such stand, then all others in the World? for they can plead Covenant-promises, and Co∣venant-priviledges, Covenant-Engagements, and Cove∣venant-Encouragements from that god, who would not have his People strangers to him, nor think that he is a stranger to them. He owns himself his Peoples God, and hence it is that he doth and will help them, 20 Exo∣dus 2. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage. The Lord is pleased to own himself his Peoples God, and gives
therefore incouragement to all his to cry out with the Church— Thou art our Father, though Abraham be Igno∣rant of us. What God doth for his People, he doth as their God, as God in Covenant with them. And as this makes delivering Mercy the greater, so it raises the Ob∣ligation to praises and thankfulness much the higher. Covenant-Interest is the sweetest part in any mercy we can enjoy, whether privitive or positive. Moses that Blessed Servant of God, was very sensible of this, demonstrated in that Song of his upon Israels deliverance from the hand of Pharoah, which you will find Recorded, Exodus 15.2. The Lord is my strength and Song; he is become my Salva∣tion; he is my God, and I will Exalt him. Q. d. This deliverance shews God to be our God, our Fathers God, and mindful of the Covenant he made with them. VVe have great reason therefore to exalt him in our Hearts and Lives, and to sing aloud of his Righteous∣ness, that hath given such a Glorious Instance this day of his being a God keeping Covenant with his Chosen Ones. Not a strange God, but the Lord Our God, our own God, keeping Covenant inviolably with all that Fear him and put their Trust in him. It is HE, even HE, that hath done great things for us. Fourthly, The Lord; the Lord that is a present help in time of Trouble; the Lord that staid the Knife just at Isaac's Throat, which gave occasion to Abraham to call him Jehovah-Jereh Deus providebit, God will provide; or as our Translators render it, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen. The Saints Extremity is his Oportunity. He is the Lord that of old has come in with succour most sea∣sonable, when Miseries have been lookt upon by his Peo∣ple as inevitable. The Light of his help has been always rising, when the Star of his Saints hope hath been setting.
He is then nearest to his People, when all other expectati∣on is farthest from them; The Scripture is not barren of instances of this great Truth, to buoy up the Anchor of Christians Faith, in most imminent times of danger; God will appear in one way or other for them, according to His old wont: He steps in, in the nick of time, Psalm 124.1. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say: If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us: Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Then the Waters had overwhelmed us, the Stream had gone over our Soul: Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us as a Prey to their teeth. Our Soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler; the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. This If hath spoiled many a cunning project of the Devil, and his Instruments, to ruine the Church of God: They would certainly many times prevail in their cursed designs of crushing the poor Saints, if God did not arise; Ay, but He doth arise, and that spoils all: He doth come to deliver at seasonable times, which blasts all the Enemies purposes, and fills their faces with Confusion. We have a notable Emblematical confirmation of this thing, in the story of the Disciples being in a Ship with our Lord, and ready to Perish (even in the judgement of the Mariners themselves) through the fury of the Storm, Mathew 8.25, 26. And his Disciples came to Him, and a∣woke Him, saying, Lord, save us, we Perish. And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a great Calm. — . This word is more significant then the English word Calm, some derive it from a word that signifies Milk, to note that the Air was as white and clear, as that in a Winter Night, which is called Via
lactea, the milky way; but I rather conclude (with Pis∣cator, Scapula, and some others) that it comes from a Theam in the Greek signifying to laugh, or to look marvel∣ous chearful: The word then imports, that there was up∣on Christs rebuking the Winds and the Seas, not only a great Calmness, Stillness and Quietness, but also a wonder∣full Serenity, the Heavens and the Sea, did (as it were) Smile and Laugh upon them, which before did so Frown and Threaten to devour them: So when Mens Spirits and Speeches, are so full of venom against the Saints, and their Passions so heightned, that they are ready to fall down right on them; then God arises, and rebukes their Passions, And—Behold there is a great Calm. Now as the Mariners cryed out—What manner of Man is this, that even the Winds and the Seas obey Him! Oh! that all the Churches of Christ in England, would be Adoring, and Admiring, and breaking forth in this Extasie—What manner of God is this, that even the enraged Passions of men are subjected to Him! Thus the Lord, who is a present help in time of Trouble, hath done great things for us. Fifthly, The Lord, the God that is affected with, and concerned at his Peoples troubles; we read, his Soul was grieved for the misery of Israel: He is pleased to call his People the Apple of his Eye; and who cannot but be deeply sensible when that part is touched? So near, so greatly near, is the Relation between God and his People, as all that is done to them, is in his account as done to Himself.—Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me? was his word to him, that then, as a malicious Informer, went up and down (like his Master the Devil) seeking where and whom of the Saints, he might devour. And upon his en∣quiry —Who art thou Lord? he was sharply answered, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou Persecutest; and at the last Judgement he will tell the hard-hearted World,—I
was Hungry, and ye gave me no Meat; I was Thirsty, and yee gave me no Drink. The Saints wants are His wants, the Saints troubles are His troubles. Isa. 63.9. In all their Afflictions He was Afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence sa∣ved them: in his Love and in his Pity he redeemed them, and he bare them and carryed them all the days of old. The for∣mer verse tells us,—He said, Surely they are my People; and being his People, he could not but be concerned at their troubles; yea so greatly, that he did (as it were) take part with them in their Afflictions—And in their Afflictions he was Afflicted. The expression is very strange and hardly to be parallell'd. What the Poet said of Augustus, we may more truely say of God: Est placidus, facilisquae parens, veniaeque paratus Et qui fulminio sepe sine igne tonat Qui cum triste aliquid statuit sit tristis et ipse Cuique ferre poenam sumere, poena sua est. And herein he glorifies, and magnifies the riches of his Love, in being so concerned at, and affected with, the troubles of his People: Oh! He is moved, He is touched with the sence of our Infirmities: And hence he cannot hold from coming to his Peoples Assistance, when their pressures and Calamities are great, and their Sorrows many; when the floods of Persecutions are over whelm∣ing them; the inraged passions of wicked men, engages the Compassion of a gracious God to appear for their help, and that right early; hear himself speaking fully as to this, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the Poor, for the sighing of the Needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord, I will set him in safety, from him that pusseth at him. When the World are doing great things against the People of God, he
will arise and do great things for them, as God said of Sodom—Because the Cry of Sodom and Gomorra is great, and be∣cause their Sin is very grievous; I will go down now, and see whe∣ther they have done altogether according to the Cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know. So he saith of Zion—Because the cry of Zion is great, and their Calamity is very grie∣vous—I will go down now, and see whether it be alto∣gether according to the cry of it, from their Sighs, and Groans, which is come unto me, and if not I will know: Thus the Sympathizing Lord hath done for us great things. Sixthly, The Lord, the only God, He has done, and in∣deed none but he could have done Great Things: For there is none besides Him; all the Gods of the Heathens are Idols, Mouths have they, but they speak not; Feet have they, but they walk not; Hands have they, but they act not: But the Lord our God, is the Living God, the only True God, whose Glory is above the Heavens, and whose Power is extended to the utmost confines of the Earth, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me and be Saved, all the ends of the Earth, for I am God, and there is none else. There may be many false Gods, many pretended Gods, but there is no God the Saviour, but me; none whose Arm hath wrought out Salvation, but mine. Judas Machabaeus had these words written on his Ensign, as his Motto—Mi Camoca Belohim Iehovah; Who is like unto thee among the Gods, O Lord? VVho can act as he acts? For he doth great things, and unsearchable, marvellous things without number: And as he (so only he) doth great things. There is none can do like him; expectation from any other Agent will be miserably frustrated: Jer. 3.23. Truly in vain is Salva∣tion hoped for, from the Hills, and from he multitude of Mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel. By the Hills and multitude of Mountains here, we are Tropologically to understand great powers, great capacities, great abilities,
and how great soever they may be in the Creature, vain is the help expected from them: God will have no Partner, no Rival, in this great work of saving his poor distressed People; he will have the sole Honour and Glory of it him∣self; that Praises may be resounded and re-echoed in all the Churches millitant—O sing to the Lord, a new Song, for he hath done marvellous things, His Right Hand, and His holy Arm, hath gotten him the Victory: The Lord hath made known his Salvati∣on, his Righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the Heathen: He hath remembred his Mercy and his Truth toward the House of Isra∣el, and the ends of the Earth have seen the Salvation of our God: Thus the great Lord, the Gracious Lord, the Faithful Lord, the present helping Lord, the Compassionate Lord, the only Lord, has done great things. And so I pass from the Agent, to the Object; For Ʋs: First, For Ʋs; poor, low, mean, insignificant Greatures; whose Original was Dust and Clay, and whose dissolution will be in the same matter; for dust we are, and to dust we shall return: The highest Honour we can pretend to, is (with Job) to claim Kindred with the inhabitants below, saying to Corruption Thou art our Father, and to the Worm, Thou art our Mother, and our Sister; Our Bodies are called Houses of Clay,—Behold he put no trust in his Ser∣vant; and his Angels he chargeth with Folly: How much less on them that dwell in Houses of Clay, whose foundation is in the Dust, which are crushed before the Moth. We are fit Creatures indeed for the Almighty to do such great things for, who are not able to stand against the weakest Creature, but waste insensibly, and by de∣grees, as a Garment that is Moth-eaten.—Man in his best state, in his best dress, under his best circumstances, is al together Vanity, and this makes him truely nothing to be accounted of: The Prophet David, could not but
break forth with a Quid est Homo? (after contemplating the rest of Gods Creatures) Psalm 8.4. What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the Son of Man, that thou dost visit him? Q. d. Man is verily nothing at all; O what a wonder of wonders is it then, that the Blessed and Glori∣ous God, should take such notice of him, and be so con∣cerned for him! In like manner we may be thus reflecting, What are we? O what are all the Dissenters in England, abstractly considered, but a company of very low mean Creatures, unable to duty, uncapable of Mercy! And yet that God should appear for us, and do such great things for us at this day, this is verily the Lords doings, and Oh that it could be marvellous in our Eyes! That we might break forth into admiration at it; Jacob on this account, thus reflected upon himself, Gen. 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy Mercies, and of all the truth which thou hast shewed unto thy Servant, for with my Staff, I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two Bands. Even so let us be bowing down our Heads, and worshiping the Lord our God this day, crying out—We are not worthy of the least of thy Favours and of thy Truth, for we are the wretched offspring of fallen man, and yet thou hast show∣red floods of Mercy upon us; Thou hast lifted us up out of the Horrible Pit of Tribulation and Persecution, which we were so miserably sunk into, and hast set our feet upon a Rock, filling our Mouths with Praises and Glad∣ness; therefore, Oh! Glory, Glory, Glory, be to thy Name for Ever. Secondly, For Ʋs, poor distressed Creatures, who are in a miserable condition, yea as miserable, as miserable could be; not only Persecuted (almost to the utmost extremity) by our open Enemies; but forsaken (and lookt a squint at) by our quodam Friends; who (through pusilanimi∣ty) were ready (with Peter) to swear they never knew
us. 'Tis rare for man to keep close to (much less to choose) a Friend in Misery; as the Poet well observed. Nulla fides unquam miseros elegit Amicos. Ay but God does; he fixed on Ʋs, for the objects of his signal Favour, when we were burning in the hottest Fire of Persecution; when we were so like our dear Redeem∣er, who said of himself—The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay his Head. Oh how great was our Misery in this respect! —The Drunkards and Debauchees of this Age, were in their Cieled Houses, and the Con∣temners of Religion dwelled secure in their Habitations; but the Saints of the most High, knew not where to fly for refuge: But then, O then, God looked upon us in Mercy, 136 Psalm, 23, 24. Who remembreth us in our low estate, for his Mercy endureth for Ever; and hath redeemed us from our Enemies, for his Mercy endureth for Ever. I shall not make any recapitulation of the particulars of our Sufferings, least the design of this day be changed from the seasonable duty of Rejoycing, into the unseasonable work of Sighing and Sobbing. It would be—Infandum renovare dolorem; and the reflecting on never so few in∣stances would make the yet-scarce-healed wounds to bleed afresh, and extort tears of Lamentation from the greatest part of this Assembly: — Quis talia fando temperet alachrimis: I confess I could not keep in my self, as being able to say with AEneas—Quaeque ipse misserima vidi et Quorum pars magna fui. But this calamity was not personal but epidemi∣cal: The cry of all the dissenting People of God, seemed to be that of the Church, Psalm 79.8, 9. O remember not a∣gainst us former iniquities, let thy tender mercy speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low: Help us, O God of our Salvation! for
the Glory of thy Name, and deliver us, and purge away our Sins, for thy Name sake. And this bitter cry hath at length pierced the Heavens, and come up before the Holy One, who hath heard us, and helped us, and delivered us in the day of our great Trouble, and in the day of the vexation of our Souls, when we were so low, that never any People sure∣ly were lower then we were; Having from without this only thing to comfort us, that whilst it pleased God to defer the altering our condition for the better, we might bid defiance to the Devil to make it worse—Qui jacet in terris non habet unde cadet. But now, Oh now! in the midst of this low and deplo∣rable state, God hath done great things for us. Thirdly, For us, Sinful Unworthy Creatures; whose deportment hath been such in all our sufferings, that we may truely (and without complement) cry out with the Church—Thou hast punished us, O Lord, less then our iniquities have deserved: we have Tempted him as at Mis∣sah, and Provoaked him as at the waters of Meribah, we have Sinned in our Hearts, and in our Lives, in our words, and in all our Actions. There have been found among us, (even among us) Spots, that have hardly been the Spots of Gods Children. VVe have Sinned away our Mercies, and thereby justly provoked the Lord to for∣sake his Tabernacle that was in our Shiloh, and the Tent which he had placed among us men: And as our Sins have justly brought down Judgments upon us, so have they continued them to us; VVe have Sinned in, as well as be∣fore our Sufferings: VVe have been as that AHAZ, Who trespassed yet more and more in his Afflictions. VVhat was said of them of Old, may well be applyed to us in this Ge∣neration, Jer. 17.1. The Sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond, it is graven upon the table of their hearts, and upon the horns of their Altars. Their Sins lay there
where the Law should have lain, even in their hearts; and so it hath been with us: Ay, and on the Horns of their Altars too; where they should have Offered up their pure and unblemisht Sacrifices: And have not we done the very same? Yea verily; we have sinned, even in our Worshiping, our Hearing, our Praying: Oh! what cor∣ruptions, what horrid Iniquities have accompanied our most solemn Duties, and thereby rendered us the most impious and impudent of Sinners? Oh! that God should then do such great things for such as we! Oh! that ever we should come into His Heart for delivering Mercy, who with our own hands, have brought down upon our own heads, the flood of all Misery! In looking back on our former ways, we cannot but joyn with the Church in condemning our selves, as justly forfeiting all those pre∣cious and pleasant things, the loss of which we so much deplore: Lam. 5.16. The Crown is fallen from our head, wo unto us that we have Sinned! for this our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim, because of the Moun∣tain of Zion, which is desolate, the Foxes walk upon it. —Ponit symbolum verae contritionis. And Oh! that we were as hearty, and as violent, in bemoaning of Sin, the true cause; as ever we were in complaining of Sorrow, the genuine effect: But we have sinned, and behold we are delivered: Oh! what a mira∣cle of Mercy, that the Almighty should appear in any way for us Sinners! Were there any real manifestations of Repentance among us, or any beginnings of turning from the evil of our ways; the admiration of this day would not be so great: But as we have Sinned, we do yet Sin, and are going on farther and farther in the paths of Sin, without any remorse or reluctancy, without any Humili∣ation,
or Contrition; and yet that God, the Holy God, the Sin-hating▪ God, should do such great things, for us great Sinners; Oh! wonder! wonder! Fourthly, For Ʋs, despised and contemptible creatures, who were low and vile in the sight of the whole World; and so far following the steps of our; dear Lord in his Sufferings, that we were verily rejected of men, a People of Sorrow, and acquainted with Grief; We were the Drunkards Song, the Atheist Scorn, and a scoff to all the Profane Ones: So that the complaint of the Church was exactly true of us, Psalm 79.4. We are become a re∣proach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us. —What flouts what jears were the sons of Belial making at us, because (and meerly because) we defended the Kingly Office of Christ in his Church; and in the defence of that, (with Moses) esteemed the re∣proaches of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of the World? How odious hath the name of a Dissenter been in this Land? How miserably have we been misrepresen∣ted in all our ways, in all our actions, in all our circum∣stances? VVhat artificial tricks have been used to make us despicable even among them that never knew us? VVhat contempt hath been poured upon us, by the men of this Generation? VVhat villanous base things have been told of us, from one end of the Land to the other? How have the Pulpits, and the Benches been full (yea run∣ning over) with these vile and most untrue suggestions, —As if our Ministers were men without Learning, our People without Sence, and all of us a company of mad distracted creatures, scarce fit to live.—How have we been Be-rebell'd, and Be-traytor'd? How many times have we been confidently accused, to be no friends to Cae∣sar; implacable Enemies to all Government, hatching of Plots, contriving of mischiefs continually? These with a
thousand other shams have been industriously managed to render us Odious and Loathsome in the Eyes of our So∣veraign. Like the dealings the Prophet speaks of, Jer. 20.10, 11. For I heard the defaming of man, fear on very side; Re∣port, say they, and we well Report it: All my Familiars watched for my Halting, saying, Peradventure he will be Enticed, and we shall pre∣vail against him, and we shall take our Revenge on him. But the Lord is with me as a mighty terrible One; therefore my Persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail; they shall be greatly ashamed, for they shall not prosper, their everlasting Confusion shall never be forgotten. The Practice of our Adversaries these late Years past, hath been much like this, they have Reported the worst they could invent: Calumniari audacter & fortiter—ali∣quid Hoerebit, hath been their avouched Principle; and indeed by their art of Lying, they have keep us a long time under their hatches. But now for us, thus Abused and Slandered Creatures, the Lord hath rouzed up him∣self to do great things; for our Persecutors are now stum∣bling, they can no longer prevail, they are now greatly ashamed, and confusion of Face is inevitably come upon them. Fifthly, For us, distrustful unbelieving Creatures; we were so worn out with Persecutions and bitter Sufferings, that as we had almost forgot what a quiet comfortable State was, so we had left it out of our Creed, to believe that such a State should ever be our Portion again. Oh! How much down and flagg'd was our Faith! We were ready to conclude with Zion—The Lord had forsaken us, and our God had forgotten us; and that he had quite shut up the tender Bowels of his Mercy, and would be gratious no more to us. Nay, our distrustfulness of the possibility of deliverance, and the All-sufficiency of God to bring it a∣bout, came up parallel with that high Provocation of Israel, we find mentioned, Psal. 78.19. Yea they spake against God, they said, Can God Furnish a Table in the Wil∣derness?
—Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wrath; so a Fire was kindle against Jacob, and Anger also came up against Israel. Oh! Have we not tempted God in the very same kind? Have not we made reflections on his Power? Have we not thought it impossible Deliverance should be wrought cut for us, and thereby highly disho∣noured the Lord our God in the wilderness of our Trou∣bles, by disponding in his Goodness, and by distrusting of his Power? Our Hearts grew faint, and our Spirits fail'd within us; so that we gave up all for lost. And (through the extream sinking of our Faith) we lookt upon our selves as a People wholly markt out for destruction. In so much as we were ready to say with the Prophet, Oh that we had in the Wilderness a Lodging place of Wayfaring men! That we might go and live solitarily alone; or that we might hide our selves in the Deserts of the Earth, till the bitter Calamity were over past. Indeed we knew not where to go, or what to do, so great was our Fear, and so little was our Faith. Oh! what an unexpected change of Providence is now come upon us, even upon us, who were puting this great and glorious day of Mercy so far from us in our thoughts and apprehensions! It was with us as with that Lord we read of, on whom the King leaned, 2 Kings 7.12. Then Elisha said, Hear the Word of the Lord, Thus saith the Lord, To morrow about this time shall a Measure of fine Flower be sold for a Sheckle in the Gates of Samaria. Then a Lord on whose hand the King leaned, answered the man of God, and said, Behold, if the Lord would make Win∣dows in Heaven, might this thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine Eyes, but shalt not Eat thereof. There requires more Faith then I doubt most of us were ever possessors of, to see the Plenty of Deliverance, in the midst of the pinching Scarcity of Persecution.
Tarda solet magnis rebus in esse fides. Well, but though our Faith could not behold it, God hath graciously vouchsafed it.—He hath done great things for us, who were great Unbelievers. Sixthly, For us, quarreling and disagreeing Creatures, who have delighted to warm our Exuberant Fancies in the long kindled Flame of Contention; and instead of VVater to quench, have poured in Oyl to enrage the burning. Who have been lifting up every one his hand against his Brother, to smite him openly; or (which is worse) his unruly Tongue to slander him privily. And by our thus Butchering one anothers good Names with our Lyes and detracting Stories (as Simeon and Levi did the Shechemites with their drawn Swords) we have made Religion stink in the Nostrils of all without. 'Tis said—For the divisi∣ons of Reuben that were great thoughts of Heart. And really, when I have seriously thought of the many and sad divisi∣ons amongst us, it hath made my Heart ake to think what would become of the Professors, and Professions of this Age. Such things fore-bode no good, if we may be∣lieve Christ, 12 Math. 25. And Jesus knew their Thoughts, and said to them, Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to Disolation, and every City or House divided against it self shall not stand. A Kingdom cut and hewn into divers Factions, so is the Emphasis of the Original word, Scinditur incertum Studia incontraria vulgus. And when these various Opinions engender Alienation in Affection, setting up of Parties to oppose one another, Oh! this is very sad and tremendous. And yet so, Oh! so it hath been with us, the Professors of Religion in this
Land: Oh! what Divisions, Dissentions, Animosities, Emulations, and Heart-burnings have there been found amongst us, to the grief of the Godly, the derision of the Wicked, and to the astonishment of all. I have some∣where Read, there were some Christian Slaves in Turkey, who upon some difference in Points of Faith, fell to so great feuds, that they built up a Mud-wall in the Dun∣geon, to prevent intercourse one with the other. VVe have verily been doing somewhat not unlike this, even under our Persecutions. And I fear our jarrings are not to this day ceased; there is the same leven of Malice and Prejudice still boyling in the Spirits of too many turbulent Ones. VVell, This Spirit (though it be abhorred of God, and abundantly born witness against in the Holy Scripture) is kept up and indulged by a Generation that are pure in their own Eyes, but yet I fear are not washed from their Filthiness. Hear what Paul saith of this Spirit of divisi∣on, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. Now this I say, That every one of you saith, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ; is Christ divided? Was Paul Crucified for you? Or were you Baptized in the Name of Paul? Ah thou meek and peaceable Apostle! didst thou blame the divi∣sions of the Church of Corinth? what wouldst thou say, wer't thou alive at this day, to see what is too plain to be seen amongst us? Oh! that then God should do such great things for us, who have not a good word, or a good thought to bestow upon our fellow Members! That we should be raising up, and not rather quite pulled down, is astonishing mercy!—I have now done with reflecting on the Object here, For Ʋs; He hath done great things for Ʋs, poor, low, mean Creatures; For Ʋs, poor distressed Creatures; For Ʋs, poor sinful Creatures; For Ʋs, poor despised Creatures; For Ʋs, poor distrustful poor despised Creatures; For Ʋs, poor distrustful
Creatures; For Ʋs, poor quarreling Creatures. I now come to the third thing, Namely the Predicate, with the amplification of it: He hath done Great Things; or (as it is in the Original) he hath magnified to do. He is a great God, and he hath done (like himself) greatly. He hath done marvelous things, as in the Land of Ham, and terrible things, as by the red Sea. So great things hath he done, that the Mouths and Hearts of all his People are full of them; yea so full, that they may better adore then ex∣press them: Now may all cry out this day with Balaam, as he was convincing Balak of his folly (through the mighty influence of the divine Spirit then upon him) in en∣deavouring to bring the People of God under the Power of a Curse, Num. 23.23. Surely there is no enchantment a∣gainst Jacob, neither is their any divination against Israel. Men may set themselves to curse and rave against the Saints, yet still they shall be preserved. That even Atheists may be forc't, adoringly to break forth, Oh! what hath God done? What Preservations hath he vouchsafed? What Deliverancs hath he wrought out for his chosen Ones? And in spite of the malice of Men and Devils to the contrary: The Church is very much enlarged, in speaking of these great things. Psalm 46.7, 8, 9. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge, Selah! Come be∣hold the works of the Lord, What Desolations he hath made on the Earth. He maketh Wars to cease to the end of the Earth: He breaketh the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in sunder, He burneth the Chariot in the Fire. By Bow, we may under∣stand the Strength and Power of the Churches Enemies, and this he hath broken: by Spear, the war of Persecution that was raised against them; and this he hath cut. By Chariots, the eagerness of mens Spirits in prosecuting the work, and these he hath burnt in the Fire. These are Great, yea very Great Things. VVhere is the adversaryes
Power to suppress us? Alas that's broken. Where is the Ad∣versaries Authority to threaten us with Bonds and Prisons, and Constables-Staves? Alas that's cut in pieces. Where's the Adversaries Rage and Malice against us? Alas that's burnt in the Fire. There is now Peace to him that goes out, and Peace to him that comes in; and among the swarm of our Adversaries, there is none to make us afraid. These are great things, good things, things of an inestima∣ble value! —Magis illa Juvant quae pluris emuntur. Oh Beloved! It would astonish Angels, and daunt the hearts of Devils; it would make the Morning-Stars sing together, and all the Sons of God shout for joy, to tell you what great things God hath done for us: Oh! that my Tongue were toucht with a Coal from the holy Altar, that in a Seraphick strain, I might be repeating some of those great things that God hath done: Help me with your Prayers, Raise me with your Devotion; that I may raise your Spirits to Joy and Thankfulness in the hearing of them. First, He hath stopt the Mouths of our malicious Ad∣versaryes, who in their reviling language took an unaccountable liberty to upbraid and abuse us at their will and pleasures: But God hath put a Hook in the Nostrils of the Senacharibs, and stopt the mouthes of our railing Rabshekaes. He hath tamed the roaring Bulls of Bashan, and quelled the wild Boars of the Forrest. Those that were foaming at the mouth for madness, at the ve∣ry appearance of a Religious Assembly, where God was worshiped in the Gospel of his Son; Those that were once raging and taring at a Meeting, as though the Town were on Fire, that were making such a horible hubbub,
with Clamours and Out-cryes, as though some Treason of the first Magnitude were a committing: Those who were a Prophaning the Sabbath, Blaspheming God and his Ways, that were indeed perfectly Drunk with Fury and Madness: VVhere are they now? Fortis ubi est Ajax? ubi sunt ingentia magni verba Viri— Alas! altum silentium, they are ashamed of their craft: Their Huffing and Hectoring, their Raving and Swearing; their Threatning, and Exclaiming; is now forcibly quell'd, and they are become as mute, as the Idi∣ot, who keeps silent because he knows not how to speak: Now verily is fulfilled that great word Psalm 3.7. Arise O Lord, save me, O my God! for thou hast smitten all mine Ene∣mies upon the Cheek-bone; Thou hast broken the Teeth of the Ʋngodly. That is, Thou hast brought them to great Disgrace and Reproach; and who can expect a better end, then that of Shame and Contempt, who run in ways of so great abomination? The Enmity, and Inveteracy in some Mens Spirits, has been beyond former presidents or examples. What a Spirit of Madness was there against the poor Dissenters? I remember what Laocoon said to the Trojans. Quis furor O Cives quae tanta insania mentem occupat? — One would wonder (in a Christian Land especially) the very Idea of modesty and sobriety should be so whol∣ly raz'd out of Mens Mouths and Hearts, in speaking and acting in so plain a way of Inhumanity, as scarce any Heathen, but would have blusht at it; But now God hath checkt this Hellish Spirit, and hath sent it to the Bottomless Pitt from whence it came, and I hope it will
never have a resurrection more in England. We may say of it, as Jacob did of Simeon and Levi. —Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it was cruell; for in their wrath, they killed a Man; and in their Self-will they digged down a Wall. Oh! how true is that great word, 76 Plalm 10. Surely the Wrath of Man shall praise Thee, and the remainder of wrath shalt Thou restrain. VVe had Sinned, and God in Judgement let loose these Savages to worry us for a Season: But now His Pleasure is performed concerning us, He hath muzled and chained them in their places again. God made use of as much of their wrath, as served his own will, and now he hath restrained the rest; though they may have the same will and inclinations, yet they have not the same Power and Opportunity, and the God of Heaven grant they never may. Oh Sirs! what a great thing is this, that God hath done for us? He hath stayed the rough Wind, in the day of the East-Wind. He hath ceased the chilling full-mouth'd blasts of Boreas, and hath made the gentle Zephirus speak peace in our Horizon: So that in gratefull remembring the Lord our Maker that hath stretched forth the Hea∣vens, and laid the foundations of the Earth; we may triumphantly say.  And where is the Fury of the Oppressor? Secondly He hath opened a way for the Ambassadors of Christ to walk abroad without danger, and Appear in the Streets without fear of Apprehending: what a terrible time hath it been with poor Ministers? How have they been driven from their Families, as not able to live at peace (or with any safety) in their Habitati∣ons? And when they went abroad, in what strange habits were they compell'd to go, lest they should have fallen, into the hands of unreasonable Men, men of no Faith, no Conscience, no Christianity, no Humanity? But now
they may shew themselves, and appear (as they are) The faithful Servants of God, and the King's dutiful Subjects: There is now no need of uncouth Garments to obscure them, no need of flanting Periwigs to disguise them, no need of changing their names, to keep them from the Cognizance of the Sons of Belial: Methinks I cannot reflect on the time past, without observing how the Messen∣gers of the Lord, were much in the like condition with Elijah, 1 Kings 1910. And he came thither unto a Cave, and Lodged there, and behold the word of the Lord came to him, and he said unto him, What dost thou here Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of Hosts: for the Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the Sword: and I, even I only am left, and thy seek my Life to take it away. Oh! London, London, how will it re∣main as an Indelible mark of reproach upon thee, that those Men, who were once thy Beauty, more then any of thy stately Structures; who were once thy Glory, more then any of thy Indian Spices, or far-fetcht Treasures, should yet be thought unworthy to live within thy Walls; but were Hunted into Holes and Corners, and sear∣ched for, from House to House, as tho they were Fellons, or some horrid Flagitious Persons: But God hath at length looked in Mercy on the Sons of Levi, and lifted up their Heads, in our Israel, yea to so great an heighth, that they may not only walk the Streets in safety, but appear in their Pulpits publickly, before the face of the VVorld; discharging the Duty of their Places, which they were solemnly set apart for. Now the People may behold their dear Pastors that were rent and torn from them, which inforced so much Heart-breaking Sorrow and Lamentati∣on; now the Blessed God is making good that Promise Isa. 30.19, 20. For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusa∣lem;
thou shalt Weep no more: He will be very gracious unto thee, at the voice of thy Cry; when he shall hear it, he will answer thee: And though the Lord give you the bread of Ad∣versity, and the Water of Affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more: But thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers. Ay they do see them, and they are Rejoycing in the sight of them. As there can be no greater Sorrow, then when Minister and People parts, so there is no greater Joy, then when Ministers and Peo∣ple Meets: and we have good ground to hope, they will be removed into corners no more. Non alis se induent, they shall not flye away, they shall not be forced from their Congregations and Families any more: Our Dread Soveraign (whose word is Inviolable) hath gra∣tiously Promised there shall no such havock be made in this Nation (during His happy Reign) as there hath been on this account. Oh Sirs! Is not this a great thing that God hath done for us, even far beyond our expectation? Thirdly, He hath made way for People to live quiet∣ly in their Habitations. Those peaceable Inhabitants who were so inoffensive in their Conversations, that Malice it self could have nothing to say against them, but (as it was with Daniel) in the matter of their God. These I say (by this great Revolution of Providence) may now live securely and quietly, without being pulled and halled out of their Dwellings, without having their Houses Plundered and Pillaged, without having their Goods wasted and destroyed, without being ruined and undone in their Trades and Callings; and that for no other cause than their Conscientious fearing to offend God, in complying with those terms of worship, which according to the discerning God had given them (after use of Prayer and other means) were really sinful. With∣out being a Prey to wicked and ungodly Ones, who re∣joyced
in nothing more then in Ravage & Devastation; 'Twas an awful Judgment the Lords own People lay under, that he should give them up to these Savage Mens Lusts, whose tender mercies they so wofully experienced to be Cruel. And indeed he was the Efficient cause in it. —Who gave Jacob to the Spoil, and Israel to the Rob∣ber? Did not I, saith the Lord? Yes he did: But tho he did so, for the glorifying his Justice; he hath at length, for the greater glorifying of his Mercy, rescued them again from these Spoilers, and taken the Power out of their hands; as he promised of old, Ezek. 34.38. And they shall no more be a Prey to the Heathen, neither shall the Beasts of the Land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid. Whatever men may think of themselves, the Spirit of God calls them no better then Beasts, for devouring his Heritage. But now lift up your Heads and rejoyce, ye Sons and Daugh∣ters of the most High, ye shall be devoured no more. Ye shall now live in quiet, and enjoy the Mercy the Pagan accounted so great. —Optat Fumum de patriis posse videre focis. Return ye scattered Ones into your Habitations again, for now the King of Kings will be a Wall of Fire round a∣bout you, and the Glory in the midst of you. Oh! Belo∣ved, this is a great thing, this is a pleasant thing, that God hath done for you. Now the Shops may be open'd again that have been so long shut up; now the Houses may be furnished again that have been so long desolate; and now you may all visit one another again with com∣fort and delight, who have been so long dispersed by a Storm so full of Terror and Amazement. Now you may sit down every one under his own Fig-Tree, and eat the
Labour of your own hands, without danger of the hun∣gry Canibal to snatch it out of your Mouths. As God said his own People should do, Jerem. 23.8. But the Lord liveth, which brought up, and which led the Seed of the House of Israel out of the North Countrey, and from all Countreys whether I had driven them, and they shall dwell in their own Land. God hath now made our Land Peace∣able, and hath restored our Cities to dwell in.—Verily this is a great thing.—This is that whereby God hath made himself known in our Judah, and whereby his Name is become great in our Israel. Whereby also he hath manifested his Tabernacle to be in our Salem, and his Dwelling-Place, in the midst of our Zion. Oh! what shall we say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? Fourthly, He hath given us just Liberty of Conscience, to Serve Him, and VVorship in that way which we are absolutely convinc'd to be the truest and nearest the Rule; So that every one hath now the Liberty and glori∣ous Freedom of his own Conscience, in matters of Re∣ligion; which hath been so much opposed and Tyran∣niz'd over by the Men of this Generation. Oh! unpa∣rallel'd Tyranny! Had VVe and our little Ones been sold for Bond Slaves, our oppressions had not been so great. VVe might have had recourse to God in Prayer and hea∣ring his Word, which would have alleviated our Sor∣rows (though never so great) and eased our burdens (though never so heavy) But to be denied this Liberty, is so great a piece of inhumanity, that nothing can be greater: No Slavery like that of having the Conscience manacled, and fettered by the impious will of Man; which (as our most Excellent Soveraign hath declared) is not to be Constrained or any way Forced: Man hath nothing so near to him or so dear to him, as his Consci∣ence;
hence Compulsion and Coertion as to that, is both against the Law of God, and the very Light of Na∣ture; Heathens have abhorred it. 'Twas the glory of Ahashuerus his Feast, that there was no compelling any man to do beyond what he had a mind to, or saw in him∣self cause for; every man was left to his own freedom; Esther 1.8. And the drinking was according to the Law, none did compel, for so the King had appointed to all the Officers of the house, that they should do according to every mans Pleasure. And shall there be more imposing in a Christian Church, then there was in the Persian Court? Shall a Heathen King be more tender then Protestant Magi∣strates? Truely this is little for the honour of Christianity. Well, how ever Conscience hath been bound, 'tis now free; this Glorious and Golden Liberty is once more re∣stored again. Aurea Libertas auro pretiosior omni. Oh! what a great thing is this, that God hath wrought out for us! Rejoyce O Land, and break forth into Shout∣ing, Oh England; for thy Inhabitants are now indeed made a free People. The Iron Yoak of the worst sort of Bondage and Captivity (which hath so long and so greatly galled them) is taken off their necks, and every man is at ease; Nothing so welcome to all Christians, as this thing. As Aristotle saith of the Hand, it is Organon Orga∣noon, the Instrument of Instruments; so we may say of Liber∣ty of Conscience, it is the Mercy of Mercies. Indeed it is a a Mercy that makes all other enjoyments to be Mercy; without this, our Bread is mingled with Gaul, how fine soever; and our drink with Worm-wood, how rich soever: without this, our health would do us little good, yea Life
self is but a protracted Misery: And as this Liberty is so pleasing to every Creature, so it is no less consonant to the mind and will of the Great Creator; and hence those that have the Spirit of God, cannot, dare not, be against it. 2 Cor. 3.17. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty. VVhere∣ever the Spirit of the Lord dwells in Power and Life, that Soul is for Liberty; that Soul having tasted the sweet∣ness of Liberty, is as willing to allow it to his fellow Creatures, as to take it himself. Whilst men are tying the Consciences of others up to the hard mead of their humours, they are doing the Devils work and not Gods. Oh Sirs! God hath done this great thing for us, he hath given us Liberty of Conscience: Oh! that we might be so glad of it, as to use it to his Glory, and not as an occasion of farther provoking him, for this would be sad and dreadful indeed. Fifthly, He hath enlarged the Preaching of the Gospel, of that Gospel which brings the Glad-tidings of Salva∣tion to poor lost Man; of that Gospel that proclaims Liberty to the Captive, and the opening the Prison-doors to them that are in Bondage, and lets the Prisoners go free; of that Gospel that shews poor Creatures the way to Life, and how to be made happy for ever; which hath so unreasonably and spitefully been hindred by all the hellish Craft and Subtilty that could be used. Oh! how have men Stretcht their Witts, and Tenter∣hookt their Power, to stop the shining light of the Glo∣rious Gospell? Though God hath commanded it to be Preached, and spread to the utmost confines of the Earth; though he hath Promised, it shall be so spread in the last days, when the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Glory of the Lord, as the Waters co∣ver the Seas, and though he hath demonstrated, it shall
be so in the Vision which John saw, Rev. 2.14.6. And I saw another Angel in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to Preach unto them that dwell in the Earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People. Had this Angel stood upon Earth (as he was to fly in Heaven) in our Climate; we lately had a sort of People would have been ready to have clapt a War∣rant on his Back, and apprehended him as a distur∣ber of the Peace (though he was to Preach no other than the Gospel of Peace,) So eager were they to cross the Almighty (Oh! Impudent Presumption) in his purposes and decrees. But now, Blessed be God, there is a large door set open, that all that are gifted and spirited for the work, may apply them∣selves thereunto without any fear of Opposition. Ill∣men may threaten and repine at it, but they cannot hin∣der it. Happy! Blessed! Glorious day! This Door hath a long time been shut to the great Grief and Trou∣ble of many poor Souls. How many poor Creatures have been hungry for the Bread of Life, but there was none to break it to them? How many were thirsty for the Water of the Sanctuary, but there was none to draw it for them? There hath been a great Famine of Bread (of Heavenly Bread I mean) in our Land. Bles∣sed be the Lord God of Israel, who hath visited his Peo∣ple and given them this Bread, and that in abundance. VVho hath brought forth his Ministers from their Pri∣sons, from their hiding places, and hath given them li∣berty and oppertunity to open their Mouths in the great Congregations, and to act according to the Te∣nour of the Prophets Commission, Esaiah 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, show my People their Transgressions, and the Sons of Jacob their Sin. Don't speak in a low flattering way; don't read
in a dull sleepy cold manner, as though you were re∣hearsing a story out of a Book, but cry, and cry aloud; speak, and speak out with a lifted up voice, Plenis fau∣cibus, voce sonora & quasi Tubali; and what a mercy 'tis that we have such Golden Trumpets sounding in the Gates of our Zion. such glorious Lights shining in our Horizon: Oh! this is a great thing. Our Meetings which of late were confined, to the most private and re∣tired rooms (and that not withot a great deal of danger) are now brought forth in open view, in the sight of all Israel, and before the Sun, VVho can think of this, and not break forth into Admiration? Sixthly, He hath given opportunity to the worst, to sit under the best means, to their Souls good. The Ig∣norant and Prophane Persons who had most need to hear, were (for cogent reasons) in most places shut out from the word. People were afraid to admit them into their Private Meetings, lest they should be betrayed by them: and every one that knows the worth of a Soul, will own this a great Mercy indeed, that such may now come freely into the Publick Assemblyes, and none have any suspiti∣on of them. The Net is now largely and extensively spread over all; and blessed be God, there is a Spirit in such to come in the Nets way: I have always observed that the worst men have a hankering after the best means: This our Saviour hinted at in his answer to John, Mat. 11.4, 5. Jesus answared and said unto them, Go, and shew John again those things which you do hear and see: The Blind receive their Sight, and the Lame Walk, the Leapers are Cleansed, and the Deaf Hear, the Dead are raised up, and the Poor have the Gospel Preached to them.—The word in the Original is Emphatical, and the Poor are Gospel∣liz'd; not only poor in respect to the World, but poor in respect of Grace. That are in a Natural unregene∣rated
Estate. what a vast injury to the Souls of thou∣sands of such, has this late Persecution been: Oh! that all concerned in it may seriously lay it to heart, and I am confident it will be small ease to them to reflect up∣on it; that so many, by the heat of their Spirits, have been kept from that word, that might have been the Savour of Life to them; but now they may come and be pertakers of it: Take notice, you Drunkards, you Swearers, you Worldlings, you Atheists, henceforth you can have no excuse, for you may now come and hear from the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, the misery of your Condition; of the dreadfullness of Living and Dying in the state you are; of the manner of True Conversion, of the freeness of Grace, of the Fulness of Love, and of the infinite Vertue, and Value of the Blood of Christ; the closing with which by faith must be your happiness if ever you are made happy: These glorious Divine Truths are not now spoken of in a private Chamber, but publickly Proclaimed as on the House top, Prov. 20.21, 22. Wisdome cryeth without, She uttereth her Voice in the Streets: She cryeth in the chief place of concourse, in the opening of the Gates, in the City, She uttereth her words saying, How long ye simple Ones will ye love Simplicity? and the Scorners delight in their Scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? Oh! what a great thing is this! Seventhly, (And which is none of the least of these great things) He hath turned the Heart of our Royal and Dread Soveraign to us, as the Heart of a Father to his Children. We are told, Pouv. 21.11. The Kings Heart is in the Hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water he turneth it wheresoever he will. Oh! Blessed be God for this Turn, how welcome, how refreshing is it, even as the breaking forth of the Sun after a tedious
Night. We may now go home to our Tents, Re∣joyce and Triumphing, that we, even we, have a Portion in our David; and that we, even we, have an Inheritance in the Son of Jesse. Through the Interposition of some shaddowing Clouds, we have not had for some years the Smiles of Caesars Face, being continually portrayed be∣fore him, as some Monstrous Creatures unworthy his Pro∣tection. There have not been wanting Hamans in the Court, suggesting to the Prince, that his Crown could not set fast upon his Head while such Disloyal Ones as we were at Peace in the Land. But we now stand right in our Soveraigns Favour, he has been pleased to spread the Wings of his Clemency over us, and this we humbly Acknowledge to be a great thing God hath done for us. Now then, If stopping the Mouths of our Adversaries which were so open; if lifting up the Head of our Ministers which were so low; if securing our Inhabitants which were so uneasy; if giving Liberty of Conscience which was so tyrrannyzed over; if enlarging the Gospel which was so opposed; if making way for the worst to hear the Word, who were so miserably kept from it; if turning the Heart of our Soveraign To Ʋs, who suffered so much by that Fatal Eclips. If these are great things, then God hath done great things for us. I come now to the last part of the words, Namely, The Influence that this has upon all that fear God— Whereof we are glad. The word saith—Light is Sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the Ʋpright in Heart. And this seems to be the Harvest time, for our God is returning (after so long with-drawing) and repenting concerning us his Servants. He is satisfying us also with his Mer∣cy, and making our Hearts glad in this day. Yea he
is making us Joyful according to the days wherein he hath afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil; his VVork is appearing unto us, and his Glory upon our Children. Oh! That we could therefore make a Joyful Noise unto the Lord, that we could serve the Lord with Gladness, and come before his Presence this day with Singing. Oh! That we could enter his Gates with Thanks-giving, and into his Courts with Praise, and be thankful unto him and bless his Name. The Preacher saith, There is a time to Weep, and a time to Laugh; a time to Mourn, and a time to Dance. VVe have had our days of VVeeping and of Mourning; we have been in the VVilderness of Sin, and as in the Vale of Siddim; with Jeremy we have even had Furrows on our Faces, and Isickles from our Eye lids with continual VVeeping; with Origen we have almost been dead with Grief; with Chrysystome we have been consuming our days in Sorrow; with Basil we have been even old be∣fore our time; and with Rebeckah we have been weary of our Lives; but now (Gaudia post luctus veniunt) the Laughing time, the Dancing time is come; our Lord is now saying to us as to his Church— 2 of the Cant. 10.11, 12, 13. My Beloved speak; and said unto me, Rise up my Love, my Fair One, and come away, for lo the Win∣ter is past, the Rain is over and gone; the Flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the Singing of Birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land; the Fig-Tree putteth forth her green Figs, and the Vine with tender Grapes gives a good smell. Arise my Love, my Fair One, and come away. From whence should she come? VVhy, from setting in her Mourning-Chamber, & giving up her self to Sorrow and Lamentation; for though it had been a bluste∣ring and stormy Winter with her, yet it is now past; though it had been a time of great and dismal Rain, yet
it is now over and gone, and the Pleasant Spring time is come; for the Flowers appear on the Earth, and the Birds begin to Sing; So it hath been with us—The ways of our Zion have Mourned, because none did come to the Solemn-Feast; all her Gates were desolate, her Priests sighed, her Virgins were afflicted, and she was in Bitterness. But now our Condition is changed, and we are called to Rejoycing, and we shall Sin greatly if we do not Rejoyce, Deut. 28.47. Because thou servest not the Lord thy God with Joyfulness and with gladness of Heart, for the abundance of all things. This was a great and a provoking Sin, pray let it not be our Sin. But let us Rejoyce in the Lord, our righteousness, and glory in the Rock of our Salvation; who hath done this great thing for us. Give me leave very briefly to shew you how we should be glad. First, As it is an Answer of Prayer, God hath mani∣fested himself a God, hearing Prayer, in doing these great things, for they are the very things we have been long Praying for; as Hannah said to Eli. 1 Sam. 1.27. For this Child I Prayed, and the Lord hath given me my Petition which I asked of him. So for this day, for this Change, for this time of Liberty the People of God have been VVeeping and Praying, and Crying aloud; Oh! what floods of Tears have been poured out; Oh! what volleys of Sighs and Sobs have been sent up in the Ex∣halations of the Spirits of the Saints unto the great God, that he would do what he hath now done for them; as it is of God that we are not destroyed, so it is of God that we are delivered; and shall we not be glad that he hath at length heard our Prayers and answered our Request? Secondly, VVe should be glad in respect to the Time of it: He hath done great things for us at this time, when we least expected it. This Inhanced the value of de∣liverance
of the Jews, 7 Ezra 12. Artaxerxes King of Kings, unto Ezra a Priest, a Scribe of the Law of the God of Haven, perfect Peace, and at such a time. Our King hath sent the blessed Message of Peace to the poor Ministers of the Gospel, and to all the Churches of Christ in this Land, and at such a time, when we looked for nothing but Sorrow and Trouble; and surely for this we should be glad. Thirdly, We should be glad demonstrated in our Ʋni∣on. Bondage and Oppression hath not driven us toge∣ther. Oh! That Deliverance might, since it hath pleased God to open a Door of Liberty for us all, of what perswasion soever. Oh! That we might heedfully attend to the Apostles pressing Exhortation, Ephe. 4.3.4. Endeavouring to keep the Ʋnity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. There is one Body and one Spirt, even as you are called in one hope of your calling. I could heartily wish that all the unhappy Names of distinction (which have kept up the feud so long among us) might be now laid aside; and that we might live together in Love, and be sincerely loving one another as the fellow Citizens of the New Jerusalem. Oh! This would be a great thing, a glorious manifestation of our Gladness. Fourthly, We should be glad demonstrated in our Re∣formation. There is a voice in Mercies as well as in Afflictions; in Deliverance as well as in Persecution; God hath been a long time speaking to us from the Fulminations of Mount Sinai, and now is speaking to us from the sweet Irradiations of Mount Sion, and his voice is that you will find mentioned, Jere. 7.2.3. Stand in the Gate of the Lords House, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the Word of the Lord, all ye of Judah, that enter in at these Gates to Worship the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your
wayes and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. Ah! Sirs, if we desire the continuance of this great Mercy of entring the Gates to worship the Lord, for Gods sake let us be reforming our Lives, and turn∣ing every one from the Evil of his wayes; that we may provoke the Lord no more to hate the Palaces of our Jacob, or forsake the Assemblys in our Israel; for here∣by indeed can we only shew that we are glad of these great things that God hath done for us. Fifthly, We should be glad demonstrated in our satis∣faction and contentedness of Spirit, with what God hath done; laying aside all needless fears and jealousies, which tend only to disquiet the mind, and render us uncapa∣ble of worshiping God as we should do. Oh hear and tremble at the Apostles solemn Admonition, 1 Exo. 10.10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. God hath influenced our Soveraign to do such great things for us, which none of his Predecessors ever did, largly expressed in his unparalleld Declaration. A Declaration so full of Princely Love and Affection, so full of Amazing Candor and Condescention, that it deserves to be writ in Letters of Gold. Behold! Majesty on the Thone, veyling the Scepter, and darting the Rayes of his Royal Favour into the poorest Cottage. Behold a Crowned King Compassionating and Commiserating the Calamities of his meanest Subjects. What shall I say? Behold an Index pointing to the rich graces and vertues in the large Folio of the Royal Breast. And shall we be yet mur∣muring, and indulge discontents and fears? Oh! this would be a very ungrateful Requital, both to God and the King. Oh Beloved! I earnestly beg you, that we may Eat our Bread with Joyfulness, and dwell in our Habitations with Gladness, with what God and the King hath done for us.
Sixthly, We should be glad demonstrated in our Du∣tiful Deportment towards our Soveraign: God is the Efficient, he is the Instrument of these great things; let us therefore be like those of old, who blessed the King, and went unto their Tents joyful and glad of Heart, for all the goodness he had done for David his Servant, and for Israel his People. We are now under the indispensi∣ble Duty of Gratitude (as well as of Law and Gospel) to be a quiet and peaceable People. Oh! that the King may never see any thing in our Carriages to make him Repent of the kindness he hath shown to us. I will leave that word with you, and I cannot but earnestly press it upon you, which Solomon the wisest of men left in charge to his Son, 24 Prov. 21.22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, for their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knoweth the Ruin of them both? Oh! let us make good our Soveraigns good Opinion, that good Christi∣ans will be good Subjects; and herein shall we shew our selves glad in a right gladness. I shall now in a few words shew you what a kind of gladness this should be, and I have done. First, It should be a forgetful gladness: I do not mean forgetful of the Mercies we receive, but of the Miseries we have felt. Oh! let them be Buried in the Grave of Oblivion; let them be as though they never were; and to that end I would commend the Spiritual Improvement of those words, Prov. 31.6, 7. Give strong Drink unto those that are ready to Perish, and Wine unto those that be of heavy Hearts; let him drink and forget his Poverty, and remember his Misery no more. Who ever hath been pincht by the late Persecution, Oh! let him come and drink of the waters that are runing in our Sanctuaries, so will he forget his Poverty and remember his Miseries no
more. God did not depress us so low, but he hath now raised us again. Dejicit ut relevei, premit ut solatie praestet, Denecat ut possit vivificare Deus. He covered the head of our Zion with a Cloud in the day of his Anger, that the Light of his Countenance and the Glory of his Presence might be now more sweet and precious. He over-whalmed us with Sorrow, that the Table he hath now spread for us, and the Oyl where∣with he is Anointing our Heads, might be the more fragrant and odiriferous. He brought us down into the Valley of Death, that after two days he might revive us; and that in the third day he might raise us up that we may live in his sight, that we may know if we fol∣low on to know the Lord; his going forth is prepared as the Morning, and that his coming to us is as the Rain, as the latter and former Rain unto the Earth. Oh then! what-ever hardships we have undergone, let them all be forgotten. Secondly, It should be a Charitable gladness: We should so be glad for these great things, as to put away all Anger and Malice, and thoughts of Revenge against those that have done us wrong; for so is the Gospel command, 5 Math. 44. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, Bless them that Curse you, do good to them that Hate you, and Pray for them which Dispitefully use you, and Persecute you. Oh! Remember that a Forgiving Spirit is a Gospel Spirit. Thirdly, It should be a Profitable gladness: We should labour to be so glad for these great things, as to get good by them, improving the means of Grace we now enjoy for our Souls good; saying with David, 112 Psa.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go unto the House of the Lord. Our Feet shall stand within thy Gates, O Jerusalem; Jerusalem is builded as a City that is compact together; whether the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord; for there are set Thrones of Judgment; the Thrones of the House of David. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. Oh Sirs! This gladness will turn to a good ac∣count at the last day. Fourthly, It should be a Spiritual gladness: Not in a Carnal way of Rejoycing as the World do, nor upon the account of any Carnal or VVorldly Intrest, but purely on a Spiritual account. As our Saviour admo∣nished his Disciples, Luke 10.20. Notwithstanding, In this rejoyce not, that the Spirits are subject to you, but ra∣ther rejoyce, that your Names are written in Heaven. I have not now time to apply it, but so should our glad∣ness be. Fifthly, It should be an Eucharistical gladness: Oh! how should we be Blessing, Praising, Adoring, and Mag∣nifying the Lord our God in the Sense of these great things he hath done for us? How should we be stiring up our selves to the Praise of him, as David did? 108 Psa. 1.2, 3, 4. O God, my Heart is fixed; I will Sing and give Praise even with my Glory. Awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake early; and I will sing Praises to thee among the Nations; for thy Mercy is great above the Heavens, and thy Truth reacheth unto the Clouds. This will be a gladness truly becoming the Professors of the Gospel. Sixthly, It should be an Influential gladness: Oh! what an Influence should these great things have upon our whole Man to serve our God more purely, to live to
him more holily, and to walk before him more humbly then ever we have done; as the Apostle urgeth the Romans, Chap. 12.1. I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the Mercy of God, that you present your Body a living Sa∣crifice holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable Service. If this Exhortation were well practiced by all that profess the Name of God in England; Oh! How would Peace Triumph over Dissention in the Nation? How would Plenty Triumph over Poverty in the City? And (that which is best of all) how would Religion Triumph over Prophaneness in every Corner of the Land? And thereby how would God have the Glory, and we the solid lasting Comfort of these great things he hath done for us? Amen. Amen. Hallelujah, Halle∣lujah. FINIS. Advertisement. THere will very shortly be Published (for the grati∣fying the Desires of many) another Sermon of this Reverend Authors; the very first he Preacht at the open∣ing of the Meeting-House in Spittle-fields, being a most Seasonable Discourse of Gods hearing Prayer.
