N1015 12498568 62606
Nevvs from the Sessions; OR, A True Relation of all the PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions in the Old-bayly, Sep. 9th. 1674. Where there were Twenty One persons Cast. VVith the Number and Particular Crimes of the Persons to be Executed, and all other things there Transacted. AND Especially the Tryal & Behaviour OF IOHN RANDAL That lately Kill'd the VVoman in Houlbourn. Printed for Phillip Breeksby▪ 1674
THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions, &c. NEwgate hath not for a long time been more thronged, nor a greater Goal-delivery been known, then at the Last Sessions: though for the most part the Crimes were so foul, and the proofs so pregnant, that the whole business was dispatcht in three days time.
But a remarkable instance of incorrigible wick∣edness, appeared in another, who but the very last Sessions was burnt in the hand, and yet took thereby so little warning that he was now in a∣gain, and found guilty of a Fellony and Burglary. For which crime three other Men were likewise arraigned and condemned, having had the Brand already. And a Woman who formerly had been (an old offender in such cases) with another her Companion were convicted also of a Burglary, but only the former conemned to Dye, the last plea∣ding her belly, and by a Jury of Matrons was re∣turned to be with child. In brief there was in all 21 convicted of Fel∣lony, or cast, but several got off, some by being burnt in the hand, and some by Transportation, amongst which there were two Boys that were Brothers both by nature and in wickedness, one not above eleven years old, but able in depth of all kind of Roguery, to supply the want of years. But there was none to be preferred to him, who for want of witness pro∣ved himself guilty of a Robbery near High-gate upon a Country Higler, who being coming to Mar∣ket to London with some Poultry one morning ve∣ry early was set upon by four of the Foot-padd, who took away some of his Poultrey, for money
he had none, or very little about him, but Com∣pany coming by they were forced to run away, and thereupon the Person rob'd, and others after some time parsuing after them, they at last took one of them, which was the Prisoner now at the Bar, who being arraigned for the same, resolutely denied that he was any of them, or knew any thing of or con∣cerning the Fact charged against him; and persist∣ed therein for a long time with so much seeming earnestness and obstinacy, that the prosecutor be∣gan to suspect his Eyes, and think that he might be mistaken in the person, till at last the Prisoner desired that since the witness had declared he was robbed by four persons, whereof two came before his Horse, and two behind him, he would declare in which rank he then was, whither before or be∣hind, To which he answering that he was behind: The Criminal suddenly and more loudly than wise∣ly, cry'd out. My Lord! this is a perjut'd Villain, and you ought not to believe a Word he sayes, for by—I was at that time one of the 2 that came up before him, whereby he confest himself concerned, and was accordingly found Guil∣ty. There was eight in all burnt in the Hand, six ordered for Transportation, three sentenced to be whipt, and one to the Pillory for a Cheat. But for the particularities of Petty Larcetines, and smaller Rogueries, it would be too tedious
Amongst the Criminals, John Randal may be reckoned one of the most Notorious, who was charged with two Indictments, one for Fellony for Stealing several pieces of Plate, and other Goods belonging to Esq Blacke, and the other for Murther, Killing his House-Keeper. The Case appeared briefly upon Evidence thus; This Randal havig been formerly Butler to the Squire, took t ootunity when he and all the rest of his Family were out of Town, to visit this wo∣man, and there in the Evening Murthered her, and rifle the ouse, carrying several pieces of Plate y to his Lodging in White-Cross-Street. And coming two days after to a R-Sp, be∣ing Next Door, he was taken upon Susption, and upon  his Lodging, the Plate was f in his , whereupon he Cofessed that he Knockt the woman Down with his fist, and that he committed the Robbery, &c. Yet now at the Barr he Pleade, Not Guilty, to both Indictment. But upon Reading is aforesaid Confession, at his Examination before the Justice ah Commited him, and the Evidence that he was the last see go into the House that Night the Murther, was Commited, and proof o te taking the Stoln Plate in his Truk as aforesaid, he was Convicted and Sentenced to Dye.
The next may be rankt Two others, though of a different Sex, yet Guilty of the like Horrid sin of Murther, and that upon their own Children, whose Crimes being so nearly resembling each o∣ther we may place them together in this Narra∣tive; For being both Young Wenches, they were it seems inticed to Folly, and at last got with Child, and to cover one sin with a grea∣ter, most Unnaturally, and Barbarously, Mur∣thered their Infants, one of them casting hers into an House of Office, and the other endea∣vouring to Bury hers in a Celler: but being both discovered by certain Symromes usually visible in that condition, upon trait search, the whole mat∣ter came to be disclosed, and they respectively Commited. They had little to say for themselves besides the common Plea, that their Children were Still-born, but upon Reading the Statute, whereby it is provided in such Cases that unless the same be proved by, at least one Credible witnes, it shall be reputed and punished as Mur∣ther, and they were both Condemned to Dye. After them we may reckon another who was pro∣ved guilty of killing a Brewers Servant in VVhite∣cross-street, but the same being found to be onely Manslaughter, and not done with any  ma∣lice (as Lawyers speak) upon his earnest begging the favour of his Book, he was admitted to the benefit of his Clergy; but after all was not capa∣ble to read, and so received sentence of Death.
here to relate them. Let us rather conclude with hearty wishes that all would take warning by these unhappy presidents to avoid the like evil Courses, seeing the miseries they thereby bring upon them∣selves. These crooked paths of impiety, though at first entrance they may seem strewed with Roses, and with delight, leading infallibly in the end to ruine and destruction. FINIS.
