N519 99831685 36150
AN English Inquisition FOR A HERETICK. OR, The Punishment due to Hereticks. Together with the Nature and Causes of Heresie. Declared in a SERMON, Preached at a Visitation at WARE, Upon the 19th. of April 1672. By Robert Neville, B. D. late Fellow of Kings-Colledge in Cambridge, and now Rector of Ansty in the County of Hertford. LONDON, Printed by S. and B. G. for Benj. Tooke, and are to be sold at the Ship in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1673.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL My Noble and Worthy Patron Sr ROWLAND LYTTON, Of Knebworth in the County of HERTFORD. Right Worshipfull Sir, WHen I first put on Reso∣lutions of making this Discourse Publick, I found no Dispute within my self to whom the Dedication of it was a just Debt; the Sense of my many Obliga∣tions to you soon put me in mind, that the Discourse and the Author might deservedly Own the same Patron: the chief Errand upon which it came a∣broad,
being to make my gratefull Re∣sentments of them as well known to the World, as those great Endearments and noble Ʋsages you have past upon me, have been to all, both our Clergy and Gentry, on this side of the County of Hertford: 'Tis by your Donation that I enjoy a Comfortable Subsistence; 'tis you alone that have been the Au∣thor of the most visible Contentment I receive in this World; and not then to have paid you the just Tribute of my Duty and Thanks, in the Dedication of this Discourse, had been a palpable Contradiction to it, and made the Au∣thor himself a Heretick, at least in Morals, and an unpardonable Schisma∣tick and Separatist, both from Gratitude and Civility; for which he might have justly been Excommunicated from your good thoughts, which (next to that
dreadfull Excommunication from the Church) would, in his eye, be the greatest misfortune that could befall him. What title this Sermon had to a Visitation, it held from you in Capite; for it was by your means that the Au∣thor of it was admitted (I will not so lessen your kindness as to say a Mem∣ber) to be the Head and Rector of the Church of Ansty; it was you alone that preserv'd him, I cannot say from Schism, or Separation from the Church of England, (for be ever resolv'd to live and dye a dutifull Son to that in∣dulgent Mother) but from a Separa∣tion from the Church of Ansty. I am not ignorant how unfit a Present this Trifle is to be offered to such a Per∣sonage as Sir R. L. nor do I swell so much in my own conceit, as to think it any part of a just Return; I only de∣sire
it may pass as a small acknowledg∣ment of those many great favours you have heaped upon me, in the same manner as of old a pair of Doves were accepted from those, whose abilities could not reach to a Lamb: and unless that great God, who was pleased to imploy you as a great Minister of his Providence to me and mine, shall en∣able me, beyond either my deservings, or expectancies, to pay my great Debt I owe you, I must run further upon the Score with you, and in the deepest sense of duty and affection, court and grasp all opportunities of owning how much I am Your obliged and indebted Orator, and humble Servant, R. NEVILLE. From my Study at Ansty, this 20th. day of December 1672.
AN English Inquisition FOR A HERETICK. Tit. 3. Vers. 10. A man that is an Heretick, after the first and second admonition reject. THE Spirit of God did not without good reason resemble the Church to a Lilly among Thorns, Cant. 2.2. as being made up of good and bad, a Compound of both; and this truth may be demonstrated from the first Infancy of the world, from the early time of our Father Adam; and those dayes, wherein the Church was con∣fined within the narrow bounds and limits of the Families of the Patriarchs: a wicked Cain was to be found in it, as well as a good Abel; a pro∣fane Esau might have been seen under the same roof with religious Jacob: This truth is also fur∣ther confirmed to us, by, that famous Type of
the Church, Noahs Ark; in which were Crea∣tures of all kinds, Beasts both clean and unclean: Gods Church hath in all ages had Chaff as well as good Corn; and in the very College of the Apostles, Christ's College, which, at its being first Founded, had but twelve Scholars, twelve Disciples, there was one Judas, one Traytor, one Devil, John 6.70. and the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Sardis, and Laodicea, were over-run with Errors and Heresies: And in the Church of Crete, of which Titus (to whom St. Paul wrote this Epistle) was Archbishop, there was such a nest of Hereticks, known by the name of Gnosticks, who imployed themselves in com∣piling a new Model of Divinity, made up of foolish Disputes, and Heathen notions of Poeti∣cal Genealogies, and contentions about obser∣ving the Mosaical Law; that St. Paul was forced to write to Titus, that it was his Office, as a Bishop, first to admonish him, who made any such Division in the Church, or taught any Doctrine contrary to that, which was delivered by Christ and his Apostles; and if after the first and second admonition, there was no amendment; then to proceed to Ecclesiastical Censures, to which he is prompted and excited, in these words of my Text, A man that is an Heretick, after the first and second admonition reject. In which words are these two General parts. First, A Punishment to be inflicted, namely, the Censures of the Church, or Excommunica∣tion; for sayes the Text, , avoid, or reject, after the first and second
admonition, i. e. Excommunicate, and proceed to Censures against him. Secondly, The Offender upon whom these heavy Censures were to be laid, [A man that is an Heretick.] First, on the first, or the Punishment to be in∣flicted, namely the Censures of the Church, or Excommunication; for sayes the Text, [after the first and second admonition reject,] that is, Excommunicate, and proceed to Censures against him: for by these words, [after the first and se∣cond admonition] St. Paul referrs to the method prescribed by Christ, in proceeding against Chri∣stian Offenders, Mat. 18.5. but in some circum∣stances differs from it: for in that forecited place of St. Matthew there is mention made of a three∣fold admonition: one, by the injur'd person alone; a second, by two or three taken with him; a third, by the Church: but here in my Text is only mention, of a First and Second ad∣monition: the Cause of this difference is to be taken from the Quality of the Person, to whom this was spoken; namely, his being a Bishop; whereas in St. Matthew the speech was address'd to every private Christian. Here in the Text, the first admonition of the Bishop carries with it an Authority, far above that of the private person, and the two or three with him, and so may well supply the place of both those: and then the se∣cond admonition here in the Text, will be pa∣rallel to the third admonition St. Matthew speaks of; and so, after that is despised and contemn'd, 'tis seasonable to proceed to Censures, and to
Excommunicate the person so offending. Thus 2 Cor. 13.2. immediately after the second admo∣nition deliver'd by St. Paul in these words, I fore∣tell you the second time; he tells the offenders, , I will not spare you; and vers. 10. he assures them, that this Admonition is, , that he may not proceed to Excision, or Cutting off, which in the last word of that verse, he calls , taking away; the word ordina∣rily used in the Canons for Excommunication. The true meaning of these words [after the first and second admonition reject] being discovered to you, and thereby the Censures or punishment due to Hereticks being declared; I shall dismiss this First General, and lay hold on the Second, where we have 2ly. The Offender, upon whom these heavy Censures were to be laid, namely, [a man that is an Heretick:] in the handling whereof, I shall pursue this method. First, I shall shew what Heresie is. Secondly, From what Fountain it springs or proceeds. First, I shall shew what Heresie is: Although the word Heresie, in it self, signifies neither good nor bad; and therefore, in Eusebius, Constantine applys it to the Christian Religion, calling it He∣resie; yet in Ecclesiastical Writers, if not con∣stantly in the Scriptures, 'tis used in a bad sence, and signifies an Election or adhering to a way of our own devising, and not that which was com∣manded by God in his Holy Word: and there∣fore Hesychius the Grammarian, defines a Heretick
thus, , He that chooses some other Doctrine or Opinion be∣sides the Truth: but that we may not dwell al∣ways in Cortice nominis, in the Bark or Outside of the meer name, I shall describe the Thing it self to you: for the effecting whereof, I shall out of the large Harvest of those Authors that treat of it, glean this description of Heresie.So Cardinal Tolet l. 4. c. 3. de instruct. and our own Country man Francis Mason l. 2. c 10 p 164 c. 13. p. 197. 198. de mini∣sterio Angli∣cano, have de∣scribed it; and Alphonsus à Castro, advers. Haereses. lib 1. p 4 defines it, Dogma falsum fidei Orthodoxae repugnans. Heresie is an obstinate Error in a Christian man in some part contrary to the Catholick Faith; for the better understanding whereof, I shall enquire after these two particulars: 1. What things Heresie sup∣poses. 2ly. What things it implys and includes: and 1. I shall enquire what things Heresie sup∣poses: as namely, 1. A meer superficial know∣ledge of the Doctrine of the Gospel, deliver'd and acknowledg'd in the Church of God: hence we read in 1 Cor. 11.19. there must be Heresies amongst you, you , you Corinthians, who are Members of the Visible Church. True and Or∣thodox Religion always goes before Heresie:Is est Haereti∣cus qui jam suscepto Bap∣tismi Sacra¦mento, Haeresin amplexus est; addimus au∣tem (suscepto Baptismi Sa¦cramento) quia qui contraria fidei dogmata sequitur, nec unquam in Ec∣clesiam catum∣que Dei recep∣tus est, Infide∣lis potiùs quàm Haereticus est appellandus. Danaeus Haeres. cap. 3. Danaeus therefore tells us, that a man must first have bound and oblig'd himself to the Christian Faith, and have receiv'd the Sacrament of Chri∣stianity, before he can properly be called an He∣retick. Hence it is that Antichrist, that man of Sin, is said to sit in the Temple of God, 2 Thes. 2.4. that is, in the bosom of the Church: Heresie there∣fore is an Error, not of any kind of men, but of those, who in appearance, and as far as the out∣ward Profession of it, made their pretences to the Christian Faith, from some part or Article where∣of they afterwards revolted and fell away: and
hereby we may easily distinguish between Here∣sie and Schism; Heresie maintains a perverse Opi∣nion or Doctrine in the Church; Schism makes a rash and needless Separation from the Church: Heresie is a desertion of Ecclesiastical Verity; Schism a breach of Ecclesiastical Unity. 2ly. Heresie supposes that some things may be retained, which in some particular savour of the Christian Faith; although it hath long since been accounted an axiom in Divinity, quod Articuli Fidei sint copulativi, that the Articles of Faith are copulative; and (asPart 2. q. 159. memb. 7. Alexander Hales tells us) Faith extends it self ad omnia Credibilia, to all things that are Credible: so that he who denies One Article of Faith, in nullo sanus judicetur, as2. 2 q. 5. a t. 3. in corp Aquinas tells us, can be thought sound in none. Yet no Heretick did ever abjure the whole Creed or Foundation of Faith, in every Article or part of it:De Baptism. contra Donatist. l. 1. c 1. St. Augustine affirms this of the Donatists themselves, that in many things they concurr'd with him, though he left them in seve∣ral Errors and Heresies: for a Heretick in this, that though he reject many things, yet retains some, differs from a total and absolute Apostate, who falls and revolts, not from some part only, but from the whole Evangelical Truth, which he before acknowledged. 3ly. Heresie supposes that the Scripture, or some part of it, at least as to the letter, is to be retained as the Common Principle of disputing. This Vincentius Lirinensis observ'd of Hereticks, saying,Mos est Haere∣ticorum Scrip¦turarum um∣braculis erro∣res suos pessi∣mos obtegere Vinc. Lit c. 35. 36, 37. in com∣monitor. ad∣vers Haer. 'Tis the custom of Hereticks to shade and shelter their foul Errors under the Covert of
Scripture. Those notorious Hereticks, Arrius, Pelagius, and the Manichees, did not universally deny the Authority of the Scripture, but at∣tempted the Defence of their Errors by Scrip∣ture, though impertinently alledged by them: they dealt with the Scriptures, as Chymists deal with Natural Bodies, torturing them to extract that out of them, which God and Nature never put in them: and as he that bought Orpheus his Harp, thought it would of it self make most ad∣mirable Musick, how unskilfully soever he toucht it; so these men supposed, that Scripture would sound wonderfull Musically, if they did but han∣dle it, with how great incongruity soever it was. And thus having discover'd to you what things Heresie supposes; I now come to shew, Secondly, What things it implys and in∣cludes: and First, It includes an error of Judgment, not of Manners: being placed in the Reason or Judg∣ment, not in Deeds or Actions: according to that known saying, Factum sine Errore non facit Haereticum; no Matter of Fact without an Error in the Judgment can make a Heretick: which I shall confirm and illustrate by this instance; Ado∣ration paid to Devils, though it be Idolatry in the highest degree, and to be abominated like Hell it self; yet if it be done without any Opinion of Divinity existing in those Infernal Spirits, 'tis not to be called Heresie;Res enim ef∣fecta absque judicio intel∣lectus definien∣tis, peccatum esse potest. Hae∣resis autem minimè Al∣phons. à Ca¦stro lib 1. advers Haeres. p. 3. For a thing done without the judgment of the Ʋnder∣standing, may be a Sin, but not a Heresie, sayes Alphonsus à Castro.
2ly. Heresie, as it is an Error of Judgment, not of Manners; so it hath for its Object a Matter of Faith, or the Doctrine of the Gospel. There may be great Errors in the Mathematicks, in Natural, or in Moral Philosophy, but those who are en∣tangled in these Errors, must not be put into the List and Catalogue of Hereticks; for they are only such, who have corrupt Judgments in mat∣ters of the Christian Faith. And as they have Matters of Faith for their Object, so 3ly. Have they those Points of Faith, which are Essentials and Fundamentals, , such as are necessarily and explicitly, to be believed by all: and therefore Hereticks may be said to be such, as Col. 2.19. Hold not the head: without which there is no Salvation. Hereticks (asQuaest. 11. Artic. 2 part 2. 2. Aquinas tells us) are such, as harbour a false Opinion of those things, quae ad Fidem pertinent, which belong to Faith; to which any thing may belong, two ways; either directly and princi∣pally, as do all the Articles of Faith: or else in∣directly and secondarily, as do all those Points, to the denying whereof, the Corruption of some Fundamental Article is a necessary Consequent. 4ly. To all these Obstinacy or Contumacy may be superadded, which is the Specifical Difference of Heresie, the chief Constituent part that makes up this Sin; to which we may referr that known saying of St. Augustine,Errare possum Haereticus esse nolo. I may erre, but I will not be a Heretick: for there is always required to Heresie, not only an Erroneous Judgment, but also an Obstinate Will. I shall conclude this par∣ticular, with those words of St. Augustine, against
the Manichees.Qui in Eccle∣siâ Christi pr∣vum aliquid sapiunt, si cor∣repti ut sanum rectum{que} sapí∣ant, resistunt contumaciter, sua{que} pestifera Dogmaa de∣fendere per∣sistunt Here∣tici sunt l 18. de Civ Dei. cap. 51. They who savour of, or main∣tain any false or corrupt Doctrine in the Church of Christ, if after a rebuke, or admonition to forsake their Error, and embrace the Truth, they shall out of Contumacy stand out, and persist to defend their poisonous Doctrines, they are Hereticks. And thus having shewn what Heresie is, I shall proceed to evince, 2ly From what Fountain it springs and proceeds. Now this Sin of Heresie, like the River Nilus, hath many Heads, many Fountains, as namely. First, Pride:. l. 1 Haeres. 75. Edit. Petav. Epiphanius tells us of that Arch-heretick Arrius, that being high and lofty in his own thoughts, he went out of the right way, and departed from the Truth. AndEuseb. Ec∣clesiast Hist. lib 4 cap. 21. Thebulis, the first Heretick in the Church of Jerusalem, fell into Heresie, because he was not permitted to succeed Simeon in that Bishoprick; his pride and ambition could not brook the loss and defeat of so high a place in the Church. You will find al Hereticks perching upon the same Pinnacle, the Devil stood, the High Pinnacle of Pride: the He∣retick Aerius (if we will believe Epiphanius) had. l. 1. Haer. 75. lib. 4. cap. 21. an ambition to be exalted; and though he wanted merit to advance him from a Presbyter to a Bishop, yet he wanted not arrogance to lessen the Bishop into a Presbyter: and this was the bane of Origen, a man of as great Learning, as ever that Age, he lived in, gave birth to; who, in his Comments upon the Scripture, conceiving (out of the high opinion of his own Wit and Parts) strange Meteors, and aiery Speculations, brought forth those dangerous Errors, which drew upon
his Person the heaviestLamentation of Origen, in Euseb. lib. 7. Eccles. Hist. cap. 1. p 122. Censures of the Church, and upon Posterity the loss of some of his Writings. AndEccles Hist. lib. 7. c. 29. p 140. Eusebius tells us, that, that blasphemous Heretick, Paulus Samosatenus, who denied the Divinity of Christ, was pufft up with Pride, and usurped Secular Dignities: and, even in the times of the Apostles, there was a proud Diotrephes, who 3 Epist. John 9. loved to have prehentinence among them. 2ly. Heresie proceeds from Affectation of No∣velty; whether it be 1. In our Opinions: or 2ly. In our Words and Phrases. 1. Heresie proceeds from Affectation of No∣velty in our Opinions: The Nature of men, especially of such as are Heretically inclined, is greedy of Novelty; andLib. 7. cap. 32 p. 369. Eccl. Hist. Socrates observes of the Heretick Nestorius, that he scorn'd to peruse the Works of the Antient Fathers; preferring himself, and his own Novel Opinions, before them all. That we may therefore stop this Inlet to Heresie, Affectation of Novelty, let us call to mind the advice of the Prophet, Jer. 6.16. Stand ye in the wayes, and see, and ask for the old paths: the Old way is the Safe way. In Christianity there can be no Concerning Truth which is not An∣tient; and whatsoever is truly new, is certainly false: Look then for Purity in the Fountain, and strive to embrace the first Faith. There are but few things, so little, or so great, either in Art or Nature, which are not willing to take advantage from the meer credit of their Antiquity: in Reli∣gion also the case is clear, That which is first is truest, asId verius quod prius Tertul. advers. Marc. lib. 4. cap. 5 Tertullian well observes. And as
Heresie sometimes proceeds from Affectation of Novelty in our Opinions, so 2ly. Doth it proceed from Affectation of No∣velty in our Words and Phrases; An unusual and new Form, or Mode of speaking in the Doctrine of Faith, opens a Window, if not a Door, to He∣resie: A Solecisme in Words sometimes turns to a Solecisme in Doctrine: The Heretick Nestorius (asEccles. Hist. lib 7. cap 32. Socrates tells us) because he would not allow the Virgin Mary to be called , the Mother of God, but quarrell'd with that form of speech, which the Practice and Custom of the Church had stampt for currant; chose rather to deny the Unity of Christs Person in his Thean∣thropy, than to speak in the Phrase and Language of the Antient Church. 3ly. Heresie sometimes proceeds from Weak∣ness and Ignorance: simple and unlearned Souls, train'd up by men of Contentious Spirits, have had strength enough to be the Authors of dan∣gerous Heresies.Euseb. Ec∣clesiast Hist. lib 5 cap. 13. Priscilla and Maximilla, two silly women, laden with iniquity, were the chief Ring-leaders in the Error of the Montanists: what one said of Civil Contentions, holds true also of Heresies, audacia etiam valet singulorum, no man is too weak, I say not to do a mischief, but to be a Principal Agent and Leader in He∣resie. Ignorance is usually the Mother of Con∣fidence, and makes men venture upon things, above the Sphere of their low capacities, leap from the Shop-board to the Pulpit, and become ex tempore Teachers and Interpreters of Scrip∣ture, which, being unlearned, they wrest unto their
own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. it wasSola Scriptu¦rarum ars est quam omnes passim sibi ven∣dicant: in Epistol. ad Paulin. St. Hieroms complaint, (and I wish it might not still be ours) that Practitioners of other Arts could contain themselves within the bounds of their own Pro∣fession, but that every one pretends to the Art and skill of interpreting Scripture. 4ly. Heresie sometimes proceeds from a desire in men, to shrowd themselves under the great name of some famous person; Jud. 16. Having mens persons in admiration: Hence sprang that Rhapsody of Heresies, with which the Church did ever abound, the Cerinthians, Nicolaitans, Arri∣ans, Manichees, Pelagians, Socinians, &c. both the time and your patience would fail me, if I should recite all those, which Irenaeus, Epipha∣nius, St. Augustine, Alphonsus à Castro, and others have taken the pains to reckon up: Such men as those which I but now named to you, usually place the Founder of that Heresie, to which they are Retainers, as a Star in the Firmament, and walk by the Light which he casteth, and by no other, though it come from the Sun it self. So that it were not amiss to advise them to take up that excellent Resolution ofHaec senten∣tia mihi stat, nallius homi∣nis praeterquam Jesu Christi nobis à Coelesti Patre commen∣dati, nomen ferre, nulli me mancipare. Vorstii Epist. ad Chr. Per. p. 79. inter Epist. Theol. Praest. ac erud vorum. Vorstius, to bear no other Name but that of Christ; wear no Title but that of Christian: for why should the Truth be built upon a Name? which, though it be glo∣rious in the world, is but the name of a Man, who is subject to Error. Tolle mihi è causà nomen Ca∣tonis, sayes Tully; Cato was a Name in great re∣pute, and that carried Authority with it; and therefore the Orator did not think fit to have him a Witness against his Client Murena: so, tolle
mihi è causâ nomen Calvini aut Socini, take away the name of Calvin, or Socinus, if you would discover the Truth: There is but one name by which you can be saved, Act. 4.12. and his name alone must prevail with you. 5ly. Heresie oftentimes grows from Covetous∣ness, which 1 Tim. 6.10. is the Root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith: thuslib. 5 c 3. Theodoret tells us of Ʋlphila Bishop of the Goths, who being enticed and allured by money, drew all the Barbarians into Communion with the Arrian Hereticks: and holy. Ignat. Epistol ad Magnes. Ignatius, describing some Hereticks that did then infest the Church, tells us that they were, Covetous of other mens goods, and greedy of wealth: This sent that swarm of Flies and Locusts, the Novatians, the Puritans of those times, Disciples of Novatus, who would needs be stiled , pure; but as pure as he pretended to be, he was (sayes Nazianzen) , a Covetous person. This Sin is the great Coiner of Heresies, which are nothing else but the inventions of worldly∣minded men, working out of the Elaboratory of their Fancy, some new Doctrine, which may fa∣vour and feed their Covetous humour, and make them rich and great in the world: this built a Throne for the Pope, and a Consistory for the Disci∣plinarian: this hath stated many Questions, and sate as President at most Councils: for, be the man what he will, private Interest is commonly the Doctor of the Chair, and è Cathedrâ determines all things; and whatsoever is once found advantagi∣ous, shall soon be determined sound and Ortho∣dox.
6ly. Heresie sometimes proceeds from exalting Reason too high in matters of pure Faith: I say matters of pure Faith; for those Principles which the Scripture contains, are of two sorts; Mixt, and Pure; the Mixt are those that are both dis∣cover'd by Reason, and declared by Revelation, and so are Principles both of Reason and Faith: of this kind are the Attributes of God, Moral Good and Evil, and the Soul's Immortality. The Principles of pure Faith are such, as are known only by the Divine Testimony, as, the Miracu∣lous Conception, the Incarnation, and the Tri∣nity: and to this purpose hath Eulogius an ex∣cellent Oration, against those who think to be able to comprehend those sublime Truths in Scripture that concern the Trinity, , by the Wit or Reason of man: these Principles of pure Revelation, Reason cannot im∣mediately demonstrate; nor can we expect it should, for they are matters of Divine Testi∣mony; all that it can do herein, is to assert the Credibility and Truth of those testimonies that relate such matters, in proving the Divine Au∣thority of the Scriptures: and it is no more dis∣paragement to our Reasons, that they cannot evince these Sacred Truths of pure Revelation by their own strength; than it is a disgrace to them, that they cannot know that there are such things as Colours, without the help of our eyes; or that there are Sounds, without the Faculty of hearing. Reason in these things must strike sail to Faith: and, many times, because she refuses to borrow Spectacles of Faith to look into these
Mysteries, she runs men into Heresie. Thus the Socinians, by exalting Reason too high, and making it the Standard of Divine Truths, and Principles of pure Revelation, fell into that dangerous Heresie of denying Christ's Divi∣nity, denying that he is the true, great, and eternal God. 7ly. Heresie proceeds from a wilfull wresting and distorting the Scripture: Scripture is either mangled by Hereticks, or put upon the Rack: used as Procrustes used his Guests, either cut off in some part of it, or stretcht too far; and is in∣terpreted by them, as Jonathan shot his arrows, sometimes beyond, sometimes beside, sometimes short of the sence of it: they are so much in love with their own Heretical Opinions, that they will let the Scripture speak no sence but theirs; and (like the Harlot in the Book of Kings) they take their dead and putrefied fancies, and lay them in the Bosom of Scripture: and as Euphra∣nor the Painter, having wearied his Art and Fancy, in drawing the Pictures of the lesser Gods, fail'd and came short in setting out the Majesty of Jupiter; so these men having wearied their Art and skill, in drawing the Pictures of their own little fancies and conceits, fall short of the true interpretation of Scripture; and will not be perswaded, that it hath too much , sublimity, and Majesty in it, to stoop to such low, and mean Phansies, as they would pin and fasten upon it: from whence it comes to pass, that when they find the Scripture run counter to them, rather than submit to it, they will be guilty
of Scripture-Slaughter, as Tertullian calls it;Marcion ex∣ertè & palam machaerâ non stylo usus est; quoniam ad materiam suam caedem Scripturarum confecit. Tert. de praescript. Haereticor. c. 38. And the same Author speaking of other Here∣ticks goes on to the same purpose as followeth; De verbi au¦tem admini¦stratione quid dicam; cum hoc fit nego∣tium illis, non ethnicos con∣vertendi, sed nostros ever∣tendi? hanc magis gloriam captant, si stan∣tibus ruinam, non si jacenti∣bus elevatio∣nem operentur; quoniam opus eorum non de suo proprio aedi∣ficio venit, sed de veritatis destructione. de praescript. Haeret c. 42. Marcion (sayes he) draws his Sword, and cuts off a part of the Scripture: so that 'tis no wonder that these men who handle the Scripture with such rude and violent hands, force it to look which way they would have it; it being no hard thing for a man of parts, who is resolved never to be divorc'd from an espoused Opinion, to find some places of Scripture, which by skil∣full handling, will be perswaded to cast a fa∣vourable countenance upon it. Tully tells us of a Musician, who being ask'd what the Soul was, answer'd, that it was a Harmony; & is à prin∣cipiis artis suae non recessit; and he knew not (sayes he) how to leave the Principles of his own Art. Again, Plato's Scholars had been train'd up in Arithmetick, and the knowledge of Num∣bers, and hence it came, that when afterwards they diverted their Studies, either to Natural or Moral Philosophy, they still fancied to themselves somewhat like unto Numbers, and thereupon fell upon a conceit, that Numbers were the Principles of all things: so when these men come to read the Scripture, it fares much with them as it did with Tully's Musician, or Plato's Scholars; they cannot forsake those erroneous Principles, and false Opinions, in which they have been brought up and educated: and as to those, who are sick of the Jaundies, all things seem yellow and discoloured; so to these men, all those parts of the Scripture they look upon, seem of the same Colour and Complexion with their own Opinions. They Lacquy the
Scriptures to their own private thoughts and sentiments. 8ly. Heresie sometimes proceeds from Cor∣ruption in Morals, from Looseness of life and manners; which oftentimes point out a Heretick, and help us to find him out with more Certainty, than the Inquisition does the supposed Heretick. Those that are Followers of their own Lusts, have often been found Haeresiarchae, Leaders in Heresie, 2 Pet. 2, 14. having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls; and vers. 15. have forsaken the right way, and gone astray. Thus Simon Magus went about with a famous Strumpet called Helena, whom he stiled , his first Conception, and preach'd up the lawfulness of all manner of Filthiness: thus Dionysius of Alexandria tells us, that that Arch-Heretick Cerinthus, taught this Doctrine,. lib. 2. . that Christs Kingdom should be an earthly one; and, agreeable to his fancy who was (sayes my Au∣thor) , a very Carnal man, that it should consist in satisfying the Paunch, and Lust, in Meats and Drinks, and Sensual Pleasures. And Ignatius speaking of some Hereticks of his Age, tells us that they were,. Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. Corrupters and De∣filers of Women: I could tell you also of those shameless Lusts of the Nicolaitans, who, as Clemens Alexandrinus tells us,. Clem Alex. Stromat. l. 3. Commit all kinds of Filthiness without shame, saying that they must. ibid. vide eti∣am Euseb Ec∣cles. Histor. l. 3 cap 26. Fight with, and affront and abuse the flesh: to which I might add the Heresies of Me∣nander and Carpocrates, were they not too filthy for chast and modest ears.
9ly. And lastly, They that are Enthusiasts, and leaving the Word of God, pretend to the Spirit, to Extatical Raptures and Transportati∣ons, may be said to be, if not Hereticks, yet in a ready way to Heresie. Thus we read of that Arch-Heretick Montanus, that he pretended to have received a Comforter from Heaven, and two Prophetesses, Priscilla and Maximilla, and that he received certain Visions and Revelations both by himself and his Followers; andl 1. Haer. 74. Epipha∣nius tells us, that those Hereticks, the Nazaraei, did boast of their , their Enthusiasms; andl. 2. c. 20. Irenaeus tells us of that Arch-Heretick Cerinthus, that teaching his Disciples , some Doctrines of Filthiness, not to be named, he pretended to have received them in Revelations. Lucian in his , or False Prophet, makes mention of a Mountebank Chea∣ter, who that he might the more artificially de∣ceive the People, set up an Oracle of his own contrivance, and like the Priests of the true Ora∣cles, (whence the Sybil never gave answer but in an Extasie) he had his Sacred Furies, his Holy Trances, and appeared to all as inspired by some Deity; and so our Heretical Enthu∣siasts pretend to Spiritual Transports, and Inspi∣red Raptures, as oft as they would give birth to any erroneous Doctrine; and feign to them∣selves as great a familiarity with God, as ever Numa did with his Goddess Egeria: but let me tell them, notwithstanding their Seraphical pre∣tensions to the Spirit, that the same may be said of their Meeting-houses, which was once said in
scorn of the Conclave of Cardinals, when they clasht for the space of two years about the choice of a Pope, They had need to uncover the roof of the house, to make way for the Holy Ghost to come upon them: and with such persons as these is this our Age too much infested, who are both Here∣tical Schismaticks, and Schismatical Hereticks; they separate from us by Schism, and (to fill up the measure of their iniquity) they add to their Schism many dangerous and damnable Heresies; and instead of the tryed silver of Gods Word, they stamp the Name and Character of God upon Nehushtan, upon brazen stuff of their own: So that what Alexander Borgia was wont to say of the Expedition of the French into Naples, [that they came with Chalk in their hands to mark out their Lodgings, and not with Weapons to fight for them] may be said of these men who pretend to such Infallibility in interpreting Scripture, they mark out their Conclusions whereon they may rest, without producing any rational premises which may force an assent; and whereas Scripture should be as the Seal to be set upon all their Doctrines and Positions, to make them pass for Sound and Warrantable; they make it as Wax, to receive the impressions of their own wild Fancies, and cause the Sheaf of Scripture to bow to their Sheaf: these Enthusiasts, with al∣most all other Sectaries, may very fitly be put in the number (if not of Hereticks) yet of those that are in a fair way to Heresie; there being scarce any Sect among them, which may not de∣rive its Pedigree from some antient Heretick:
theEuseb. Feel. Hist. l 3 c. 5. Millenaries, from Papias; theIrenaeus l. 1 c. 24 p. 79. Excus. 1570. Ran∣ters, from Carpocrates, whose Doctrine it was, that there was no other way of appeasing the , the Princes of this World, but by paying them their dues by all their , unnatural filthiness: the Anabaptists may derive their Sect from Agrippinus, asContra Do∣natist. Tom 7. lib. 2. p. 369. Edit Basil St. Augustine clearly demonstrates: theEpiph. Haer. 75 p. 904. Tom 1. Edit. Petav. Anti-episcopal Disciplinarians, from the Heretick Aerius: theEpiph Haer. 62 p. 513. Socinians bear date from Sabellius: theIrenaeus l 1. c. 10 p. 48, &c. Irrespective Reprobatarian, from Simon Ma∣gus and the Manichees, as we may see in Iraeneus: so that having traced our Modern Sectaries to their first Parents, the antient Hereticks, I have made my way easier to demonstrate to you, that many times Hereticks and Schismaticks hunt in Couples; and though of disagreeing and diffe∣rent Principles, yet they agree and combine in their wicked designs against the Church, the one to corrupt her Doctrine, the other to break her Unity; which that I may evince, I shall shew you that Schism flows from the same Fountains, that I have already proved Heresie does: amongst which, I shall at present instance only in these three. First, Pride. Secondly, Affectation of Novelty in Words and Phrases. Thirdly, Bold Ignorance. And 1. Schism flows from the same Fountain of Pride that Heresie does: so that what St. Hierom said of Hereticks, is also true of Schismaticks,
Matrem ha¦bent iniquita∣tis sue super∣biam dum in Ecclesiae contu∣meliam debac∣chantur. Hic∣ronym. Com∣ment. in Hos. vers. 5. [they have pride the mother of their iniquity, whilst they rage to the contumely and reproach of the Church:] and this made Iraeneus joyn them together, who calls them,Scindentes elatos, & sibi placentes. Iren. adversus Haeres lib. 4. cap. 3. Schismatical, proud, and self-pleasing men; who out of a high opinion of their own gifts and perfections, un∣dertake to dictate to Church-Governours, and teach those Captains of the Church Militant, their several Postures in the Service of the Lord of Hosts: Cynthius aurem vellit & admonuit; their Spiritual Pride makes them pretend to Inspira∣tion, and (like the Pea in Mahomets ear) brings the Dove, the Holy Dove, to whisper to them, what is most fit and convenient. And as I told you Heresie did, so also 2ly. Does Schism flow from Affectation of Novelty in Words and Phrases: O how happy and peaceable had the affairs of Christendom been! if men had not too much affected new Words and Phrases, and too nicely sifted and winnow'd Divinity, by not contenting them∣selves with the general forms and ways of ex∣pressing the Truth; and hath not this our Age been acquainted with many? who, that they might make the Church look more like Joseph's party-colour'd Coat, than our Lord and Savi∣ours, which had neither Seam nor Rent in it, make use of Canting Phrases, calculated for the Climate of their Exotick Divinity, and obtruded upon the world in lieu of better. They speak the language of Ashdod, rather than that of Ca∣naan, and separate from us in their very words and phrases; you may know them by their Thou
and Thee in their ordinary discourses, as the Gileadites might distinguish their Enemies from their Friends, by the pronouncing of Shibboleth. And then, 3ly. Schism (as well as Heresie) proceeds from Bold Ignorance; because these ignorant Zealots have not Light proportionable to their Heat, and want Knowledge to hold a Candle to them, they become Schismatical: St. Paul indeed tells us, Gal. 4.18. that 'tis good to be zealously affected, but it be , in a good thing; and not only so, for he speaks of some who had the best of zeals, the zeal of God, and yet in them too there was something wanting, they had it not according to knowledge, Rom. 10.2. I will take a step into St. Augustines path, and add a third possible de∣fect, and that is, in the Qualification or Condition of the persons, according to which (as he ob∣serves) zeal will admit of a directly opposite Specification, in bonitate & malitiâ, and there∣fore he commends it as good in David, who was a wise King, when he said, the zeal of thy house hath eaten me up; but on the other side, con∣demns it as bad, and mis-beseeming the ignorant multitude, (the Arm of whose discretion and judgment was not able to weild a weapon of that size) when 'tis said of them,Zelus occu∣pavit plebem ineruditam. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 20. c. 12. Zeal hath possess'd an ignorant people: I have read of the Embassadors of the Sarmatae, that attendingHist. of the Roman Emp. vita V lentin. p. 341. Valentinian the First, and telling him that (as basely clad as they were) they were the prime men of that Nation; he fell into such a Passion for waging War with so base a people,
that he dyed suddenly: So if Religion in these dayes did but view well the Grandees of Schism in their Mechanick Habits, and seriously consi∣der, with what a Ragged Regiment of ignorance, and impudence, she hath so long encountred, she would leave and forsake us out of indignation. And thus having too clearly demonstrated, how nearly related and allied Schismaticks and Here∣ticks are, as being derived from the same Foun∣tains; I shall make my humble address to those, who have power to inflict that punishment my Text appropriates to such offenders, in those words which Tully spake of Catiline's Conspiracy,Orat. 2. in Catilina. . Lenitati jam non est locus, severitatem res ipsa flagitat, there is no place left for lenity and gentleness, Severity is now a necessary piece of Justice; for he is a bad Chirurgeon, that out of pity spares the part corrupted, till the Gangrene spread; and all the body perish: He who is mer∣cifull to the bad, is cruel to the good; the keys of Ecclesiastical Censures must therefore always be in your Hands, and not only hang at your Girdles; they must not lye rusting by you, but be kept bright by constant use: for tame mercy is the Breast that suckles Schism and Heresie, till (Hydra-like) they multiply their heads, and become insuperable; 'tis therefore incumbent upon all (who are intrusted with this power) to see that such Offenders be soundly scourg'd with the Pastoral Rod; that they be cut off from the body of the Church, with the Spiritual Sword of Excommunication; of which I may say the same that David did of Goliah's Sword, there is
none like it; and that especially, because it does not cut a member off from the Inward Commu∣nion, but from the Outward only; and that, to the end he may be brought in again; delivering only to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. this weapon, this blow, hurt∣eth not but where it meets with a stiff neck: it drives out Offenders that it may draw them in, it Anathematizes that it may Canonize; it puts them to shame, that they may be asham'd to stay out, but return again into the Bosom of the Church: To this purpose God of his mercy dispose the minds of all that have lived in Error, to the en∣tertainment of the Truth, that so we may at last with one consent, with one heart, and voice, send up to God this Petition of our Litany, with which I shall conclude, From all false Doctrine, Heresie, and Schism, Good Lord deliver us. FINIS.
