N720 12637652 64933
A New Presbiterian Ballad to the Old Tune of The clean contrary way. I. ALass poor Whiggs, our Senat's gone, Our Glory's now a setting: The Popish Plot's laid at our door, A Bastard of our getting: Our bloody Cheats, and Shifts and Tricks, And all our Devillish Play Will be disclos'd and we prov'd Saints The clean contrary way. II. Discoverers will Discovered be, As paultry Purjur'd stuff, And we the Hellish Plotters, that Prepar'd such Hell-hound-Proof: We had the face to guild their Vice, And them like Saints display, And wheedled them to swear the Truth The clean contrary way. III. We made their piteous Nonsence good, And Contradictions true, And relisht their unlikely Tales, So blundring like blind Hugh. What car,d we, if they damn'd themselves? So we obtain'd the day, And meritorious make our work The clean contrary way. IV. When men did scruple to believe Things, so absurd to Reason, We scorned Reasons Ballance, and We still cry'd, Treason, Treason: When the Informers halted had Our hubbubs bore the sway, Affrighting folks into their Wits, The clean contrary way. V. ch Toolls we rak'd for Evidence, Like those, that search in Ditches, nd darksome holes for poysonous Toads, hungry sucking Leeches: for more guile, guiltless betray: whi 'l reap a sweet reward The clean contrary way: VI. We made the Papists Traitors all, That none the Snare might scape, And all the Royal Protestants We would bring in the Trap: They must be Romanizers too, What e'r they do or say And Zealous wishers to the Pope The clean contrary way. VII. The Realms Religion, that's by Law In its Establishment, We made as if afraid to lose, Though from it we dissent; The Church of England in the dust That Level we would lay To shew our selves true Protestants The clean contrary way. VIII. The long-black-rebel-Parliament We stood to vindicate, We blossom'd new in th' good Old Cause Of Commonwealth and State; Yet Monmouths Duke cry'd up the while And us'd him like a Toy A future Monarch he's design'd, The clean contrary way. IX. 'Twas such, as we, for Charles the first, With many a Protestation His Glory did so much pretend, His Weal and Preservation; But drew the Sword against his Friends, And forc'd them all away, And him forlorn they did preserve, The clean contrary way. X. Twas such, as we, the second Charles Did scornfully disown, Call'd him the common Enemy Debar'd him from his Throne: Who now, but we, cry out of Plots, And for his safety pray, And stand up stout in his defence The clean contrary way. XI. Twas such, as we, in Scotland late Twice actually Rebel'd, And (Maugre all the Mercy here) Our English venom swel'd: We to Oblivions Act so kind Unkind Oblivion pay Like cherisht Vipers yielding thanks The clean contrary way: XII. Yet we assum'd the confidence Tho conscious of what's past, To busy our Petitions bold, So frequent and so fast: Instead of Blest, we Blasted are, Alack and well aday! And we henceforth shall trusted be The clean contrary way. London printed in the Year 1681.
