P101 12589021 63816
A Letter from the Jesuits in the Savoy to the Jesuits at S. Omers, giving an Account of the Affairs of England, taken from the Priests in the Dover Coach, together with 200 Guineas. OUR last gave you a full History of what we had done in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles I. and II. for the introducing our Holy Ca∣tholick Religion into England; and tho our Powder Plot, and our Fireing the City of London had not the success we proposed to ourselves, yet our late Me∣thods prosper daily so happily, that we can now send you the glad Tydings of our perfect∣ing the Grand Design: The present Scheme and Model of this our Great Work, shews it self in these Parts and Figures: I. We have got a great Body of Protestants that cry up a Jus Divinum of our good King, Passive Obedience, Non-resistence, &c. so from them we can have no Opposition, especially of Blows or Arms; and as for their Paper-War, we value it no more than Sugar-Plums, or a Fart. II. We have alwaies in readiness a Herd of Addressers and Flatterers, who upon the first notice, will thank us for what soever we think fit to declare, tho Contradictions and Im∣possibilities. III. We have at hand a Sett of Judges, who declare our will and pleasure for Law; besides two or three Couples of Bishops who open and hunt all the Game we start. IV. We have erected an Ecclesiastical Court of Protestants, who never stick to Sus∣pend and Deprive all the Protestants we send them. We have got into our Shop the universal Sale of all sorts of Offices and Employments, which brings us in all the Money of the Land. V. We have put our Faithful Roman Catholicks into all Places of Trust, Civil and Military in all the Three Kingdoms, for which we have made them pay well. And an Irish Army is coming over to purge the English Army. We Closet and Cashier the Protestant Officers as fast as you supply us with Catholick ones from the several Parts of the World, to which our Fathers have sent their Circular Letters. We are Planting the Two Univer∣sities with Catholick Rectors and Seminaries: In a word, We are Catechising and Threatning all sorts of People both in Church, State, and Army, to comply with our De∣signs; we punish the Refusers, and yet for all this we have a strong Party both in City and Country, who write and talk up and down of our glorious intention to settle Li∣berty of Conscience. But these our Abettors, as Mr. Pen and his Enthusiastick Sectaries, have a Mental Reservation in this Case, for they mean only the Liberty of our Catholick Consciences to do whatsoever we please with the Laws, the Religion, the Estates, and Lives of the Damnable Heretical Protestants. Our Brother Pen and his Disciples have done us signal Services; for under a Mask of Gravity, of Purity of Manners, and Liberty of Con∣science, they have intangled a great number of busie gadding Women, and some dressing and visiting Gentlemen, who snuff up the Jesuits Powder as fast as the Ladies swallow their French Sweet-Meats. VI. We have pack'd and regulated all the Corporations to our hearts desire, in order to have good Parliaments. We daily model our English Army and the Militia for our purpose. We have Money to bribe all the Protestant Knaves, and Wit to cheat the Protestant Fools, or in case at any time they prove stubborn, we have power to force them; for we have a K—, Judges, Bishops, L. Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, P. Council, and Army, at our command; so the Devil is in it, if we miscarry. Pray send us over all the Priests you can take together from all Parts of the World, we shall want them all, for we have not as yet 12000 in this Kingdom, and we shall stand in need of above 30000 Regulars and Seculars. Ireland and Scotland are our own as secure as England; we suppose our Fathers there give you an Account of the Posture of Affairs in those Countries; the Scoth and Irish are all Beasts of Burthen, born for our Yoke. Tyrconnel and Perth (those Glorious Patrons of our Cheats and Designs) have brought the Natives to Obey without Reserve, and the English are already very easie Pads, only if we curb them too hard, and spur too often, they'll kick and unsaddle us fometimes, and afterwards run over to the Dutch, who (according to our un∣doubted Advice, just now come since we writ the foregoing Lines) are preparing to un∣kennel us and all our Cubs; so that we are now hasting to you, pray provide us good Dormi∣tories and good Cheer, for we have fared very deliciously in England, and hate to think of returning to out Cells again. Adieu till we see you. From our Colledge in the Savoy, Septemb. 28, 1688. Reverend Fathers, your most Affectionate Brethren, R. P. T. B. R. S. F. P. F. D.
