P1637 13178196 98356
THE VISION OF John Perrot, Wherein is Contained The Future State of EUROPE, &c. Particularly The Empire of Greece, France, Germany, Spain, and England: As it was Shewed him in the Island of Jamaica, a little before his Death, and Sent by him to a Friend in London, for a Warning to his Native Country. Published at the Request of some of his Friends, By a Lover of Sions Seed. ACT. 3.17. And it shall come to pass in the Last Days, saith God, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophesie, the Young men shall see Visions. London, Printed in the Year M.DC.LXXXII.
In Memoriam Johannis Perotti. SWeet was thy Voice, and Ravishing thy Strain, Thy Silver Trumpet Sounded not in Vain: In Vain did Sions Enemies, we see, Labour, by Cruelties, to Conquer Thee: Patience and Holy Zeal did Overcome The Cruelties of Antichristian-Rome: Thy Sufferings there for Truth, what Tongue can tell? The Zeal God gave thee, few do parallel. In Shilohs Holy Ink thy Learned Pen Was dipt, which Ravished the Sons of Men: Where thy Fair Fabrick's Fall'n, if ere I come, I'll drop some Tears upon thy Honoured Tomb: Thou Heaven-Born Seed, Blest let thy Memory be, The Love of Men and Angels Honour Thee. The 27th. of the 8th. Month, 1676.
THE VISION OF John Perrot, Wherein is contained the Future State of EƲROPE, &c. WOE! Woe! unto the Sanstuary of the Lord, for it is Polluted! Woe to the Mountain of the Lord for it is at Ease! The Habitation where the God of Jacob should Dwell, is become the Habitation of Devils. The Day is coming that it shall be Plowed like a Field: And the Fami∣lies of the Mountain shall Worship apart, yea, every one apart, and their Wives apart. Be∣hold a Desolation is coming from the Four Winds, which shall Scatter the Inhabitants of the Mountain, because they Trusted in Themselves, and Not in the Lord. They thought that their Mountain should be their Safety in the Day of Trouble: But, Lying Vanities shall not Deliver in that Day, neither shall taking the LORDS Name in Vain be a Refuge; For they have gone astray from the Ways of the Lord, every one walkes in, and Loves his own Way, and is gone a Whoring after other Gods. Their Covetous∣ness
is their Delight, they walk not in the Truth, neither do they Love it, but Diceit is their Covering all the Day long: They Profess, and draw near [to] the Holy One in words, but their Hearts are far from Him. They walk Craftily with their Neighbour, and deal Deceitfully with their Friend, and make the Profession of the Lords Holiness their Covering; They fill their Mouthes with vain Words, and Codemn the Things which they Do, and yet Hate him which Reproves in the Gate. Shall not the Lord Visit for these Things? Shall not the Holy One take Vengeance suddainly? For the Pride of their Hearts, their foolish Imaginations, and their Spiritual Idolatry in High Places, which would constrain the Lord to their Mountain, and the Holy One to their Habitations. Is He not the God of the whole Earth? Shall Man Limit his Spirit? Or teach him to understand who is the Fountain of Wisdom? Surely No. The time was when thou wast a Small People, and Little in thine own Eyes, thou didst Walk in Simplicity, Innocency was thy Covering, and Lowliness of Mind became thy Habitation: Truth in the Inward Parts was thy De∣light, and the Lord rejoyced to do his Plant good, and to bless it, and increase it, that it might flourish and bring forth good Fruit; but when the time came that he expected Fruit, behold nothing but Barrenness and Deadness, and wild Grapes. What shall the Lord do to this Plant? He will Prune it, and Dress it, and Cut off all the dead and barren Bran∣ches, and those that bring forth wild Grapes, and Graft other Branches in. A Day of Vengeance from the Lord is coming, which shall try all Flesh, and it shall begin at the Lords Sanctuary first. Woe! woe! unto those have known the Way of Truth, and have not Walked answerable to it, but have made Deceit their Covering, and have walked like careless Daughters, at ease in the Flesh. The Lord will Visit with Wrath: He will Overturn, Overturn the deceitful Mourners of the Sanctuary; the weeping and sighing Women shall not prevail in that day, which make a noise for vanity and hang down their Heads for an hour like a Bulrush in Deceit. These things are an Abomination to the Lord, his Soul hates them, He will surely be Avenged on such a People as this, the Prophaners of his Holy Name. And behold the Man that talked with me (who told me of the things that are to come) had a Sword drawn, and he answered and said, This is the Sword of the Lord, and it is drawn to make a separa∣tion between the Righteous and the Wicked, and to make a Desolation amongst the Kingdoms of the Earth: For a Destruction is determined, and it shall come to pass and none shall let it. Nevertheless, before these things be fulfilled, the Holy Seed must pass through a fiery Tryal, and the Children of thy Father shall endure manifold Afflictions, such as when they are told, shall make a Mans Ears to tingle. These things
will be permitted for a Time, for a Tryal of those that are His; that there may be a Separation between Those that are Talkers of the Name of the Lord, and Them which are truly Purified with Blood. When these have filled up their Measures, not long after, the Blackness of Darkness shall cover the Face of the Earth, Paleness shall be upon eve∣ry Countenance, Feebleness shall take hold of all Loyns, and a Horrible Fear shall surprize every Soul. The Hypocrite shall Tremble; the Lofty shall be Abased: for the Lord shall then begin to Reign: Then shall the Seed of the Covenant Spring Fresh, and Flourish; and the Everlast∣ing Generation shall begin to be made Manifest, even in the Sight of all Nations. This is the Work which is to be Done; and it shall Surely Come to Pass. The Things which I tell thee, Write in a Book. And as He talked with me, He Shewed me Several Things concern∣ing the Kingdoms of the Nations: and he Pointed out One Kingdom to a Certain Destruction. And He said unto me, Son of Man, turn thee, and look into the South: And I turned, and behold I saw a Leopard, and towards the North of Him, a Terrible Monstrous Beast with Three Heads, having Many Horns: And I looked till I Saw the Leopard make War with the Beast with Three Heads, until the Leopard had Destroyed Him, and cut off all his Heads. I asked the Man that Talked with me, say∣ing, What meaneth this? And He said, Wait and See. And I waited till I Saw an Eagle arise: And She also made War with the Leopard, and She had, for a Season, the better of the Leopard; for when She was at any time in Danger, Her Wings helped Her, and She Lifted Her Self from the Earth; so as the Leopard could not Touch Her: The Contest began to be very Great. And I Looked, and behold I Saw a Lyon Rise out of the Earth, and Terrible to look to; and He helped the Eagle against the Leopard; but yet was not able to Over∣come Him: The Leopard waxed Greater and Greater, and begun to have Many Heads, and every Head had Several Horns, with which He Pushed, insomuch that He made the Nations of the Earth Afraid. Thus he walked in Great Majesty, Destroying many Kingdoms, and Wasting much People: Now when the Lyon which Helped the Eagle, was in Danger, She bore the Lyon upon her Wings. I Looked till I Saw the Eagle Wounded, and one of Her Wings Hurt, so as She could not Fly, and She cryed out for Help, and Lo many Young Eagles came to Rescue Her, and Save Her till Her Wound was Healed, and till Her Wing was Grown again: Then the Leopard with many Heads withdrew: And the Heads made War one against another, and Destroyed one another: and in a little Time after, the Leopard was no more seen, but Sunk into the Earth.
After all these Things, the Man that Talked with me, Said, Seest thou all these Things? And I said, Yea. Then He said, All these Things after many Days, shall Come to Pass. And the Sword which he had in His Hand, He put into the Sheath. And he took from his Side a Vial, and it was Full, and he Poured it upon the Waters; and on the Side of the Vial was written, Death, Death: And after He had Poured the Vial upon the Waters, the Wa∣ters became Dead, and Stinking, and very Noysome. And He Poured forth another Vial upon the Earth: and upon it was written, Wo! Wo! Sorrows, Misery, Anguish, and Tribulation. Which when I saw, my Heart began to Faint: and he said to me, Fear not, for I will stand by thee in the midst of all Troubles: Never∣theless, these Things shall not be in thy Days. And I asked the Man the Meaning of all these Things: and what should Come to Pass hereafter: and the Time when every Thing should be Fulfilled. Now the Man had a Writers Inkhorn by his Side, and a Rowl of Paper in his Hand: and he wrote the Signification of eve∣ry Thing expresly, when all Things should Come to Pass. And I desi∣red to Read it: But He told me it was Sealed for a Little Season. Ne∣vertheless He gave me the Rowl into my Hand, and bad me Prophesie; for these Things were Certain and True. And He bid me Eat the Rowl: and I went to Eat it, but it was in my Mouth Bitter as Gall: so I could not Eat it. And He took the Rowl, and cut it into many Pieces, and ground it to Powder, and Spread it upon the Face of the Whole Earth, that every Nation might partake of it. As for me, I had Tasted of it, and it was very Bitter: and He told me, Its Bitter∣ness should Afflict all Kingdoms. And He said unto me, Son of Man, Prophesie. And I asked him, What? And He answered me, and said: Speak and Pronounce Destructi∣on to that Kingdom, and Nation and People, which Choaks the Lillies, and Afflicts an Ʋpright Family. Say unto Him, I will Pluck up thy Lil∣lies: I will Transplant Them: Thou who Buildest thy Nest up to Heaven, and makest thy Throne with the Highest: That sayest, I have Enough, I need no more; I will Exalt my Majesty to the Clouds, and my Horn to the Firmament it Self. I will Bow the People under me, and Break the Inhabitants by my Power: I will Build me Ships; I will Ride upon the Seas as a Mighty Man of War, and who is the Lord, that he should Resist me? Behold an Arm is Formed against thee, which shall Bruise thee, and a Power is Arising which shall Dash thee to Pieces, O thou Proud Flesh! What art thou Better than thy Fellows, that thou thus Kickest? That thou Banishest the Poor in Exile? And Afflictest the Lords Anointed? Prepare thee for the Evil Day; Secure thy Strong
Places; Fortify thy Garrisons; Raise up thy Bulwarks; for Strong is He that will Plead with Thee: Say not, Thou art Rich, thou hast Enough; thou Fearest not, it shall deliver thee out of all Distress: Nay surely, that which thou Trustest shall first Fail thee; thy Riches shall be thy Destroyer. Thy Kingdom is Great, as is thy Power, yet certainly thou shalt be Destroyed: O Proud People! Great among the Nations, and Renowned among the Princes, your Kingdom shall be left to you Desolate; for a Destroyer shall come from the South, and from the East, and destroy you with the Edge of the Sword. A Cruel Nation, which are not Acquainted with Pity, nor have any Knowledge of Mercy, they shall Ravish thy Virgins, Destroy thy Old Men, and Kill thy Young Men and Infants with the Sword: thy Houses and thy Pleasant Habitations shall be Burnt with Fire; thy Vines shall be Destroyed, and thy Images Confounded, O thou Kingdom of Pictures! A certain De∣struction is Coming, thou shalt not Escape it, and Terribly it shall Persue thee, till thou art Consumed. After many Days the Garden of Lillies shall again Flourish. And I asked Him which Talked with me, When those Things should be? And He Answered me, saying, Cursed be that Kingdom, but Blessed in his Off-Spring, which brings it to Destruction. When thou seest the Pestilence with Vengeance from the Most High, Afflicts its Principal City, Know, these Things Draw near; yet it shall not be in that Kings Days. To the Empire of GREECE: This is the Vision: It shall be Di∣vided into many Parts; the Body shall Rebel against the Head: After a Little Season the Storm shall be over; then behold (as it were) an Everlasting Rest. In those Days God shall Create thee a Prince, and make thee a King, which shall have the Knowledge of his Ways. But before these Things be accomplished, He that is now thy Lord shall Sorely Bruise thee; the next shall Break thee to Pieces; and a Third shall Devour thee: Not long after shall be thy Restauration. To France speak these things: Take away the Crown, Cast down the Diadem; Touch not the Scepter; for New Lords shall Rule over thee. But bless the Name of the Lord, the Cruelty of his Off-spring shall be sweeter than thy tender Mercies. To Germany proclaim; That all its Stubble shall be burnt, its Dross consumed, its Leprosie cleansed; and after many dayes it shall wholly be subject to one Prince; Nevertheless God shall do this; the Hand of the Lord only shall be upon thee, and not of Man, For to thee a Bles∣sing is reserved in store, O that thou couldest see it. To Italy say, Thy Kingdom shall be taken from thee, and given to another; thy Tripple Crown shall fall, and never rise again. And this shall be a Sign unto thee, which shall not fail thee, but be a Monument
to succeeding Generations, Vengeance within the Capital shall destroy thy High Priest. To Spain signify, As thou art the Eldest Son of thy Mother, so must thou have a part of her Portion: Thy Kingdom shall not be wholly taken from thee, but it shall be Divided: Thy own rebellious Children shall help forward thy Misery. As a Woman with Child so shalt thou travel with several Princes, when the time of Delivery shall come, then shall be thy greatest Distress; Thou shalt be afflicted by a foolish Nation, and stand in fear of them that are no People: Yet fear not, through all the Lord shall leave a Root and a Branch. And to ENGLAND say, (and I Wept when I heard him speak) thy Pride, and thy Loftiness shall be brought down, the LORD Him∣self will do it. And He will bring to pass a Work which now thou canst not believe. He will Purge thee with Fire, and Refine thee with Coales, and take away thy Dross; If thou beest all Tin he will Consume thee wholly. And I said, LORD, What shall become of thy CHOSEN? And HE said, I will HIDE them in the Hollow of mine HAND till my Vengeance pass over. Afterwards, I will Establish a PRINCE that shall RƲLE in RIGHTEOƲSNES, and this THRONE to a THOUSAND GENERATIONS: I will make it as the GARDEN of GOD; and I will Delight to do it Good; For in Blessing I will bless it: Nevertheless what I have determined shall sure∣ly come to pass. Afflictions shall follow it for a season, and sore Stripes But the Rod shall spring out of its Own Bowels. And he said unto me, Take up a Lamentation for thy Country, and for thy People, and say, How is Brass become weak? and Steel as Straw? How are the Mighty fallen? and the Beautiful ashamed? How are the Golden Dayes of Vani∣ty changed in a Moment? The Fat become Lean! The Wise, Foolish! How are the Songs of Joy turned to Howling? thy Noon-day into Mid∣night? Was ever such a thing heard of before, that the Sun should set at Noon: and the darkness of Night should possess the Noon-Day? Thus shall it befall thy People in the Day of Purging: and the Furnace shall yet be Hotter. He that speakes these things is Faithful and True, and there shall no∣thing of them fail. As for me he said, Go thy way, for thou shalt Rest in Peace. FINIS.
