P2022 11352850 47553
The Grandeur OF THE LAW: OR, An exact Collection of the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, whose Honors and Estates have by some of their Ancestors been ac∣quired or considerably augmented by the Practice of the Law, or Offices and Dignities relating thereunto. The Name of such Ancestor, toge∣ther with the Time in which he Fluorished, the Society in which he was a Member, and to what Degree in the Law he arrived, be∣ing perticularly expressed. By H. P. Gent. LONDON, Printed for Arthur Jones at the Flying-Horse near St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1684.
TO The RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS Lord GƲILFORD, LORD KEEPER OF THE GREAT SEAL OF England, &c. MY. LORD, THE welfare of Mankind hath so necessary a De∣pendance upon Laws, and the Administration of Justice, that by the Vote of all Ages, The Profession of the Law hath ever
been rank't amongst the most Honorable Callings. Perhaps in the Judgment of many, it would not have become any Person, less eminent than Cicero, to have said, Cedant Arma Togae; And yet, if a good Peace be the end and only justifiable ground of War, and if it be true what Philoso∣phy teacheth us, That the End is always more noble than the Means, I do not well see how the Consequence will be avoided, in Favour and Preferrence of the Gown. But this small Treatise hath nothing to do with such Polemical Debates; It only de∣signs to set down, and enume∣rate those Illustrious Families of our Nation, which have been raised to Honor and Wealth by
the Profession of the Law: The very Nature of the Subject, does in a manner entitle it to your Lordships Protection, who are in your self the greatest Example of this kind, and the greatest Ornament of the Law, in this, or any Age. Others have owed their Preferments in Honor and Estate to the Law, To which your Lordship is much more a Creditor, than a Debtor: When we consider your Nobi∣lity of Extraction, Eminency of Parts, and above all, your Invio∣lable Integrity, we are all bound to confess, that you brought with you more Honor to the Gown, than you receive from it. But these great Truths are not fit to be spoken by so mean
a Person, as I am who shall be too much honored in being permitted to lay my self with this small Tribute at your Lord∣ships Feet, and to make a Pro∣fession of being, My Lord, Your Honors most Obedient and most humble Servant H. Philipps.
TO THE READER. THE Method I have taken, is first of all to Enumerate so many of the present Nobility of England, and such Englishmen whose Titles of Honor are in Scotland and Ireland, (of which there are but few) as by the Study and Practice of our Laws, eminent Preferments, and Places of Trust and Profit relating thereunto, are risen and advanced to such their Dignities; and according to the times of their respective Creations, have placed them with all Cir∣cumspection; Yet I do not insist that they are ranked without any Error, but submit it to the Judgment of those better read in Matters of that Nature: It may be Objected, That I ought not to have preferred the Scots and Irish Nobility any otherwise than according to such English Honors as they are here invested
with, and truely they ought not; but in re∣gard they were but few, I thought it would not be improper to place them next after our English Nobility according to their Titles. The next Degree are the Baronets, which being an Hereditary Title, I have with the like Care placed them persuant to the Date of their several Patents. And as to the Knights and Esquires, foras∣much as there is not any material Precedency claimed or used, I have placed those Degrees promiscuously as they came to my hands, with∣out the least design or intention of Injury to them or any of them, and hope it will be so taken. There have been many Families both of Nobility and Gentry, as have been raised by the means above-mentioned, besides such as I have expressed in this Book, who are now become Extinct as to their Names, though perhaps their Estates have been Ʋnited to some other Families by Daughters and Heirs, but being it is difficult to point particularly at such Families to whom such Estates were carrid, and least it might be offensive, I have not in the least meddled therewith.
THE NOBILITY. THE first who laid the Foundation of that Noble, and Flourishing Family of the Howards, was William Howard, one of the Judges of the Howard. Court of Common-Pleas, in the Reigns of the two first Ed∣wards: From which William, are directly descended, Henry Howard, Duke of Norfolk, Earl D. of Nor∣folk. of Arundel, Surry, Norfolk and Norwich, and Earl Marshal of England, &c. James Howard, Earl of Suf∣folk, and Baron Howard of E. Suffolk. Walden. Thomas Howard, Earl of E. Berkshire.
Berkshire, Viscount Andover, and Baron of Charleton. Charles Howard, Earl of Car∣lisle, Viscount Morpeth, and E. Carlisle. Baron Dacres of the North. Henry Lord Stafford. Son and Ld. Stafford. Heir to William Howard, Late Lord Viscount Stafford. Francis Howard, Baron of Ld. Effing∣ham. Effingham. And William Lord Howard Ld. Escrick. of Escrick, with diverse other Honourable Persons of this great Family. Henry Cavendish, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of New-Castle, D. of New∣castle. Earl of Ogle, Viscount Mansfield, Baron Ogle Bertram of Bothall and Bolesover; as also William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire, and Baron Caven∣dish E. of Devon∣shire. of Hardwick, are both descended from Sir John Ca∣vendish Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench, in the Reigns of King
Edward the Third, and Ri∣chard the Second. *Observe, The Earl of Devonshire is the Elder House. Charles Sackvill Earl of Dor∣sett E. of Dorsett. and Middlesex, Baron of Buckhurst, and Lord Cranfield, is descended of an Ancient Fa∣mily of that Name in Sussex: But the first who made any considerable addition to the Estate and Honour, was Sir Richard Sackvill Knight, one of the Benchers of the Inner-Temple, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; and after∣wards Under-Treasurer of the Court of Exchequer, whose Son and Heir was the first Lord Buckhurst. James Cecill Earl of Salisbury, E. of Salis∣bury. Viscount Cranbourne, and Ba∣ron of Essendon; as also John Cecill Earl of Exeter, and Ba∣ron E. of Exeter. of Burleigh, are both Issued
in a direct Line, from William Cecill, an eminent Lawyer of the Society of Grays-Inn, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; in which Study he made so great a Progress, that (besides many other worthy Offices) he at last was consti∣tuted Lord High Treasurer of England, and created Baron of Burleigh, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and at his Death, left an Estate of a prodigious Vallue. John Edgerton Earl of Bridge∣water, E. of Bridge∣water. Viscount Brackley, Ba∣ron of Elsmeere, is the Grand∣son of Thomas Edgerton, a Na∣tural Son to Sir Richard Edger∣ton of Ridley in Cheshire Knight, which Thomas being placed in Lincolns-Inn, to the Study of the Law, so improved himself therein, that he became, first, Sollicitor General to Queen Elizabeth, next, her Attorney
General, then Master of the Rolls, then Lord Keeper, after∣wards Lord Chancellor, and last created Baron of Elesmere, and Viscount Brachley, leaving at his Death, an Estate of his own raising, of at least Eight thousand pound per Annum. Edward Rich Earl of War∣wick E. of War∣wick. and Holland, Lord Rich of Leez and Kensington, is Li∣neally descended from Sir Richard Rich Knight, Reader of the Middle-Temple, in the One and twentieth year of Henry the Eighth, who for his great knowledge in the Law, was made Sollicitor General to that Prince; and afterwards in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, farther advanced to the Dignity of Lord High Chancellor of England, and created Baron of Leez Court, obtaining a great share of the Revenues of the Church
to support his Dignity; both which he left to his Son Ro∣bert, created Earl of Warwick. Charles Montague Earl of Manchester, E. of Man∣chester. Viscount Mande∣vill, and Baron of Kimbolton; Edward Montague Earl of Sand∣wich, E. of Sand∣wich. Viscount Hitchinbrooke, and Baron of St. Neotts; and Ralph Montague Baron of Bough∣ton, all persons of great Estates: The foundation whereof, was first laid by Sir Edward Mon∣tague Ld. Monta∣gue. Knight, Serjeant at Law, first, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, and then Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth: He was the Father of Sir Edward Montague Knight, who had Six Sons; First, Sir Edward, made Lord Montague of Bough∣ton; the Third Son was Sir Henry Montague of the Middle-Temple, London, Knight, Ser∣jeant
at Law, Lord Chief Ju∣stice of the Court of Kings-Bench, Lord High Treasurer of England in the Reign of King James, afterwards ad∣vanced to the Dignity of the Earl of Manchesters: The Sixth Son was Sir Sidney Montague Knight, Grandfather to Ed∣ward now Earl of Sandwich. John Sheffield Earl of Mul∣grave, E. of Mul∣grave. and Baron of Butter∣wick, is directly descended from Sir Robert Sheffield of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Recor∣der of London, and Speaker of the House of Commons, in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh; which Sir Robert, by his great knowledge in the Laws of this Kingdom, very much advanced his Family, and purchased a fair Estate in the County of Lincoln, which is now part of the Inheritance of the present Earl, who is
the Fifth Baron, and Third Earl of the Family. Henry Mordant Earl of Pe∣terborough, E. of Peter-Borough. Baron of Turvey, and Charles Lord Viscount Viscount Mordant. Mordant, are both of them the Descendants of John Mor∣dant of the Middle-Temple, Serjeant at Law, and Chancel∣lor of the Dutchy of Lancaster, in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, who having ac∣cumulated a great Estate, was before his death, made a Peer of this Realm by King Henry the Eighth. Thomas Weston Earl of Port∣land, and Baron of Neyland, is E. of Port∣land. descended from Richard Weston of the Inner-Temple, one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, who being a younger Brother, may truly be supposed to be the first ad∣vancer
of this Family to the Quality and Estate it now en∣joys. Henry Hide Earl of Claren∣don, E. of Cla∣rendon. Viscount Cornbury, and Baron of Hindon, as also Law∣rence Hide Earl of Rochester, Viscount Kenellworth, and Ba∣ron E. of Roche∣ster. of Wooton Basset, are both of them the Sons of Edward late Earl of Clarendon, who was bred up in the Middle-Temple in the Study of the Law, in which he arrived to such perfection, that he be∣came first, Chancellor of the Court of Exchequer, and af∣terwards Lord High Chancel∣lor of England, by means of which Honourable prefer∣ments, 'tis well known what a Vast Estate he left to his Posterity. Robert Brudnell Earl of Car∣digan, and Baron Brudnell of E. of Cardi∣gan.
Stanton-Wivell, is direct Heir-Male to Robert Brudnell Esq;, Serjeant at Law; and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the time of King Henry the Eighth, a Man of great Learning in the Laws, and Master of a great Estate, most of his own acquiring. Robert Earl of Alesbury, Vis∣count E. of Ales∣bury. Bruce of Ampthill, and Baron of Skelton, is the Grand∣son of Edward Bruce Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King James; by whom, the said Edward was created Baron of Kinloss in Scotland: The place of Master of the Rolls did doubtless much conduce to the advancement of the E∣state which the said Edward Lord Kinloss had; yet notwith∣standing, he was Honourably descended, and enjoyed an ample Fortune before he exe∣cuted that Office: but most
of it lay in Scotland, the place of his Nativity. Anthony Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury, E. of Shaftes∣bury. Baron Ashly of Wimbourne Saint Giles, and Lord Cooper of Paulett, is the Son and Heir to Anthony late Earl of Shaftesbury, who, tho' I cannot say he ever made it his business to study the Law, yet was he of the Society of Lincolns-Inn, and by the pro∣fits arising out of such Offices as he enjoyed, relating to the Law, did he greatly augment his Estate, being, first, Chan∣cellor of the Exchequer, and afterwards Lord High-Chan∣cellor of England. Charles Gerrard Earl of Macklesfield, E. of Mack∣lesfield. Viscount and Ba∣ron of Brandon; Digby Lord Gerrard, Baron of Gerrards-Bromley, Ld. Gerrard are both descended from that Learned and Judici∣ous
Lawyer of Grays-Inn, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knight, At∣torney General, and Master of the Rolls in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, who being a Younger Son of the House of Bryn in Lancashire, was placed to Study the Law, and thereby lay'd the first Foundation of those great E∣states and Honours, which in succeeding times accrewed to this spreading Family. * The Reader may be pleased to observe, that though the Earl of Macklesfield, ac∣cording to his Dignity, be placed before the Lord Gerrard of Bromley, yet the said Lord Gerrard is of the Elder House. William Paston Earl and Vis∣count E. of Yar∣mouth. of Yarmouth, and Baron of Oxnead, is descended from Sir William Paston Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. Much might be mentioned to the Antiquity and Greatness of
this Worthy Family, were it not contrary to the method designed. Daniell Finch Earl of Not∣tingham, E. of Not∣tingham. and Baron of Daven∣try, is the Grandson of Sir Heneage Finch of the Inner-Temple Knight, Recorder of the City of London, and Son of Sir Heneage Finch Barronet, a Member of the same Society, who was first, Attorney Ge∣neral to this King; next, Lord Keeper, then Baron of Daven∣try, after, Lord High Chan∣cellor of England, and lastly Earl of Nottingham; which first Sir Heneage was a young∣er Branch of the House of Winchelsea, and so consequent∣ly it may be presumed what Estate this Noble Earl now enjoys, was in a great measure acquired by those two famous Members of the Law. A younger Brother of this Earl,
is that most Ingeneous and Excellent Lawyer, Heneage Finch of the Inner-Temple Esq;, His now Majesties Sollicitor General; as also William Finch Esq; his Brother, a learned Gentleman of the same Soci∣ty: Of this Family was John Finch of Grays-Inn Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King Charles the first, and for a short time, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and created Baron of Ford∣wich in Kent, but dyed without Issue. William Brabazon Earl of Meath in Ireland, is the direct E. of Meath. Heir Male to Sir Roger Braba∣zon of Estwell in the County of Leicester Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the first.
Francis Lord Angier, Earl of Longford in Ireland, is de∣scended E. of Long∣ford. from Francis Angier of Grays-Inn Esq;, Reader thereof in the Four and fortieth year of the Reign of Queen Eliza∣beth, and afterwards became Master of the Rolls in Ireland, where he layd the foundation to this Honour, and the Estate that attends it. Horatio Townsend, Lord Vis∣count Viscount Raynham. Raynham, and Baron of Lynn-Regis in the County of Norfolk, is descended, by many worthy Ancestors, from Sir Roger Townsend Knight, Reader of Lincolns-Inn, who, for his great knowledge in the Law, was called to the Degree of a Serjeant, and made one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas, in the Reigns of King Richard the Third, and Henry the Seventh▪
Thomas Thynn, Viscount Viscount Weymouth. Weymouth, and Baron of War∣minster, enjoys a very plenti∣ful Estate, as descended from Sir Egremont Thynn of the Inner-Temple, London, Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law in the Reign of King James; which Sir Egre∣mont did not a little augment the Estate of his Ancestors, who were before Men of very considerable repute and Qua∣lity. Christopher Hatton, Viscount Ld. Hatton, Viscount Gretton. Gretton, and Baron of Kirby, in the County of Northampton, is a Branch of the Ancient Stem of the Hattons of Che∣shire, and is the Heir to Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, who, from a Student in the Inner-Temple, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, did, by his great abillities, and singular knowledge in the Laws, raise himself to great Honour and
Estate by the access of divers places of great Profit and Re∣pute, and at last arrived to the highest step of Preferment, being made Lord High-Chancellor of England; but Dying without Islue, a great part of his Estate did at length devolve to the Ancestor of this Lord Hatton, who was Nephew to the said Lord-Chancellor. William Farefax, Lord Vis∣count Viscount Farefax. Farefax of the Kingdom of Ireland, is descended from that famous Lawyer, Sir Guy Farefax Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the several Reigns of King Edward the Fourth, and Richard the Third. Bryen Cockain, Lord Viscount Cullen of the Kingdom of Lord Cullen. Ireland, whose Seat is at Rush∣ton,
in the County of Nor∣thampton, is descended, by a Younger Son, from that fa∣mous and Learned Judge, Sir John Cockain, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, and afterwards one of the Ju∣stices of the Court of Common-Pleas, in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, which John had his residence at Ashborn in the Peake, in the County of Derby, where his Ancestors for many Ages before, and his Successors ever since, continue and live in great Honour and Esteem. Charles Mildmay, Lord Fitz Lord. Fitz Walter. Walter, a person of very Noble Extraction, as descended from the Female Issue of the Anti∣ent Lords Fitz Walter, and the Ratcliffs Earls of Sussex; and by the Fathers side, from Thomas Mildmay Esq;, one of
the Auditors of the then new Erected Court of Augmenta∣tions, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Henry Yelverton, Lord Grey Ld. Grey of Ruthyn. of Ruthyn, is lineally descended from those two Learned Judg∣es, Sir Cristopher Yelverton of Grays-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench, in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and King James, and also from Sir Henry Yelverton of the same Society Knight, (Son of the said Sir Chistopher) who was called to the Degree of a Serjeant, and constituted one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas, by King Charles the First, in the begin∣ning of his Reign; both which Eminent persons were the Descendants of Sir William Yelverton Knight, one of the Justices of the said Court of
Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. Vere Cromwell, Lord Cromwell, Baron of Oakeham in England, Ld. Cromwel. and Earl of Ardglass, Viscount Lecale, &c. in Ireland, is di∣rectly descended from Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex, Baron of Oakeham, and Knight of the Garter, who being a person of no great Extraction, did, by his great knowledge in the Laws, and other singular accomplish∣ments, first of all obtain the place of Clerk of the Hannaper, next, Chancellor of the Court of Exchequer, then Master of the Rolls, after, Lord Privy-Seal, and lastly to those Honourable Titles abovementioned, by the access of which Offices, and by the dissolution of Religious Houses (in which he acted a considerable part) he did great∣ly enrich himself, till at last being Convicted, Attainted and
Beheaded for Treason, or some other great Offence, the Earl∣dome of Essex was thereby lost, and his Son an Heir only dignified with the said Barony, by a new Creation; and restored to a considerable part of his Fathers Estate. William Pagett; Lord Pa∣gett Ld. Pagett. and Baron of Beudesert in Stafford-Shire, is descended by many Noble Peers of this Realm, in a direct course of succession from Sir William Pagett Knight, a Gentleman very Learned in the Laws, by means whereof he was made one of the Clerks of the Council, and Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster, in the several Reigns of King Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, and afterwards having greatly advanced himself in E∣state and Riches, he was created a Baron of this Kingdom, being
at first but a Student in the Inns of Court. Charles North, Lord North, Ld. North, and Grey. Baron of Carthlidge, and Lord Grey of Rolleston, is lineally descended from Edward North Esq; a Younger Branch of the worthy Family of the Norths of Walkringham, in the County of Nottingham, which Edward having applyed himself to the Study of the Laws, and there∣by made himfelf capable of those honourable Preferments, to which he afterwards arriv∣ed, was first, one of the Clerks of the Council, next, Treasurer and Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; and lastly made a Peer of this Realm by Queen Mary. John Lord Petre, Baron of Writtle in the County of Essex, Lord Petre. is descended from Sir William
Petre Knight, Doctor of the Ci∣vil Law, and one of the Secreta∣ries of State to King Henry the 8th, Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, and by his great Learning and Honourable Preferments, be∣came Master of a great Estate, most of which continueth to his Successors at this Day. Christopher Roper, Lord Tenham, Baron of Tenham in Ld. Tenham. Kent, is very Honourably de∣scended from a Family of great Antiquity in the said County, amongst whom was John Roper of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, direct Ancestor to this Noble Lord; which John being Attorney General to King Henry the Eighth, and of profound Judge¦ment and Knowledge in the Laws, made a very considerable Augmentation to the Antient Inheritance of this worthy Fa∣mily.
John Lovelace, Lord Love∣lace, Ld. Lovelace. Baron of Hurly in Berk∣shire, is Descended from that eminent Lawyer, William Lovelace of Grays-Inn Esq;, Reader thereof in the fourth Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and soon after called to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law. John Lord Coventry, Baron Ld. Coventry▪ of Alesbrough in the County of Worcester, enjoys an Estate of vast extent and worth, as Heir to those two most famous Lawyers of their time, the first of which was Thomas Co∣ventry of the Inner-Temple, London, Esq; Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James, Fa∣ther of the no less Learned Thomas Coventry, a Student in the same Society, who for his great Abillities was, first, Re∣corder
of London, next, Solli∣citor, and afterwards Attorney General to King James, and lastly, further advanced to the Dignity of Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England. which Honourable place, he Executed with great Honour and Justice for the space of Fifteen years, in the Reign of King Charles the first, And was longer than any person before, or since his time, ever held the same, and longer he might have enjoyed it had not Death interposed. Francis Smyth, Lord Carring∣ton, Ld. Carring∣ton. and Baron of Woton in Warwickshire; is directly de∣scended from John Smyth, Esq; Serjeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, which John Dyed, seized of a very plenti∣ful Estate, most of his own ac∣quiring.
John Lord Colepeper, Baron Ld. Colepeper. of Thoresway in the County of Lincolne, is lineally descen∣ded, by many worthy Ance∣stors, and men of great quallity in the County of Kent, from John Colepeper Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas, in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth. The Father of this Lord Colepeper was Master of the Rolls for a short time, till he was devested thereof, for his Loyalty, by the Parliament, about the year, 1642. Thomas Crew, Lord Crew, Ld. Crew. and Baron of Stone in the County of Northampton, is the Grandson and Heir to Sir Thomas Crew Knight, one of his Majesties Serjeants at Law in the Reign of King Charles the First; which Sir Thomas purchased a very fair Estate in the County of Northampton,
himself being a younger Branch of the Antient Family of the Crews of Crew in Che∣shire. A younger Brother of the present Lord Crew, is the Right Reverend Father in God, Nathaniel Lord Bishop of Durham. Hugh Clifford, Lord Clifford Ld. Clifford of Chudleigh. of Chudleigh in the County of Devon, is the Son and Heir to the late famous and truly ho∣nourable Sir Thomas Clifford, Baron Clifford of Chudleigh, who was of the Society of the Middle-Temple, and for his sin∣gular Learning and Merits, was made Lord High-Treasurer of England, which great Trust he faithfully Executed with all the Justice and integrity ima∣ginable. Francis Lord North, Baron of Ld. North, Baron of Guilford.
Guilford in the County of Sur∣ry, (whose descent from Edward North Esq;, Treasurer and Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations, I have herein before expressed) being a younger Son of Dudly, late Lord North, applyed himself to the Study of the Law in the Middle-Temple, in which he became so eminent for his great Learning and Experience, that he was, first, invested with the Honour of Knighthood, and then constituted his now Most Gracious Majesties Soli∣citor General, after, Attorney General, then one of his said Majesties Serjeants at Law, and shortly after Lord Chief Ju∣stice of the Court of Common-Pleas, from whence, upon the Death of the late Earl of Nottingham, his Lordship was most worthily removed to the Dignity of Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, in which
he now continues, Admini∣string Justice and Equity with∣out partiallity, to the great ease and satisfaction of His Majesties Subjects, and his own everlasting Honour. Henry Lord Farfax, Baron of Ld. Farfax. Cameron in the Kingdom of Scotland, is descended from that Learned Lawyer, Sir Guy Farfax Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth; which Sir Guy was de∣scended of a Family of great Antiquity and Honour in the County of York, in which his now Lordship's residence is. Henry Lord Richardson, Ba∣ron Ld. Richard∣son. of Cramond in the said Kingdom of Scotland, is descen∣ded from the late famous Sir Thomas Richardson of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law,
first, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas, and thence removed to the same Dignity in the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King James; by which honourable places, and his own great Abillities, he laid a fair founda∣tion to that Honour and Estate which now attends this Noble Lord. Henry Hare, Baron of Cole∣rane Ld. Colerane. in the Kingdom of Ireland, is descended from Sir Nicholas Hare Knight, Reader of the Inner-Temple in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, made Master of the Rolls in the Reign of Queen Mary, and from Hugh Hare Esq;, who was Reader of the same Society in the last Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Thomas Needham, Lord Kil∣murry Ld. Kimurry. of the Kingdom of Ire∣land
is descended from Sir John Needham of Shevington, Alias Sheinton, in the County of Salop Knight, Serjeant at Law, Cheif Justice of Chester, and one of the Judges of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.
Baronets. SIR Edmond Bacon of Red∣grave Bacon. in the County of Suffolke, Baronet, (the first of that Dignity within this King∣dom) is Descended from the famous Sir Nicholas Bacon of Grays-Inn Knight, Attorney of the Court of Wards, and Liveries, and Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; a younger Son of which Sir Nicholas, was the no less learned Francis Bacon of Grays-Inn aforesaid; a person singularly read in the Laws, and of in∣comparable Parts, in respect whereof, he was Created Baron of Verulam, Viscount, St. Albans, and Lord High Chancellor of
England by King James, which great Honours and Preferments were soon blasted by some great Offence he committed, during the time he had the Custody of the Seal, and so became reduced to lead the remainder of his Life in priva∣cy, at his Chambers in Grays-Inn till his Death, leaving no Issue Male. Sir Henry Hobart, of Int∣wood, Hobart. in the County of Nor∣folk Baronet, a Gentleman of a very fair Estate in those parts, is the great Grandson and Heir to Sir Henry Hobart of Lin∣colns-Inn Knight and Baronet, Serjeant at Law, Attorney General to King James, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas, a person of profound Judgment and Knowledge in the Laws, as by his Learned works lately published under the Title of
Hobarts Reports, is sufficiently manifested; which said Reve∣rend Judge was descended by a Younger Son from Sir James Hobart Knight, Reader of the same Society, and Attorney General to King Henry the Se∣venth. Sir John Shelly, of Michel∣grove Shelly. in the County of Sussex, Barronet, is Descended from William Shelly of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, which William did very considerably augment the Estate of his Ancestors, who for many A∣ges before had flourished in this County in great splendor. Sir Henry Mounson, of Carle∣ton, Mounson. in the County of Lincoln, and of Broxbourn-Bury, in the County of Hertford Ba∣ronet,
of the Antient Family of the Mounsons of Burton, in the County of Lincoln, is de∣scended from Robert Mounson, a Learned Lawyer of Grays-Inn, called to the degree of a Ser∣jeant at Law by Queen Eli∣zaheth, in the beginning of her Reign, and soon after constitu∣ted one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas, by which means he made a fair Addition to his Antient Inheri∣tance. Sir Philipp Woodhouse of Wil∣ber Hall in the County of Nor∣folk Woodhouse. Baronet, is descended by many worthy Ancestors of great honour in this County from Robert de Woodhouse, Esq one of the Barons of the Ex∣chequer in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Sir Philip Tirwhit, of Ket∣tilby in the County of Lincoln Tirwhit.
Baronet, is descended from Robert Tirwhit Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justi∣ces of both Benches in the se¦veral Reigns of King Henry the Fourth, and Henry the Fifth. Sir Robert Dallison of Lauton Dallison. in the County of Lincoln Ba∣ronet, is descended from Wil∣liam Dallison of Grays-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas. Sir Thomas Hussey of Hen∣nington, in the County of Lin∣coln, Hussey. Baronet, is directly descen∣ded from Sir William Hussey of Grays-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, Attorney General to King Edward the Fourth, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, in the Reign of the same Prince.
Sir Charles Mordant of Mas∣singham Mordant. in the County of Nor∣folk, Baronet, is descended by a younger Branch from John Mordant Serjant at Law, and Attorney of the Dutchy of Lancaster in the Reign of King Henry the seventh, created Lord Mordant of Turvey by King Henry the 8th. Sir Thomas Spencer of Yarn∣ton, Spencer. in the County of Oxford, Baronet, (a younger Branch of the Spencers Earls of Sun∣derland) had a fair Addition made to his Estate by the access of divers Mannours and Lands of great value, given to Sir Thomas his Grandfather, by Thomas Spencer of Claverdon in the County of Warwick, Esq; a Lawyer of Eminent practice and Note in Lincolns-Inn, of which Society he was many years one of the Governours, or Treasurers, in the Reign of King James.
Sir William Appleton, of Appleton. South-Bemstead, and great Badow, in the County of Essex, Baronet, is descended from Thomas Appleton Esq;, Reader of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King Richard the Third. Sir Charles Sedley of Ayles∣ford, Sedley. and Southfleet in the County of Kent Baronet▪ is descended from Sir William Sedley of Lincolns-Inn Knight and Baronet, one of the Bench∣ers of the said Society in the Reign of King James. Sir Edward Hales of Wood∣church, Hales. and Tunstal in the County of Kent Baronet, is descended from James Hales Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas, in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.
Sir William Portman of Or∣chard Portman. in the County of Somer∣set, Knight of the Bath, and Baronet, a person of great Honour and ample Fortune, is descended from William Port∣man Esq;, Reader of the Middle-Temple, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Reverend Judges of the Kings-Bench, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir John Wray, of Glentworth Wray. in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is descended from the Famous and Learned Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; which Sir John lately terminating in one Daughter and Heir, She by her Intermarriage with George Son and Heir apparent to George Sanderson, Lord Viscount
Castleton of the Kingdom of Ire∣land, hath annexed avast Estate to that Honourable Family. Sir William Ayloff, of Ayloff. Braxted-Magna, in the County of Essex, Baronet, is directly descended from William Ayloff Esq;, Reader of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, and from William Ayloff of the same Society, Esq; Serjeant at Law in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir Christopher Wivel, of Constable-Burton, in the County Wivell. of York Baronet, (a Family of great Antiquity and repute) is descended from John de Wi∣vell, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and one of the Judges of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Third. Sir Thomas Englefield, of Englefield.
Wooton-Basset, in the Coun∣ty of Wilts, Baronet, is de∣scended from Thomas Engle∣field of the Middle-Temple, London, Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir John Napier of Lewton∣how, Napier. in the County of Bedford, Baronet, is descended from Sir Robert Napier of the Middle-Temple, London, Knight, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in Ireland. Sir Henry Littleton, of Franckley, and Over-Arley, in Littleton. the County of Worcester, Baro∣net, is the Eldest Male Branch, directly descended from the Famous Sir Thomas Littleton, Alias Westcote of Franckley aforesaid, Knight of the Bath, Author of that Excellent Book,
Intituled, Littleton's Tenures, which Sir Thomas applied him∣self to the Study of the Law, in the Inner-Temple, wherein he soon arrived to such perfection, that he was called to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law, (a Dignity in those days e∣steemed of at a better rate than it is now usually looked upon) and lastly constituted one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth; this Sir Thomas accu∣mulated a very great Estate, and therewith made such ample Provisions to advance his Posterity, that few Families in this Kingdom, now living, do surpass them in Estate and Dignity, as by what I shall herein after mention of the rest of the Branches thereof, will sufficiently be Demonstrated. Sir Edward Philipps of Bar∣rinton, Philipps.
in the County of So∣merset Baronet, is directly de∣scended from Sir Edward Philipps of the Middle-Temple London, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Master of the Rolls (a place of great Honour and Profit) in the Reign of King James. Sir Henry Newton, alias Pucke∣ring of the Priory near War∣wick, Newton. alias Pucker∣ing. in the County of Warwick, and of Charleton in the Coun∣ty of Kent Baronet, enjoyeth a great Estate as Heir to the Learned Sir John Puckering of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, towards the latter end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir John Boteler of Hatfield-Woodhall Boteler. in the County of Hatford, Baronet, is descended from John Boteler of Lincolns-Inn
Es{que}, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir John Packington, of Packington. Hampton-Lovett, in the Coun∣ty of Worcester, and of Ayles∣bury, in the County of Bucking∣ham, Baronet, is descended from John Packington of the Inner-Temple Esq;, one of the Kings Serjeants at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, which John greatly advanced his Estate and Family. Sir Thomas Delves of Dud∣dington, in the County of Delves. Chester, Baronet, a Family of long continuance in that County, is direct Heir Male to Sir John Delves Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third.
Sir John Norton of Rother∣field, Norton. in the County of South∣ampton, Baronet, is descended from Richard Norton Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas, in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the Fifth. Sir Henry Skipwith of Priest∣wold Skipwith. in the County of Leicester, Baronet, is descended, through a continued course of Eminent Ancestors, from William de Skipwith Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Ex∣chequer, and also one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Sir Thomas Tempest of Stella, Tempest. in the Bishoprick of Durham, Baronet, is descended from Thomas Tempest, a Learned Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, and
twice Reader thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, this Family is of far greater Antiquity in those Northern parts, than in Henry the 8th's time, though the said Thomas then did consi∣derably add to the Antient In∣heritance thereof. Sir John Playters of Sotterly-Hall, in the County of Suffolk Playters. Baronet, a Person of a very worthy Family; is descended from Thomas Playter Esq;, a Learned Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, and one of the Governours thereof in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. Sir John Harpur of Calke, in Harpur. the County of Derby Baronet, is directly descended from Richard Harpur of Swarkeston, in the said County, Esq;, who being brought up to the Study of the Law in the Inner-Tem∣ple,
became one of the Readers of that Society in the begin∣ning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and in a short time af∣ter called to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law, and then made one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas. Of this Family was Sir John Harpur, late of Swarkeston afore∣said, Knight, who dyed without any Issue Surviving. Sir Thomas Beaumont of Beaumont. Grace-dieu, in the County of Leicester, Baronet, (a Younger Branch of the Antient Lords Beaumont) is descended from John Beaumount of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, and from Francis Beaumont of the same Society Esq;, (Son and Heir of the said John) Serjeant at Law, and one of the Learned Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas
in the Reign of Queen Eliza∣beth: By which two Eminent Persons was this branch of that Noble Family very considera∣bly advanced both in Honour and Estate. Sir Thomas Colepeper of Colepeper. Preston-Hall, in the County of Kent, Baronet, is descended from that learned Lawyer John Colepeper Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth. Sir Henry Moore of Falley, Moore. in the County of Berks, Baro∣net, is the Heir directly de∣scended from Sir Francis Moore of Falley aforesaid, Knight, Reader of the Middle-Temple, and a Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King James, Author of that elaborate Collection of Reports, entituled, Moores Re∣ports, some time since made
publick by the learned Sir Gefrey Palmer, Knight and Baronet. Sir Henry Hele of Fleet, in Hele. the County of Devon, Baronet, is descended from John Hele of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, in the several Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James. Sir Edward Littleton of Littleton. Pillaton-Hall in the County of Stafford, Baronet, is de∣scended from Richard Littleton, second Son of the famous and Learned Sir Thomas Littleton, Alias Westcote, of Franckly in the County of Worcester, Knight of the Bath, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, which Richard was also of the Society of the Inner-Temple, where he became very Emi∣nent
for his great Judgement in the Law, and thereby, and by his Intermarriage with Allice Sole, Daughter and Heir to William Winsbury of Pillaton-Hall aforesaid, Esq;, together with what Estate the said Sir Thomas setled upon him, did he leave an ample Estate to his Posterity, who were and are of as Honourable Esteem as this County affords. Sir Henry Bacon, of Milden-Hall, Bacon. and Laund in the Coun∣ty of Suffolk, Baronet, is de∣scended by many Honourable Ancestors, from John de Bacon, one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas, in the Sixth Year of the Reign of King Edward the Second, and from Thomas de Bacon, one of the Learned Judges of the same Court in the Reign of King Edward the Third.
Sir John Corbett of Stoke, up∣on Corbett. Tene and Adderly, in the County of Salop; Baronet, is li∣neally descended from Reignald Corbett of the Middle-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which Reignald was a younger Son of Sir Robert Corbett of Moreton Corbett in the said County, Knight, a Fa∣mily of great Antiquity in those parts. Sir Thomas Nitingall of New¦port-Pond, in the County of Nitingall. Essex, Baronet, is descended from Gefrey Nitingall of Grays-Inn, a person very Eminent for his great Knowledge in the Laws, and Reader of the said Society in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir William Colepeper of Colepeper. Wakehurst and Ardingly in the
County of Sussex, Baronet, is descended, by many re∣nowned Ancestors, from John Colpeper, one of the Learned Judges of the Court of Common-Pleas, in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth. Sir Thomas Vavasour of Ha∣selwood, Vavasour. in the County of York, Baronet, is descended from John Vavasour of the Middle-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, in the Reigns of King Edward the Fourth and Fifth, after which, he became Reader of the said Society, being the first that arrived to that Dig∣nity in that House, and in the fifth year of King Henry the Seventh was constituted one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas: This is a Family of ve∣ry long continuance, and great Honour in the County of York for many Ages before this Learned Judges time, yet did
he in a large measure augment the Estate of his Ancestors. Sir Charles Wolsely of Wol∣sely Wolsely▪ in the County of Stafford, Baronet, is descended from Ralph Wolsely Esq;, one of the Barons of the Court of Ex∣chequer in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. Sir John Anderson of St. Ives, Anderson. in the County of Huntington, Baronet, is directly descended from the Famous and Learned Sir Edmond Anderson of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Ju∣stice of the Common-Pleas in the first year of the Reign of King James, which Sir Edmond was the Author of that Lear∣ned Volume of Reports, Intitu∣led, Anderson's Reports. Sir Roger Cave of Stanford Cave. in the County of Northamp∣ton,
Baronet, a person of a very Honourable and Antient Family, who for many Genera∣tions have had their Cheif Seat and Residence at Stanford afore∣said, is descended from John de Cave, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, in the begin∣ning of the Reign of the Vi∣ctorious and renowned Prince, King Edward the First. Sir Oliver Boteler of Teston, Boteler. in the County of Kent, Baro∣net, is descended from John Boteler Reader of Lincolns-Inn, and called to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law by King Henry the Seventh, after which, in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth he was constituted one of the Barons of the Exche∣quer. Sir Robert Hatton, of Long Hatton. Stanton, in the County of
Cambridge, Baronet, is descen∣ded from Thomas Hatton Esq;, Reader of the Middle-Temple in the Reign of King Charles the First, a Branch of the Antient Family of the Hattons in Cheshire. Sir Thomas Hare of Stow-Bardolf in the County of Nor∣folk, Hare. Baronet, a person of a very fair Estate, is descended from Sir Nicholas Hare Knight, Reader of the Inner-Temple in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and afterwards made Master of the Rolls by Queen Mary. Sir Roger Norwich of Bromp∣ton, Norwich. in the County of Nor∣thampton, Baronet, is descend∣ed from Robert Norwich of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
Sir John Brownlow of Hum∣bey Brownlow. and Belton, in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, a person of a vast Estate in those parts, is descended from Richard Brownlow, a Learned Lawyer, and one of the Benchers of the Inner Temple in the Reign of King James, Author of Brown∣low's Reports. Sir John Sidenham of Brimp∣ton, Sidenham. in the County of Somer∣set, Baronet, is descended by many worthy Ancestors, from Richard de Sidenham Esq;, one of the Learned Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, in the Eleventh year of the Reign of King Richard the Second. Sir Edward Nicholls of Hard∣wick and Flaxon, in the County Nicholls. of Northampton, Baronet, is descended from Sir Augustine Nicholls of the Middle-Temple,
Knight, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James, and Chancellor to King Charles the First whilst he was Prince of Wales. Sir Hugh Cholmley, alias Cholmondleigh of Whitby, in Cholmley▪ the County of York, Baronet, is directly descended from Sir Roger Cholmondley, of Lincolns-Inn, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, which Sir Roger was descended by a younger branch from the Cholmondleighs of Cholmondleigh in Cheshire, the Chief of which is Hugh Lord Viscount Cholmley of Kellis in Ireland, residing at Cholmley aforesaid.
Sir Thomas Trevor of Ten∣nington Trevor. Hastings, in the County of Warwick, Knight and Baronet, is descended from Sir Thomas Trevor Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Charles the First, which Sir Thomas is (as I hear) lately Dead without Issue Male. Sir Francis Rhodes of Barl∣brough Rhodes. in the County of Derby, Baronet, is descended from the Learned Sir Francis Rhodes of Grays-Inn, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Eliza∣beth. Sir Robert Bindloss of Borrick-Hall, Bindloss. in the Parish of Warton in the County of Lancaster; Baronet, is lineally descended from William Bindloss, a Fa∣mous
and Learned Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, and one of Her Majesties Serjeants at Law in the Reign of Queen Mary; which William left a great E∣state to his Posterity. Sir William Walter of Sares∣den Walter. in the County of Oxford, Baronet, is descended from Sir John Walter of the Inner-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King James; which Sir John was the Son and Heir to Ed∣mund Walter Esq;, a Man of great Judgement in the Law, and divers times Reader of the same Society in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by which two eminent persons, a great part of the Lands and Estate of this Sir William was Pur∣chased, and annexed to the Ancient Possessions of this worthy Family.
Sir Robert Coke of Longford, Coke. in the County of Derby, Baro∣net, is descended by a younger Son, from the Famous and Pro∣found Lawyer Sir Edward Coke of the Inner Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, Attorney General to King James, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench, whose Learned and Elaborate Works now extant, and made publick, do sufficiently evi∣dence his great Abilities, and remain as lasting monuments of Honour to him and his Posterity. Sir John Gell of Hopton in Gell. the County of Derby, Baronet, is descended from Anthony Gell, an Eminent Lawyer of the Inner-Temple, Reader, as also one of the Benchers thereof in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Sir William Ingilby of Ripley Ingilby. in the County of York, Baronet, is lineally descended from Tho∣mas Ingilby Esq;, one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third; and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Richard the Second. Sir John Lowther of White-Haven Lowther. in the County of Cum∣berland, and of Sockbridge in the County of Westmorland, Baronet, a Family of great Antiquity and Honour in those Northern parts, is descended by many worthy Ancestors of Signal Renown and Quality, from Hugh de Lowther, Attor∣ney General to King Edward the First, and from Thomas de Lowther, one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third.
Sir Robert Markham of Sedge∣brook Markham. in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is descended from that Reverend and Learned Judge, Sir John Markham Knight, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth; which Sir John Mark∣ham was descended from ano∣ther Sir John Markham Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas, in the several Reigns of King Richard the Second, and Henry the Fourth. Sir Anthony Thorold of Mar∣ston, Thorold. in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is a person of a very Ancient Family in this County, and men of great Repute and Honour in their times, amongst whom was that Learned Law∣yer of Grays-Inn, Sir Anthony
Thorold Knight, one of the Readers of the said Society in the Reign of Queen Mary, by which last named Sir Anthony, was the Estate of this flouri∣shing Family considerably ad∣vanced. Sir William Halton of Sam∣ford, in the County of Essex, Halton▪ Baronet, is directly descended from Robert Halton of the In∣ner-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and Reader of that Honourable Society in the Fifteenth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir Thomas Littleton of Littleton. Stoke-Milburge and Munslow, in the County of Salop, and of North Okindon, in the County of Essex, Baronet, a person of a very ample Fortune, is lineally descended from Thomas Littleton of Spechley, in the County of Worcester Esq;, the
third and youngest Son of the deservedly famous, and Learn∣ed Judge, Sir Thomas Littleton of the Inner-Temple, Knight of the Bath, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. The Estate of this Sir Thomas Lit∣tleton, Baronet, was in a large measure augmented by the Access of what his Mother annexed thereto, who was, Ann Sole, Daughter and Heir to that Eminent Lawyer, Ed∣ward Lord Littleton, Baron of Mounslow aforesaid, who (being a younger Son of the Little∣tons of Spechley abovemention∣ed,) applyed himself to the studies of the Law in the Inner-Temple, and therein arrived to such perfection, that he became first of all, Reader of that House, then Solicitor General, soon after Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common-Pleas, and lastly, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, all in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the First; He was the Author of that Learned Book Intitu∣led Littleton's Reports, lately made publick; and elder Bro∣ther of William Littleton Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and to Sir Timothy Littleton of the Inner-Temple Knight, also Serjeant at Law, and lately one of the Barons of the Exchequer. Sir Thomas Chamberlain of Chamberlain Wickham in the County of Ox∣ford, Baronet, is descended from Sir Thomas Chamberlain of Grays-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Chief Justice of Chester, from whence he was removed, and constituted one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James.
Sir Samuell Danvers of Cull∣worth Danvers. in the County of North∣ampton, Baronet, is descended from Robert Danvers, a Learn∣ed and Famous Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, one of the King's Serjeants at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of Henry the Sixth. Sir Richard Anderson of Pen∣ley Anderson. in the County of Hertford, Baronet, is descended from Sir Edmond Anderson Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the first year of the Reign of King James. Sir Richard Foster of Stokesly in the County of York, Baronet, Foster. is descended from William Fo∣ster Esq;, Reader of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law by Queen Mary.
Sir Aston Cockain of Ashburn Cockain. in the Peak in the County of Derby, and of Pooley in the County of Warwick, Baronet, a Family of great Antiquity in those Counties, perticularly in Derbyshire, is descended from Sir John Cockain of Ashburne aforesaid, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, as also Lord Chief Ba∣ron of the Court of Exchequer. Sir Paul Whichcott of Hendon Whichcott. in the County of Middlesex, Baronet, is the Son and Heir to Sir Jeremiah Whichcott of the Inner-Temple, Baronet, some∣time Warden of the Fleet in His now Majesties Reign. Sir John Bridgeman of Great Leaver in the County of Lan∣caster, Bridgeman. and of Castle-Bromwich in the County of Warwick,
Baronet, is the eldest Son, and Heir to the late famous Sir Orlando Bridgeman of the In∣ner-Temple, Knight and Baro∣net, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, and from thence removed to the dignity of Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England; he was the first English man that His pre∣sent Majesty advanced to the degree of a Baronet after His most happy Restoration. Sir Lewis Palmer of Carleton Palmer. in the County of Northampton, Baronet, a Gentleman of a very plentiful Estate, is the Son and Heir to the late worthy Sir Jefrey Palmer of Carleton a∣foresaid, and of the Middle-Temple, Knight and Baronet, His Majesties Attorney Gene∣ral, a person of profound Judgement in the Laws, and
of other singular Abilities. Sir Humphry Winch of Han∣nes Winch. in the County of Bedford, and of Harleford in the Coun∣ty of Buckingham, Baronet, is descended from Sir Humphry Winch of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in Ireland, and thence removed to the dignity of one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in Eng∣land in the Reign of King James. Sir Thomas Allen of the City of London, Knight and Baronet, Allen. sometime since Lord Mayor thereof, is descended from John Allen Esq;, Serjeant at Law, Reader of Lincolns Inn in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, and afterwards one of the Barons of the Exchequer.
Sir Henry North of Milden∣hall North. in the County of Suffolk, Baronet, a younger branch of the Honourable Family of the Lord North, is descended from Sir Edward North Knight, who was Chancellor and Treasurer of the Court of Augmentations in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, after created Lord North. Sir Thomas Darcey of St. Cleres Hall in the County of Darcey. Essex, Baronet, (of the An∣cient Family of the Darcies of the North) is descended from John Darcey of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Readers of that Ho∣nourable Society in the Reign of His late Majesty King James. Sir Henry Stapleton of Mitton in the County of Tork, Baronet, Stapleton. is descended by many worthy Ancestors, (who by Marriages
were allyed to the best Fami∣lies in this Kingdom) from Ni∣cholas de Stapleton, a Person of great Note in the time of Henry the Third, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench, in the first Year of the Reign of King Edward the First. Sir Robert Cordell of Long-Melford Cordell. in the County of Suf∣folk, Baronet, is descended from Sir William Cordell of Lincolns-Inn Knight, a person of great Learning and Knowledge in the Laws; in respect whereof he was called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law by Queen Mary, and afterwards made Master of the Rolls. Sir William Wray of Ashby in the County of Lincoln, Ba∣ronet, Wray. is a younger Branch, descended from the Famous Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord
Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir George Warburton of Are∣ly-hall Warburton▪ in the County of Chester, Baronet, a Family of long continuance, and great esteem in this County, is descended from Sir Peter Warburton of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and one of the Ju∣stices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James, a person very eminent in his time for his great abili∣ties in the Law. Sir Saint Andrew Saint John of Woodford in the County of St. John. Northampton, Baronet, is de∣scended from Oliver St. John of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, a man of great Prudence and Learning, who was Attorney General to King Charles the First, in the
year One thousand six hundred and fourty, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of the Ʋp∣per Bench (as it was then termed) in the time of the late unhappy Usurpation. Sir Andrew Henly of Bram∣sell Henley. in the County of Somerset, Baronet, is descended from Sir William Henley Knight, one of the Readers of Grays-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir William Ellis of Wyham in the County of Lincolne, a Ellis. Gentleman of a very great Estate, is the Son and Heir to Sir Thomas Ellis Baronet, and Nephew and Heir to the late Famous and Learned Judge, Sir William Ellis of Grays-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and several times one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in His now Majesties Reign:
Both which, Sir Thomas, and Sir William, were the descen∣dants of another Sir William Ellis Knight, who was also one of the Readers of Grays-Inn in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir Robert Hales of Beaks∣bourne Hales. in the County of Kent, Baronet, is descended from James Hales Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Hen∣ry the Eighth, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth. Sir Thomas Vernon of Hodnett in the County of Salop, Baro∣net, Vernon. is descended from George Vernon of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of the said Society, afterwards one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and lastly, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James.
Sir Robert Leicester of Nether Leicestar. Tabley in the County of Chester, Baronet, a person of a very fair Estate, and great Antiqui∣ty in those parts, is descended, by many Honourable Ancest∣ors, from Roger de Leicester, one of the Barons of the Ex∣chequer toward the later end of the Reign of King Edward the First. Sir John Knightly of Off-Church in the County of War∣wick, Knightly. Baronet, enjoys the Lord∣ship of Off-Church, and other Lands of good worth in that County, as Heir to Sir Edmond Knightly of the Middle-Temple, Knight, a Learned Serjeant at Law, and one of the Readers of that House in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; which Sir Edmond was a younger Son to Sir Richard Knightly of Fawsely in the County of Northampton Knight.
Sir John Bowyer of Knipersley Bowyer. in the County of Stafford, Ba∣ronet, a person of a very am∣ple Fortune in those parts, is descended from Iohn Bowyer Esq;, of great judgement in the Laws, and several times Reader of Lincolns-Inn, as also many years one of the Gover∣nors thereof, in the several Reigns of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth. Sir Felix Wilde of St. Cle∣ment Wilde. Danes, in the County of Middlesex, Baronet, is the Son and Heir to Sir William Wilde Knight and Baronet, Serjeant at Law, Recorder of the City of London, and lately one of the Learned Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench. Sir Iohn Wroth of Blenden∣hall Wroth. in the County of Kent, Baronet, is descended from Robert Wroth of Grays-Inn Esq;
Attorney of the Dutchy of Lancaster, in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir Iohn Anderson of Brough∣ton Anderson. in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is descended from the memorable Sir Edmond Ander∣son of the Inner-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas for Twenty years toge∣ther in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and so continued for some time in the Reign of King James. Sir Edward Ward of Bexley Ward. in the County of Norfolk, Ba∣ronet, is descended from Rich∣ard Ward of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Reader, as also Treasurer of that Society in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir John Jackson of Hickleton Jackson.
in the County of York, Baronet, is descended from Sir James Jackson Knight, one of the Readers of the Inner-Temple in the beginning of the Reign of King James. Sir William Rookeby of Skyers Rookeby. in the County of York. Baronet, is descended from Ralph Rookeby Esq;, an Eminent Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, and twice Reader thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir Walter Ernley of Itchil∣hampton and Salisbury in the Ernley. County of Wilts, Baronet, is descended from Sir John Ernley Knight, Solicitor General to King Henry the Eighth; by whom (in the Tenth year of his Reign) he was advanced to that great dignity of Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas.
Sir Compton Read of Burton Read. in the County of Berks, Baro∣net, is descended from John Read Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Fourth. Sir Walter Henly of Lunch∣field Henley. in the County of Sussex, Baronet, is descended by a younger Son from Sir William Henley Knight, a Learned Law∣yer of Grays-Inn, and one of the Readers of that House in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir Charles Golding of Colston-Bassett Golding. in the County of Not∣tingham, This Sir Charles Gold∣ing is not pro∣perly placed; for in point of Precedency, he ought to stand next above Sir Thomas Little∣ton of Stoke-Milburge, Ba∣ronet. Baronet, a person of great integrity and worth, is descended from Robert Golding Esq;, a Learned Bencher of the Inner-Temple, and several times Reader of that Honourable Society in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Sir Charles Gawdy of Crowshall Gawdy. in the County of Suffolk, Knight and Baronet, is descended from two eminent persons of great knowledge and learning in the Laws, and both Readers in the Inner-Temple, the one was Sir Thomas-Gawdy Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and the other was Francis Gawdy Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James. Sir John Curson of Water∣pirry Curson. in the County of Oxon, Baronet, (a Family of great honour and esteem) is descend∣ed from Robert Curson Esq;, Reader of the Society of Lin∣colns Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and after∣wards made one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer by
King Edward the Sixth, in the beginning of his short Reign. Sir William Glyn of Amersden near Bisseter, alias Burncester, Glyn. in the County of Oxon, and of Hawarden Castle in Flintshire, Baronet, is the Son and Heir to that famous and wealthy Lawyer, John Glyn of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Ʋp∣per Bench in the time of the late unhappy troubles in this Kingdom. Sir Robert Brooke of Netton, in the County of Suffolk, Ba∣ronet, Brooke. is descended from ano∣ther Sir Robert Brook Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of the Middle-Temple, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Mary. Sir Henry Andrewes of Lath∣bury Andrewe.
in the County of Bucks, Baronet, is descended from Eusebius Andrewes Esq;, one of the Governors of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King James; and one of the Readers thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the first. Sir Henry Dereham of West-Dereham in the County of Dereham. Norfolk, Baronet, a Family of long continuance there, is de∣scended, by many honourable Ancestors, men of singular esteem and reputation, from Thomas Dereham Esq;, a person of profound Learning in the Laws, and Attorney General to King Henry the Fourth. Sir Thomas Sylyard of Dela-Ware in the County of Kent, Sylyard. Baronet, is descended from John Sylyard of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench
in the Reign of King Richard the Third, and from William Sylyard Esq;, (Son of the said John) a person of emi∣nent repute for his great abili∣ties in the Law, and one of the Treasures of that honour∣able Society of Lincolns-Inn for many years, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir Charles Hussey of Gay∣thorpe in the County of Lincoln, Hussey. Baronet, is a descendant of the famous Sir William Hussey of Graies-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. Sir John Bankes of Ailesford in the County of Kent, Baro∣net, Bankes. is descended from Sir John Bankes of Grayes-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James. Sir Henry Ingoldsby of Le∣thenborow Ingoldsby▪ in the County of Bucks, Baronet, is descended from John Ingoldsby Esq;, one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. Sir Walter Young of Colliton in the County of Devon, Ba∣ronet, Young. is descended from Tho∣mas Young Esq;, a Learned Ser∣jeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. Sir Thomas Wyndham of Or∣chard Wyndham in the County Wyndham. of Somerset, Knight and Baro∣net, is descended from Francis Wyndham of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of
Common-Pleas in the One and twentieth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; from which Francis, did also descend the late Learned and Loyal Wad∣ham Wyndham of Lincolns-Inn aforesaid Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and made one of the Judges of the Court of Kings-Bench by His now Majesty, soon after his happy Restoration. Sir John Southcott of Witham Southcott. in the County of Essex, and of Bliborrow in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is descended from John Southcott of the Middle Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of that House, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of Queen Mary. Sir Richard Bacon of Gilling∣ham in the County of Norfolk, Bacon. Baronet (Brother and Heir to Sir Edmond Bacon, Baronet,
lately deceased) is a younger branch, descended from the late memorable Sir Nicholas Bacon of Grayes-Inn Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which Sir Nicholas was descended from Thomas de Bacon, one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Sir Myles Stapleton of Carle∣ton, Stapleton. in the County of York, Baronet, (a Family of great Honour and Antiquity in the North) is descended from Nicholas de Stapleton, one of the Judges of the Court of Kings-Bench in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the First. Sir John Bernard of Brampton Bernard. in the County of Huntington, Baronet, is the Son and Heir
to Sir Robert Bernard Knight and Baronet, a person very famous for his great Judge∣ment in the Laws of this King∣dom, in respect whereof, he was called to the degree of a Serjeant by His now Majesty, in the first year of His most happy Reign. Sir James Long of Draycott-Cerne Long. in the County of Wilts, Baronet, is the Heir both to the Honour and Estate of Sir Robert Long of the City of Westminster, Baronet, deceased, late Auditor General of the Court of Exchequer. Sir George Reeve of Thwaites in the County of Suffolk, Knight Reeve. and Baronet, is descended from Edmond Reeve Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and Reader of Grayes-Inn in the Reign of King Charles the First.
Sir Thomas Brogave of Ham∣mels, in the County of Hert∣ford, Brograve. Baronet, is descended from Sir John Brograve of Grayes-Inn Knight, one of the Readers thereof, and Attorney of the Dutchy of Lancaster in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James. Sir William Cooke of Brom∣hall Cooke. in the County of Norfolk, Baronet, is descended from William Cooke Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Readers of the Honourable Society of Grayes-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and afterwards made a Judge of the Common-Pleas by King Ed∣ward the Sixth. Sir William Gawdy of West-Herting in the County of Nor∣solk, Gawdy. Baronet, is descended from that excellent Lawyer, Sir Thomas Gawdy Knight, one
of the Readers of the Inner-Temple, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, afterwards called to the degree of a Ser∣jeant at Law, and constituted one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir Robert Barnham of Bough∣ton-Montchensey Barnham, in the County of Kent, Baronet, a Family of Signal Esteem, great Antiquity, and an ample Estate, is descen∣ded from Sir Walter Barnham Knight, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Richard the Se∣cond. Sir George Selby of Whitehouse in the Bishoprick of Durham, Selby. Baronet, is descended, through a continued course of Eminent Ancestors in that Northern Tract, from William de Selby,
Attorney General to King Edward the first in the begin∣ning of his Reign. Sir Edmond Fortescue of Fortescue. Fallowpitt, in the County of Devon, Baronet, is descended from Lewis Fortescue, one of the Readers of the Middle-Temple, as also a Serjeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer in the latter end of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, which said Lewis was a younger Son of the Antient and Flourishing Family of the Fortescues of the West. Sir John Tempest of Tong in the County of York, Baronet, Tempest. an Ancient Family in the North, is descended from Thomas Tempest, a famous Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, and divers times Reader of that Society in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
Sir Littleton Osbaldeston of Osbaldeston. Chadlington, in the County of Oxon, Baronet, is descended from Richard Osbaldeston a person of eminent practice and great Judgment in the Law, and Reader of Grays Inn in the beginning of the Reign of his late Majesty, King Charles the First. Sir Gyles Tooker of Madding∣ton, Tooker. in the County of Wilts, Baronet, is descended from Gyles Tooker, one of the Readers, and one of the Governors of Grays-Inn in the beginning of the Reign of King James. Sir Stephen Anderson of Ey∣worth, Anderson. in the County of Bedford, Baronet, is a descendant of the truly Honourable and Learned Sir Edmond Anderson of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, who for above twenty Years successively in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, and for sometime in the Reign of King James, sate in that great place of Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Sir Thomas Tayler of Park∣house in the County of Kent, Tayler. Baronet, is descended from Edward Yayler Esq;, Serjeant at Law, in the Reign of King Charles the First. Sir Phillip Tyrell of Han∣slape Tyrell. and Castlethorpe, in the County of Bucks, Baronet, is descended from Sir Thomas Tyrell of Castlethorpe aforesaid, and of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas, in the beginning of his now Majesties Reign. Sir Abell Barker of Hamble∣don, in the County of Rutland, Barker. Baronet, is descended from
Richard Barker Esq;, a Learned Lawyer of Grays-Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir Anthony Shirly of Preston, Shirly. in the County of Sussex, Baro∣net, is descended from that Eminent Lawyer, Sir George Shirly Knight, Reader of the Middle-Temple, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench in Ireland in the Reign of King James; which Sir George was a Branch of the Antient Family of the Shirlyes of Shirly in Derbyshire, Nether Ettendon in Warwick∣shire, and Stanton Harrold in Leicestershire, all which Lord∣ships, with many more, are now the Inheritance of Robert Shir∣ly, Lord Ferrers of Chartly. Sir Goddard Nelthrope of Nelthrope▪ Burton, in the County of Lin∣coln, Baronet, is the Son and
Heir to Sir John Nelthrope Ba∣ronet, a Lawyer of very con∣siderable note, and of the Society of Grays-Inn in His now Majesties Reign. Sir Roger Twisden of Brad∣burne near East-Malling, in the Twisden. County of Kent, Baronet, is the Son and Heir to the late Reve∣rend and Learned Judge, and most Excellent Lawyer, Sir Thomas Twisden of the Inner-Temple, and of Bradburne afore∣said, Knight and Baronet, Ser∣jeant at Law, and for above Twenty years together one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench, till through the great∣ness of Age, and the infirmities of his Body, he obtained His Majesties leave to retire from the Affairs of the Bench, and spend the short remainder of his days in Peace, whereupon he betook himself to a private Life at his Mannor of Brad∣burne,
and there soon expired, in the Eighty first year of his Age. Sir Gilbert Gerrard of Fisker∣ton, Gerrard. in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is descended by a younger Son from Sir Gilbert Gerrard of Grays-Inn Knight, Reader thereof in the Reign of Queen Mary, and afterwards made Attorney General, and Master of the Rolls by Queen Elizabeth. Sir Roger Martyn of Long-Melford, Martyn. in the County of Suffolk, Baronet, is descended from Roger Martyn Esq;, one of the Reaers, as also one of the Governors of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Sir Orlando Bridgeman of Ridley, in the County of Che∣ster, Bridgeman. Baronet, is the second Son
to the late famous Sir Orlando Bridgeman of the Inner-Temple, Knight and Baronet, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, and lastly Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England; which said Sir Orlando the Father was descended from John Bridgeman of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Chief Justice of Chester in the Reign of King James. Sir Francis Wyndham of Trent, Windham. in the County of Somerset, Baronet, is descended from Francis Wyndham Esq;, a Learn∣ed and profound Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law, and constituted one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas by Queen Elizabeth. Sir Arthur Onslow of West-Clandon Onslow. in the County of Surry, Baronet, (in revection expect∣ant
upon the Death of Sir Thomas Foot Baronet) is de∣scended from Richard Onslow Esq;, a Reader of the Inner-Temple in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which Richard was a Branch of the ancient Stock of the On∣slowes of Shropshire. Sir Thomas Rich of Sonden, in Rich. the County of Essex, Baronet, is descended from Sir Richard Rich, Knight, Reader of the Middle-Temple, and Solicitor General to King Henry the Eighth; afterwards created Baron Rich of Leez in Essex, and constituted Lord High Chancellor of England by King Edward the Sixth. Sir Jobn Hoskins of Harwood Hoskins. in the County of Hereford, Baronet, one of the Masters of the High Court of Chance∣ry, is descended from Bennet
Hoskins Esq;, a Learned Law∣yer, and one of the Readers of the Middle-Temple, in the Reign of King Charles the First. Sir Francis Willoughby of Willoughby. Wollaton-Hall, in the County of Nottingham, and of Middle∣ton, in the County of Warwick, Baronet, is directly descended from Sir Thomas Willoughby of Lincolns Inn, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Ju∣stice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth: which said Sir Thomas was a younger Son to Christopher Lord Willoughby of Eresby, and married with the only Daughter and Heir to Sir Robert Read Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, from which said Sir Thomas, descended Sir Percevall Willoughby Knight,
who in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, did intermarry with one of the Daughters and Heirs to Sir Francis Willoughby then of Wollaton aforesaid, Knight, descended from Sir Richard de Willoughby Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Sir John Newdigate of Erd∣bury, in the County of Warwick, Newdigate. Baronet, is Son and Heir to the late Famous and Wealthy Sir Richard Newdigate of Erd∣bury and Lincolns-Inn, Baronet, Serjeant at Law, who was li∣neally descended from John Newdigate, Reader of the same Society in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, and made a Serjeant at Law by King Henry the Eighth. Sir James Poole of Poole, in the County of Chester Baronet, Poole
a person of singular Repute and Worth, and of a very Honour∣able Family in this County, is descended from Ralph Pool Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. Sir Thomas Skipwith, of Skipwith. Methringham, in the County of Lincoln, and of Grays-Inn, Knight and Baronet, Serjeant at Law, a Gentleman of an excellent Family, is descended from William de Skipwith Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Sir Roger Bradshaw of Haigh in the County of Lancaster, Bradshaw. Knight and Baronet, is descend∣ed from Henry Bradshaw of the Inner-Temple Esq;, one of
the Readers thereof, Attorney General, and Lord Chief Baron of His Majesties Court of Ex∣chequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, branched out of the Ancient Family of Bradshaw of Bradshaw in the said County. Sir Thomas Parkins of Bonney Parkins. in the County of Nottingham, Baronet, is lineally descended from Richard Parkins of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Recorder of the Towns of Leicester and Nottingham, and a Lawyer of great Note in those Counties, in the Reign of Queen Eliza∣beth. Sir John Crooke of Shilton in Crooke. the County of Buckingham, Baronet, is descended from Sir John Crooke of the Middle-Tem∣ple Knight, Serjeant at Law, Recorder of the City of London, Speaker of the House of Com∣mons,
and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King James. The time of the Creation of this Sir John to the Dignity of a Baronet, I cannot at present find; and there∣fore I place him here till I can be certified of his due precedencey. Sir Thomas Gascoigne of Barn∣bow Gascoigne. in the County of York, Ba∣ronet of Scotland, is descended, by many renowned Ancestors, persons of great Interest in those parts, from the famous Sir William Gascoigne of Grays-Inn, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, in the Se∣cond year of the Reign of King Henry the Fourth. Sir John Lowther of Lowther-Hall Lowther. in the County of West∣morland, and of Newton-Reigney in the County of Cumberland, Baronet of Scotland, is de∣scended
from Thomas de Low∣ther; one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third.
Knights. THE Right Honourable Mountague. Sir William Mountague of Croft in the County of Lincoln, Knight, and of the Honoura∣ble Society of the Middle-Temple, Serjeant at Law, for∣merly Attorney General to Her most Gracious Majesty Queen Katharine, and at this time Lord Chief Baron of His Majesties Court of Exchequer, having been most worthily ad∣vanced to that great dignity in April 1676. and there sate with great Honour and Pru∣dence in the worst of times, executing the trust reposed in him with that equality and Justice, that the poisonous Tongues of factious and male∣volent persons (of late so for∣ward
in aspersing His Majesties Ministers of publick Justice) never once found the least imaginary foundation where∣by they might vent their mal∣lice upon this Honourable per∣son, honourable in his place of Judicature, but much more in Blood, as being the Son of Edward, and Brother of Ed∣ward, both late Lords Mounta∣gue of Boughton, and great Grandson to that famous Law∣yer, Sir Edward Mountague of the Middle Temple Knight, Serjant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of both Benches in the Reign of King Henry the 8th, and Edward the Sixth, being first of the Kings-Bench, and then of the Common Pleas. Sir John Ernley of Buriton in the County of Wilts, Ernley. and of Much-Marcle in the County of Hereford, Knight, sometime since Chancellor and Under-Treasurer
of the Court of Ex∣chequer, and at present one of the Commissioners of His Ma∣jesties Treasury, is descended from Sir John Ernley of Grays-Inn Knight, Solicitor General to King Henry the Seventh, and afterwards in the begin∣ning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, he was cre∣ated a Serjeant at Law, and made Attorney General to that Prince, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas. Sir Hugh Wyndham of Sylton Wyndham. in the County of Dorset, and of Lincolns-Inn Knight, was called to the degree of a Ser∣jeant at Law in the year 1653. but not owning the Authority whereby he was so called, His present Majesty, in the first year of his most happy Re∣storation, directed his Writ to this great and famous Lawyer,
to call him to the said dignity; after which, in the year 1672. he was made one of the Ba∣rons of the Exchequer, where he sate Two years, and then was further advanced to the Common-Pleas, and continues one of the Justices of that Court to this day: He is de∣scended from Francis Wyndham of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, a person of great Learning and Judge∣ment in the Law; in respect whereof, the said Francis was first made a Serjeant, and af∣terwards one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: Which said Sir Hugh Wyndham is like to terminate in Two Daugh∣ters and Heirs, who are very honourably advanced in Mar∣riage, the one to John Digby the present Earl of Bristol, and the other to Sir Nathaniel Nap∣per of Dorsetshire, Knight and Baronet.
The Reverend Sir Job Charle∣ton Charleton. of Whitton in the County of Sallop, Knight, Serjeant at Law, lately Chief Justice of Chester, and now one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas, is descended of the Ancient and Honourable Fa∣mily of the Charletons of Shropshire, who deduce their descent from Sir Robert de Charleton Knight, a person of profound Judgement and Knowledge in the Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Richard the Se∣cond. The Honourable Sir Edward Atkins. Atkins of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Barons of His Majesties Court of Exchequer, is a young∣er Son of that Eminent Law∣yer Sir Edward Atkins Knight, Serjeant at Law, Reader of the
said Honourable Society in the Reign of King Charles the First, and afterwards one of the Ba∣rons of the same Court; which Sir Edward the Father, was the Son and Heir of Richard Atkins Esq;, Reader of that House in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and Chief Justice of North-Wales; and the Son and Heir to Thomas Atkins Esq;, another Learned Member of Lincolns-Inn, and twice Reader thereof, in the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth and Edward the Sixth. Sir Richard May of the City May. of Chichester, in the County of Sussex, Knight, now the puisne Baron of the Exchequer, is descended from Sir Humphry May Knight, Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King Charles the first. Sir Robert Sawyer of the In∣ner-Temple, Sawyer.
and of Lawrence Waltham in the County of Berks, Knight, His Majesties Attorney General, whose great Loyalty, and profound Judgement and Abilities in the Law, are sufficiently conspicu∣ous to the World, by his pru∣dent management of Affairs of great import to his Prince, and couragiously effecting the same, in a time when Fidelity and Loyalty were branded with reproach and Infamy; and to serve His Majesty, was looked upon as a disservice to his people, by such whose en∣deavours tended wholly to the subversion of all Civil Govern∣ment and Society: Notwith∣standing which, and the af∣fronts of the Faction, did this most worthy Gentleman faith∣fully adhere to the Service of his Prince in those distracted times. He is the Son and Heir of Sir Edmond Sawyer of the
same Society, Knight, deceased, late one of the Auditors of the Court of Exchequer. Sir John Franklyn of Lincolns-Inn Franklyn. Knight, one of the Masters of the Honourable Court of Chancery, is descended from Nicholas Franklyn Esq;, a Learn∣ed Lawyer of that Society, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Charles the First. Sir Robert Henley of North∣ington in the County of South∣ampton, Henley. and of the Inner-Tem∣ple, Knight, Master of the Kings-Bench-Office, a Place of great Honour and Profit, is descended from Sir William Henley Knight, Reader of Grays-Inn, and a person very emi∣nent for his great Learning in the Laws, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
Sir John Heath of Brastead Heath. in the County of Kent, and of the Inner-Temple Knight, His Majesties Attorney General of the Dutchy of Lancaster, is de∣scended from that great Law∣yer Sir Robert Heath Knight, one of the Readers of that House, and Solicitor General to King James; after which, in the Reign of King Charles the First, he was Recorder of the City of London, Attorney General to that Prince, who called him to the dignity of a Serjeant at Law, and then ad∣vanced him to the Honour of Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas. Sir Edward Turner of Little Turner. Paringdon, and Hollingbury in the County of Essex Knight, is the Son and Heir to the late Famous and Learned Judge, Sir Edward Turner of Little Par∣ringdon aforesaid, and of the
Middle-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, Speaker of the Ho∣nourable House of Commons, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, which Sir Edward was the Son and Heir to Arthur Turner of the same Society Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and he the second Son of Edward Turner of Paringdon aforesaid, and of the Middle-Temple Esq;, a person very E∣minent for his Learning and practice in the Law, in the Reign of King James. Sir William Scroggs of South∣weal, Scroggs▪ in the County of Essex, and of the Society of Grays-Inn, Knight, one of His most Gracious Majesties Council, Learned in the Laws, is the Son and Heir apparent to the Learned and Memorable Sir William Scroggs of the same Society, Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the
Court of Common-Pleas, and thence removed to that great Honour of Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench, where he sate not long, but the clamours of the Faction, backed by some haughty Mem∣bers of the House of Commons, found a means to get him re∣moved from the said Dignity, nor would their malice have ended there, had not the Dis∣solutions of those hot Spirited men so fortunately ensued, whereby his Enemies became dispersed. Sir Robert Atkins of Sapper∣ton, Atkins▪ in the County of Glocester, of Totteridge, in the County of Middlesex, and of Lincolns-Inn, Knight of the Honourable or∣der of the Bath, Serjeant at Law, lately Recorder of the City of Bristol, and before that time one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas,
is the Son and Heir to Sir Ed∣ward Atkins Knight, Serjeant at Law, Reader of Lincolns-Inn in his late Majesties Reign, and since one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, soon after this Kings most happy Resto∣ration. Sir John Brampston of Screnes, in the County of Essex, Knight Brampston. of the Bath, and High Steward of the Burough of Malden, is directly descended from that able Lawyer, Sir John Bramp∣ston Knight, one of the Rea∣ders of the Middle-Temple, in the Reign of King James, by whom he was called to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law, and by King Charles the First advanced to the place of Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas. Sir Francis Popham of Little Popham. coat, in the County of Somerset,
Knight of the Bath, a person of a very plentiful Fortune, and a worthy Family, is descend∣ed from that Eminent and Ju∣dicious Lawyer, Sir John Pop∣ham of the Middle-Temple, Knight, Reader of that Society, Serjeant at Law, Solicitor and Attorney General to Queen Elizabeth, who afterwards made him Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, which great Trust was also reposed in him by King James. Sir Edward Sylyard of We∣therden Sylyard. in the County of Suffolk, Knight, is descended, through many Honourable Ancestors, from John Sylyard of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, one of the Readers of that House in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, by whom he was called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law, and by King Richard the Third made one of the Justices of
the Court of Kings-Bench, whose Son and Heir William Sylyard Esq;, was an Eminent and Learned Lawyer of the said Honourable Society, and for many years one of the Benchers and Governours thereof, in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir Robert Howard of Va∣sterne, in the County of Wilts, Howard. and of St. Margarets Westmin∣ster, in the County of Middle∣sex, Knight, (of the Noble Blood of the Howards, and a younger Branch of the House of Berkshire) is descended from the Learned William Howard Esq;, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reigns of King Edward the First and Second. Sir Thomas Yarborough of Snaith, in the West-Riding of Yarborough.
Yorkshire, Knight, a person of a very plentiful Fortune in those parts, is descended from Francis Yarborough Esq;, a famous Law∣yer of Lincolns Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir William Hoskins of Ox∣tead, Hoskins. in the County of Surry, Knight, is descended from John Hoskins of the Middle-Temple Esq;, one of the Rea∣ders thereof, and called to the degree of a Serjeant by King James. Sir Nevill Catlyn of Dar∣sham-Hall, Catlyn. in the County of Suffolk, Knight, is descended from Richard Catlyn Esq;, Rea∣der of Lincolns-Inn, and made a Serjeant at Law by Queen Mary. A Contemporary with this Richard; and of the same Society and Family was that profound Lawyer, Sir Robert
Catlyn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, who leaving one only Daughter and Heir, She by her intermarriage with Sir John Spencer of Althorpe in the County of Northamptom, and of Wormleighton, in the County of Warwick, Knight, annexed a considerable estate to that wor∣thy Family, from whom Ro∣bert Spencer the present Earl of Sunderland, and Mr. Spencer of Ashton in Lancashire are line∣ally descended. Sir Richard Ingoldsby of Wal∣ridge, Ingoldsby. in the County of Bucks, Knight of the Bath, is descend∣ed from John Ingoldsby Esq;, a person very well read in the Laws, and one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. Sir Thomas Engham of God∣mingston, Engham.
in the County of Kent, Knight, is descended from Ralph de Hengham or Engham, one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas, in the Reigns of King-Henry the Third and Edward the First. Sir Thomas Harvey of the Harvey. Town of St. Edmonds-bury, in the County of Suffolk, Knight, is descended from the late fa∣mous and profound Lawyer, Sir Francis Harvey Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Rea∣ders of the Middle-Temple in the Reign of King James, and afterwards one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas. Sir Thomas Forster, of Eg∣ham, Forster. in the County of Surry, Knight, is descended from William Forster Esq;, Reader of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, after which, in respect of his great
Learning and Abilities, he was made a Serjeant at Law. Sir Thomas Estcourt of St. Dunstans in the West, London, Estcourt. and of Pinckney, in the County of Wilts, Knight, is the Son and Heir to Sir Thomas Estcourt Knight deceased, late one of the Masters of the Hononrable Court of Chancery, who was de∣scended from Edmond Estcourt Esq;, one of the Benchers of Lincolns-Inn, and Reader there∣of in the Reign of King James. Sir George Crooke of Water∣stocke, Crooke. in the County of Oxon, Knight, is the lineal Heir, and Eldest male branch, descended from the Learned Sir John Crooke of Waterstocke aforesaid, Knight, and of the Middle-Temple, Serjeant at Law, Speak∣er of the House of Commons, Recorder of the City of London, and one of the Justices of the
Kings-Bench in the Reign of King James. Sir Nicholas Bacon of Shrub∣land Bacon. Hall, in the County of Suffolk, Knight of the Honou∣rable order of the Bath, is de∣scended, by a younger Son, from that famous Lawyer, Sir Nicholas Bacon of Grays-Inn, Knight, Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir Thomas Stephens of Little Stephens. Sadbury, in the County of Glocester Knight, a person of a signal Repute and an ample Fortune, is descended from Thomas Stephens Esq;, an Emi∣nent Practicer in the Law, and Attorney General to Henry Prince of Wales, after whose Decease he Executed the like Office to Prince Charles, (af∣terwards
King Charles the First.) Sir Francis Brampston of the Middle-Temple, Knight, Serjeant Brampston. at Law, one of the Readers of that Society, and lately one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, is also descended from Sir John Brampston Knight, one of the Readers of that Honourable House, one of His Majesties Serjeants at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Charles the First. Sir Bulstrode Whitlocke of Chilton Park, in the County Whitlocke. of Wilts, Knight; a person of an ample Fortune, is the Son and Heir to Bulstrode Whitlocke of the Middle-Temple Esq;, a man of great Note in the late miserable distractions of this Kingdom, being one of the Commissioners of the great
Seal, and one of the prime favourers of the Factions so predominant in those unhappy Days, he being commonly called Bulstrode Lord Whit∣lock. Sir Henry Wood of Lowdham-Hall, VVood. in the County of Suffolk, Knight, of an Ancient and worthy Family in that County, is descended from the Learned Sir Thomas Wood Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Sir Edward Ascough of North Ascough. Kelsey, in the County of Lin∣coln, Knight, High Sheriff of the said County, is directly descended, by many worthy Ancestors, from Sir William As∣cough Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the
Reign of King Henry the Sixth; by which Sir William, was this worthy Family greatly advan∣ced. Sir John Pooley of Boxtead, in the County of Suffolk Knight, Pooley. a Family of great Antiquity and Esteem in that County, a great advancer whereof was John Pooley, a Learned Lawyer, and one of the Readers of Grayes-Inn in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Lineal Ance∣stor to this Honourable per∣son. Sir John Knivet of Ketring∣ham Knivet. in the County of Norfolk, Knight of the Bath, is descended from John Knivet Esq;, Serjeant at Law, first, one of the Justi∣ces of the Court of Common-Pleas, and afterwards consti∣tuted Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench by King Edward the Third.
Sir John Clopton of Clopton, Clopton. in the County of Warwick, Knight, a Family of Eminent quallity, and long continuance at Clopton aforesaid, is descend∣ed from Walter de Clopton Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Edward the Third, and advanced to the Dignity of Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench by King Richard the Second. Sir John Coventry of Pit-Minster, Coventry. in the County of Somerset, and of Mere in the County of Wilts, Knight of the Honourable Order of the Bath, is descended from Tho∣mas Coventry of the Inner-Tem∣ple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Com∣mon Pleas in the Reign of King James's Father, of the Famous Thomas Lord Coventry, first a Member of the said So∣ciety, and afterward Lord
Keeper of the great Seal. Sir Henry Fitz-James of Fitz James. in the County of Essex, Knight, is descended from John Fitz-James of the Middle-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, Sir Robert Crooke of Chekers, Crooke. in the County of Bucks, Knight, is a Branch of the Honourable Family of the Crooks of Water∣stocke in Oxfordshire, descended from Sir John Crooke of the Middle-Temple, Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas for many years in the Reign of King James. Sir Peter Ball of Mynehead in the County of Devon, Ball. Knight, is descended from Sir
Peter Ball Knight, a late wor∣thy Member of the Middle-Temple, and Attorney General to her late Majesty Mary the Queen Mother. Sir Anthony Browne of Chig Browne. well in the County of Essex, Knight, is descended from that eminent and Learned Lawyer, Sir Anthony Browne of the Mid∣dle-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the several Reigns of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth. Sir William Fleetwood of Fleetwood. Woodstock in the County of Oxon, Knight, is descended from William Fleetwood Esq;, a Learned Lawyer of the Middle-Temple, several times Reader of that Society, and Recorder of the City of Lon∣don in the time of Queen Elizabeth.
Sir Robert Clench of Creting∣hall Clench. in the County of Suffolk, Knight, is descended from that famous and eminent Lawyer of Lincolus-Inn, John Clench Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and afterwards one of the Ju∣stices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir John Mallett of St. An∣drews in West-Quantox-head, in Mallett. the County of Somerset Knight, Recorder of the Town of Bridgewater in the said County, is the Son and Heir to Thomas Mallett of the Middle-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of His late Maje∣sty, where he sate, till for his Loyalty to that Prince, he was forced to retire, but His Maje∣sty, upon his most happy Re∣storation, re-advanced him to the same dignity.
Sir Philip Howard of Sissing∣hurst, Howard. in the County of Kent, Knight, is a younger Branch of the House of Carlisle, of the Noble Blood, and numer∣ous Family of the Howards, descended from Sir William Howard Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the first, as before is expressed. Sir Drue Drury of Rougham, Drury. in the County of Suffolk, Knight is descended from Robert Drury of Lincolns Inn, Esq;, one of the Readers thereof, Speaker of the House of Commons, and a person of singular Note and Esteem in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Sir Edward Chisnall of Chis∣nall in the County of Lancaster, Chisnall. Knight, is descended from Richard Chisnall Esq;, a Learn∣ed
Lawyer, and one of the Readers of Grays-Inn, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeths Reign. This is a Family of great antiquity and repute in this County for many Genera∣tions before this eminent per∣son; yet did he make a very considerable addition to the Ancient Inheritance of his An∣cestors. Sir Dudly North of the City of London, Knight and Alder∣man, North. is descended from Ed∣ward North (afterwards Lord North) a person of great judge∣ment in the Laws, and Trea∣surer of the Court of Augmen∣tations in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir Francis Wingate of Har∣lington in the County of Bed∣ford, Wingate. Knight, is descended from that Learned Gentleman Ed∣mond Wingate of Grays-Inn Esq;,
Author of that Excellent Book Intituled Wingate's Maxims. Sir Gilbert Ireland of the Ireland. Hutt and Beausey in the Coun∣ty of Lancaster, Knight, a per∣son of great Integrity and Ho∣nour, and of an Ample Fortune, is descended from Sir Thomas Ireland Knight, Reader of Grays-Inn, and Vice Chamber∣layn of the County Palatine of Chester in the time of King James. Sir Richard Piggott of De∣dershall in the County of Bucks, Piggott. Knight, is descended from Thomas Piggott Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of the Inner-Temple in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir John Walpole of Dunston in the County of Lincoln, Walpole. Knight, a person of exemplary Loyalty and singular Repute,
is directly descended from John Walpole of Grays-Inn Esq;, Reader thereof, and called to the degree of a Serjeant by Queen Mary. Sir Thomas Scott of Scots-hall in the County of Kent, Knight, Scott. is descended, by many Ho∣nourable Ancestors of signal Renown and Quality in this County, from William Scott Esq;, Serjeant at Law first, one of the Justices, and after∣wards Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third: A descendant also of which William, was that great Lawyer Sir John Scott Knight, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir William Carleton of Carle∣ton Carleton. in the County of Cumber∣land,
Knight, a Family of great Antiquity, is descended from William de Carleton Esq;, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward the first. Sir Walter Moyle of Bake in Moyle. the County of Cornwall, Knight, is descended from Walter Moyle Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Com∣mon Pleas in the time of King Henry the Sixth. Sir Robert Pye of Farrindon Pye. in the County of Berks, Knight, is descended from Sir Walter Pye of the Middle-Temple, Knight, Attorney General of the Court of Wards and Live∣ries, and one of the Readers of that Honourable Society in the time of King James. Sir John Arderne of Arderne in the County of Chester, Arderne.
Knight, is descended from Sir Peter Arderne of Arderne aforesaid, Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the time of King Henry the Sixth, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the first year of the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. Sir John Zouch of Codnor in the County of Derby, Knight, Zouch. (of the Noble Family of the Ancient Lords Zouch,) is de∣scended from Alan-le-Zouch, Lord Chief Justice of England in the Reign of King Henry the Third. Sir John Archer of Theydon Garron in the County of Essex, Archer. Knight, is the Son and Heir to John Archer Esq; deceased, Ser∣jeant at Law, and lately one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas, a person of
great Judgement in the Laws. Sir Lumley Robinson of the Robinson. Inner-Temple, Knight, is the Son and Heir to the late unfor∣tunate Gentleman Sir Thomas Robinson of the same Society, Knight, one of the Prothono∣tories of the Court of Common-Pleas, which said Sir Thomas had the hard fate to lose his Life in August last; For a sud∣den Fire breaking forth in or near his Chamber, he, to avoid the fury and violence of the Flames, adventured to leap out at his Chamber Window, and thereby (being a very corpulent Man) so bruised his body, that he soon expired, leaving a great Estate to this worthy Gentleman. Sir Charles Caesar of Benning∣ton Place in the County of Caesar▪ Hertford, Knight, is the direct and eldest Male Branch, de∣scended
from Sir Julius Caesar Knight, Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King James, Father of Sir Charles Caesar Knight, also Master of the Rolls in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the First. Sir Philip Boteler of Wotton-Woodhall in the County of Boteler. Hertford, Knight of the Bath, is descended from Sir John Bo∣teler of Lincolns-Inn, Knight, Serjeant at Law in the time of King Henry the Seventh, and constituted one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas by King Henry the Eighth. Sir Thomas Daniel of Beswick in the County of York, Knight, Daniel. is descended from William Da∣niell of Grays-Inn Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Read∣ers of that honourable House in the time of Queen Eliza∣beth, and one of the Justices
of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James; which William was a younger Son of the Ancient and worthy Fa∣mily of the Daniels of Over-Tabley in Cheshire, where they have flourished for many Ages in great repute, and still re∣main in the name and person of thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley aforesaid, Esq;. Sir William Coventry of St. Martins Coventry. in the Fields in the County of Middlesex, Knight, a person of great Prudence and excellent parts, is one of the younger Sons of Thomas Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England. Sir John Henden of Bidden∣den in the County of Kent, Henden. Knight, is descended from Edward Henden Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Readers of Grays-Inn in the Reign of
King James, and afterwards made one of the Barons of the Exchequer by King Charles the First. Sir Robert Owen of Tundover Owen. in the County of Salop, Knight, is descended from that Famous and Learned Lawyer Thomas Owen Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the honourable Bench∣ers of Lincolns Inn, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir Francis Clerke of the City Clerke. of Rochester, and of Ʋlcombe in the County of Kent, Knight, is descended from Henry Clerke of Rochester aforesaid, and of the Middle-Temple Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, and one of the Readers of that House in the Reign of King Charles the First, which Henry was a younger Branch of the worthy Family
of the Clerks of Willough by in the County of Warwick, per∣sons of great esteem and plen∣tiful fortune. Sir Francis Rolles of Shap∣wick in the County of Somerset, Rolles. and of East-Tedderley in the County of Southampton, Knight, a Gentleman of an Ample For∣tune in these Western Counties, is descended from the late Learned and most Excellent Lawyer Henry Roll Esq;, Reader of the Inner-Temple, and called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law by His Majesty of Blessed Memory; after which, in the times of the late Rebellion, being no great Enemy to the predominant factions of this miserable King∣dom, then Governing, he was pleased to accept of that great Office of Lord Chief Justice of the Ʋpper Bench, which he executed under the Authority
of the late Traytor and Usurp∣er Oliver Cromwell, and was the Author of those Learned Vollumes, intituled Rolls Re∣ports and Rolls Abridgement. Sir Roger Hill of Wesdon in the County of Bucks, Knight, is descended from Roger Hill Esq;, called to the dignity of a Serjeant at Law in the year 1655. by the same Usurped Powers next above mentioned, and further advanced to sit as one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer then in being. Sir Charles Littleton of St. Martins in the Fields, in the Littleton. County of Middlesex, Knight, a person of renowned Vallour, and Military Conduct (and younger Brother, and Heir apparent to Sir Henry Littleton of Frankly in the County of Worcester, Baronet,) is de∣scended from Sir Thomas Lit∣tleton
of the Inner-Temple, and of Frankley aforesaid, Knight of the Bath, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. Sir Marmaduke Dalton of Dalton. in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Knight, is descended from James Dalton Esq;, a Learned and skilful Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, and one of the Benchers of that House in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Author of several Learned Books now extant. Sir Mondiford Brampston of Brampston. Woodham-Walter in the County of Essex, and of the Middle-Tem∣ple, Knight, lately one of the Masters of the High and Ho∣nourable Court of Chancery, is descended from the late famous Sir John Brampston of the said Society, Knight, Serjeant at
Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles. Sir Thomas Overbury of Burton Overbury. upon the Hill, in the County of Glocester, Knight, is de∣scended from Sir Nicholas Over∣bury, Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of the Middle-Temple, and one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King James. The eldest Son of which Sir Nicholas, was that Ingenuous Gentleman Sir Tho∣mas Overbury Knight, Poisoned in the Tower of London during his Imprisonment, by the pro∣curement and contrivance of Robert Carr, Earl of Somerset (a great Favourite to King James▪) and his Countess. Sir Edward Challoner of Gisburgh, in the North Riding Challoner.
of the County of York, Knight, is descended from Robert Challoner Esq;, a person eminent for his Learning in the Laws, and one of the Readers of Grays-Inn in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir Robert Rich of Horndon in the County of Essex, Knight, Rich. is a younger Branch of the Noble Family of Rich, Earls of Warwick, descended from Rich∣ard Rich of the Middle-Temple, Esq;, one of the Readers of that Society in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, after∣wards created a Peer of this Realm, and constituted Lord High Chancellor of England. Sir William Ʋnderhill of Id∣licote Underhill. in the County of War∣wick, Knight, is descended from William Ʋnderhill of Id∣licote aforesaid, and of the Inner-Temple Esq;, an eminent
practicer of the Law in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by means whereof, he raised a considerable Estate in this County, which his posterity now enjoys, he himself being a younger Son of Edward Ʋn∣derhill of Nether-Etendon in this County Esq;, where the eldest Branch of this Family now maketh his residence. Sir Edward Griffin of Dingley Griffin. in the County of Northampton, Knight, a Family of great Honour and Interest in that County▪ and possessor of a very plentiful Estate, is de∣scended from Sir Edward Griffin of Dingly, Knight, one of the Readers of Lincolns-Inn, and Solicitor General in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, also Attorney General to Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary. Sir Robert Townsend of the Townsend.
City of Coventry in the Coun∣ty of Warwick, Knight, is de∣scended from Sir Robert Towns∣end of Ludlow in the County of Salop, Knight, Reader of Lincolns-Inn, Chief Justice of all Wales, and called to the de∣gree and dignity of a Serjeant at Law by King Henry the Eighth. Sir Humphry Sydenham of Dulverton in the County of Sydenham. Somerset, Knight, is desended from Richard de Sydenham Esq;, one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the beginning of the Reign of King Richard the Second, this is a Family of great Antiquity, and of Signal note in these Western Counties. Sir Edward Rich of Milbur∣ton Rich. in the County of Norfolk, Knight, is descended from Richard Rich of the Middle-Temple
Es{que}, Chyrographer of the Court of Common-Pleas, Reader of the said Society, and Lord High Chancellor of Eng∣land, in the several Reigns of King Henry the Eighth and Edward the Sixth. Sir Edward Philips of Moun∣tacute in the County of Somer∣set, Philips. Knight, is descended from the Learned Sir Edward Phi∣lips of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of that Honou∣rable Society, and thence ad∣vanced to that great Office of Master of the Rolls by his late Majesty King James. Sir Thomas Colepeper of Hol∣lingbourne Colepeper. in the County of Kent, Knight, is descended from John Colepeper Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Learn∣ed Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign
of King Henry the Fifth. Sir Christopher Calthorpe of Calthorpe. Basham in the County of Nor∣folk, Knight of the Bath, is descended from the late Learn∣ed Sir Henry Calthorpe of the Middle-Temple, Knight, one of the Readers thereof, and At∣torney of the Court of Wards and Liveries in His late Maje∣sties Reign; this is a Family, which for many Generations have flourished in great splen∣dor, and Executed many Honourable Offices relating to this County: Nevertheless did this Sir Henry, by his great Prudence and eminent Practice, together with the profits arising out of the Court of Wards, in a great measure augment the ancient Inheri∣tance of his Ancestors. Sir Stephen Hales now or late of Newland, and Snitfield in Hales.
the County of Warwick, Knight of the Bath, is descended from Sir Charles Hales of Newland aforesaid, and of Grays-Inn, Knight, one of the Readers of that Society, and one of her Ma∣jesties Council in the North in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir James Altham of Latton, in the County of Essex, Knight Altham. of the Bath, is descended from Sir James Altham, Knight, one of the Readers of Grays-Inn in the Reign of Queen Eliza∣beth, and afterwards called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law, and made one of the Barons of the Exchequer by King James. Sir George Carey of Dorr-Abby in the County of Devon, Knight, Carey. is descended in a lineal course of many renowned Ancestors, from John Carey of Hollway in the County of Devon, Esq;, Ser∣jeant
at Law, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Richard the Second, from which John, by a younger Branch, did descend John Carey, late Earl of Dover, and Robert Carey, late Earl of  Monmouth, both lately ter∣minated and extinguished in Female Heirs, (the too common Fate and utter Ruin of many great Families of this Kingdom.) Sir William York of Burton-Pedwardine York. in the County of Lincoln, Knight, is descended from Roger York Esq;, a Learn∣ed Lawyer of Grays Inn, and one of the Readers of that Ancient and Honourable So∣ciety in the Fifteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Sir William Bastard of West-Allington Bastard. in the County of
Devon, Knight, a person of great Loyalty and Repute, is descended from that able and Learned practicer of the Laws, William Bastard Esq;, one of the Readers of the Middle-Temple in the Reign of King James. Sir Robert Cary of Clovel in Cary. the County of Devon, Knight, is also a younger Branch, de∣scended from John Cary of Holl∣way aforesaid Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Richard the Second, which John was of the Ancient Family of Cary, of Cary in the said County, and indeed the prime Branch thereof.
Esquires. I Shall begin the Catalogue Finch. of those of this dignity, with the Honourable Heneage Finch of the Inner-Temple Esq;, a person endowed with all the ac∣complishments that Learning and Education can afford, and a most Excellent Ornament of the Laws; in the Studdy whereof, he hath already ar∣rived to so great perfection, that his most gracious Majesty, as a mark of his Royal Favour, hath been pleased to make choice of him to execute the Office of his Solicitor General, being but an entrance to those future preferments which his great Learning, Loyalty and Elloquence do most justly in∣title him to. He is the Second
Son of the late Famous and most Incomparable Lawyer, Heneage Earl of Nottingham, Lord High Chancellor of Eng∣land, and the true inheritor of his great Abilities and Judge∣ment, who (as in the Cata∣logue of the Nobility I have there mentioned) was the Son and Heir of another great Lawyer of the same Society, namely Sir Heneage Finch Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Recorder of the City of Lon∣don, a younger Son of Sir Thomas Finch, and Brother to Thomas Finch Earl of Winchel∣sea. Roger North of the Middle-Temple Esq;, Chief Justice of North. Chester, and one of His Maje∣sties Learned Council in the Law, is a younger Brother to the Right Honourable Francis Lord North, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
Sons of Dudley, late Lord North of Carthlidge, who was de∣scended from Edward Lord North, a person eminently Learned in the Laws, and Treasurer of the Court of Aug∣mentations in the Reigns of Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary. Evan Seys of the City of Seys. Gloucester, and of Boverton in the County of Glamorgan Esq;, several times one of the Mem∣bers of Parliament for the said City, was called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law by the Arch-Traytor Oliver Cromwell, in the year 1656, and again, by his present Majesty in the year 1660. which said Evan Seys (being by Birth of the Ancient British Race) is de∣scended from Roger Seys of Bo∣verton aforesaid, a Man of great Note, and Attorney General of the whole Princi∣pality
of Wales in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Tristram Coniers of the Mid∣dle Temple, Coniers. Serjeant at Law, and of Walthamstow in the County of Essex Esq;, a per∣son of great Judgement and knowledge in the Law, is de∣scended from William Coniers Esq;, a Learned Member of the said honourable Society, and one of the Readers thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the First. Gyles Strangwaies of Melbury-Samford in the County of Dor∣set Strangwaies. Esq;, a Gentleman of a very fair Estate, is the direct descendant of James Strang∣waies Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the several Reigns of King Henry the Fifth and Sixth.
John Caryll of Harting in Caryll. the County of Sussex Esq;, a person of great Learning and Integrity, is the eldest Male∣branch, directly descended from Sir John Caryll of Harting aforesaid, and of the Inner-Temple Knight, one of the Readers of that Honourable Society in the Thirty Sixth year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, after which, by Queen Mary, in the Second year of her Reign, he was called to the degree of a Ser∣jeant at Law, and lastly by Queen Elizabeth was consti∣tuted her Attorney of the Dutchy of Lancaster; which Sir John Caryll, was the Son and Heir to the no less famous and learned John Caryll of the Inner-Temple aforesaid Esq;, advan∣ced to the like dignity of a Serjeant at Law by King Henry the Eighth, in the Second year of his Reign; by which two
great Sages of the Law, was considerable part of the Estate of this Honourable Family raised, which remains to their Posterity at this day. Francis Plowden of Shiplake in the County of Oxon Esq;, Plowden. and Cotton Plowden of the City of London, Gentleman, are lineally descended from that famous and excellent Lawyer of his time, Edmond Plowden, originally of Plowden-Hall in the County of Salop (a Fami∣ly of great Antiquity there) and of the Middle-Temple Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Mary, by whom he was called to the de∣gree of a Serjeant at Law, whose Learned Works now extant, do sufficiently evidence his great Abilities. Thomas Markham of Allerton in the County of Nottingham, Markham
Es{que}, a person of great Inte∣grity and Repute, is the Son and Heir to the late valiant and Loyal Thomas Markham of Allerton aforesaid Esq;, who discerning the Flames of Re∣bellion breaking forth upon this Kingdom, which threatned no less then those Miseries and Calamities which afterwards befel this distressed Nation, did Cordially put himself in Arms on the behalf of His late Ma∣jesty, in whose Service he was slain, at Gainsburgh in Lincoln∣shire, fighting stoutly against the Parliament forces, in the year 1643. to the no small diminution of his Estate; which Thomas was descended, by many Ancestors of the greatest note in this County, from Sir John Markham, Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, and he the Son of Robert Markham and
Grandson of John Markham, both Eminent Lawyers. John Lukener of West-Dean Lukener. in the County of Sussex, Esq;, a Gentleman of a very ample Fortune, is descended from Sir Roger Lukener, Knight, one of the Readers of the Middle-Temple, and made a Serjeant at Law by Queen Elizabeth in the latter end of her Reign, which Sir Roger was descended from Geffrey de Lukener, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the First. John Stoner of Stoner in the Stoner. County of Oxon Esq;, a Fa∣mily of great Honour and Antiquity in this County, is descended from John de Stoner Esq;, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer; and Lord Chief
Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reigns of King Edward the Second, and Edward the Third. Thomas Sympson of the Inner-Temple Sympson. Esq;, is the Son and Heir to the late Learned and Judicious Sir John Sympson of the same Society, Knight, one of His Majesties Serjeants at Law, Recorder of the Town of St. Albans in the County of Hertford, and one of the Judges of the Sheriffs Court held in the City of London. Thomas Gawdy of Claxton in Gawdy. the County of Norfolk, Esq;, is descended from Thomas Gawdy of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Read∣ers of that House, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the beginning of Queen Elizabeths Reign.
William Fortescue of Buckland Fortescue. in the County of Devon, Esq;, is descended from the famous Sir John Fortescue of Buckland aforesaid, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth; he was a Man of profound knowledge and experience in the Law, as his Learned Works (some part whereof) still ex∣tant do manifest, and by Birth was a younger Son to Sir Henry Fortescue of Wood in the said County of Devon, Knight, Chief Justice of Ireland, and descended of a Family of great Honour and Antiquity in the West of England. Edward Tildesly of Morlies in the County of Lancaster, Tildesly. Esq;, is the Son and Heir to that great patern of Loyalty and Valour, Sir Thomas Tildesly of Morleys aforesaid, Knight,
who being in Arms on the be∣half of his late Majesty; after many brave Actions by him atchieved, had the hard fate at last to dye in the Bed of Ho∣nour, being killed in the Road near Preston in Lancashire, fight∣ing stoutly in his Princes Ser∣vice; after which, his Body was buried in the place where it fell, under a heap of Stones there remaining as a monument to perpetuate his memory, it be∣ing a Custom amongst the An∣cient Romans, to erect such as marks of Honour where any great Action was performed: which said Sir Thomas Tildesly was descended, by many re∣nowned and honourable An∣cestors of this County, from Thomas Tildesly Esq;, a person famous for his great Judgement in the Laws of our Nation, and called to the dignity of a Ser∣jeant at Law by King Henry the Fourth, and from whom
also did descend another Sir Thomas Tildesly of Grays-Inn, Knight, one of the Readers thereof, and one of the Coun∣cil in the North in the Reign of King James, but he dyed with∣out Issue Male. Henry Guildeford of Hemp∣sted in the County of Kent, Esq;, Guildeford. a Gentleman of a fair Estate, and a most excellent Family in that County, is descended from Henry de Guildeford, one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the First. Richard Hopton of Cannon-Frome (vulgarly) Can-Frome Hopton. in the County of Hereford Esq;, is descended from Walter de Hopton Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of Assize for several years, in the Reign of King Edward the First.
Collonel John Wyndham of Wyndham. Norrington, and of the City of Salisbury in the County of Wilts Esq;, a Gentleman of great Loyalty and Repute, and possessor of a very considera∣ble Estate, is the Son and Heir of the no less Loyal Wadham Wyndham of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the year 1660. who was descended from Fran∣cis Wyndham of the same Soci∣ety Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the same Court in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and he descended of a younger branch of the Ancient Family of the Wynd∣hams of Felbrig-hall in Norfolk, where the same still remains and flourisheth in great esteem. John Caesar of Barkway in the County of Hertford, is de∣scended Caesar. from Sir Julius Caesar
of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Chancellor of the Court of Exchequer, and Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King James, and one of the Privey Council to that Prince. Francis Harvey of the Mid∣dle-Temple, Harvey▪ and of Cockfield in the County of Suffolk, Esq;, lately Reader of that Honour∣able Society, is descended from Sir Francis Harvey of the same House, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King James. Lestrange Calthorp of the Calthorp. Middle-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, is descended from Sir Henry Calthorp of the same So∣ciety, Knight, one of the Readers thereof, as also Attor∣ney of the Court of Wards and Liveries in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the
First, descended of the Ancient Family of the Calthorp's of Cock∣thorp in the County of Norfolk. William Fitz-Herbert of Tis∣sington Fitz-Herbert in the County of Derby, Esq;, a Gentleman of an Am∣ple Fortune, is directly de∣scended from the famous Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert of Nor∣bury in the said County of Der∣by, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth: He was descended of an Ancient Family in the said County; but having an elder Brother, who happening to dye without Issue Male, a great part of his Estate de∣scended to this Learned Judge, who so greatly augmented the same, that thereby he preferred his younger Children (of which he had divers, both Sons and Daughters) by matching
them to several worthy Fami∣lies of this Kingdom; and yet left a very plentiful Estate to his Son and Heir. Christopher Danby of Masham, Danby. Thorp-parrow, and Scruton in the North Riding of Yorkshire, of Driffield in the East-Riding, and of Thornby near Leeds in the West Riding of the said County, Esq;, a Family of great interest in those parts, is descended from Sir Robert Danby Knight, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, and constituted Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the first year of the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. William Stanford of Salford-Priors in the County of War∣wick, Esq;, is descended, by a younger Son, from that great and famous Lawyer William
Stanford Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of Grays-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; after which, by Queen Mary he was made one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas. Richard Walmesly of Dunken∣halgh Walmesly. in the County of Lan∣caster, Esq;, a Gentleman of excellent parts, and of an am∣ple estate, is the direct Heir to the sometime Learned and most expert Lawyer of his time, Sir Thomas Walmesly of the Honourable Society of Lin∣colns Inn, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the said Court of Common-Pleas, in the several Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James. The Right Honourable Henry Coventry. Coventry of Enfield in the County of Middlesex Esq;, late one of His present Majesties
principal Secretaries of State, and a person of great Inte∣grity and Stedfastness to the Royal Interest, is one of the younger Sons of Thomas Lord Coventry. Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, who was the Son and Heir to Tho∣mas Coventry of Crombe in the County of Worcester, and of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James. Robert Coke of Holkham in Coke. the County of Norfolk Esq;, is the eldest Branch, descended from Sir Edward Coke of the Inner-Temple Knight, so much celebrated for his profound Judgement and experience in the Laws of this Kingdom, in respect whereof he became the Autumn Reader of the said Society, in the thirty fourth year of Queen Eliza∣beths
Reign; soon after which time, he was constituted Soli∣citor, and then Attorney Ge∣neral to that Princess, as also Recorder of the City of London; and by King James called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law, and advanced to the dignity of Lord Chief Justice of the Com∣mon-Pleas, whence he was re∣moved to the like Honour in the Kings-Bench, and elected one of His then Majesties Pri∣vy-Council. John Crew of Misterton in the Crew. County of Leicester Esq;, is descended from the Famous Sir Randolph Crew of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and  Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King James, which said Sir Randolph was descended of the Antient and Worship∣ful Family of the Crews of Crew-Hall in the County Palatine of
Chester, where they have flou∣rished for five Hundred years and upwards, as men of the greatest Honour and Esteem of that County, and are at this day so reputed. William Whitlocke of Fellis-Court Whitlocke. in the County of Oxon, and of the Middle-Temple Esq;, lately one of the Readers and Treasurers of that House, a person very well read in the Law, and of eminent note for his great Knowledge in the Rules and Practice of the Ho∣nourable Court of Chancery, is a younger Son to Bulstrode Whitloke of the same Society, Esq;, one of the Commissioners of the great Seal of England in the time of the late Rebelli∣on, and a leading Man in those unhappy days; which Bulstrode was descended from Sir James Whitlocke of the Middle-Temple aforesaid, Knight, Serjeant at
Law, Chief Justice of Chester, from whence he was removed to the Court of Common-Pleas, and made one of the Justices thereof by King James. Thomas Bedingfield of Dar∣sham-Hall, and other fair Pos∣sessions Bedingfield. of great vallue in the County of Suffolk Esq;, is de∣scended from the late worthy Sir Thomas Bedingfield of Dar∣sham-Hall aforesaid, and of Grays-Inn, Knight, one of the Readers of that Society, At∣torney of the Dutchy of Lan∣caster in His late Majesties Reign, since which, by His now Most Gracious Majesty, in the year 1660. he was called to the dignity of a Ser∣jeant: Which said Sir Thomas was a Younger Branch of the Antient and Flourishing Family of the Bedingfields of Norfolk and Suffolk.
Charles Dallison of the City Dallison. of Lincoln Esq;, is the Son and Heir to the late Learned Sir Charles Dallison of Lincoln a∣foresaid, and of Grays-Inn, Knight, Serjeant at Law, who was descended from William Dallison of the same Society, Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth. Henry Lowther of Cokermouth Lowther. in the County of Cumberland, a Gentleman of an Excellent Family in those parts, is de∣scended from Thomas de Low∣ther Esq;, one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench, in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Third. Francis Beresford of Fenny-Bently Beresford. in the County of Der∣by Esq;, is descended from William de Beresford Esq;, Ser∣jeant
at Law, one of the Justi∣ces of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the first, and Lord Chief Justice of the same Court in the Reign of King Edward the Second. Walter Littleton of the City Littleton. of Litchfield in the County of Stafford Esq;, is one of the Descendants of the memorable Sir Thomas Littleton of the Inner-Temple, Knight of the Bath, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reigns of King Henry the Sixth and Edward the Fourth, this Walter being descended from Richard Littleton (second Son of the said Sir Thomas) a Learned Lawyer, and one of the Rea∣ders of that Society in the Reign of King Henry the Se∣venth.
Richard Harpur of Little-Over Harpur. in the County of Derby, Esq;, is descended from Sir Richard Harpur of Swarkeston in the said County, and of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justi∣ces of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Ralph Earle of Sawle in the County of Norfolk Esq;, is Earle. descended from Erasmus Earle Esq;, one of the Honourable Benchers of Lincolns-Inn in His late Majesties Reign, and afterwards called to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law. Wallop Brabazon of Eaton, Brabazon. in the County of Hereford, Esq;, is directly descended, through a∣lineal course of divers renown∣ed Ancestors, from the Learn∣ed Sir Roger de Brabazon of Eastwell in the County of Lei∣cester,
Knight, many years Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the First. William Milward of Eaton in the County of Derby Esq;, Milward. is descended from Sir Thomas Milward Knight, a Lcarned Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, one of the Readers thereof, and Chief Justice of Chester in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the First. Roger Wilbraham of Nant∣wich Wilbraham. in the County Palatine of Chester Esq;, is descended from Sir Roger Wilbraham of Nantwitch aforesaid, Knight, one of the Readers of Lincolns-Inn in the latter end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; after which, King James ad∣vanced him to the dignities of Master of the Requests, and Surveyor of the Court of Wards
and Liveries; which Sir Roger was a younger branch of the Ancient Family of the Wilbra∣hams of Woodhey in the said County of Chester, the chief branch whereof is Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey afore∣said, Baronet. William Fortescue of Cokehill Fortescue. in the County of Worcester, and of Wethele in the County of Warwick Esq;, by a younger Son is descended from Lewes Fortescue of the Middle Temple Esq;, one of the Readers there∣of, and one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Richard Caryll of West-Grin∣stead in the County of Sussex, Caryll. Esq;, a Gentleman of singular repute and excellent parts, is descended from those two fa∣mous Lawyers of the Inner-Temple
herein before mention∣ed, namely, John Caryll Esq;, and Sir John Caryll Knight his Son, both Serjeants at Law in the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth and Queen Mary, and the latter, Attorney of the Dutchy of Lancaster in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Richard Brudnell of Stanton-Wivell in the County of Leice∣ster Brudnell. Esq;, (of the Honourable Family of Robert Earl of Car∣digan) is descended from Ro∣bert Brudnell Esq;, Serjeant at Law; and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Charles Caesar of Gransden in Caesar. the County of Huntington, and of Much-Hadham in the County of Hertford Esq;, is the se∣cond Son of Sir Charles Caesar of the Inner-Temple Knight,
Master of the Rolls, Son of Sir Julius Caesar of the same Society Knight, also Master of the Rolls, and Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Reign of King James. Anthony Gawdey of the Town of Ipswich in the County of Gawdey. Suffolk Esq;, is descended from the Learned Sir Thomas Gawdey Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of the honourable Society of the Inner-Temple, and one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Henry Cavendish of Done∣bridge in the County of Derby, Cavendish. Esq;, a person of great Honour both by birth and otherwise: (being nearly related in blood to the Duke of Newcastle and the Earl of Devonshire) is de∣scended from Sir John de Caven∣dish Knight, Lord Chief Ju∣stice
of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Edward Sylyard of Runwell Sylyard. in the County of Essex Esq;, is descended from William Syl∣yard of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, a person of eminent Note, and one of the Governors of that honourable Society for many years, in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the eighth; which William was descended from John Sylyard Esq;, Serjeant at Law, ano∣ther Learned Member of the said House, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Edward the fourth, and constituted one of the Ju∣stices of the Court of Kings-Bench by Richard the third. Henry Bromley of Holt-Ca∣stle, and other Mannors and Bromley. Lands of large extent and val∣lue
in the County of Worce∣ster Esq;, a Gentleman of great Loyalty and Repute, is the direct Heir to the famous Sir Thomas Bromley of Holt-Ca∣stle aforesaid, and of the Inner-Temple Knight, Recorder of the City of London, Solicitor General, and lastly Lord High Chancellor of England in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; which Sir Thomas was the Se∣cond Son of George Bromley of Bromley in the County of Chester and of the Inner-Temple Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Francis Bell of Outwell in Bell. the County of Norfolk, Esq;, is descended from that incom∣parable Lawyer of his time, Sir Robert Bell of the Middle-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Edward Vaughan of Yraws∣coed Vaughan. in the County of Cardigan Esq;, is the Son and Heir to Sir John Vaughan of Yrawscoed aforesaid Knight, Serjeant at Law, late Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas, and Author of the Learned Vollume, Entituled Vaughan's Reports. Stephen Anderson of Eyworth Anderson. in the County of Bedford, and Hamstead in the County of Middlesex Esq;, is descended from the Learned Sir Edmond Anderson of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the several Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James. Anthony Irby of Boston in Irby. the County of Lincoln Esq;,
(a Gentleman of a very plen∣tiful Fortune) is descended from Anthony Irby of the Ho∣nourable Society of Lincolns-Inn, Esq;, one of the Readers, as also for several years one of the Governours thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. William Lenthall of Bessel∣sleigh Lenthall. and Burford in the Coun∣ty of Oxon Esq;, is the Grand∣son and Heir to William Len∣thall of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Rea∣der thereof in the Reign of King Charles the First: After the cruel Murther of which Royal Martyr, the said Willi∣am complying with the usur∣ped Authority of those misera∣ble times, became a person of principal Note and Action, be∣ing constituted Master of the Rolls, Elected Speaker of the House of Parliament then St∣ting, and frequently Honoured with the Title of William Lord Lenthall.
Richard Lovelace of War∣grave Lovelace. in the County of Berks Esq;, is descended from Willi∣am Lovelace Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Readers of Grays-Inn in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Eli∣zabeth. John Thymelby of Iruham in Thymelby. the County of Lincoln, Esq;, a Gentleman of great Integri∣ty and of ample Fortune, is descended from Stephen Thymel∣by Esq;, very eminent for his Learning in the Law, and one of the Benchers of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. George Mordant of Ickwell in the County of Bedford Esq;, Mordant. is directly descended by a younger Branch from the Right Honourable John Mor∣dant of the Middle-Temple, Serjeant at Law, and Attor∣ney
of the Dutchey of Lan∣caster in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, after which, by King Henry the Eighth he was created Baron of Turvey in the County of Bedford. Nicholas Overbury of Barton on the Heath, in the County Overbury▪ of VVarwick Esq;, is directly descended by a younger Son from Sir Nicholas Overbury of Burton on the Hill in the County of Glocester, and of the Middle-Temple Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King James. Hugh Trevanion of Treluggan Trevanion▪ in the County of Cornwall Esq; is descended from John Tre∣vanion Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Eighth
year of the Reign of King Ed∣ward the Third. Geffrey Nightingal of Knes∣worth Nightingal. in the County of Cam∣bridge Esq;, is descended from Geffrey Nightingal Esq;, one of the Readers of Grays-Inn in the Reign of Queen Eliza∣beth. Allexander Crook of Studly, Crook. in the County of Bucks Esq;, is one of the younger Branches, descended from Sir John Crook of Waterstock in the County of Oxon, and of the Middle-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James. Robert Berkley of Spechly in the County of Worcester Esq;, Berkley. a person of rare Accomplish∣ments, Singular Repute, and of an ample Fortune, is the Grand∣son
and Heir to the Learned and Loyal Sir Robert Berkly of the Middle Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, and for many years one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of His late Majesty of Blessed memory: But at last the dark Clouds of Tyranny and Rebellion over-spreading this miserable Nation; and all such as favoured or stood firm in their Duty and Allegiance to their Prince, being branded with that ignominious Title of Malignants and enemies to the Arbitrary Government of those unhappy days, This great Lawyer had the Honour to be one of those many worthy and Loyal Patriots as were then deposed and bereft of their places of trust, and great part of their Estates, for not com∣plying with the Barbarous cru∣elties then practiced.
Mondeford Brampston of the Brampston. Middle-Temple Esq;, Recorder of the Burrough of Maulden in the County of Essex, is descended from Sir John Brampston of the same Society Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Charles the First. John Mingay of Gimingham Mingay. in the County of Norfolk Esq;, is descended from Francis Min∣gay Esq;, one of the Readers of the Inner-Temple, in the Reign of King James. John Breerewood of the City Breerewood. of Chester Esq;, is descended from Sir Robert Brerewood of the Middle-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, Recorder of Chester, and one of the Justices of the Court of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Charles the first.
VVilliam Noy of Pendrea in Noy. the County of Cornwall Esq;, is descended from that expert Lawyer, VVilliam Noy Esq; (a man of great practice) one of the Benchers of Lincolns-Inn, and Attorney General to his late Majesty King Charles the first in the beginning of his Reign. Alexander Denton of Hilles∣den Denton. in the County of Bucks Esq;, is descended from Thomas Denton a learned Lawyer of the Middle-Temple, and one of the Benchers thereof in the Reigns of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth. Edward Turpin of Basing∣bourne Turpin. in the County of Cam∣bridge Esq;, is descended from John Turpin Esq;, one of the Governors of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.
Thomas Catesby of Ecton in Catesby. the County of Northampton, and of Harmead in the Coun∣ty of Bucks Esq;, a Family of great Antiquity, is descended from Sir John Catesby Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Ed∣ward the Fourth. Francis Meynell of Bradley in Meynell. the County of Derby Esq;, is descended from Robert Meynell of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the eighth; and afterwards called to the dignity of a Serjeant at Law. William Ayloff of Chisele in Ayloff. the County of Essex, Esq;, is descended from William Ayloff Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Readers of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and he descended from another William Ayloff Esq;, a learned Lawyer of the same Society, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Bazill Fitz Herbert of Nor∣bury in the County of Derby, Fitz. Herbert. and of Swinnerton in the County of Stafford, Esq;, a Gentleman of a very fair estate, is de∣scended from the famous and learned Sir Anthony Fitz Her∣bert of Norbury aforesaid, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the eighth; a younger Son of which Sir An∣thony, was William Fitz Herbert, who by Marriage with Eliza∣beth, Daughter and Co-heir to Humphry Swinnerton of Swinner∣ton aforesaid, Esq;, annexed that Lordship and other Lands of good vallue to this Family, and
so continue to this day in the possession of the said Ba∣zill. William Palmes of Ashwell in Palmes. the County of Rutland Esq;, is descended, by many honour∣able Ancestors, from Guy Palmes of the Middle-Temple, Esq;, who, for his great Judge∣ment and Abilities in the Law, was called to the state and dignity of a Serjeant by King Henry the Seventh; and by King Henry the eighth consti∣tuted one of his Council, learn∣ed in the Laws. William Petre of Stanford in Petre. the County of Essex Esq;, (of the Noble Family of the Lord Petre) is a younger Branch, descended from Sir William Petre Knight, Doctor of the Civil Law, Secretary of State to King Henry the eighth, and a man of great action in most
of the revolutions of that Princes Reign. Richard Dowdswell of Poole-Court Dowdswell. in the County of VVor∣cester Esq;, enjoys a very fair estate in that and other adja∣cent Counties, as Grand-son and Heir to Richard Dowdswell of Poole-Court aforesaid Esq;, an eminent Practicer in the Laws, and Principle of New-Inn, as also Steward to the Right Honourable George Lord Coventry. Daniel Kingsmill of Kings-Clere Kingsmill. in the County of South∣hampton Esq;, is descended from George Kingsmill of Lin∣colns-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; which George was descended from John Kingsmill Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Ju∣stices of the same Court in the
Reign of King Henry the Se∣venth. George Scott of Chigwell in Scott. the County of Essex Esq;, is descended from John Scott Esq;, a Learned Lawyer and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Robert Coke of Trusly in the Coke. County of Derby Esq;, is de∣scended by a younger Son from Sir Edward Coke of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, Attorney General to Queen Elizabeth, and Lord Chief Justice of both Benches in the time of King James. Thomas Snagg of Milbrooke in the County of Bedford Esq;, Snagg. is descended from Thomas Snagg Esq;, a Learned and able Law∣yer of Lincolns-Inn, and twice Reader thereof in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth; who in the two and twentieth year of her Reign, advanced him to the degree of a Serjeant at Law. Peter Phesant of Ʋpwood in the County of Huntington Esq Phesant. is descended from Peter Phe∣sant of Grays-Inn, Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King James, who was the Son and Heir to Peter Phesant another famous Law∣yer, and one of the Readers of that Honourable Society in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; who constituted him her At∣torney for the Northern parts of this Kingdom. William Purefoy of the Sow, in the County of Purefoy. Warwick Esq;, is descen∣ded from Humphrey Purefoy of Barwell in the County of Lei∣cester, and of Grays-Inn Esq;,
one of the Readers of that House in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which Humphrey was a younger Branch of the Anti∣ent and Numerous Family of the Purefoys of Drayton in the said County of Leicester, where they have flourished for above five Hundred years past, Sir Henry Purefoy of Wadley in the County of Berks and of Drayton aforesaid, Baro∣net, being the principal and Eldest Branch thereof. Edward Bromley of Hampton Bromley. in the County of Chester Esq;, the eldest Branch of that Ho∣nourable and Antient Family, is descended from George Bromley of the Inner-Temple, Esq;, one of the Readers thereof, and Chief Justice of Chester, in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which George was the eldest Brother to Sir Thomas Bromley Knight, Lord
High Chancellor of England, and the eldest Son and Heir to George Bromley Esq;, another Learned Lawyer of the same Society, and one of the Rea∣ders thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Samuel Trotman of Siston in the County of Glocester, and Trotman. of Bucknell in the County of Oxon, Esq;, one of the utter Baristers of the Inner-Temple, and a person of a very fair e∣state, is descended from Ed∣ward Trotman Esq;, one of the Readers of that Honourable Society in the third year of the Reign of his late Majesty King Charles the First. Richard Norton of South∣wick in the County of South∣ampton Norton. Esq;, is descended from Richard Norton Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, and Lord
Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reigns of King Henry the Fifth and Sixth. John Turner of Walden in the Turner. County of Essex Esq;, is de∣scended from Edward Turner of Little-Paringdon in the said County Esq;, an eminent Lawyer of the Middle-Temple, and one of the Benchers thereof in the Reign of King James. Thomas Babington of Rothely Babington. in the County of Leicester Esq;, is descended by many Worthy and Honourable Ancestors from Sir William Babington Knight;, Serjeant at Law, At∣torney General to King Henry the Fourth and Fifth; by which last Prince he was advanced to that great Dignity of Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, and from thence removed to the like Honour
in the Court of Common-Pleas being constituted Lord Chief Justice thereof. Phillip Caryll of Shipley in Caryll. the County of Sussex Esq;, is descended from Sir John Ca∣ryll of Harting in this County, and of the Inner-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Attorney of the Dutchy of Lancaster, Son and Heir to John Caryll of the same Society Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of Henry the Eighth. Thomas Coventry of Chilvers Coventry. Coton in the County of Warwick Esq;, (Uncle to John now Lord Coventry) is descended from Thomas Coventry of the Inner-Temple Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, called to the Dignity of a Serjeant at Law, and made one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon
Pleas, in whose Reign he Dyed, leaving Thomas Coven∣try Esq; his Son and Heir, who Studying the Laws in the same Society, became Recorder of London, Solicitor and Attorney General to King James, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and Baron of Alesbu∣rough in the Reign of King Charles the First. Thomas Atkins of Easendon Atkins. in the County of Hertford Esq; is descended from Thomas At∣kins Esq;, a Learned Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Richard Maunsfield of West∣leak in the County of Notting∣ham Maunsfield. Esq;, is the Son and Heir to Thomas Maunsfield of West∣leak aforesaid Esq;, an ingeni∣ous practicer of the Law, and
a Barister of the Inner-Temple in the Reign of King Charles the First. Edward Willoughby of Bore∣place in the County of Kent Willoughby. Esq;, is descended from the Learned Sir Thomas Willoughby of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; which Thomas inter∣marrying with the sole Daugh∣ter and Heir of Sir Robert Read Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the same Court, did thereby annex an ample Estate to this Honourable Family, amongst whom was Edward Willoughby of Boreplace aforesaid Esq;, who added very considerably there∣unto by a Match with one of the Daughters; and Coheirs to Sir Francis Willoughby of Wol∣laton in the County of Notting∣ham Knight, descended in a di∣rect
Course of Succession, from Sir Richard de Willoughby Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Third; from which Sir Richard, by younger Sons, did descend Sir Henry Willoughby late of Risley in the County of Derby Baronet, and Sir Willoughby late of Willough∣by in the County of Notting∣ham Baronet, both lately ter∣minated in Daughters and Heirs, who have carried the Inheritance of those two ho∣nourable persons to several worthy Families of this King∣dom. Edward Rich of Dowdeswell Rich. in the County of Glocester Esq; is the Son and Heir to the late Learned Sir Edward Rich of Dowdswell aforesaid Knight, one of the Readers of Lin∣colns Inn, and a person eminent
for his great Experience in the Laws in the beginning of His now Majestie's Reign. George Willoughby of Cossale Willoughby. in the County of Nottingham Esq; of the Ancient Family of the Lords Willoughby of Eresby, is descended from Sir Thomas Willoughby of Lincolns-Inn a∣foresaid Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Richard Shuckburgh of Burton Shuckburgh. upon Dunsmore, and Birding∣bury in the County of Warwick Esq; is directly descended from John Shuckburgh of Birdingbury aforesaid, one of the Six Clerks in Chancery in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; Which John being a wary provident Per∣son, Purchased all or the great∣est part of the Estate which
this worthy Gentleman is now possessed of. Francis Morgan of Kingsthorp Morgan. in the County of Northampton Esq; is descended from Francis Morgan of Heyford in the Coun∣ty aforesaid, and of the Middle-Temple Esq; Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of that House, and one of the Justi∣ces of the Court of Kings-Bench, in the Reign of Queen Mary. Robert Brome of Woodlow in Brome. the County of Warwick Esq; is descended from John Brome of Badsly-Chiston in this Coun∣ty Esq; a Lawyer of very emi∣nent note in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, and Purcha∣sor of this Mannor of Woodlow; which he settled upon Nicho∣las Brome his Son and Heir, who left it to Ralph his Son by a Third Venter (the lineal
Ancestor of the said Robert) which John was himself the Grandson and Heir to Ro∣bert Brome of Warwick Esq; a∣nother learned Lawyer in the Reign of King Richard the Se∣cond. William Seyes of Killan in the County of Glamorgan Esq; is de∣scended Seyes. from Roger Seyes of Bo∣verton in the said County Esq; a Learned Lawyer, and Attorney-General of all Wales, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Gilbert Boon of Hockerton in the County of Nottingham Esq Boon. is the Son and Heir to the late Learned and Loyal Gilbert Boon of Grayes-Inn, Esq; called to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law by His late Majesty King Charles the First, in the year 1636. after which he endu∣red great Oppressions in the time of the late Rebellion,
for his exemplary Loyalty and Stedfastness to his Prince. Charles Skipwith of Gosberton Skipwith. in the County of Lincoln Esq; is descended from William de Skipwith Esq; Serjeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Thomas Wetenhall of East-Peckham Wetenhall. in the County of Kent Esq; a Gentleman of honora∣ble Extraction and great Inte∣grity, is descended from George Wetenhall Esq; a learned Lawyer of Grayes-Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. John Philipps of the Inner-Temple Philipps. Esq; one of the Auditors of His Majestie's Court of Exchequer, is descended from Sir Edward Philipps of the same Society Knight, Serjeant
at Law, and Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King James. Cecill Tirwhitt of Camering∣ham Tirwhitt. in the County of Lincoln Esq; a Family of great Anti∣quity and Honor in that Coun∣ty, is descended from Robert Tirwhitt an eminent Lawyer, in the Reigns of King Henry the Fourth and Fifth, by which two Victorious Princes, he was first called to the Dignity of a Serjeant at Law, and then con∣stituted one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas, out of which Court he was removed to the like Place in the King's-Bench. Henry Reynell of Laytham in the County of Middlesex Reynell. Esq; is descended from Richard Reynell Esq; Reader of the Middle Temple in the Reign of King James.
Edward Atkins of Albury-Hall in the County of Hert∣ford Esq; is descended from Thomas Atkins of Lincolns-Inn Esq; one of the Readers there∣of in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Michael Lister of Burwell in the County of Lincoln Esq Lister. with other worthy Gentlemen of that Name and Family in the said County, are descended from Sir Richard Lister of the Middle Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, Solicitor-General to King Henry the Eighth; which Prince in the last year of his Reign, constituted him Lord Chief Justice of the King's-Bench. Thomas Herlakenden of Wood∣church Herlakenden. in the County of Kent Esq; a Family of long conti∣nuance there is descended from Thomas Herlakenden of Wood∣church
aforesaid, and of Grayes-Inn Esq; a Person of great Judg∣ment in the Laws of this Na∣tion, and one of the Readers thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. George Townsend of Wrotham Townsend. in the County of Norfolk Esq; is descended from Sir Roger Townsend of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Reader thereof in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, by whom he was called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law. After which, by King Richard the Third, he was made one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas, and in that place con∣tinued by King Henry the Seventh. Richard Raynsford of Dalling∣ton Raynsford. in the County of Northamp∣ton Esq; is the eldest Son and Heir to Sir Richard Raynsford
of Dallington aforesaid Knight, Serjeant at Law deceased, first one of the Barons of the Ex∣chequer, then one of the Justi∣ces of the Kings-Bench, and lastly, Lord Chief Justice of that Court; in which he sate not long before he was eased of the burthen thereof by His Majesties Writ. Robert Heath of Oford in the County of Kent, and of the Heath. Inner-Temple Esq; called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law in Hillary Term last, is descend∣ed from that excellent Lawyer Sir Robert Heath Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, a worthy Mem∣ber of the same Society, Re∣corder of the City of London, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Charles the First.
Francis Bacon of the City of Bacon. Norwich Esq; Recorder of the said City, lately one of the Readers of Grayes-Inn, is de∣scended from Francis Bacon Esq; Serjeant at Law, also one of the Readers of that Honorable Society, and one of the Justi∣ces of the Common-Pleas, in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the First. George Hill of St. Martins in Hill. the Fields in the County of Middlesex Esq; is the Son and Heir to George Hill late of Clifford's-Inn Esq; a Person of great Practice and Eminent Repute, as also one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex for many years before his Death. Robert Challoner of the City of London Esq; is descended Challoner▪ from Robert Challoner Esq; a
learned Lawyer of Grays-Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Francis Twisden of the Inner-Temple Esq; one of the Masters of the Examiners Office belong∣ing to the Court of Chancery, is one of the younger Sons of the late famous and Profound Lawyer, Sir Thomas Twisden of Bradburne in the County of Kent, and of the Inner-Temple aforesaid, Knight and Baronet, Serjeant at Law, and for many years one of His present Maje∣jestie's Justices of the Court of King's-Bench. Francis Crawley of Enfield in the County of Middlesex, and Crawley. of Someris near Luton in the County of Bedford Esq; is de∣scended from Sir Francis Craw∣ley Knight, Serjeant at Law, Reader of Grayes-Inn, and last∣ly,
one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James. Henry Montague of the Inner-Temple Montague. Esq; a Person of Noble Extraction, is descended from Sir Henry Montague of the Middle-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of King's-Bench, and Lord High Treasurer of Eng∣land in the Reign of King James; after which, he became Earl of Manchester, and was de∣scended by a younger Son from Sir Edw. Montague of the said Honorable Society of the Middle-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, in the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth. Edward Diggs of Chilham-Castle Diggs. in the County of Kent Esq;, ( of good ac∣count
there) is descended from Sir Dudley Diggs Knight, Ma∣ster of the Rolls in the Reign of His late Majesty; which Sir Dudley was descended from Richard Diggs of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King James. John Danvers of Shackerston, Danvers. in the County of Leicester Esq;, is descended by many worthy Ancestors from Sir Robert Dan∣vers of Lincolns Inn Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, Recorder of the City of London, first one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, and afterwards one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas for many years in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. George Markham of Werksopp-Lodge Markham. in the County of Not∣tingham Esq;, is descended, by
many eminent Ancestors, from Sir John Markham Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, who was descended from Robert Markham, (Son of John) both very learned Lawyers in the Reign of King Edward the Second, and Edward the Third, which said Sir John was Father also to the famous Sir John Markham Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the same Court, from whom is descended Sir Robert Markham of Sedgebrooke Baro∣net, herein before mentioned amongst the Baronets. William Booth of Witton in Booth. the County of Warwick Esq;, is descended from William Booth of Witton aforesaid, and of the Middle-Temple Esq;, Reader thereof in the Reign of King Charles the First; which William was a younger Branch
of the honorable Family of the Booths of Dunham-Massey in Cheshire, Originally of Barton in Lancashire. Nevill Brome of Clifton in the Brome. County of Oxon Esq;, a Gen∣tleman of an Ancient Family in this County and Warwick∣shire, is descended from Robert Brome of Warwick Esq;, a Per∣son very eminent for his Knowledge in the Laws. In respect whereof, he was made Steward to Thomas de Beau∣champ Earl of Warwick, who lived in the Reign of King Richard the Second, and there∣by layed the first step to the Estate and Preferments, which in succeeding Ages accrewed to his Posterity. Richard Seys of Swansey in Seys. the County of Glamorgan Esq;, is descended from Roger Seys of Boverton in the said County
Es{que}, Attorney General of all Wales for many years in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Cliston Rhodes of Sturton in Rhodes. the County of Nottingham Esq;, is a younger Branch, descended from Sir Francis Rhodes of Grayes-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Eli∣zabeth. George Montague of St. Mar∣tin's Montague. in the Fields, in the Coun∣ty of Middlesex Esq;, is de∣scended from Sir Henry Mon∣tague of the Midale-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the King's-Bench in the Reign of King James; which Sir Henry was the Grandson of Sir Edward Montague of the same Society Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the same
Court in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. John Fountayn of Melton upon Fountayn. the Mount, in the West Riding of Yorkshire Esq;, is the Son and Heir to that able Lawyer John Fountayn, late Serjeant at Law deceased, a Person of very considerable Practice and great Wealth. Thomas Sackvill of Seddles∣combe Sackvill. in the County of Sussex Esq;, is descended from Sir Richard Sackvill Knight, one of the Benchers of Grayes-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and soon after became Under Treasurer of the Court of Exchequer. George Harpur of Twiford in the County of Derby Esq;, is Harpur. descended from the Learned Sir Richard Harpur of the Inner-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law,
one of the Readers of that anci∣ent House, and one of the Justi∣ces of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. William Cartwright of Nor∣manton Cartwright. in the County of Not∣tingham Esq;, is the Son and Heir of William Cartwright of Normanton aforesaid Esq;; Ba∣rister at Law, and a Person of considerable repute and pra∣ctice in this County. John Sylyard of Penshurst in Sylyard. the County of Kent Esq;, is descended from John Sylyard of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, and by King Richard the Third called to the State and Digni∣ty of a Serjeant at Law, and made one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench.
Thomas Ascough of West-Terrington Ascough. in the County of Lincoln Esq;, is descended by a younger Son from Sir Wil∣liam Ascough of Colling in the said County of Lincoln Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. John Bingham of Bingham's-Melcombe Bingham. in the County of Dorset Esq;, is descended from Sir Richard Bingham Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reigns of King Henry the Sixth, and Edward the Fourth. George Faunt of Foston in the County of Leicester Esq;, a Faunt. Gentleman of a very Ancient and Worshipful Family in that County, is descended from William de Faunt Esq;, one of
the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Clement Spelman of Magdalen Spelman. in the County of Norfolk Esq;, is descended from Clement Spel∣man Esq;, late Serjeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the year 1663. who was descended from Sir John Spelman of Grayes-Inn Knight, (the first Reader of that House) Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of K. Henry the Eighth. Francis Howard of Thornthwait Howard. in the County of Westmorland, is a younger Branch of the Noble house of the Howards Dukes of Norfolk, and conse∣quently descended from Wil∣liam Howard Esq; one of the Ju∣stices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Ed∣ward the First.
Francis Lovelace of Baynhurst Lovelace. in the County of Berks Esq;, is descended from William Lovelace of Grays-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. William Bromley of Baginton Bromley. in the County of Warwick Esq;, is descended from Sir Thomas Bromley of the Inner-Temple, Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; after the Death of which Prince he was constituted Chief Justice of that Court by King Edward the Sixth: This Sir Thomas was the Son and Heir of Sir John Bromley of Radington in the County of Chester Knight, by his second Wife, the Daugh∣ter of Richard Widvill Earl Rivers; but it so fell out, that Sir John had before entailed his whole Estate upon the Issue of
his first Lady, who were all Daughters, insomuch that the said Sir Thomas left little to his Posterity, but what was of his own acquiring. Thomas Townsend of Horse∣ford in the County of Norfolk Townsend Esq;, is one of the descendants of Sir Roger Townsend of Lin∣colns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. John Chamberlayn of Chil∣vers-Coton, in the County of Chamberlain. Warwick Esq;, is descended from Richard Chamberlayn of Chilvers-Coton aforesaid, and of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Clerk of the Court of Wards and Liveries in the Reign of King Charles the First. Charles Baldwin of Stoake in the County of Salop Esq;, Baldwin.
is the Son and Heir to the late Learned Sir Samuel Baldwin of Stoake aforesaid, and of the Inner-Temple Knight, one of His Majesties Serjeants at Law deceased, which Sir Samuel was descended from Sir John Baldwin of the same Society Knight, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. —Paston of Paston and Appleton in the County of Nor∣folk Paston. Esq;, a Gentleman of an Honourable Family of great Antiquity, is descended from Sir William Paston of Paston Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of Henry the Sixth. John Keeling of Southill in Keeling. the County of Bedford Esq;, is the Son and Heir to Sir John
Keeling of the Inner-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, lately deceased, Son of another Sir John Keeling of the same Society Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Com∣mon Pleas in His now Majestie's Reign. William Glanvill of Broad-Hinton Glanvill. in the County of Wilts Esquire, is descended from the learned John Glanvill of Lin∣colns-Inn Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas towards the lat∣ter end of Q Elizabeths Reign. Francis Fitz Herbert of So∣mersall-Herbert in the County Fitz. Herbert. of Derby Esq;, is descended from Sir Anthony Fitz Herbert of Norbury in the said County Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
John Coke of Melburne in the County of Derby Esq;, is de∣scended by a younger Son from the famous Sir Edward Coke of the Inner-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King James. John Hobart of the City of Norwich in the County of Nor∣folk Hobart. Esq;, is descended from Sir James Hobart of Lincolns-Inn Knight, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, and Attor∣ney General to King Henry the Seventh. Robert Jenny of Knats-Hall in the County of Suffolk Esq;, Jenny. is descended from Christopher Jenny Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; which Christopher was descended from Thomas Jenny Esq; an eminent Lawyer, seve∣ral
times Reader of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King Ed∣ward the Fourth. Baldwyn Mallett of Poynting∣ton Malle in the County of Somerset Esq;, is descended from Bald∣wyn Mallett of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Edward Skipwith of Ketsby Skipwith. in the County of Lincoln Esq;, is descended from William de Skipwith Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Ex∣chequer in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Roger Downes of Wardley in the County of Lancaster Esq, Downes. is descended from Roger Downes Esq, Reader of Grayes Inn, and Vice-Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Chester in the Reign of King James.
Adrian Scroope of Cockring∣ton in the County of Lincoln Esq;, (Brother and Heir to the Ingenious Sir Carr Scroope Ba∣ronet, deceased) is descended by many honorable Ancestors and Peers of this Realm, from Geffery de Scroope Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of Edward the se∣cond. Vincent Denn of Denn's-hill in the County of Kent Esq;, is Denn. descended from Thomas Denn of Denn's-hill aforesaid, a learned Practicer of the Laws, and Reader of the Inner Temple in the Third year of the Reign of King Charles the First. Clement Higham of Barrow Higham. in the County of Suffolk Esq;▪ is descended from Richard Higham of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Richard the Third,
and afterwards by King Henry the Seventh he was called to the degree of a Serjeant at Law. Anthony Drury of Intwood in Drury. the County of Norfolk Esq;, is descended from Robert Drury of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, a Person of great Learning, and Speaker of the House of Commons in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Thomas Colepeper of Hacking∣ton Colepeper. in the County of Kent Esq;, a younger Branch of that tru∣ly Noble and worthy Family of that County, who derive their descent from John Cole∣peper Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth. William Bassett of Cheale alias Chedle in the County of Lin∣coln Bassett.
Es{que}, a Person of very Noble and Honorable Paren∣tage, being branched out of the Ancient stock of the Lords Bassett of Drayton, whose An∣cestor was Ralph de Bassett Lord Chief Justice of England (the first Advancer of this sometime renowned Family) in the Reign of King Henry the First, which is now almost Six hundred years since. Richard Lister of Thorp-Arnold Lister. in the County of Leice∣ster Esq;, is descended from Sir Richard Lister Knight, Serjeant at Law, Reader of the Middle-Temple, and Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. John Petre of Feedlers in the County of Essex Esq;, is de∣scended Petre. from the famous Sir William Petre of Corbican in the County of Devon Knight, Do∣ctor
of the Civil Laws, and one of the Principal Secreta∣ries of State to that resolute Prince King Henry the Eighth. Evers Armyne of Osgodby in the County of Lincoln Esq;, Armyne (the only remaining Branch of that honorable and worthy Family) is descended from Wil∣liam Armyne Esq;, a learned Lawyer, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth. Robert Oldsworth of Bradley in the County of Glocester Esq;, Oldsworth. is descended from William Olds∣worth Esq;, Reader of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Thomas Turner of Queendon Turner. in the County of Essex Esq;, is descended from Edward Tur∣ner of Paringden in the said County, and of the Middle-Temple
Es{que}, a learned Lawyer, and one of the Benchers of that honorable Society in the Reign of King James. Edward Roper of Eltham in the County of Kent E{que} the Roper. eldest Branch of that ancient and honorable Family, is de∣scended from John Roper of El∣tham aforesaid, and of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, one of the Readers thereof, and Attorney General to King Henry the Eighth. Edward Briscoe of Aldenham in the County of Hertford Esq;, Briscoe. is descended from William Bris∣coe Esq;, a Person of great ex∣perience in the Laws, and several times Reader of Lin∣colns-Inn in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth John Empson of Boston in the County of Lincoln Esq;, is Empson. descended from Sir Richard
Empson Knight, a learned Law∣yer, and a Person of great Note, and employed by King Henry the Seventh in matters of confiderable moment and advantage to that provident Prince. But this Sir Richard Empson incurring the hatred of the People, through the great Exactions and Oppres∣sions which he imposed upon them; at length they formed an Accusation against him and Edmond Dudley Esq;, Serjeant at Law (Father to John Dudley Duke of Northumberland) both joyntly concerned, of divers Misdemeanors & undue Cour∣ses by them committed beyond the bounds of their Authority, for which at length they both suffered Death▪ Edmond Clench of Great Be¦lingshall in the County of Suf∣folk Clench. Esq;, is descended from John Clench of Lincolns-Inn Esq;,
Serjeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Hugh Cholmley of Newton-Grange in the County of York Cholmley. Esq;, is descended from Sir Ro∣ger Cholmley of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Montfort Spelman of Narbo∣rough Spelman. in the County of Nor∣folk Esq;, is descended from the learned Sir John Spelman of Grayes-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Richard Crooke of Marston in Crooke. the County of Oxon Esq;, is
the Son and Heir to Richard Crooke of Marston aforesaid, and of the Inner-Temple aforesaid Esq;, Serjeant at Law deceased, and lately Recorder of the Ci∣ty of Oxon; which Richard was descended from Sir John Crooke of the same Society Knight, Serjeant at Law, Recorder of London, Speaker of the House of Commons, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King James. John Brooke of Redlesham in the County of Suffolk, is de∣scended Brooke. from Sir Robert Brooke of the Middle-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law and Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Mary. William Frampton of Moreton in the County of Dorset Esq;, Frampton. is descended from Robert Framp∣ton Esq;, one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.
St. Leger Scroop of Louth in the County of Lincoln Esq;, is descended by many honorable Ancestors, from Geoffrey de Scroop Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Second. Francis Tirwhitt of Misson in the County of Nottingham Esq;, Tirwhitt. a Gentleman of Honorable Blood, is descended from Ro∣bert Tirwhitt Esq;, a Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justi∣ces of both Benches in the several Reigns of King Henry the Fourth and Fifth. Edmond Walter of Godstow in the County of Oxon Esq;, is Walter. descended from the learned Sir John Walter of the Inner-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer in the Reign of King James; which Sir John
was the Son of Sir Edmond Walter of Ludlow in the Coun∣ty of Salop, and of the same Society Knight, several times Reader thereof, and Chief Ju∣stice of South-Wales in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Philip Bacon of Wolverton in the County of Suffolk Esq;, Bacon: with divers other worthy Gen∣tlemen of that Name in the said County, are descended from John de Bacon Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Second. John Hody of North-Over in the County of Somerset Esq;, Hody. is descended from Sir William Hody Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reigns of King Henry the Seventh and Henry the Eighth; which said Sir William was
descended from Sir John Hody Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. Ʋnton Crooke of Heddington Crooke. in the County of Oxon Esq;, is descended from Ʋnton Crooke of the Inner-Temple Esq;; cal∣led to the Dignity of a Serjeant at Law by Mr. Oliver Cromwell; which Ʋnton was descended from Sir John Crooke of Water∣stock in the said County, and of the same Society Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Kings-Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James. Ralph Darnall of Lawton-Hope Darnall. in the County of Here∣ford Esq;, is descended from John Darnall Esq;; Serjeant at Law, one of the Barons of the
Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth. Francis Charlton of Apley in Charlton. the County of Salop Esq;, a Gentleman of a very plentiful Estate, and of a very ancient Family, is descended from Sir Richard de Charlton Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Richard the Second. Willliam Lenthall of Great Lenthall. Hasely in the County of Oxon Esq;, is the Grandson of Sir John Lenthall Knight, late Mar∣shal of the Court of Kings-Bench, and Prison thereunto belonging: The Inheritance of which Office is vested in the said William. William Tate of De-la Pree Tate. in the County of Northampton
Es{que}, is descended from Francis Tate of the Middle-Temple Esq;; one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King James. Roger Sydenham of Shilgate Sydenham. in the County of Somerset Esq;, is descended from Richard de Sydenham Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Com∣mon-Pleas in the Reign of King Richard the Second. Henry Bromley of Ʋpton in the County of Worcester Esq;, Bromley. is descended from the famous Sir Thomas Bromley of the In∣ner-Temple Knight, Solicitor General, and lastly, Lord High Chancellor of England in the Reign of Queen Eli∣zabeth. John Danvers of Bainton in the County of Wilts Esq;, is Danvers. descended from Robert Danvers of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, a Person
of great learning in the Law, in respect whereof he was cal∣led to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law, and made one of the Justices of the Court of Com∣mon-Pleas by King Henry the Sixth. The Honorable Colonel Ed∣ward Sackvill of St. Martins in Sackvill. the Fields in the County of Middlesex Esq;, a Person of exemplary Loyalty and Va∣lour, is of the Noble Blood  of the Sackvills Earls of Dorset, descended from Sir Richard Sackvill of Buckhurst in the County of Sussex, and of Grayes-Inn Knight; one of the Ben∣chers of that Society, and Un∣der Treasurer of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. The Honorable Edward Ho∣ward of Ʋrchfont in the County Howard. of Wilts Esq;, (a younger Son
of Thomas late Earl of Berk∣shire) is descended from Wil∣liam Howard Esq;, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the First. Isaac Farfax of Dunsley in Farfax. the County of York Esq;, is de∣scended from the learned Sir Guy Farfax Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Justi∣ces of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reigns of King Edward the Fourth and Richard the Third. Anthony Ingilby of Clape-Dale in the West-Riding of Yorkshire Ingilby. Esq;, is descended from Thomas de Ingilby Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third, from whence he was removed, and made one of the Justices of the Common Pleas by King Richard the Second.
The Honorable Robert Phi∣lipps Philipps. Esq;, one of the Gentle∣men of His Majestie's Bed-Chamber, is descended from Sir Edw. Philipps of the Inner-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Master of the Rolls in the Reign of His late Maje∣sty King James. Nicholas Delves of Camber∣well Delves. in the County of Surrey Esq;, (a Branch of the ancient Name and Family of Delves of Cheshire) is descended from Sir John Delves Knight, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Robert Sheffield of Kensington Sheffield. in the County of Middlesex Esq;, is descended (by a youn∣ger Son of Edmond late Earl of Mulgrave) from Sir Robert Shef∣field of Botterwick in the Coun∣ty of Lincoln, and of the Inner-Temple
Knight, Recorder of London, and Speaker of the House of Commons in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Edmond Pooley of Collumbyne-Hall Pooley. in the County of Suffolk Esq;, is descended from Ed∣mond Pooley Esq;, one of the Readers of Grayes-Inn, and a Person very Eminent for his learning the Laws, in the Reign Queen Elizabeth. John Fitz Herbert of Luck∣ington in the County of Wilts Fitz Herbert. Esq;, is descended (by a youn∣ger Son) from Sir Anthony Fitz Herbert of Norbury in the County of Derby Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Justi∣ces of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. John Vavasour of Fogarthorp Vavasour.
in the East-Riding of the Coun∣ty of York Esq;, is descended from John Vavasour of the Middle-Temple Esq;, the first Reader of that Honorable So∣ciety in the 17th year of King Henry the Seventh: After which he was called to the Dignity of a Serjeant at Law, and constituted one of the Ju∣stices of the Common-Pleas by that Prince. Dymock Walpole of Louth in Walpole. the County of Lincoln, and of Grayes-Inn Esq;, is descended from John Walpole of Grayes-Inn aforesaid Esq;, one of the Rea∣ders thereof, and one of Her Majesties learned Serjeants at Law in the Reign of Queen Mary. Thomas Petyte of Boughton Petyte. Ʋnder Bleane in the County of Kent Esq;, is descended from John Petyte of Grayes-Inn Esq;,
Serjeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. John Gerrard of Hilderston in Gerrard. the County of Stafford Esq;, is descended from Sir Gilbert Ger∣rard of Grayes-Inn Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, Attorney Gene∣ral for above Twenty years together, and also Master of the Rolls in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Thomas Colepepper of Bedge∣bury in the County of Kent Colepepper. Esq;, is descended from John Colepepper Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth. Henry Drax of Sibsey in the County of Lincoln Esq;, is de∣scended Drax. from Richard Drax a
learned Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, and one of the Governors thereof for many years in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. Anthony Drury of Intwood in Drury. the County of Norfolk Esq;, is descended from Robert Drury Esq; one of the Readers of Lin∣colns-Inn, and Speaker of the House of Commons in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. John Kingsmill of Sandleford Kingsmill. in the County of Berks Esq;, is descended from John Kings∣mill Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. William Walsh of Abberly∣lodge Walsh. in the County of Worce∣ster Esq;, is descended from Tho∣mas Walsh Esq; Remembrancer of the Court of Exchequer, and
one of the Barons of the same Court in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. John Stapleton of Warter in the County of York Esq;, is de∣scended Stapleton. from Nicholas de Staple∣ton Esq; one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Third and Edward the First. John Wyvell of Osgerby in the Wyvell. County of York Esq;, is descen∣ded from John de Wyvell, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Third. Thomas Keble of Newton in the County of Suffolk Esq;, Keble. with several other worthy Gentlemen of that Name, Fa∣mily, and County, are de∣scended from Thomas Keble Esq;, a learned Serjeant at Law
in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. John Higham of East-Ham Higham. in the County of Essex Esq;, is descended from Richard Higham of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, one of the Readers thereof, and called to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law by King Henry the Seventh. Henry Henly of Coleway in the County of Dorset Esq;, is Henly. descended from Sir Walter Hen∣ly Knight, a learned Lawyer of Grayes-Inn, and twice Reader of that Society in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Charles Trevanion of Goran in Trevanion. the County of Cornwall Esq;, is descended from John Treva∣nion Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Third.
Christopher Turner of Milton-Erneys Turner. in the County of Bed∣ford Esq;, is the Son and Heir to Sir Christopher Turner late of the Inner-Temple Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer de∣ceased. Edward North of Benaker in the County of Suffolk Esq;, is North. a younger Branch of that No∣ble Family descended from Sir Edward North Knight, Treasu∣rer and Chancllor of the Court of Augmentations in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Bryan Farfax of Denton in Farfax. the East-Riding of Yorkshire Esq;, is descended from Sir Guy Farfax Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.
---- Cavendish of Cavendish Cavendish. in the County of Suffolk Esq;, the Principal Branch of that truely Honorable and Ancient Family is descended from Sir John de Cavendish Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third and Richard the Se∣cond. Thomas Windham of Witham Windham. in the County of Somerset Esq;, is descended from Francis Wind∣ham of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Justi∣ces of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. James Hobart of Great Plum∣stead in the County of Norfolk Hobart. Esq;, is descended from Sir James Hobart of Lincolns-Inn Knight, one of the Readers thereof, and Attorney General to King Henry the Seventh.
John Boys of Fredvill in the Boys. County of Kent Esq;, is de∣scended from John Boys Esq;, an eminent Lawyer of Grayes-Inn, and several times one of the Readers thereof, and At∣torney of the Dutchy of Lan∣caster in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Thomas Berkley of Tibberton Berkley. in the County of Worcester Esq;, is descended from Sir Robert Berkley of Spechly in the said County of Worcester, and of the Middle Temple Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Charles the First. Walter Faunt of Kingsthorpe in the County of Northampton Faunt. Esq;, is descended from William Faunt Esq;, one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third.
Thomas Carus of Horton in Carus. the County of Lancaster Esq;, is descended from Thomas Carus of the Middle-Temple Esq;, one of the Readers there∣of, and called to the Degree of a Serjeant at Law by Queen Mary, and afterwards by Queen Elizabeth was constituted one of her Justices of the Kings-Bench. John Bagshaw of Lulworth in Bagshaw. the County of Northampton Esq;, is descended from Ed∣ward Bagshaw of the Middle-Temple Esq;, one of the Rea∣ders thereof in the Reign of King Charles the First of Blessed Memory. Thomas Conningsby of Hamp∣ton Conningsby. Court in the County of He∣reford Esq;, a Family of great Interest and Antiquity in that County, is descended from Humphrey Conningsby Esq;, Ser∣jeant
at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. John Cave of Horsepoole-Grange Cave. in the County of Lei∣cester Esq;, is descended from John de Cave, one of the Justi∣ces of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of Edward the First. Lionell Gosnold of Otley-Hall Gosnold. in the County of Suffolk Esq;, is descended from John Gosnold Esq;, a learned Lawyer of Grayes-Inn, and twice Reader of that Society in the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth and Edward the Sixth. Charles Holloway of the City Holloway. of Oxon Esq;, is the Son and Heir to the late learned Charles Holloway of the Inner-Temple Esq;, Serjeant at Law de∣ceased.
Ambrose Philipps of the Inner-Temple Philipps. Esq;, a Person of great Learning and Judgment in the Laws, and particularly in the Rules and Practice of the Court of Chancery, is the Son and Heir to Ambrose Philipps Gen∣tleman, a worthy Practicer in the same Court. Joseph Offley of Kentish Town Offley. in the County of Middlesex Esq;, enjoyes a very fair Estate as Brother, Heir, and Executor to Robert Offley late of the Mid∣dle-Temple Esq; deceased. Thomas Hesketh of Rufforth Hesketh. in the County of Lancaster Esq;, a Gentleman of an Ample Estate and a very ancient Fami∣ly in that County, is descended from Sir Thomas Hesketh of Grayes-Inn Knight, one of the Readers thereof, Attorney of the Court of Wards and Live∣ries, and one of the Council in
the North in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James; which Sir Thomas was descended from Richard Hes∣keth Esq;, another able Lawyer, and Reader of the same Society in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. John Glanvill of the City of Glanvill. Exeter in the County of De∣von, and of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, is descended from the learned Sir John Glanvill of the same Society Knight, called to the Dignity of a Serjeant at Law by King Charles the First; which Sir John was descended from John Glanvill of the same Society Esq; Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court  of Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Gilbert Hody of Cornworthy Hody. in the County of Devon Esq;. is descended from Sir William
Hody Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; which Sir William was descended from Sir John Hody Knight, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. Richard Hutton of Goldes∣brough in the West Riding of Hutton. Yorkshire Esq;, is descended from the famous Sir Richard Hutton Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James. Oliver Luke of Wood-End in Luke the County of Bedford Esq;, is descended from Walter Luke Esq;, Reader of the Middle-Temple, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
John Moreton of Kiddington Moreton. in the County of Oxon Esq;, is descended from Sir William Moreton Knight deceased, late one of His Majestie's Serjeants at Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench in the year of our Lord 1666. Charles Pelham of Brocklesby Pelham. in the County of Lincoln Esq;, is descended from Sir Edmond Pelham of Grayes-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in Ireland in the Reign of King James; which Sir Edmond was descended of the Ancient and Worshipful Fa∣mily of the Pelhams of Lawton in Sussex, where Sir John Pel∣ham Baronet, the eldest branch thereof, now resideth. Francis Lane of Glen in the County of Northampton Esq;, Lane. is descended from Thomas Lane
of Lincolns Inn Esq;, one of the Readers of that House in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Thomas Mead of Wenden in the County of Essex Esq;, is Mead: descended from Thomas Mead of the Middle-Temple Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Thomas Neale of Wollaston in the County of Northampton Neale. Esq;, is descended from Sir Ri∣chard Neale Knight, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the se∣veral Reigns of Edward the Fourth, Edward the Fifth, Ri∣chard the Third, and Henry the Seventh. Robert Redmayne of Foulforth in the County of York Esq;, is Redmayne. descended from Edward Red∣mayne
a learned Lawyer of Lincolns-Inn, and one of the Readers of that ancient Socie∣ty in the Reign of King-Henry the Seventh. John Powtrell of West-Halome Powtrell. in the County of Derby Esq;, is descended from Nicholas Powtrell of Grayes-Inn Esq;, called to the Degree of a Ser∣jeant at Law in the first year of the Reign of Queen Eliza∣beth. Nicholas Pedley of Abbotsley in the County of Huntington Pedley. Esq;, is the Son and Heir to Sir Nicholas Pedley of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law. Richard Hopkins of the City of Coventry in the County of Hopkins. Warwick Esq;, is the Son and Heir to Sir Richard Hopkins Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of the Inner-Temple,
and lately Recorder of the said City of Coventry. Littleton Powis of Lincolns-Inn Powis. Esq;, is the Son and Heir of Thomas Powis of the said So∣ciety Esq; Serjeant at Law, and very eminent for his great Knowledge therein. John South of Skelston in the County of Lincoln Esq;, is de∣scended South. from Thomas South Esq;, a learned Lawyer of the Mid∣dle-Temple, and one of the Rea∣ders thereof in the Reign of King James. Henry Portington of Porting∣ton Portington. in the County of York Esq;, (a Gentleman of an Excellent Family) is descended from John Portington Esq;, Serjeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.
Francis Roper Esq;, lately Roper. Gentleman Usher to Her most Gracious Majesty Queen Ca∣therine, is descended from John Roper of Eltham in Kent, and of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Attorney General to King Henry the Eighth. Edward Thurland of Rigate in the County of Surrey Esq;, Thurland. is the Son and Heir to the late learned Sir Edward Thurland of Rigate aforesaid, and of the Inner-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law, Sollicitor General to his Royal Highness James Duke of York, and afterwards one of the Barons of the Exchequer. Charles Stutevill of Daltham Stutevill. in the County of Suffolk Esq;, is descended from Thomas Stute∣vill (or Stotevill) Esq;, one of the Benchers of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.
William Stratford of Barton Stratford. on the Heath in the County of Warwick Esq;, is descended from George Stratford Esq;, a learned Lawyer, and one of the Governors of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of Queen Eli∣zabeth. William Peck of the Inner-Temple Peck. Esq;, a Gentleman of a very fair Estate, is the Son and Heir to Edward Peck of the same Society Esq;, Serjeant at Law, very eminent in that Calling, and more particularly for his Skill in the Rules and Practice of the Court of Chancery. William Branthwaite of Swar∣ston in the County of Norfolk Branthwaite. Esq;, is descended from Richard Branthwaite of Lincolns-Inn, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Rea∣ders thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
John Thorpe of Danthorpe in Thorpe. the East Riding of Yorkshire, Esq; is descended by many wor∣shipful Ancestors from Sir Ro∣bert de Thorpe Knight, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third. Richard Shuttleworth of Gaw∣thorpe Shuttleworth in the County of Lan∣caster Esq;, is descended from Richard Shuttleworth of Grayes-Inn Esq;, one of the Readers thereof, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by whom he was called to the Dignity of a Ser∣jeant at Law, and made Chief Justice of Chester. Charles Hare of Tottenham-High-Cross, Hare. in the County of Middlesex Esq;, is descended from Sir Nicholas Hare of the Inner-Temple Knight, Reader thereof in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth; to which Prince he was Master of the Requests, and by King Edward the Sixth was constituted Ma∣ster of the Rolls. Nicholas Townley of Royle in Townley. the County of Lancaster Esq;, (of the Ancient and Honora∣ble Family of Townleys of Town∣ley in the said County) is de∣scended from Nicholas Townley Esq;, a learned Lawyer of Grayes-Inn, and one of the Rea∣ders thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Robert Spelman of Holme in the County of Norfolk Esq; is Spelman. descended from the learned Sir John Spelman of Grayes-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. William Sydenham of Winford Sydenham.
Eagles in the County of Dorset Esq;, is one of the Descendants of Richard Sydenham Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Justi∣ces of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Richard the Second. John Boyse of Pottshanger in Boyse. the County of Kent Esq;, is de∣scended from John Boyse of Grayes-Inn Esq; divers times Reader of that Honorable So∣ciety, and Attorney of the Dutchy of Lancaster in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Richard Naylour of Offord-D'arcey Naylour. in the County of Hun∣tington Esq;, is descended from William Naylour Esq;, one of the Six Clerks in the High and Honorable Court of Chancery in the Reign of Queen Eliza∣beth.
James George of Bawnton in George. the County of Glocester Esq;, is the Son and Heir to John George of Bawnton aforesaid Esq;, a Person of great Loyal∣ty, and one of the Benchers of the Middle Temple for many years before his Death. Edward Salter of Rich-Kings Salter. in the County of Bucks Esq;, is the Grandson and Heir to Sir Edward Salter Knight, a learned Lawyer, and one of the Masters of the Court of Chancery in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the First of blessed Memory. Challoner Chute of the Vine in Chute. the County of Southampton Esq;▪ a Gentleman of a fair E∣state, is the Son and Heir to Challoner Chute of Sutton-Court in the County of Middlesex Esq;, a Person of great Abilities and Practice in the Law.
Nicholas Martyn of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, is the Son and Heir Martyn. to Nicholas Martyn Esq;, a late learned Lawyer of the said ho∣norable Society. Roger Portington of Barnsby upon Dun in the West-Riding of Portington. the County of York Esq;, is de∣scended from John Portington Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas in the Twenty second year of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. Robert Montague of Sharn∣borne Montague. in the County of Bedford Esq;, is descended from Sir Hen∣ry Montague of the Middle-Tem∣ple Knight, Serjeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench and Lord High Treasu∣rer of England in the Reign of King James and King Charles the First; which Sir Henry was descended from Sir Edward
Montague of the same Society Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the same Court in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Charles Gerrard of Lamburne Gerrard. in the County of Berks Esq;, is descended from Sir Gilbert Gerrard of Grayes-Inn, and of Gerrards-Bromly in Staffordshire Knight, Serjeant at Law, At∣torney General, and Master of the Rolls in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Ralph Leicester of Toft in the County of Chester Esq;, (a Leicester. younger Branch of the worthy Family of the Leicester's of Nether-Tabley in the said Coun∣ty) is descended from Roger de Leicester one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward the First.
Thomas Yarbrough of Camp∣sall Yarbrough. in the West Riding of the County of York Esq;, a Gentle∣man learned in the Law, is de∣scended from Francis Yarbrough Esq;, one of the Readers of Lin∣colns Inn in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Richard Godbolt of Hatfield-Peverell Godbolt. in the County of Essex Esq;, is descended from John Godbolt of Grayes-Inn Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law in the Reign of King Charles the First. William Roper of Brentford in Roper. the County of Middlesex Esq;, a Gentleman of great Probity and Loyalty, and of an Excel∣lent Family, is descended from John Roper Esq;, a learned Law∣yer of Lincolns-Inn, of which Society he became one of the Readers, and was Attorney General to King Henry the Eighth.
William Broxholme of Barrow Broxholme. in the County of Lincoln Esq;, is descended from Thomas Brox∣holme Esq;, a learned Lawyer of Grayes Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Robert Houghton of Ranworth Houghton▪ in the County of Norfolk Esq;, is descended from Robert Hough∣ton of Lincolns-Inn Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. John Cary of Wilcott in the Cary. County of Oxon, is descended from John Cary of Holway in the County of Devon Esq;, Ser∣jeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Richard the Second. Peter Warburton of Abbots-Bromley Warburton. in the County of Staf∣ford Esq;, is descended from the learned Sir Peter Warburton
of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and one of the Justi∣ces of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King James. John Gaynsford of Cohurst-Place Gaynsford. in the County of Surrey Esq;, is descended from Wil∣liam Gaynsford Esq;, a famous Lawyer and one of the Gover∣nors of the Honorable Society of Lincolns-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Gyles Eyre of Brickworth in the County of Wilts, and of Eyre. Lincolns-Inn Esq;, Recorder of the Town of Southampton, and Deputy Recorder of the City of Salisbury, a Gentleman of great Experience and Judgment in the Law, and of eminent Practice; is descended from William Eyre of the same So∣ciety Esq;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Charles the First.
John Goodrick of Altofts in the Goodrick. West-Riding of Yorkshire Esq;, is descended from the late learned Sir Francis Goodrick of Lincolns-Inn Knight, Temporal Chan∣cellor of the County Palatine of Durham. John Scroope of Castle-Combe Scroope. in the County of Wilts Esq;, (a younger Branch of the Noble and Ancient Family of the Lord Scroop) is descended from Sir Goffery de Scroop Knight, Serjeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench in the Reign of King Ed∣ward the Second. Henry Shelly of Lewes in the County of Sussex Esq;, is de∣scended Shelly▪ from William Shelly Esq;, Serjeant at Law, one of the Readers of the Inner-Temple, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the 8th.
William Peckham of the City Peckham. of Chichester in the County of Sussex Esq;, is the Son and Heir to the late learned and Judicious Sir Henry Peckham Knight Serjeant at Law, and Recorder of the said City of Chichester. Robert Hyde of Dinton in the County of Wilts Esq;, is Hyde. descended from Sir Robert Hyde of the Middle-Temple Knight, Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Charles the First, and upon His Majestie's Restora∣tion was first constituted one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, from whence he was shortly after advanced to the Dignity of Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench. James Zouch of Woking in the County of Surrey Esq;, is de∣scended Zouch. by many Noble Ance∣stors from Allan le Zouch Lord
Chief Justice of England in the Reign of King Henry the Third. Robert Bernard of Syleby in Bernard. the County of Leicester Esq;, is descended from Sir Robert Bernard of Brampton in the County of Huntington Knight and Baronet, a wealthy and learned Serjeant at Law, being called to that Degree in the year 1660. Thomas Needham of Dutton Needham. in the County of Chester Esq;, (a Gentleman of great Honor and Repute, and of an excellent Family) is descended from Sir John Needham of Sheinton in the County of Salop Knight (the Ancient Seat of this Family) Serjeant at Law, Chief Justice of Chester, and one of the Justi∣ces of the Common-Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the 6th. Charles Yaxley of Yaxley-Hall Yaxley.
in the County of Suffolk Esq;, is descended from John Yaxley of Yaxley aforesaid Esq;, a learned Serjeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. Humphrey Noy of Carnanton Noy. in the County of Cornwall Esq;, is descended from the famous William Noy of Lincolns-Inn Esq; Attorney General to King Charles the First. Henry Mildmay of Graces in Mildmay. the County of Essex Esq;, is descended from Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor and Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which Sir Walter was the Son and Heir to Thomas Mildmay Esq;, one of the Auditors of the Court of Augmentations in the Reign of Henry the Eighth. FINIS.
THE INDEX. A. ALlen, Pag. 69 Altham, 149 Anderson, 53, 66, 77, 91, 182 Andrews, 81 Anger Lord Strang∣ford, 15 Appleton, 38 Archer, 135 Ardern, 134 Armyn, 231 Ascough, 124, 220 Atkins, 108 114, 200, 208 Ayloff, 40, 190 B. BAbington, 194 Bacon, 32, 50, 85, 122, 237 Bagshaw, 253 Baldwin, 223 Ball, 127 Banks, 83 Barker, 92 Barnham, 89 Basset, 229 Bastard, 150 Beaumont, 47 Beddingfield, 172 Bell, 181 Beresford, 173 Berkley, 186, 252
Bernard, 86, 275 Bindloss, 58 Bingham, 220 Boon, 205 Booth, 215 Boteler, 43, 54, 137 Bowyer, 76 Boys, 252 Boyse, 266 Brabazon Lord of Meath, 14, 175 Bradshaw, 100 Brampston, 115, 123, 142, 188 Branthwaite, 263 Brerewood, 188 Bridgman, 67 Briscoe, 232 Brograve, 88 Broome, 204, 216 Bromley, 180, 196, 222, 240 Brooke, 81, 235 Browne, 128 Brownlow, 56 Broxholme, 271 Brudnell Lord Car∣digan, 9, 178 Bruce Lord Alesbu∣ry, 10 C. CAlthorp, 148, 165 Carleton, 133 Cartwright, 219 Carus, 253 Cary, 149, 151, 271 Caryll, 156, 177, 199 Catesby, 190 Catelyn, 118 Cave, 53, 254 Cavendish Lord New∣castle and Devon, 2, 179, 251 Caesar, 136, 164, 176 Cecil Lord Exeter and Salisbury, 3 Chaloner, 143, 211 Chamberlayn, 65, 223 Charleton, 108, 239 Chisnall, 130 Cholmley, 57, 234 Chute, 267
Clerk, 139 Lord Clifford, 27 Clopton, 126 Cockain Lord Cullen; 17, 67 Lord Colepeper, 26, 48, 51, 147, 229, 246 Coke, 60, 169, 194, 226 Conyers, 155 Coningsby, 253 Cooke, 88 Cooper Lord Shafts∣bury, 11 Corbet, 51 Cordell, 71 Lord Coventry, 24, 126, 138, 168, 199 Crawley, 712 Lord Crew, 26 Cromwell Lord Ard∣glass, 20 Crook, 101, 121, 127, 186, 234, 238 Curson, 80 D. DAllison, 36, 173 Dalton, 142 Danby, 167 Daniell, 137 Darcey, 70 Darnall, 238 Danvers, 66, 214, 240 Delves, 44, 243 Denn, 228 Denton, 189 Dereham, 82 Diggs, 213 Dowdswell, 193 Downes, 227 Drax, 246 Drury, 130, 229, 247 E. EArle, 175 Egerton Lord Bridgewater, 4 Ellis, 73
Empson, 232 Engham, 119 Englefield, 40 Ernley, 78, 105 Estcourt, 121 Eyre, 272 F. LOrd Farfax, 17, 29, 242, 250 Faunt, 220, 252 Finch Lord Notting∣ham, 13, 152 Fitz Herbert, 166, 191, 225, 244 Fitz James, 127 Fleetwood, 128 Forster, 120 Fortescue, 90, 161, 177 Foster, 66 Fountain, 218 Frampton, 235 Franklyn, 111 G. GAscoigne, 102 Gaudy, 80, 88, 160, 179 Gaynsford, 272 Gell, 60 George, 267 Gerrard Lord Max∣field, &c. 11, 95, 246, 269 Glanvill, 225, 256 Glyn, 81 Godbolt, 270 Goodrick, 273 Gosnold, 254 Griffin, 145 Guilford, 163 H. HAles, 38, 74, 148 Halton, 63 Hare, 264 Harpur, 46, 175, 218
Hare Lord Colrain, 30, 55 Harvey, 120, 165 Lord Hatton, 16, 54 Heath, 112, 210 Hele, 49 Henly, 73, 79, 111, 249 Henden, 138 Herlackenden, 208 Hesketh, 255 Hide Lord Claren∣don and Roche∣ster, 9 Higham, 228, 249 Hill, 141, 211 Hobert, 33, 226, 251 Hody, 237, 256 Holloway, 254 Hopkins, 260 Hopton, 163 Houghton, 271 Howard Duke of Norfolk, &c. 1, 2, 117, 130, 221, 241 Hussey, 36, 83 Hutton, 257 Hyde, 274 I. JAckson, 77 Jenuy, 226 Ingilby, 61, 242 Ingoldsby, 84, 119 Irby, 182 Ireland, 132 K. KEble, 248 Keeling, 224 Kingsmill, 193, 247 Knightly, 75 Knivett, 125 L. LAne, 258 Leicester, 75, 269 Lenthall, 183, 239 Lister, 208, 230 Littleton, 41, 49, 63, 141, 174
Long, 87 Lord Lovelace, 24, 184, 222 Lowther, 61, 102, 173 Luke, 257 Lukener, 159 M. MAllet, 129, 227 Markham, 62, 157, 214 Martyn, 95, 268 Maunsfield, 200 May, 109 Mead, 259 Meynell, 190 Mildmay Lord Fitz∣walter, 18, 276 Milward, 176 Mingay, 188 Montague Lord Man∣chester, 6, 104, 213, 217, 268 Moore, 48 Mordant, Lord Peter∣borough, 8, 37, 184 Morgan, 204 Moreton, 258 Mounson, 34 Moyle, 134 N. NApier, 41 Naylour, 266 Neale, 259 Needham Lord Kil∣murry, 30, 275 Nelthorpe, 93 Newdigate, 99 Nicholls, 56 Nitingall, 51, 186 Lord North, 22, 27, 70, 131, 153, 250 Norton, 45, 197, Norwich, 55 Noy, 189, 276 O. OFfley, 255 Oldsworth, 231 Onslow, 96
Osbaldeston, 91 Overbury, 143, 185 Owen, 139 P. PAckington, 44 Lord Paget, 21 Palmer, 68 Palmes, 192 Parkins, 101 Paston Lord Yar∣mouth, 12, 224 Peck, 263 Peckham, 274 Pedley, 260 Pelham, 258 Pettit, 245 Lord Petre, 22, 192, 230 Phesant, 195 Philipps, 42, 147 206, 243, 255 Piggott, 132 Playters, 46 Plowdon, 157 Poole, 99 Pooley, 125, 244 Popham, 115 Portington, 261, 268 Portman, 39 Powtrell, 260 Powis, 261 Puckering, 43 Purefoy, 195 Pye, 134 R. RAinsford, 209 Read, 79 Redmayne, 259 Reeve, 87 Reynell, 207 Rhodes, 58, 217 Rich Lord Warwick, 5, 97, 144, 146, 202 Lord Richardson, 29 Robinson, 136 Rolles, 140 Rookby. 78 Roper Lord Tenham, 23, 232, 262, 270
S. SAckvill Lord Dor∣set, 3, 218, 241 Salter, 267, awyer, 109 Scroop, 228, 236, 273 Scott, 133, 194 Scroggs, 113 Sedley, 38 Selby, 89 Seys, 154, 205, 216 Sheffeild Lord Mul∣grave, 7, 243 Shelly, 34, 273 Sherly, 93 Shukburgh, 203 Shuttleworth, 264 Sidenham, 56, 146, 240 Skipwith, 45, 100, 206, 227 Smith Lord Caring∣ton, 25 Snagg, 194 South, 261 Southcott, 85 Spelman, 221, 234 Spencer, 37 Stanford, 167 Stapleton, 70, 86, 248 Stephens, 122 Stonher, 159 Strangwaies, 155 Stratford, 263 Stutevill, 262 Sylyard, 82, 116, 180 219 Sympson, 160 T. TAte, 239 Taylor, 92 Tempest, 45, 90 Thorold, 62 Thorpe, 264 Thurland, 262 Thymelby, 184 Thyn Lord Wey∣mouth, 16 Tildesly, 161 Tirwhit, 35, 207, 236
Tooker, 91 Townley, 265 Townsend Lord Rayn∣ham, 15, 145, 209, 203 Trever, 58 Trevanion, 185, 249 Trotman, 197 Turner, 112, 198, 231, 250 Turpin, 189 Twisden, 94, 212 Tyrrel, 92 V. VAvasour, 52, 244 Vaughan, 182 Vernon, 74 Ʋnderhill, 144 W. WAlmesly, 168 Walpole, 132, 245 Walsh, 247 Walter, 59, 236 Warburton, 72, 271 Weston Lord Port∣land, 8 Wetenhall, 206 Whichcot, 67 Whitlock, 123, 171 Wilbraham, 176 Wilde, 76 Willoughby, 98, 201, 203 Winch, 69 Wingate, 131 Wivell, 248 Wolseley, 53 Wood, 124 Woodhouse, 35 Wray, 39, 71 Wroth; 76 Wyndham, 84, 96, 106, 164, 251 Y. YArborough, 117 270 Yaxley, 275
Yelverton Lord Grey, 19 Yorke, 150 Young, 84 Z. ZOuch, 135, 274. FINIS.
