P2386 13640527 100886
THE GARDEN OF EDEN. OR, An accurate Description of all Flowers and Fruits now growing in England, with par∣ticular Rules how to advance their Nature and Growth, as well in Seeds and Herbs, as the secret ordering of Trees and Plants. By that learned and great Observer, Sir HUGH PLAT, Knight. The Fourth Edition. LONDON, Printed for William Leake, at the Crown in Fleetstreet betwixt the Two Temple Gates. 1654.
TO THE HONOURABLE and most perfect Gentleman, FRANCIS FINCH junior, of the Inner Temple, Esquire. SIR, YOu may please to pardon my forward in∣scribing this Book to your name. Were it a
Work of mine own composition, I should have thought on a mea∣ner Patron. But the memory of that lear∣ned Knight the Au∣thour (to whom I had so neer Alliance) may excuse this presumption. He was a great Sear∣cher after all sorts of Knowledge, and as great a lover of it in all others. And I
humbly conceiv'd I could not doe him a higher service than by placing his Book under your Protection, who are not more honour'd by those many Noble Families whence you are descended, than by that large Portion of Learning and Ver∣tue which have so enriched your Noble mind; and rendred you
precious to all that know you. I hope that Can∣dor and sweetness which accompanies all your Actions, will also shew it selfe in acceptation of this Offering from him who is ambitious of no other title than SIR, The most humble and most devoted of all those that honour you CHARLES BELLINGHAM.
The PƲBLISHER To the Reader. I Shall not blush to tell you, I had some am∣bition to pub∣lish this Book, as well to doe right to the learned Author (my ever honoured Kins∣man) as to check their for∣wardnesse who were ready to violate so usefull a Work. There are some men (of great name in the world) who made use of this Author,
and it had been civil to have mentioned his name who held forth a candle to light them to their desires; but this is an unthankfull age. And what ever you may think of this small Piece, it cost the Author many yeares search, and no small expence, there being not extant in our lan∣guage) any work of this Sub∣ject so necessary and so brief. He had consultation with all Gentlemen, Scholars, nay not a Gardiner in England (of any note) but made use of his Discoveries, and confirm'd his inventions by their own Experience. And what ever they discover'd (such was his modesty) he freely acknow∣ledges by naming the Au∣thors, sometimes in words at
length, as Mr. Hill, Mr. Taver∣ner, M. Pointer, M. Colborn, M. Melinus, M. Simson, and some∣times by T. T. A. P. &c. What ever is his own hath no name at all, unlesse sometimes (and that not often) he add H. P. at the end of the Para∣graph. And when he refers you to some other part of the Book, 'tis according to the Number or Section, not the Page, for that onely serves for the Table. He wrote other pieces of Natural Philosophy, whereunto he subjoyned an excellent Abstract of Cornelius Agrippa de Occulta Philosophia; but they fell into ill hands, and worse times. As for this Collection of Flowers and Fruits, I would say (if I had not so near Relation to it)
that no English man that hath a Garden or Orchard can hand∣somely be without it, but at least by having it will finde a large benefit. And all Ladies and Gentlemen by reading these few leaves may not on∣ly advance their knowledge and observation when they walke into a Garden, but discourse more skilfully of any Flower, Plant, or Fruit then the Gardiner himself, who (in a manner) growes there night and day. Farewell. C. B.
The Author's Epistle To all Gentlemen, Ladies, and all others delighting in God's Vegetable Creatures. HAving out of mine own experience, as also by long confe∣rence with divers Gentlemen of the best skill and practice, in the altering, multiplying, enlarging, planting, and transplanting of sundry sorts of Fruits & Flow∣ers, at length obtained a pretty volume of experimentall obser∣vations in this kind: And not
knowing the length of my daies, nay, assuredly knowing that they are drawing to their period, I am willing to unfold my Napkin, and deliver my poor talent a∣broad, to the profit of some, who by their manuall works, may gain a greater imployment than heretofore in theirusual callings: and to the pleasuring of others, who delight to see a rarity spring out of their own labors, and pro∣voke Nature to play, and shew some of her pleasing varieties, when shee hath met with a stir∣ring workman. I hope, so as I bring substanti∣all and approved matter with me, though I leave method at this time to Schoolmen, who have al∣ready written many large and methodicall volumes of this sub∣ject (whose labours have greatly
furnished our Studies and Libra∣ries, but little or nothing altered or graced our Gardens and Or∣chards) that you will accept my skill, in such a habit and form as I shall think most fit and ap∣propriate for it; and give me leave rather to write briefly and confusedly, with those that seek out the practicall and operative part of Nature, whereunto but a few in many ages have attained, then formally and largely to i∣mitate her Theorists, of whom each age affordeth great store and plenty. And though amongst these two hundred experiments, there hap∣pen a few to faile under the workmans hand (which yet may be the Operators mistake not mine) yet seeing they are such as carry both good sense and proba∣bility
with them, I hope in your courtesie I shall find you willing to excuse so small a number, be∣cause I doubt not, but to give good satisfaction in the rest. And let not the concealing, or rather the figurative describing of my last and principall secret, withdraw your good and thank∣full acceptation, from all that go before; on which I have bestowed the plainest and most familiar phrase that I can: for▪ Jo. Bapti∣sta Porta himself, that gallant and glorious Italian, without craving any leave or pardon, is bold to set down in his Magia naturalis, amongst many other conclusions of Art and Nature, four of his secret skils, (viz. con∣cerning the secret killing of mē, the precipitation of salt out of sea water, the multiplying of
corn two hundred fold, which els∣where I have discovered: & the puffing up of a little past, to the bignesse of a foot-ball) in an ob∣scure and Aenigmatical phrase. And I make no question, but that if he had known this part of ve∣getable Philosophy, he would have penned the same as a Sphinx, & roll'd it up in the most cloudy and dark some speech that he could possibly have devised. This Author, I say, hath em∣boldened me, and some Writers of more worth and higher reach then himself, have also charged me, not to disperse or divulgate a secret of this nature, to the com∣mon and vulgar eye or ear of the world. And thus having acquainted you with my long, costly, and la∣borious Collections, not written
at adventure, or by an imaginary conceit in a Scholars private study, but wrung out of the earth by the painful hand of experi∣ence: and having also given you a touch of Nature, whom no man as yet ever durst send naked into the world without her veile; and expecting, by your good enter∣tainment of these, some encou∣ragement for higher and deeper discoveries hereafter, I leave you to the God of Nature, from whom all the true light of Nature pro∣ceedeth. H. P. Knight.
An Alphabeticall Table to the Book. A. ANnis seeds to grow in England page 78 Apple cornels to set 101 Apple agreeth not with a pear-stock 120. notè contra 121 Apples kept without wrinkles 164 Apricot multiplied 127 Apricot, which is best 136 Apricots fair 157 Apricots to bear well 148 Apricot stones to set 155 Apricots in what ground 146 Apricots to prosper 105 Arbour when to cut. 90 Arbour aloft 94 Artichocks from frost 39, 41, 79 97 B. Barking to help 159 Barking of trees 107 Barly growing without earth 47
Barrenness in trees, upon what cause, and how helped 163 Bayes to plant 36 & 100 Beasts of hearbs to grow speedily 76 Birds of hearbs to grow speedily 76 Blossoms from frost 104 to stay blossoming 157 Borders of hearbs delicate 77 Box tree to plant 100 Branches to root 70, 102, 105 Briony sap to gather 62 C. Candying of growing flowers 42 Canker avoided 107 Carnations growing in winter 50, 96 Carnations old and revived 52 Carnations how to set 69 Carnations plants to carry far 69 Carnations seed to gather 72 Carnations of divers kinds upon one root. 75
Carnation pots of a stately fashi∣on 49, 50 Carnations to multiply 83 Carnations early 65 Carots kept long 66 Carots to grow large 35, 67 Carots when to sow 68 Cats at the roots of trees 99 Cherries when to plant 101 Cherries growing long upon the tree 105 Cherry stock wilde, of what big∣nesse to graft on 110 Cherry upon a plum stock 113 Cherries fair 157 Cherry to grow large 119 Cherries in clusters 265 Chestnut tree to plant 111 Cions how to chuse 119 Cions made the stock 120 Cions how to carry far 126 Cions to prosper 146 Cions and stock sutable 164 Coleflower seed to gather and
plant 73 Coleflower to bear late 74 Coliander to sow 81 Colour of a flower altred 71, 138 Cowcumbers to multiply 63 Crabstock, at what bignesse to be grafted 109 D. Dogs at the tree roots 99 Dung for pot-herbs 35 Dwarf-trees 150 Dwarf-trees in an orchard 52 Depth for trees 108 E. Earth barren strengthned 77 Earth, see Ground Eldern to plant 36, 100 Elme no stock to graft on 120 Elme to lop truly 152 Early fruit 56, 64, 103, 145 F. Fearn to enrich ground 33 Flower de luce of seed 91 Flowers to grow gilded 41
Flowers candied as they grow 42 Flowers to keep backward 66, 67 or forward 64, 65 Flowers to grow upon trees 71, 67 Flowers grafted one upon ano∣ther 71 Flowers single made double 85 Flowers from frost 96 Fruit early. See Early. Frets of hearbs in a delicate manner 77 Fruit hanging long upon the tree 104 Frut without stones 136 Frut hiden with leaves 136 167 G. Garden enriched philosophically Garden ground rich 70 Garden within doors 44 Garlick to grow large 35 Grafting in the bud, with all the rules 111 Grafting in the cions, with all the rules 117
Grafting, how often in the yeere 135 Grafting between the bark and tree 139 Grapes kept long 67, 92, 97 Grapes growing long upon the Vine 105 Ground to temper 33 Ground enriched with Fearn 33 Ground enriched with soot 33 Ground enriched with horn 34 Ground enriched 99, 100 Gilding of leaves, and flowers growing 41 H. Hasels when to plant 101 Hedge of fruit trees for a garden 72 Hedge when to cut 90 Hedge of white-thorn, how to use 72 Hearbs with great heads 34 Hearbs to grow upon trees 71 Hearbs grafted one upon ano∣ther 71
Hops, how to order 98 Horn to enrich ground 34 I. Inoculation, witb all the rules thereof 111 K. Kernels when to set 70 L. Leaves growing gilded 41 Leeks to grow great 36 Lettice to sow 37 Lettice seeds to gather 37 Lettice to grow great 37 Lopping of trees for beauty 108 139 Lopping of trees for bearing 147 M. Medlar upon a white thorne 110 Medlar stock for a Quince 137 Mellons to grow great 63 Mellons to order 57 Musk-mellon to prosper 94 Mellons to multiply 63 Misseltoe to find 86
Misselchild 86 Mosse to kill 160 Mold rich for Orchard or Garden 33, 99 N. Nursery, what ground it requi∣reth 134 Nuts, when to set 70 Nuts set 111 O. Oake, when not to be felled 109 Oake, how to lop 152 Onions and Baysalt sowed toge∣ther 34 Onions how to order 79 Orchard of dwarf-trees 52, 103 Orchard ground how to keep 140 Orchard wet, how to help 146 Orchard barren to bear 99 P. Parsnips kept long 66 Parsnips when to sow 68 Parsnips to grow large 35, 68 Peaches in what ground 149 Peach stones to plant 102, 155
Peach upon a plum-stock 123 Peare, in what ground 149 Peare stocks, of what bignesse to be grafted on 110 Peare, not to be grafted upon a white thorn ibid. Pear tree when to plant 101 Pescods early and late 80, 90 Pineapple when to set 102 Pinks of Carnations, and in car∣nation time 72 Piony of the seeds 91 Pippen upon what stocks 137 Pyramides of hearbs to grow speedily 76 Plants, when to set 102 Plants rooted, how to remove without harm 88 Plums growing long upon the trees 105 Plum-stocks white, of what big∣nesse to graft on 110 Plum agreeth not with a Cherry stock 113
Plum-stones when to set 101 Pompions to grow great 38 Pompions to multiplie 63 Poplar to grow 100 Pot-hearbs, what dung they re∣quire 35 Pots for Carnations, of a stately fashion 49, 75 Proining of trees for beauty 108 Proyning of trees for bearing 147 Purslane seed to gather 37 Q. Quinces when to plant 101 Quince grafted upon Medlar 121 Quinces to grow delicate 155 R Radish 91 Radish to grow large 35 Roots when in their best strength 40 Roots to grow long and great 67 Roots old removed 88 Roots of trees, how to be ordered in setting 149
Roses grafted, upon what stocks 38 Rose musk to bear late 40 Roses growing in winter 50 Roses to bear late 65, 82 Roses to defend from frost 65 Roses early 65 Roses late 66, 82, 95 Roses to multiply 83 Rose to bear twice in one yeer 89 Rose of Gelderland, how to plant 90 S. Salt sowed with Onions 34 Sap in trees checked 162 Sappinesse in wood avoided 153 Sap of hearbs, how to gather 82 Sap of trees, how to gather 156 Seeds how old they may be 34 Seeds how to choose 34, 84 Seeds to multiply 67 Seeds to sprout speedily 84 Seeds to grow full and plump 91 Seeds kept from Fowle 91 Sent of flower altered 71. 138
Snayles to kill 35 Soot to enrich ground 33 Spring when to set 102 Stock gilliflower made double 85 Stock and cions sutable 164 Stock gilliflowers how to plant 69 Stock gillyflowers to continue long growing 88 Stock when it is big enongh to be grafted on 110 Stock made to prosper 131 Stock to multiply 134 Stones when to set 70 Strawberries wild into gardens 38 Strawberries how to water 38 Strawberries early 64 Strawberries large 92 Suckers planted 111 Spinage when to sow 91 T Tast of a flower altered 71, 138 Timber or tree togrow of any fashion 148 Trees old recovered 56, 103
Trees coming of a branch 70 Tree to bush in the top 55, 9 Trees to prosper 105 Tree from barking, or canker 107 Tree, at what depth to set 108 Trees to top 108 Tree bark-bound, helped 31 Tree let into another 124 Tree how to transplant 134, 143 Tree transplanted, how it alte∣reth. 137 Tree-gum in Winter 140 Tree to grow tall 55 Tree made to root higher 141, 162 Tree with a wreathed body 142 Tree-gum in Autumn 158 Tree to burnish 160 Tree barren to bear 143 Tulip to double 86 Turneps kept long 66 Turneps to grow large 35 V. Vine cutting to choose 35 Vine when to plant 35
Vine young, when to proin 35 Vines old, recovered 56, 103, 145 Vine to carry grapes long upon it 105 Vineyard how to keep 141 Vine bleeding helped 145 Vineyard to plant 54 W Walnut tree to plant 111 Walflowers how to plant 69 Wardens in what soyl 159 Warden agreeth not upon a white-thorn 110 Water philosophicall for gardens 167 Water artificiall for gardens 75 93 Wax artificiall for graffing 124 Weather ill to work in 109 White-thorn for what Cions 110 White-thorn stock at what big∣nesse to be graffed on 109 Woods speedy 106 Worms to kill 70
THE GARDEN OF EDEN. OR, A briefe Description of all sorts of Fruits & Flowers, with meanes how to ad∣vance their nature and growth in England. I Shall not trouble the Reader with any curious rules for shaping and fashioning of a Garden or Orchard; how long, broad, or high the Beds, Hedges, or Borders should be cōtrived; For every man may dispose it as his House or quantity of ground requires. And (to
deale freely) I look on such work as things of more fa∣cility then what I now am a∣bout. Every Drawer or Em∣broiderer, nay (almost) each Dancing-Master may pre∣tend to such niceties; in re∣gard they call for very small Invention, & lesse learning. I shall therefore speake to that which common sear∣chers passe over, or never aymed at, being somewhat above their reach, who neg∣lect the cause of what they find effected. Yet I shall be∣gin with the ground, soile, or earth it selfe, as the Foun∣dation of all; still confessing what light or assistance I had from those who im∣ployed their hours this way as well as my selfe.
2. Break up your ground,Tempe∣ring the ground. and dung it at Michaelmas. In Januar. turn your ground three of four times, to min∣gle your dnng and earth the better, rooting up the weeds at every time. Pro∣ved by Mr. T. T. 3 In winter time,Fern to enrich ground. if you co∣ver the ground which you meane to break up in the Spring, with good store of Fern, it keepeth down grass and weeds from springing up in winter, which would spend some part of the heart of the ground, and it doth also inrich the ground very much, for all manner of Roots and hearbs. By Mr. And. Hill. Ashes of Fern are excellent. 4. Quaere,Soot to enrich ground of enriching
ground with Soot, which Mr. Stutfield (that married my Lord North's Brothers Daughter) assured me to have found true in pasture grounds, the same onely strewed thinly over. 5. Shavings of Horn strew∣ed upon the ground,Shavings of horn to enrich ground. or first rotted in earth, and (after) that earth spread upon the ground, maketh a Garden ground very rich. Probatum at Bishops Hall, By H. P. 6. Onions & Baysalt sowen together,Onyons & Bay-salt. have prospered exceeding well. 7. The surest way to have your seeds to grow,Age of seeds. is to sow such as are not above one year old, T. T. 8. If hearbs be nipped with the fingers,Hearbs with great heads. or clipped, they
will grow to have great heads. T. T. 9. Chuse such seeds as be heavy,Choice of seeds. & white with in, T. T. 10. Swines & Pidgeons dung are good for potherbs and sisted ashes laid about them,Dung for potheabs killeth Snails,To kill Snailes. T. T. 11. If you would have Gar∣lick,Roots made large. parsnep, radish, turnep, carot, &c. to have a large root, tread down the tops often, else the sap will run into the leaves, T. T. 12. Take the cutting of a Vine from a branch that spreadeth most in the midst of the Tree,Chusing of a Vine cutting. and not from the lowest nor the highest branch, having five or six joynts from the old stock, and it would be a cubit long or more:Vine when to plant. plant it in
Octob. or March. T. T. 13. Proine not your young Vines untill they have had three years growth.Young Vines to proine. T. T. 14. Every slip of a Bay tree will grow,Bayes to plant. strip off the great leaves, and set them in March when the sap begin∣neth to rise. T. T. 15. Every plant of an El∣dern will grow.Eldern to plant. T. T. 16. First,Leeks to grow great. put some good fat dung into water, and therein water your Leekes one night, and make your beds of good fat dung, that the dung may be a foot at the least in depth: then co∣ver the bed with Fern, and set the Leekes with a great planting stick, and fill not the holes with earth, but water them once in two
dayes and no more; after this maner of setting I have seen Leekes as great as the stemme of a spade. T. T. 17. Sow Lettice in August for Winter.Lettice to sowe. T. T. 18. After the Lettice is all blowen,Lettice seed how to gather. and some of the bolles begin to bear a white poff, then cut off the whole great stem, and lay it a dry∣ing in the sun: and when it is dry, beat it up and down with thy fist upon a boord, & put altogether in a dish, & blow away softly all the dust.Lettice to grow great. T. T. And if you sow or set your lettice in the shade they will be very great. 19. When it hath bolles,Purslane seed to gather. cut it up, and lay all the hearb to dry in the shadow then beat it out. T. T.
20. Strawberries which grow in woods,Wood Strawber∣ries into Gardens. prosper best in Gardens: and if you will transplant them forth of one Garden into another then enrich the last ground by watering the same either with Sheeps dung,Watering of straw∣berries. or Pid∣geons dung infused in wa∣ter; by Master Hill. 21. The muske and yellow Rose,Roses grassed upon what stock. and all those double and centiple Roses, may well be grafted in the bud upon the Sweet-brier. By Mr. Hill. 22. If you would have Pompions to grow excee∣ding great,Pompions to grow great. first plant them in a rich mold, then trans∣plant those sets into other fat mold, watring them now and then with the wa∣ter
wherein Pidgeons dung hath been infused, then take away all the hang-bies, maintaining only one or two main runners at the most, and so you shall have them grow to an huge big∣nesse. Proved by Mr. Hill. You must nip off these side branches about blossoming time, with their flowers and fruits; and take heed you hurt not the heads of the main runners, for then your pompions will prove but dwindlings. 23. In winter time raise little hills about your Arti∣chokes close to the leaves,Arti∣chokes from frost. See this in Numb. 26. 58. because they are tender; and if any extream frosts should happen, they might
otherwise be in danger to perish. 23.Musk rose to beare late. If you cut away the old branches of a Muske∣rose, leaving onely the shoots of the next year to bear; these shootes will bring forth musk roses the next year, but after all o∣ther musk-rose trees. By Mr. Hill. 25.Roots in their best strength. The roots of every tree and plant, are most full of sap when their tops or heads are most green and flourishing: and when the bark of the Tree will pill and loosen from the body, then will the rind also loo∣sen from the root; and when the tops begin to wi∣ther or stand at a stay, then doe the rootes likewise.
And therefore that com∣mon opinion, that rootes are best and of most force in Winter, is erroneous. So as if I should gather any roots, for the use of Physick or Surgery, I would gather them either at their first putting forth of leaves, or else between their first springing, & the springing up of their branches, when they begin to encline to∣wards their flowring. By A. H. 26.Artichocks from frost. 23, 38. If every evening you lay a great colewort or cab∣bage leaf upon the top of every Artichoke, this will defend the apple from the violence of the frost.Flowers or leaves gilded and growing. By Goodman the Gardiner. 27. A branch of Box or
Rosemary will carry their leaves gilded a long time fair,Quae of Isinglasse dissolved. notwithstanding the violence of rain, if you first moisten the leaves with the gum of Mastick, first dissol∣ved in a hard egge accor∣ding to art, and leafe-gold presently laid thereon. Do this in a Summers day, when all the dew is ascended, and when the Sun being hot, may presently harden the Mastick, and so bind down the gold fast unto it. Quaere, if Myrrhe and Benjamin will not do the like, dissol∣ved as before. 28. Make gum water as strong as for Inke,Flowers candied as they grow but make it with Rose-water; then wet any growing flower therewith, about ten of the
clock in a hot Summers day, and when the Sun shi∣neth bright, bending the flower so as you may dip it all over therein, and then shake the flower well; or else you may wet the flow∣er with a soft callaver pen∣sill, then strew the fine sear∣ced powder of double refi∣ned sugar upon it: do this with a little box or searce, whose bottom consisteth of an open lawn, & having al∣so a cover on the top; hold∣ing a paper under each flower, to receive the sugar that falleth by: and in three houres it will candy, or har∣den upon it; & so you may bid your friends after din∣ner to a growing banquet: or else you maycut off these
ers so prepared, and dry them after in dishes two or three dayes in the sun, or by a fire, or in a stove; and so they will last six or eight weeks, happily longer, if they be kept in a place where the gum may not re∣lent. You may doe this also in Balme, Sage, or Borrage, as they grow. 29. I hold it for a most de∣licate and pleasing thing to have a fair Gallery,A Garden within doors. great Chamber or other lodging, that openeth fully upon the East or West sun, to be in∣wardly garnished with sweet Hearbs and Flowers, yea and Fruit if it were pos∣sible For the performance whereof, I have thought of these courses following.
First, you may have faire sweet marjerom, basil, car∣nation, or rose-mary pots, &c. to stand loosely upon faire shelves, which pots you may let down at your pleasure in apt frames with a pulley from your Cham∣ber window into your Garden, or you may place them upon shelves made without the room, there to receive the warme sun, or temperate raine at your pleasure, now and then when you see cause. In eve∣ry window you may make square frames either of lead or of bords, well pitched within: fill them with some rich earth, and plant such flowers or hearbs therein as you like best; if hearbs you
may keep them in the shape of green borders, or other forms. And if you plant them with Rosemary, you may maintain the same running up the transumes and movels of your win∣dowes. And in the shady places of the room, you may prove if such shady plants as do grow abroad out of the Sun, will not also grow there: as sweet Bryars, Bayes, Germander, &c. But you must often set open your Casements, especially in the day time, which would be also many in number; be∣cause flowers delight and prosper best in the open aire. You may also hang in the roof, and about the sides of this room, small
pompions or Cowcombers, pricked full of Barley, first making holes for the Barley (quaere, what other seeds or flowers will grow in them and these will be over∣grown with green spires,Barly growing without earth. so as the Pompion or Cow∣comber will not appear. And these are Italian fancies hung up in their rooms to keep the flies from their Pictures: in Summer time, your chimny may be trim∣ed with a fine bank of moss, which may be wrought in works being placed in earth, or with Orpin, or the white flower called Ever∣lasting. And at either end, and in the middest place one of your flower or Rosemary pots, which you
may once a week, or once every fortnight, expose now and then to the sunne and rain, if they will not grow by watering them with raiue water; or else, from platformes of lead o∣ver your windows, raine may descend by smal pipes and so be conveyed to the roots of your hearbs or flowers that grow in your windowes. These pipes would have holes in the sides, for so much of them as is within the earth, and also holes in the bottome, to let out the water when you please in great showers And if you back the bor∣ders growing in your win∣dowes with loose frames to take off and on, within the
inside of your windows, the Sun will reflect very strong∣ly from them upon your flowers and hearbs. You may also plant Vines with∣out the walls, which being let in at some quarrels, may run about the sides of your windows, and all over the sealing of your rooms. So may you do with Apricot trees, or other Plum trees, spreading them against the sides of your windowes. I would have all the pots wherein any hearbs or flowers are planted,Pots for flowers of a good fa∣shion. See this also Numb. 56. to have large loose squares in the sides; and the bottoms so made, as they might be ta∣ken out at ones pleasure, and fastned by little holes with wiers unto their pots,
thereby to give fresh earth when need is to the roots, and to remove the old and spent earth, and so in your windowes: See more of this in Numb. 30. 30. To have Roses or Carnations growing in Winter,Roses or Carnati∣ons in winter. place them in a Room that may some way be kept warm, either with a dry fire, or with the steam of hot water conveyed by a pipe fastened to the cover of a pot, that is kept see∣thing over some idle fire, now and then exposing them in a warm day, from twelve to two, in the Sun, or to the rain if it happen to rain; or if it rain not in convenient time, set your pots having holes in the
bottom in pans of rain wa∣ter, & so moisten the roots. I have known Master Jacob of the Glassehouse to have Carnations all the winter by the benefit of a room that was neare his glasse house fire; and I my self, by nipping off the branches of Carnations when they began first to spire, & so preventing the first bearing, have had flow∣ers in Lent, by keeping the pots all night in a close room, and exposing them to the Sun in the day time, out at the windowes, when the wather was temperate: this may be added to the Garden (mentioned Nu. 20.) to grace it in winter, if the roome stand conveniently
for the purpose. 31.Reviving of Carna∣tions. You shall oftentimes preserve the life of a Carna∣tion or Gilliflower growing in a pot, that is almost dead and withered, by breaking out the bottom of the pot, and covering the pot in good earth, & also the old stalks that spring from the roots; but every third or fourth year, it is good to slip and new set them. 32.Orchard of dwarf trees. If you make an Or∣chard of dwarf-Trees, suf∣fering none of them to grow above a yard high; then may you strain course Canvas over your Trees in the blooming time, especi∣ally in the nights and cold mornings, to defend them from the frosts: And this
Canvas being such as Pain∣ters use, may after be sold with the losse onely of a penny upon the ell. You may use it onely for Apri∣cots, and such like rare fruit whose blossoms are tender; or else to backward them after they be knit, if you would have them to beare late when all other Trees of that kind have done bear∣ing. In this dwarf Orchard I would have the walks between the Trees either pavedwith brick, or gravel∣ed, and the gravel born up with bricks, that the sun might make a strong re∣flection upon the Trees, to make them bear the sooner. And to bring forth the better digested fruit, I
would also have the plot so chosen out, that all easterly and northerly winds may be avoided by some de∣fence. I would have it but a small Orchard; and if it were walled in, it were so much the better. Help this Orchard with the best artificial earths and waters that are.Uineyard to plant. I think a Vineyard may thus be planted, to bring forth a full, rich, and ripe Grape: or if you could happen upon a square pit of a yard deep, whose banks are sloaping▪ & whose earth have been philosophically prepared (as before Num. 10.) & that your Trees were bound sloaping to the sides of your Orchard, and back∣ed with boards, or lead, for
reflexion, that so your trees would prosper and beare most excellent fruit: And to keep your Trees low, when your stock is at such height as you would have it,Trees growing either high or lowe. nip off all the green bunds when they come first forth, which you finde in the top of the Tree, with your fingers; and so, as often as any ap∣peare in the top, nip them off: and so they will spread but nor grow tall; even as by nipping off the side buds onely, you may make your Tree to grow streight and tall, without spreading, till you see cause: And thus with your fingers onely, and vvithout any toole, you may keep your young Trees grovving in
what form you please. 33.Early fruit To have early fruit, you must have an especial care to plant or graffe such fruits, as are the earliest of all other, and then adde all artificial helps thereto. 34.Old trees recovered Two quarts of Oxe∣bloud or Horse bloud for want thereof, tempered with a hat full of Pidgeons dung, or so much as will make it up into a soft paste, is a most excellent sub∣stance to apply to the prin∣cipal roots of any large tree, fastening the same about them, after the root of the Tree hath taken ayr a few dayes, first, by lying bare: and it will recover a Tree that is almost dead,Vines re∣covered. and so likewise of a Vine. For this
will make a decaying Tree or Vine to put forth both blossoms and fruits afresh. This must be done to the Tree about the midst of Fe∣bruary, but apply it to the Vine about the 3d or 4th of March. This is of M. Nicholson Gardiner. 35. Get a load or two of fresh Horse dung,Ordering of the Musk-Mellon. such as is not above 8. or 10. dayes old, or not exceeding four∣teen: lay it on a heap till it have gotten a great heat, & then make a bed thereof an ell long, and half a yard broad, and eighteen inches high, in some sunny place, treading every Lay down very hard as you lay it; then lay thereon three inches thick of fine black
sifted mold; prick in at eve∣ry three or four inches di∣stance a Muske mellon seed, which hath first bin steeped twenty four hours in Milk: prick the top of your bed full of little forks of wood appearing some four or five inches above ground; upon these forks lay sticks, and upon the sticks so much straw in thicknesse, as may both keep out a reasonable showre of rain, and also the sun, & likewise defend the cold (some strain canvas slopewise onely over their beds) let your seeds rest so untill they appeare above ground, which will com∣monly be in six or seven dayes. You must watch them carefully when they
first appeare; for then you must give them an howers sunne in the morning, and another in the afternoon; then shall you have them shoot an inch and a halfe by the next morning; then strew more fine earth about each stalk of such plants as have shot highest, like a lit∣tle hill to keep the Sun from the stalks: for if the Sun catch them, they perish; and therefore you shal often see the leaves fresh, when the stalks wither. Heighten your hills, as you shall per∣ceive the stalk to shoot higher and higher. The plants must remain till they have gotten four leaves,The short∣est way is to buy plants and set them. and then remove them, ta∣king up earth and dung to∣gether
carefully about eve∣ry root: make a hole fit for every of them good ground, placing them (if the ground serve) upon an high slope bank, which ly∣eth aptly for the morning sun, if you may; let this bank be covered with field sand two inches thick all over, except neare about the plants (this ripeneth & enlargeth the fruit greatly) then cover each plant with a sugar pot, gilliflower pot, or such like, having a hole in the bottom; or else prick in two sticks acrosse, arch∣wise, and upon them lay some great leaves to keep your plants from rain, sun and cold. After they have been planted a day or two,
you may give them two houres sun in the morning, and two in the evening, to bring them forward, but, till they have stood 14. dayes, be sure to cover them from 12 to 4 in the afternoon every day, and all night long. These pots defend the cold, and keep out all worms from spoyl∣ing your plants; and there∣fore are much better then leaves. Note, that you must defend them in this manner in the day time, until your plants have gotten leaves broad enough to cover their stalks and roots, from all injury of weather; and then may you leave them to the hot Sun all the day long.
If there be cause, you must with rain water, wa∣ter them now and then, but not wetting the leaves. And if by any exceeding cold, or moysture, your plants doe not shoot forward suffici∣ently, but seem to stand at a stay, then take some blood and pidgeons dung tempered (as before in Num. 34.) apply the same to the roots of the young plant; leaving some earth betwixt the roots, and the same will make them to shoot out ve∣ry speedily. Remember to plant three plants toge∣ther ther in each place, being round, and a little deep, and of the bignesse of a round trencher. Now when they have shot out all
their joynts (which you shall perceive when you see a knot at the very end of the shoot, which is some∣what before the flowring time) then some do use to cover every knot, or joynt, with a spade or shovel full of fine and rich earth; and thereby each knot will root, and put forth a new shoote (quaere, of the same course in Pompions or Cowcumbers) by means whereof you shall have great increase of Mel∣lons.Pompions and Cow∣cumbers multiplied When your Mellons are as big as Tennis Balls, then if you nip off at a joynt, all the shoots that are beyond them,Mellons to growe great. the Mellons will grow exceeding great; for
then the sap doth not run any more at waste. But some hold, that you shall have greater Mellons though not so many, if you suffer their shoots to run on without earthing the knots; and then, when when you see your Mellons of the bigness of Tennis balls (as before) then nip off, at a joynt, all the shoots that are beyond the Mellons, but meddle not with the chief runner. This of Mr. Nicholson Gardi∣ner. Lay your young Mel∣lons upon Ridge-tiles, to keep them frō the ground, and for reflection. 36. Make a high bank, slopewise like a penthouse,Earlie straw∣berries. that openeth to the Sun, and is by some means de∣fended
from all hurtfull winds: plant your Straw∣berries therein, and water them with the infusion of some apt dung, now and then, when the weather is dry. 37. Bow down the bran∣ches of Roses,Roses to bear late, and from frost. having buds upon them, into a vessel of wood pitched, standing within the ground, to keep them long upon the stalk, or to prevent frosts if you see cause. 38. Quaere,Early Ro∣ses and Carnati∣ons. What Pigeons dung and bloud, applyed to the rootes of Roses, or Carnations, will do, in the forwarding of their bea∣ring. 39. Plant Roses,Early Roses. accor∣ding to the manner set
down for Strawberries before (Num: 36.) to have them before all others. 40. Make a Lay of sand, and a lay of carot rootes,Carots, parseneps, and Tur∣neps, kept long. cutting away the toppes close to the root, with some of the small ends of the ca∣rots; do this in October or Novemb: in dry weather: and about the last of De∣cember where there is no frost, unpack them againe; and if you will then keep them longer, you must pare off the shooting at the up∣per end of the root, and then lay them in sand. This out of Gardiners Kitchin-Garden, printed 1599. So of Parsneps and Turneps. 41. Quaere,Roses and flowers backward. If binding the bark somewhat hard with
a packthred, or rather with Brawn-bands,Quaere, of doing thus after the rose is new budded. will not keep roses, and other flow∣ers and fruits, long from blowing, by staying the sap from rising. 42. To have rootes pros∣per and grow great,Roots long and great. you must trench your dung a∣bout the depth of your root which you would sow; and if the root once get into the dung, then it forketh, and gathereth fi∣bras, whereas otherwise it will grow wholly into a long, round, and fair root, of Mr. Andr. Hill 43. But if you desire to multiply your seed,Seeds to multiply. not respecting the rootes, then mix your dung first well rotted with good mold,
and therein sow your seeds and they will encrase much: so as for seeds the dung must lye in the top, and for roots in the bot∣tom By Mr. Andr. Hill 43. Gather your carot or parsnep seeds &c.Large Ca∣rots, or parsneps. from the highest spiring brances, and out of some friends Garden, where you may be sure of the best; sow these seeds about March, or A∣pril: and at drawing time choose the fairest roots of all other; cut off their tops somewhat low, and set them againe, and then let them seed the next yeare; then take the seedes from the highest toppes and sow them, and so shall you have most faire and large roots.
This of Master Hunt, the good horseman. 44. Take off the tops as far as the green goeth,A new planting of carna∣tions, wall∣flowers, & stock gilli∣flowers. viz. till you come to the wood, from Carnations, Gilliflow∣ers, &c. slit them upward thorough the nethermost joynt, thrusting between the joyns some fine sear∣ced earth, made first into pap; and with the same pap close the ends round about as big as a Walnut: make holes in your pots, and put in your tops so earthed; these do seldome or never faile. By Minisris Hill. Also, the old root is here preser∣ved, and you may carry these tops thus earthed 100 miles in a box.Plants to carry far. Quaere, if this secret will not also extend
to stock Gilliflowers, Wall∣flowers, &c. 45. Cut off a bought from any tree; and two inches from the bottom,Branches to root. take a∣way the bark round about, prick it into the ground, and it will grow. Quaere. 46. In the end of Fe∣bruary or March,To kill Wormes. wet the ground first, and about eight or nine of the clocke at night, by candle-light, gather up all the Wormes in dishes, and so you may destroy them. 47. A Rich mold for a Garden:Rich mold See among the Trees. Numb: 29. 48. Set or sow Kernells in November,When to set or sow. Nuts in Fe∣bruary, stones of fruit in March, all in the increase
of the Moon. 49. Quaere,One plant upon ano∣ther, or upon a tree. Of graffing ro∣ses, the splicing way, and so of thyme, rosemary, hy∣sope, &c. to be graffed in this manner, either one up∣on another, or graffing them upon the boughes or branches of trees, if happi∣ly they will take. 50. Whether the colour, sent,Colour, sent, or taste of a flower, al∣tered. or tast, may be altered in a Flower or Hearb, by Art, see the Title, Trees and Plants, numb: 90. 51. Instead of privy hed∣ges about a quarter,Fence of fruit trees. I com∣mend a Fence made with lath or sticks, thinly placed and after graced with dwarf apple, and plumme Trees, spred abroad upon the stick.
52. When you would have a strong and speedy White-thorne hedge about your garden,White-thorn hedge. set your plant high and sloping, and not flat, after the common man∣ner. Prick in the cut∣tings, with the slope side downward, that the rain may not get in between the Wood and the Bark. Weed these hedges twice every yeare, and as the sprowts doe grow of some length, let them be platted, or brayded upward from the ditch; defend them from Cattell with a dry or dead hedge. 53 Let Carnations or Gilliflowers shed their leaves,Carnation seed to gather. and leave the cods standing upon the root
till the end of October, vz. so long as you may for the danger of frost: then cut off the stems with the cods upon them; stick them up∣right in some dry place in an upper roome, and so let them rest untill the Spring, then sow them. Your Car∣nation seed will prove faire large pink, and beare in Carnation time; by S. 54. Your Coleflower seed will not ripen till Michael∣mas, Coleflow re seed to gather & to plant. or a week after; let it stand so long or longer, if you feare not frost, before you gather the seeds, which grow in yellow cups; and being ripe, are also yellow themselves. Be sure you gather the cups before the seedes be
shed; put these seeds with their cups or cods in a box, but cover not the box, and keep the box in some place from the frost; prick them in about the full of the Moon in Aprill, when cold weather is spent: remove them when they have got∣ten four leaves, and in the full of the Moon in any case. Remove some of them in severall moneths,Coleflow∣er to bear late. and so you may save them grow∣ing with Coleflowers till Christmas. Your ground cannot be too rich for them; the best removing is not till June and July, and those of least growth, are best to remove late, to bear in Winter. Cover each Coleflower in frosty wea∣ther,
every night with two of their great leaves, fastned in two places, with two woodden pricks. Do this also in cold gloomy dayes, when the sun shineth not. 55. Graft the branches of Carnations the splicing way,Divers carnations in one root. as in small twigges of Trees, placing upon each branch a severall coloured flower, but let the branches which you graft, be wood∣dy enough. By S. 56. Cause large Carnati∣on pot to be made,Stately pots for carnations As before Num. 29. viz. double in bignesse to the usuall pots, let them have ranks of sloping holes, of the bignesse of ones finger, each rank one inch distant from another. Set in the midst of the pot a Carna∣tion,
or a Lilly, and in eve∣ry of the holes, a plant of thyme or hysop; keep the thyme or hysop as it grow∣eth, even with clipping, or in the forme of frets or bor∣ders, and set these pots up∣on faire pillars in your Gar∣den, to make a beautifull shew.Birds, beasts, pyramides &c. to grow speedily. Also, you may ei∣ther of stone or wood, make Pyramides, losinges, circles, pentagons, or any forme of beast or fowle, in wood, or burnt clay, full of slope holes (as before) in Gilli∣flower pots; these being planted with hearbes, will very speedily grow greene, according to the forme they are planted in: And in this manner may you in two yeares space, make a
high pyramid of thyme, or rosemary. In hot weather, they would be shaded with some strained canvas from the sun,See after in Num. 84. and watered now and then by some artificiall meanes. Also, a fret or border may be cut out in wood or lead,Delicate frets or borders. and after placed in a Garden when the hysope or thyme sides are growne to some height to be let thorough the cuts,The wood may be laid in some oyle colour. and alwayes after kept by clipping, according to the worke of the border, or fret: let the earth settle well before you sow your seeds;Earth strength∣ned. water with an infusi∣on of dung, or good earth, because otherwise the earth within your molds will spend, and then your plants will decay.
57. Sow English Annis seeds when the Moon is at the full in February,To sow Anniseeds in England. or any time between the full and the change: if frosts will not suffer you to take the full Moon, hatch them in∣to the ground, with a rake stricken thick upon them: then strew new hors-dung thinly upon the ground, to defend the seedes from the frost. These will ri∣pen about Bartholomewtide; then respecting the Moon as before, sow againe, and these seeds will be ripe soo∣ner then those which were sowen in February. These seeds will also come up well, being self-sowen, only break up the ground a∣bout them when they be∣gin
to ripen. That ground which you would sow in February, breake up about Michaelmas; let it lye and crumble all the Winter: then when you meane to sow, stir it up againe, that it may be mellow; for, the mellower the better. A black rich mellow ground is best, and they like well in a rich dunged ground: Proved by S. 58. Having well earthed your Artichocks, then strew upon them some fresh hors∣dung,Artichocks from frosts one inch in thick∣nesse, and so leave them all the winter: By 23. 56. 59.Oniō seeds ordered. Sow Onion seeds in February within eight dayes after the full at the farthest (but the neerer the
full, the better, so all will go to seed, or head, and not grow to scallions: after you have sowed them, co∣ver them as you did your Annis seeds, before in Num. 57. By S. 60. Sow the early Pease as neer Midsommer as the Moon will suffer,Early and late Pes∣cods. if you would have them come a∣bout six weekes after Mi∣chaelmas: but if you would have them ripe in May, then sow them in the be∣ginning of September, somewhat before or after, as the Moon will give you leave: at the full is good, or three dayes before the full, and till eight dayes af∣ter the full, is also good: these will be ripe in May.
Make your holes about one inch and a halfe deepe, wherein you set your pease; let the ground be rich, mel∣low, and ordered, as before, (numb. 57.) in Annis seeds; beare them up with stickes, as they doe the Garden∣pease; cover them after they be set with new hors∣dung about halfe an inch thick, all over; and (if you may possibly) plant them so, as that they may be de∣fended from the North, and Northeast, by reason of some hedge or wall. Quaere, of covering them with un| sleakt lime powdered, after they have been steeped in some apt liquor a conveni∣ent time; by S. 61.Colianders to sow. Sow Coliander seeds
in February, respecting the Moon as in Annis seedes, (Num: 57) but they need no dunging: By S. 62.Sap of Bri∣ony, to gather. In Aprill make a deep overthwart cut or gash into a Briony root, taking away the earth first from it; put in a Goos-quill a little un∣der the slit, sloping the quill at the end which you thrust into the root: but first make a hole with your knife to get in the quill, and so you may gather great store of the water of Briony, placing a Receiver under the quill; By S. 63.Roses to beare late. Quaere, If one may not prevent the early bud∣ding of the Rose, by cross∣hacking the bark (as in trees to kill mosse, or to
stay their sap from rising.) 65.Roses and carnation multiplyed You may multiply many rootes from a pro∣vince rose, and the double musk-rose, (quaere, of Car∣nations) if you buy a graf∣ted rose tree, that hath got∣ten many sprowts from the place graffed, and setting the root so as the body may lye sloping neer the earth: then lay as many of the branches as you may conveniently into the earth, loosing every slip a little from the body, and pricking with an aule a∣bout the joynt that is next the slip, from whence many sprowts will issue. And thus may you have great store of Province roses without graffing in the bud,
because each of them stan∣deth upon his owne roote; whereas the bud is maintai∣ned from one Roote, whch also maintaineth many o∣ther branches. By S. See before in numb. 53. 65.Good seeds to know. Put some of your seeds in a sawcer of faire water, set it a while upon a Chafingdish of Coales; and if they be good, they will sprowt in a short time, else not. 66. Quaere,Seeds to sprowt speedily. In what time seeds may be made to grow in earth, moystened with warme water now and then, and the same placed in a warme roome, over a Fornace, with a small tem∣perate heate under the same.
67. Remove a Plant of stock gilliflowers when it is a little woodded,Single flowers doubled. and not too greene, and water it presently; doe this three dayes after the full, and re∣move it twice more before the change. Doe this in barren ground, and like∣wise three dayes after the new full Moone, remove againe; and then remove once more before the change: Then at the third full Moon, viz. eight dayes after, remove againe, and set it in very rich ground, and this will make it to bring forth a double flower; but if your stock-gilliflow∣ers once spindle, then you may not remove them. Al∣so, you must shade your
plant with boughs for three or foure dayes after the first removing; and so of Pinks, Roses, Daysies, Fea∣therfew, &c. that grow single with long standing. In removing, breake not the least root. Make Tu∣lipees double in this man∣ner.Tulipee double. Some think by cutting them at every full Moone before they beare, to make them at length to beare double. Num: 71. 68. By sitting upon a hill late in an evening,Miseltoe to finde. neere a Wood, in a few nights a fire drake will appeare; marke where it lighteth, and there you shall finde an Oake with Misletoe there∣in, at the Root whereof there is a Misell-childe,
whereof many strange things are conceived.Missel child Beati qui non crediderunt. 69. Gather your Grapes at the full of the Moon,Grapes kept long. See after in Num. 82 and when they are full ripe, slip each bunch from the stocke whereupon it grew, and hang those bunches along by beames, in the roofe of a warme chamber, that doth not open to the East, or to the North, and these will keepe plump and fresh till our Lady day, or therea∣bout: or else with every bunch, cut off some of the stock whereupon the stalke grew, and then hang up the bunches. Both these wayes be true; By S. 70. Make a tle square or round hole in a Tree,Flowers in Trees. or
in some great arme there of, of halfe an inch, or an inch deep, fill it with earth, sow therein some Rosemary seeds, Wall-flower, Carna∣tion, or other seeds; and these will grow first in the earth, and after root in the sap of the Trees, and seeme in time as if they were graffed. 71. Remove both double and single stock-gilliflow∣ers,Stock-gil∣liflowers to conti∣nue. when they are halfe a foot high, and then they will stand six or seaven yeares: whereas otherwise they will decay very spee∣dily: See before, Num. 67. 72. If you remove any rooted plants of Hearbe or flower,To remove rooted plants. though it be some∣what forward in the Sum∣mer,
so as you do it in the evening, after the heat is past; and plant it present∣ly, and water it, there is no danger of the parching heat of the sun the next day. But in any case heave up the Earth with the Root carefully, so as you do not breake the least sprigge of any root; for then the sap goeth out of the Plant, and it perisheth. This way you may recover great Gilli∣flower rootes, and others, without danger; by S. 73. Cut your Roses,Roses to bear twice. after they have done bearing, so soone as the Moone will give you leave, viz. the fourth, fift, or sixt day after the change, and so you shall have store of Roses againe
about Michaelmas, or after. Take heed you cut no branch of a Rose so low, as that you leave no leading branches upon it: for that will hinder the bearing of the Roses exceedingly. It is also good in the after-said dayes after the change,Hedge and Arbour when to cut. to cut any Hedge, Arbour, &c. to make it grow the better: By S. 74. If you would have Peascods before all men,Early Peascods. sow the early pease in Au∣gust, three dayes before the full Moon, or within six dayes after, and these will come very early; By S. 75. How to plant the Gelderland rose,Gilder∣land roses. see among Trees and Plants, Numb: 119.
76. How to have Onion seeds,Seeds full & plump. Annis seeds, and other seedes, to keepe full and plump, see among Trees: Numb: 135. 77. Sow at every wane before Midsommer,Radish & spinage. to have Radishes unseeded, and one under another; but at Midsommer wane so we Radish, Spynage, &c. but once, to grow till win∣ter unseeded; Proved by Tomkins the Gardner. 78. The double Piony,Piony and Flower∣deluce. and Flowerdeluce, will grow of their own seed. By Tomkins. 79. Lime beaten to pow∣der,Seeds from devouring and mixed with corne before it be sowen, preven∣teth Rookes, and other fowle, from devouring the
same. By my Cousin Mathews of Wales; Quaere, If it do not also help to enrich. 80. Gather you Grapes, as before,Grapes kept long. Prove this in cheries, clusters of raisins, figs. num. 69. dry them in a stove, till the faint water be spent, and so you may keep them all the yeare for your table. Quaere, If they will not plump up againe at any time in warm water. Quaere, of drying all manner of ap∣ples, plummes, peares, &c. this way, for lasting. Before numb. 69. 81. As soone as your Strawberries have done bearing,Strawber∣ries large. cut them down to the ground; and as often as they spire, crop them, till towards the Spring, when you would have them to proceed towards bearing:
now and then as you cut them, strew the fine pow∣der of dryed Cow-dung (quaere of Pidgeons dung) upon them, and water them when there is cause.After in Num. 85. Field strawberries, this way, will grow two inches about in bignesse, as I am credibly enformed. Enrich Carnation pots this way. 82. To water your pyra∣mides,Watering artificiall. pentagons, globes, beasts, &c. made of wood, or lead, and overgrowne with hearbes, as before in num. 56. let there be placed a long and large pipe of Lead, or tinne plate, reach∣ing from the bottome to the top; let the bottome be so∣dred up, and let it have di∣vers holes in the sides, at a
reasonable distance: then have an exceeding large funnell of tin plate, to let in to the pipe at your pleasure to receive so much raine as will water the same suffici∣ently; and when it raineth not, you may also water thereby with some rain∣water kept of purpose. 83. Quaere, If Pompions planted in large pots,Arbour aloft. will not grow and beare fruit: for then you may have an Arbour of them in an open tarras, leades, or gutter, ha∣ving a frame to support the fruit. Enrich the earth; as before, Numb. 83. now and then, to nourish the plant the better. 84. Quaere,Musk-Mellon to prosper. If Musk-mel∣lons will not grow, and
beare in such pots, for so in a Leads or tarras, the sunne will shine shrongly upon them; and you may defend frosts and cold winds by streining of canvas: water the pots with raine water put into other pannes, wherein you may place these pots when you want raine. 85. cut you Roses when they are ready to bud in an apt time of the Moon,Roses late. and they will begin to bud, when other Roses have done bearing: this is an excellent secret, if frosts happen in budding time: for so may you have store of Roses, when others shall have few or none, and may then be sold at a high rate.
This I proved the 18th. of March 1606. being a few dayes after the change, up∣on divers standards at Bed∣nal-green, being extreame∣ly nipped with frosts, in budding time; and many of them did yeeld me great store of Roses, when the rest of my Garden did in a manner fail. 86.Store of Roses. Cut your Rose-stan∣dards in the twelve dayes, and not before: so they will beare exceeding well. Pro∣ved often by Garret the Apo∣thecary, and Pigot the Gar∣dener. 87.Flowers from frost. Towards Winter, new earth your Gilliflow∣ers, Carnations; and such other flowers as you would defend from the violence
of Winter; then whelme carnation pots that are bot∣tomlesse upon them, or ha∣ving a great hole in the bot∣tom: and by this meanes, neither the sharp windes, nor the frost, can easily pearce to their roots. I hold this to be a good course for the defence of ArtichokesArtichocks from frost. in Winter. 88.Grapes kept. You may keep bun∣ches of Grapes that are sound and well gathered, in stone pots, covering them carefully, with sand.
TO choose ground for a Hop-Garden, you must be sure it bee not a moorish or wet soyle (though such perhaps may content a wild Hop) but a dry ground, if it be rich, mellow, and gentle, is absolutely best. Yet a light mold (though never so rich) is unapt for this purpose, for the hea∣viest ground will bear the greatest weight of Hops. Place your Garden so as the Sun may have free accesse to it, either all day, or warmest part of the day. It must be guar∣ded also from the wind, either naturally defended by hills, which is best; or arti∣ficially by Trees: but your Trees must stand aloofe, lest the shadow of them reach the Hops, or drop wet upon them, which will destroy all. About the end of March, or beginning of April, take your roots from some Garden where they are yearly cut, and where the hills are raised high (for there the roots will be greatest) let each root be nine or ten inches long, let there be three joynts in every root, and of the last yeer's springing; but be sure no wild hops cumber the ground, which cannot be di∣stinguished by the root, but by the fruit, or stalk.
Secrets in the ordering of Trees and Plants. DOgs and cats applyed toDogs and carst to the roots. the roots of trees before the sap rise, have recovered many old decaying trees, shred them. 2. Divers waies for the enriching of a ground,Rich ground. whereof to make an Or∣chard, see among Flowers. Numb. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 3. Gravelly ground is toGround enriched.
be dunged with chalk, and chalky with gravell, for lack of dung. T. T. 4. Strip away the leaves form the boxen slippe,Box tree pranted. and winde not the stemme, but set it whole without wind∣ing. T. T. 5.Bayes to plant. Every slip of a bay tree will grow: strip off the great leaves, and set them in March, when the sappe beginneth to rise. 6.Eldern to plant Every plant of an El∣dern will grow. T. T. 7.Ground enriched. Sand enricheth a clay ground; and clay a sandy ground. 8.Poplar to grow. Every slip of the Poplar tree will grow. 9.Trees to bush in the top. All Trees which you would have to grow thick at the top, and to bush
there, cut or proin them in May: for they spring more in June and July, than all the yeare before or after. 10.Cherries when to plant. Plant Cherries in Octo∣ber, November, January, and February. T. T. 11.Quinces when to plant. Plant Quince Trees in October, November, Februa∣ry, and March. T. T. 12.Hasels and pear trees when to plant. Set Hasells and Peare Trees in October, November, February, and March. T. T. 13.Apple cornels set. Set Apple cornells e∣vermore the end that is next the root downward, five fingers breadth be∣tween every cornell; moy∣sten them often with water by sprinkling, and set the cornells in March. T. T. 14.Plum∣stones set. Set plumstones in November, six or eight in∣ches
ches deep in the earth. T. T. 15.Pineapple corness set. Set the Pineapple cornel (first steeped in wa∣ter three dayes) in October, November, February, and March, four inches deep. 16. Set Peach-stones the sharp end downward,Peach stones set. in November, four or five in∣ches deep. T. T. 17.Springs & plants set Set springs and plants in harvest. 18.Branches to root in the ground. If a Plant put forth many stalkes or branches from the root, and you would have each branch to root, then bear up the earth about them to some reaso∣nable height, either with tills or brickbats; and in that earth, every branch will root. (Quare, if your branch will root at any
part but in a joynt, about the which also, with a great aule you must pricke many holes even to the wood,) This is a necessary secret in all such plants as be straight and stisse, and not apt to bow, or to be laid along within the earth. By Mr. Pointer. 19.O'd tree or vine recodered How to recover an old decaying tree or Vine, with bloud, and pigeons dung, see among the Flowers Numb. 34. 20.Orchard of dwarf trees. An Orchard of dwarf-trees, that may be defended from all frosts, see among the Flowers, Numb. 32. 21.Early fruit How to have early fruit, see among the Flowers Numb. 33.
22.Fruit growing long. Plant Dwarse Trees, and when the fruit is al∣most ripe, bow down their branches with their fruit upon them, into great ear∣then pots, or pitched tubs, either with bottomes, or without bottomes, the pots or tubs standing in the Earth; then cover them with boards and earth from the sun, and the sap of the Tree will keep them grow∣ing a long time, as I sup∣pose. Prove this in greene fruit,Blossoms frō frests. ripefruit, and almost ripe fruit; also in the bloo∣ming time, if you fear frosts bow downe the branches with the blossoms, as before to defend them in May, from the injury of the wea∣ther: and by this help you
may happily have Fruit, when others shall want. 23.Grapes growing long upon the Vine. Put a Vine branch through a basket in Decem∣ber, chuse such a one as is like to beare grapes; fill the basket with earth, and when the Grapes are ripe, cut off the branch under the basket:Plums and Cherries growing long. keep the basket abroad, whilst the weather is warme; and within doors in cold weather, in a con∣venient place: Prove this in plummes and cherries, &c. 24.Trees to prosper Make divers holes with a croe of iron, round about the bodies of your Trees; and about Alhallon∣tide, pour Oxe bloud into the holes, cover them with earth, and this will make
your trees to prosper well. Probatum in Apricot trees,Apricots to prosper By Mr. Andr. Hill. If you do this at the Spring, the smell of the bloud will of∣fend you; and therefore this practice is best for the Winter season. 25. Plant the shoots of Sallow,Speedy woods. Willow, Alder, and of all swift growing trees, being of seven yeares growth, sloping off both the ends one way, and lay∣ing the sloaped ends to∣wards the ground, let them be of the length of a billet, bury them a reasonable depth in the ground, and they will put forth seven or eight branches, each of which will becom a tree in a short time. I take moyst
grounds to be best for this purpose: thus you may have speedy growing woods. 26. To make any branch of a tree to root,Branches to root. see among the Flowers, numb. 45. 27. Mixe green Cow∣dung and urine together,Trees frō Barking or canker. wash the trees with a brush so high as you think meet, once in two or three months, and it will keep the trees from barking with beasts, conies, &c. and the same doth also destroy the canker. 28. Take of the rich crust of one acre of ground,Rich mold for O∣chard or Garden. and therewith you may make any Garden, or Or∣chard ground, that is but a foot deep in goodnesse, of
what depth you please to make the rootes of your trees to prosper the better. 29. In high grounds and sandy,Depth for trees. set Trees deepe: in low grounds, and watry, plant them shallow; the shallower the better. By Master Hill. But by Taverner, you must set your Trees so, that the rootes may spread in the upper crust, which is the fruitfull part of the earth. This crust in some grounds is two foot; in some three foot; in some one foot; and in some but halfe a foot deepe: see the reason more at large, in his booke, page 34. 30. Lop,Procining Of trees. top, and proin all Trees in January, in the wane of the Moone, and
pare them over in March: so shall the bark cover his stock the sooner. 31. Slit the barke of all Trees that are bark bound,Trees baak∣bound, helped. in February, or March, in the increase of the Moon. 32. Refuse to grasse,Ill wea∣ther for Orchard works. plant, remove, lop, top, proin, to slit the barks of trees, or set or sow cornells, nuts or stones, in weather frosty or watry, and when the wind shall be East or North, or North-east. Yea, the best Oake felled under such a winde,Oak when not to be selled. will prove but wind-shaken timber. 33. Small Crabstock of three inches about,Bignesse of crabstock. or lesse, may be graffed. 34. Peare stocke,Bignesse of Pear stock and white thou ne. and white thorne stockes of the
same scantling, all of them about the length of twelve or twenty four inches. 35. Wild cherry stocks,Bignesse of wild chery stocks. three, four, or five foot long and three inches about, lit∣tle more, or lesse. 36. White plumstockes would be of the same big∣nesse.White plum∣stocks. 37. When the stocke is able to put forth in one yeare a shoot of a yard long,When a stock is to be graffed. then is it of strength suffici∣ent to bear a Cions; for then it sheweth to like the ground well; otherwise, it will never prove a fair tree. 38. A Peare or Warden,White thorn no stock for peare or warden; good for a medlar. grasled upon a white thorn, will be small, hard, cap∣pard, and spotted; but a Medlar may well be graf∣ted
upon a white thorne. Taverner. 39. The suckers of Quince trees,Suckers planted. and Filberds, will prove well being plan∣ted. Taverner. 40. For Chestnuts and Wallnuts,Nuts set. set the nuts one∣ly. Taverner. Rules for inoculation, or graf∣fing in the bud. 41. IF you graft in the bud,1 Close well in the bottom. be carefull to close the same well in the bottome of the scocheon; for there the sap riseth that maketh it to take. By Andr. Hill. 42.2 Time of grasting. From the eight of June until the 24 is the best
time to graft in the bud in plums and cherries, but specially in Apricots; but the surest rule is to do this work when you find the bark to come easily from the body. 43.3 Instru∣ment to graft with. Two parts of three in a Goos-quill taken a∣way in breadth, is an apt tool to take off a bud with∣all, without danger of hur∣ting the bud. By Master Pointer. Some commend a tool of Ivory; some do one∣ly slip off the bud and the bark together. 44.4 Losenge∣wise. Graffing, by taking off a bud losenge wise, and setting the same in another like place upon a stock, is good. By Master Pointer. This is done at such time,
as is sit to graft in the ci∣ons. 45.5 What to do when the bud taketh. When your bud takes, then in March after, cut off all that groweth a∣boue it, stripping away all the buds that put forth: and that which remaineth serveth to leade up the branch of the bud to keepe it straight, and to defend it from breaking with the wind. 46.6 The low∣est bud maintain∣ed. If you graft two or three buds upon one tree, and they all do take, main∣taine onely the lowest, and preserve and strengthen the same with some neither branch, as before in num. 45. 47.7 A cherry upon a plum tree. A Cherry prospereth well upon a Plum stocke; but not e contra: and there∣fore,
if you graft a Cherry in the bud upon a branch, or bough, of a Plumtree that doth beare, you may make the same Tree to bear both Plums and Cherries. Proved by Mr.8 Grafting compasses. Hill. 48. A pair of Compasses made flat at the ends, and sharp with edges, is an apt instrument to cut away the bark for inoculation, both for a true breadth and di∣stance all at once. And so likewise with the same you may take off the bud, truly to fit the same place again in the stocks some Compas∣ses are made flat at one end, and sharp at the other. 49.9 Galy preserved in the stock. You must have care in this grafting, not to hurt or bruise the gelly next the
stock which must minister sap to your bud. 50.10 Gelly in the bud preserved. Also when you have taken off your bud, clip the sides of the bark whereon the bud standeth, with a pair of Scissors, very even, in a square form; or rather somewhat longer then broad: for if you cut the Bark at the ends with a knife, laying the inside up∣on any board, you will hurt the gellie in the inside, and then the bud will never take. 51.11 Bud to take no ayre. Make the place rea∣dy for inoculation, and re∣move not your bud before you mean to place it, for ta∣king of too much ayre. 52.12 How to slit the bark. When you have cut down the bark on either
side, and likewise at the top, leave the bottome of the barke whole, and then slip down the bark; and be∣tweene the barke and the Tree, put in the bud, and bind the loose barke of the Tree upon your bud, and by this meanes your graf∣ting will take more cer∣tainly. The lesser your slit is, and the closer that your bud fitteth the slit, it it the likelier to take. 53. Take off your bud from a sprig of the last years shoot,13 What buds are best. for that is best for this purpose; by Mr. Andr: Hill. 54. Make an overthwart cut at the bottom,14 How to slit the bark. and then begin your slit upward, putting up your bud from
the bottome of your slit, closing well at the bottom, This is contrary to the common course, which be∣ginneth at the top, with a slit downward. Graffing of a Cions. 55. A Tool of Ebony,1 Grasting tocl or Box, is bet∣ter to open the bark than a toole of Iron, if you would graft a cions betweene the bark and the tree. By Master Pointer: for Mars tainteth the sap presently. 56. Grafting whipstocke wise,2 Splicing way. and letting in the ci∣ons into the stock by a slit, is good for young Trees, that spring upot stones, or
pippins, being of theee of foure yeares growth, and not above. Some call this the splicing way. 57. Grafting upon a old tree,3. Cleaving he body. by cutting off the head, and one inch from the center by striking in a small iron wedge, and as it eleaveth by following the same with your knife; and so on either side, placing of a cions, sap to sap; this is a way of grafting used by Master Pointer of Twicknam. 58. Graft within a foot of the ground,4. Low grafting. if you would have the fruit to grow low, and easie to be gathered; and this is also thought a fit way to make your cions to take, because the sap riseth speedily to the cions.
59. Graft your cions on that side the stock,5 On which side to graft. where it may take least hurt with the south-west wind (be∣cause it is the most com∣mon, and the most violent wind that bloweth in the spring, and summer:) so as that wind may blow it to the stock, and not from the stock. 60. If you would have faire and kindly Cherry trees,6 How to have large Cherries. set the stones of Cher∣ries, of the same kind as your bud or cions is of, and at three of foure yeares, you may graft thereon, accor∣ding to the manner, spoken of before, in Numb: 57 viz. great Cherries, upon stocks that carry great cherries. 91. Some think it good,7 What ci∣ons is best.
that your cions have some of the former yeares shoot with it, that it may be the stronger to graft, and abide to be put close into the stock; and perhaps it will forward the sam in bearing. 62. It is the best way,8 Cions put in close. to put in your cions in the graffing as close and straight as you may: neither are you here to fear the pinching of the stocke, unlesse it bee where you graft in a deepe clift of a large body. 63. So likewise you may graft,9 The ci∣ons made the stock. upon a bearing bough of an Apple tree, a contrary Apple; and when that cions is growne great enough to receive another graft, you may graft a contrary fruit thereon; but an Apple cions
doth not agree with a Peare stocke,Uponwhat stock to graft. (not e contra) nor a Plumme upon an Apple or peare stock, neither will any Cions of a Fruit Tree take upgn an Elme stocke; pro∣ved by Master Hill. 64. A Quince may well be grafted upon a Medlar stock:to Quinces upon a Medlar. and a Medlar will grow, but not prosper so well upon a Quince stocke, because the Cions will out∣grow the stocke; proved by Master Hill. 65. Unlesse the utter∣most rind or barke of your stocke be very gentle and thin,11 Bark when to slit. it is best to slit the same along: but hurt not the innermost barke when you graft between the bark and the tree By Mr. An. Hill.
66. Before you graft your cions,12 Prepa∣sing the cions. take a way a little of the uppermost barke on ei∣ther side the edge, but hurt not the greenish part. 67. If your bark and cions are both straight,13 When to graft deep. then may you graft the deeper into the stock, viz. foure inches, and that is a very sure way to make the Cions to take, so as you joyne sap to sap well; but if either the stock or cions be crooked, then two inches are sufficient. By Mr. And: Hill. 68. You may graft an Apple cions at Christmas,14 Gras∣ting at Christmas. so as you graft the same very deepe into the stocke, viz. four inches, or three at the least, and close it well: for, though the sap rise not, yet
the moysture of the stock is sufficient to preserve the cions, untill the sap do rise; proved by Mr. And: Hill. 69. Long Mosse,15 Graft bound with mosse well bound about the head of your stock and of an inch or more in thicknesse, is sufficient alone to keep out both wind and water from the stock where the cions is let in. This must be re∣paired again at Midsomer. 70. Close your Cions with red or green wax,16 Closing the cions. ha∣ving a little butter therein about the slit: and this both keepeth out the wind, and maketh the sap to creepe under, and cover the slit the sooner. 17 Peach upon a plum stock 71. A peach may well be grafted or inoculated in
a plmme stocke, and will thrive better then upon his own stock. 72. If two Trees grow together,18 One ree let into ano∣ther. that be apt to be grafted one into another, then let one brach into an other workmanly joyning sap to sap. 73. If you have three or foure good buds next the foot of the cions,19 Length of a cions. that cions is long enough to be graf∣ted; and so you may make divers cions of one branch, where you cannot get plen∣ty of cions. 74. Close all your incisi∣ons upon small and young stocks,20 Artifi∣iall wax to close with. with a mixture con∣sisting of green wax, or red wax: and if your wax be old, melt the same, and
adde some fresh turpentine thereto, or else you may use pitch instead of wax, ad∣ding Turpentine: but let there be alwayes in your wax, one fifth, or one sixth part of butter, to keep the same supple; and when you have applyed this salve close to the joynts, then strew thereon the fine pow∣der of dryed earth, which you must have alwayes ready; and that keepeth it hard in the sun-shine: This is the onely composition to make the bark to cover the stock. You must first after your grafting, binde the stock and the cions toge∣ther, with the bands of Brawne, and then lay your tempered wax thereon;
and if the band continue whole, you shall cut it in sunder about August follow∣ing; by Andr: Hill. 75. You may carry your cions in this manner,21 How to carry a cions far. a long journey without endange∣ring them: First, wax over the ends with the artificiall Wax, (mentioned before in Numb: 74.) then role them up in great store of greene Mosse moystened, and tye them, and then put them into a case or box of wood, and so carry them; By And: Hill: You may keep a cions fourteen dayes or 3 weekes in grafting time, so, as it be done before March, by sticking the same in your window onely; yet some will have ends of them
dipped in the compounded wax, as before in Numb: 74. 76. Alwayes be carefull when you graft upon your stocks the splicing way, 22 Upon large fruited stocks. that your stocke be of as large a kind of fruit, or lar∣ger, then the Cions, or else it will not be able to feed the Cions: or else you must graft upon larger stocks, if the cions be of a large fruit, and the stock but of a small fruit. 77. Plant an Apricot in the midst of other plumme Trees round about it,23 Many Apricot Trees of one. at a convenient distance; then in an apt season, bore tho∣rought your plum Trees, and let in to every one of them, one or two of the branches of your Apricot tree, tho∣rough
rough those holes, taking away the barke on both sides of your branches which you let in, joyning sap to sap, and lute the holes up with tempered loame; and when they are well knit, the next year cut off the branch from the A. pricot Tree: and so you have gotten many Apricot Trees out of one. Take a∣way in time all the head of your plum Tree, and all o∣ther branches maintaining onely that which is gotten from the Apricot. But some commend rather the leting in of a branch of one Tree, into the other, worknanly, for the more certaine kinde of grafting. 24 Obser∣vation in stock. 78. Plant every stocke
with one leading branch, at the least, to carry up the sap: and after your stocke hath growne one year, and maketh good shew of liking the ground, then graft your cions upon it, leaving one or two leaders; but none so high as to overtop your ci∣ons: and when your cions is well taken, then cut a∣way your leaders, and all other spires; and so your cions will prosper excee∣dingly. By Andr. Hill. 79. Some hold opinion, that if when others begin to graft in the slit,25 Head∣ing of stocks, and grafting after. you doe then cut off the head of your stock, leaving one branch near the head to lead the sap, and then after cold weather is all past, if
you graft in the slit, that so your stock and cions will prosper far better, then if you had grafted the same in the slit at the first. By Andr: Hill. But then yon must re∣member to take away the leader, that the sap may more plentifully feed the cions. 80. Some doe cut off all their cions in the Winter,26 When to cut down a cions. viz. either in November, or December, and then lay them in earth; and in the new Moone of March or Aprill, they graft them, and they prove exceeding well; per∣swading themselves, that no knife is so sharpe, but that it will hurt the barke orgelly of the cions, if the
cions should be cut downe when the sap is up. This of Mr. Colborne; who com∣mendeth this course, upon long experience. And if you graft those cions upon such forward trees,Upon what stock to graft. as have put out their sap very plentifully, they will pros∣per exceeding well; be∣cause being hungry, and almost starved for want of nourishment, they take hold of the sap that ariseth from the stocke, very ea∣gerly. 81. Note,27 Stocks when to graft. that your stocks may put forth buds, yea, small leaves; and yet you may safely graft upon them. 28 Stockss to prosper 82. If you would have your stocks of your young
grafted Trees to prosper, and grow exceedingly, then suffer the water∣boughs to grow up with the stock, till the bodies be as big as your arme, and then prune them at your pleasure; for by this meanes the sap doth rise more lusti∣ly, when it hath many branches to draw from the root. 83. You may graft in the Cions,29 Late, grafting, yet with advantage a Moneth after other men, and yet have a longer shoot than they, the same yeare, in this manner: Cut off the head of your stock when other men do (which many times falleth out to be in very cold weather) then cover your stock over with your artificiall wax,
(as before in Numb. 74.) and one moneth after, or when all cold weather is past, crop your stock one inchlower, and then graft your cions; and then (cold weather being past) the sap will rise very plentiful∣ly to maintaine the cions. Proved by Master Andr. Hill. 84. Graft not upon any young stock,30 When to graft a stock. till it be able to put forth a shoot of a yard long in one yeare (which sometimes will not happen, till it have been of two or three years growth) for till it put forth abun∣dance of sap, it will never feed the cions sufficiently. proved by Master Andr. Hill. 85. The stocks of black Cherry Trees,31 Stocks so great cherriet. are best to
graft the great Cherry up∣on; proved by Mr. Colborne. 86. To have your Nur∣sery full of stocks to graft on,32 Store of stocks. sow the stampings of crabs; which are common∣ly: full of Cornells; By Mr. Kirwin. 87. Let your Nursery consist alwayes of a more barrain ground then your Orchard,33 Ground for a Nursery. whither you meane to remove your stocks and grafts. So like∣wise,A rule for transplan∣ting of Trees. if you transplant any Fruit trees, bring them al∣wayes from a worse ground to a better, or else they will never prosper. 88. Slope your stockes which you meane to graft on,34 Stocks stopped. like Colts feet before you graft them: for so the
bark will cover the sooner, and the raine shooteth from the stock the better. Proved by Master Colborne. 89. If you would have your graft to beare quick∣ly,35 Cions to beare quickly. one speciall help is, to take it out of a bearing branch. 90. At the beginning of the yeer,36 The times of severall grafting. and before the sap doe rise, you may graft in the body of the stock, or by way of splicing upon every little branch of your Tree (but alwayes remember to take off the top of your ci∣ons, having any leaves up∣on it:) when the sap is up, then you must graft be∣tweene the barke and the stock; and then the sap is so plentifully risen, that
the barke will easily pill from the body, then may you graft in the bud, or leafe. How to graft at Christmas, See before in Numb. 69. 91. To graft Roses,37 Plants upon trees or hearbs upon trees, see among the Flowers, Numb. 49. 92. Graft the small end of the cions downward;38 Fruit without stones, and hidden with leaves. and so of pears and apples; and they will have no coar. Quaere, of glummes grafted upon a Willow, to come without stones. Also, such apples and pears thus graf∣ted, will for the most part hang under the leaves, and not be seene, unlesse you come under the trees: By S. 93. A grafted Apricot is the best:39 Apricot grafted. yet from the stone
you shall have a faire Apri∣cot, but not so good; and the grafted is more tender then the other. By S. 94. Graft a Medlar upon a Quince,40 A large Medlar. and it will bring a faire and large Medlar: By S. 95. A cion of a pippin,41 A pip∣pin upon what stock grafted upon a crab-stock, is more kindly, and keep∣eth better, without touch of canker, then being graf∣ted upon a pippin. By Mr. Simson. 96. Trees that bear ear∣ly,Why trees transplan∣ted doe alter. or often in the yeare, as Peare Trees upon VVindsor∣hill, which beare three times in a yeare; these, though they be removed to as rich, or richer ground, yet they do seldom bear so early, or
so often, except the soyle be of the same hot nature, and have the like advantages of situation, and other cir∣cumstances, with those of VVindsor. And therefore commonly, the second fruit of that Pear tree be∣ing removed, doth seldome ripen in other places. By Master Hill. 97. All those fantasticall conceits,Colour, sent, or taste alte∣red. of changing the colour, taste, or sent, of any Fruit, or Flower, by infu∣sing, mixing, or letting in at the bark, or at the roots of any tree, hearb, or flower, of any coloured, or aroma∣ticall substance, Master Hill hath by often experience sufficiently controlled: and though some Fruits and
flowers, seeme to carry the sent or taste, of some aroma∣ticall body, yet that doth rather arise from their own naturall infused quality then from the hand of man. 98. Some do never graft betweene the bark and the tree,Graft be∣tween bark and tree. but in old stocks. 99. Lop the branches of your trees alwayes in Win∣ter,How to lop. before the sap doe rise within ten or twelve in∣ches of the trunk; and in the Spring, when the sap is up, cut those branches close to the trunk: And so shall you both have your tree lusty, because no sap is left in those vast branches (which would have beene lost, if you had proined them according to the usu∣all
all manner, in March, or A∣prill) and also the sap will then come purling out, and soone cover the Wood; whereby you shall avoid those blemishes in your trees, which others procure by proining them in the Winter. By Master Andr. Hill. 100. Quaere,To have green trees in winter. what hearbs, flowers, or branches of trees, may be grafted upon the bay or holly tree, or any such tree as keepeth green to Winter, to make them also carry green leave in Winter. 101. Pare your ground with a shod shovell,Orchard ground to order. so of∣ten as any grasse or weedes begin to put forth, both in your nursery and orchard;
and so shall you both keepe the ground mellow, and the raine shall have better passage unto the roots of your trees. By Masters Poin∣ter; who keepeth Coines in his Orchard, onely to keepe downe the grasse low, be∣cause otherwise it would be very chargeable.Vineyard to order. Also, in Vineyards, the use is to turne up the grounds with a shallow Plough, as often as any grasse offereth to spring: but I thinke, that prevention of graffe, both in Orchard and Vineyard, is much better, if in were not too costly. 102. Upon the Epiphany,Tree roo∣ted higher See after in 106. by reason of a great storme, an Apple Tree, that had not beene very fruitfull before,
was almost blowne up by the roots at Hackney; and after with Ropes it was drawne upright, and the what mounted, and the Root covered with earth; and that Tree, the next Sommer, bare an exceeding great burden of fruit. 103. When your Apple Cornells are of two yeares growth,Wreathed bodies of trees. then set a long straight stick by each of them, winding the young stocke about the stick; by little and little as it grow∣eth, and fastning it with bands under the stick, and so it will grow in a wrea∣thed form. 104. Quaere,Fruit en∣larged. If nipping off the new and tender tops about blossoming time
will not make sommer fruit trees to blossome speedily, or to enlarge the fruit. 105. If an old Tree that is spent,Barren trees to beare. and hath done bea∣ring, be underpropped, so as the body sink not, and that the earth be after ta∣ken away from under all the roots, and instead there∣of, good rich mold be con∣veyed into the void places, that so an old tree will flo∣rish againe, and beare fruit. See before in Numb. 103. 106. The Lord Zouch,Transplan∣ting old trees. in Winter, in the yeare 1597 (and Master And. Hill) thinketh moist weather is best, that the earth cleaving to the roots, may be also removed with them, the earth being fast bound
with Fearn branches to the roots) removed diverse ap∣ple trees, damson trees, &c. being of thirty or forty years growth, at Hackney: the earth was digged in a good large compasse from the roots, the roots little hurt; holes were prepared for each tree before hand, enriched with fresh and good earth; and branches and tops taken off almost close to the trunk; and they were planted again in the same hower wherein they were removed; and the roots placed towards the same point of the com∣passe as they first grew. He had a few damsons the first year, and all put forth leaves at Michaelmas after, anno 1598.
107. Blood laid at the roots of old Vines,Old Vines recovered hath been commended for an excellent substance to har∣ten them, unto Mr. Andrew Hill. 108. If you cut any Vines when the sap is up,Bleeding of Vines stayed. presently cover the place with good store of Turpen∣tine, and it will stay bleed∣ing. Proved by Mr. Melinus. Some commend the straight binding of a packthred a∣bout the bark thereof: some sear with a hot iron, and drop hard wax presently upon it. 109. By the opinion of some men,Early fruits. if outlandish fruit Trees be planted in England, they do strive to put forth blossoms, and to
bring fruit at the same time with us, as they did in their naturall places, un∣lesse the extremity of cold doe nippe or hinder them. And this seemeth to them to be the reason, why the Black thorne at Glassenbury Abbey, did use to blossome at Christmas, because happi∣ly the plant was brought from such a climat, as where it did blossome at the same time of the year. 110. If your Trees stand in wet grounds,Wet Or∣chard hel∣ped. some doe advise to lay lime on the face of the ground, to help the bearing of the trees. 111. If whilst you main∣taine some suckers to your stock,The Cions to prosper (because the stock is not yet so big as your arme)
your Cions doth not pros∣per to your mind, then nip off the buds that grow up∣on the suckers, now and then in the midst, till your cions thrive according to your owne desire. 112. In proining of your Fruit Trees,True proining or of any other shrub or plant bearing fruit you must alwayes have re∣spect, whether it beare his Fruit upon the first, second, or third yeares sprowt; for you must never cut away all the bearing sprowts, if you meane to have any Fruit. As, in Pippins, the third yeares sprowt doth onely beare Fruit; and in some other Fruit Trees; onely the second yeares sprowts; in Gooseberries,
the last years sprouts bear most, by Mr. Andr. Hill. 113. When your Trees are young,Timber to grow of a∣ny fashion. you may bow them to what compass you will, by binding them down with packthread to any cir∣cular form, or other shape that pleaseth one best. And by this means your Timber will growe fit for Ships, Wheels, &c. where∣by great waste of Tim∣ber in time would be a∣voided. 114. Mix Cow-dung and Horse-dung well rotted,Apricots to beare. with fine earth and Claret wine Lees, of each a like quantity, baring the roots of your Trees in Jan. Febru∣ary, and March: and then apply of this mixture to
the roots of your Apricot Trees, and so cover them with common earth: by this means, such Apricot Trees as never bare before, have brought forth great store of fruit. Prove this in other Trees. This of Mr. Andr. Hill. 115. Pears,Peare, Warden, Peach, in what ground. Wardens, and Peaches, delight in Clay grounds. 116. When you plant any Tree,How to use the roots in settings. presse not down the Roots together, with laying earth confusedly up∣on them, but extend every branch by it self, and cover it loosly with earth, accor∣ding to that form wherein it did first growe. By Mr. Colborn.Apricot, in what ground. 117. Apricots like well
in sandy ground. 118. Some hold opini∣on,Dwarf trees. that if one set the slips of an Apple Tree, and so of divers other Trees, that these will prove Dwarfe Trees. And so of the Tree that beareth a white flower as big as a Rose,Gelder∣land Rose. called the Gelderland rose. 119. From May to the end of July,Dwarf trees. you may take off the bark from any bough of a Tree, round about the bough foure inches deep, if the bough be as large as a mans wrist; or else a lesse depth will serve. If the bough be lesse in compasse cover the bare place; and somwhat above and below, with loame well tempered with Horse dung, binding
downe the loame with hay, and brawn ban ds upon the hay: and so let it rest till about Alhallontide: And then within two or three dayes of the first New Moon, cut off the bough in the bare place, but in any case cut not the green bark above it; and then set it in the ground, and it will grow to be a faire Tree in one yeare, according to the length of the bough. Quaere, of watering the loam now and then. Yet in reason, me thinkes it a likelier course, to clap a gilliflower pot made of purpose in two halfes, with a great hole in the bottome, about such an arme; and after you have bound the pot well with
wier, then to fill it with good earth, which you may better water in dry wea∣ther, than you can do the lump of loam. You may al∣so use a twig no bigger than ones finger, in the same manner. Yet some do ra∣ther commend the binding of the loam, or earthing the Tree, with a pot about it, without taking away any bark at all, but only prick∣ing many holes with a great aule, in that part of the bark which is covered with the loam or earth. You must re∣member to underprop the pot, or else to hang it fast to the Tree. Quaere, if a branch must not root at a joynt.How to lop Elms. 120. If you cut off the
top or head of an Elme, it will not leave rotting downward, till it be hollow, and doat within: but an Oake will abide heading and not rot. Also, the boughs or branches of an Elme, would be left a foot long, next to the Trunk when you lop them. This of an expert Carpenter. 121. To avoid sappinesse,Sappiness to avoid. fell both the bodies and the arms of Oaks and Elms in December after the frost hath well nipped them: and so your saplings, whereof raf∣ters, sparres, &c. are made, will last as long as the heart of the Tree, without having any sap. By the same man. 122. Take off a thin turfe of two foot,Young trees to grow. round about
each tree newly planted, co∣ver the same with Fearn, Pease straw, or such like, a handfull thick: water your Trees once a moneth, if the weather prove dry, with dung water, or common water, that hath stood in some open pit in the sun. This keepeth the ground loose from baking; whereby the Tree will prosper the better, and put forth shoots of three and four foot in one year: remember you do not set any Tree above one foot deep, or little more, & give each Tree some props for the first yeare, that the wind shake it not too much. And yet some, of good experi∣ence, doe hold, that it skil∣leth not how much a young
tree be shaken (so as it be not blown up by the roots) and that it prospereth so much the better. 123. Quinces growing a gainst a wall,Delicate Quinces. lying open to the sun, and defended from cold windes, eate most deli∣cately. This secret the Lord Darcy brought out of Italy. quaere, of all other Fruits. 124. Set Peach stones in a dry ground,Peach and Apricot stones to set. where there is no water within three or four foot; for this tree hath one root that will run deep into the ground: and if it once getteth into the water the Tree dyeth. The stone bringeth forth a kindly Peach. Set Peach and Apri∣cot stones in pots of earth, within doors in February;
keep the earth moist, by wat ring now & then; trans∣plant them in March into your Orchard. By S. 125. In the end of March,Sap of tree to gather gather the sap of the Trees within a foot of the ground: but take off the first bark, & then slit the white bark o∣verthwart wise, even to the body of the Tree; but slit onely that part of the bark which standeth South-west, or between South & West, because little or no sap ri∣seth from the North, or North-east side. After you have slit the Tree, open the slit with your knife, so as you may let in a leafe of a Tree, first fitted to the breadth of the slit; and from this the sap will drop, as it
doth in filtration. Take a∣way the leaf, and the bark will close again; earthing it with a little earth upon the slit. By S. 126. Cut away all the idle shoots of the last year,Fair Apri∣cots and Cherries in your Apricot and Cherry Trees, before Christmas some three weeks, to make your fruit the fairer. 127. If you would stay the sap of Trees from rising,To stay blossom∣ing. to make your Trees to blossom later, thereby to avoid frosts in blooming time, then hack crosse-wise, viz. overthwart the Tree, upon so much of the Tree as is within the ground, even down to the root, and then cover it again with earth. Hack it very thick, even
thorough all the bark to the very Wood, in the new Moone three weekes before Christmas, if they be Apple trees, pear trees, or warden trees: but for Apricots, doe this rather in the full of the Moone, next before Christ∣mas; but crosse hack your cherry trees and peach trees in the new moon next after Christmas: and so you shall have your blossomes, and by consequence your fruit, come later then other mens doe, because the sap cannot rise. I thinke you must also hack the maine root. Cuaere. By S. 128. If you would make a tree in a short time to cast his leaves,Green trees in Autumne. and thereby to bring forth young leaves,
which will last upon the tree fresh and green, when all other Trees have lost their leaves; then crosse hack the bark, close to the wood about Midsomer.Quaere, if the Moon be here to be respe∣cted. In all the crosse hackings here mentioned, let every of them be halfe an inch, or thereabout, distant one from another; and every rank of hacks, one inch a∣bove another, or therea∣bout. Also, this practice to avoid the fall of the leafe, must be done but every se∣cond yeare to any Tree, for fear of destroying the same. 129. But if in January,Bodies of trees to enlarge. Bark∣bound. or before the sap doe rise, you hack the body long-wise, and not overthwartly, and that only thorough the first
bark, and no further; this will make the bodies of your Trees to swell, and burnish the better, to main∣tain their heads or grafts. 130. And if by over∣thwart hacking you would only kill the mosse of Trees,To kill Mosse. then let your overthwart backs be thorow the bark, even to the wood: and this you must do between Alhal∣lontide and S: Andrews day; viz. so soon as the leaves be off the Tree, both to avoid mosse, and to make barren Trees to bear. You must make these hacks with the nether corner, or point of a small hatchet, so as every notch may be about half an inch long: and hack the body the height of a man;
viz. one row of hacks, two inches below one another; all over the body: but let there be a distance between the overthwart hacks, so as they may not meet in a round ring, like a circle, about the tree: and by this meanes the uppermost bark whereon the mosse grew, will in time fall clean away, and the mosse with it, and the tree will gather a new bark. And though the tree be thus hacked but to a mans height, yet the tree will beare much better the next yeare. But when your leisure serveth, crosse-hack all the body in this manner, even to the trunk, as also a part of every great arme that groweth next the tree:
Note, that in seven years the Tree will bee bark∣bound, and so mossie again, as at the first: and therefore once in seven yeares you must renew this work. By S. 131. But if your tree bear not,A Tree to root higher. because it was planted too deepe at the first, then take away the earth from the body of the tree; and a little below the uppermost face of the ground, prick the body of the Tree clean thorough the bark, full of holes, with a pretty round aule or bodkin, of a reaso∣nable bredth. Then cover the body with earth, and divers new roots will issue, to make the same fruitfull. 132. And if your Tree beare not well,Sap choa∣ked. by reason
that all the sap runneth in∣to leaves,Barren trees to beare. which is a com∣mon fault in divers Orch∣ards, then to check the sap, cut off all the young roots that grow about the master roots; and crosse hack the body under the ground, and likewise the maine roots, as before (Num. 131.) to avoid mosie, and cover the Tree with earth againe: for by this meanes the sap is kept from rising up too plentifully. By S. 133. All barrennesse,Causes of barrenness in trees. or unfruitfulnesse in Trees, doth for the most part arise, either by reason of their mossinesse, whose cure is set downe before in Numb. 131. or because they are bark-bound; whose remedy
is also in Numb. 130. or be∣cause they were planted too deepe, whose remedy is in Num. 132. or by reason that the sap, which should turne into fruit, runneth together, or for the most part into leaves: and this is remedied also in Numb. 133. 134.App'es without wrinckles. Gather not your Pippins till the full Moon, after Michaelmas; so may you keepe them a whole yeare without shrinking: and so of the grapes, and all other fruits; so of Onion seeds, Annis seeds, and other seeds, which you would keepe full and plump. By S. 135.Respect between the stock and cions. Let your tree where∣on you graft, be more for∣ward then the cions; viz:
let it either have bigger buds then the cions hath, or small leaves: but the cions is best that hath onely red buds, and no leaves. 136.Cherries in clusters I have seen Cherries∣grow in clusters like Fil∣berts, viz. 2, 3, 4, and 5. up∣on one stalk. Cuaere, if it be not performed in this man∣ner; Joyne 2, 3, 4, or 5. leaves with the buds in one flit to∣gether, by way of incoulati∣on, and so leave them. Here I will conclude with a conceit of that delicate Knight, Sir Francis Carew; who, for the better accom∣plishment of his Royall en∣tertainment of our late Queen of happy memory, at his house at Beddington, led her Majesty to a Cherry
tree, whose fruit he had of purpose kept back from ripening, at the least one moneth after all Cherries had taken their farewell of England. This secret he per∣formed, by straining a Tent or cover of canvas over the whole tree, and wetting the same now and then with a scoope or horne, as the heat of the weather required▪ and so, by with-holding the sun-beames from reflecting upon the berries, they grew both great, and were very long before they had gotten their perfect cherry colour: and when he was assured of her Majesties comming, he removed the Tent, and a few sunny dayes brought them to their full maturity.
A Philosophicall Garden: with a touch at the vegetable work in Physick, whose prin∣cipall fire is the Stomach of the Ostrich. FIrst, pave a square plot with brick, (and if it be covered with plaister of Paris, it is so much the better) making up sides of brick also plaistered likewise: let this be of a convenient depth, fill it with the best vegetable ♄ which you can get, that hath stood two yeares, or one at the least, quite within his owne Spheare: make contrition of the same; and be sure to avoid all ob∣structions, imbibe it with Aqua coelestis in a true proportion, grind it once a day till it be dry: being dry, let it stand two or three days without any imbibition, yt it may the better attract from all the hea∣venly
influence, continuing then also a Philosophical contrition every day (this grinding must also be used in the vegetable work where the ☿ of hearbs is used instead of aqua coelestis) during all the time of preparation: then plant what rare flowers, fruits, or seeds, you please therein. And (if my Theory of Nature deceive me not this ♄ so enriched from the heavens, without the help of any manner of soyl, marle, or compost (after one years revolution) will make the same to flourish and fructifie in a strange and admirable man∣ner: yea, I am perswaded, that it will receive an Indian plant, and make all vegetables to prosper in the highest degree, and to bear their fruits in England, as natu∣rally as they do in Spain, Italy, or elsewhere. So likewise of that Walnut∣tree, planted within the limits of the aforesaid Abby, which on
St. Barnabias Eve standeth bare, and naked without leaves; and upon the day it self, richly clo∣thed with his green vesture. I could remember many Phi∣losophical plants in England, were it not that the losse of Rip∣ley's life, that renowned Alchy∣mist, who suffered death (as the secret report goeth) for making a Pear-tree to fructifie in Winter, did command an altum silentium in these matters: but it was the denial of his medicine, and not the crime of conjuration, which was but colourably laid to his charge, that wrought his over∣throw. Nay, if the earth it self, after it hath thus conceived from the clouds, were then left to bring forth her own fruits and flowers in her own time, and no seeds or plants placed therein by the hand of man, it is held very probable (unlesse for the sin of our first Pa∣rents,
begun in them, and mighti∣ly increased in us, the great God of Nature, even Natura naturans, should recall, or suspend those fructifying blessings which at the first he conferred upon his coe∣lestial Creatures) that this hea∣venly earth, so manured with the starres, would bring forth such strange and glorious plants, fruits and flowers, as none of all the Herbarists that ever wrote till this day, nor any other, unlesse Adam himselfe were alive againe, could either know, or give true and proper names unto these most ad∣mirable simples. Also, in the work of fructifica∣tion, I think that Corn it self may be so philosophically prepared, only by imbibition in the Philo∣sophers aqua vitae, that any bar∣ren ground, so as it be in nature kindly for Corn, shall bring forth a rich crop, without any matter added to the ground, and so with
a small or no charge, a man may sow yearly upon the same ground And he that knoweth how to lay his fallowes truely, whereby they may become pregnant from the heavens, and draw abundantly that coelestial and generative ver∣tue into the Mataix of the earth; this man, no doubt, will prove the true and philosophical Hus∣bandman, and goe beyond all the Countrey Coridons of the Land, though never so well acquainted with Virgils Georgicks, or with Master Bernhard Palisiy his conge∣lative part of raine water, which he calleth the Vegetable salt of Na∣ture: wherein though he observed more then either Varro, Columella, or any of the ancient Writers in this kind, did ever dream of; yet doth he come many degrees short of this heavenly mystery. Now, to give you some taste of that fire which the Philosophers
call the Stomach of the Ostrich, (without which the Philoso∣phers true and perfect Aqua vitae can never be made) you must un∣derstand, that it is an outward fire of Nature, which doth not onely keepe your Glasse, and the matter therein contained, in a true proportionable heat, fit for workmanship, without the helpe of any ordinary or material fire: but it is also an efficient and prin∣cipal cause, by his powerful na∣ture and pearcing quality, to stir up, alter and exalt, that inward fire that is inclosed within the Glasse in his owne proper earth. And therefore here, all the usual Chymical fires, with all their graduations, are utterly secluded; so as neither any naked fire, nor the heat of filings of Iron, of sand, of ashes, nor of Baln. Mar. though kept in a most exquisite manner, nor any of the fires en∣gendered by putrefaction, as of
dung and such like, no nor the heat of the Sun, or of a Lamp, or an Athanor (the last refuge of our wandring and illiterate Alchy∣mists) have here any place at all. So that by this fire and furnace onely, a man may easily discern a mercenary workman (if he deale in vegetables onely from a second Philosopher; and if in any thing (as no doubt in many things) then here especially vulgaris ocu∣lus caligat plurimum. This fire is by nature generally offered unto all, and yet none but the children of Art have pow∣er to apprehend it: for, being coe∣lestial, it is not easily understood of an elemental braine; and being too subtile for the sense of the Eye, it is left onely to the search of a divine wit: and there I leave it for this time. The physical use of this fire, is to divide a Coelum terrae, and then to stellifie the same with any
animall or vegetable star, where∣by in the end it may become a quintessence. Here I had thought to have handled that crimson coloured salt of Nature, so farre exceeding all other salts, in a true, quick, and lively taste, which is drawne from the Philosophers earth, and worketh miraculous effects in mans body; and withall, to have examined that strange opinion which Doctor Quercitanus, an excellent Theorist in Nature, and a great Writer in these dayes doth. violently maintaine, in his dis∣course upon Salt-peter. But because it is impertinent to this subject, and that I have dis∣coursed more at large thereon in my Abstract of Corn. Agrip. his Booke De occult. Philos. and for that Quercitanus doth shew him∣selfe to be a true Lover of Hermes Houshold, I will not straine my wit, to write against any particu∣lar
person that professeth himselfe to be of that family; although both he, and some others, as great as himselfe, must give me leave, whensoever I shall be forced in that Booke to handle the practi∣cal part of Nature, and her pro∣cesse, happily to weaken some principles and positions, which both he and they have already published; excusing my selfe with that golden saying of Aristtle, . Amicus So∣crates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. But I am affraid I have been too bold with vulgar wits, who take no pleasure to heare any man altius philosophari, that they can well understand; and therefore I have compiled this Book in plain termes, of such a Garden and Orchard as will better serve for common use, and fit their wits and conceits much better. FINIS.
ooks printed or sold by William Leake at the signe of the Crown in Fleetstreet between the two Temple Gates. A Bible of a faire large Roman letter, 4o. Tokt's Heraldy. Man become guilty, by Iohn Francis Senalt, & Englished by Henry Earl of Monmouth. Welby's second Set of Mu∣sique, 3 4 5 and 6 Paris. The Hstory of Vienna, and Paris. Callis learned Readings on the Stat. 21. H. 8. cap. 5. of Sewers. Sken' de fignificatione Verba rum. Posing of the Accidence. Delaman's use of the Hori∣zontall Quadrant. Corderim in English. Doctor Fulkis Meteors. Nyes Gunnery & Fireworks Gato Major, with Annotat. Mel Helliconium, by Alex. Riss Lizerillo de Tormes. The Ideot in four books. Aula Luck, or the house of Light. Topicks in the Laws of Engl Perkins on the Laws of Engl Wilkinsons Office of She iffs Parsons Law. Mirrour of Justice. The Fort Royall of Holy Scripture, or a new Con∣cordance by J. H A Tragedy written by the most learned, Hug Grotius, Called Chris Patiens, and Englished by George Sands Solitary devotions, with man in glory, by the most Reve∣rend and holy Father, An∣selm, Archbishop of Canter∣bury. Excitatio Scholastica. Mathernaticall Recreations with the Generall Horolo∣gicall Ring, and double Horizontall Dyall, by Wil∣liam Oghtred. PLAYES. Hero and Leander. The Wedding. The Hallander. Henry the Fourth. Maids Tragedy. King and no King. Philaster. The gratefull Servant. The strange Discovery. The Merchant of Venice
