P253 11864455 50070
A LITTLE VIEW OF THIS OLD VVORLD, IN TVVO BOOKS. I. A Map of Monarchy, Wherein the state of the World is represented under Kings, with their entrance, Reign, and Ends, from King Saul, to King Charls. II. An Epitomy of Papacy, VVherein is discovered the rise of Anti-christ, with the Entrance, Reign, and Ends of the Popes of Rome for 740 years, till the Pope was fully declared to be the Anti-christ. A Work fitted for the Press Five years agone, and now published, by Tho. Palmer, Pastor of a Church of Christ in Nottingham. LONDON, Printed for Livewell Chapman, and are to bee sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Crown in Popes-head Alley. 1659.
To the Council of State of the Common-Wealth of England. Honourable Worthies: THe Lord God Almigh∣ty is the original of all Created beings, and his glory is the great end he is carry∣ing on both in Earth and Heaven. Wisdome, Grace, and Power are the Essence of God, and from him∣self he made and governs the whole Creation independently, and none can say, Why hast thou done thus? There is some parity between a Saints Soul-state, and the true Church-state: Darkness and bon∣dage precedes light and comfort; sufferings goe before rest; Abra∣hams
true Seed are in AEgypt, they Gen. 15. 13. Exod. 12. 40, 41. pass the red Sea, and wander in a houling Wilderness, before they can possess the promised Land of Canaan: and all these former deal∣ings of God with his people in Co∣venant, were written for examples 1 Cor. 10 11. and types for us upon whom the ends of the world are come. Jeho∣vab hath not usually made great promises to his people, and inrich∣ed them with his Free Grace, but he hath brought them to live upon him by faith for the performance of the word that went out of his mouth; yet as God saw the state of future times, he was pleased still to discover and fore-tell to his suf∣fering Saints the enemies fall, and the Churches advance and glory in this world. The state both of the Jewish and Christian Church, as to their sufferings, union and glory, were fully represented in Daniels Vi∣sions, and Johns Revelations. When Jesus Christ was in the Flesh hee
was frequently Preaching, and in Parables representing the Churches suffering, and raised estate, and af∣ter him the Apostles taught the same things. The Prophets and A∣postles spake not only of the Chur∣ches future sufferings under the Beasts & false Prophet, the Dragon and the Whore, but God was plea∣sed also to compute and measure the time of Saints sufferings to their promised Redemption. In Christs fore-telling the events of time after his Resurrection, hee gives not his Disciples the number of years, but leaves with them seve∣ral fore-going signs of their promi∣sed Redemption, that both by com∣putation of time, and by signs, the Saints might the better finde the time of the Beasts reigns, and the appearing and Kingdome of Jesus Christ. Indeed Chronologies are imperfect, and I judge the very year of the Beasts fall, and Churches deli∣verance, Mat. 24. 36 cannot be asserted by man;
yet I humbly conceive, that both from computations and signs, God hath begun his Churches delive∣rance in these Nations. The Churches Restoration is as fully promised, as her afflicted state fore-told; and when the Dragon and the Whore have had their time of tyranny over the Saints, why should we not certainly beleeve and look for promised rest? If you please here to take a view of the Kings of the Earth, and examine Antichrists plots and practices, they have fulfil∣led the Word of God by the mouthes of his Prophets, and an∣swer them exactly, as face answers face in a Glasse. Great Senators, I may be bold to say, God hath honoured England a∣bove all the Nations of the earth, and you above many Sons of men, in making use of you to begin (and prosess your resolutions) for the e∣stablishment of Truth and Holiness in these Lands; it was only the Lords
free mercy that brought, and hath continued the Gospel in England a∣bove any Country and Kingdom in Europe; and may we not upon that ground beleeve, that appearing, and kingdom of the Son of Man promised shall here begin, and from hence run from Nation to Nation, till all the Vials of Gods Wrath be poured out upon the Churches enemies, & that great voyce out of the Temple in Heaven be fulfilled, saying, The King∣doms Rev. 11. 15. of this world are become the king∣doms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever? True∣ly the night is not yet past, and the Lords work in your hands is atten∣ded with great difficulty, yet you shall ever have a Pillar and a Cloud to guide and defend, if you keep your eye upon them. I think I may say, God now calls you to an unwonted work, the bringing in of the New 2 Pet. 3. 13 Dan. 7. 26, 27. Heavens, and New Earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness, which is the Kingdom of Saints in this World.
Carnal Counsellours, and worldly Politicians know little of the Lords designs at this day, and will doe as little in his work. God is now stai∣ning worldly glory, God is now ful∣filling promises to his Son, and his Saints, and none but the Spiritual∣wise Dan. 12. 10 understand the work before you. I beseech you look much to God, hearken after the teaching and light of the Spirit in the Churches of Christ, and so act that you may render up your account with joy, & not with fear. This is the end, and all of my desires in this little peice I humbly present you with, who shall rejoyce to bee found serviceable in his generation, to promote the great design of Jesus Christ, and shall a∣bide Your Honours real and faithful Ser∣vant in my Lords Work, Tho. Palmer. From my Lodging upon London Bridge, the 4th. Mon. 1659.
To all that beleeve, and look for the Kingdom of Christ, and glory of the New-Testamen-Church in this World. Precious souls, IT was the providence of my dear Father, when he took me from more rough imployment in the Warrs of England, to call me to preach the Gospel of Light in a dark cor∣ner; which was not without success and comfort to my soul, and refreshing to many at home and abroad: but after a little time Satan raised so great opposition a∣gainst some few painful Servants of the Lord, who (with my self) joyned freely to preach the Gospel on week-days from Town to Town where we were invited by any of the Lords people; that after the continuance of this course for about two years, and some light (especially in the order of the Gospel) brake forth, the Pa∣rish Ministers shut the doors of the Com∣man Meeting-places against us, and by de∣grees put an end to those fruitful and bles∣sed exercises. My more publick Ministra∣tion of the Gospel being so prevented, and
my preaching in my Parish-relation by the same spirit of Antichrist made very in∣effectual, that young Converts were stag∣gered about Church-order, and many Christians drew back; It was upon my heart to imploy my spare hours to prepare something for the Presse, and preach in Print, when I could not preach in other mens Pulpits. I was (for some time) un∣resolved of a Subject to write upon, but seeking to the Lord in Prayer, God set the sence of the old Dragons, and the Whore of Babylons long-continued Ty∣ranny over the Saints much upon my soul, and I judged it was now a time seasona∣ble, and a Work necessary afresh to take a view of this old World under Monarchi∣cal Tyranny in States, and under mystical Babylons usurpations over the Church of Christ. In the time of the Jewish Church-state, and for some time after the New-Testament-church-state was begun, Dani¦els four parted terrible Image, and his four monstrous Beasts, had all their answerable times and terms, that with Christs In∣carnation, Johns Serpent, or Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns, the Heathen Roman Empire was entered the stage of this World, and acted like himself. But as this Beast grew weak, and fell in power, the
great Whore, Mystery, Babylon, took her opportunity to get up, and rides that Scar∣let-coloured Rev. 17. 3 Beast to this day. Since the Pope, or Papacy hath ridden the Dragon or earthly Monarchy, the Whore hath made great use of the Kings of the Earth to ex∣ercise her bloudy cruelty upon the Saints, that have owned and sought those privi∣ledges where-with the Lord Jesus Christ hath made them free. What the Dragons and the Whores time and Tyranny hath been, is not unknown to many Saints, and light will break forth more and more to the perfect day. Large and vast are those Volumes which have been written upon these four great Empires of the World, and the Papacy of Rome; but these (for the greatest part) have been written in strange Tongues, and are in the studies of great Scholars, to little Spiritual use. When Nebuchadnezzar had taken Je∣rusalem, and setled the Empire of Baby∣lon in himself, his desires were to know what after should come to passe in the lat∣ter daies; His mind being thus busied, he had a Vision of a great and terrible I∣mage, whose head was of Gold, his brest and arms of Silver, his belly and his thighes of Brasse, his leggs of Iron, his
feet part of Iron and part of Clay; a stone cut out without hands, smote the Image upon his feet—and brake them to peeces—that no place was found for them; and the stone that smote the Image became a great Mountain, and filled the whole earth. This Vision was revealed from the Lord to Daniel, and by Daniel to King Dan. 2. 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Nebuchadnezzar, wherein is presented the future state of the world from that time to the Kingdom of Christ, or Kingdom of the Stone, and end of this old World. From that time the world was to bee under the successive government of four Kingdoms, of which Babylon was the first. And in the days of these Kings shall the God of Vers. 38. Heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed—but it shall break Vers. 44. in pieces, and consume all these King∣doms, and it shall stand for ever. The Lords revealing this dream, and the inter∣pretation Vers. 46, 47, 48. of it to Nebuchadnezzar, cau∣sed that Heathen King to give glory to God, as God of gods, and greatly honoured Daniel (as honoured of the Lord) to re∣veal the secret. I may hence infer, its now a work becoming the Lords people to be in∣quiring after light in this Prophecie, and be saying to the Lords Watch-men, as those of Sier, Watch-man, what of the night? Isa. 11. 11
watch-man, what of the night? that is, how much of the time of these four King∣doms are run out, or what remains yet to be fulfilled of them? when the fifth Kingdom is to begin? and the watch-men may an∣swer, The morning cometh, also the Vers. 12. night; that is, the morning for Saints, and the night for sinners. It was a mercy that the Lord should have this Prophecie as a ground for faith, and prayer to his people; but God hath a∣bundantly fore-told the suffering state of his Church under these four Kingdoms, hath by his Prophets and Apostles, which are now so plain, that Saints doe run and ead them. God Omniscient fore-seeing the need saints would have of support under so long me of sufferings, gives a further disco∣very of these four Kingdoms to the Pro∣phet Daniel, in the first year of Belshaz∣zer Dan. 7. 1 King of Babylon. In this Vision, these Ver. 3, 4, &c. ur Kings or Kingdoms are represented nder four monstrous Beasts, and these eat Beasts which are four, are (inter∣eted Ver. 17. of) four Kings, which should arise Ver. 18. t of the earth; and for a support to the The King∣dom of the Saints be∣gins with the fall of the four Monarchies rds people, the Angel also further adds, at the Saints of the most High shall ke the Kingdom, and possess the
Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever. The Babylonian Monarchy, the Me∣dian Dan. 2. 38 and Persian Monarchy, and the Dan. 8. 20, 21. Grecian Monarchy, are three of these four Kingdoms, expresly sonamed by, and to Daniel. And the fourth Beast which Dan. 7. 7 was dreadful and terrible, and strong ex∣ceedingly, can be no other than the Empire of Rome. Time hath now interpreted who the fourth Beast is, but Daniels fourth Rev. 12. 3 Beast, and the Apostle Johns Dragon, ar one and the same, and generally understood to represent the Roman Monarchy. Earth and Sea, Corruption and Confu∣sion The ori∣ginal of earthly Monarchy was the original of these Kingdoms and I may as truly say, Pride and Conten∣tion are the support of earthly Kings and Crowns. For the sake of Saints I have ga∣thered this Compendium of these four Kingdoms of Babylon, Media, and Per∣sia, Greece, and Rome, out of large an vast Volumes, to give light into Daniel Visions, and Johns Revelations. They that with serious thoughts shall read these few pages, and run down the line of Mo∣narchy in the several Beasts reigns, do no need Spiritual light, to discover what im∣placable enmity hath (at all times) run the veins of Kings against King Jesu and his Saints.
The Popes and Prelacy had the same o∣riginal with earthly Monarchy, and no less an enemy to the intrest of Christ and his Saints; the Papacy is a Beast arising out Rev. 13. 11. of the earth as well as Monarchy, yet hath Horns like a Lamb, but speaks as a Dra∣gon. This Whore hath not only drunk but Rev. 17. 6 hath been drunken with the bloud of Saints, and the Martyrs of Jesus, as well as Monarchy, and the time is now near that the Saints shall have commission from the Lord Jesus Christ, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, not only to give Babylon Rev. 18. 5, 6. bloud to drink, but to reward her double, according to her works, in the Cup which she hath filled, fill to her double; I say, this time is near in the whole, and in part be∣gun in England. I say again, and again, (this is my faith) That the hour of Gods Judgements is come, to turn the waters of his indignation upon his Churches enemies. Beleevers have the Word, Covenant, and Oath of the erernal God for all this, they have the ingagement of the faithful Al∣mighty God that cannot Iye, and why should we not expect it? Surely the work is upon the wheel that turns fast, and no∣thing but Voyces, and Thunders, and Earth-quakes; nothing but shakings, and changes, and over-turnings can bee expe∣cted
in Churches and States, till he come Eze. 21. 27 Psal. 2. 8, 9 Rev. 15. 3 Hag. 2. 6, 7 and be lift up, whose right alone it is to rule as King of Saints, and King of Nations. As yet the Lords people see little into this great Mystery of the Prophets, and if you find slips and failings in my Computa∣tions Rev. 10. 7 of years, or application of Prophecies, cover them, or correct them in love, con∣sidering my love to Christ and his Saints hath ingaged me in this Work, and as yet it is neither dark nor light. I confesse, the whole Book is little more than a Tran∣script of Divine and prophane Histories, in all which I have been faithful to God and Men; which Mite I now cast into the poor Saints Treasury, and if the Lord Jesus Christ shall make it a seasonable word of truth to Saints, it will bee the comfort and crown of him who waites, and prayes for the promised Redemption of Sion. T. P.
A MAP of MONARCHY. LIB. I. ALL the dealings of God with man, are works of wonder. As the Lords e∣lecting Love hath been cast upon a few of old A∣dams children to evi∣dence the freedome and riches of his grace: So the infiniteness of his Al∣mighty power, is manifest in his gui∣dance, preservation and protection of these chosen ones, through the oppositi∣ons and difficulties they meet with in this world. For the sake of these was Christ promised, Laws, Ordinances and Government given. For the first 2000. years sin reigned, and there were few Acts 7. 2. 3. Gen. 12. 1, 2. persons whom the Lord approved of as godly. About which time, the Lord sin∣gled
out Abraham, and made a special Covenant with him, and his seed after his faith. Abraham had one Isaac de∣scending from him, Isaac had but one Gen. 17. 1, Jacob coming out of his Loynes: but Rom. 4. 11, 12. from Jacob came the twelve Patriarchs. Gen. 21. 1, 2, 3. I will omit many passages of Gods pro∣vidence in those times: yet it's manifest Gen. 25. 26. that the Church of God then was con∣tained Gen. 49. 1, &c. in one Family; and though Jacobs Israels go∣ing into E∣gypt. Family had in it seventy souls at his go∣ing into Egypt, (amongst themselves) these were onely under houshold-Go∣vernment. Gen. 46. 26, 27. The time of Israels bondage until their full deliverance, was 430. years: Exo. 12. 40, 41. all which time (till neer the end) Israel (in civil things) were under the Govern∣ment of the Kings of Egypt. But when Exo. 3. 7, 11. Israels oppressions brought them to their prayers, the Lord heard their cries, and Israels deli∣verance out of Egypt, was about made provision for their deliverance by the hand of Moses, to whom the Lord gave the Government of his people Israel Ann. mun. 2398. as Judge. I cannot here let pass the glori∣ous appearance of God in the multiply∣ing of these people, that in the Land of their sad afflictions and hard bondage, Gen. 46. 26. the number of seventy souls entering E∣gypt, were multiplied to six hundred
thousand, and 3000. and 550. men of Num. 1. 46, 47. War, besides the Tribe of Levi. The Lord now having made good his Israels in∣crease in E∣gypt. promise to Abraham in so great a mea∣sure, that from a Family they were in∣creased into a Body Politick, or Com∣monwealth. For the well-ordering of The first in∣stitution of Judges. whom, God in his wisdom gave to them a sweet fatherly Government under the name and title of Judge (many or most of which were Prophets and High-Priests,) elected by the people; not to have a violent, proud arbitrary or abso∣lute dominion over them; but to mini∣ster justice, and guide them by the coun∣sel of God. Under this happy Govern∣ment the Lord blessed this people about Act. 13. 20, 1 Sam. 8. 1, 3, 4. 450. years. It is too manifest that upon the cor∣ruptions of some in Government, the people would not be satisfied until they had cast off that Government the Lord had given them, and blessed to them, and Vers. 5. would have a King to Judge them like The Origi¦nal of king∣ly Govern∣ment Hea∣thenish. all the Nations. This Heathenish re∣quest sadly grieved good Samuel, and much displeased the Lord: yet God in Vers. 6. his unsearchable wisdom, (having great Kings first given with a curse. designes to accomplish in the world) granted Israel their desires, though to be Vers. 7.
a scourge and a curse to them; and com∣manded Samuel to tell them what op∣pressors and Tyrants these Kings should Ver. 11, 12, &c. be to them. And Israel groaned woful∣ly under this Kingly Monarchical Go∣vernment Ver. 19, 20. &c. for about 517. years, which ended with the last and great Captivity in Babylon: but upon their restauration and return, they again set up the Go∣vernment Note. by Judges according to the in∣stitution of God, and so continued it; many of which Judges ruling after the Captivity (as before) were High-Priests. Now as Kingly, Monarchical Govern∣ment, Rev. 12. hath been most general in the world, and these Kings and Emperours Rev. 16. 13, 15. implacable enemies, and bloudy persecu∣tors of Christ and the interest of the Psal. 2. 12. &c. Saints; yea, and such as have been the great instruments of the Devil to keep Eph. 1. 21, 22, 23. down or keep out Christ from his King∣ly, Isa. 2. 2. &c. Monarchical visible Government o∣ver the Saints and Churches, which God the Father hath promised to him, and conferred upon him; I will therefore spot a little Paper, and spend a little time to run down the line of Monarchy, to give a touch upon the enterance, reign, and ends of some Kings, Emperours, and
Kings again in the latter times. I will begin with the Kings of Israel: at their ending, I will come to Daniels four Kings; and fall in with the Histories of the Kings of England, until that name was taken away at White-hall West-minster. The Map of Monarchy. WHen nothing but a King would Saul first King of Is∣rael. 2848. content Israel, Samuel caused all the Tribes of Israel and all the People to gather to Mizpeh, where they chose Saul the son of Kish for chief 1 Sam. 10. 17, 21. Captain. This was a free election of Kings by E∣lection of the people. the People, and no secret combination of any party. Yet I cannot but note the modesty of the young man (seeming) to judge himself unfit for so great an honour, and high trust, hid himself from the Crown. If we may judge affections by actions, Saul sought the Asses with more desire, then a Kingdom: And pos∣sibly Kingly Of∣fice hath made good men bad. if he had continued in his Native imployment, his life might have been longer, and his sin less. But being now
lift up to the Throne, Saul ruffles in the world, and did something while God was with him: yet when the Lord took from Saul the spirit of Government and cou∣rage, he fell into gross wickedness; & in the life-time of Saul, David was anoint∣ed 1 Sam. 13. 13. King over Israel. I will not insist upon 1 Sam. 31. 4. the vile practices of this ungodly man which came to miserable end: for not finding a man willing to separate his di∣stracted soul from his miserable body, he fell upon his own sword, and became his own executioner. But this I must fur∣ther add, the lusts of Saul cost Israel dear; for he spent much treasure, spilt much of their bloud, and reigned with Samnel Act. 13. 21. 2888. 40. years about Anno mun. 2888. For the wickedness of Saul, the Lord David se∣cond King of Israel. rejected him, took away the spirit of Government he had, and commanded Samuel to anoint David the son of Jesse, 1 Sam. 16. 12. when Saul had reigned but a few years: Vers. 13. yet David was not set upon the Throne until the death of Saul, and then David 2 Sam. 2. 4. was onely Crowned King of Judah at Hebron by a small party of Israel, the greater number following Ishbosheth the son of Saul, who was made King of Isra∣el Vers. 8. by Abner Captain of Sauls Host: and now they fell to war and bloud-shed.
In this war Davids party got the better; Ver. 12, 13, 16. but a little after, Ishbosheth reproving Abner for lying with one of his fathers Ishboshet set up by Abner. Concubines, Abner was displeased, and thereupon sought to betray Ishbosheth: 2 Sam. 3. 7. Kingdom to David, and had audience Vers. 12. with David about it. But Joab Captain Ver. 17. 20. of Davids Host returning from pursuit Vers. 22. of the enemy, and hearing that Abner had been at Davids Court, and was new∣ly departed, Joab sent for him back, and being returned, Joab took Abner aside Abner kill'd by Joab. as if he would speak privately to him, and secretly stabbed him to the heart, in revenge upon Abner for killing Asahel Ver. 27. Joabs brother. The death of Abrer did 2 Sam. 4. 1. greatly astonish those that followed Ish∣bosheth; Vile trea∣son. and as his Kingdom was decli∣ning, Ver. 2. Baanah and Rechab, two false bre∣thren, finding an opportunity, secretly murdered Ishbosheth, cut off his head, and Vers. 7. carryed it to David. These wretches Vers. 8. hoped now to have been greatly advan∣ced Ishbosheth murdered. by David for this bloudy cruelty; but good David troubled at their sin, Vers. 12. gave them the just reward of traytors: The due re∣ward of treason. yet upon the death of Ishbosheth, at the end of 7. years, all Israel came into David, and the whole Kingdom was set∣led 2 Sam. 5. 1. in him.
There is no question but David was a very godly and precious man, nei∣ther Psa. 51. 4. will I afresh rake amongst his ma∣ny and great sins over which he deeply mourned, and which free grace pardon∣ed: yet this may be observed, that his sin brought much misery upon all Israel, and because of bloud the Lord 1 Chro. 22. 8. denied him the honour to build his House; neither do we finde since David, that great Warriers have done much in 2 Sam. 5. 4. 5. Church-reformation. David was 30. years old when he was Crowned King Note. of Judah: He reigned over them 7. years and six moneths, and over all Israel 33. years; In all 40 years and six moneths, 1 King. 1. and left Solomon his son upon his Throne. About Anno mundi 2929. 2929. Solomon succeeded his father David: Solomon the third King of Is∣rael. In the fourth year of his reign was the foundation of the House of the Lord laid, in the moneth Zif, or 1 Kin. 6. 37. And in the 11. year, in moneth Bul, Vers. 38. or October, which is the eighth moneth, The first Temple 7. years in building. was the house finished: so was he seven years in building it. About Ann. mund. 2940. Solomon walked long with the 1 King. 10. 23. Lord, and the Lord made him glorious in the world, yet in his old age (which should have been most fruitful in holi∣ness)
his wives turned his heart after o∣ther 1 King. 11. 4. 5. gods, and his heart was not perfect with the Lord. This sin of Solomon, a sin against so many and high engage∣ments Vers. 11. of love and obedience, greatly provoked the Lord to alter his purposes concerning him and his house; upon which God threatned certainly to rend Vers. 12. the Kingdom from him, and to give it to his servant. Yet this sad sentence was sweetly mixt with mercy, That the Lord would not do it in his daies, for Davids Vers. 13. sake; Nor rend away all the Kingdom, but leave one Tribe to his son, for his fa∣thers sake, and Jerusalem sake, whom he had chosen. But to all the rest, Solomon was a great oppressor of his brethren, as will appear more anon, and reigned o∣ver all Israel 40. years, about An. mund. 2969. 2969. Upon the death of Solomon, all Israel Rehoboam the first King of Ju∣dah after the division. came to Shechem to Crown Rehoboam son of Solomon. Against which time they called Jeroboam home, who fled for his life from Solomon into Egypt. And be∣ing 1 King. 12. 1, 2, 3. returned, Jeroboam was speaker for the Congregations of Israel, who requi∣red ease of Rehoboam from that grievous yoke put upon them by Solomon his fa∣ther, before they would establish him in Vers. 4.
the Throne. Rehoboam desired time to Kings by a∣greement with the people. give them answer; to which they wil∣lingly granted. In the interim Rehobo∣am consulted with his fathers old Coun∣sellours, and they advised him to con∣sent Vers. 7. to the people. But this not well suiting to Rehoboams humour, he also called his young Courtiers, who Coun∣selled Vers. 8. him to keep his Prerogative, and Evil Coun∣sel. keep them under. Rehoboam (upon the next meeting) returns this full answer: My little finger shall be thicker then my fathers loynes, &c. Though here ap∣peared Ver. 10, 11. a visible just cause that Israel Solomons Kingdom rent, &c. should provide for their own safety a∣gainst oppression, yet assuredly it was of the Lord, to make good that same word he had threatned against Solomon; and therefore Israel refusing to submit to Re∣hoboam, only the Tribe of Judah set him up King of Judah, the rest set up Je∣roboam King of Israel (of which in its place.) But this was occasion of a sad 1 King. 14. 30. breach in the bowels of Israel, and there was War between Rehoboam and Jero∣boam all their daies; and to the rest, this was a woful consequent that fell out upon that unnatural strife about a King; while brethren were letting out the bloud of brethren, and one weakened by another,
they gave occasion to the common ene∣my to accomplish his design upon them all: for Shishake King of Egypt came a∣gainst Vers. 25. Jerasalem, and made a great spoil upon the Lords house, and the Kings 26. house, and took away rich prizes of gol∣den The first spoilling of the Temple. shields made by Solomon, which ne∣ver again were made good. But above all, Judah provoked the Lord by Idola∣try, and they suffered Sodomites in the Ver. 22, 23. 2 land, and did commit the same abomina∣tions that the Heathen did that the Lord cast out before them. Yet Rehoboam Vers. 21. reigned 17. years in Jerusalem, and slept 2 Chro. 12. with his fathers. About Anno mund. 2986. And to the rest, the Lord hath set 2986. this black brand upon this King, That he Chro. 12. 14. did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord. In the 18. year of Jeroboam, Abijam, Abijah se∣cond King of Judah. or Abijah began to reign over Judah; he walked in all the sins of Rehoboam his father: yet for Davids sake the Lord 2 Chro. 13. 1, 2. gave him a lamp in Jerusalem, and set up 1 King. 15. 1, 2, 3. his son after him in the Throne. But Abijah reigned only 3. years: 2989. In the 20. year of Jeroboam King of Asa the third King of Judah. Israel, Asa son of Abijah was set up o∣ver Judah: the Holy Ghost hath left this glory upon his name still, that he did 1 King. 15. 9.
that which was right in the eyes of the Vers. 11. Lord; and expresseth this as a great mark of the uprightness of his heart to God, Vers. 13. that he spared not his Queen-Mother who was an Idolater, but put her down from being Queen, and burnt her grove. Vers. 16.  The bloudy War between the house of Judah and Israel was not yet ended, but lasted between Asa and Baasha (the third King of Israel) all their daies: and Asa reigned 41. years, about Anno Vers. 10. mund. 3020. 3020. But yet the high places were not removed. Vers. 14. Note. Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to Jehosha∣phat the fourth King of Judah. reign over Judah, in the fourth year of Ahab King of Israel; he walked in all the waies of Asa his father, and took out of the land those Sodomites that remai∣ned 1 King. 22. 41, 43. in his fathers daies. In his time he Vers. 46. 44. made peace with Israel, by matching his son with Ahabs daughter; and by that 2 Chro. 18. 1. and 19. 2. neer affinity to that wicked King, joy∣ned with him to fight his battles: which It's ill si∣ding with bad men. sin of his was deeply threatend, and soundly reproved from the Lord. This good man had great infirmities, 2 Chro. 17. and 18. and 19. yet did more in reforming his people then any King after Solomon to his time, and reigned 25. years, about Ann. mund. 1 King. 22. 42, 43. 3045. 3045. Nevertheless the High places
were not taken away. Jehoram succeeded his father Jeho∣shaphat Jehoram the fifth King of Ju∣dah. in the Kingdom, but not in his piety: when he was settled in the Throne, he murdered his six brethren, 2 King. 8. 16. the sons of his father, and divers Princes. This was a woful beginning, and yet the 2 Chro. 21. 1, 2, 3, 4. holy Pen-man gives this account of him, that he walked in the waies of the Kings of Israel like as did the house of Ahab: Vers. 6. for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife. Marriage with Idolatrous wives hath Note. been the ruine of many men and Nati∣ons. Vers. 11. And to all the rest of this wicked∣ness, Idolatries commanded by the King. Jehoram set up Idols, and compel∣led Judah to worship them. I shall o∣mit some things, but I may not pass the miseries God brought upon his people and this vild person, as the just reward of his sin, yet less then he deserved, though eternity may pay for all. In his Vers. 8. time the Edomites revolted, and set up a King amongst themselves: at the same Vers. 9. time also Libnah revolted, because Jeho∣ram The ground of revolt. had forsaken the Lord. But Jeho∣rams sad doom was sent to him in wri∣ting from the Prophet Elijah; possibly it Vers. 12. might be in this extraordinary way, ei∣ther to give the full certainty of the sad judgements determined against him, or
rather to prevent some bloudy design of of this wicked King against the Prophet for the discharge of his duty. But soon Vers. 16. after, the Lord stirred up the Philistines and Arabians, who came to judah, and carryed away all the substance that was 17. Jound in the Kings house, and his sons, and his wives, so that Jehoahaz the yong∣est son was saved. And after all this, the Vers. 18. Lord smote Jehoram with an incurable disease in his bowels, of which he langui∣shed Vers. 19. for the space of two years, and in Jehorams miserable end. the end his bowels fell out, and so died; but Judah buried him not in the Sepul∣chres of their Kings. Thus he lived wickedly, dyed miserably, and was buri∣ed 20. shamefully, when he had reigned (or 2 Chro. 21. 5. rather raged) 8. years. About Ann. mun. 3053. 3053. In the 12. year of Joram King of Is∣rael, Azariah the sixth King of Ju∣dah. the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Azariah the youngest son of Jehoram (who was lest alive) King of Judah: This 2 King. 8. 25, 26, 27. is the general account the Holy Ghost gives of him, That he walked in the 2 Chro. 22. 1. 2. 3. waies of the house of Ahab: for his mo∣ther Athaliah the daughter of Omri King of Israel was his Counsellor to do wick∣edly. In 2 King. 8. 26. it's said Aza∣riah was 22. years old when he began to
reign: but 2 Chron. 22. 2. it's said, he was 42. years old when he began to reign. This deserves further thoughts to reconcile: yet in both places it is said, he reigned but one year. Azariah had but a short reign, and the Holy Ghost adds this as a further reason which is worth observing, he did evil in the sight An obser∣vation for Kings. of the Lord like the house of Ahab, for they were his Counsellors to his distru∣ction. About Anno mund. 3054. An. 3054 Ahaziah going to visit Joram King Athaliah Queen of Judah. of Israel, son of his grand-father Ahab, when Jehu came to execute judgement upon Ahabs house, he found Ahaziah 2 King. 9. 27, 28. King of Judah, hid in Samaria, and put 2 Chro. 22. 6, 8, 9. him to death with the rest; this news be∣ing brought to Athaliah his mother, she 2 King. 11. 1. set up her self Queen of Judah, and at first she murthered the seed Royal of Cruel mur∣der of chil∣dren to get the Crown. her own son, to sit quietly in the Throne. Yet to make good his word to David, the Lord preserved Joash, who was se∣cretly 2 King. 11. 2, 3. stole away from amongst the Kings children by Jehosheba, Ahaziahs sister, and hid five years with his Nurse in the A Priest married the Kings sister. house of the Lord. Jehosheba was wife to Jehoiada the Priest, by whose Counsel and help Joash was saved alive. In the 2 Chro. 22. 11. seventh year, Jehoiada made Joash
known to the Captaines of the Army; 2 King. 11. 4. and taking an Oath of them, Guards were appointed, the Kings son was brought forth and Crowned, at which there was great rejoycing: when A∣thaliah heard the great noise in the Tem∣ple, Ver. 11, 12. she came forth to know the matter; 13. But seeing the King stand by the Pillar (according to the usual manner of the 14. 15. Kings of Judah at their Coronation) she rent her cloaths, and cryed, Treason, Treason: But Jehoiada commanded to lay hold on her, and to have her out of the range of the Temple and to kill her: which they did, when she had reigned Ver. 20. 7. years; about Anno 3061. An. 3061 Joash or Jehoash was seven years old Joash the seventh King of Ju∣dah. when he began to reign, which was the seventh year of Jehu: so soon as Joash was Crowned King, Jehoiada caused a 2 King. 12. 1. Covenant to be made between the King and the people, and between the King, 2 King. 11. 17. people and the Lord; and presently all Vers. 18. the people went into the house of Baal, The King in covenant with the people. and they destroyed it thoroughly. Joash reigned well while Jehoiada lived; yet the High places were not taken away: but after the death of Jehoiada, the 2 King. 12. 2. Princes of Judah had full recourse to the King, and by their flatteries the King
was drawn to Idolatry, that both the The King corrupted by evil coun∣sel, the wor∣ship of God was laid down. King and his Courtiers left off to wor∣ship God in the Temple, and served Groves and Idols. The Lord in mercy sent Prophets to reprove their sin, and bring them back again: but they would not harken to these; then the Lord sent 2 Chro. 24. 17, 18. Zachariah the son of Jehoiada the Vers. 19. Priest, who dealt plainly both with the King and people: he told them, Because yea have forsaken the Lord, the Lord al∣so Vers. 20. hath forsaken you; and that was the reason they could not prosper. This home preaching they could not digest, They cannot prosper that forsake God. and by the command of the King the good man was stoned to death in the Court of the Lords house, though he was an extraordinary Prophet sent by God, and the son of Jehoiada. It's a known Vers. 21. truth, Tyranny can know no relations Zachariah kill'd for the discharge of his duty. when they are not any thing; yet Za∣chariah left his bloud at their doors, and appealing to the righteous God, and Vers. 22. Judge of all the earth, who upon his death said, The Lord look upon it and require it; And the Lord did so. For a∣bout Vers. 24. the end of the year, the Syrians came to Jerusalem with a small compa∣ny, and the Lord delivered a very great Vers. 25. Host into their hand, (because they had
forsaken the Lord God:) thus God execu∣ted 2 Chro 24. 23, 24. his judgement against Joash. At this time Hazael King of Syria destroyed all those wicked Princes from among the Wicked Kings will undo a Na∣tion, to keep a Crown. people; and to pacifie him, Joash King of Judah took all the holy things dedicated by Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, and Ahazia his father, with all the gold found in the 2 King. 12. 17, 18. Treasury of the Temple, and in the Kings house, and sent them to Hazael, and he carryed them to Damascus; this was a just and dreadful misery that the Kings sin (especially) brought upon the Jewes. But the Lords hand stayed not there: For Joash himself was afflicted The Lord ordinily gives bloud for bloud. with great diseases, and for the bloud of the sons of Jehoiada the Priest, his own servants conspired against him and kill'd him in his bed. And after they 2 Chro. 24. 25. buried him, but not in the Sepulchres of the Kings. This I would leave to consideration, That none can stand long when they leave the Lord, and the Lord forsakes them; but a shameful end shall 2 King. 12. 1. follow a wicked life: this King reign∣ed 40. years, about Ann. mun. 3100. An. 3100 In the second year of Joash son of Je∣hoahaz Amaziah the eighth King of Ju∣dah, . King of Israel, Amaziah son of Joash King of Judah was set up King: at his first coming to the Crown, he did
some good things in hypocrisie, as his 2 King. 13. 10. with the 14. 1. ver. 3, 5. father did; but when he was settled in the Kingdom, he put to death those ser∣vants that killed his father. After this Amaziah raised an Army of three hun∣dred thousand choise men to make War 2 Chro. 25. 5, 6. with the Edomites; yet thinking himself too weak, he hired also 100 thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel. But Vers. 7. by a Prophet the King was admonished not to joyn with that Army of Israel, because God was not with those Idola∣trous wicked people: upon which A∣maziah Ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. dismist them; but in much dis∣content they returned, and (taking the time) they fell upon many Cities of Ju∣dah as they went, flew 3000. of them, and took much spoil. Amaziah pro∣spered in this battel, and smote 10000. men; and 10000. men which they took prisoners, they carryed to the top of a steep Rock, and threw them down, that they were broken in pieces. Amongst the spoil of the Edomites, Vers. 14. Amaziah took their gods, and set them up to be his gods, and burnt Incense to Note. them. Good Lord! what folly will not wise and great men commit, when God leaves them? Amaziah was exceeding∣ly lift up in this Victory, and now he
thinks to revenge the wrong done to 2 King. 14. 8. him by the Army of Israel, and there∣fore he sent a Challenge to Joash King of Israel. The King of Israel was unwil∣ling to meet Amaziah, and disswaded him from it. But Amaziah would not be so satisfied: therefore Joash King of Isra∣el Ver. 11, 12, 13, 14. went to Bethshemesh in the land of Ju∣dah, and gave battel to Amaziah. In this battel Judah was worsted, and Amaziah taken prisoner. The King of Israel now having the field, he marched his Army to Jerusalem, brake down the Wall, took Jerusalem sacked the third time. all the gold, silver, and vessels in the Lords house, with the Treasures of the Kings house; He also took Hostages for subjection, and so lest Amaziah in Je∣rusalem. This was in the 14. year of Amaziahs reign: but Amaziah after this The King slain for his wickedness. sell from the Lord, & the people conspi∣red against him in Jerusalem, upon which 2 Chro. 2. 27. he sled to Lachish; yet they sent after him and flew him there, when he had 2 King. 14 2. reigned 29 years: about Anno mundi 3129. An. 3129 After the Death of Amaziah, Judah Between A¦maziah and Azariah there was in internal of 13 years. was without a King 13. years; which this appears. In the 15 year of Ama∣ziah the son of Joash King of Judah, Je∣roboam son of Joash King of Israel be∣gan Ann. 3142.
to reign. And in the 27. year of Jeroboam King of Israel, began Azariah son of Amaziah King of Judah to reign. Now from the 15. of Amaziah to the 29. is 14. years to Jeroboams reign; so that to the 27. of Jeroboam there must needs be an interval of 13. years to the 2 King. 14. 23. with 15. 1. Crowning of Amaziah, about An. mun. 3142. 3142. The People of Judah took Azariah Amaziah the ninth King of Ju∣dah son of Amaziah, and made him King in his fathers stead. At 16. years old A∣zariah was Crowned King of Judah, in 2 King. 14. 21. the 27. year of Jeroboam King of Israel. Azariah (or Uzziah) did well in all 2 Chro. 26. , 4, 5. the former part of his reign; He was a man of War, built divers Forts in Jeru∣salem, Vers. 9, 10. and both built and took in several Cities: he also did much in reformation of Religion; and so long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper. But when he was strong, his heart was lifted Vers. 16. &c. up in him to his destruction. For he transgressed against the Lord his God, by going into the Temple (and usurping the Priests Office) to burn incense upon the Altar. Azariah the Priest, with The King was judged by God for usurping the Prists Of∣fice. 80. Priests of the Lord, went in after the King, and withstood him, and said, It pertaineth not to thee Uzziah to burn
Incense to the Lord, but to the Priests the sons of Aaron that are consecrated for it. Go out of the Sanctuary: for thou hast transgressed; neither shall it be for thy Honour. Then was the King wroth with the Priests, and presently the Leprosie rose upon his forehead; and the Priests discerning of it, they thrust him out from thence: and he himself also hasted to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. After the King dwelt in a house several from others, and was a Leper until the day of his death; and Jo∣tham his son was over the Kings house, judging the people of the land Uzziah, or Azariah, reigned 52. years, about Vers. 3. An. mund. 3194. An. 3194 In the second year of Pekah King of Jotham the 10. King of Judah, was not crowned till a year after his fa∣thers death. Israel, Jotham began to reign over Ju∣dah: Jotham did according to all that his father Uzziah did before him, but yet the High places were not taken away, and the people did corruptly. In his time he built the high Gate of the house of 1 King. 15. 52. with vers. 27. the Lord, and built Cities and Forts. Jo∣tham became mighty, because he prepa∣red his waies before the Lord his God: he was 25. years old when he began to reign, and reigned 16. years, about An. 3200. An. 3200
In the 17. year of Pekah King of Is∣real, Ahaz the 11. King of Judah, Ru∣led two years with his father. Ahaz the son of Uzziah King of Judah began to reign: He was 20. years old when he began to reign; but he did wickedly, and walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, and made his son to pass 2 King. 15. 32, 33. ver. 27. with through the fire according to the abomi∣nation of the Heathen: he made Moul∣ten Images for Baalim, and burnt In∣cense in the high places: then Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah son of Remali∣ah 2 Chro. 28. 2, 3, &c. King of Israel, joyned their forces, and came up and laid siege to Jerusalem: at this time the King of Syria recovered Vers. 6. the City Elah which was taken from his Kingdom by Azariah King of Judah: and between Rezin and Pekah they al∣most destroyed the Kingdom of Judah, for the Lord delivered them into their enemies hands. The King of Syria smote the Army of Ahaz, and carryed away a great multitude of them to Da∣mascus: And Pekah slew in Judah 120000. valiant men in one day (and this Judahs first Captivity. was the reason) because they had forsa∣ken the Lord God of their fathers. Sin un-mans men, and renders. Champions slaves. Here was a woful slaughter, yet Israel took also captive 200000. women with Vers. 8.
their sons and daughters, and much spoil, Vers. 9. and brought them to Samaria. But O∣bed a Prophet of the Lord in Samaria, went out to meet the Army of Israel, and said, Behold, because the Lord God of your fathers was wroth with Judah, he hath delivered them into your hands, and ye have slain them in a rage that reacheth up to heaven. And now you purpose to keep them bond-men and bond-women to you: But are there not Ver. 10, 11. with you, even with you, sins against the God useth bad men to punish they, sin of others. Lord your God? Now hear me there∣fore, & deliver them again, for the fierce wrath of God is upon you. Wonderful, O wonderful wisdom and bowels of God! that the sin of his people should bring them to the sword, and slavery, and yet this misery the sin of those that are the Lords executioners. Sin divides, and raiseth war amongst brethren; yet the Lords fierce wrath is upon those bre∣thren, who execute Gods wrath upon their sinful brethren, because they have sinned against God themselves. But in Ver. 16, 17. these straits King Ahaz sent to the King of Assyria to help him: for (to all the rest) the Edomites had again smit∣ten Judah, and carryed away captives; The Capti∣vity by E∣dom. The Philistines also invaded the Cities of
the low Countries, and took away many Vers. 18, 19 Towns and Villages, and dwelt in them; Sin raiseth enemies round a∣bout. for the Lord brought Judah low, because of Ahaz King of Israel. Kings seldom sin alone; And dreadful are the sins of great men, when the sin of the chief Magistrate may bring National judge∣ments. The more effectually to engage the King of Assyria, Ahaz took a part of the Vers. 21. Treasure out of the house of the Lord, and out of the house of the King and of the Princes (which I finde not done be∣fore) and gave it to Tilgath-Pilneser King of Assyria: But he helped him not. Note. Certainly the strength of man cannot deliver the Nation that God will break down. But in the time of this distress, the King did trespass yet more against the Lord (and above others, the Holy Ghost hath left this black brand upon Ver. 22, 23, 24. him) This is that King Ahaz: And the reasons follow; he sacrificed unto the When God leaves a man, he knows not what he shall do. None can save when God will destroy. gods of Damascus which smote him, say∣ing, Because the gods of the Kings of Assyria helped them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But the text saith, They were the ruine of him, and of all Israel. 2. Rea∣son, for that Ahaz gathered together
the Vessels of the house of God, and cut The Temple shut up. in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house of the Lord, and made him Altars in every corner of Jerusalem; and in every several City of Judah, he made High places to burn Incense to the gods, and provoked the Lord to anger. When Ahaz had thus run out 16. years in these abomina∣tions, 2 King. 16. . he died, and they buried him in the City, but not in the Sepulchres of the Kings, about Ann. mun. 3216. An. 3216 In the third year of Hoshea King of Hezekiah, the 12. King of Judah, ruled one year with his father. Israel, Hezekiah son of Ahaz King of Judah began to reign: he was 25. years old when he came to the Crown, and did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David 2 King. 18. 1. with 2 King. 17. 1. and 16. 12. 2. 3. 5. did. Hezekiah excelled all the Kings from David, that went before him, and after was none like to him. In the first year of his reign, in the first moneth, he began to reform, and opened the doors of the Lords house, and restored Religi∣on: he removed the High places, brake 2 Chro. 29. 3, 4. down the Images, and took away the A thorow Reformati∣tion. Brazen Serpent set up by Moses, to which the people burnt Incense, and re∣formed thorowly: yet in the 14. year of Hezekiah, Sennacherib King of Assyria 3 King. 18. 12, 13.
came with a mighty Army, against all the fenced Cities of Judah, and took them: Then Hezekiah sent an humble submissive message to the King of Assy∣ria, desiring of him to draw way his Ar∣my, and he would pay him what he A low spi∣rit, the ef∣fect of sin. would lay upon him. Sennacherib appointed Hezekiah to Vers. 14. give him 300. Talents of Silver, and 30. Talents of Gold. Whether Hezekiah was able to raise the same, is not certain: but he did what he could; Hezekiah Vers. 15. took all the silver that was found in the The Temple pild to bribe the Assyri∣ans. Lords house, and in the Kings Treasury: At that time also Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the Temple, and Vers. 16. from the pillars, and gave it to the King of Assyria. But as pride hath no bow∣els, and a covetous heart knows no pi∣ty, Sennacherib is unsatisfied with all the Treasure Hezekiah could scrape up, though he pilled and defaced the house of God for it, and therefore sent an in∣solent 2 King. 19. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7. Army up against Jerusalem. This put all Jerusalem into a terrible fear, and Straites drive to God. now they have none to slee to but the Lord; Hezekiah sent away Messengers presently with his sad complaints to the Prophet Isaiah, to pray to the Lord for them: And Isaiah comforts them with
a sweet and seasonable answer from the Lord, that the Lord will send a blast up∣on Rabshakeh, and he should hear a ru∣mour Vers. 8. and return to his own Land, and Faith and prayer doth much with God. there he should fall by the sword, in his own Land. So Rabshakeh returned from Jerusalem, for he heard that Sennacherib was gone from Lachish, and Rabshakeh found him warring against Libnah. Af∣ter this Sennacherib brought his Army into Judah a second time, and then sent Messengers with a Letter to Hezekiah, Vers. 9, 10. 14, &c. stopped full of pride & blasphemy. When Hezekiah had received the Letter, he went into the Lords house, and in pray∣er, spread it before the Lord, and beg∣ged his help; and the Lord promised him that the King of Assyria should not lay siege, or shoot an Arrow into Jerusa∣lem, but he would defend it and save it: And that very night the Lord sent an Angel, who smore in the Assyrians Camp 185000. So Sennacherib departed, and went to Niniveh. In these daies Hezeki∣ah 1 King. 20. 1, . fell sick, and neer to death. But upon his prayer the Lord restored him, and Vers. 1, 13, &c. added 15. years more to his daies. Up∣on Hezekiahs recovery, the King of Ba∣bylon sent a present unto him, which he accepted: and to gratifie the Messengers,
Hezekiah shewed them the house of his precious things, the house of his Armor, and his Treasures, &c. But the Prophet Isaiah sadly reproved his pride and vain∣glory, that he who had such abundant experience of an allsufficient God, in the Creatures nothingness, should have his The Capti∣vity of Ba∣bylon threatned. heart going out to his wealth and works. And therefore the Prophet foretold He∣zekiah of the woful Captivity which Vers. 14. should come from Babylon. Herein He∣zekiah 2 Chro. 32. 31. fell sadly: but God left him, to see Prosperity tries mens hearts. what was in his heart: and this lesson we have all to learn, That the best of Saints stand not longer then the Lord Note. sustains and keeps them. When Hezekiah had reigned 29. years, he went to the Lord: about Anno mund. 3245. An. 3245 In the reign of Hezekiah, Israel was Note. carryed away Captive; and the Kings of Israel ceased, and so not mentioned after. Manasseh succeeded his father Heze∣kiah, Manasseh the 13. and was 12. years old when he be∣gan to reign: But he did evil in the sight King of Ju∣dah. of the Lord, and was a gross Idolater. 1 King. 12, 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. In the former part of his reign, he buil∣ded again the High places, reared Altars for Baal, sacrificed his own son, &c. and did worse then the Heathen. In his time
the Lord left not Manasseh and Judah without reproof: But they hearkned not, Therefore the Lord threatned to bring the same destruction upon Manas∣seh and Jerusalem, as he had brought up∣on Samaria, and the house of Ahab, and to wipe them clean from all their filthi∣ness, Afflictions upon Gods people are to make them clean. as a man wipeth a dish, and turneth inside down to keep it from dust: and soon after the Lord brought up the King of Assyria, the Rod of his anger, who took Manasseh among the thornes (whi∣ther he was run to hide himself) and 2 Chro. 33. 11, 12, 13. bound him in fetters, and carryed him to No hiding from God. Babylon. In this low estate Manasseh humbled himself greatly before the Lord, Repentance doth much with God. and the Lord heard his prayer, and re∣stored him again to his Kingdom: And now Manasseh knew (out of real experi∣ence) that the Lord was God. After this Manasseh repaired and reformed, yet the people still sacrificed in the High places: Bad Kings denied ho∣nourable burial. and when Manesseh had reigned 55. years, he slept with his fathers, and they brought him not into the Sepulchres of 2 King. 21. 1. the Kings, but buried him in the Garden of his own house at Uzza: about Anno mund. 3300. An. 3300 Amon the son of Manasseh at the age Amon the 14. King of Judah. of 22. years was Crowned King of Ju∣dah:
he again destroyed Religion, set up I∣dolatry, 2 King. 21. & walked in all the wicked ways of his father: and his own servants con∣spired Amon kill'd by his own servants. against him, and slew him, in his own house, when he had reigned 2. years: about Anno mun. 3302. An. 3302. Amon coming to the Crown at 22. Note. years of age, reigning but 2. years, and his son Josiah 8. years old when he came to the Crown, unless Amon had Josiah at 15. years of age (which is not ordinary) there must be an interval between A∣mon and Josiah. After the death of Amon, the people Josiah the 15. King of Judah. took Josiah his son, when he was 8. years old, and made him King. Josiah walked in all the waies of David: he again de∣stroyed 2 King 21. 24. and 22. 1, 2. and 23. 3. ver. 26, 27. Idolatry, repaired the Temple, and was a choice Reformer: Josiah also renewed the Covenant with the Lord, and all the people, to be the Lords peo∣ple, Repentance would not prevent judgement and keep his Commandments. Ne∣vertheless the Lord turned not from his fierce and great wrath, before denoun∣ced Veis. 29. against Judah, because of the sin of Manasseh whereby he provoked the Lord: in Josiahs daies the King of Egypt went to War against the King of Assy∣ria at Euphrates, and Josiah went out a∣gainst him. I do not finde the ground
of his quarrel: but probably Josiah might 2 Chro. 35. 20, 21, &c. take offence at the King of Egypt for passing through his Land: yet Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, sent Embassadors to Josiah, to let him know he intended not to War against him, but against the house against which God had comman∣ded him to fight; and charged Josiah not to meddle with him, left God should de∣stroy him. But Josiah being a man of courage, would not be said to turn his face upon any: yet his resolution being not rightly ordered, and not hearkning to the words of Necho from the mouth of God, Josiah was shot in the sight, and his servants brought him in his Chariot to Jerusalem, and he died there; and all Judah and Jerusalem, and the Prophet Jeromiah lamented Josiah, who reigned 2. King. 22. 3. 31. years: about Anno mund. 3333. An. 3333 Upon the death of Josiah the people took Jehoahaz a younger son, and Crow∣ned Jehoahaz the 16. King of Judah. him King when he was 23. years old. Jehoahaz did evil in the sight of the Here again (upon the former ground) it's probable was an in∣terval. Lord, according to all that his fathers had done. But Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt came up, put Jchoahaz in bonds, when he had reigned 3 moneths; laid a Jerusalem taken by the King of 2 King. 23. 30, 31, &c. Egppt.
Tax upon the Land, of 100. talents of Silver and one Talent of Gold, and made Eliakim, (Jehoahaz his elder brother) King of Judah, in the room of Josiah his father, and called his name Jehoiakim; but took Jehoahaz into Egypt, and he died there. Jehoiakim now succeeded, being 25. Jehoiakim the 17. King of Ju∣dah. years old. Jehoiakim seems to be well pleased to have the Crown: and to gra∣tifie his new Master, he forthwith gave 2 King. 23. 36. and 35. Sia makes great confu∣sion, and sad changes. the Tribute of silver and gold to Pha∣raoh, but taxed all the Land for it. It's an easie matter to grant large sums of Money, when they lay it upon others to pay: and this the holy Pen-man notes Note. in general, that Jehoiakim did evil ac∣cording Vers. 37. to all that his fathers did; so Ne∣buchadnezzer 2 King. 24. 12, &c. came up against him, and Jehoiakim became his servant, and sub∣mitted Sin makes men slaves. to him. Ah, how doth sin un∣man men, and render them low slavish spirits! When men leave God, they will stoop to any bondage. But Jehoiakim after three years rebelled against the King of Babylon, and the Lord sent a∣gainst him the Caldees, the Syrians, the Moabites and Amonites, to destroy Ju∣dah, for the sins of Manasseh, and for the Bloud, is pu∣nished with bloud. ver. 4. innocent bloud he brought upon Jerusa∣lem,
which the Lord would not pardon: 2 King. 23. 36. so Jehoiakim ended his daies in trouble, when he had been King, (but hardly reigned) 11. years, about Anno mund. 3344. An. 3344 Jehoiachim the son of Jehoiakim suc∣ceeded Jehoiachim the 18. his father, in the Throne, and in his sin: but the King of Babylon came King of Ju: 1 King. 24. 9, 10. up with an Army, and laid siege to Je∣rusalem, and Jehoiachim and his Princes Ver. 11, 12. went out, rendred themselves prisoners, and delivered up the City, when he had reigned three moneths, in the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzers reign. At this Nebuchad∣nezzers 8. year ver. 12 time the King of Babylon made havock of the Temple, took away the Treasures of the Lords house, and the Kings house, Jerusalem taken ver. 13, 14, &c. and carryed all away Captives, but the poor of the Land, and made Mattaniah Vers. 8. Jehoiakims brother King of Judah, and called his name Zedekiah. Zedekiah was 21. years old when he Zedekiah the 19. and last King of Judah. came to the Throne, and did according as his fathers had done before him: And after some time he also rebelled against 2 King. 24. 18, 19. the King of Babylon; and in the 9. year of Zedekiahs reign, in the 10. day of the 10. moneth, Nebuchadnezzer brought up all his Army and laid siege to Jerusa∣lem. In the 11. year of Zedekiah, on 1 King. 25. 1, 2.
the 9. day of the 4. moneth (June) the Siege was laid to Je∣rusalem, December 10. Anno 3353. and taken the 9. of June 3355. which was one year five moneths and 24. daies. Famine prevailed in the City (which was exceeding great) the City was bro∣ken up, and the men of war fled by a back way, and the King went towards the plains of Jericho: But the Chalde∣ans pursued him, and brought him to the King of Babylon to Riblah, where they gave sentence upon him: so they put the sons of Zedekiah to death before his eyes, then put out his eyes, bound him in fetters of Brass, and led him to ver. 2. 3. &c. Babylon. And in the 5. moneth, the 7. Vers. 7. day (in the 19. year of Nebuchadnezzer) Jerusalem burnt. Nebuzaradan the Captain-General of the Army made a full destruction of the Vers. 8. 9. glorious City; and amongst the rest, he Ver. 10, 11. took also those that fell away to the Jerusalems last and great Capti∣vity under Zedekiah, King of Babylon, and carryed them Cap∣tives all together. It is very remarkable, that when perfidious men have served the turn of Tyrants, themselves will e∣qually An. 3355. suffer with their brethren. This was the last and great Captivity, which continued 70. years. Thus we have the sad estate of Judah under their Kings which they so much desired: and whether they have not been as dreadful a scourge to this people, as 1 Sam. 8. 9, to 18. God foretold they should be, I leave o∣thers
to judge. I have only this further to tender to examination, whether the grounds of those intervals of Govern∣ment mentioned, after the Race of the Kings of Israel ended, have any weight; and if they have, then there are more years to be added. The Kings of Israel after the Division, which begun Ann. 2969. I Have here run down the Line of the Kings of Judah, from first to last, so Israel un∣der Kings 516. years, from first to last. that you have the beginning and end of Kingly Government amongst the Jewes (which were the peculiar Church and People of God under the Old Testa∣ment) which lasted from the beginning of Saul's reign, unto the Captivity in the 11. year of Zedekiah, which was 516. years, viz. from Anno 2948. to Anno 3365. the year (or neer the time) of Judahs last and great Captivity menti∣oned before. In the next place I will make out a lit∣tle, to take a brief view of the Kings of Israel after the Division, which began
with Jeroboam, about Ann. mund. 2969. The King and Kingdom of Israel 1 King. 11. 11. (consisting of 10. Tribes) was but the testimony of Gods wrath, and the pu∣nishment of Solomons sin, which in some measure came to pass in Rehoboams 1 King. 12. 4, 5, &c. time: when Rehoboam resused to ease the Taxes of the Land, the people refu∣sed to take him and make him their King; and so the people called Jeroboam, and made him first King over Israel, a∣bout Anno mundi 2969. Jeroboam was now the first King of Jeroboam the first King of Is∣rael after the division. Israel after the Division; But he fearing in his heart that the minds of the people might change, and fall off again from him, he turns Politician, and letting go 1 King. 12. 20, 26, &c. the fear and conscience of God, set up Idolatry, and the worship of Calves, to Jeroboam gave the people liber∣ty in Religi∣on, to pre∣serve his Crown. please the people, and keep them from going to worship at Jerusalem. O when men leave God, and live upon humane policy to uphold a carnal interest, they will break all the bonds of Religion, to preserve their own standing. I will not gather up the Catalogue of this vile mans miscarriages; The black brand the Holy Ghost hath so oft set upon him, shews what he was; Jeroboam the son 1 King. 22 52. of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. Yet
under all his abominations, the Lord per∣mitted 1 King. 14. Jeroboam to reign 22. years, a∣bout Ann. mund. 2991. An. 2991 In the second year of Asa King of Nadab the second King of Israel kill'd Judah, Nadab the son of Jeroboam be∣gan to reign over Israel; He walked in the way of his father, and in his sin 1 King. 15. 25, 26, &c. wherewith he made Israel to sin: and when Nadab lay in siege against Gib∣bethon, Baasha murdered him in the third Ver. 28. year of Asa, and reigned in his stead, a∣about Anno mund. 2993. An. 2993 In the third year of Asa King of Ju∣dah, Baasha the third King of Israel. Baasha set up himself King of Israel: and to clear his title to the Crown, Baa∣sha 1 King 15. 28, 29. murdered all the house of Jeroboam, he left not any to breath. Oh the dread∣ful Vers. 30. sins the gain of a Crown brings some men to! Baasha destroyed the house of Jeroboam; yet Baasha walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin, wherein he made Israel to sin, and reigned 24. years, Ver. 33, 34. Ann. 3017. An. 3017 In the 26. year of Asa King of Judah, Elah the fourth King of Israel, ruled one year with his father. Elah the son of Baasha, began to reign. A∣bout this time the Lord sent the Prophet Jehu to denounce evil against Baasha and his house, in being like the house of Jeroboam, and yet killed him. Though 1 King. 16. 8. God raised up Baasha to execute his
judgements upon Jeroboams house, yet Ver. 7. the Lord charged this for sin of Murder upon Baasha, because Baasha lived in the sins of Jeroboams house. Oh, oh, oh, that this were set deep upon the hearts of all that God makes executioners of his ju∣stice Gods rod is ost burnt when his work is done. upon others! This came suddainly, upon Baasha's house: for Zimri (Captain of half Elah's Chariots) conspired against Elah; and when he had drank himself drunk in the house of Arza his Steward, 1 King. 16. 9, 10. Zimri smote him, and killed him in the 2. year of his reign, and reigned in his stead, about Anno 3018. An. 3018 In the 27 year of Asa King of Judah, Zimri the 5. King of Israel. Zimri set up himself King of Israel; and as soon as he sat on the Throne, he kil∣led all the house of Baasha, he left him 1 King 16. 11, 12. not one to piss against the wall, Neither kinsfolks nor friends. Zimri thought Crowns were got and kept by bloud and murder. now to establish the Throne in his own posterity, by removing all that stood in the way: But when the Army that was encamped against Gibbethon heard what Zimri had done, they made Omri Vers. 16. Captain of the Host, King over Israel, in the Camp, and presently went up and 17. 18. laid siege against the City Tirzah where King Zimri was. When Zimri saw the City was taken, he went into the Palace
of the Kings house, set it on fire, and Observe the end of blou∣dy Tyrants. was burnt with the house, when he had reigned but 7. daies. Oh, what will not carnal proud men do, for a fleeting un∣certain Vers. 15. Crown! The people of Israel upon the death Israel had two Kings for four years. of Zimri were divided; half followed Tibni the son of Ginah to make him King, And half followed Omri. Much confusion continued amongst them for four years: but Tibni dying, Omri came to the Crown alone, about An. 3023. An. 3023 In the 31. year of Asa King of Ju∣dah, Omri a∣lone, the 6. King of Is∣rael. Omri began to reign over Israel; Omri bought the Hill Shomeron or Sa∣maria, of Shemel, for two Talents of sil∣ver. 1 King. 16. 23, 24, 25. But Omri did worse then all that were before him. It is said he reigned 12. years: yet he began to reign alone the 31. year of Asa, and died the 38. of Asa: by which it appears, that the Kings account the year wherein they are Note. Crowned, for the first year of their reign: and so accounting the former four years to Omri's time, Omri reigned 12. years, about An. 3031. An. 3031 In the 38. year of Asa King of Ju∣dah, Ahab the 7. King of Is∣rael Ahab the son of Omri began to reign over Israel: Ahab was a very wicked man, but I will only give you 1 King. 16. 29, 30.
what is recorded in general of him, That Vers. 33. he did evil above all that were before him: And Ahab did provoke the Lord to anger, above all the Kings of Israel that were before him. One would judge (who reads the lives of all the other Kings) that a man could not exceed in sin those who had gone before him: yet we must give credit to the sacred word. 1 King. 22. 34, &c. But it is manifest the Lord brought dreadful judgements upon Israel in A∣habs reign: and Ahab being seduced by false Prophets, was slain at Ramoth-Gi∣lead, according to the word of the Lord 2 King. 16. 29. by the Prophet Micaiah, when he had reigned 22. years, about An. 3053. An. 3053 Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to Ahaziah the 8. King of Israel, reigned in the last year of his father. reign over Israel, the 17. year of Jeho∣shaphat King of Judah. He walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to sin. 1 King. 22. 51, 52. But the judgement of God was upon 2 King. 1. 2. him, for he fell down from an upper Chamber in Samaria, and was sick: In which sicknesse he sent to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron, whether he should recover of his sickness? As the Messengers were going, the Lord spake to Elijah the Prophet, and bad him go
meet the Messengers, and say to them, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal∣zebub the God of Ekron? Now there∣fore thus saith the Lord, Thou shalt not come down from that bed which thou art gone up to, but shalt surely die. So Aha∣ziah died according to the word of the Lord, when he had reigned two years, about An. 3055. An. 3055 Ahaziah King of Israel had no son, Joram the 9. King of Israel. and so Joram or Jehoram the second son of Ahab reigned in his stead. Jehoram did evil in the sight of the Lord, yet not 2 King 3. 1. like his father and mother; for he put a∣way 2 King. 3. 2, 3. the images of Baal, though he clave to the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. In the 23. year of his reign, and in the first year of Aha∣ziah King of Judah, Joram perswaded Ahaziah (his brother in law) to go out 2 King. 8. 25, &c. to War with him against Hazael King of Syria at Ramoth-Gilead. In that battel Joram was wounded, and went to Jezreel to be healed. But the measure of the 2 King. 9. 4, 5, &c. sins of Ahabs house being now full, the God makes one wicked man to be a scourge to another. Lord called out Captain Jehu, and makes him King of Israel, to be his executioner upon Ahabs family. The Souldiers had a grudge in their hearts against Joram, Ver. 13, 14, &c.
and so soon comply'd with Jehu; and Je∣hu as readily conspired against Joram his Master. Yet Jehu consulted his confede∣rates, and presently gave charge when he was proclaimed King, that none should go to tell the news at Court; but Ver. 15, 16. Jehu himself drives on furiously to Jezreel to put Joram to death. When Jehu came neer to Jezreel, Joram went out to meet him: but discovering treachery, Joram Joram kill'd by Je∣hu his own captain. turned and fled: yet Jehu drew a bow with all his might, and sent a speedy mes∣senger of Death after him, and the ar∣row 2 King. 3. 1. went out at his heart. Thus Joram died in the 12. year of his reign, about An. 3067. An. 3067 In the first year of Ahaziah King Jehu the 10. King. 2 Kin. 9. 24. of Judah, Jehu came to be King of Israel, and effectually fulfilled the word of the Lord in the destruction of Ahabs house. 2 King. 10. 28, 29. But he kept Ahabs sin, which also proved his ruine. Jehu was mighty zealous to Sin will de∣stroy the house of the destroier. fulfil the word of the Lord in the total destruction of Ahabs family, as it con∣curred with his own interest, for the e∣stablishing Vers. 13. the Crown in his Posterity. But (when Jehu had got the Crown) he took no heed to walk in the Law of the Honour soon discovers hypocrites. Lord God of Israel with all his heart (but play'd the hypocrite) and hug'd the Hos. 1. 4.
sins of Jeroboam which made Israel to 2 King. 10. 36. sin. So (though he was the Lords exe∣cutioner) yet the Lord charged that bloud upon him as a Murtherer. In his sin he died, when he had reigned 28. years, about An. 3095. An. 3095 In the 23. year of Joash King of Ju∣dah, Jehoahaz the 11. King of Israel. Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel. Here is a difference in 2 Kin. 13. 1. sacred accounts to be considered: Joash 2 Kin. 12. 1. began his reign in the 7. year of Jehu, Jehu reigned 28. years: And Jehoahaz son to Jehu began not his reign till the 23. year of Joash: By which it appears, Here was an interval between Je∣hu and Je∣hoahaz for two years. Jehoahaz the son of Jehu came not to the Crown for two years after his fathers death. And when he was set up, Jehoa∣haz followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; 2 King. 13. 2, 3, &c. he departed not therefrom. In his time the Lord delivered Israel into the hands of the Syrians; so that of the great Armies that Israel had formerly raised, now the King had only 50. horse-men, A wicked King brought mi∣sery upon the people. 10. Chariots, and 1000. foot: For the King of Syria had destroyed them. Now Jehoahaz sought to the Lord, and the Lord raised them help, pitying their wo∣ful oppression: but yet Israel departed 2 Kin. 13. 1. not from the sins of Jeroboam, and kept
the Grove in Samaria. Jehoahaz reig∣ned 17. years, about An. 3114. An. 3114 Between Jehu and Jehoahaz there was an inter-reign, for two years: which were to be placed above; but I have ad∣ded those two years to the 17. of Jehoa∣haz. In the 37. year of Joash King of Ju∣dah, Jehoash the 12. King was taken into Go∣vernment three years with his fa∣ther. Jehoash son of Jehoahaz began to reign over Israel. Jehoahaz began to reign in the 23. year of Joash, and reig∣ned 17. year (which makes 40. years:) yet it's said, Jehoash began his reign the 37. year of Joash; By which it appears, Jehoash was Crowned in the life of his 2 King. 14. 13. 10. with 2 Kin. 13. 1. father, and so those years accounted to his reign. Little is said of this King: but this is recorded, that he departed not Vers. 11. from the sins of Jeroboam, but walked Vers. 10. therein, and run out 16. years, about An. 3130. An. 3130 In the 15. year of Amaziah King of Jeroboam the 13. King 2 King. 14. 23. Judah, Jeroboam the son of Jehoash or Joash, reigned in his stead: here again is a different account, as thus: Joash began to reign in the 37. year of Joash King of Judah, who reigned 40. years; and Jero∣boam began to reign in the 15. of A∣maziah This is no∣ted in the reign of A∣maziah. (which are 18. years) whereas Joash King of Israel reigned but 16.
years; here are two years difference, which time Amaziah did reign, with his father Joash. Jeroboam departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin: yet the Lord made him victorious, for the delivery of Israel from very bitter afflictions, and restored them to much liberty: he reig∣ned Vers. 23. 41. years, about An. 3171. An. 3171 In the 38. year of Azariah King of Zachariah the 14. King of Israel. Judah, Zachariah the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel: here again is 2 King. 15. 8. with Vers. 1. the like case as before. Azariah King of Judah, began to reign the 27. year of Jeroboam King of Israel. Jeroboam reigned 41. years: from 27. to 41. is 14. years of Azariah's reign; and in the 38. year of Azariah, Zechariah began his reign. So that Israel was 24. years An interval of 24. years between Je∣roboam and his son Za∣chariah. without a King 3195. Zechariah followed his fathers, and departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin; and Shallum flew him before the Vers. 9, 10. people, and reigned in his stead, when Zachariah had reigned but six moneths, about An. 3195. An. 3195 Now sin was high, and judgement Zachariah murdered. neer; Shallum had lost shame and Con∣science, Vers. 22. to murder the King openly: yet
this was the fulfilling the word of the Lord, and the end of Jehu's race. Note. In the 39. of Azariah or Uzziah King Shallum the 15. King of Israel for one moneth. of Judah, Shallum began to reign over Israel; and Menahem smote him, and flew him, when he had reigned a just 2 King. 15. 13, 14. moneth. Now it was ordinary to mur∣der Kings for a Crown, and the people Shallum killed. wofully slaved by Tyranny: yet all the fruit of sin, An. 3195. An. 3195 In the 39. year of Azariah King of Menahem the 16. King of Israel. Judah, Menahem began to reign over Is∣rael. I may not omit to mention the bloudy beast-like cruelty of this wretch∣ed 2 King. 15. 17. Tyrant, which was great. When Menahem came up from Tirzah (which was formerly the chief City, and the seat of the Kings of Israel) with pur∣pose to murder the King at Samaria, the City Tizrah refused to open the gates Bloudy, beastly cru∣elty. ver. 16. to him. Thereupon he destroyed the City, and all the Coasts thereof, and ript up all the women who were with child. But though he murdered the King, to sit on his Throne, yet he departed not (all his daies) from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. It Vers. 18. doth appear this bloudy Tyrant sat not Vers. 19. quietly in his new aspired seat: for upon discontents amongst the people, Pul
King of Assyria took the opportunity of that division to bring up his Army a∣gainst Vers. 20. Israel: In this strait Menahem gave Pul 1000. Talents of silver to be on his side, to confirm the Kingdom in his hand: And Menahem exacted it of the people, especially of the wealthyest Wonderful slavery. of them. Oh the woful bondage and slavery Israel were now brought to! A bloudy Tyrant kills their King, and ex∣acts money from them, to confirm him∣self in the Throne he got by murder: yet thus he reigned 10. years, about Anno Vers. 19. 3205. An. 3205 In the 50. year of Azariah King of Pekaiah the 17. King. 2 King. 15. 23, 24, 25. Judah, Pekaiah the son of Menahem be∣gan to reign over Israel: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin: But Pe∣kah the son of Remaliah a Captain of Pekaiah murdered. his conspired against him, and killed him, when he had reigned two years, about An. 3207. An. 3207 In the 52. year of Azariah King Pekah the 18. King. 2 King. 15. 27, 28, &c. of Judah, Pekah began to reign over Israel: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. In his daies came Here was murder up∣on murder. Tiglah Pilneser King of Assyria, and took from him a great part of his Kingdom,
even eight Cities and Countries: and Hoshea the son of Elah conspired against Vers. 27. Pekah, and slew him, when had reigned 20. years, about An. 3220. An. 3220 In the 12. year of Ahaz King of Ju∣dah, Hoshea the 19. King of Israel, and last. Hoshea began to reign over Israel: He was bad, but not so bad as the Kings that were before him. This we must 2 King. 17. 1, 2. with 2 King. 1. believe, because it's sacred Scripture: But the Lord would let us know, that many of the Kings of Israel were more then bloudy Murderers. It is plain Ho∣shea did murder Pekah, yet stands nine No King in Israel for 9. years. years before he took the Crown of Is∣rael; and became King, about Anno 3229. In his time Shalmanezer King of As∣syria, 2 King. 17 3, 4, &c. came up against him, and Hoshea subjected to him, and paid him tribute as a sub-King: but the King of Assyria not having his tribute paid for some years, and finding that Hoshea did hold confe∣dracy with the King of Egypt, Shalmane∣ser shut up Hoshea in prison. After which he brought up his Army, and besieged Sa∣maria three years: The siege was laid in 2 King. 18. 9, 10, & c. Sin the de∣struction of Israel. the 7. year of Hoshea, continued the 8. year, and Samaria was taken in the 9. year of Hoshea, which was the 6. year of Hezekiah King of Judah. This was the
final Captivity of the Kingdom and peo∣ple of Israel, and the sad fruit of their own doings, which is largely exprest by the sacred Pen-man of this History: so that Israels destruction, which they brought upon themselves by their vile Israels Cap∣tivity. abominations, was finished about Anno mun. 3238. An. 3238 What dreadful miseries these despe∣rate Thus the word of the Lord spoken by Samuel was made good to the ruine of Is∣rael. Idolaters and vile Murderers (called Kings) brought upon this people Israel, who were the Lords peculiar people, I leave to sad and serious thoughts. But to gather the better account of these times (which seem greatly to differ, I will here put down a very brief Chro∣nology 1 Sam. 8. 10, 11, &c. of the beginning and time of the reign of the Kings of Judah and Is∣rael, &c. Kings of Judah. IN the 18. year of Jeroboam, Abijam son of Rehoboam began to reign, 1 King. 15. 1, 2. and reigned 3. years, In the 20. year of Jeroboam, Asa son of Abijam reigned, 1 King. 15. 9, 10. he reigned 41.
In the 4. year of Ahab, Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign, and continued 25. years, 1 King. 22. 41, 42. In the 5. year of Joram, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat was crowned in his fa∣thers life-time, and reigned 8. years, 2 King. 8. 16, 17. In the 12. year of Joram, the people crowned Azariah (the youngest son of Jehoram) King, who reigned one year, 2 King. 8. 25, 26. Athaliah destroy'd the seed Royal, and set up her self, and continued 7. years, 2 King. 11. 1, 4. In the 7. year of Jehu, Jehoash began to reign, and reigned 40. years, 2 King. 12. 1. In the 2. year of Joash, Amaziah son of Joash King of Judah began to reign, and continued 29. years, 2 King. 14. 1, 2. and was then kill'd by a conspiracy, vers. 19. In the 27. year of Jeroboam, all the people took Azariah, and made him King in his fathers stead, 2 King. 14. 21. he reigned 52. years, 2 Chro. 26. 3. Before him Judah had no King for 12. years. In the 2. year of Pekah, Jotham the son of Azariah, or Uzzah, began to
reign, and continued 16. years, 2 King. 15. 32, 33. Consider 52. and 2. of Pe∣kah. In the 17. year of Pekah, Ahaz the son of Jotham began to reign, and conti∣nued 16. years, 2 King. 16. 1, 2. In the 3. year of Hoshea, Hezekiah the son of Ahaz began to reign, and reigned 29. years. Kings of Israel. IN the 2. year of Asa, Nadab the son of Jeroboam reigned, 1 King. 15. 28. he reigned 1. year. In the 3. year of Asa, Baasha set up himself King, 1 King. 15. 28. he reig∣ned 24. years, vers. 33. In the 26. year of Asa, Elah the son of Baasha reigned, 1 King. 16. 8. he reigned 2. years. In the 27. year of Asa, Zimri set up himself, 1 King. 16. 10. seven daies, vers. 15. In the 31. year of Asa, Omri set up himself, and reigned 12. years, 1 King. 16. 23.
In the 38. year of Asa, Ahab son of Omri began to reign, and continued 22. years, 1 King. 16. 29. In the 17. year of Jehoshaphat, Ahazi∣ah son of Ahab began to reign, and con∣tinued part of 2. years, 1 King. 22. 51. and had no son. In the 18. year of Jehoshaphat, Jeho∣ram the son of Ahab began to reign, and continued 12. years, 2 King. 3. 1. In the 12. year of Joram King of Is∣rael, Jehu kill'd him, and set up himself, and reigned 28. years, 2 King. 9. and 10. 36. In the 23 year of Joash, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign, and conti∣nued 17. years, 2 King. 13. 1. In the 37. year of Joash, Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz began to reign, and continued 16. years, 13. 10. In the 15. year of Amaziah, Jero∣boam the son of Jehoash began to reign, and continued 41. years, 2 King. 14. 23. In the 38. year of Azariah, Zachariah the son of Jeroboam began to reign, and continued but 6. moneths, 2 King. 14. 13. In the 39. year of Azariah, Shallum kill'd Zachariah, and set up himself, and reigned one moneth, 2 King. 15. 13. 10. In the 39. year (or same) of Aza∣riah,
Menahem kill'd Shallum, and set up himself, and continued 10. years, 2 King. 1 h. 14, 17. In the 50. year of Azariah, Pekaiah son of Menahem began to reign, and con∣tinued 2. years, 2 King. 15. 23. In the 52. year of Azariah, Pekah kill'd Pekaiah, and set up himself, and reigned 20. years, 2 King. 15. 25, 27. In the 12. year of Ahaz, Hoshea be∣gan to reign, and all Israel was taken Captives the 9. year of his reign, 2 King. 17. 1, 6. and 18. 10, 11. This was the final Captivity of Israel. Thus you have the several Kings of Judah and Israel gathered up in a few words: but for the better finding out of a true computation of these times, I will yet give them more briefly. Kings of Judah. 1. Saul 40. years 2888. 2. David 40. years and 6. moneths: he began his reign 2929 3. Solomon 40. years 2969 1. Rehoboam 17. years After the Division. 2986 2. Abijam 3. years 3989 3. Asa 41. years 3020
4. Jehoshaphat 25. years 3045 5. Jehoram 8. years 3053 6. Ahaziah 1. year 3054 7. Athaliah 7. years 3061 8. Joash 40. years 3100 9. Amaziah 29. years 3129 10. Azariah 52. years 3194 11. Jotham 16. years 3200 12. Ahaz 16. years 3216 13. Hezekiah 29. years 3245 Thus far the Kings of Judah have the beginning of their Reigns accounted from the reigns of the Kings of Israel, except the four first Kings. Manasseh 55. years   3300 14. Amon 2. years 3302 15. Josiah 31. years 3333 16. Jehoahaz 3. moneths   17. Jehoiakim 11. years 3344 18. Jehoiakin 3. moneths   19. Zedekiah 11. years, which with Zedekiahs reign is 3355 These were Kings of Judah after the division, and before, who ended, about An. mun. 3355. By this account, this kingly race last∣ed 519. with Saul, and from David 477. years.
Kings of Israel. 1. Jeroboam 22. years: he began his reign with Rehoboam 2969 2. Nadab 1. year 2971 3. Baasha 24. years 3017 4. Elah 2. years 3011 5. Zimri 7. daies 3019 6. Omri 12. years 3031 7. Ahab 22. years 3053 8. Ahaziah 2. years 3055 9. Jehoram 12. years 3067 10. Jehu 28. years 3095 11. Jehoahaz 17. years 3112 12. Jehoash 16. years 3130 13. Jeroboam 41. years 3171 14. Zachariah 6. moneths 3195 15. Shallum one moneth 3195 16. Menahem 10. years 3205 17. Pekaiah 2. years 3207 18. Pekah 20. years 3227 19. Hoshea 9. years 3236 These were the Kings of Israel after the division, which began about Anno mun. 2969. and lasted 267. years.
The Monarchy of Chaldea. CHaldea is a Country or Province in that part of the World called Asia: it hath on the East Assyria, on the West Syria, on the North Armenia, and on the South Arabia Deserta. The chief Cities were, Ur, Erech, Gen. 10. 8, 10. Accad, Carnel, and Babel, or Babylon. Nimrod was the first founder of the Tower of Babel, and of the City Babylon neer Euphrates, and was the first that ever took the title of King, about 150. years after the Flood, and Anno mundi 1807. Belus succeeded in the Kingdom. Be∣lus Note. was called Jupiter Babylonious; the image of whom was worshiped, and had the name of Bel and Baal. Historians give account of the growth of this Monarchy, and record the names of 44. Kings from Belus, to Nebuchad∣nezzer the Great, who subdued all Sy∣ria, part of Egypt, and Judea: of whom Daniel speaks, &c. Nebuchadnezzer the first of that name, Sleidan, was son to Merodach-Baladan Lieute∣nant
of Babylon, under Assaradon King of Assyria. But having his opportunity, he revolted; and overcoming Assaradon in the 12. year of his reign, Merodach possessed the Empire, and after lest Ne∣buchadnezzer his son to reign in his stead. Nebuchadnezzer began his reign in the fourth year of Jehoiakim King of Jer. 25. 1. An. 3346 2 King. 24. 1, 7. Judah, Ann. mund. 3346. In the fourth year of his reign, & in the eighth year of the reign of Jehoiakim, Nebuchadnezzer made War with Pharaoh-Necho King of Egypt, and took all from him (which he had gotten) from the River of Egypt un∣to the River Euphrates; and so Jehoia∣kim King of Judah became a servant, and was tributary to Nebuchadnezzer King of Babylon three years. In the 11. year of Jehoiakim he rebelled against the King of Babylon, who came up and bound him in fetters, and carryed him to Baby∣lon; 2 Chro. 36. 6. and Jehoiakim his son reigned in his stead. In the 18. year of Nebuchadnezzer he 2 Kin. 25. 1. Jer. 52. 5. came up against Jerusalem, and laid siege to it, in the 9. year of Zedekiah King of Judah, and took the City in the 11. year 2 Chro. 3. 6. of Zedekiah, which was the 19. year of Nebuchadnezzer. At which time he made the Temple and City desolate: and
this was the last and great Captivity of the Jews, Anno mundi 3365. An. 3365 Sleidan. In the 23. year of Nebuchadnezzer (when he had subdued the Kings of the Ammonites, Moabites, &c.) he led his Army into Egypt; and having gotten the whole Country, Nebuchadnezzer be∣gan his Monarchy, and was now the first of the four Kings. In the second year of Nebuchadnezzers Empire, he had the Note. Dream expounded by Daniel, for the 2. Dan. 2. 38. year of his reign as King of Assyria, was 17. years before the last Captivity. After this Nebuchadnezzer, reigned as Emperour of Babylon 22. years, and in all 45. which I thus compute: Nebuchad∣nezzer began to reign in the fourth year of Jehoiakim: Jehoiakim reigned 7. 7. years more: Jehoiakin three moneths, but was not taken away until the end of 1. the year. Zedekiah reigned 11. years: In the 11. 37. year of Jehoiakins captivity, Evil∣merodach began to reign, Jer. 52. 31. so that Nebuchadnezzer had reigned 19. years, at the captivity, and after sway'd 26. which make 45. the Scepter 26. years, in all 45. After Nebuchadnezzer succeeded E∣vilmerodach his son, who reigned 30. years. I finde Chronologers differ
much about the successors of Evilmero∣dach: yet I Judge from the word of the Prophet Jeremiah, Belshazzer only suc∣ceeded Jer. 17. 6. 7. 37. years; so that more years of necessity then 30. are to be allowed to Evilmerodach, to compleat the 70. years of the Jews Captivity in Babylon. Authors speak of others; But the sacred History saith, The Jews were servants 2 Chro. 36. 20. to Nebuchadnczzer, (and his sons) un∣til the reign of the Kingdom of Persia, Dan. 5. 31, 32. 3435. The Monarchy of Media and Persia. MEdia and Persia are two Regions in Heylin. in Asia: Media is limitted on the East with Parthia, on the West with Ar∣menia, on the South with Persia, on the North with the Caspian Sea. The chief Cities of old in this Coun∣try, were Laodicea, Appannia, Rhaga, Tauris. Persia is bounded on the East with the River Indus, on the West with the Persian Gulf, on the North with the Caspian Sea, on the South with the main Ocean.
Persia hath 10. several Provinces, and many Cities, of which as chief were Per∣sepolis, Casbin and Susis. Media and Persia were distinct King∣doms, but were united under Cyrus King of Persia, which after became the second Monarchy. This Kingdome is signified by the Dan. 2. 32. breast and arms of Silver, in Nebuchad∣nezzers Dan. 8. 20. image. But in regard Cyrus was the chief King and Monarch, and yet the taking of the Kingdom of Babylon is given to Darius King of the Medes, it's necessary to reconcile this in the first Dan. 5. 31, 32. place. Darius of the Medes (call'd Cyaxares the son of Astyages) or as Daniel nam'd him Ahasuerus) the eighth King of the Dan. 9. 1. Medes, being old, and having no son, and withal finding his Souldiers uncon∣stant to him; Darius gave Mandana his daughter unto Cyrus King of Persia, who was his sisters son, and joyned him in the Government with him, and so uni∣ted the Kingdoms of Media and Persia: but how long time they reigned toge∣ther, is not certain. Darius called to his help, Cyrus his son in law, and at that time won the most mighty City of Baby∣on, and so brought the Empire to Media
and Persia. This Victory is given to Darius as the chief in Government, and Dan. 5. 31. aged about 62. years, who (it's thought) lived not passing one year after this Vi∣ctory, and then Cyrus came to be sole Emperour of Persia, where began the se∣cond Monarchy. Historians agree not about the Kings of Persia, neither for number, names or times of their Reigns; neither need we much to seek after them, sith now the Computation of times falls into Daniels Numbers. Therefore I will forbear to set down any of them, but refer the Rea∣der to a further view of these, in the Annotations I give upon Dan. 9. But all Writers with one consent a∣gree, That Alexander son of Philip Mar. 2. 12. Sleidan. King of Macedon made War against Darius, and overcame him in three Bat∣tels, where Alexander took Darius his Mother, his Wife and Children; but Da∣rius himself was murthered by his own Souldiers in flying to save himself. So the Empire of Persia had its end, and was translated to Grecia.
The Monarchy of Grecia. GRrecia or Greece is a Country in Europe, bounded on the East with Heilen. the AEgean Sea, the Hellespont on the West, Italy and the Adriatique Sea, on the North with Mount Hemus, on the South with the Jonian Sea. Greece is parted into Provinces, Peloponnesus, A∣thalia, Epirus, Albania, Macedonia, Mig∣donia, and Thracia. Peloponnesus is in compass 600. miles, and rounded with the Sea; only it joyns to the main Country by a neck of land of five miles in breadth. 1. Peloponnesus contains five Countries, and many Cities, of which were Lacede∣mon, in Laconia, and Corinth. 2. Achaia contains seven Countries, and beautified with many Cities, of which was famous Athens in Attica, Thebes in Boetia, Delphos in Phocis, Le∣panto in Lacris. 3. Epirus was famous (amongst other things) for Mount Pindus. 4. Albania. 5. Macedonia had also Countries and
Cities. This Province was famous for the Birth of Alexander the great. 6. Migdonia: this Province hath ma∣ny Cities, of which are Apollonia, Nea∣polis, and Thessalonica. 7. Thracia, in which are the famous Cities of Adrianopolis, and Constantinople. Grecia continued a Kingdome for the Heylin. reign of 22. Kings to Alexander the great, who became Monarch of the World. Alexander son to Philip King of Ma∣cedonia, in the 7. year of his reign fully overthrew Darius of Persia, and brought the Empire to Grecia, and after reigned Monarch 5. years, some say 7. years. It is said that Alexander reigned 12. years, Scriptures Harmony. Mat. 1. 7. but it's supposed 12. years as King of Macedon, not as Emperour of Grecia. But Alexander going to Babylon, there Sleidan. died of an Ague, others say of Poyson, at 30. years of age. However, in this sickness perceiving he should dye, He called his servants, such as were honour∣able, and had been brought up with him from his youth, and parted his Kingdom among them whilst he was yet alive. Of Mar. 1. 5, 6. which the chief are these four: Seleucus Dan. 11. 2. had Syria, Ptolomeus Egypt, Antigonus Asia the less, and Cassander had Mace∣donia:
All these put Crowns upon them∣selves, and each affecting Soverainty o∣ver the rest, they soon fell to great and continual Wars amongst themselves: but the main conflicts were between the Kings of Syria & Egypt, call'd by Daniel, The Kings of the North and South, Dan. 11. This was the third Kingdom repre∣sented in Nebuchadnezzer's image, &c. and in Daniel vision by, &c. But amongst Dan. 2. 32. all these I will only mention the Race of Dan. 5. 8. the Syrian Kings, as most sit for us to consider, and giveth the most light to un∣derstand the 11. Chap. of Daniel. Syria hath on the East Euphrates, on Heylin. the West the Mediterranean Sea, on the South Palestine or Canaan, and on the North Cilicia and other parts of the les∣ser Asia. This Country is thought (in part or in whole) to be the very place of Paradise, the Garden of Eden. Syria Paradise. contains three Provinces. 1. Phoenicia, lying upon Canaan, where are these Ci∣ties; Ptolomais, Sarepta, Sidon, Tyrus. 2. Province is Coelosyria, the chief City of which, was Damascus the Royal seat: and of these Kings of Syria, Scriptures speak much. The 3. Province is Syro-Phoenicia, whose chief Cities were Beri∣tus, Aleppo, or Sabab, Biblis, Tripolis,
and Antiochia. There was also Palmy∣ra, which was a City and Province. The Kings of this Country were as follows. Seleucus Nicanor was the first King of Heylin. Syria, and reigned 32. years. 2. Antiochus Soter 19. years. 3. Antiochus Theos 15. years. 4. Seleucus Gallinicus 20. years. 5. Selences Ceraunius 3. years. 6. Antiochus Magnus 36. years. 7. Seleucus Philopater 12. years. 8. Antiochus Epiphanes son to Anti∣ochus Magnus succeeded his brother Se∣leucus, and is the vile person Daniel speaks of, Dan. 11. 21. and that wicked root Antiochus (surnamed) Epiphanes, son of Antiochus the King, and he reig∣ned in the 137. year of the Kingdom of the Greeks, 1 Mac. 1. 10. On the 15. day of the month Casleu (by the Romans, No∣vember), in the 145. year of the Grecian Kingdom, they set the abomination of desolation upon the Altar, and burnt the Abominati∣on of deso∣lation set up by Antio∣chus. books of the Law, 1 Mac. 1. 54. &c. Joseph. Antiq. 12. lib. 7. chap. Dan. 8. 9. to 12. Thus Antiochus prevailed against the Jews, and fulfilled the word of the Lord spoken by Daniel: but the Lord a∣gain appearing in mercy to a few of his own people, (who had kept themselves
from the abominations of those evil times, and deeply mourned over the sins and sufferings of their brethren, and e∣specially the woful desolations of the Temple and worship of God) gave them 1 Mac. 4. 41, 52, a glorious deliverance from the Armies of Antiochus, and liberty again to re∣store the pure worship of God. This news being brought to Antiochus, he was astonished; and lying down upon his bed, fell sick with grief, and in his trouble lamented his cruelty against the Jewes, whom he destroyed without cause; acknowledging the just hand of the Lord was upon him for it. So giving order for the education of his son, he di∣ed 1 Mac. 6. 16 in the 149. year of the Kingdom of Grecia, and in all reigned 12. years. 9. Antiochus named Eupater succeed∣ed Antiochus Epiphanes his father in the Kingdom, and reigned two years. 10. Demetrius son of Seleucus came from Rome, and gathered an Army whereby he surprized Antiochus in his 1 Mac. 7. 1. and 10. 50. Palace, and reigned in his stead 9. years. 11. Alexander the son of Antiochus Epiphanes got an Army, and came against Demetrius, who had slain his brother Eupater, and possessed the Kingdom, and in a set battel, Alexander overthrew the
Army of Demetrius, where he also was slain, and Alexander sat upon the Throne. When Alexander was now e∣stablished in the Kingdom, he sent Em∣bassadours to Ptolomy King of Egypt, to make a league of amity with him, and to 1 Mac. 10. 51. give him Cleopatra his daughter to wife. Ptolomy King of Egypt seemed to rejoyce in the motion, and appointed Ptolomais to be the place of their meeting for to accomplish the Marriage; which was done with great glory. But both these Kings hearts were to do mischief (and according to Daniels Prophesie) they Dan. 11. 27 spake lies at one Table: for Ptolomy went about through deceit to get Alexanders Kingdom, and joyn it to his own. 12. In the 165. year, Demetrius Ni∣canor, son of Demetrius, who was over∣come by Alexander, came out of Crete 1 Mac. 10. 67. with an Army against Alexander: but Ptolomy King of Egypt having by deceit got into many of Alexanders Cities, left Garisons therein, and in the mean time offers a league with Demetrius, and to 1 Mac. 11. 8, 9, 10. give his daughter Cleopatra to him, (whom he had given before to Alexan∣der) which was done. Thus Ptolomy quieted Demetrius, and so took the op∣portunity to set the Crown of Asia and
Egypt both upon his own head. When Alexander heard of this, he came with his Army out of Cilicia, and made War with Ptolomy, but was worsted; and flying into Arabia, Zabdiel the Arabian took off Alexanders head, and sent it to Pto∣lomy: but Ptolomy died the third day after, and so Demetrius came to the 1 Mac. 11. 17, 18, 19 Crown in the 167 year of the Kingdom. Demetrius Nicanor came thus to the Kingdom, yet injoyed little peace: for Tryphon, who had been of Alexanders party, finding Demetrius his Army mur∣muring against him, set up Antiochus the son of Alexander, and lav sore upon Sinialcus the Arabian to deliver young Antiochus, that he might reign in his fa∣thers Mac. 11. 38, 39, 40, 54, 55. stead. At last Tryphon got Antio∣chus Crowned; and drawing unto him Here was killing to get a Crown many Souldiers who were discontented from Demetrius won Antioch, and so got much power. All this was done in 1 Mac. 13. 31, 32. and 14. 1, 2, 3. policy by Tryphon: for when opportunity served, he kill'd Antiochus, and set the Crown upon his own head: by this means Demetrius was full of trouble all his days; and going with his Army towards Media to get help to fight with Tryphon, Ar∣saces King of Persia smote his Host, and took Demetrius prisoner, in the year of the Kingdom 172.
13. Antiochus Sadetes son of Deme∣trius 1 Mac. 15. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. the King, gathered a great Army in the Isles of the Sea, to recover his Kingdom from Tryphon. He came up in the 174. year, at which time most of Tryphons forces left him, and joyned with Antiochus. Tryphon seeing trou∣bles coming upon him, fled to the City Dora, where Antiochus laid siege against him with an Army of 120000. foot and 8000. horsemen, and beset the Town by Land and Sea. But Tryphon got away, Ver. 37, 39 1 Mac. 16. 8, 9. and went by Sea to Oethosias: and the King pursued him. At this time Anti∣ochus brake his Covenant with the Jews, and made War upon them; where Judas was slain. Yet John his brother pursued the Victory, and gave an utter overthrow to the Army of Antiochus. How long Antiochus reigned, is not left certain; but he is thought to reign 3. years. 14. Antiochus Pius 12. years. 15. Demetrius Nicanor 4. years. 16. Alexander 2. years. 17. Antiochus Gryphius 29. years. There now arose much strife amongst the Nations, which continued about 10. years: but the Syrians (to end the strife amongst the Princes) chose Tygranes King of Armenia, to govern them, who
reigned about 18. years. And now the Syrian Monarchy being thus weakened through strife and division, Pompey the Roman General came up with an Army, overcame Tygranes, conquered Syria, and brought all in subjection to the Ro∣man Empire, about Ann. mund. 3902. A View of the Roman Empire. THis Empire had it's Original from Rome, as is well known. Italy is Maginus. a Country in this part of the World cal∣led Europe, and lies thus: Italy is round∣ed with the Ionian and Adriatique Seas, except towards France and Ger∣many, from whom it is parted by the Alps. This Region was distinguished into four parts. 1. Hesperia, 2. Latium, 3. Au∣sonia, Merula. and 4. Oenotria. Of all the Cities wherewith Italy was beautified, Rome had the first place, and became Mistress of the World. This City is supposed to be founded by Romulus and Rhemus, in Romes first building, a∣bout Anno mun. 3230. the reign of Hezekiah King of Judah, about Ann. mund. 3230. This City in her glory spread her lines to the compass
of 50. miles: But this City felt the fury of the Gaules, and by them was laid in Sleidan. heaps. So that now Rome standeth low∣er upon the Bank of Tiber, and is drawn Funke. into narrower bounds. This Empire hath (according to Daniels Prophesie,) Dan. 7. 7. differed greatly from the other three, and in nothing more then in the several changes of Government: yet as the Lord described to Daniel this fourth and last earthly Kingdom in several parts and properties, it is apparent that no City or Empire of the World hath answered the Vision, like this of Rome. Daniels fourth beast is described with 10. horns; but John in the Revelation having a Vision Rev. 12. 3. of the same beast, saw him with seven Rev. 17. 9, 12. heads, and ten horns: where the Ho∣ly Ghost there interpreteth the seven heads to be seven mountains, and the ten horns, ten Kings. Both which, time hath proved true in Rome. First, Rome in her plantation was built upon seven hills, which are thus named and numbered. Rome built upon seven hills. 1. Palatinus. 2. Capitolinus. 3. Vimi∣nalis. 4. Aventinus. 5. Exquilinus. 6. Cae∣lius. Rome had 7. several Govern∣ments Abbot. 7. Quirinalis. Secondly, Rome hath been eminent for seven changes in the Government of the Empire, every of which in their time had Supreme Au∣thority.
1. By Kings. 2. Consulls. 3. Decemviri. 4. Dictators. 5. Tri∣bunes. 6. Senate. 7. Emperours or Cae∣sars. But though ambition and avarice did cause these changes in the Roman State, yet the word of the Lord hath been fulfill'd in it and upon it, that there is lit∣tle to be accomplished. I shall wholly pass over the State of Rome under all these former Governments, and onely speak to the Imperial. When the Romans had ended their Note. War in France, Civil War arose a∣mongst themselves between Julius Cae∣sar, and En. Pompey his kinsman. Pom∣pey and Caesar were both Roman Gene∣rals, and had great interest in the people. But Pompey laying his design to get into sole power, would have Caesar put out of his Consulship, unlesse he would dis∣band his Army. Caesar could not think himself safe to dismiss his Souldiers: yet did offer, that he would do it, if Pompey would do the like. Yet this equal mo∣tion not being accepted, Caesar presently speeded to his Army in France, marched into Italy, and there possessed himself of divers strong Holds. This news being brought to Pompey, he rallied his Army, and gave Battel to Caesar. But in this
Fight Pompey's Army was routed, and Pompey himself fled into Egypt. But where Pompey looked for requital of for∣mer A false friend. kindness, his low estate was now despised, and Ptolomy King of Egypt fearing uprores in his Country by har∣bouring Pompey, he caused Pompey to be treacherously slain, and so Caesar came to sole power. In the 5. year of this Civil War, Julius Caesar returned to Rome: and now ene∣mies being vanquished abroad, and the Plutarch. people pacisied at home, Julius Caesar had the honour of Dictator; but having the power of the sword, he assumed Supreme Authority to himself, chose Senators of his own party, and conferred honours and Offices of the Weale-publike, upon whom he pleased. By this usurpation, Caesar was lost much in the affections of the people in general, and hated by di∣vers. So that conspiracies were made against him, and at last he was murdered in the Senate, the 15. of March, the 5. moneth after he came to Rome, by those he had shewn great kindness to. The Roman Monarchy here took beginning, and from hence I intend to trace the Emperours so long as the Roman Em∣pire lasted, and give a view to the world
what beastly Monsters most of them were, according to the Visions of them to Daniel. After the death of Julius Caesar, Octa∣vius Augustus first Emp. of Rome. Augustus, Caesars sisters son, drew the Souldiers after him, and pretended to put himself into Arms for the Weale∣pu An. mun. 3848. like. At this time the Government of Triumviri were established, and the Rule given to Augustus, and two of his friends. But the greedy ambition of sole Authority ingendred strife amongst the three Governours. M. Lepidus was soon deposed, for conspiring against Au∣gustus. And not long, after Augustus made War upon Antonius, (who had married the sister of Augustus) for put∣ting her away, and marrying the Queen of Egypt. In this War Augustus over∣came, and made Antonius, and Cleopatra his new wife, to kill themselves. And thus Augustus came to the Empire of Rome. Historians say, Our Saviour Jesus The birth of Christ. 3891 Luk. 2. 1. Christ was born of the Virgin, in the 42. year of the reign of Augustus. That Christ was born in the reign of Augu∣stus, the Scripture assures us; but to finde out the particular year of his reign, we must consult Chronologers. John Slei∣dan saith, It was the 29. year of Augu∣stus,
&c. Yet these may be thus recon∣ciled: accounting 13. years of Augustus his reign as Triumviri, and 29. in sole Government as Emperour, the birth of Christ falls in the 42. year of Augustus; after which he reigned 14. years, and in all 56. and died Anno Christ. 15. An. 15. After Augustus, Tiberius (his son in Tiberius the 2. Emp Sleidan. law) took the Empire. At first he seem∣ed hard to be perswaded to accept the Crown, and for some time did nothing of moment without the Senate. But Luk. 3. 1, 21, 23. when he was well setled in the Throne, he did what he pleased. In the 15. year Mat. 3. 13. and 4. 1, 15. Christ's Bapt. and Death. of Tiberius, Jesus Christ was Baptized, and entered upon his publike Ministry, and suffered death in the 18. or begin∣ning of the 19. of the reign of Tiberius. Cytreus upon the 21. of Mat. hath it thus: Our Saviour Christ Jesus, when Cytreus. he had lived here on earth 33. years, and something more, suffered death for the Salvation of mankinde the 25. day of March, in the 18. year of the reign of Tiberius. In his reign also Steven was stoned, John Baptist beheaded, and Paul called. In all, Tiberius reigned 22. years, and odd moneths, An. Christ. 37. An. 37. Caius Caligula now took the Imperial Scepter: This Emperour abounded in Caius th 3. Emperour.
cruelty, Idolatty, and pride; forgetting he was but dust, he claimed to himself the honour of God, causing the people to pray to him, and dedicated the Lords ho∣ly Euseb. Temple in Jerusalem (never before so Sleidan. defiled) to new Caius, as a famous God. In the time of Caius, Pilate who past The misera∣ble end of Pilate, who condemned Jesus Christ. Sentence of death upon Christ, fell into a tormenting disease, and to end his mise∣ry kill'd himself: Also Herod that be∣headed John was put down and banished: Caius himself was also slain by his own Guard, when he had reigned 3. years and 10 moneths, An. 42. An. 42. Claudius Uncle to Caius came next to Claudius the 4. Em∣perour. the Throne: He was a great Warrior, and reduced many Countries to obedi∣ence to the Roman Scepter; amongst o∣thers, this Nation of England, and marri∣ed Flor. Hist. his daughter to Arviragus the King: and in memory of that great solemnity, Euseb. he built Kaerlow, now Glocester, An. 44. When Claudius had borne the Crown 13. years, 8. moneths, and 20. daies, he died, An. 56. An. 56. Nero took the next turn: He past the Nero the 5. Emperour. former part of his reign quietly. But af∣ter he was setled, he fell into abominable wickedness; his malice carried him be∣yond the bounds of humanity, that he
tormented to death his own mother, his brethren, and his wife. Nero (to all o∣ther The first per∣secution. evils) raised the first persecution a∣gainst the Christians: In this persecuti∣on Peter and Paul the Apostles suffered Martyrdom, and by this means the Gos∣pel was much spread; at which time it's said, The Gospel was brought into Eng∣land The Gospel brought to England. Euseb. by Joseph of Arimathea. Upon the cruelty of Nero, divers Countries rebel∣led, and great troubles were raised in the Roman State: but to prevent a deserved death by the sentence of the Senate, Ne∣ro became his own executioner, when he had reigned 13. years and 8. daies, An. 69. An. 69. The Empire at the death of Nero was Galba the 6. Emperor. in great disorder, and the Sword bare the greatest sway. By this means Galba was set upon the Throne; yet he kept it but 7. moneths and 7. daies, but was behea∣ded. Otho succeeded Galba, yet he continu∣ed Otho the 7. Emperour. his honour but for 3. moneths, and he was slain. Vitellius took the next turn, who was Vitellius the 8. Em∣perour. Emperour but 8. moneths, and he was dispatched. Vespatian being now General of the Vespatian the 9. Em∣perour. Roman Armies sent against the Jewes,
the Army proclaimed Vespatian Empe∣rour of Rome. Hereupon the Empe∣rour left the Government of the Army to his son Titus, and himself returned to Rome. At this time the Lord fulfilled the word of Prophesie in a great mea∣sure Jerusalems destroy'd by fire and sword. Joseph. Euseb. upon the Jewes: for under Titus, Je∣rusalem was sacked, the Temple burnt, and the most dreadful slaughter of the miserable Jewes, that ever happened to them, or any other people, the 8. day of September, An. 73. In the reign of Ves∣patian, Timothy was put to death at E∣phesus, by the worshippers of Diana. Ves∣patian reigned 10. years, and died of a Lask, An. 81. Titus succeeded his father Vespatian, Titus the 10. and reigned two years and two moneths, An. 83. Domitian second son to Vespatian, fol∣lowed Domitian the 11. Em∣perour. The second persecution. his brother Titus. Domitian be∣gan the second persecution against the Christians in his fathers reign, but pro∣secuted it when he came to the Empire. Domitian was taken into Government with his brother Titus, whom he soon murdered; and falling from one wicked∣ness to another, in the hight of his sin, he caused himself to be worshipped as God. This vile monster respected nei∣ther
estate, age, or sex, but exercised great cruelty to all. In his time the A∣postle The Reve∣lation given to John. John was put into a vessel of boil∣ing oyl, but the Lord miraculously pre∣serving his life, after which he was ba∣nished into the Isle Patmos, where he had the Revelation. After Domitian Rev. 1. 9. Euseb. had shed much bloud, he was murdered, and his Corps mangled by his own ser∣vants, when he had reigned 15. years, An. 98. Nerva was now called to the Empire. Nerva the 12. Emper. At this time the Senate made void all the honours conferred by Domitian, and pro∣claimed liberty to all in exile: By which Peace to the Church. John was restored in the first year of Nerva, and openly preached the Gos∣pel. John lived to the age of 120. years; and going into a grave which he had made with his own hands, he laid himself Dorotheus. down and slept with the Lord. Nerva reigned 1. year and 4. moneths, Anno 100. Trajan a Spaniard (the adopted son of Trajan the 13. Emper. Nerva) had the Crown. Trajan was very fair in the first part of his reign, but about the 10. year of his reign he began the third bloudy persecution against the The third persecution. Christians. Trajan died of a Lask when he had reigned 19. years and 6. moneths. An. 118.
AElius Adrianus succeeded in the Em∣pire, Adrian the 14. Emp. and for some time continued the persecution against the Christians, but after gave them their liberty. In the 18. year of his reign, he sent an Army in∣to Judea against the Jewes who had re∣volted, and by woful slaughters they The Jewes dispersion, &c. Ann. 136. were overcome, and banished their own Country, so that by the Emperours de∣cree, the Jewes were not to come so neer Judea, as to stand upon the top of an hill, and look to their own native Country. At this time the Jewes were dispersed, that unto this day they have not been a Nation, nor enjoyed the common priviledge of Laws and Go∣vernment amongst themselves as a Com∣monwealth. And upon this dispersion of the Jewes, Jerusalem was dedicated to idol-worship; the worship of God, the dayly sacrifice wholly ceased, and Jerusalem called by the name of AElia, Euseb. Joseph. after the Emperours own name. In all, Adrian reigned 21 years, and died An. 139. An. 139. Antoninus Pius was next chosen to the Pius the 15 Emperour. Empire by the Senate, upon the desire of Adrian. He lived peaceably, and died in the 23. year of his reign, Anno 162. An. 162.
Antoninus Verus succeeded his father Verus the 16. Empe∣rour, raised the fourth persecution. Pius in the Empire, but not in his piety or peaceableness. He raised the fourth persecution against the Christians, and continued 19. years, An. 181. An. 181. Commodus came next to Imperial Rule: Commodus the 17. Emp. He continued the former persecution; but the Lord doing a miracle upon the prayers of his people, the Emperour staid that persecution. Commodus reigned 13. years, and died by poyson, Anno 194. An. 194. Pertinax succeeded in the Empire. Pertinax the 18. Emp. He was a friend to Christians, and in his time the Church had peace, and flouri∣shed much. Pertinax reigned but 6. moneths. Severus took the Scepter. He was fa∣vourable Severus the 19. Emp. raised the fifth perse∣cution. to the Christians, for ten years; but being stirred up against them by ma∣licious accusations, he raised the fifth persecution. He reigned 18. years, and died at York, An. 212. An. 212. Caracalla succeeded his father Severus Caracalla the 20. Em∣perour. in the Empire, and in his persecution of the Christians, but was slain when he had reigned 7. years and 6. moneths, Anno 220. An. 220. Macrinus succeeded, and died in the Macrinus 21. first year, An. 221.
Antonius Heliogabalus reigned 4. Helioga∣balus 22. years, An. 225. Alexander Severus took the next Alexander the 23 Emp. turn. He was a valiant Warrior, and re∣duced divers Countries to obedience: But going against the Germans, he was Sleidan. slain by his own Souldiers, when he had reigned 13. years, An. 238. An. 238. Maximinus succeeded Alexander. He Maximi∣nus the 24. Emperour. began the 6. persecution up on the Chri∣stians, and his main design was upon the Teachers, thinking thereby the better to root out Religion. Maximinus did subject some Countries to the Roman Euseb. Empire, but for his cruelty the Souldiers hated him, and in his absence chose Gor∣dianus Sleidan. Emperour, whom the Senate con∣firmed. Maximinus thus deposed, thought upon revenge, and raising what strength he could, laid siege to Aquileia. But the Senate sent out an Army against him, and both Maximinus and his son were presently slain by his own Souldiers, in 3. year of his reign, An. 241. An. 241. Gordianus was now established in the Gordianus the 25. Emp. Euseb. Emperial seat; yet after by the Treason of Philip chief Governour under Gordi∣anus, Gordianus was betray'd and murde∣red by his own Souldiers, in the 6. year of his reign, An. 247. An. 247.
Philip now ascended the throne, but Philip the 26. was paid in his own coyn, when he had reigned 7. years, An. 254. An. 254. Decius was now chosen to be Empe∣rour Decius the 27. Emp. by the Army. He raised the se∣venth persecution against the Christians. He left the Government of the Publike Weale to the Senate, and went forth to Euseb. Sleidan. War against the Scythians; but both he and his son were traiterously slain, when he had reigned something more then a year, An. 255. An. 255. Gallus was presently made Emperour Gallus the 28. Emp. by the Army; and the better to keep his new Crown, made a dishonourable peace with the Scythians. But Amili∣anus Governour of Mysia stirred up the Souldiers to prosecute the War a∣gainst Sleidan. the Scythians, who were put to flight, and hereupon the Souldiers made him Emperour. This stirred Gallus, who forthwith raised an Army against Amilia∣nus his competitor: but in that battel Gal∣lus was slain, & so ended the strife, when he had reigned about a year, An. 257. An. 257. Amilianus was next to succeed; but Amilianus the 29. Emp. while Gallus and he were contending for the Crown, another Army which lay a∣bout the Alps, called Valerian (a man of Sleidan. a Noble family) to the Emperial dignity.
Whereupon Amilianus his Souldiers soon took away his life, when he had held the Throne but 3. moneths, and joyned with the new Emperour. Valerian now setled in the Empire, took Gallienus his son into Government Valerian the 30. Em∣perour. with him. At first, Valerian greatly fa∣voured the Christians, and had many in his Court. But after being incensed a∣gainst them by an Egyptian Enchanter, raised the eighth persecution, about An. The eighth persecution. 259. Yet the righteous God made him feel the smart of Tyranny. Valerian go∣ing to War against the Persians, was ta∣ken Clarks Martyr. prisoner, where he was made the Kings foot-stool when he got upon his horse, and after flea'd alive and salted, and so ended this miserable life. Galienus left in Government, still con∣tinued Gallienus the 31. Emp. Emperour; but he gave himself up to his pleasure, and neglected the Publike Weale, by which many Pro∣vinces took their opportunity to pro∣vide Sleidan. for their own safety, and set up Em∣perours of their own. In his reign also the Gothes made invasions upon the Romans: all which together, Gallienus grew into hatred, and was soon slain. Yet it is said, Gallienus stayed the perse∣cution Euseb. against the Christians, about
An. 262. and with his father kept the Imperial Throne 15. years, An. 272. An. 272. Claudius next had the Empire. But Hi∣storians Claudius the 32. Emp. agree not in the time of his reign, or who succeeded; therefore I fol∣low Mr. Heylin, who gives to Claudius one year, An. 272. An. 272. Quintilius had the Throne for one Quintili∣us 33. year, and left it, An. 273. Aurelianus then took his turn. At Aurelius the 34. Emp. The ninth persecution, add how it was sud∣denly stayed. Euseb. first he favoured the Christians, but after raised the ninth persecution against them. It is said, When this Emperour was about to sign his Edict against the Christians, the Lord stroke that arm, that he could not write his name: upon which he was so terrified, that he stay'd that persecution; and after this sign from heaven, the Church had peace through divers Emperours reigns. Aurelius was a valiant Warriour, and subdued di∣vers Provinces to the Roman State. Yet was after murdered by pretending friends, when he had reigned 6. years, An. 278. After Aurelius, the Empire was va∣cant, The Empire vacant. and no Emperour chosen for some time: which never happened from Ro∣mulus to that instant. Yet at length Tacitus was chosen Emperour, and rei∣gned 6. moneths. Tacitus 35
Florianus then took the Scepter, and Florianus 36. held it 80. daies. Probus was chosen to the Empire, as Probus the 37. Emp. some say, By the nomination of Tacitus, and confirmed both by the Army and Senate. He by his wisdom so setled the Nations in such peace, that on a time he said, We shall not shortly need Armies Sleidan. or Garisons. But this speech of the Emperour so greatly offended the Soul∣diers, Euseb. that they consulted new troubles; and not long after, Probus died, when he had held the Crown 6. years, An. 286. An. 286. Carus succeeded Probus. He took Carus the 38. into Government with him his two sons, Carinus and Numerianus: Carus Numeria∣nus the 39. soon died, and Numerianus follow∣ing the Wars, was slain by his fa∣ther in law. Upon this, Dioclesian was chosen Emperour, and raised an Army against Carianus; but in battel Cari∣anus Carianus 40. lost his life, when all three Empe∣rours had reigned but 3. years, Anno Euseb. Sleidan. 289. An. 289. Dioclesian now succeeded in the Em∣pire Dioclesian the 14. Emp.; and finding troubles and tumults arising in many places, he took Maxi∣minian into Government with him, and The division of the Em∣pire. divided the Empire into East and West. That the Publike Weale might be yet
more stable, and better ordered, Diocle∣sian adopted Galerius to succeed him, and Maximinian chose Constantius Clorus to follow him: Yet Galerius was sent to command in the East, and Constantius kept the West. These Emperours by this Policy kept peace at home, and got Victories abroad, by which they were exceedingly lift up in pride. In such height was Dioclesian, that he would be Dioclesian worshipped as God. The tenth persecution. worshipped as God. And to the rest of his sin, he raised the tenth persecution against the Christians, which rose very high. In the 19. year of his reign, neer the Feast of Easter, the Emperour sent out his Edict, by which he commanded all Churches to be laid even with the ground, the holy Scriptures to be burnt, Scriptures burnt. the Pastours of Churches first to be im∣prisoned, and then forced to offer sacri∣fice to idols, or suffer death, &c. It cannot be said, how much Christian bloud was shed in a little time. Yet the righteous God suffered not these bloudy persecutors to go in peace to their graves. In the 20. year of these Empe∣rours Government, they grew weary of their honours, and resigned their Empe∣rial trust to their Companions. But The woful end of per∣secutors. Maximinus grew mad, and hanged him∣self:
And Dioclesian fell into a horrible Disease, his intrails and flesh rotting, Euseb. with innumerable lice swarming upon him, and so wasted away, An. 309. An. 309. Though now the Empire be divided into East and West, or West and East; I shall only follow the Western Empire, and speak only of the Eastern Emperours occasionally, as this History requires. Constantius now Emperour of the Constanti∣us the 42. Emp. of Rome. West, had his abode in England, and married Helena, daughter of King Coel. Constantius was greatly affected with Religion, and the worship of God, which he much promoted; but in the 7. year of his Government, after the Resignation of the former Emperours, he departed this life at York, An. 316. Constantius being now dead, Galerius Emperour of the East adopted Severus and Maximinus to succeed next in Go∣vernment. In the interim, the Nobles and Souldiers at Rome elected Maxenti∣us to be Emperour. Upon this, great troubles did arise; and to quier both the parties up in arms, the Nobility called Constantine son of Constantius out of France, to deliver Rome from the Ty∣ranny of Maxentius: Constantine forth∣with drew into Italy with his Army,
where he got the first Battel, and after totally routed Maxentius neer to Rome. Constantine was Proclaimed Emperour after the death of his father in England: Constan∣tine the great the 43. Emp. Sleidan. Socrates. But now he had overcome his enemies, he was established in the Imperial Throne. Constantine bearing great affection to Licinius, took him into Government, and married his sister Constantia to him, out of this respect, that Licinius favour∣ed the Christians. But after some time his hypocrisie was discovered, and it ap∣peared that he intended secretly to mur∣der Constantine, and to raise persecution against the Christians. Yet the All-wise God prevented the one, and stay'd the other begun: For this malicious bloudy cruelty being brought to light, Constantine went against Licinius, over∣came him, and after ruled alone. Con∣stantine now setled the afflicted Church in much peace, and the Romans gave him the title of Constantine the Great. It is Historied by Socrates, That when Constantine was drawing up of his Army to relieve Rome from the Tyranny of Maxentius, that he was yet unsetled in Religion: But in the day-time there appeared a lightsome Pillar in the hea∣vens
like a Cross, with this inscription, In this overcome. But this appearance was of these Greek characters , which are the name of Christ; As Euseb. This In the life of Con∣stantine. lib. 1. c. 22. 25. at first amazed the Emperour: Yet he being assured by the restimony of others as well as himself, of the reality of the vision, Constantine did fully believe in Christ, and in that strength prospered. I will not spot paper with reciting the Popish fables reported of Constantine. But without question, he was a pious and peacable man, and did much for the Church of God. He was converted to Socrates. the faith about the 41. year of his age. Yet was not Baptized of long, purposely deferring his baptism, to be baptized in Jordan where Christ was baptized. Constantine had three sons, to whom he divided his Empire. First, Constantine, whom he made Emperour over the We∣stern parts of his Empire, in the 10. year of his reign. Secondly, Constantius, whom he set over the Eastern parts of his Empire, in the 20. year of his reign. Thirdly, Constans had his Empire assign∣ed to him, in the 30. year of his fathers reign. The division of the Roman Em∣pire is given more particularly, Thus: Sleidan. The division of the Empire by Constan. 1. Constantine had the Alpes, France,
Spain, England, Ireland, the Isles of the Orchades, and Thile. 2. Constantius had the Countries of Asia, and Thracia. 3. Constans had Italy, Affrick, with the Isles, Sclavonia, Macedonia, Achaia, Peloponnesus, and Grecia. Of all the Empire, Constantine the great delighted in Byzantius, a City in Thra∣cia, which he made the Emperial seat, and called it Constantinople. In the 65. Constan∣tines Bap∣tism. year of his age, and the 31. of his reign, Constantine fell sick, and for the recovery of his health, went to the hot Baths in Helenopolis: But finding his sickness to increase, he left the Baths, and came to Nicomedia, and without the walls of the City was baptized into the faith of Christ, by Eusebius Pastor of the Church in Nicomedia. Constantine greatly re∣joyced in his baptism, and after made his Will; and the 22. day of May, in the 65. year of his Age, and the 31. of his reign, he departed this life, An. 340. An. 340. Though the Empire was divided by Constantine in his life time to his three sons, and each had large Dominions; Yet (as ambition can keep no bonds) Con∣stantine made War upon his brother Con∣stans, and invaded some of his Coun∣tries.
This stirred up Constans, who went against his brother, where Constan∣tine (the Elder brother) lost his Army and life together. This gave encourage∣ment to Constans, who past the Moun∣tains, and in two years possessed himself of all his brothers Dominions. But up∣on the death of Constantine, the Souldiers chose Magnentius Emperour, who pro∣secuted the War against Constans, and in a short time had him murdered by con∣spiracy. Thus in a little time the Eldest and youngest of Constantines sons came to sudden if not sad ends. Constantius (the only son of Constan∣tine Constanti∣us the 2. the 44. Emp. now living) having knowledge of these things, left Gallus his brother in law, his Lieutenant in Asia, and with a great Army came into Italy against Magnentius. Upon the first Battel, the Army of Magnentius was totally routed, but himself escaped away with life: Magnentius in this low condition sent Ambassadours to Constantius for peace: But that being refused by Constantius, Magnentius resolved to try his fortune in another pitched battel, which also proved unhappy to him; and not finding now a way open to save his life, he slew The Roman Empire a∣gain united. himself, and so the whole Empire came
into the hand of Constantius. But in the absence of Constantius, Gallus rebelled, and set up himself Emperour of the East. Yet Constantius by a wile, got Gallus in∣to France; and when he had him there, soon took off his head, and so ended that strife. Constantius then took Julian his bro∣thers son into Government, and left him in France. Julian prospered in War, and growing into the affection of the Souldiery, they elected him Casar Au∣gustus. The news of this sorely displea∣sed Constantius, who was drawing down his Army against Julian: But in the way Constantius died of an Apoplexia, the 3. day of November, in the year 45. of his Socrates. age, when he had reigned 11. years with his father Constantine, and 25. years after him, An. 365. An. 365. Julian now succeeded in the Empire, Julian call'd the Apostate, the 45. Emp. and the 11. day of December following the death of Constantius, was proclamed Emperour. At Julians first coming to the Empire, he found the people greatly divided; but being unsound in Religion, (to which he much pretended, to please his Uncle, and get the Crown,) now he set himself to please men. In Policy he applyed himself to every Socrates.
sort, and framed his behaviour to every humor. He slattered some, he allured others with gifts, and places of prefer∣ment, and gave all their liberty in Reli∣gion, Devilish Policy. to establish himself. Julian's hy∣pocrisie, and dissembling of the Christi∣an Religion, was undiscovered until this time. But now having got his design, and setled in the Throne, he manifested himself a desperate Apostate, soon open∣ed the Idol Temples, and offered sacri∣fice therein. After this, the Christians were banished his Court, and the vilest persons taken into favour. Julian now persecuted the Christians with bitter ha∣tred, Julians persecution. and studyed how to root out Reli∣gion. He would not put Christians to death, because Martyrs had so great ho∣nour; but as Learning was a great help to maintain the Doctrine of the Gospel, Julian made a Law, that Christians should not be trained up in the Schools of Literature. And further, to trouble The last building, and utter destruction of the Tem∣ple in Jeru∣salem. the Christians, he called in again the Jewes, and gave them Authority and supplies to build the Temple in Jerusa∣lem, there to offer sacrifice. The unbe∣lieving Jewes rejoycing in this opportu∣nity, set themselves busily to work. But though the seasonable word of Cyril was
slighted by them, yet the righteous hand of God was upon them, by which the word of the Lord was fulfilled. In that very night following, the Lord caused Socrates. an Earthquake, by which the very founda∣tions of the Temple was cast up, and fire (as lightening) which burnt the Tools of the Work-men, &c. About this time Julian drew his Army into Persia, where he was shot with a poysoned Ar∣row, of which wound he died the 26. of June, the 31. year of his age, in the 3. year of his reign alone, An. 367. An. 367. Jovinian was next chosen Emperour Jovinian the 46. Emp. by the Army. He gave some liberty to the Christians, but died the 17. of Fe∣bruary, in the 33. year of his age, when he had reigned but 7. moneths. Valentinian was chosen Emperour by Valentini∣an the 47. Emperour. the Souldiers the 25. day of February. This Emperour being married, and yet having a minde to a beautiful Maid that pleased him much, he made a Law, That Sleidan. as many men as would, might have two wives; and so took Justina to be his se∣cond wife. After this, he broke a Vein in his Lungs, whereat the bloud stream∣out Socrates. until he died thereof, which was the 16. of November, in the 45. year of his age, and the 13. of his reign, An. 380. An. 380.
After the death of Valentinian, there Valens the 48. Emp. arose great strife between his sons. Some chose Gratian, who came by the first wife; and some chose Valens, who was by the second wife: But the bastard carryed it. Valens was an Arrian by profession, and sadly persecuted the Christians. In his reign the Goths driven out of their own Country by the Huns, were taken into protection by the Roman Empe∣rour, Socrates. and placed in Thracia. But soon after, the Goths laid siege against the Im∣perial City of Constantinople; and the Em∣perour coming against them in battel, was slain the 9. of August, in the 3. year of his reign, An. 383. An. 383. Gratian now came to the Throne. Gratian the 49. Emp. The Roman State was now greatly weakened, and the barbarous people strengthened: so Gratian took into Go∣vernment to him Theodosius a Spaniard. But Maximus a Captain under Gratian Sleidan. conspired the death of Gratian, who was murdered, when he had reigned 15. years. An. 391. Theodosius being established in the Theodosius the 50. Emp. Government with Gratian, set himself to suppress this bloudy Tyrant, and there∣fore drew his Army neer to Maximus: But when the Souldiers of Maximus
understood that the Emperour Theodosius came against them with a mighty Army, Socratos. they soon took Maximus, bound him, and brought him to Theodosius, who as soon caused the Tyrant to be executed. Theodosius was very laborious, and in his time called several Councils to finde out the truth, and to advance the purity of Religion. This Emperour had two sons, Arcadius and Honorius, whom he took into Government, when they were both young. Theodosius being at Millain, and finding bodily sickness increase, he sent for his son Honorius, who came to his father forthwith: but he departed this life, the 17. of January, the 60. year of his age, when he had reigned 16. years, An. 414. An. 414. Arcadius and Honorius, after the death Honorius the 1. Emp. of Rome. of their Father, divided the Roman Em∣pire. Arcadius went to the East, and Honorius rul'd te West. At this time Christian Religion began greatly to flou∣rish and spread, so that the greatest trou∣bles did arise from the ambition of Bi∣shops, which after I shall speak more to. In the reign of Honorius, by the treachery of Stilicus, the Goths took The Empire again divi∣ded. Rome, but stay'd not long. I finde no certain account given of Honorius his
death, or the time of his reign. Valentinian had the Empire of Rome, Valentini∣an the 52. Emp. and desired in Marriage his Couzen Endoxia daughter to Theodosius the se∣cond Emperour of the East. The moti∣on being accepted, Valentinian went to Constantinople, where the Marriage was solemnized. Long it was not but Valen∣tinian was slain by the treason of Max∣imus; and to revenge this treason, En∣doxia call'd in Genzericus King of the Vandals: but by him Rome was burnt, and the Western Empire brought to great desolation. After the death of Maximus, Avitus Avitus the 53. Emp. took the Imperial power, but was taken away by the Plague, when he had reig∣ned 8. moneths. The Empire now was vacant for some Majorinus the 54. Emp. time, but in the year following Majori∣nus took the Government upon him, but was soon murdered by Severus. Severus now come to the Imperial Severus the 53. Emp. Diadem, and Rome lying in her ashes, he made Ravenna the chief seat. Wo∣ful confusions now wasted the Western Empire, yet Severus kept the Crown 4. years. In the distractions and distresses of the Roman State between Genzericus
and others, Ambassadours were sent to Leo the second Emperour of the East, to desire him to send an Emperour to Rome. Hereupon Leo sent Anthemius, and with Anthemius the 56. Emp. him a great Army, to settle him in the Roman Empire. But Anthemius was slain, when he had governed 5. years. Olimbrius then ascended the Imperial Olimbrius the 57. Emp. Throne, and was dispatched in seven moneths. Glicerius next succeeded in the Roman Empire, but after 5. years was deposed Glicerius the 58. Emp. by Nepos. Nepos took the Crown, but had it ta∣ken Nepos the 59. Emp. again from him by Orestes, when he had worn it but 56. daies. Orestes possest the Empire, but gave it to Orestes the 60. his son Augustulus. Augustulus was the last Emperour of Augustu∣lus the 61. and last Emp. of Rome. Rome, and reigned but one year. It is said that Odoazer succeeded Au∣gustulus; but so low was the Roman State, that he refused the title of Empe∣rour, and took only the stile of King. Thus this Roman Empire, which had been the glory and terror of the World, for the space of 500. years, was now through sedition, pride, and cruelty, brought to woful ruine. In these distra∣ctions several Provinces of the Empire
fell off, and set up Kings amongst them∣selves: and here the Roman Empire ceased. The Monarchy of England. IT is agreed by Writers, that England was a Province of the Roman Em∣pire. Stowe. Some suppose it was first subjected England one of the Dragons ten horns. by the Emperour Severus, who in the 18. year of his reign was slain at York, Ann. Christ. 213. But it's granted Sleidan. that Constantine the great, upon the divi∣sion of the Empire to his three sons, France, Spain, England and Ireland, were sub-Kingdoms given to his eldest son Constantinus, about An. 343. Our Chro∣nologers acknowledge Brittain continu∣ed a Roman Province, until the time of Theodosius the second. At this time the Camden. Emperour had drawn the strength of this Nation over into France, and in those Stowe. Wars were much wasted, so that Brit∣tain was very weak of men; and upon this advantage the Picts and Scots made Inroads into England, and invaded some Countries, and did great hurt. Here∣upon
the Brittains required aid of the Romans: But the Roman Empire was This Horn took the Crown. now brought very low; and they having at that time Wars in Italy and in France, they neglected poor Brattain, who were forced to provide for themselves as well as they could; and so Brittain cast off the England cast off the Roman Go∣vernment, Roman Government, about the 16. year of Theodosius the 2. about Anno Christi 441. An. 441. The Brittains (when left to them∣selves) continued in doubtful Wars with the Picts and Scots, about 6. years, and Vortiger the 1. King of Brittain, then with one consent they Elected Vor∣tiger to be their King, An. Christi 447. An. 447. Vortiger was the first Brittish King. Stowe. In whole time the Land was greatly wa∣sted by a destroying Plague, that the li∣ving could scarcely bury the dead. This woful mortality gave the cruel Picts and Scots advantage again to enter England, who did make great spoil while there was no strength to resist them. Hereupon The first co∣ming of the Saxons in∣to England Vortiger sent for aid into Germany, from whence came Hingest and Horsus, with some Saxons. When Vortiger had beat back the Picts and Scots, He gave the An. 452. Isle of Thanet in Kent to the Captains, and their Companies to inhabit, as the reward of their good service. Captain
Hingest grew into great favour, and King Vortiger married to him his daugh∣ter Rowan, who was a very beautiful creature. Upon this match the Saxons did come into the Land abundantly, and carryed so high, that the Brittish people complained to the King, fearing they might invade the Land. But by the Queens interest the peoples complaints were slighted, and the Saxons encou∣raged. Whereupon the people depo∣sed Vortiger from the Crown, and made King Vor∣tiger de∣posed. Vortimer their King in his fathers stead, when Vortiger had reigned 7. years, An. 454. An. 454. Vortimer hotly pursued the growing Vortimer the 2. King of Brit. poy∣son'd by his mother in law. Saxons, who as stifly stood it out. But he got the better of them in divers bat∣tels: yet in revenge, Rowan his Step∣mother poysoned him, when he had reig∣ned 6 years, An. 460. An. 460. Vortiger the father of Vortimer once Vortiger King the se∣cond time. again obtained the Crown, and shortly after Hingest entred the Land again, with an Army of Saxons. Hingest fin∣ding a great preparation of the Brittains The trea∣chery of Hingest. against him, desired a Treaty for peace; and while they were treating, he treache∣rously slew 440. Earles and Barons up∣on Salsbury Plain, and took the King
prisoner. In this low condition, the King was constrained to give Kent, Sus∣sex, The first Kingdom of the Saxons in England Suffolk, and Norfolk, to Hingest, and there he set up his Kingdom. In this interim of time, Aurelius Ambrosius (son to Constantine) brought over an Ar∣my out of France to recover his right; and falling upon Vortiger, burnt him in his Castle in Wales, when he had reigned 6. years more, An. 466. An. 466. Aurelius Ambrose being set in the Ambrose 3 King of Brit. Throne, hasted speedily with an Army against Occa son of Hingest at York. In The setting up of the stones upon Salisbury Plain, about An. 467. that battel he took Occa prisoner, and soon after set up the great stones upon Salisbury Plain, in memory of the Brit∣tains that were buryed there, who were treacherously murdered by the Saxons, as before. In this Kings time the Saxons grew fast. They set up the South Kingdom of Saxons, containing Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, and Cornewall: Also Porthe set up the East Kingdom of the Saxons, containing Norfolk and Suffolk. Not long after, Aurelius Ambrose was poy∣soned, Ambrose poysoned. when he had reigned 32. years, An 498. An. 49. Uter Pendragon then bare the royal Uter Pan¦dragon the 4. Brit. King Diadem. No Lady would please him
but the Duke of Cornewall's wife; and on her he begat Arthur Pendragon, and reigned 18. years, An. 516. An. 516. Arthur the son of Uter succeeded his Arthur the 5. King of Brit. father. He fought twelve battels with the Saxons: when Arthur had much subdued these enemies at home, he com∣mitted the Government of Brittain to one Mordred, and followed the Wars beyond Sea. But in his absence Mor∣dred confederated with the King of the West Saxons, and set up himself King of The just end of an Usur∣per. Brittain. The news of this coming to Arthur, he speedily returned to Brit∣tain with an Army, and gave battel to Mordred in Cornewal, where Mordred was slain, and Arthur deadly wounded: yet they brought him to Glastenbury, where he died, when he had governed 16. years, An. 532. An. 532. Constantine a kinsman of Arthur got Constan∣tine 6. King of Brit. the Crown after him; But Aurelius a Brittain, raised War against him, and slew him, when he had reigned 3. years, An. 535. An. 535. Aurelius Conan, (Nephew to Arthur) was crowned King of Brittain, about An. 545. There was now great strife for the Kingdom; and it appears that for some time, one King was kill'd be∣fore
another got to the Throne. At this time Arthurs brother was next heir to the Crown; but Aurelius his Couzin got it by great hand (having the longer While di∣verse did strive for the Crown, the Saxon got the King∣dom. Sword) and kept his Uncle a prisoner. In the time while these were striving for the Crown, the Saxons got ground, and set up the fifth and sixth Kingdoms of the Saxons: Aurelius reigned 33. years, An. 578. An. 578. Vortipor succeeded his father Conan. Vortipor the 8. King of Brit. He was a vile person; he put away his wife, and kept his daughter for his Con∣cubine. He reigned 4. years, An. 582. An. 582. Malgo-Conan then had the rule. He Malgo the 9. King. delighted in the filthy sin of Sodomy; he kill'd his wife, and took his brothers daughter. In wickedness he reigned 4. years, An. 586. An. 586. Cara next got the Crown. This King Cara the last King of Brit. was so vile, abominable and wicked, that the people moved the Saxons, and the King of Ireland, to make War against him: and after two years, they drove him out of his Kingdom, An. 588. An. 588. The Brittains were now exceedingly wasted, the Christian faith before recei∣ved neer worn out. The Saxons prevai∣ling The Saxons possssd of all Eng. land. against the Brittains, drive them to the desolate Mountains in Wales, and got
the whole Dominion of this Land. In the time of the Saxons, the Inhabitants of this Land were called Angles or Anglish∣men, and now English-men, and the Brit∣tains Stowe. Welch-men. But though the Brit∣tains were driven into Wales, yet there they elected Kings over them, and as they had strength made War upon the Saxons until King Cadwalladar, Anno 687. The Saxons being now masters of Angland or England, they set up their The Saxons Heptarchy. Heptarchy or seven several Kingdoms, and every King had his Dominion. But when other competitors were gone, Am∣bition, and a varice, set them at variance, until one Kingdom had swallowed up all the other. Alas, alas, It's not Towns, or Countries, or some Nations that will satisfie aspiring spirits! Time and great experience hath proved this. Possibly, it may be expected that I should go through the Lines of these several Sax∣on Kings. But I find them treading in the same steps of those that went before them; and those that follow after, are the right sons of their Progenitors. Therefore I will enter again with Mo∣narchy, and pass all the rest (from the ex∣pulsion of the Brittains into Wales, and
the whole Land as divided amongst the The Saxon Heptarchy lasted 284. years. Saxons) until the Nation was again run up into one Monarchy, which was from An. 588. to 872. In the time of the Saxon Heptarchy the Danes made their first inroad into Danes first entered England. England, by Portland Island in the West; but were then repulsed, An. 800. Yet after they came with redoubled force, and entered in Northumberlaud; against whom Ethreldred King of the West Saxons (who had greatest strength of the Saxon Kings) gave them battel: but the The Danes second co∣ming to England. King was there slain, when he had reig∣ned 5. years; and the Danes still kept their hold, about An. 871. An. 871. Alfred or Alured last King of the West Saxons, began the first Monarchy Alfred 1. Monarch of England. of the Saxons in England. He put the Saxons Laws into English; he restored and repaired the City of London, and made it again habitable, which was wa∣sted and burnt by the Danes, An. 839. It is The univer∣sity of Ox∣ford foun∣ded. Stowe. thought also that this King was the first Founder of the University of Oxford. He reigned 29. years and 6. moneths, Ann. 900. An. 900. Edward the elder succeeded his fa∣ther Edward the 2. Saxon Monarch. Alfred. He subdued the Kings of Scotland and Wales. He built divers
Towns, and Nottingham-Bridge, and reigned 24. years, An. 924. An. 924. Adelstain or Athelstain, son to Ed∣ward, Athelstain 3. Saxon Monarch. took the Throne, and did much in his time. He expell'd the Danes out of the Land, and reigned 15. years, Anno 939. An. 939. Edmund succeeded his brother Athel∣stain, Edmund 4. Saxon Mo∣narch. and was slain, when he had reigned 5. years, An. 344. An. 944. Edmund left two sons young, and El∣dred brother to Edmund took on him the Eldred Protector made him∣self King. Government as Protector: but soon af∣ter he was Crowned King, and reigned 9. years, An. 953. An. 953. Edwin the son of Edmund succeeded Edwin 6. Saxon King. his Uncle Eldred; and in the day he was Crowned, he ravished his own kinswo∣man, the wife of a Noble man, and put her husband afterwards to death, that he might have her: For this and some other abominable acts, his Subjects de∣prived The King deposed. him of his Royal dignity, when he had reigned 4. years, An. 957. An. 957. After Edwin, Edgar his brother was Edgar 7. Saxon King. set on the Throne. He was a good Com∣monwealths-man, and reigned 16. years, An. 973. An. 973. Edward the second son of Edgar suc∣ceeded Edward the 8. King murdered. his father, but was murdered,
when he had reigned 3. years, Anno 976. An. 976. Etheldred the second son of Edgar, Etheldred the 9. Sax∣on King. murdered his brother, and set up him∣self in the Throne. But by this bloody act, and other ill carriages, he lost the hearts of his people. This division gave A wicked King was the ruine of the Nation. hope again to the Danes to set up them∣selves in the Nation; and in a little time they grew so great, Etheldred was con∣tent to give them yearly tribute of 1000. li. to purchase his peace to sit in the Throne. But the Danes finding Etheldred willing to lye down to the bur∣then, while his people had money to pay, by degrees they enhanced the 1000. li. per. an. to 48000. li. per. an. and when the King could not pay the tax, he se∣cretly The Lur-Danes (or Lord Danes) murdered. laid a plot (to which the people oppressed readily comply'd) to pay the Danes for all together. So upon the 12. day of Novemb. 1012. the Saxons kill'd all the Danes in the night. In revenge The Danes Conquered England. of this Massacre, Swain King of Denmark invaded England, with fire and sword, and possessed himself of this Monarchy. All the strength that Etheldred could raise, was no ways able to repel these conquering Danes; but King Swain tyran∣nized over the Saxons, & Etheldred died,
when he had reigned 38. year, An. 1014. An. 1014 Swain King of Denmark left his son Swain the first Danish King left Canutus in Rule. Canutus to rule in England. But Edmund (called Iron-side) a valiant man, son to Etheldred, set up himself in the Kingdom after his father, and made War upon Ca∣nutus the new King of the Danes. Many bloudy battels were fought between the Danes and the Saxons, and neither part prevailed: so that the Kings agreed to end the quarrel for the Empire between them. These stout Kings fought hand to hand for the Crown: In which Com∣bat they manifested their skill in arms, as well as courage, and wearied out them∣selves in fighting, but neither overcame; and so they agreed to divide the Nation England divided be∣tween the Danes and Saxons. between them: this was accordingly done. But not long after Edmund, was treacherously murdered by one, that thought thereby to be preferred by Ca∣nutus. Yet Canutus (like a man of worth) hated that wicked murder of so gallant a Prince, and for his reward caused the The just re∣ward of a Traytor. England reduced a∣gain to the Danes. Murderer to be tormented to death, and cast into a Ditch: Yet here the King∣dom of England was only reduced under Canutus, An. 1018. Canutus having thus brought the Nati∣on of England unto the Government of
the Danes. He put to death the next Canutus murdered the heir ap∣parent of the Saxons. heir apparent of the Saxons which was in England. But the better to confirm the Kingdom to him, he propounded a moti∣on of a Marriage with the Widow of E∣theldred, who was fled into Normandy Canutus married the Widow of Etheldred. with two of her sons. Emma the widow agreed to match with Canutus, upon con∣dition that the Kingdom of England should be confirmed unto the children begotten of her. Shortly after she bare a son to Canutus, called Hardie Canutus. By this Affinity, Canutus strengthened himself greatly; and subduing the Scots, was King of England, Scotland, Den∣mark and Norway, and reigned 20. years, An. 1028. Hardie Canutus having his residence Harold 2. Danish King of England in Denmark, Harold son to Canutus by a former wife, by assistance of the Danes, set up himself King of England. Harold knowing by what interest he was Kings rule by might, and not right. brought in, and setled in the Throne, he displaced the English, and put the Danes into places of Honour and Trust. He ba∣nished Emma, and put Alured her youn∣gest son by Etheldred to death, and reig∣ned 3. years, An. 1041. An. 1041 Hardie Canutus after the death of his Hardie Ca∣nutus the 3. Dan. King and last. brother Harold, possessed the Crown of
England, and in hatred of his brothers wickedness, caused Harolds body to be digged out of the earth, and cast in into the Thames. But Hardie Canutus being at a marriage feast, died suddenly in the midst of his cups, in the third year of his reign in England, An. 1043. An. 1043 Here ended the Line of the Danish Kings, and the Saxons again restored. Edward the remaining son of King Edward the 4. the 11. Saxon King Etheldred, was again brought into Eng∣land, and crowned at Winchester. He released the money paid to the Danes, call'd Danes-gift. He also collected a body of Common Laws. He cured the The Kings∣evil first healed by the King. swelling of the Throat, since called the Kings evil. And for holiness of life, was called Sr. Edward, and Edward the Con∣sessor. King Edward took to wife Ed∣giha the daughter of Earl Godwin; but died without issue, when he had reigned 23. years, and 6. moneths and odd daies, An. 1067. An. 1067 In the life time of Edward, he made Harold the 2. King. Harold son to Earl Godwin Regent of England, in the non-age o Edgar grand-child to Edmund Ironside, who was the heir apparent to the Crown, un∣til he should come to age. Unto which,
Edward the Confessor took an Oath of Harold. But when Edward was dead, Harold refused the Regentship, and crowned himself King of England: which It is a dreadful thing, to break a so∣lemn Oath, to get a Crown. shortly after brought distraction upon him, and misery to all the Nation. Yet for all, I may not pass in silence the good nature of the man, that he had some re∣spect to Prince Edgar. For though he took his Kingdom, yet Harold gave him the Earldom of Oxford, and above all, spared his life. But the righteous God soon raised black clouds, and sad storms, to disquiet England punishd for Harolds perjury. Harold with his dear purchased Crown, and the whole Nation for their wicked compliance with a sorsworn King. Ha∣rold King of Norway came with a great Army to fall upon England both by Sea and Land: And while Harold of Eng∣land was preparing to encounter the King of Norway, William Duke of Nor∣mandy landed a compleat Army in Eng∣land, the 28. of September, An. 1067. and claimed the right to the Crown of England, by gift from Edward the Con∣fessor. This the Duke pretended; and what small probability there is to assert Small pre∣tences will serve to claim a Kingdom. the truth of it, men may easily judge, by Edwards care to set up Edgar, the next
in succession of bloud. Harold of Eng∣land at this time had much wasted his men in a great battel fought with Ha∣rold of Norway: But having got the better of that enemy, he rallied his wea∣ried Souldiers to fight William Duke of Normandy, a new competitor for his ill got Crown. In this battel Harold was Gods speedy and sad re∣compence upon Ha∣rold, for breaking Oath made before God. slain, and the Normans got the Victory, and the Kingdom together, where there fell with their King 66654. English Souldiers, when Harold had reigned but 3. moneths, An. 1067. Here ended the Race of Saxon Kings in England. Normans, Kings of England. WIlliam Duke of Normandy (called William a Bastard the 1. K. of the Norman Race in England. Stowe. William the, Conqueror) was a Ba∣stard-son of Robert Duke of Normandy; who began his reign over England, the 14. day of October 1067. or by many, 1066. Upon these Wars, Edgar the true heir to the Crown of England, fled into Scotland, and many English men with him, who after raised an Army, and
came into England, and besieged York, It's ordina∣ry to swim though blood, to a Crown. where William had a Garison for himself. Edgar got the City, and possessed it. But William came with a great Army, and dave Edgar back to Scotland. At Williams first coming to the Crown, very considerable Cities in England stood a∣gainst him: so that he was established in the Throne by shedding of bloud, of much innocent bloud, which God hath and will yet judge some for. In the 4. year A great Famine in England. An. 1071 of his reign was a dreadful Famine, in which people eat mans flesh. In the 8. year he subdued Scotland, and made them do homage. In England he left no na∣tural Noble man to bear rule: but so impoverished the Nation by great Taxes, England reduced to extream misery. that much Tillage was laid, down, and good ground laid wast many miles toge∣ther. When the Tyrant had brought the nation into extream poverty, he im∣posed upon them an Oath of allegiance, and went into Normandy; and not long after falling to War with the King of France, he was over-heat in his fat body by his harness upon him, and got a The King sweatted. painful disease, and dyed the 9. of Sept. when he had reigned 20. years, 10. moneths, and about 25. daies, Anno 1008. An. 1088
William Rufus the 3. son of Duke Wil∣liam, William Rufus Norm King. took advantage of his elder bro∣ther Roberts absence, stepped into the Royal Throne, and began his reign from the death of his father. Most of the Nobility stood for Robert, and raised war against William: But by pleasing words and fair promises, he gained some of them to him, and then subdued the rest by force. After Robert claimed his right to the Crown; and William refusing to surrender, they fell to War, and at length agreed, that if either of them had not is∣sue, the Crown should descend to the survivers. In the 11. year of Williams The family and  judged by God. reign, all the Lands belonging to Earl Godwin (whose son proved a perfidious perjured man) by the breaking in of the Sea, was utterly. overwhelmed with wa∣ter, which is added to the vast Ocean, and still bears the name of Goodwins sands. King William was one that fulfilled the curse of God upon that kind of Govern∣ment; for it is recorded of him, that he did not only shave, but slea the people of England. But the just had of God found The just judgement of God upon William for his fa∣thers and his own op pression. him out, and at last Sir Walter Terril shooting at a Deer (in New Forrest, which his father had made a Forrest by the destorying the People and Town
30. miles together) the King being there hunting, the righteous Lord guided the Arrow to Williams brest, of which wound he fell dead, and spoke no word. Some of his men laid the dead body upon a Colliers Cart, drawn with one poor horse, which came by accident; which carried him to Winchester, where he was buried the day after: at whose burial men Tyrants dead, are basely e∣steemed. could not weep for joy. He reigned 12. years, 10. moneths, and about 22. daies, An. 1101. An. 1101 Henry brother to Rufus, the 4. son of Henry 1. the 3. Norm. King. William Duke of Normandy (who for his learning was called Beau-Clark) got into the Throne after his brother William Rufus. At first he abated the taxes, and reformed the Laws. But Robert Duke of Normandy returning from the holy Wars, made War upon his brother Hen∣ry for the Crown of England. At this time Robert was appeased with money; A cruel but∣cherly bro∣ther, to take his Crown, liberty, and life. but upon this quarrel was raised a second and third War. Till at last, Henry took Robert prisoner, and Duke Robert en∣deavouring escape, was taken, and then Henry caused his brothers eyes to be put The first King that bad power over the Clergy in England. out, and kept close prisoner to his death. King Henry in a Council or Par∣liament, had power given him over the
Clergy: But he took their Money, and suffered them to do what they pleased. And unto all other his black sins, It's plain, he was a whore-monger: for he made Robert his Bastard-son first Earl of Golcester. Many dreadful judgements, and great signs of Gods displeasure, were manifested upon the Land about these times. Yet Henry ruled 35. years and 4. moneths, and died the first day of De∣cember, An. 1136. An. 1136 Steven Earl of Bulloin, son to Alice Steven the 4. Norm. King. daughter to William the Conqueror, claimed the Crown of England, and suc∣ceeded his Uncle Henry. He was a gal∣lant Souldier, and much favoured and eased the people. But the Nobles of Eng∣land sent for Maud King Henry's daugh∣ter, who was married to the Emperorr England hath paid dear for the pride, ave∣rice and murder of Kings. of Rome (of the French line) and pro∣mised her to possess her in the Throne of England. At this time also the King of Scots invaded the North parts, and woful desolations were made in the Land by Armies on all sides. But at last Steven made peace, by adopting Henry, son to Maud, to succeed him in the Kingdom: so Steven died in peace, the 25. day of October, when he had reigned 18. years, 10. moneths, and odd days, An. 1155. An. 1155
Henry the 2. called Henry Plantage∣net, Henry the 2. next took the Royal Scepter: And now again the Saxon line was restored. Maude daughter to King Henry, son to William the Conqueror, was first The Saxon line again restord by marriage. married to the Emperour, and after to Geffery Plantagenet Earl of Angeou, and Duke of Normandy, by whom he had this Henry, who married Elianor descended from Malcolme a Saxon. It was obser∣ved of this King, that he was unsteadfast, or unfaithful in his promises, and a wed∣lock breaker. He caused his son Henry to be Crowned in his life-time, who married the King of France's daughter. But Henry and his brethren raised great Wars against their father, who died the A Crown sts the chil∣dren against their father 6. day of July, An. 1189, when he had reigned 34. years, 9. moneths, and 12. days. An. 1190 Richard the 2. son to Henry the 2. Richard the 1. The Kings fraud to get money. took the Crown of England. He sold great possessions and immunities from the Cown; and after pretending that he had  his Seal, caused all that had purchased to have their Deeds and Pa∣tents sealed again. Richard left the Government of England with a Chan∣cellor, and went into Normandy, and there he agreed with the King of France
to go to Jerusalem. In his absence, John Johns en∣deavour to get the Crown. his brother set up himself King: But up∣on Richards return, John was perswa∣ded by his mother to lay down the Crown, and Richard was again crowned Richard crowned the 2. time. King of England the 12. day of March; and then he entered again upon all the Lands he had sold, unless they would An. 1194 buy them again. How this man loved An uncon∣scionable King, had a sad end. Money, and let go Conscience, any may judge: But after he was shot with a poy∣son'd dart, of which he died the 6. day of April (or the second moneth) An. 1200. An. 1200 when he had reigned 9. years and 9. moneths. John now succeeded his brother Ri∣chard. John. He was divorced from his wife, and married another. Amongst other the great evils he brought upon England, this was not the least, That he resigned England first resigned to the Pope. his Crown, with the Realms of England and Ireland to the Pope. The Barons fell at difference with the King, and ob∣tained help from France; upon which the King sleeing up and down, ended his mi∣serable The Kings miserable end. life at Newark Castle (as some say by poyson.) But when he was dead, his servants divided what he had, not lea∣ving enough to cover his dead body, and then left him. He died the 19. of Octob.
Ann. 1217. when he had run out 17. An. 1217 years, and 6. moneths, with some odd daies. Henry the eldest son of Richard, by a second wife or Concubine, was set upon Henry the 3. by a Con∣cubine. the Throne at 9. years of age. Upon this the French withdrew out of the Nation. He took to wife Elianor daughter of Raymond, Earl of Provence. In his time The begin∣ning of the Barons Wars there fell great strife between the King and the Barons. At first they kept Par∣liaments apart, and after their consulta∣tions raised Armies; and in a battel, the King with his sons Edward and Ri∣chard, and many Nobles, were taken pri∣soners: But Edward being set at liberty, got up an Army, and fell on afresh: so at last the Earl of Leicester and many great ones were slain in the battel of Evesham. This begot bloudy wars, and brought woful desolations to poor England. And Many dreadful judgements upon Eng∣land. to the merciless sword, the Lord brought fearful judgements of Plagues, Famine, Earthquakes, and many other strange wonders in heaven and earth. But Hen∣ry resigned all to death the 16. of No∣vember 1273. when he had reigned 56. An. 1273 years and 28. days. Edward the eldest son of Henry, suc∣ceeded
his father. He married Elianor Edward the first. the daughter of the King of Spain, in his fathers life-time, Ann. 1254. King Ed∣ward The Jewes banished England, Ann. 1254. banished the Jewes this Nation. In the memory of Queen Elianor, he built stately Crosses, where the Corpes Crosses built upon the ways from Lincolne to Westmin∣ster. rested every night. In his reign there was great wars with the French, Welch, and especially with the Scots, who oft rebelled, but were as oft subdued: yet in those wars the King got a bloudy Flix, of which he died the 7. of July, An. 1308. when he had reigned An. 1308 34. years, 7. moneths, and odd days. Edward the 2. succeeded his father. Edward the second. He was said to be a dissolute Prince, ha∣ted of his Nobles, and contemned of the Common people. He married Isabel A miserable man. daughter to the French King. In his time also the Scots rebelled, vanquished the Kings Army, and after besieged him in York, and burnt the Suburbs. The Barons also raised War against the King for defending Piercy, and the Spencers (his creatures) against justice. In which straits the King sent the Queen to medi∣ate with her brother the French King: She took with her, her son Edward. But she not returning so soon as her hus∣band appointed her, and with all disco∣vering
some compliance with some No∣bles, sled out of England to France, the King proclaimed them all to be bani∣shed. But the Queen, her son Edmund Woodstock: all of Kent, (the Kings bro∣ther) with many Nobles, came into Eng∣land, and joyned with the Barons and City of London, by which they raised a great Army, took divers strong Holds, and at last the King and his creatures. The King was committed prisoner to The King for protect∣ing evil mn against ju∣stice, was himself de∣posed, and they execu∣ted. the Earl of Lancaster; but the creatures were hanged, headed and quartered. The Queen, her son, and Barons, came pre∣sently to London, and the next day called a Parliament, where the King was depo∣sed, when he had reigned 19. years, 6. moneths, and some daies, An. 1328. An. 1328 Edward the eldest son of Edward the Edward the third. 2. was set up in his fathers stead at 14. years of age. It is said, His father was soon after murdered in Corfe-Castle. King Edw. murdered in prison by the Queen. A marriage with Scot∣land. But the young King was much ordered by his mother. A peace was made with the Scots, and Davi Scotland marri∣ed Joan, King Edwards ster. But to keep all quiet at home, the old Queen, who contrived the death of King Ed∣ward her husband, also plotted the death of his brother the  of Kent, and caus∣ed
him to be beheaded at Winchester, the Earl of Kent murdered. 3. year of King Edward the 3 's reign. In the 6. year of Edward, the Scots rebelled, and possessed Barwick. The King laid siege before them, and the Scots endea∣voured A great Vi∣ctory over the Scots. with their Forces to raise the siege; But were overcome in battel, An. 1335 where were shin of the Scots 8. Earls, with 1300 horse, and 35000. footmen. Upon this, Barwick was delivered: the King placed Edward Baliol Governour, who was after King of Scotland. About the 11. year of this King, War arose with France: King Edward ised a Navy of a∣bout King Edw. the 3. took the title of King of France. 200. sail of Ships, and went to Flanders, where in a Sea-sight he over∣came the French and Normans, and stiled himself King of England and France. Thi King took Calice, and made great inroads, and wo desolations in France; and the  i the Scots upon The Scots did great hurt in England. England. They burnt Calice, Penneth, and came killing and burning down to Durham: But after King Edward made peace both with the French and Scots upon honourable terms. After this the King of Spain was driven out of his Kingdom by his Bastard brother, and Edward Prince or Wales went to the King Edw. relieved the K. of Spain. Kings relief with a great Army, and in a
battel put the Bastard to flight. King Edward reigned 50. years and 4. months, who departed this life the 21. of June, An. 1378. An. 1378 Richard the son of Prince Edward, Richard the 2. the 8. and last King of Plantage∣nets race. (his father being dead) succeeded his Grand-father Edward the 3. He came to the Crown at 11. years of age: As he was young, he hearkned to young Coun∣sellours, and neglected his old and wise Council, which brought sad troubles to The wo of young Coun∣sel. the Nation, and woful misery to him∣self. In the first year of his reign, the French made great inroads, and wasted many Towns in England: and at this time Guns were invented. The King Guns first invented. in these straits, laid a great Tax upon the Nation: Upon which, some Countries rose in Arms, went to London, and did great hurt, but were after appeased by the King through fair promises. This Ri∣chard married Anne daughter to the King of Bohemia, who brought hither the use of women riding side-ways on horse∣back. Some Earls and Barons seeing Oppression oft the ground of civil war. the King missed, and the Nation misgo∣verned by a few persons, they considered how it might be reformed, and thereup∣on raised an Army of 40000. and came to London to the King: upon this the
King called a Parliament suddenly, in The Lord chief Justice Tresilian, put to death for betray∣ing the Law of England which Parliament Sir Robert Tresilian chief Justice of England, and divers o∣thers, were convicted of Treason, and put to death, An. 1388. Richard sent to the City of London, Ann. 1392. to borrow of them 1000. li. An. 1388. but they refusing, he called the Maior, The Kings revenge up∣on London for refusing to lend him 1000. Sheriffs, and Aldermen of London to a Council at Nottingham; and there ap∣pearing, the King Arrested and impriso∣ned them, and nulled all their liberties. Queen Anne dying, the King took Isa∣bel the King of France's daughter to wife, and so made peace there. The King now grew high again, and put to cruel death The Kings revenge up∣on the Ba∣rons. the Earl of Arundel, and divers others, for dealing with him about his ill Go∣vernment. This King shed much bloud of the Nobility, and Bishops, besides o∣thers (which lay in the bosoms of many, and not forgot) though he carried it with a high hand. But the King going into Ireland, Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster, with others, who were out of the Land, came into Yorkeshire, to whom went the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Westmerland, and many Lords: and gathering up an Army they laid siege to Bristol, where they took the
Lord Treasurer, and some others, and beheaded them. The King hearing of this, hasted out of Ireland, and landed in Wales; and more fully understanding the Dukes strength, took to the Castle of Conway, and desired a Treaty. The Duke of Lancaster met the King: but the issue was, the King was sent to the Tower to be tryed by Parliament, where he was deposed and murdered; or (as some write) The just de∣sert of a Ty∣rant. the King resigned the Kingdom to Hen∣ry Duke of Lancaster and Hereford, much confessing his mis-government, when he had ruled 22. years, 3. months and some daies, An. 1400. An. 1400 Henry the 4. son of John of Gaunt Henry the fourth 1. King of the Line of Lancaster. Duke of Lancaster, was now elected and crowned King of England. He was de∣scended of Edward the 3. though not next in succession of bloud: and here comes in the Line of Lancaster. King Richard quickly deposed, was sent to Pomfret Castle, and (as some write) there quickly murdered King Ri∣chard King Ri∣chard murdered. had yet a great party of Nobility, and others that still appeared for him, when he was deposed; and many conspi∣racies there were against Henry, to have killed or poyson'd him. Indeed King Henry cut them off apace; but it's pro∣bable,
these were the death of Richard. Henry put men to death for words. A∣bout this time the Welch on one part, and the Scots in the North, did wast greatly. In the 3. year of Henry, Hen∣ry Percie son to the Earl of Northumber∣land, The Crown of Eng∣land, hath cost Eng∣land dear. Thomas Percie Earl of Worcester, with a great part of the Barons and Commons, fought a great battel against King Henry. In this battel at Shrewsbu∣ry many fell on both parts; but there Sir Thomas Percie was taken prisoner, and after beheaded. It was a sad time with England, by frequent Mutinies amongst them, and great judgements of Plague and Earthquakes upon them. And when Henry had sat upon the royal Throne 13. years, 6. moneths and odd daies, he died the 20. of March, An. 1414. An. 1414 Henry the 5. now bare the Crown. Yet Henry the 5. the Earl of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Grey, with others, conspired his death: but being discovered, he took off their heads. The King prepared a great Army, and with a Fleet of 1000. sail of Ships, he past A Fleet of 1000 Ships. to Normandy, and got great Victories. After this, Henry was made Regent of France, and then married Katherine the Kings daughter. Katherine bare Henry the Kings son, but Henry died himself in
France, the last day of August, Anno 1423. when he had reigned 9. years, 5. moneths and odd daies. An. 1432 Henry, son to Henry the 5. succeeded Henry the 6. his father, and was crowned at 8. months old. In his Infancy, the Government of the Nation was committed to the Duke of Glocester, the guard of his per∣son to the Duke of Excester, and the guidance of France to the Duke of Bed∣ford. In this year Charles King of France died, and the Kingdom descended to Henry the 6. and so the most of the Nobi∣lity delivered the possession thereof to the Duke of Bedford for the Kings use. After, in An. 1432. Henry was crow∣ned Hen the 6. crowned K. of France in Paris. King of France in Paris, and so re∣turned to England: Yet to make all sure, he took to wife Margret the Kings daughter of Cicily, An. 1445. But this glorious rising Sun soon de∣clined. After the death of the Duke of Bedford in France, France fell off, & the Old Court-Policy. Dukedom of Normanday lost. And here at home the Duke of Glocester, by order of Parliament, was Arrest; upon which in sorrow he soon died. Also the Duke of Suffolk was banished; but as he was passing the Sea, a Ship of war met him, and there they beheaded him, and cast his
body into the Sea. These things brought discontents and mutinies: at which time came up to London the Commons of Kent, who made fearful slaughters by fire and sword. After this, the Duke of York began commotions, and the Barons were divided. The King, the Duke of Buckingham, the Duke of Somerset, the Earles of Pembrook, Northumberland, Devonshire, Stafford, Dorset, and Wilt∣shire, The battel at St. Al∣banes be∣tween the King and Duke of York. with many Barons, marched to St. Albans; and in the Town of St. Al∣banes, in Peters street, was a fierce and cruel battel fought, where on the Kings side were slain the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Clifford, and many others, and the King taken: whom the Duke of York, Printing was brought into Eng∣land. the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury brought to London, and in a Parliament the Duke of York was made Protector, the Earl of Salisbury Chancellour, and the Earl of Warwick Captain of Calice. But by the Queens interest, the Duke of Yorke was dismist the Protectorship. These evil sparks for a time were con∣cealed, and a feigned agreement seemed to be amongst them. But about a year The battel at North∣ampton be∣tween the K. & Duke of York. after, the Duke of York and his party ap∣peared again, with a puissant Army in the field, and gave the King battel at
Northampton, where his Army was rout∣ed, and the King taken prisoner in the field. The Duke of York now claimed the Crown, and by Parliament he was proclaimed heir apparent. But the Queen gathered up a company of Northern men, who neer Wakefield in a sharp fight kill'd the Duke of York and his son Ed∣mund. Also the Queen routed the Earl of Warwick, and the Duke of Norfolk neer St. Albanes, and delivered King Henry her husband. The Earl of War∣wick A battel be∣tween the Barons in Wales. fled into Wales to the Earl of March, who had in a battel put to flight the Earl of Pembrook and Wiltshire; and with the Earl of Warwick went most of the South Country people. Upon these Earls joyning, they marched towards London; and the King having intelli∣gence of it, drew away towards the North, and went to York. But the Earls marched on to London, where they were joyfully entertained; and the 4. day of March, Edward Earl of March was proclaimed King of England. And thus Henry the 6. lost the Crown, when he had reigned 38. years, 6. months and odd daies, An. 1462. An. 1462 Edward Earl of March (called Ed∣ward Edw the 4. first K. of the line of York the 4.) was son to Richard Duke of
York, descending from the fourth son of Edward the 3. and so brought in the house of York to the Crown. When Edward had adorned his Temples with the Crown, he now endeavoured to keep it on his head, and presently drew his Army towards King Henry at York. Neer Todcaster a bloudy battel was The bloudy battel of Todcaster. fought, where many Nobles fell, and in all were slain 35711. persons. But Ed∣ward had the field. Upon this fearful rout, the Duke of Exceter, the Duke of Somerset, with many others, fled to the King at York; and then King Henry, his Queen, and their party left York, and fled to Scotland. Yet after this, King Henry came into In the battel of Hexam King Hen∣ry was the fourth time overcame. England to venture the hazard of ano∣ther fight, and was again routed at the battel of Hexam, where many Nobles were slain, but King Henry escaped with life: yet he and some others lived in Woods and Caves unknown about a year. Now King Edward was quiet, he took to wife the Widow to Sir John Grey. In the 5. year of Edward, King Henry was taken neer York, and carried prisoner to the Tower of London. But now the Duke of Clarence raised an Ar∣my in the North against King Edward
his brother, and to him fell in the Earl of Warwick; which brought great trouble to the Nation. King Edward hearing this, left his Army at Nottingham, and fled into Flanders. The Duke of Cla∣rence followed the King to London, where King Henry the 6 the 2. time crow∣ned King of England. they set King Henry again at liberty af∣ter 9. years imprisonment, and newly e∣lected and crowned him King. But soon after, King Edward returned again to England, with some Souldiers; and then the Duke of Clarence his brother turned to him, and so greatly increased the Kings strength, that he came to London, and took King Henry prisoner, and then fol∣lowed the Earl of Warwick, whom he al∣so overcame and slew, with his brother the Marquess of Mountacute. When Warwick was down, the King pursued Queen Margaret wife to King Henry; and getting the Victory in a battel at The battel of Tewks∣bury. Tewksbury, he took the Queen prisoner, with Prince Edward her son: And soon after, King Henry was murdered in the Tower. And after him the Duke of Cla∣rence Murder up∣on murder. was murdered in the Tower: a sad, but just reward of a turn-coat. To all other the bloud and Tyranny mention'd of this Usurper, sad is the story recor∣ded of Mr. Burdet of Arrow. The King
hunting in his Park with others, kill'd one white Deer, of which he set some e∣steem; and for Mr. Burdets saying, I would the Horns of the Buck was in the belly of him that shewed him the King, the said Mr. Burdet was accused, and condemned, and executed for a Traytor, Deep seve∣rity. and so lost both life and estate. Indeed his words (being a curse) were sinful; But yet a small offence to the King, to have so sharp a censure: But not long after, the Lord shot the Dart of death at him, summoning of him to appear before Di∣vine Justice, the 9. of April, An. 1484. An. 1484 when he had reigned 22. years, 1 month and odd days. Edward the 5. about the age of 13. years, was to succeed his father Edward the 4. But about 3. months after his fa∣thers death, his Uncle Richard Duke of Glocester, caused him to be secretly mur∣dered. Edw. the 5. murdered. & conveyed away, that it was not known where he was buried; and so set up himself, An. 1484. Richard the 3. Richard the 3. brother to Edward the 4. to get the Crown, murdered Prince Edward, and Richard Duke of York, his brothers sons, This Tyrant ered by , and ded in bloud. in the Tower, with George Duke of Cla∣rence his own brother; also Henry Duke of Buckingham, Hastings, Rivers, Vag∣han,
Grey, and very many others, and his own wife Anne, that so he might make way to marry his Couzen Elizabeth. Yet this wicked Tyrant raged but a short time. For Henry Earl of Richmond the heir apparent, came out of France, with the Earl of Pembrook his Uncle, the Earl of Oxford, & many others, to whom some of the Nobility joyned in Eng∣land, who gave battel to Richard, the 22. of August, neer Bosworth, where Richard was slain, when he had born his usurped Crown 2. years, and 2. months, Ann. 1486. An. 1486 Henry the 7. who was heir to the house of Lancaster, when he came to Henry the 7. united the houses of Lancaster and York. the Crown, married Elizabeth the daugh∣ter of Edward the 4. (whom Richard in∣tended to have taken) and so united the houses of Lancaster and York. Henry had also a strain of the British Race, and of the French bloud. In this Kings time were great Tumults & Taxes; and Taxes brought Tumults, and the shedding of much bloud. And when Taxes were not England was yet a free people. willingly paid, the King craved or beg∣ged benevolence, or something of their own good will. Divers rebellions there were, some from without, and some within the Nation; and it's noted that
Lambert was a chief rebel in these times. The Scots also made inroads into the North parts: But to quiet them, the King gave his eldest daughter in Marri∣age A marriage with Scot∣land to make peace. to the King of Scots. When Henry had reigned 23. years, and 8. months, he died, An. 1510. An. 1510 Henry the 8. succeeded his father Henry the 8. Henry the 7. He enjoyed the Crown in much quiet by union of the Families, for which there had been fought 17. pitcht battels, in which were slain 8. Kings, 40. Kingly So∣verainly hath spilt abundance of bloud in England. King Hen∣ry first wife. Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, besides Barons, Knights and Gentlemen, and a∣bout 200000. common people. This King married his brother Arthur's wi∣dow, which Arthur died before his fa∣ther. And so Henry began: he was for Religion a Roman Catholike, and in his zeal writ against Luther, for which great Defender of the Faith, a title given by the Pope to the Kings of England King Hen∣ry the 8. cast off the Popes Su∣premacy, and took the Government of State and Church. act his father the Pope gave him the Title of Defender of the Faith, which the Kings and Queens held to the last: Yet when Henry the 8. grew great, he cast off the Popes Supremacy over Eng∣land, and judged himself fit enough to be head in Church and State. The King going to War in France, James King of Scots came with a great Army into Eng∣land, but in a bloudy battel was repul∣sed.
About this time Mary the Kings sister was contracted to Lewis the 12. King of France, but was before promised to the King of Castile. Yet after, Charles Duke of Suffolk wedded the Lady, Anno 1516. About Ann. 1533. King Henry put off Katherine, and married Anne Bul∣lin King Hen∣ry's 2. wife., and she was proclaimed Queen. Upon this divorce many were disconten∣ted, but the King sent out an Oath to be taken by all people, especially to the Priests, to swear fidelity to the King, Queen Anne, and their heirs. But the High Tyran∣ny, to inslave mens Con∣sciences to a wicked mans lusts. Lord Chancellour, some Bishops, and many others, for refusing this ungodly oath, were committed to the Tower, and other prisons. But to the rest of this Kings sins, when he had cast off the Popes Supremacy, he became Pope of England, Horrid Blasphemy, to usurpe the diginity of Christ. Tenths and first fruits taken by the King. and was made head of the Church of England, having full authority over the same: And withal, took the first fruits and tenths, An. 1535. In the next year, the 2. of May, Queen Anne was com∣mitted to the Tower, and there behead∣ed. Also the Queens brother, with 18. of the Kings Privy Chamber were put to death the 17. of May; and the 20. of May, the King married Lady Jane Sey∣mor. King Hen∣ry's 3. wife. The 12, of October 1537. Queen
Jane brought forth Prince Edward, and Prince Ed∣ward born. lost her life the 14. day. The 3. of Ja∣nuary 1539. the King married Anne of Cleve. Thomas Cromwel Secretary to King Hen. 4. wife. the King was a rising Favourite, and pro∣moted to places of trust and honour a∣bove any in his time, beginning about An. 1536. and An. 1540. he was be∣headed Great changes. at Tower-hill, and the new Queen Anne of Cleve divorced. The King had another wife in good readi∣ness, if not already married: for the 8. of August following, the Lady Katherine Howard appeared openly as Queen. But King Hen. 5. wife. he made as speedy dispatch with her; for the 13. of February following, she was beheaded in the Tower: yet after the Queen Ka∣therine be∣headed. King had cut off that Katherine, the 12. of july following, the King married the Lady Katherine Parr, late wife to the Lord Latimer, 1543. and the 35. year King Hen. 6. wife. of the Kings reign. All this Kings time were mutinies, heading, hanging, and a∣bundance A sad time of bloud in England. of bloud-shed continually, of all sorts, Nobles, Bishops, Priests, and people: He cut down all that stood in his way, who answered not his desires. Thus this King spent 37. years, 9. months and odd days, An. 1548. An. 1548 Edward the 6. succeeded his father Edw. the 6.
Henry the 8. and was crowned at 9. years of age. In the 2. year of his reign, he did so much towards reformation, that the Church-service was turned into English. In the Kings Minority, the The first re∣formation from gross Popery in England. Duke of Somerset was made Lieute∣nant Protector, but not long after was committed to the Tower, and after was beheaded at Tower-hill. King Edward about 16. years of age fell sick, and died, The Prote∣ctor behead∣ed. when he had reigned 6. years, 5. months and odd daies, An. 1554. An. 1554 After the death of Edward, Lady Jane, Lady Jane Clifford was pro∣claimed Queen. Queen. Ma∣ry. wife to the Lord Clifford, fourth son to the Duke of Northumberland, was pro∣claimed Queen, as given to her by Ed∣ward the 6. But Lady Mary, eldest daughter to King Henry, had the grater party, and so came to the Crown. She soon restored the Pope, Cardinal, &c. to his former Supremacy over England, The Hie∣rarchy of Rome re∣stored in England. and dashed the reformation begun, and appointed the Church-service again in Latine. To make sure, Queen Mary beheaded the Lady Jano Clifford, the Duke of Suffolk, the Lord Clifford and o∣thers, Lady Jane beheaded. D. of Suf∣folk, &c. to take them off from laying claim to the Crown. Yet she did not sit quiet in the Throne. But to compleat her sin, she drunk deep of the bloud of the A bloudy persecution.
Saints, and sent many multitudes to hea∣ven in fiery chariots. The Queen mar∣ried Philip Prince of Spain: Yet the Lord shut up her womb, that she had no child; and cut her off, when she had ra∣ged over the Saints in this Nation 5. years, 4. months and odd daies, Anno 1559. An. 1559 Elizabeth sister to Queen Mary, now Queen Eli∣zabeth. Elizabeth restored the Reformation of Edw. the 6. came to the Crown: she again rejected the Pope; and did something towards Reformation of Religion. She had great honour in the hearts of the people, and was a terror to forain Nations, and reig∣ned 45. years, An. 1604. An. 1604. After Queen Elizabeth, James King James King of Scotland of Scots, descended from Margaret daughter to Henry the 7. came to the Crown of England. He was a man of much learning, and writ divers Books. But his practice answered not his light and professions. How he passed over the death of his son Prince Henry, was ob∣served by many; and how the Lord rea∣ched him at last, many have said more then I will write. King James sawyed the Scepter of England, Scotland, and Ireland 22. years, 3. days, An. 1626. An. 1626 Charles succeeded his father James. Charles 2. King of the Scotish race. Contrary to the counsel once given by
King James to Heary his son, Charles did marry with Henerietta Maria of France a Papist, and gave her the liberty of her Religion by Articles A wosul wedding to England. of Marriage. By her interest, Popery was advanced through corrupt Bishops, and the true worship of God was little known in England: what the life of Charles was, is yet fresh in the memory of most alive at this day. He set all the three Nations on a fire, that yet is not quenched, nor is like to be. In Eng∣land, Ireland, and Scotland, the sword hath spilt the bloud of many thousands; and as he was worthy, the Lord gave him bloud to drink, who was beheaded at White-hall West minster, January 30. An. King Char-beheaded. 1649. An. 1649 when he had born the Crown 24, years, 10. months and 7. days. Thus, as in a Map, I have represented some remarkable passages in the rise and succession of Kings, from Saul to our pre∣sent Age. If this little be laid up in the minds of men, by this taste you may judge much of all their Lives, and Reigns that is vailed under the Curtain. To my best skill, I have only run down sa∣cred and prophane History, and have taken the relations of others, and writ∣ten their Stories. But if so much wicked∣ness
came to light, what was done in the dark, that is open to the all-seeing eye of Heaven? Surely a woful sad burden have this sort of men (I may well say, Mon∣sters) been to all People and Nations where-ever they were. And that the Dragon, the Beast, and all their limbs, shall be utterly destroyed by Jesus Christ, who is King of Kings, I question not: I am perswaded the work is now up∣on the wheel; and as Jesus Christ is im∣braced, here will appear more and more, Note. to clear up to the Saints another way of governing his people, then yet we see. There is nothing hinders, but our un∣worthiness. But if I may discover what I see yet afar off, I conceive the Go∣vernours call'd and set up by Jesus Christ, shall be like Jesus Christ himself, humble, self-denying Saints, such as shall set up a publike, and not a self-interest. Such as shall ease burdens, and not op∣press. Such as shall deliver the poor, and not seed upon them. Such as shall guide the people by the rule of Gods sa∣cred word, and not make lust and self-will their law, and force it by a long Sword. For certain, if the Lord did not leave A caution for Kings. wise-men to themselves, they could not but easily reade their own ruine by mul∣tiplied
examples in all times: God is the same yesterday, to day and for ever: And in the same way that God did manifest his righteousness and justice under the sacred Scriptures, the same hath been the Lords providences and dispensations in the world, ever since the Scriptures were written; and as the Apostle expres∣seth it, These things were written for our 1 Cor. 10, 11. examples, upon whom the ends of the world are come. I may say, sin was the rise of Monarchy, sin hath been the strength of Monarchy: and Monarchy hath been the punishment of sin, ever since it was. Therefore when the sin of Kings grew high, the Lord stirred up some to punish & pull down these Kings, by the shedding of much bloud, and exhausting of treasure. But when such had got into the Kings State, they did the same that the King did before them; & when their sin again was full, the Lord raised up o∣thers to destroy them and their Families. And this is the track of times. But when Isa. 2. 2, 3, &c. Jesus Christ is truly received, there shall be an end of this proud, oppressing sort of Dan. 2. 44. and 7. 26, 27. men; the Saints shall rule, & then judge∣ment and righteousness shall run down Isa. 32. 1. Act. 17. 31. like mighty streams. Now for the accom∣plishment of these blessed promises, wait and pray, till Christ say, It's done.
AN EPITOMY OF PAPACY. THat there was a Gospel Church in the City of Rome Rom 1.  in the times of the Apostles, is clear by Divine authority: And that this Church of Christ had or∣dinary Church Officers, Bishops, and Deacons, I think there is no question. But the better to discover the Roman Antichrist, two things have been in de∣bate amongst the godly. 1 Whether the first Bishops of the Churches of Christ, had, and did ex∣ercise (by power given from Jesus Christ) a Lordly and Soveraign Juris∣diction over the Saints in their particu∣lar Churches? 2 Whether the power of one Bishop
or Pastor, by the institution of Jesus Christ, did extend to divers Churches? The judgements of many learned men are published to the World, upon these needful questions; yet I desire to assert my thoughts in this place. First, That ordinary Church Offi∣cers The power of Bishops or Pastors. ought not, nay may not, put out a Lordly Soveraign power over the Church, or Brethren, is plain to all that will read it, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. Secondly, That ordinary Church-Officers, have not any power or charge given them over diverse Churches, is plain from Scripture and Reason. When Paul called the Bishops toge∣ther, and spake to them all present, yet he presses every one to take care of his own particular Flock, Acts 20. 28. If any through prejudice should seek other glosses to put upon this text, to hold their own opinions, they let goe natural reason, and deal worse with Christian souls, than they are willing to doe by their flocks of Sheep. Cer∣tainly a Shepherd that takes charge of divers flocks in several places, is very Note. like to Rot them all. But my business is to gather an Epitomy of the Papacy, that the rise and growth of this proud
scarlet. Whore (who rides the Roman Empire) may bee yet more perfectly discovered, and that the Antichrist of Rome may appear to bee the very Whore of Babylon, shadowed out in Types and Figures unto John in his Revelations. The Gospel was no sooner preached by the Apostles, but Satan had some ministers ready to pervert the truth of it, and turn away Disciples. The A∣postle Paul not only describes, but dis∣covered the working of Antichrist in his time; Paul said then, the Mystery of iniquity doth already work, 2 Thes. 2. 7. that is, in that very age, pride, end usurpation of false teachers, corrupti∣on of Doctrine and Discipline, grew fast on, and many were drawn off from the simplicity of the Gospel, to Idolatrous and Superstitious practices, through ignorance and blind devo∣tion. It cannot be denied, but that the first Bishops of the Church of Christ in Rome, were many of them sound in the faith, and sealed the truth of the Gospel with their bloud in Martyr∣dome, yet in those times Heresies, and Sects in Religion grew fast, and
after more and more. I shall pass in si∣lence all the first Bishops, and begin with Elutherius the twelfth Bishop of Rome. Elutherius was chosen Bishop of the Church at Rome, in the fifteenth year Elutherius the 12 Bi∣shop of Rome, and dyed, Anno 191. Euseb. of Antonius Verus the Emperour, Anno 178. and governed that Church thir∣teen years; untill this time the same Doctrin, and Order in the Church which was left by the Apostles, was ob∣served in the Church of Rome. In his England received the Christian Faith. time England received the Christian Faith, and when Lucius the British King sent to Rome (as a famous Chri∣stian Church) and desired Elutherius to send them the Roman Lawes, the good Bishop (not dreaming then of a Supremacy) modestly refused it, and referring of the Christians to the Books of the Old and New Testament, to gather out Lawes from thence, urged this reason; The Roman Lawes, and the Emperours Lawes we may ever re∣prove, but the Law of God wee may not—out of them take yee a Law, and by that Law rule your Realm of Britain. At this time there was a Sect followed Marcus, who denied the real suffering of Christ, and that there
was no resurrection of the Flesh, and therefore lived in Adultery. Victor succeeded Elutherius; In his Victor the 13 Bishop. The diffe∣rence about Easter. Euseb. Murnie. time there fell a great difference be∣tween the Eastern and Western Chur∣ches about the time of Easter, or the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Some observed it upon the fourteenth day of the Moon, after the Jewish Passeover, some upon the Sunday following. Up∣on this contention many Synods of Bishops were called in all parts; and so Victor called a Synod at Rome, where he himself sate President. In this Sy∣nod at Rome, Victor took upon him to Antichrist appears. Excommunicate the Churches in A∣sia, because they conformed not to the practice of the Western Churches; But this insolent attempt of Victor was stoutly opposed, and Victor overcome. Soon after this Victor dyed, when hee Anno 203 had governed twelve years, anno 203. At this time sprung the Heresie of Euseb. Artemon, the Disciple of Theodotus a Tanner, who denied the Divinity of Christ. Zephyrinus was the next Bishop of Zepheri∣nus the 14 Bishop. Anno 221. Euseb. Rome, and governed eighteen years, Anno 221. In his time was Neotus, who denied the Trinity of the Deity:
He called himself Moses. There were also the Sect, Melchisedechiani, who held Melchisedech to bee greater than Christ. Some taught also, that the Soul dyed with the Body, yet rose a∣gain at the general resurrection. Calistus now took the Chair, and continued five years, and dyed, Anno Calistus the 15 Bi∣shop. Anno 226 226. Urbanus followed Calistus, and go∣verned eight years, Anno 234. Urban the 16. Anno 234 Pontanus succeeded Urban, and con∣tinued six years, Anno 240. Pontanus the 17. Anno 240 Anterus came next to the place. It is Historied, that when the Church was met upon the death of Pontanus, for a Anterus the 18. Bish Euseb. A lying Wonder. new Election, a Dove setled upon the head of Anterus, and so the multi∣tude cried out, Anterus is worthy of the Bishoprick. I repeat this as a Po∣pish relation, yet possibly this might be one of Antichrists Miracles to de∣ceive, which after were more fre∣quent: But however Anterus entred. he held his honour but one Month, and gave way to Fabian. Fabian was Bishop of Rome, and dyed Fabian the 19 Bish. Anno 254 a Martyr in the seventh Persecution, raised by the Emperour Decius, Anno 254.
Cornelius followed Fabian, and ruled Corneli∣us the 20. 257. three years, Anno 257. Lucius followed Cornelius, and kept the Sea not full eight months. About Lucius, the 21 Bish. Euseb. this time was Novatus, who called the Sect following him Puritans. Hee re∣fused to receive into their Fellowship again those that fell, though they shewed their repentance. He also de∣nied second Marriages. Stephen was chosen next Bishop of Rome, and ruled two years, Anno 260. Stephen the 22 Bish. Anno 260 Euseb. In his time it was much controverted, whether Hereticks converted, or per∣sons baptized by Hereticks, should bee again baptized. Also in Stephens Government, some Bishops deposed in Spain and Africk, fled to Rome, and sought to bee resto∣red by the authority of Stephen. It seems Stephen was willing to close with Mystery of iniquity. The begin∣ning of Romes Su∣premacy. such an opportunity, or else in a bro∣therly way; the Bishop of Rome writ to the Bishops of Spain and Africk, to receive again those Bishops deposed, & the Bishops of Rome made other use of it in after times. But whether Stephen writ to command, or desire, yet the Bishops to whom Stephen did write, re∣turned answer, That the offenders
running to Rome, could not have those just Censures past upon them, rever∣sed, &c. Xystus came next in place, and go∣verned Xystus the 23 Bi∣shop. Anno 271 Euseb. eleven years, Anno 271. About this time the Heresie of No∣vatus was revived, and some Bishops corrupted with it. Dionysius governed nine years, and di∣ed, Anno 280. In this time were the Sect Origenia∣ni: These denied Marriage, yet lived worse than Beasts, using vile ways to keep Women from conceiving with childe. Faelix had the next turn, and ruled Faelix the 25. Anno 285 Eutychia∣nus the 26 Bish. five years, Anno 285. Eutychianus followed Faelix, yet go∣verned but ten Months. Caius then had the rule of the Ro∣man Church, and continued fifteen Caius the 27 Bishop. Anno 300 Euseb. years, Anno 300. At this time the Heresie of the Ori∣geniani was broached afresh by Ada∣mantius a Priest in Alexandria, and much increased. These held there was no Resurrection; that Christ and the Holy Ghost were only Creatures; that the Souls of men were first in Heaven, and came down into bodies, &c.
Marcelinus followed Caius, who in Marcellus the 28 Bi∣shop. the Persecution under Dioclesian, de∣nied Christ to save himself; but soon after he sorely repented his great sin, and under the same Emperour dyed a Martyr for Christ. Historians agree Sleidon, Anno 305 not about the time of this Bishops Go∣vernment, but it is said to bee five years, Anno 305. Though this was a sad time of per∣secution, yet then sprang the Here∣tick Manes, of whom came the Ma∣niches. This Heretick Manes cald him∣self Socrates. Christ, and chose twelve Disci∣ples. Eusebius followed Marcellus, and governed one year and seven months, Anno 307 Anno 307. Miltiades next had the Ecclesiasti∣cal Chair; he was Bishop of Rome Miltiades the 30 Bish. when Constantine the Great was Empe∣rour, as appears by a Letter writ∣ten from Constantine unto Miltiades, about the beginning of Constantines reign; untill this time the Bishops of Rome were poor and low in the world: But as Constantine affected Religion, Euseb. and greatly tendred the growth of it, so he gave revenues unto Christian Churches, and especially to that of
Rome. I find no Chronologers setting down the time of Miltiades Govern∣ment, but by computation, I judge hee continued six years, and dyed in the fourth year of Constantines reign, Anno 313. Anno 313 Sylvester succeeded Miltiades, in Sylvester the 31 Bi∣shop. the Church of Rome, in the time of Constantine the Great. In the time of Sylvester, Arias, or Arrias, born in Lybia, a Priest in A∣lexandria, made great opposition a∣gainst the Bishop of Alexandria, and bestirred himself to get Disciples; his Heresie he held was, That the Son of God had a beginning of Essence, &c. This grew, and spread much, and brought great trouble to the Churches; whereupon Constantine summoned a The first Council of Nice. Euseb. Sleidan. Socrates. general Council at Nice: some say, Anno 325. some say, 326. some 328, &c. But in that Synod there was ga∣thered together the chief Ministers of God, of all the Churches of Europe, Africk, and Asia, also Syrians, Cili∣cians, &c. there were present also ma∣ny of the Laity. In this Council Ar∣rias was condemned, and the Creed ratified. Sylvester continued his govern∣ment twenty years, and dyed, anno 333. Anno 333
Mark was Bishop of Rome after Syl∣vester Mark the 32. eight months. Julius followed Mark, and Gover∣ned Julius the 23 Bish. Anno 348 fifteen years, Anno 348. Heresies did now spread much, especially the Arian Heresie; whereupon the Sons of Constantine, by consent, called the general Council of Sardis. This Coun∣cil was summoned in the eleventh year after the death of Constantine, and from the going forth of the Procla∣mation to the meeting of the Synod, The gene∣ral Council of Sardis. Anno 350 Sleidan. Socrates. was one year and six months. There met three hundred Bishops and Bre∣thren of the West, and but seventy six of the East. The occasion of this Council was in behalf of Paulus, Bi∣shop of Constantinople, and Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria. These were de∣prived of their bishopricks by the Ar∣rians, and because these two Bishops were admitted to sit in the Council, many of the Eastern Bishops rose and departed the Synod; yet in that Coun∣cil the Nicen Creed was confirmed, Paulus and Athanasius restored, and their accusers deposed. It is said, Julius Bishop of Rome wri∣ting to the Eastern Bishops, bla∣med Mystery of Iniquity. them for depriving Paulus and
Athanasius, in assuming that power to The first open appear∣ing of An∣tichrist. them that was committed to the Bi∣shop of Rome by Divine command. This was like Antichrist himself, and the Popish Proctors have made great use of this, to plead it for a sufficient proof of the Popes Supremacy. But Socrates. Council of Antioch. Anno 336 this attempt of Julius was condemned in the Council of Antioch, about Anno 336. About this time also Monastical life began, and many idle Fopperies, Mar∣riage was forbid, strange Garments brought up, the eating of Flesh forbid, and many perswaded to leave their Sleidan. Possessions. Liberius was chosen next Bishop of Liberius, the 34. Anno 366 Rome. Some Historians say well of him, some say ill, but it appears hee continued seventeen years, Anno 366. By this time Supremacy had got some footing, in this manner, as the The origi∣nal of E¦piscopal Jurisdicti∣on. Christian Churches multiplied, Sects and Seditions grew fast, and to pre∣vent these, the Churches near Rome, and other eminent Cities, were made Provinces, and consociated for Order and Government; upon this account the Bishop of Rome (with others) be∣came
Metropolitan, and chief Bishop in the Province, and called Synods. After in a Council at Antioch it was Sleidan. ordered, That if in matters of impor∣tance the Bishops accord not, that then the Metropolitan should call some Bi∣shops of the next Province to judge, and give definitive sentence. Damasus followed Liberius, but got Damasus the 35 Bi∣shop. the Chair with great difficulty; the Sea of Rome was now greatly increased in wealth and pomp, and so became a Bait to ambitious spirits, and the dig∣nity hardly obtained. In the vacancy of the Sea, Ursinus a Deacon of the Church made a strong Party against Damasus, Strife a∣bout electi∣on of the Bishop. Mystery of Iniquity. and the Faction was so great at the E∣lection, that the House of Prayer floa∣ted with bloud, where there were left one hundred thirty seven dead bo∣dies. The pride and Usurpation of the Roman Bishops doth plainly appear, by The Bishops began to u∣surp power in Civil af∣fairs. the several Lawes made by the Empe∣rours to restrain them; it is very ma∣nifest by the Epistles of Damasus, that he claimed a Supremacy in the Sea of Rome, in Ecclesiastical affairs: but it seems the Bishops were ambitious also of the Civil Sword, yet by the Empe∣rours
they were forbid to hear and de∣termine The Myste∣ry of Ini∣quity. offences between Person and Person, except in matters of Reli∣gion. Until this time the People had the The peoples liberty to chuse their Pastor first denied. Election of Bishops or Pastors, but this great priviledge was taken from them by a Council held at Laodicea; also that Lessons should bee read between certain Psalmes, that the Gospel should bee read, and other Scriptures, upon the Sunday, &c. Here abominable Superstitions and Corruptions thron∣ged fast in, which I forbear to men∣tion. Now were the Sect of the Dimeritae, who denied that Christ had a Soul, &c. Also the Massiliani, a sort of idle Monks; these said, The Body of Christ in the Sacrament did neither good nor harm, &c. These were also, call Euchitae, &c. Socrates. It is said, that Damasus kept the E∣piscopal Chair eighteen years, and dy∣ed, Anno 384. Anno 384 Sericius succeeded Damasus; Hee is Sericius the 36 Bi∣shop. said to be the first that forbid the Mar∣riage of Priests; now the name of Priest grew into fashion, and was the ordinary stile of all common or inferi∣our
Bishops. Sericins governed fifteen years, Anno 399. Anno 399 In this age were the Heresie of Pro∣clianites, who denied that Christ came in the Flesh, also the Patriciani, who say that God made not mans flesh, but the Devil; and therefore Murder themselves and others, to be out of the flesh. Anastatius was chosen next Bishop of Rome, and continued but three years, Anastatius the 37 Bi∣shop. Anno 402 Anno 402. Innocentius next entred the stage of the Roman Sea, and acted the part of Innocent the 38 Bi∣shop. Antichrist himself. Damasus in an E∣pistle to the Bishop of Mauritiania, sti∣led the Sea of Rome, the Firmament of all Bishops, the Top of all Chur∣ches; and Sericius in an Epistle to the Socrates. Bishop of Arragon, said, It was not law∣ful for any Priest of the Lord to bee ignorant of the Decrees of the Sea A∣postolick. And, Innocent would not so wrong Peters Chair as to let any Papal Dignity fall in him, and therefore claimed Authoritative Censures in all greater matters, to be only in the A∣postolick Sea. This Innocent begged what would not bee granted for fif∣teen years, and ceased, Anno 417.
Zosimus was the Successor of Inno∣cent, Zosimus the 39 Bi∣shop. Socrates. and strongly followed his Plea for Supremacy; He supposed, having had three Predecessors before him that had begged hard for Supremacy, hee might well require it. In the first year The sixth council of Carthage. of his Government was held the sixth Council of Carthage, where were as∣sembled two hundred twenty seven Bishops: To this Council Zosimus sent three Legats, requiring the Bi∣shops of Africk to appeal to the Sea Apostolick. But Zosimus obtained it not from the Council, and dyed in the second year, Anno 419. Anno 419 Boniface the First succeeded Zosi∣mus; He was also the first Bishop of Boniface the first, the 40 Bishop. The first Bishop that exercised Secular power. Rome, that assumed and exercised Kingly Authority over Secular peo∣ple, which he put out in banishing the Novatians, and seizing their estates. He pursued the claim of Zosimus in the Council of Carthage, but obtained it not; yet that I may the better dis∣cover the shamelesse impudence of the Bishop, and the working of Antichrist in this age, Zosimus pretended to the Council, that this Supremacy was gi∣ven The Bishop forged a Lye to get Supremacy. to the Sea of Rome by the Council of Nice; but the Bishops knowing of
no such Canon past in that Council, sent Letters presently to the Bishops of Constantinople, Alexandria, and An∣tioch, desiring them to send the Acts of the Nicen Council sealed up. In this interim Zosimus dyed, and Boniface came to the Sea; but the Council find∣ing no such Canon in the Nicene Council, it was not granted, and so Boniface only pursued it, yet saw no end of it, and dyed in the third year of his Government, anno 422. Anno 422 Coelestine was chosen next to the E∣piscopal Coelestine the 41 Bish. Dignity; now the Bishops of Rome exalted themselves exceedingly, and affected great swelling Titles. Coelestine blushed not to take into pro∣tection such Bishops and Priests as were justly excommunicate, and banished for Heresie and Scandal, out of A∣frick and other Countries, and took up the names of Blasphemy that these flattering Parasites put upon him, the very Titles of God himself; yea and sent out his roaring Bulls, much threat∣ning those Churches, if they did not a∣gain receive the banished Bishops. Whereupon St. Augustine writ a tart Letter to Coelestine, saying, wee are threatned with a Posse comitatus, and
force of armes, to put the sentence of the Apostolick Sea into execution. Let August. 261 Epist. not these things be so, I doe conjure thee by the bloud of Christ, and by the memory of the Apostle Peter (who war∣neth those that are set over Christian Assemblies, to be meek and humble) not to domineer with violence over your brethren. But Coelestine was a∣bove brotherly admonition, and beat on boldly through all opposition to establish Supremacy in the Roman Sea, yet after nine years deceased, Anno 431. Anno 431 In this time Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople broached his Heresie a∣gainst the union of the two Natures in Christ; Cyril now Bishop of Alexan∣dria opposed this Heretick; but to de∣termine the Controversie, the Empe∣rours The Coun∣cil of E∣phesus. Valentinian and Theodosius the se∣cond of the East, called the General Council of Ephesus, Anno 431. in Anno 431 which Council, Nestorius was con∣demned and banished. Sextus came next to the Sea of Rome, Sextus the 42 Bishop. Socrates. he was accused of several Crimes laid to his Charge before the Emperour Va∣lentinian, and was put to purge him∣self in a Synod called at Rome. This
Bishop kept the Sea eight years, Anno Anno 439 439. Leo the first had the next turn, and Leo the first, the 43 Bishop. in his time hee mightily advanced the Supremacy of the Roman Sea. In the Government of Leo, a Pro∣vincial Council was called at Constan∣tinople, about Eutiches an Abbot, who maintained the Heresie of Nestorius, in which Council Eutiches was con∣demned and degraded; yet by ano∣ther Council of corrupt Bishops held at Ephesus, Eutiches was again restored. The Gene∣ral Council of Chalce∣don. But after, there was a general Council called at Chalcedon, of six hundred and thirty Bishops, to re-examine the Case of Eutiches; in this Council the Heresie of Nestorius was again damned, and Diascorus with other Bishops depri∣ved, the thirteenth of Octob. Anno 453. Unto this Council Leo sent his Legates to accuse Diascorus, and the main matter of his complaint against Dias∣corus, was, that hee had rejected the Decrees of the Roman Church. In this Council also it was ordered, that no Pluralities of Benefices forbid. Clerk should bee admitted into two Churches. By this time the Bishops of Rome had got some preheminence, and in
this Counil had the title of Pope. The The first title of Pope given to the Bi∣shop of Rome. Empire of Rome was now in great con∣fusion, Enemies made invasions, and (to fulfill the Word of the Lord) Leo took his time to raise the Episcopal Throne, by the woeful distractions in the Civil State, the Emperour had little power, and all he could doe was to preserve himself. But now Leo took his opportunity to advance the Sea of Rome, and though hee could exercise but little Jurisdiction, yet he took upon him the Title of Pope of the Roman Ca∣tholick Church, and universal Bishop. Thus Leo continued one and twenty years, Anno 460. Anno 460 Hillary was Successor to Leo, of Hillary the 44. whom I find little mentioned; he had the Government six years, Anno 466. Anno 466 Simplicius followed. Hillary; but now there arose much strife between Simplicius the 45 Bish. the Church of Rome, and the Church of Constantinople, which should bee supream; but Leo Emperour of the East, gave the Supremacy to Constan∣tinople, as being his royal City. Sim∣plicius used his utmost endeavour to reverse the Edict of the Emperour, Evagri. and dyed in pursute of desired Supre∣macy,
when he had ruled fifteen years, Anno 481. Anno 481 Faelix followed Simplicius in his Pa∣pal Faelix the 46 Bishop. Dignity, and in his eager pursute for Supremacy in the Roman Chair, but left the Work undone, and de∣parted in his ninth year of Govern∣ment, Anno 490. Anno 490 Gelasius came next to the Chair, but Gelasius the 47 Bish. was a man of more modesty than ma∣ny that went before him: He neither pleaded his Supremacy from the Ni∣cene Council, or the antient custom of Mystery of Iniquity. the Church, but held to the text, Tu es Petrus. This goeth not (said Gela∣sius) Gelasius in Epist. ad Dardanos. by Synodal Decrees, but by the very voyce of the Gospel. Therefore hee spake it openly, that the Sea of Rome might either absolve such as were wrongfully condemned by any Coun∣cil, or condemn such as deserved it; yet after (forgetting himself) hee pleaded Synodal authority, saying, The Canon hath so ordained it, that all Churches ought to appeal to this Sea, and not from it. Thus Gelasius laboured subtilly to advance the Ro∣man Sea, yet held it but four years, Anno 494. Anno 494 Anastatius the second followed Ge∣lasius; Anastatius the second the 48.
To all other evils in this man, he held the Nestorian Heresie, and fa∣voured that Party, but was taken a∣way by the hand of Gods Justice, when he had governed two years, anno 496. Anno 496 Upon the death of Anastatius, Sy∣machus was set up by one Party, and Symachus the 49 Bish. Two Popes together. Laurence by another Party; at this time, Zeno Emperour of the East, had sent Theoderick King of the Ostrogothes with an Army into Italy, who in two Battels overcame Odoazer King of Rome, and in the last slew him. Theoderick now coming to Rome, complaint was made to him of the un∣due Sleidan. Election of Symachus to the Sea of Rome. To end this quarrel, Theoderick Mystery of Iniquity. calls a Synod at Rome of the Bishops of Italy, who gave the Chair to Syma∣chus, and banished Laurence. But after four years, the Party for Laurence brought him back again to Rome, and now the Faction grew from words to blowes, that much bloud was spilt, and great mischief done. At this Theoderick was greatly offended, deposing of them both, and made Peter Bishop of Altin Bishop of Rome, in the fifteenth year of Symachus, anno 509. Anno 509 Peter continued (as some think)
six years, and dyed, anno 515. Anno 515 Hormisda was taken into the Pon∣tifical Hormisda the 51 Bishop. Chair, and did much for the Pa∣pal interest. He made many Bishops his Vicars over the Western Provinces, which for honour sake was well ac∣cepted by such as looked for prehe∣minence over others. Hormisda Go∣verned nine years, and dyed, anno 524. Anno 524 John the first now took his turn; John the first the 52 Bishop. Theoderick sent Bishop John Ambassa∣dour to the Emperour Justine, at Con∣stantinople, who gave him great ho∣nour, and although hee was crowned Sleidan. before by the Patriarch of Constantino∣ple, yet had John also to put on his Crown a second time. This extraor∣dinary This was an evil O∣men to the Emperour. entertainment of John Bishop of Rome, with the Emperour, caused Theoderick to suspect some confede∣racy against him, so that when John returned, Theoderick clapt him up in Prison, and after there beheaded him, when hee had born his Honour two years and ten months, anno 527. Anno 527 There was a great division upon the Faelx the second the 53 Bishop. next Election, and so great, that the Sea was voyd fifty eight dayes: but then Theoderick put in, and carried it
for Faelix the second, who governed but two years, anno 529. Anno 529 Upon the death of Faelix new strife Boniface the second the 54 Bish. arose about the Election of another Bishop; some stood for Boniface, and some for Diascorus, and neither Party would yeeld: But about eighteen days after Diascorus dyed, and the Dignity was left to Boniface the second. Great mischiefs did now arise at every Ele∣ction Great strife about Ele∣cting of Bishops. of a new Bishop; but to prevent this, Boniface called a Council, and there it was ordered, That a Successor should bee created in the life-time of the present Bishop; and upon that or∣der Boniface nominated, Vigillius a Deacon, for his Successor. But soon af∣ter Boniface grew suspicious of his Suc∣cessor, and called another Synod, to whom hee accused Vigilius for Trea∣son, and so voyded the nomination. The woeful troubles of these times were very great, yet the pride and a∣varice of the Clergie no whit abated; but to all the rest of their abominati∣ons, the Worship of God was corrup∣ted, Latine Ser∣vice used. and their Service, or Liturgy in Latine; yet Boniface kept the Chair but two years, and departed, anno 531. Anno 531
John the second succeeded Boniface John the second the 55 Bishop. the second. Now the Bishops took the Titles of Holinesse, Arch-Bishops, Patriarks, and some of them, Popes; Justinian Emperour of the East, being newly come to the Crown, had a de∣sire to keep fair with the Bishop of Rome (who was now grown great) the better to regain Italy, which Theo∣derick had got to himself; and there∣upon sent an Ambassadour to John, with a Gratulatory Epistle, as here followeth. To the Holy John, Arch-Bishop The Bishops willingly took on them the names of Blasphemy. of Rome, and Patriarch. We will that your Holinesse know all matters which belong to the State Ecclesiastical, &c. And the same Emperour writing to the Bishop of Constantinople, gives him yet a higher stile, as thus; The most holy Arch-bishop of this royal City, and universal Patriarch. We will that your Holinesse know all matters which belong to the State Ecclesiastical, and we Sleidan. have written to the same effect to the Pope of old Rome, &c. Its beyond an Epi∣tomy to gather up the wickednesse of these times, yet this I may not omit to insert. Some to get voyces upon Ele∣ction for Bishop, promised such large bribes to Senators, and Courtiers, that
when they came to bee Bishop, they sold the very Vessels of the Church to pay, &c. John the second ruled two years, anno 533. Anno 533 Agapete followed John; so soon as he was setled, he also was sent Ambas∣sadour Agapete the 56 Bish to Justinian, to Constantinople, while Agapete was there, hee presided in a Council, yet lived but one year, anno 534. Anno 534 Upon the death of Agapete, Theoda∣tus Silverius the 57 Bish. set up Silverius in the Episcopacy, and by fear and force, caused many Priests to subscribe to it. Silverius Sleidan. came in by force, and was thrust out by fraud; the Empresse Theodora be∣ing of the Eutychian Heresie, thought Vigilius (before mentioned) a fit sub∣ject for a bad design, and therefore she promised to make him Pope of The plot of a wicked woman. Rome, and give seven hundred marks of Gold, if when hee was Pope hee would abrogate the Council of Chalce∣don, and confirm the faith of Theodo∣sius, Anthymius, and Severus (Here∣ticks of the same profession.) And withall she promised to send to Belisa∣rius at Ravena to set him in the Sea. Vi∣gilius was willing to accept the moti∣on, and the more effectually to engage
Belisarius in the expedition, Vigili∣us promised Belisarius two hundred marks for his part. Bellisarius went presently to Rome, and forth-with charged the Bishop of Treason, in hol∣ding secret intelligence with the Goths to surprize the City of Rome, and Let∣ters were forged to the same purpose, as written by Silverius. Upon this ac∣cusation the Bishop was first clapt up in Prison, and then secretly banished. The Sea being thus voyded, the next day an Election of a Bishop was called, and Vigilius put into the Roman Chair. Now when Vigilius was installed, Be∣lisarius Vigilius the 58 Bish. requires his Fee; but when Vi∣gilius was in, hee refused to pay the money, unlesse Belisarius would give Silverius into his hand; this made a little pause, but at last Belisarius gave up Silverius to the rage of Vigilius, who shut him up close Prisoner, and there Cruel mur∣der. starved him to death. And now for his engagement to the Empresse, Vigilius did as much as he could; he that blushed not wilfully to break the Comman∣dements of God to get the Episcopal Seat, made no scruple to deny the Faith of Christ. This was so grosse, that Baronius (the Papal Champion) was Baronius.
ashamed of him, and with open mouth, calls him a Wolf, a Thief, and Anti∣christ. But if Antichrist appeared so Note. early in the Roman Sea, where is the Antichrist confessed. The fifth general Council at Constanti∣nople. Apostolical succession so much boasted on by Papists and some others amongst our selves. Vigilius grew hateful for his wickednesse with all good People, and was at last complained of to the Emperour, and accused in the Coun∣cil at Constantinople, where by the Em∣perour and Council, Vigilius was de∣posed and banished, anno 556. Anno 556 By the power of the Emperour Ju∣stinian, Pelagius the first the 59 Bish. Pelagius the first succeeded in the Sea of Rome; this offended the Bishops of Italy, upon which they called a Sy∣nod at Aquilia to consult about it; but Pelagius sent to them a Confession of his Faith, and so pacified them, and governed eleven years, anno 567. Anno 567 John the third followed Pelagius, he John the third the 60 Bishop. strongly pursued the Plea of his Prede∣cessors for Supremacy, at home and a∣broad; Pelagius sent his Mandates to the Bishops in France, and Germany: Wee will and command all Bishops and Mystery of Iniquity. Priests whatsoever, to observe all the Decretals and Ordinances of our Prede∣cessors in matters belonging to the Church;
and if any shall attempt the contrary, let A sad threatning. him know there is no place left for repen∣tance to him, &c. If John may bee beleeved, it was now a dreadful thing to transgresse the commands of the Roman Church; yet these high words did not affright the Bishops, and when hee had continued twelve years he dyed, anno 579. Anno 579 Benedict the first took the next turn, Benedict the first the 61 Bishop. but in his time Narses Lieutenant of I∣taly, being discontented with the ingra∣titude of the Emperor, invited the Lum∣bards into Italy, who presently came in and laid siege to Rome, in which time Benedict dyed, anno 579. Anno 579 In the same year, and during the Pelagius the second the 62 Bish. same siege, Pelagius the second was chosen Bishop of Rome. Rome being now besieged, and Italy in uproars, John Bishop of Constantinople having John Bi∣shop of Con∣stantinople was first Universal Bishop. the favour of the Emperour Maurice, got the Title of Universal Bishop, and called a Council at Constantinople, anno 580. but the siege of the Lumbards be∣ing now raised from the walls of Rome by violence of weather, Pelagius sent presently to the Council at Constantino∣ple, and charged the Bishops to break up, being no Council, but a Conven∣ticle
without him, and also that if they did not forth-with depart, they should The pride of Pelagius be Excommunicate by the Sea Aposto∣lick. And further, Pelagins forbids them to acknowledge John Universal Bishop, for says he, If the chief Patri∣arch (meaning himself) should be cal∣led Universal, by that prophane Title, the name of Patriarch would be taken from all other Bishops; but God for∣bid that it should ever fall into the heart of a Christian to assume to him∣self that, whereby the honour of his Brethren may be abased. And consi∣der my Brethren what is like to ensue. He cometh neer unto him of whom it is written, This is he which is King o∣ver all the Children of Pride, and so John went about to attribute to him∣self, that which was only due to Christ, &c. Thus Pelagius preacht a pithy Lecture but sought only with words, and John mattered not such windy weapons; Pelagius continued ten years and left the Chair of Rome to Gregory the first, anno 590. Anno 590 Gregory the first, surnamed the Grogory the first the 63 Bishop. Great, took up the Weapons against John of Constantinople, but John being backed by the Emperour Maurico,
stood stifly to uphold his new Title; and the Emperour (further) in favour of John, writ his Letters to Gregory, and commanded him to keep peace. This greatly troubled Gregory, and thereupon he writ Letters to the Em∣perour, and the Empresse. To the Em∣perour he wrote thus: All those who have read the Gospel, know well what the Lord said to Peter, &c. The care and primacy of the whole Church was committed to him, yet behold my Fel∣low Priest, John, seeketh to bee called the Universal Bishop? I am now for∣ced to cry, Oh the times, oh the man∣ners of men! Europe is now exposed for a prey to the Barbarians, and yet the Priests who should lye down in the dust, weeping and rolling themselves in ashes, seek after names of vanity, and boast in their new found prophane titles, &c. And Gregory to the Empress, thus; Maurice indeed hath done like a godly man, and a religious Prince, to command due observance to men of the Church: But farre bee it that your time should bee defiled by the exalting of one Antichrist described. man above others, neither let it ever be said, that you gave way to that crooked name of universal. By this Arrogancy
and Pride, whas doth it else portend, but that the time of Antichrist is now at hand, in that (hee) imitates Lucifer, who making light of that happinesse he possessed with others, would needs aspire to a sin∣gularity above the rest, lost all, &c. I should exceed my bounds to follow Gregory in his invectives against John of Constantinople, for getting Suprema∣cy before him; and while John deligh∣ted himself in his new title, Gregory took up to himself the stile of Servant of the Servants of God. But in Grego∣ries The title of Servant of Servants. time the Emperour Maurice grew into hatred of the Souldiers, and fear∣ing the conspiracy of Phocas, Maurice fled to Chalcedon; Phocas heading the Mutineers, was by them proclaimed Emperour, and after the solemnity he pursued Maurice, where he first in a barbarous manner killed his Wife and Children before his face, and then The mur∣der of the Emperour. murdered him. Notwithstanding all this bloudy cruelty of Phocas, Gregory writ abominable flattering Letters to him, and his new Empresse, of which I must give you a taste. Gregory begins Gregories Hypocrisie discovered. his Epistle thus to Phocas: Glory bee to God on high, which changeth times, and translateth Kingdoms, who sometimes in
his Justice sendeth Princes to afflict his people, and at other times in his Mercy those that lift them up again; for which cause we rejoyce that thou art come to the Empire, let the Heavens rejoyce, and the Earth leap for joy, and let all the people be glad thereof, &c. but in the conclusion, Gregory prayes, that the Emperour would take the Church of Rome into protection, and bee mindful of Tu es Petrus, assuring of him, that for his re∣quital St. Peter would take him and his Empresse into protection, and keep him in the Empire. Now you have the bottome of Gregories heart opened, and his Hypocrisie fully brought to light; but he soon dyed, and saw not the ac∣complishment of his desires, anno 605. Anno 605 Sabinian followed Gregory, but dyed Sabinian the 64 Bishop. quickly. Boniface the third now had the Roman Sea, and all things concurring to ac∣complish Boniface the third the first Pope. Usurpers of∣ten finde trouble. the old design, and especially (to fulfill the Word of God) it so hapned, that Phocas was left by Cyria∣chus patriarch of Constantinople, and was hated by all good people for his bloudy cruelty, that the Empire was sore shaken, and Italy ready to revolt. Phocas now being in great straights, and
not knowing how to keep all quiet: In this nick of time Boniface offered his service to Phocas, which was so well ac∣cepted, that he conferred this Honour The Supre∣macy of Rome, the Douation of Phocas, Anno 606 upon the Church of Rome, that Shee should be the head of all other Chur∣ches, and the Bishop of Rome to be cal∣led, the Soveraign and Universal Bi∣shop. Boniface now got the desired pri∣macy, and brought in the Antichrist, yet continued but eight months, and dyed, Anno 607. Anno 607 Boniface the fourth succeeded, and governed six years, Anno 613. Deus-dedit came next to the Sea, and governed three years, Anno 616. Boniface the fifth now took his turn; these times were troublesome, and Boniface the fifth the fourth Pope. these Popes found much opposition, but to all the rest they did greatly cor∣rupt the Worship of God, and in a little time, they brought in Prayers for Prayers for the dead, &c. the dead, Invocation of Saints, the Li∣turgy in a strange Language, and abun∣dance of Jewish and Heathenish Ce∣remonies. This Pope continued five years, Anno 621. Anno 621 Honorius the first came next to the Honorius the first the fifth Pope. Papal Dignity; but though the name and title of universal Bishop was given
to the Sea of Rome, yet Papal Jurisdi∣ction was much resisted by the Bishops. Honorius hoping to subject the Bishops, The Popes policy to subject the Bishops. sided with Adelwaldus fifth King of the Lumbards, who raised an Army against them, but the Bishops had the better in that Battel, and Honorius carried not his design at that time. To give a demon∣stration that infallibility was not yet ti∣ed to Peters Chair, Pope Honorius fell into the Heresie of the Monothelites, and denied two Natures, and two Wills in Christ. For this Heresie hee The Coun∣cil of To∣ledo con∣demned the Pope. was condemned in the fourth Council of Toledo by 289 Bishops. Also in this Council it was decreed, That the Book of the Revelation should bee read in time of Masse, that all men might the Note. better know, and arm themselves a∣gainst Antichrist, who gave life to the Beast, the Roman Empire. This Pope was said to rule 13 years, anno 634. Anno 634 Severinus the first came next to rule; Severinus the first the sixth Pope. as yet the Pope was under the jurisdi∣ction of the Emperour, and every Pope confirmed by the Exarch for the Em∣perour, lying at Ravenna. Upon the election of Severinus, the Exarch made him stay a year and half for confirma∣tion, and hee lived but half a year
more, and dyed, anno 636. Anno 636 Boniface the sixth succeeded Severi∣nus, Boniface the 7 Pope. Theodore the first the 8 Pope. and ruled two years, anno 638. Theodore the first had the Papal seat; he strongly pursued the claim of Ju∣risdiction over the Bishops, but was stoutly denied it; yet Victor Bishop of Carthage gave him this Title, stuffed with Blasphemy; To the most blessed Blasphemy. Lord, and our Honourable Holy Brother, Pope Theodore, &c. Theodore had the Sea five years, and dyed, anno 643. Anno 643 Martin the first followed Theodore; Martin the first the 9 Pope. he was a great undertaker, and thought to carry great things; but assuming too much upon the Bishops of the East, the Emperour Constans gave a check to his ambition, who caused him to bee brought Prisoner to Constantinople, where he dyed in banishment, when he had kept Peters Chair eight years, anno 651. Anno 651 Eugenius succeeded Martin; but in Eugenius the 10. Pope his time divers Councils were held without his privity, and hee could not help it. He governed two years and dyed, anno 653. Anno 653 Vitalion had the Government, and Vitalion the 11 Pope. not inferiour to any of his Predecessors for a high mind; John Bishop of Lam∣peon
being condemned by a Synod un∣der Paul Arch-bishop of Candia, John appealed to the Bishop of Rome, who retracted the sentence of the Synod, and absolved him; but John was still kept out of his Sea. At this time also the Arch-bishop of Ravenna (under the Popes nose) rejected the Supremacy of Rome. But the Pope being repulsed in all the Countries about him, purposed to seek honour in places further re∣mote. It is said, about this time Austine the Monk was sent into England, but instead of spreading the Gospel, and converting souls, they here broached their Popish Fopperies; the Latine Altars, Or∣gans, Ta∣pers, &c. brought into England. Service, Organs, Altars, Tapers, &c. were brought into England. The Popes Agents also stirred ignorantly devout Princes to inforce their Subjects to use and practise this way of seigned Wor∣ship, Note. and the better to advance the main design, as the Agents found ambitious men thirsting for preheminence above their brethren, these were taken into favour, and honoured with preferment. But the issue was, by these means to bring in the Pope, and transferre Cau∣ses to Rome. Vitalion bare rule 15 years, and dyed, anno 668. Anno 668
Adeodate followed Vitalion: the Adeodate the twelfth Pope. The Pope Excommu∣nicated by the Bishop of Raven∣na. Arch-Bishop of Ravenna coming to that Sea, refused to bee Consecrated by the Pope of Rome; and for that offence A∣deodate Excommunicated the Arch∣bishop; and the Arch-bishop paid him in his own coyn, and excommunica∣ted the Pope of Rome: and this was all the Pope yet got. This Pope kept the Sea five years, anno 675. Anno 675 Domnus came next to the Pontifical Throne; he continued to fight the Pa∣pal Domnus the 13 Pope Combate for desired Supremany, and what by power, and what by poli∣cy, he at last subjected the Arch-bishop of Ravenna to Peters Chair, Anno 680, Domnus rejoyced in this addition, and lived two years after it, anno 682. Anno 682 Agatho next took Peters pretended Agatho, the 14 Pope. Chair, and being lift up in Domnus his uniting Ravenna to the Roman Sea, hee openly pronounced, That all Decrees made by the Sea-Apostolick, ought to be received, as if they had proceeded Blasphemy. from St. Peters own mouth. But the pride of the Prelate staid not here, but writing to the Bishops, he stiled himself, Head of all the Churches: and in a Let∣ter to the Emperour, he blushed not to The Popes Lye. say, That unto that day the Church of
Rome had never been stained with any Error, neither would be, by vertue of that promise made heretofore by our Saviour to Peter. Agatho kept his hap∣py place but two years, anno 684. Anno 684 Leo the second held the Apostolick Leo the second 15. Sea but ten months. Benedict the second followed Leo; in Benedict the second the 16 Pope his time he obtained of the Emperour, That hee who should bee elected Pope by the Clergie, People, and Souldiers, The Empe∣rours Pa∣tent. should have all the power at Rome, and not seek to the Emperour for confir∣mation. This was no small step to lift up the Dignity and Tyranny of the Roman Sea, into the Imperial Throne, but Benedict lived not out the year. John the fifth was chosen according John the fifth the 17 Pope. Anno 687 to the new establishment, but dyed quickly, anno 687. Upon the death of John, there fell a division about the election, the Clergie chose Peter, the Army chose Theodore; the contention was great, and neither Party would yeeld; but at last they all pitched upon Conon, a third person, and Conon the 18. he was made Pope, yet lived but eleven months, anno 688. Anno 688 While Conon was yet sick, Paschal an Arch-Deacon, made a Party for Sergius the 19 Pope
him, and promised large monies for Voyces: but at the Election there were many stood for Theodore, and some for Paschal. The division was great, and so lasted for two months; and to prevent bloud and mischief, they took Sergius The Pope cast off the Emperour. Anno 700 a poor Priest out of the throng, and made him Pope. When Sergius was lift up to this high Dignity, hee had nów the spirit of a Pope, so that when the Emperour Justinian sent to him the Books of the general Councils to sub∣scribe to them, Sergius denied it. Here∣upon the Emperour was justly displea∣sed, and sent to apprehend him; but Sergius so plaid his Game, that by the help of the Souldiery he kept his Chair, and slighted the Emperor, & continued his government 13 years, anno 701. Anno 701 John the sixth followed Sergius; he John the sixth the 20 Pope, still sought to promote the Papal Dig∣nity, as not having what was aymed at. The better to perswade John to sub∣scribe the General Councils, Justinian General Councils re∣jected by the Pope. sent to him a Confession of his Faith; but John also refused it, and gave this reason, Because of certain Articles in them which were contrary to the Church of Rome. This Pope ruled three years, anno 704. Anno 704 John the seventh the 21 Pope. John the seventh took the next turn,
but by this time, the Popes of Rome be∣gan to grow great in the world, and did cause others to know it. The Eastern Empire was now brought low by the Lumbards in the West, and the Sara∣cens in the East, that the Emperour was constrained quietly to put up all af∣fronts from the Pope, and speak him fair too. It is said also, that Aripert The Dona∣tion of A∣ripert. King of the Lumbards, to keep John on his part, gave to the Sea of Rome the Cottian Alpes, Anno 705. yet John kept the Sea but three years, anno 707. Anno 707 Zosimus the second came next to the Zosimus. the 22 Pope, Papal Dignity, yet held it so little time, that some Historians pass him by with∣out naming. Constantine followed next, but did Constan∣tine the 23 Pope. improve his time above many his Pre∣decessors. Upon offence given by the Patriarch of Constantinople to the Em∣perour, he sent the Patriarch prisoner to Rome, thinking thereby the more to please the Pope, Anno 708. as yet the Emperours Exarchs at Ravenna kept the Pope under that he could not work his will: but in this Popes time, the Souldiers conspired against Justinian, slew him, and made Philipicus Barda∣nes Image∣worship in∣ioyned by the Pope. Emperour. By this means the Ea∣stern
Empire was brought near to ru∣ine, and a door was opened for the se∣cond Beast to enter; Philipicus coming thus to the Empire, thought to doe some eminent act to please the good people, and so made an Edict, That all Images should bee puld down in the The occasion the Pope took to re∣ject the Emperour, and set up himself. Churches; upon this, the Pope took oc∣casion to cast off the Emperor, pronoun∣ced him an Heretick, and forbad the people of Rome to receive the Empe∣rours Commands, his Image on their Coyn, or mention him in their Service. This was not so much an Excommu∣nication, as a final Deposition of the Emperour, and soon after hee had his The wosul end of an Usurper. eyes put out, and thrust out of the Em∣pire. This was the first Pope that pro∣ceeded so high against the Emperours, and this doth sufficiently evidence, that Antichrist come. the Antichrist is now come, and hath taken his Throne. All this was accom∣plished by Constantine, who governed seven years, Anno 714. Anno 714 Gregory the second succeeded Con∣stantine, Gregory the second the 24 Pope and was not inferiour to any that went before him, in Pride, Policy, or Tyranny. It is said, that this Pope was so expert in Conjuring, that he was cal∣led Gregory the Diabolist. At this time Gregory ae Cryurer.
Leo Isaurius General of the Emperours Army, put down Theodotius from go∣vernment, and set up himself Empe∣rour, and having a little respit from the Saracens, he renewed the Edict of the former Emperour against Images, and hoped to maintain it in Italy. But Gre∣gory Treachery and bloud hath raised Antichrist. called in the Lumbards, and by their help routed the Emperours. Ar∣my; now Gregory and the Lumbards shared Italy, and by this means a huge Dominion was added to the Church. Though the Lumbards had done the Pope great service in this expedition, yet Gregory casts how to clear Italy to the Sea of Rome. It seems the Pope fea∣red a complyance of the Lumbards, with Charls Martil of France, who now grew great: and to engage him for the Church, Gregory sent an Am∣bassador The Keys of the Holy Sepulcher, and Peters Chain. to Charls, with a present of the Keys of the Holy Sepulcher, and St. Pe∣ters Chain. These unheard of Relicks were greatly accepted, and Charls Mar∣til ratified an accord with the Pope. Gregory did this for the Sea, and after he had ruled seventeen years departed, Anno 731. Anno 731 Gregory the third succeeded Gregory Gregory the third, the 25 Pope the first; Hee Decreed in a Synod,
That whosoever would not doe religi∣ous honour unto Images, should bee cut off from the Body and Bloud of Christ, and the unity of the whole Church. At this time Thrasamond Duke of Spoleto, intending to revolt from Luitprand King of the Lumbards, he fell in with Gregory, and to ingage the Church on his Party, Thrasamond deli∣vered into the Popes handsome strong Holds which he had kept for the Lum∣bards, and upon this ground the King of Lumbards raised an Army, and came against the Duke, and worsted him in that Battel. The Duke fled to Rome, and the King demanded him of the Pope, but the Pope refused to deliver him, & thereupon he laid siege to Rome. Gre∣gory was now sore puzled, and sent for Charls Martil to interpose; upon the perswasion of Charls, the King of Lum∣bards raised his siege, and returned in∣to Pavia, and in that year Gregory dy∣ed, when he had ruled ten years, Anno 741. Anno 741 Zachary next took place, and carried on the main design stoutly, and now an Zachary the 26 Pope opportunity was offered to compleat the work. Pipin, Master of the Kings House to Childrick King of France,
had a great desire to get into the throne, yet had some scruples how to be absol∣ved from his Oath; but in a little time Pipin was informed that the Pope had the power of Christ and St. Peter, and could doe all things. Pipin dispatches a∣way Ambassadours to Pope Zachary about the businesse. At first the Pope made a pause, and thought the attempt vile, but considering of what advan∣tage this might be to the Roman Sea, he put on impudence, and exercised all his power. Zachary deposed Childrick, ab∣solved The King of France deposed by the Pope, and the Kingdom given to Pipin. Anno 750 The Pope and Pipin court each other. the French people from their Al∣legiance, and gave the Kingdom to Pi∣pin. This was such an ingagement up∣on Pipin, that hee must not refuse the commands of his new Father the Pope, and as a requital to Zachary, Pipin drove the Lumbards out of Italy, and gave the whole Dominion to the Church of Rome. This Booty did so please Zachary, that in token of thank∣fulnesse, he confirmed Pipin in the King∣dom of France, & gave him the title of most Christian King; and to answer this new kindness, Pipin prostrated himself, kist the Popes feet, and sware Fealty to The ori∣ginal of kissing the Popes Toe. him. Thus you have the advance of Antichrist, and the ingagements of the French Crown to Peters Chair.
I need not seek further for the disco∣very of that Man of Sin, that Son o Perdition spoken of by the Prophet and Apostles, nor need any a sharp sight to discern him sitting in the Sea of Rome. Now was that word of the Lord perfectly fulfilled spoken by the Pro∣phets and Apostles, who described the Antichrist by several marks, some of which I will here observe. These are the Prov. 8. 15 Psal. 75. 7 Mar. 2. 7 Prerogative Royal of God Almigh∣ty, to dispose of Kingdoms, and pardon Sin; so that he who shall assume these out of the Hand of God, is the Anti∣christ, as described at large by the A∣postle Paul; and both these Pope Za∣chary took upon him at this time, when he absolved Pipin, and the French peo∣ple from their Allegiance to Childrick King of France, and when hee deposed Childrick, & set the Crown upon Pipin. I might give the particular Characters the Holy Ghost hath set upon Anti∣christ, and shew how clearly they are fulfilled in the Popes of Rome, above a∣ny other order of men in the world, but this would swell my Discourse too much; neither doe I need to go further than what I have here noted, for though some Emperours have deposed Kings,
and disposed of their Kingdoms, yet Emperours have not taken upon them to absolve from Oathes, & pardon Sin; though some Priests have taken upon them to pardon sin, yet they have not taken upon them power to dispose of Kingdoms; these only have been assu∣med by the Popes of Rome, and so the The Pope is the Anti∣christ. Pope is the Antichrist. I have now at∣tained my end in this Epitomy, to wit, to discover the Antichrist, and therefore will not detain the Reader with any farther relation of this abominable, blasphemous Beast, yet these two things in general I may not passe, which evi∣dence the Popes Pride, and fulfill the Word of God. First, when Zachary had brought a∣bout that design which had been so long in hatching, hee was cloathed in his Pontifical Robes, and caused himself to bee carried in Triumph upon mens shoulders, to the Church of St. Lateran. He appointed Lettanies to bee said in every Church of Rome; He also caused the Sculls of the Apostles (if you can beleeve it) and other like Reliques to be openly shewed, which were not be∣fore; and from this time the Popes of Rome have been carried upon mens shoulders.
Secondly, this is considerable, the unsatisfied ambition of the Popes cea¦sed not till they had perfectly inflaved the Roman Empire, to make good tha Word of the Lord spoken by the A∣postle John, I saw a Woman sit upon a scarlet-coloured Beast, full of Names of Revel. 17. 3 Blasphemy &c. At the first the Bishops of Rome contended only for a priority of piace in Councils; then for Jurisdi∣ction over the Bishops of their Pro∣vince, but after they took upon them to call Councils, to depose and trans∣late Emperours and Kings at their pleasure; so that while they bare the Title of Christs Vicars, they blushed not to assume the Prerogatives of God Almighty, and put upon their heads a Triple Crown, as King of Heaven, Earth and Hell. All these things are published at large, both by Protestant and Popish Writers, to whom I referre those who desire a fuller relation in the particulars. FINIS.
