P2624 R226694 13734307 101619
THE LAST SPEECH and CONFESSION OF Oliver Plunket Titular Primate of Ireland; with an Account of his Behavior in Newgate, since his Condemnation. And also of Edward Fitz-Harris: At their EXECUTION at TYBURN, upon Fryday, July 1. 1681. For HIGH-TREASON, in Conspiring the Death of the KING, &c. FRyday the first of July, being appointed by his Majesties Warrant, for the Execu∣tion of Oliver Pluncket and Edward Fitz-Harris, they had some days notice given them thereof, in order to prepare themselves for Eternity; during which time several persons of Quality came to visit them, and Discoursed them concern∣ing the horrid Crimes whereof they were found Guilty, to whom Mr. Plunket, (accor∣ding to the Popish Mode) denied his being any way concerned or Guilty of the matters Charged against him, insisting much upon his not having his Witnesses ready to Vindicate his Innocency; yet owning he had received divers Summs of Money, which he alleadg∣ed were given him for the Relief of the Inferior Clergy, which he, as their Bishop di∣stributed among them, repeating likewise many of those things which he urged at his Tryal, but especially at his Condemnation, and particularly his being Tryed in this Coun∣try, for Facts said to be committed in Ireland; adding, That if he had been Tryed there, he did not question but he should have been cleared. But however he said his Soul was now so well prepared for another World, that he did not desire to continue any long∣er in this, since he doubted whether ever he should attain to the same Temper of Mind again, and (contrary to the usual Roman Uncharitableness) desired all good Christians to pray for him. Last Night about 5 a Clock, Mr. Pluncket desired Captain Richardson that he might retire himself to his private Devotions, and that no person whatsoever might be permitted to disturb him, nor to come to him till morning, which was accordingly done, and we hear, That some of his Friends told him, They had begged his Body. Between Nine and ten a Clock this Morning, the Sheriffs of London, attended by Cap∣tain Richardson went to Tower-Hill, and there received the Body of Edward Fitz-Har∣ris from the Lieutenant of the Tower, who being put into a Sled, prepared for that pur∣pose, was drawn from thence through Cornhil and Cheap-side to Newgate, where Oliver Pluncket being also put into a Sled, they were both drawn from thence to Tyburn, there being a multitude of Spectators all the way as they passed. Mr. Pluncket came first to Tyburn, and as soon as he was taken out of the Sled, and put in the Cart, he crossed him∣self thrice upon the Brest, and then delivered a Paper to the Sheriff, which he desired might be Published; He then asked whether he might have liberty to speak, and it was told him, He might, and the Executioner having fitted the Rope to his Neck, he began with very solemn Protestations to declare, That he was sensible he was now going to appear before the Just Judge of Heaven and Earth, and that if he did not now speak the Truth he should be Damned to all Eternity, and then he proceeded to Declare what he was ac∣cused of, which he divided into five or six particulars, and then he repeated the same Pro∣testations, which he had formerly used, denying his having any manner of Correspon∣dency with the French King, or his Confessor, and alleadging the Impossibility of Land∣ing an Army of Seaventy Thousand men in that place which the Witnesses Swore to,
and likewise of the improbality of their maintaining them, who could hardly keep Cloths to their backs, and were not all able to provide for half a Regiment. He said, That he had been accused in Ireland, and cleared, and that he was now Try∣ed here, where the Jury could take no Cognizance of the likelyhood or improbability of the matter; and that he had endeavoured to reform some irregularities of the Cler∣gy in that Kingdom, which had occasioned much hatred against him; and then be∣cause the Old Protestation, That he was as Innocent as the Child unborn is now grown Threadbare, He said, That, as he hoped for Salvation, he was altogether Innocent of a∣ny thing whatsoever which was charged against him, which he said he affirmed to be absolutely true, according to the common and usual meaning of such words among Protestants, without any manner of Equivocation or mental Reservation whatsoever; Asserting, That he did not believe that any man or power upon earth whatsoever could dispense with Lying at such a time as that: He then prayed that it would please God to bless his Majesty, the Queen, the Duke of York, and all the Royal Family, and conclu∣ded with forgiving all the World, and desiring pardon of all those whom he had offend∣ed, and then recommended his Soul to the mercy of God, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Saviour, and the Blessed Virgin Mary; Declaring that he dyed a Roman Ca∣tholick, which Religion he had long continued in, and was resolved to dye in; after which he pulled his Cap over his eyes, and continued in his private Devotions above half an hour. During which time, Mr. Edward Fitz-Harris was brought thither, and as soon as he came under the Gallows, Dr. Hawkins, Minister of the Tower of London, stept into the Sledg to him, and kneeling down, discoursed privately with him for some time; Then Mr. Fitz-Harris was put into the Cart, and the Doctor coming up to him, Mr. Sheriff asked Mr. Fitz-Harris if he had any thing to say, who answered he had delivered two Papers to Dr. Hawkins, upon which the Doctor produced one of them and delivered it to Mr. Fitz-Harris, desiring him to read it, which he accordingly did, it being an half sheet of paper on one side, wherein he did deny he was any ways concerned in the Libel for which he suffered, any farther then the discovering to his Majesty the Designs and Practises of some Persons, reflecting likewise upon Sir William Waller and the other Witnesses, and some other persons who had fail'd him at his Tryal. Mr. Sheriff then desired him to Confess what he knew, and if possible to prevent the shedding of Innocent Blond, reminding him, what he had said, when in Newgate, that he knew more of the Popish Plot than any other; But Mr. Fitz-Harris said, He had left his Mind with Dr. Hawkins: Then Mr. Sheriff desired to know, Whether he died a Protestant or a Papist? and Dr. Martin of St. Mary Overys inforced the same, asking him, How it stood between God and his Soul, and wishing him to declare, Whether he dy∣ed in the Communion of the Church of England, or a Roman Catholick? telling him, That he needed not to be ashamed of dying a Protestant, but he still evaded to give any Answer, referring all to what he had given to Dr. Hawkins, and that he had no more to say: The Sheriffs then desired Dr. Hawkins, to deliver them the Papers, the Dr. reply'd, That they should have a Coppy of that which Mr. Fitz-Harris had read, but for the o∣ther Paper, he should deliver it only to those whom it properly concerned, or to that purpose. Then Mr. Fitz-Harris asked the Sherriffs, Whether they had not an Order concerning his Body, that it should not be broken (as he called it) or quartered, where∣upon Mr. Sheriff Cornish read the Order to him, which was, That after Execution, accord∣ing to the Sentence was done upon him, his Head and Quarters should be delivered to his Wife, Mrs. Ann Fitz-Harris: He said, He thought he should not have been Quar∣tered; Then Dr. Hawkins Kneeled down with him in the Cart, and prayed, or discoursed privately with him, and the Doctor going out of the Cart, prayed God to have Mercy on his Soul. Mr. Fitz Harris then pulled his Cap over his Eyes, and prayed to himself, and then put his Cap up again, and desired Dr. Hawkins to take care of his Body, to which the Doctor Answered, It was a very unbecoming Employment for him, and that others were appointed for that purpose; The Doctor likewise declaring, That he desired the Prayers of all there present, which Mr. Fitz-Harris hearing, put up his Cap again, and said, I desire all your prayers for an happy Passage; and in a short time after the Cart being drawn away, they were both turned off: Mr. Plunket was Dead in a short time, but Mr. Fitz-Harris, by staggering in the Cart brought the Noose just behind the Pole of his Neck, so that he was some what longer a-dying. After they had hanged a confiderable time, they were both Beheaded and Quartered, and their Quarters delivered to their Friends, according to the afore-mentioned Order. LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtiss, on Ludgate-Hill. 1681.
