P528 13798571 101884
A Collection Of the Several WRITINGS Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord, through that Meek, Patient and Suffering SERVANT of GOD, James Parnel; Who (though a Young Man) bore a Faithful Testimony for God, and Dyed a Prisoner under the Hands of a Persecuting Generation, in Col∣chester Castle, in the Year 1656. In the sight of the Vnwise they seemed to Dye; and their Depar∣ture is taken for Misery, and their going from us to be utter De∣struction; but they are in Peace: For, though they be Punished in the Sight of Men, yet is their Hope full of Immortality; and having been a little Chastized, they shall be greatly Rewarded; for, God proved them, and found them worthy for himself, Wisd. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. & 5. 4. Being Dead, yet speaketh, Hebr. 11. 4. Published in the Year 1675.
Stephen Crisp HIS TESTIMONY Concerning James Parnel IT was the Care of the Holy Men of Old, To keep in Remembrance the Words & Works which sprang from the blessed Power of God, and therefore did record the Words of many Prophecies, and the Histories of many Battels and Wars, in which the Arm of God was manifest; and whenever God Crown'd any with Worthiness and Honour, as his Witnesses of his Word and Power, this was commonly added unto the Renown of their Noble Acts and Faithful Testimo∣nies, That their Name and Manner of Life was committed unto the Generations that
followed after; insomuch as one said, The Righteous should be had in Everlasting Remem∣brance; and another said, The Name of the Righteous was Precious; and many other suh like Sayings are there in the Holy Scripture: Christ said to her that anoin∣ted him with the Box of Oyntment, Where∣ever the Gospel should be preached, this Charity and Love of hers, bestowed on him, should be spoaken of. And if ever any Age had Cause to prize and keep in Remembrance the Words and Sayings, Great Deliverances and Spiritual Battels, and Mighty and Noble Acts of God, wrought by the Finger of his Power, sure this Age hath Cuse to be di∣ligent in gathering up and keeping in Re∣membrance the Migty Works of Wonder, which our God hath wrought in our Day, in which he hath brought forth Life, Peace, Rest and Joy to a emnant by a Way which the Wise and Prudent of this World were not nor are not yet aware of▪ but Babes have been his Messengers, and Chil∣dren have been his Ministers, who in Inno∣cency have received the Revelation of his
holy Spirit, by which the Deep Things both of his Law and of his Glorious Go∣spel of Life and Salvation were revealed. And among these Babes, who thus came to receive the Knowledge of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, by the Working of his divine Power, was this Noble Child, JAMES PARNEL, who was a Ves∣sel of Honour indeed, and Mighty in the Power and Spirit of Immanuel, breaking down and laying desolate many mighty and strong Holds, and Towers of Defence, in the which the old Deceiver had fortified him∣self and his Children. Much might be spoaken of this Man, and a large Testimony doth live in my Heart to his blessed Life, and to the Power and Wisdom that abounded in him, but I do not intend at this time to write much about him, but to give the Reader a brief Account of my Certain Knowledge, which I had of Him, and his Life, and Labours, and End. As to his Country & Manner of Life,
and how he was about the Age of Fifteen or Sixteen Years brought to the Know∣ledge of God, and to the Working of his Power in him, and how he obeyed the same in many Travails and Tryals, until he came to be about Eighteen Years of Age▪ all this, I say, it being spoaken to in ano∣ther place, and before my particular Ac∣quaintance with him, I shall pass over, and only speak of things within the Compass of my own Knowledge. When he was about Eighteen Years of Age, the Lord (who had heard the Cry of his own Seed) put it into the Heart of this Young Man to come ino Essex, and to preach the Word of Life, and to pro∣claim the Acceptable Year of the Lord there, where it might indeed well have been said, Behold, the Fields are White unto Harvest; For, very many were there in that County, who were both weary and heavy laden with their Sins, and were as weary with running to and fo, to seek a Way out of them; and having travailed all Mountains, and all Hills and High
Things, that could be travailed and tryed; and found no Deliverance; and some sate down concluding, If there was a Way, God would manifest it; others concluded, There was no Way, but we must dye in this Wilder∣ness, and never see the Bread of Life; some othes set their Wits on work, to find out and invent New VVayes and Manners of VVorshipping, but all was in vain; and great was the Darkness and Sorrow of those dayes, which some can yet well remem∣ber; and when all Hearts were ready to faint, and all Hope was almost at an end with some, & when others had built their Tower of Profession so high, that they con∣ceted it did touch the Heavens it self; then, I say, then did the Lord send this his Fith∣ful Messenger, endued with Power from on High, to preach the Acceptable Year of God, and the Day of Vengeance, to comfort them that mourned: His Coming was in the fore-end of the Year 1655. VVhere He preached the Gospel in many parts of that County, as, Felsted, Stebben, Witham, Coxal, Halsted, and many other places,
where many hungry Souls had gladly re∣ceived the VVord of God, and it being mixed with Faith in the Hearts of them who heard it, it became Effectual to the saving the Souls of many: And after he had passed up & down many Parts of that County, and planted diers good Meet∣ings, and confirmed them that had belie∣ved; he at length, about the middle of the Summer, the same Year, came to Col∣chester, upon the seventh day of the week, & on the day following preached the Gospel unto many Thousands of people, first in his Lodging; then in a Steeple-house there, af∣ter the Sermon; then in a Great Meeting, appointed on purpose; and after that dis∣puted with the Town-Lecturer and another Priest in the French-School, all in One Day: in all which the Wisdom, Power and Patience of Christ appeared very Gloriously, to the Convincing of my self and many more, who were Witnesses of that day's Work: So he spent that week in Preaching, Prayng, Exhorting and Admonishing, turning the Minds of all sorts of Professors to the Light of
Jesus, which did search their Hearts, and shew their Thoughts, that they might believe there∣in, and s mght become Children of the Light; and many did Believe, and found it so; and others were Hardned, and Rebell'd against the Appearance of Truth, and became E∣nemies, with whom he Disputed daily in great Soundness, and in the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit, by which also many were reached, and convinced of the Truth, and the Mouthes of Ginsayers stopt; which made many gnash their Teeth on him; and some undertook to club out the Priests & Professors Arguments by beat∣ing this dear Lamb with Fists and Staves, who took all patiently; as particularly, one who struck him with a great Staff as he came out of one of the Steeple-houses, called Nicholas, and said, There, Take that for Jesus Christ's sake;To which he returned this Answer, Friend, I do Receive it for JESUS CHRIST's sake:
And many other intolerable Affronts were offered him, in all which his Spirit was not seen to be raised in Heat or Anger; but was a Pattern of Patience and Meekness: And having laboured in that great Town about Ten Dayes, it lay upon him to go back to Cogshall (to a Meeting holden as a Fast, of which read more in that part of his Writings, called, The Fruits of a Fast) from whence he was committed to Colche∣ster Castle, and from thence had up to Chelsford Assizes in Irons, and again thither re-committed, where he remained until he offer'd up his Life for his Testimony. He lived in that Castle about Ten or Eleven Moneths, in great Self-denyal and Careful∣ness, being truly watchful over the Flock of God both in Essex and in Cambridgeshire, Huntingtonshire and the Isle of Ely, and else∣where, where he had travaled, and turned many to God, and wrote many blessed and heavenly Epistles, both to particular Per∣sons, & to the Churches in general, which were so many, that we have no certain
Account of them, nor cannot place them in order as we would, if all could be col∣lected together; but those Books and Pa∣pers, which could be found, are here com∣posed for the View of those who desire to taste the first Fruits of this Tender Plant; who in the Dayes of his Youth laid down his Life for his blessed Testimony: Ma∣ny Things he suffered in that Prison, which is other-where in this Book to be found. And as he lay in Prison, he laboured for the building up of them that were Con∣vinced; and he saw the Desire of his Soul concerning many, in whom he saw the Seed which he had sown Multiply and Grow, to his Refreshment. And at last, having passed through many Tryals and Exercises, both Inward and Outward and fulfilled his Testimony in Pati∣ence, Courage and Faithfulness, and been a Comfort to us who had believed, He at length laid down his Head in Rest and Peace, stretching forth Himself, saying, Here I Dye Innocently:
And after his Departure he was buried in the Castle Yard, where other Prisoners use to be buried, because the Cruel Goaler would not deliver his Body without Fees. And though he be, as to the Outward, ta∣ken away, his Life doth remain, and his Testimony doth yet live in the Hearts of many, and will live through Generations to come; and happy and blessed are and shall all they be, who are Partakers there∣of, and are Faithful therein, they shall be also Partakers of that Crown Immortal with which He is Crowned. Thus, honest Reader, have I given thee a brief Ac∣count of this dear Plant of God, and of his blessed Fruit, some whereof thou may'st find in this following Book; which, if read in Sincerity and in Uprightness of Heart, will tend to thy Benefit, and will give thee Cause, with me and many more, to bless the Lord on his Behalf, who is the Well-spring of Life, from whom all Good Gifts come, and to whom all Glory and Honour doth belong, now, hence∣forth and forever, Amen. Stephen Crisp.
Samuel Cater's TESTIMONY Concerning James Parnel COncerning our Dear Friend and Bro∣ther, Iames Parnel, I have this Te∣stimony to bear for him, in a true Remem∣brance of him, as being Turned unto the Truth of God by him; through Obedi∣ence unto which Heavenly Light & Truth of God within, which he turned me un∣to, I have found and do enjoy Peace with God; so that although the Dark World and Envious Priests and Professors Raged against him, Imprisoned him and Perse∣cuted him unto Death, and made Lyes of him when he was dead, speaking Evil of him, accounting of him a Deceiver when he was alive, I do say, He was unto Me a
True Minister and Messenger, sent of God, who brought Tidings of the Way of Life and Salva∣tion unto me, and many more in these Parts of the Nation, whom, I know, have the same Testimony to bear for this Innocent Man; For God hath made us Seals of his Ministy, through a blessed Experience of the Work of Regeneration, brought to pass by this Heavenly Light & Everlasting Truth, unto the which he turned our Minds. And this I can say also, As the Lord was pleased to call him into his Blessed Work, so he furnisht him with Virtues suitable for the same, according to the Work of the Day in which he brought him forth; and did mightily appear for him and with him, in giving of him Courage, and Wisdom, and Power, whereby he was Prepared and Fitted for every Service & Exercise y• the Lord called him unto; which Service he faithfully perform'd of a Ready Mind, & with a Willing Heart, not neglecting: Nor did he refuse to ap∣pear in any Service, in which his Testimo∣ny was concern'd, which God had called him to bear, although it were to the Ieo∣pardy of his Life, which many times he did, both in Going to Steeple-Houses & amongst
the Rude Schollars in Cambridge, both in Disputing with them, and Declaring the Truth. And after he went from Us, he was moved of the Lord to go into Essex, where he was gladly received by the Ho∣nest-hearted, which wanted the Knowledge of the Lord and his Wayes, which he de∣clared unto them; and many there were that Received him, and Believed in the Truth which he declared? But the Envi∣ous Professors roe up against him, in Cain's Murdering Spirit, and cast him into Pri∣son, and there kept him in Hard Bonds un∣til Death, at whose Doors, Hearts and Con∣sciences the Guilt of this Innocent Man's Blood lies, which all their Outward Wa∣shings, nor Carnal Ordinances, nor Out∣side Performances, neither could nor can purge away; but the Judgments of the Lord have been, and yet will be executed upon all that have had a Hand, or have taken a Part with them in shedding of Innocent Blood, which the Lord will not acquit. And now, as to the Person, Virtues and Parts of this our Dear Friend, it is some∣thing
upon me to give some Account of, as having a Certain Knowledge of him, not only because I was turned unto Truth by him, but my Heart loved him, which Love constrained me, as oft as I could, to be with him; so that what Service he had in these Parts, in Meetings of Friends, or amongst Professors, or with Priests, I was frequent∣ly with him; whereby I was both Eye and Ear Witness of the Mighty Power and Wisdom of God, that attended him, by the which He was prepared for eve∣ry Work and Service which he was called unto, and which he performed to the Ho∣nour of God and Comfort of his People, and to the Confounding of those that Op∣posed the Truth. He was but Young in Years, and of a Little Stature; for the which he was by Brutish, Envious, Perse∣cuting Priests and Professors Mocked, and by them in a scornful Mind called, The QVAKING BOY: but in him was seen the Mighty Power of God. VVhen any of them that were climed up so high in their Imaginations, and strengthned themselves in their Self-righteousness, and
came forth in the Strength of the power of Darkness to Oppose the Truth of God, which he bore Testimony unto, with him did then appear the Name and Power of the Living God, which was with the little Stripling, David, in which Name and Power he many times stopped the Mouths of Gain-sayers; and by the Wisdom of God that was with him, he caught the Wise and Crafty in their own Snares, and Con∣founded them in the sight of all that had an Eye to see, and so brought shame upon them; whereby the Saying is fulfilled, That by Weak things the Lord would confound the Mighty, and things that are Despised hath God chosen; yea, and things that are not, to bring to nothing things that are. He had also a good Gift to declare the Truth, and was full of Zeal and Heaven∣ly Courage, in the which he performed the same, for the informing of the Minds of those that wanted the Knowledge of the Lord; also, to Mark Out and Make Ma∣nifest the Deceivers, which People were to turn from. His Exhortation was unto Us, that were turned unto the Truth, To
Walk in it, and to Watch unto it, and to Keep Low in God's Holy Fear, & to Deny our selves, and Take Vp the Daily Cross to our own Wills, and to be Faithful in that Little Appearance of Light & Truth which we had already receiv'd; alwayes declaring unto us, That if we were Faithful in that, the Lord would make known more unto us; whose words many of us are now Living Witnesses of the fulfilling of; Blessed be the Name of the Lord forever and for evermore, saith my Soul. Also, He was a Good Example and a Pat∣tern in his Life and Conversation unto us, by the which he preached Truth unto us, as well as by his VVords; for He himself li∣ved according to what he taught us; for, he was adorned with Gravity, and walked before us in Humility; yea, he had a Blame∣less Conversation, and was unspotted from the World; so that his Presence, as well as his Words, was a Strengthning and a Comfort to the Upright and Honest-hearted; but he was an Awe & a Dread to the Careless and Disobedient, which made a Profession of the Truth, but did not walk Answer∣ably thereunto, who he alwayes told
should be cloathed with Rags, which could not cover them, and their SHAME should appear, and they left Naked; for, the Light and Day of the Lord was come, that would make all ma∣nifest, and strip off all False Coverings, so that a Profession, although it were of the Truth it self, would no longer do, nor cover, without the Life and Power be known and witnessed, which doth not only Discover Sin and Evil, but also Overcomes it, Removes it & Takes it away: The Truth of this Doctrine, which he preached unto us, there are many of us, by the good Hand and Power of the Lord have & do see the Fulfilling of this Honest-hearted Young Man's Testimony, both on them that received the Truth, which he preached, into an Honest and Good Heart; and also, upon the Careless and Disobedi∣ent: so that I shall and do conclude in this Testimony concerning Him, That He was a Faithful Servant and Messenger, sent by God to Declare the Way of Life unto them that wanted the Knowledge of it, and to Reprove Sin, and to Make Manifest De∣ceivers, and to Testifie against them, which
may be seen and felt, to the better Satisfa∣ction of them that never saw his Face, in reading over his own Books and Epistles, which were written by his Own Hand, which all that read with an Honest Heart & in a Serious Mind, I doubt not but will say with me, Surely the Mighty Power and Wisdom of the Lord was with him of a Truth. Samuel Cater.
Thomas Bayles HIS TESTIMONY Concerning James Parnel THis Blessed Man, the Writer of these following Books, was made a Partaker of that Faith & Patience through which the Righteous in all Ages obtained the Crown of Life, and Victory over all their Enemies; and had a share in his Day and Time (as alwayes they had in this World) of the Sufferings of Christ in him. He was sent into this County with the Testimony of God in his Heart & Mouth, and therefore was Bold in the Name of the Lord to cry REPENTANCE in the Ears of the Sons of Men; and as He said, so
lived he, as many in this Town and Place are living Witnesses of, who have true Cause to bless and praise the Name of the Lord, and do, for that He and other of his Brethren were sent among us. He was of a sweet Savour of Christ to the Almighty God (through his Faithfulness to him who sent him hither) in them who receiv'd his Testimony, though many there were that hardened their Hearts against the Lord, of which Number were many of the Rulers, Priests and Professors of that Time, who, notwitstanding they cryed, Reformation, the Ordinances of Christ Jesus, Christian-Duties, and the like, yet manife∣sted themselves of that Stock and Genera∣tion which always slew the Righteous: and the Lord God soon stretcht forth his Righ∣teous Hand of Judgment upon some, as Warnings unto others, whom he spared from that swift Stroak, that they might Repent (as some did) and seek his Face, who is the Light of the World, God bles∣sed for evermore. He was as a Youth, and mean in hs Out∣ward
Presence and Appearance; but God hath chosen the Foolish Things of this World to confound the Wise: And so high was the spirit of the Professors (and the Prophane encouraged thereby) that with whom a∣mong such was his Name used, but in a way of Derision and Scorn? terming him, The Railing Fellow in the Castle; He owneth himself to be Christ Jesus; A Wandering Star, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness forever. But since it came to Light, and the Wandering Stars seen, and their Black∣ness of Darkness felt, who durst not stand by their Ordinances, Duties nor Christianity, but in Obscure Holes, Secret Places & Vaults; which shews them of a low, dark, earthly, wandering spirit, who know not the Spirit of Life from God, nor the Stability there∣of, to set them above the Fear of Man, where they lie in great Captivity. The Lord hath put it into my Heart (in the blessed Remembrance of his Innocent Life) to bear my Testimony upon this Oc∣casion, and thus to appear in the Memori∣al of him: And I am assured in my Spirit,
That although the Lord suffer'd him to be cruelly kept in Bonds until Death, and to be hated & persecuted beyond what we had known before amongst us, yet it was for his Righteous Life sake (as from his Ene∣mies) and testifying against te gross Hypo∣crisie of that Day. And this I have to say concerning him, and it  in many, and shall not dye, That he was an Innocent, Man, and lived in the Testimony and Fea of God; that he sought nothing here for himself, but alone laboured and travied that People might be brought into the Knowledge and Love of God; and had he bin otherwise spirited, he should have had Ac∣ceptance with many of hs Enemies, I be∣lieve: And as he was an Innocent Man, so he li∣ved Innocently towards all men, and so he dyed Innocently, as himself estified a small time before his departure, Here I Dye Innocently: And as several (who were with him) were Eye-Witnesses of the sme, and is enter'd into the Bosom of the Eternal Rest with God forever.
His Testimony was, That God was Light, and that Christ, who proceeded and came from God, did enlighten every Man that cometh into the World, that all Men through him might believe; which Testimony of Truth bear∣ing, although it was rejected by many, and the heavenly Light of the Lord too mean an Appearance for the aspir'd Minds of those Dayes o submit unto, yet accepted of was it by some, who by it soon were taught to take the Yoak of Christ upon them, and to receive his holy Far into their Hearts, and were blessed of the Lord, prospered and encreased, although therefore persecu∣ted and reviled by the Vngodly Generation, who turn away their Eyes from the Re∣proof of Instruction, because of the Re∣proof thereof, and preserved through ma∣ny grievous Trials & Tribulations (through their faithful Obedience in the Light) Va∣liant for the Truth upon the Earth: so what Acceptance ever had the Righteous in this World, by the men and spirit there∣of, is apparent by Scripture and Historical
Account, and our Experience doth con∣firm the same, viz. Persecution and Cruelty, Prisons and stinking Holes, Banishments and Death, Destroying of the Goods and Estates of the Innocent (and what do I behold at this day!) I never saw or read of a Lamb wor∣rying a Dog, nor an Innocent Sheep to tear or devour a Wolf: What Christianity or Holiness is that which hurts and destroyes, and thinketh thereby of doing God good Ser∣vice? Surely it is not to be found in all God's Holy Mountain, saith the Lord. And so, The Name of the Righteous is had in Everlast∣ing Remembrance, ad his Memorial shall shine forever and ever. In true Faith and Assurance (as a Bro∣therly-Testimony to my deceased Friend's Innocency) is this written, that it may be known from one who was acquain∣ted with his Life and Death in this Town, that the Lord was with him in his Life and Death, that those who are yet in being, that had a Hand in his Sffe∣rings, or consented, may Repent: Repent
unfeignedly, and seek the Lord while He is to be found; for, if thou art found out by Him to be a Blood-guilty Man, and knowest not his Hysop in thy Day of Visi∣tation to have purged thee, know thou, that the Lord God will give thee Blood double to drink in his Day of Judgment, with Horror and Destruction for ever∣more. olchester, the 7th of the 7th Month, 1671. Thomas Bayles.
A TESTIMONY Concerning the Sufferings and Death OF James Parnel I Having a Knowledge of J. P. the Author of these Books, and being an Eye-Witness of part of his great Sufferings, he under-went for the Testimony of the Blessed Truth, which he sealed with his Blood, being persecuted by a Pro∣fessing Generation, who, though they made great Pretence to Christianity, yet they were upon Try∣al found to be such who were born of the Flesh, who always persecuted them that were born after the Spirit; and were like the Professing Jews, who reckoned they were of the Stock of Abra∣ham, and that he was their Father, when they were of their Father the Devil, doing his Works, Persecuting the Innocent. And that the Remem∣brance
of the Great Suffering of this our Dear Friend and Brother JAMES PARNEL may not be extinguished, I shall insert a full Relation of his Imprisonment and Death, as follow∣eth. The said JAMES PARNEL being moved of the Lord to go to a Steeple-House at Cogg∣shall, the Priests and the People having appoin∣ted a Fast (as they said) against Error, the 12th Day of the 5th Month, in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Fifty Five; after the Priest had Ended, James spake a few Words to them; so passing forth of the Steeple-House, one cal∣led Justice WAKERING followed him, and clapt him on the back, and said, He Arrested Him, although he shewed no Writ; and by the means of divers Priests he was (by Dionysius Wakering, Herbert Pelham, Thomas Cook and Wil∣liam Harlakenden) committed to Colchester-Castle, and there kept close up, and none of his Friends suffered to come near him; and from thence, at the Assizes, was carried to Chelmsford, where they kept him on the Chain Day and Night; but when he appeared at the Bar, the Chain was taken off, on∣ly had Irons on his Hands, where Judge Hill urged the Jury to find him guilty, declaring what he could against the Prisoner to them, and would not suffer him to speak to the Jury to clear himself; so the Judge fined him Forty Pounds, and to be
committed Close Prisoner till Payment; and gave Charge to the Goaler, Not to let any Giddy-Headed People (as he called them) come at him; so the Goaler denyed his Friends to come to him, to Relieve him, and would not let them in; but such as came to Abuse, Scorn and Beat him, they let in to him; and the Goaler's Wife did set her Man to Beat him, who threatned to Knock him down, and make him shake his Heels; and she her self did Beat him several times, and swore, She would have his Blood: And sometimes they would not let him have any Victuals brought to him; other times, they would set Prisoners to take a∣way such Victuals as was brought to him; and would not let him have a Trundle-Bed, which his Friends would have brought him to lie on; but forced him to lie on the Stones, which in a wet season would run down with Water; and when he was in a (Room for which he paid Four Pence a Night) he was threatned if he did but walk to and fro in it: Then they put him in the Hole in the Wall, which is very high from the Ground, and where the Ladder was too short by Six Foot; and when his Friends would have given him a Cord and a Basket, to have taken up his Victuals in, they would not let them (though they much de∣sired it) but he must either come up and down by a Rope (or else Famish in the Hole) which he did a long time: But after a long Suffering in this Hole, where there was nought but Misery, as to the Outward Man, it being no Place either
for Air or Smoak (and James being much be∣numbed in his Naturals) as he was climbing up the Ladder, with his Victuals in one Hand, and coming to the top of the Ladder, catching at the Rope with his other Hand, missed the Rope, and fell from a very great Height down upon Stones, by which Fall he was exceedingly Wounded in the Head and Arms, and his Body much Bruised, and taken up for Dead: Then they put him in a little low Hole, call'd the Oven (which place was so Little, that some Bakers Ovens have been seen Bigger then it, though not so high) without the least Air, Hole or Window for Smoak; neither would they suffer him to have a little Charcole brought in to pre∣vent the Smoak: And after he was a little Re∣covered, they would not suffer him to take a lit∣tle Air, which was but once desired by him, feeling himself spent much for want of Breath: And although some did offer their Bond of Forty Pounds, to a Justice (so called) and another to lie Body for Body, that James might have but Liberty to come to their House while he was well, and to be returned again when he should be Reco∣vered, and that if he Dyed, they should have his Body; but they would not, their Wills be∣ing unalterably set in Cruelty against him: And it was desired, That he might but walk in the Yard? but it was said, He should not have so much Liberty as to walk to the Castle Door; which was strictly executed; for, the Door being open, he
did but walk forth into a Close Stinking Yard be∣fore the Door, and the Goaler came in great Rage, and lock't up the Hole where he lay, and shut him out in the Yard all Night, being in the Coldest Time of all Winter. And seeing that their Rage did more and more encrease, and there was an Addition to his Sufferings daily, and seeing there was no way to satisfie their Malice, but his Blood, and seeing his Life could not in all likelihood be continu'd long in that Place and Condition he was in, there was no little Labour and Means used to lay it before the Highest in Authority, yea, more concerning that Man (that his Life might have been saved, and they kept from Innocent Blood) then ever was concerning any (if not all) that ever were Imprisoned of our Friends for some Years before; but no Mercy could be found a∣mongst them; and though they were told of his Wounds, Weakness and Ill Usage, yet would not be∣lieve it, till he was Dead; and then some, who were his Persecutors, used their Wits to cover his Sufferings from being known, and would cast it upon himself. At his Departure there were present with him, Ann Langley and Thomas Shortland, who related his last words as followeth, viz. HERE I DYE INNOCENTLY; and further said, NOW I MUST GO; and turned his Head to Thomas, and said, THIS DEATH I MUST DYE; and further said, THOMAS, I HAVE SEEN GREAT THINGS; and bad him, That he should
not hold him, but let him go; and said it over again, WILL YOU HOLD ME? then said Ann, Dear Heart, we will not hold thee; and then he said, NOW I GO; and stretched out himself, and fell into a sweet Sleep, and slept about an Hour (as he often had said, that ONE HOUR's SLEEP WOULD CURE HIM OF ALL) and so drew Breath no more. This is the Substance of a Relation given (of his Sufferings and Death heretofore printed) in a Book entituled, The Lamb's Defence against Lyes, published soon after James Parnel departed. Thus did this Valiant Souldier in the Lamb's War Conquer through Sufferings, and hath laid down his Head in Peace forever. London, the 29th Day of the 6th Moneth, 1675. Written by a Lover of the Faithful Followers of CHRIST JESVS, ELLIS HOOKES.
A TABLE OF THE Principal Heads Contained in this Book. I. A Tryal of Faith; wherein is discovered the Ground of the Faith of the Hypocrites, which perisheth; and the Faith of the Saints, which is founded upon the Everlasting Rock, page 1. II. Christ Exalted into his Throne, and the Scripture owned in its Place. 11. III. The Trumpet of the Lord Blown; or, a Blast against Pride and Oppression, and the Defiled Liberty which stands in the Flesh, 28. To the Libertine, whose Liberty stands in the Flesh, 41. To all Scoffers, Scorners, Reproachers and Revilers of the Children, Servants and Messengers of God, 49.
IV. A Shield of the Truth; or, the Truth of God cleared from Scandals and Reproaches, cast upon it by Scandalous and Reproachful Tongues, which the De∣vil in all Ages did make use of, whereby he Blasphe∣med the Truth of God, striving to present it Odious to the Eyes and Ears for all People, that so he might uphold his own Kingdom. pag. 55. Concerning the Name Quakers, 58. We are Accused to be False Prophets, False Teachers and Deceivers, &c. ibid. We are Accused to deny the Scriptures, 68. We are Accused to deny the Baptism, 67. We are Accused to deny the Supper of the Lord, 68. We are Accused to deny all Prayer, 70. We are Accused to be destructive to the Ministry, 72. We are Accused to deny all Magistracy and Go∣vernment, 81. We are Accused to be destructive to all Superiority and Honour, Breeding and Manners, &c. 85. We are Accused to say, That we are Perfect, with∣out Sin, 97. We are Accused to deny Christ come in the Flesh, 104. We are Accused that we Judge People, 105. We are Accused to deny the Church, 107. We are Accused to deny the Sabbath, 108. We are Accused, That we Justifie our selves, and Condemn all others, 109. We are Accused to be one with the Ranters, 111.
We are Accused, That the Ground of our Religi∣on is Popery, pag. 113. A few words to all you Heads, Rulers and Magistrates, of what Degree soever, 115. To all who are convinced by the Light of God in your Consciences, 118. V. The Watcher; or, The Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, striking at the Feet of the Image, whose Head is Gold, and Breast of Silver, and Thighs of Brass, and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron and part Clay, 121. A Relation of several Passages that James Parnel had with the People called Baptists in several Meetings, with the Occasion of the First Meeting, 180. A Copy of some Queries, which were sent to the Bap∣tized People in Fenstanton, 188. The Occasion of another Meeting between the People called Baptists, and the People called Quakers, 196. Another Meeting between the People called Baptists, and the People called Quakers, 208. The Excommunication of Ezekiel Cater and Sa∣muel Cater, out of the Baptists Society; with their Answer thereunto, 225. A Word to all who are still in their own Formings, Self actings and Imitatings, 230. VI. The Fruits of a Fast, appointed by the Churches gather'd against Christ and his Kingdom, who go about to mock God with their Out-side Worship, and Appoint∣ed
Fasts, and Dayes of Voluntary Humiliation; or, a Declaration of the Persecution of a Messenger of the Lord, by a People who go under the Name of Indepen∣dents in Essex, who have set themselves in the En∣mity of their Spirits to oppose the Truth of God, calling it a Lye, and Persecuting his Messengers as Decei∣vers and Wanderers, wherein their Persecuting Spi∣rits are made manifest, and them to be in Cain's Ge∣neration, and Strangers to the Spirit of Christ, which were persecuted, and so are none of his. And also, of the Unjust Dealings of Judge Hill, who sate up∣on Life and Death at the Assizes at Chelmsford, 229. A Reply to his Mittimus, 250. A Copy of some Queries, that were sent to the Ju∣stices, so called, 266. The Copy of a Note, that was written against the I∣dol's Temple, 271. Several Queries, that were sent to four of the Chief Priests in Essex, 274. The Copy of a Letter writ to Judge Hill after the Assize, 282. A few Words unto you, who call your selves Gather∣ed Churches, and go under the Name of Inde∣pendents in Essex, 286. A few Words to Friends in Essex, 291. VII. Goliah's Head cut off with his own Sword; in a Combat betwixt Little David, the Young Strip∣ling, who stands in the Power and Strength of his God; and Great Coliah, the Proud Boaster: In a Reply to a Book set forth by an unnamed Author, under Pretence
of an Answer to Thirty Six Queries propounded by J. Parnel: And also, an Answer to several Counter-Queries, propounded by the same Unnamed Author, pag. 295. VIII. A Warning of all People, 426. IX. An Epistle to Friends in London, 433. X. An Epistle to Friends in Essex, 438. XI. Another Epistle to Friends, 445. XII. An Epistle to all Friends, 453. XIII. Some Queries sent to the Masters of the Col∣ledges in Cambridge, 457. XIV. To all Judges, Justices, Rulers and Officers, 463. XV. To all Magistrates, Rulers and Officers, who call Men to Swear, and Imprison them if they will not, 470.
A TRYAL Of Faith: VVherein is discover'd the Ground of Faith of the Hypocrites, which Perisheth; and the FAITH of the SAINTS, which is Founded upon the Everlasting Rock. So all may see what their FAITH is, and what they Trust to. COme. try your Faith, all you Professors of Godliness, of God, and of Christ; who say, God is your Father, and Christ is your Redeemer; and say, You Believe in God, and you are saved through Faith in Christ: Come, search the Ground and Bottom of your Faith, what it is built upon; for the Faith and Hope of the Hypocrite perisheth, which stands in words, and on any Unstedfast Foundation.Job 8. 13. You say, You are Saved by the Blood of Christ, and by his Stripes you are
Healed; and so would make him the Ground of your Faith: But what are you saved from? and what are you healed of? Search and see within: Christ came to save and redeem Sinners from their Sin, and to heal them of the Wound of Sin; to bruise the Serpent's Head; and to bind the Strong Man,1 Tim. 1. 15. and cast him out of his House; to cast out the Buyers and Sellers out of the Tem∣ple of God,Mat. 21. 12. which is made a Den of Thieves; and to open the Prison Doors, and to set at Li∣berty the Imprisoned,Gen. 3. 15. and to lead Captivity Captive; to throw Antichrist out of the Tem∣ple of God, who sits as God there, and saith, He is God; and he is come to rend that Vail of Darkness, and to open the Eyes of the Blind, and to unstop the Deaf Ears, and to make Blind those that can see, and to make Deaf those which can hear;Luke 4. 18. and give Strength to the Weak, and to make Weak those that are Strong; and to Feed the Hungry,Isa. 42. 6, 7. and to Famish that which is Fed; and to make a separation betwixt the Precious and the Vile, betwixt the Wheat and the Tares, the Sheep and the Goats,Luke 4. 18. and to purchase to man that which man hath lost; and to this end is he come: and who can witness this,Luke 8. 10. can witness him, and may claim an Interest in him, and have an As∣surance of their Salvation; and their Faith will stand against the Beast,Mat. 8. 21. and overcome; for the Lamb shall get the Victory: But who cannot witness this, cannot witness Christ, and so are Reprobates concerning the Faith. Now here
all you Drunkards are shut out; here all you Swearers are shut out; here all you Proud, and Covetous, and Lustful Ones are shut out; here all you Scoffers, and Scorners, and Back-biters, and Bevilers, and Extortioners, and Whoremon∣gers, and Envious Ones, and Gamers, and Spor∣ters, & all you Self-righteous Professors, who live in the Fashions and Customs of the World, deligh∣ting in the Pleasures and Vanities of the World, having Fellowship with the World, whose Con∣versation is amongst the Children of the World, all in one Generation, cleansing only the Out∣side of the Cup, and the Inside full of Lust and Filthiness, Pride and Covetousness, and all Un∣cleanness, Whited Walls and Painted Sepul∣chres, who deceive the Carnal Eye and Ear; but the Lord searcheth the Heart: Here you are all shut out from the true Faith, which purifieth the Heart; and the Serpent is Head in you; and your Strong Man keeps the House, and a stronger than he is not yet come; and the Buyers and the Sellers are uncast out of the Temple; and Antichrist sits in the Kingdom, and raigns, as an Angel of Light; and the Imprisoned lies in Prison; and the Wound of Sin is yet fresh; and the Vail of Darkness is yet spread over; and Death raigns; and Christ lies low in the Manger, and the Inn is taken up with other Guests: and here you can challenge no Inte∣rest in the Blood of Christ, and have nothing
to do to Talk of God and Christ, and have no Assurance of your Salvation; and all your Faith is vain, and Hope vain, and the Founda∣tion thereof is Sandy, and will not stand in the Day of Tryal, but will be as a broken Reed to to lean upon; and all your Prayers, and Praises, and Singings, and Graces, and Baptism, and Sa∣craments, which you build your Faith upon, and think to Merit withal, are all in vain, and the Enflaming Sword is set against it, being offered up from an Unclean Heart: For how can your Hearts be clean while you live in sin? for sin lodgeth in your hearts; and while sin is there, no purity can dwell, and nothing that is pure can come forth of an unclean Vessel; and God doth not put his Treasure in an unclean Vessel; and he is Pure, and receives nothing that is Impure: and here all your Faith is vain; and here you destroy all your Faith out of your own mouthes, who say, You believe you shall never overcome your Sins so long as you are here, or be made free from Sins: And here you shew, your Faith is not built upon Christ, who came to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to cleanse from all sin; and those whose Faith was built upon him, did witness it, and said, The Blood of Christ hath cleansed us from all sin; and they that are Christ's, have Crucified the Flesh, with the Lusts and Affe∣ctions thereof, which is the Ground of Sin; and he that Believeth is born of God; and he that is born of
God cannot commit sin; and no Unholy nor Unclean thing must enter. So now, What Assurance have you of your Salvation, or what is your Faith built upon, when both Christ and the Scriptures witness against you? And Faith, which is not built on the Rock, Christ Jesus, is vain, and perisheth. And he that hath this Hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is Pure: Here all your Faith is searched, tryed and proved, and is found all vain and perishing; and so is not built upon the Rock which Perisheth not. Therefore come down all you High-minded Pharisees, and lay away all your Profession, and throw down all your old Building, and be∣gin, and lay a new Foundation; for, the high∣er the Pharisee climbs, the greater will be his Fall; and he that will be Wise let him first become a Fool: For, man by his Wisdom knows not God: Here the Pharisee is shut out from the Knowldge of God, who stands in his own wisdom. And all you Wilful Blind, Carnal, Igno∣rant Creatures, whom my Soul pittieth to see how ignorantly you are led, who pin your Faith upon the Sleeves of your Fore-Fathers, and live in Lightness and Wantonness, spen∣ding your Youth in Vanity, in Gaming, Plea∣sures, and Sporting, in Drunkenness, in Swearing, and Lying, in Vain Talk and Foo∣lish Jestings, in Pride, and Lust and Filthiness; and say, You follow your Fore-Fathers; and say,
What is become of them? and say, Your Pleasures is Pastime, and Recreation; and your Vain Talk and Foolish Jesting is Pastime and Merriness; and so you pass the Time away, and say, Your Drinking, and Rioting, and Feasting, is Good-Fellowship and Neighbourhood; and so you cover over your Sins and Iniquities: but Wo unto him that hides his Sin, and covers his Iniquity; and all this will not profit you any thing; neither can your Fore-Fa∣thers excuse you before the Lord: for in the be∣ginning it was so, that Eve could not Justifie Adam, neither could be any Excuse, but rather Condemned him, because he hearkened to the to the Voice of the Woman, and Disobeyed the Lord; so Adam suffered for his own Sin, and so did Eve for her's. And so this will be no Excuse for you in the Day of Account, to say, You followed your Fore-Fathers, and did as they did before you: But then will the Lord say, Because you followed the Traditions and Fashions, and Customs and Inventions of Man, and have hearkened to the Voice of the Serpent, and have Disobeyed my Voice, and my Command, and Sleighted my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof; but cast my Law behind your Backs, and trampled my Mercy under Foot, and have turned my Grace into Wantonness, and have nourished your Hearts as in a Day of Slaughter, and have spent my Creatures upon your Lusts, and Stoned, Stocked, Buffeted, and Imprisoned and Shamefully in∣treated my Messengers, which I sent unto you to Fore∣warn you of your Iniquity, and have killed my Son;
therefore depart, ye Workers of Iniquity, I know ye not; into Everlasting Torment, prepared for the De∣vil and his Angels. To see now how vain your Hope is, and how unstedfast your Faith is, when you have more Assurance of your Damnation, than your Salvation: for the Lord saith, No Un∣righteous Person must enter into his Kingdom; nor no Unholy, nor Unclean thing. Therefore all you, who desire Salvation to your Souls, Try and Prove your Faith and Hope, which you do trust to; and take heed of trusting to a broken Reed, lest it deceive you: Experience hath taught you, That if a Foundation of a Building be decayed, and wasted, and naught, the Building will Fall when a Storm cometh: so let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he falleth. So every one, whose desire is after Righteousness, hearken to that in your Consci∣ences, which raiseth up Desires after Righte∣ousness, and which sheweth you the Vainness of your Lives, and checks you when you do a∣miss, and troubles you and torments you in Con∣science when you have been Drunk, or have done some Evil Act; be willing to be guided by that, and that will lead you to Repentance, and Newness of Life, to forsake those things which it discovers to be contrary to the will of God: and if you be willing to follow this, and be gui∣ded by it, you shall find a Teacher continually present, checking in the Conscience for vain Thoughts, and for Vain, and Idle, and Needless
Words and Actions, and so will Crucifie the Lust, which is the Ground of those things, and which will lead you out of the Pathes of Death, into the Way of Life; out of the Traditions, and Customs, and Fashions & Opinions of the World, into the Assurance of the Eternal Truth: And thou that art willing to follow this, and be guided by this, shalt need no man to teach thee; but it will be a Teacher unto thee, Teaching and Directing in Righteousness, Pu∣rity and Holiness; and if thou art Dilligent, keeping thy Mind within, with an Ear open to the pure Voice, thou shalt find it present with thee wheresoever thou art, in the Fields, in thy Bed, in Markets, in Company, or where∣soever thou art, when thy Outward Priest or Teacher is absent, it may be in the Ale-House, or at his Pleasures and Delights, or far off, it will be present with thee, and will Check thee and Condemn thee for that which no Outward Eye can See, and will cleanse thy Heart from Lust, and Deceit, and Uncleanness; and will purifie thy Heart, and will make it a fit Temple for Purity to dwell in; and then thy Sacrifices will be Pure, which come from a Pure Heart, the Lord will accept them; for, Abel's Sacrifices he receiveth, but Cain's he denies: but if thou wouldest attain to this, thou must be willing to deny thy Lusts, thy Vanity, thy Delights, or whatsoever hath been thy Life; For, He that will save his Life, shall lose it; and he that will lose his
Life for my sake, the same shall save it. So there is no obtaining of Life, but through Death; nor no obtaining the Crown, but through the Cross: So thou must deny thy self, and take up thy daily Cross, and follow Christ, if thou wouldest be his Disciple, and give up thy Self wholly to be guided by the Will of God, that all which is contrary to the Will of God may be Crucified (though it be never so near and dear to thee) and be forsaken; Lands or Living, Wife or Children, Friends and Ac∣quaintance, or all the World, and all Delights in the World: For he that loveth any thing better then Me, is not worthy of Me: And all things below the Lord Vanisheth; but He Endureth forever. So the Lord God Almighty prosper all the Tender Desires which are raised up towards him, and feed the Hungry and Thirsty Souls, as he hath promised, and raise up his own in all his, that he alone may be Glorified, Prai∣sed, and Honoured, who is Worthy, and to whom all belongeth. And this is the Desire of his Soul, who is a Servant of the Lord; who is Hated, Revi∣led and Derided of the World, because he hath no Fellowship with the World, nor the Vanities of the World; but testifieth against their Wayes, Fashions, Traditions, Customs,
Fellowship, Words and Worship; and seeth them all to be Formal Imitation, and the Invention of Man, out of the Covenant of God, so cannot but deny them; and for this Cause he is Hated of all, both Priest and Peo∣ple: Whose Name according to the World is, JAMES PARNELL. The Servant is not Greater then his Master. Try your selves, prove your selves; know ye not that Christ is in you, unless you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Christ Exalted Into His THRONE, And the SCRIPTURE Owned in its Place. THis then is the Message that we have received of the Father, That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all: if we walk in Darkness, and say, we have fellowship with him, we lye, and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son clenseth us from all sin, 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7. And this is the Word which was in the beginning, by which all things were made; and in him was Life, and his Life was the Light of men, John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. By which Light all the holy Men of God, in the dayes of old, were inspired: By
which Light Moses saw the things that were done in the beginning, and wrote of them: Which Word was a Lamp unto David's Feet, and a Light unto his Pathes, Psal. 119. 105. Which Light dwelt in the Prophets and holy Men, by which they saw the Day of Christ, and wrote of him, Isa. 49. 6. & 60. 19, and spoke as they were moved by it; and by it saw the Deceit, Iniquities and Transgressions of Israel; and declared against it, both in Priest, People, and Rulers; speaking the Word of the Lord faithfully, whether they would hear, or for∣bear, Ezek. 2. Mic. 3. Isa. 56. And this Word came unto the Prophets, which was as a Fire and a Hammer in their Bones, Jer. 20. 9. & 23. 29. Which Word in due time became Flesh, and dwelt among the Apostles, and they saw the Glory thereof as of the Only Begotten Son of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, John 1. 14. whom John bears witness of, to be the Light of the World, who doth enlighten every one that comes into the World, John 1. To which Light Paul was sent to turn the minds of the Hea∣then, Acts 26. 17, 18. Which Light is the Con∣demnation of the World, who love Darkness rather then Light, because their deeds are E∣vil; and he that hates it, hath it, though he will not bring his deeds to it, by it to be pro∣ved; therefore his Condemnation it is, John 3. 19, 20, 21. And there is a time, Light shines in Darkness,
and Darkness comprehends it not, John 1. 5. and this is the Cause why many stumble at it, and are offended in it. And there is a time Light shines out of darknes, and darkness flees away, and then is witnessed the perfect Day, where the Children of the Day do walk, Isa. 42. 16. Mat. 4. 16. Eph. 5. 8. Which Light is the true Tryer of spirits, & gives the discerning of spirits, and discovers the works of darkness, and manifests the deeds of darkness; and by it the Se∣crets of the heart are seen, and hidden things searched out; and by it all things are manifest; and whatsoever makes manifest is Light, Heb. 4. 12. Ephes. 5. 13. all which the natural man knows not, and therefore cannot receive the things of God, but by this Light is seen and judged; for by this Light the Spiritual Man is able to discern and judge the natural man, but he himself is judged of no man, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. For this is the Judge of the World, and by this the Prince of the Air is judged, wheresoever he ru∣leth, John 16. 11. and therefore at it rageth, and stirreth up his Servants to persecute it, where it is manifest: and so it is a Stumbling Stone and a Rock of Offence to the Children of the World, in whom the Prince of this World lodgeth, Rom 9. 33. And of this Word the Apostle Paul beareth witness, to be quick and powerful, and sharpe- then a two-edged Sword, to the dividing assunder betwixt the
Marrow and the Bones, Heb. 4. 12. to which Word the Apostle directed the minds of people within them, from looking without for to find it with∣out, Rom, 10. And from this same Word the Apostles spoke forth the Scripture; which Word was their Guide, and Rule, and Teacher all a∣long from the beginning; by which both the Apostles, and Prophets, and the holy Men were acted, moved, and carry'd forth in the Power of it, to declare that which by it they were taught, 1 John. 1. 2. Pet. 1. 21. And this is the free Grace of God, which bringeth Salvation, and hath appear'd to all men, Tit. 2. 11, 12. which is their Condemna∣tion who do despite unto it, Heb. 10. 29. but this was the Saints Teacher, by which they were taught to deny all Ungodliness and world∣ly Lusts, and to live Godlily, Righteously and So∣berly in this present evil World. And this is the Anointing, which teacheth all things freely, which is Truth, and no Lye, and leads into all Truth: and he that knows this, needs no man to teach him; but is come to the end of mans teaching, 1 John 2. 27. unto which the Prophet was come, and therefore called freely, Come, buy Wine & Milk without Money or Price; Why spend ye your Money for that which is not Bread, or your Labour for that which profitteth not? Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. And from this the Apostle spoke freely, nor coveting any man's Silver or Gold; but as
they freely had received, freely they gave, Acts 20. 33. And whosoever speaks from this, speaks freely, and its Ministry leads to the end of Teach∣ing; and here let all flesh keep silence before the Lord, Zach. 2. 13. And let all Hirelings, and greedy Shepherds, stop their mouthes, who cry Peace Peace to them that put into their mouthes, but if not, they even prepare War against them, and such like the Prophet in the Light saw, and by it testified against them, Mich. 3. 5. And all this the Scrip∣ture bears testimony of, which was spoken from the Light, but is not the Light, nor the Word, nor the Life, nor the Judge, nor the Rule, nor the Guide, nor the Tryer of spirits; for all this be∣longs to Christ, who is the Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 1, 2. who is the Light, John 8. 12. who is the Word, John 1. 14. who is the Life, John 14. 6. who blamed the Pharisees that thought in the Scriptures to find eter∣nal Life, but would not come unto him that they might have Life, John 5. 39, 40. who is the Anointing, who is the Guide and Teacher, and the Rule, 1. John 2. 27. who when we are going to the right hand or to the left, cryes, This is the Way walk in it, Isa. 30. 21. Of which the Scripture is a true Declaration spoken from this Word of Truth, of which Light every one hath a measure, which unto them is the free Gift of God to profit with∣all, which Light in the Conscience reproves for sin and iniquity, and manifests the deceit of
the heart, and checks the Creature when it swears, or lyes, or doth amiss, telling it, that it should not do so; and calls for Repentance and A∣mendment of Life, and leads unto the same as it is owned and followed; and as many as receive it, receive power to become the Sons of God, Joh. 8. 12. and 1. 12. Rom. 2. 4. But he that doth evil hates the Light, and will not bring his deeds to it, by it to be proved, and to him it is condemnation; but he that loves the Light brings his deeds to the Light, that it may manifest them whether they be wrought in God, John 3. 20, 21. But of this Light you People and Teachers of the World are ignorant, and so are doting upon the Scripture without, with your dark minds there, with the blind Pharisees, see∣king for Life where it is not to be found, but will not come to Christ the Light, that you might have Life; but would cast him out of his Throne, and exalt Scriptures above him, cal∣ling them the Judge, and the Light, and the Word, and the Life, and the Rule, and the Guide; and thus with your dark minds you would take the Authority from Christ and would give it unto the dead Letter, which is but a Declaration of these things; And thus your Leaders cause you to err, Isa. 3. 12. for their own ends, and of the Scripture they make an Idol, to get mo∣ney, by adding their own Meanings, Interpreta∣tions, and Constructions upon them, which are all the Conceivings and Imaginations of their own hearts, by which they lead you in Blind∣ness,
ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth in your hearts; but are looking without, doting without in the Let∣ter, acting and imitating out of the Light for Life, and so in darkness, doing your own works, which are not required at your hands, but are for Condemnation by the Light; And so in vain are you worshipping a God, whom ye know not, crying up his Ordinances, and crying up his Com∣mands, and crying up the Scripture, exalting it in the Place of Christ, and thus coming neer him with your lips, and your hearts far from him; still living in the corrupt sinful nature, ignorant of the free Grace of God, which should lead you to repentance and amendment of life, Ephes. 2. 5. 8. And because we do witness this Mystery, which hath been hid from Ages and Generati∣ons, now made manifest in us, which is, Christ within the Hope of Glory, Col. 1. 26, 27. who is the Light of the World, who doth enlighten eve∣ry one that cometh into the World, who is the true Shepherd, John 10. and the true Teacher, no more to be removed into a Corner, Isa. 30. 20. who is the Anointing, who teacheth all things, and is the End of mans teaching: therefore your Ministry of the Letter, who make a Trade and a Gaine of the Letter, by idolizing it, and set∣ting it up in the room of Christ, by taking the Authority from Christ, and applying it to the Let∣ter, that your minds, who are taught by them, may the more be drawn without, to look at it,
and Idolize it, expecting Life and Salvation by it, and no hope without it, that they may the longer make Merchandize of you, and still uphold their Trade, and Gain by it, do now see that this our doctrine of Christ to be all in all, and that without him we can do nothing, John 15. 5. but that by him we can do all things without the help of Scripture, or any thing else without, Phil. 4. 13. and that there is no other name under Heaven by which we can be saved, but that he is able to save to the utmost all that shall come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25. and that he is the Word, and the Scripture is not; and that he is the Light, and the Scripture is not; and that he is the Rule and Guide, and Teache, and Judge, and the Scripture is not; but a Declaration of him to be so: and that the Scripture all along witnes∣seth with our Doctrine to be one with it, and theirs to be another Doctrine, which the Scripture will not maintain, but the Scripture is against, and is onely brought in for Lucres sake to satisfie their own carnal ends, that they may bear rule by their Means, as the false Prophets did before them, Jer. 5. 30, 31. And this Light all along makes them manifort in all their Colours and false Covers, so that they cannot hide themselves from being Deceivers, and also this they do know, that if every one come to know and find a Teacher within them, which doth teach them the will of God, and doth enable them for to obey it, so that they need
no man to teach them; then indeed they will no longer spend their Money upon them for that which is not Bread, nor their Labour for that which profitteth not, and will be a Prey unto them no longer: So not only their Craft, and Trade, and Idol will fail them; but also, their great Gain and Riches will be taken from them, and all their Honour, and Fame and Dignity will come to nought: Therefore they in their hot Rage, and Fierceness, and Enmity of their Spirits, do set themselves to oppose this Light, wheresoever it is made manifest; and persecu∣ting the Publishers of this Doctrine, railing a∣gainst them as Deceivers, & Seducers & Bringers in of false Lights, and such as deny the Scrip∣ture, and would rob it of its Authority, and give it to a Light within them (which the Priests call, natural Light) and insufficient to lead to Salvati∣on without the help of Scripture, and other out∣ward Helps; and so would set the Scripture above the Light of Christ; saying among themselves, If we let go the Authority of Scripture, then all is gone; (that is to say) Take away our Idol, then take away our Maintenance, then down with our Ministry. So here is clear the Foundati∣on they stand upon, and this is the cause why they call the Scripture their Foundation; and so all this Authority, which they put upon the Scripture, they take from Christ, who alone is the Foundation of the Faithful, of whom the Scripture is a Declaration: and so we do own it
by the same which gave it forth, which unto us doth open it and reveal it, and manifesteth them to be out of the Life of it, and so by the Life thereof are judged and condemned, as be∣fore is proved. And though they call it the Word, yet in the same it doth witness against them, and witness Christ to be the Word before the Scripture was written, John 1. And though they call the Scripture the Light, yet in the same it doth witness against them, and witness Christ to be the Light before the Scripture was written, and is able to save to the utmost all that shall come unto God by him; and they that climb up any other Way, the same are Thieves and Robbers, John 10. 1. And therefore is not a Natural Insuf∣ficient Light, as they that know not him do report of him, and therefore shew them∣selves to be as ignorant as the Pharisees, who on∣ly supposed him to the Son of Joseph, yet won∣dred at his Power, and the Works that were done by him; as these do now wonder at the Prosperity of this Ministration of Light, and to see how it prevails upon the Hearts of the people, so that they know not what to think of it; they are not able to encounter with it, but that they see it strikes so much at their Diana, and lies so hard at their Foundation, so that it makes their Building Totter, therefore the Ru∣lers, Priests aud Pharisees take Counsel toge∣ther, saying one to another, If we let this People alone, all men will go after them, and they will draw
away whole Nations; therefore they take the same course, as ever the false Prophets did, joyning to∣gether with the Earthly Powers to make War with the Lamb, Persecuting, Stocking, Whipping, Imprisoning and shamefully intreating his Messengers, whom the Lamb sent forth to bear Testimony of this Light in peoples Consciences (where we have a Witness both in them that believe, and in them that perish) and also, striving all the wayes they can, by their Evil Incensing, Ly∣ing, Railings, and false Accusings and Repor∣ting to defame this Light, and leaven your minds against it (that if it were possible) to put it out, that still they might uphold their Father's king∣dom of darknes, and bear rule by their Means over the Blind, carrying captive the minds of people: But who is able to make War with the Lamb, or who shall withstand the Day of his Coming? Saul, Saul, it is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks: And though they call the Scripture their Rule and Guide, yet in this it witnesseth against them, to be in Cain's way, and Balaam's way, and in the Gain∣Saying of Core, and so have not God, Jude 11. 2 John 9. but are found to be the Generation who are born after the Flesh persecuting them that are born after the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. And though they call the Scripture their Rule and Guide, yet they receive not Power from it to enable them to walk according to it; but are altogether er∣ring from it, in any thing that crosseth Self: but as many as receive the Light, receive Power to
follow it, and come out of the corrupt sinful nature, which they live in who know not the Light, John 1. 12. and here the Light is above the Scripture. And though they say, the Scripture is the Judge and Try∣er of Spirits, yet in the same it witnesseth against them, to be Lyars, and bears witness of Christ to be the Judge, and Tryer, and Searcher of the Heart, and Discerner of the Thoughts, Heb. 4. 12. Rom. 1. 16. 1 Pet. 4. 5. and that whatsoever makes manifest is Light, Eph. 5. 13. therefore that which makes manifest false spirits is the Light, and not the Letter, which Light manifested and discovered false spirits before the Scripture was written: And also, though they say, the Scrip∣ture is the Judge and Tryer of Spirits, yet by the Scripture they cannot discern or judge of Spirits, else, what makes all this difference in Judgment amongst them who profess to try Spirits by the Scripture, and profess it to be their Rule, and ground their Judgments upon it, yet are so confus'd in the same, and never a one knows which is the Truth, when as the Way is but One? So that it follows, that they have nothing but the Scripture without, and are still without, in Darkness and Confusion, as all those appear to be who call the Scripture their Rule, and Guide, and Judge, and Tryer of Spirits, aud yet know not the Truth; but are jangling, and rangling, and arguing, and disputing, and contending about the Scripture, every one with a several Judgment upon it: surely this Distraction is not in Scrip∣ture;
for it was spoken from One, and all a∣grees in one; therefore you that so profess the Scripture, see if you can find it out by the Scrip∣ture, and see where you are; but they that are in the Light have fellowship one with another, 1 John 1. 7. and are of one heart, and one Soul, Acts 4. 32. and all agree in one, and are Epistles wrote in one anothers heart, 2. Cor. 3. 2. and by the Light they try and discern false spirits, and in it are able to judge them, and open the Scriptures without wresting adding or di∣minishing, and by it do know, they are of God, because they love one another with the same love with which Christ loved them, 1 John 4. it is not such love which is to day, and to morrow cross the will, and it is turned into wrath and anger; nay that love stands in the corrupt will, but this love stands in the bond of peace which doth indure; and here again the light is above the Scripture; and though they say the light must be received from the Scripture, yet in this the Scripture doth witness against them, and bears witness of Christ to be the light of the World, and doth enlighten every one that cometh into the World. And they that could never read letter of the book have this light, which is sufficient to teach them and lead them into all Truth, after they come to the knowledge of it, & from this light the Scripture was spoken, 2 Pet. 1. 21. and without this light none can read the Scripture with understanding; and here the light is before the Scripture, and out of it all the Children of Darkness are shut
with their busie minds and vain contending spi∣rits: and though they say, they must receive life and salvation from the Scripture, yet in this the Scripture witnesseth against them, and testifies of Christ to be the alone Fountain of Life and Sal∣vation, and that there is no other name under Heaven by which we can be saved, Psal. 30. 9. and 144. 10. And that the Pharisees had the Scripture, yet had not the Light, neither could see that he was the Christ, though the Scripture bare testimony of him, or either would come unto him for Life and Salvation, but trusted in the Scripture, thinking there to find eternal Life, and therein found it not, John 5. 39, 40. As all you are now who are seek∣ing the living among the dead, and here again the light is above the Scripture, which light is within us the hope of glory. Col. 1. 26, 27. and those that cannot witness this are in the re∣probation, though they have the Scripture with∣out, 1 Cor. 13. 5. and from it we receive life and salvation, and from no other, and this alone is our Guide, Teacher, Judge, and Law-giver, if we never see letter, Luke 1. 79. John 6. 45. Isa. 33. and this alone is the Ground and Foundation of our Faith and Hope, by which we are made able to cry Abba Father, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Rom. 8. 15. And here it is not self that judgeth or con∣demns, but Christ that liveth in us, Gal. 2. 20. and it is not self that justifies us, but Christ that liveth in us; and here Christ is exalted into his Throne, and the Scripture owned in its place,
without contempt or undervaluting. And they are found the Ministers of Antichrist, who would cast Christ out of his Throne, and take the Scrip∣ture out of its place to exalt above him, ap∣plying to it that Authority which alone be∣longs unto him, for their own by secret self∣ends; so that in that they apply such Autho∣rity to the Scripture, they in the same Rob Christ of it, and undervalue him, as the Pha∣risees did, who thought in the Scriptures to find Eternal Life, but would not come to Christ that they might have Life; in whose steps ye and your Teachers are now found, professing Christ in words, but in Life denying him, and therefore must be judged and condemned by him, as they were. And if you Priests do alledge, there is a false Light, as well as a True Light; I Answer, That is it in you, which blinds your Minds so that you cannot receive this Gospel, but from you it is hid, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. And therefore you bring another Gospel, calling the four Books Mattew, Mark, Luke, and John, the Gospel; in which, these four Books will Witness against you, and bear Witness of Christ to be the Gospel, which is the Power of God unto Salvation; who is the Lamb of God, slain from the Foundation of the World, who came to take away the Sins of the World; and blessed are they that are not offended in him; John 1. 26. and vers. 13.
Luke 7. 23. And also, that is a false Light in you, which leads you into the Form or Re∣semblance, or outward Shew of Holiness, but denies the Life and Power, 2 Timothy 3. 5. and to profess the Scripture to be your Rule, but in Life and Practice deny it; and to be short, leads into a Profession without Possession; but that which leads into the Life and Power is no false Light; for it leads into the Possession, before the Profession, and so the Profession is from the Possession; but your Profession is from anothers Possession, and so Boast in an∣others line, by which you beguile both your selves, and others; and therefore in that you go about to Arm your selves with the Scripture, to oppose the Light, by exalting it above the Light, thinking thereby to de∣base the Light, and so to keep Peoples Minds from the Light, that they may still remain in Darkness and Blindness under you; You do but in the same bring a Weapon to cut off your own heads, and raise a War to destroy your selves, and increase more light to the people, and manifest your selves odious, and to be the Blind Guides of the Nation; who are to be denyed and turned away from by us,2 John vers. 9, 10. as De∣ceivers, and to be held as accursed, who bring an∣other Doctrine in oposition to the True Do∣ctrine which is held forth in the Scripture; for the Scripture and the Light agree in one,
from both which you are shut, with jangling contentious spirits, by which you would wrest the Scripture out of its place, to clash against its Original, thereby to uphold your Father Antichrist's Kingdom, and therein do the more Manifest your selves to be the Ministers of Antichrist, who under Profession of the True Christ do oppose him, and make War with him, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. but your Weapons are weak, as is daily made manifest. James Parnell.
THE TRUMPET Of the Lord BLOWN OR, A Blast against PRIDE and OPPRESSION; and the De∣filed Liberty, which stands in the FLESH. WO unto you that are called, Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, in respect to your Persons, who are exalted in the Earth, who are proud, and high, and lofty; who are cal∣led of men Master, and Sir, and Mistris and Madam, in respect to your Persons, because of your gay Clothing, because of your much Earth, which by Fraud, Deceit and Oppression you have gotten together: You are exalted above your
Fellow-creatures, and grind the faces of the Poor, and they are as Slaves under you, and must la∣bour and toyle under you, and you must live at ease, sporting in day time, and spending your time in Pleasures, and Chambring, and Wonton∣ness, according to your lustful minds,2 Pet. 2. 12. 13. in Hau∣king and Hunting, and Bowling, and Car∣ding, and Dicing, in all manner of Musick, Plea∣sure and Delights, in Eating and Drinking and Sleeping; and you must have your Wine and Ale, and all your Dainty Dishes, and all manner of Delights and Novelties; and so ye feed the lust, eating and drinking, and rising up to play, which is Idolatry;1 Cor. 107. and you have your fine Attire, and all manner of New Fashings, Silk and Vilvet, and Purple, Gold and Silver; and you have your Waiting-Men, and Wating-Maids under you, to Wait upon you, and your Coaches to ride; and your high and lofty Horses are like your selves, according to your lofty minds; and you sit at ease, Dives-like, Devouring the Creation, and spending it upon your Lusts, and with it com∣mitting Fornication, into it your hearts being adultred from God, who created you; and your Fellow-Creatures must labour like slaves un∣der you, and work for all this; when you are at your Pleasures, they must be at work and labour; and must hunger, and thirst, and labour when you are eating, and drinking and sleeping; and here, like Dives, you sit at ease, and poor Lazarus lies starving without: and here you are
Lords over your Fellow Creatures, and they must bow and crouch to you,Luke 16. 19, 20, 21. or else they must be ha∣ted, and punished, and put out from your presence, and be scoffed, and scorned, and reproached: and you will be called Masters, and think Scorn that a Poor Man should stand with his Hat on before you; and so set up partiality, which the Law of God condemns, upholding that which Christ in his Doctrine forbids; who saith, Be not ye called Ma∣sters; and so by that which you do prosess,Mat 23. 8. you are condemned: And you think Scorn in parti∣cular, to be Thou'd of your Fellow-Creatures, which is the Scripture Language to one; but you will Thou God and Christ, and yet you will not be Thou'd; and here you exalt your selves above God, and lord over your Fellow-Creatures: but though you be exalted as high as the Heavens, and set your Nests amongst the Stars,Obed. 3. 4. and lay up Treasures for many years, thence will the Lord fetch you down, and cast you into Hell, the Pit, as he did Lucifer, Dives,Isa. 14. 13, 14, 15. and Hamon, and Pha∣raoh, and Herod, and the rest of your Fore-Fa∣thers, who would have been exalted above the Creator, as you would; for, it is Lucifer who is Head, and is exalted in you above all that is called God (opposing God)2 Thess. 2. 3, 4. who is Godd over you, whom you serve and worship, for whom the Pit is prepared. To the Light in all your Con∣sciences I speak, which is Honest of God, and Impartial, which will let you see you are guilty, and condemn you; but you think to have the
Pleasure and Delights of this World, to be at Ease and Peace here, and to have an Inheri∣tance in the Kingdom of God too: and you have Covers for all this; you say, Your Pleasures is Pastime, and Recreation; and your fine Clothes, and gay Attire, is Comeliness and Decency; and your dain∣ty Dishes, and Banquetting, Novelties and Attendance, you say, you are able to maintain it, and it belongs to your Places; and so you have Covers for all: But Wo unto you that hide your Sins, and cover your Iniquities, who cover with a Covering, but not with the Lord; but all your Covers are found too narrow before the Lord Christ,Prov. 28. 13. who will lay all your Hypocrisie and Deceit before you, and your Lyes and vain Actions,Isa. 30. 1. and you shall be re∣warded accordingly, and shall have your Portion in the Lake that burneth, which is prepared for you Earth-Worms, whose Pleasure is in the Earth; but you think to be Saved, and so make Christ and his Apostles Lyars, who said, None could obtain two Kingdoms; and no such must enter, who have their Portions and Delight in the Earth:Jam. 5. 1, 5. and you make a Profession of Godliness with your Prayers, Praises, Graces, and Singing, and for∣mal imaginary Worship; and have a Chaplain or Priest to preach to you one day in a Week, and all the Week after doing as you do, and spending their time as you do, in Eating, and Drinking, and rising up to Play; and live in Pride and Cove∣tousness, and are call'd of men, Master; and you have a Place for him to preach to you in, either
in your Houses, or hard by, so have all things at ease, aud all this for your Money; but the Pearl you want, which is not to be purchased with money, where lies the inestimable Treasures: and you say, He is a Minister of Christ; and he saith, You are Christians; whenas you all are Heathens, both Priest and People, living without God in the World, and so the Blind leads the Blind into the Ditch; and so you lead your lives, and spend your time here, and think to be Saved hereafter; no, no, Wo, and Wo is coming up∣on you all who are Proud; you must all give an Account before the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who is Terrible to the Wicked; and behold, the Day of the Lord cometh, which will burn as an Oven,Mal. 4. 1. Gal. 6. 6, 7, 8. and all that are Proud, and all that do Wickedly shall be as Stubble: And such as you sow, such must you reap; he that sows to the Flesh, of the Flesh must reap Corruption: The Lord abhors all your Profession, and your Hypocrisie; it is not Profession that he seeks for, it is Practice; it is not the Sayer, but the Doer that shall inhe∣rit; your Fore-fathers said, but did not, so do you; But it is not all that saith,Mat. 7. 21. Isa 7. 21. Lord, Lord, that shall in∣herit, but he that doth the Will of my Father: What is the Chaff to the Wheat? the Lord looks for Fruits; you profess him in Words, but your Works are the Works of the Devil; and so are of this Sort, who come near him with their Lips, but their Hearts are far from him, in your Gay
Attire, in your New Fashions, in your Varie∣ties, in your Dainty Dishes, in your Gaming, and Pleasures and Sporting, in your Wealth and earthly riches, in your lofty Houses, in your cu∣rious Buildings, in your fine Musick, in your earthly Honour, which are all the Fruits of the Devil; and here Outwardly you profess the Lord with your Tongues, but serve the Devil with your Hearts and Actions, who is the King of Pride;James 5. 6. and here you are in the Broad and Easie Way, in the first Nature, which is in the Fall, separated from God, whose Kingdom is of this World, Strangers to the Life of God, and are at enmity, slaying and crucifying the Just and Innocent, and so are no Christians, but Heathens, both Priest and People And the Lord abhors all Sacrificers from Cain, which is the first Na∣ture, wherein you live, drove out from God in∣to the Earth, your lives preach you forth; so all your Graces before and after Meat, and your Pray∣ers, and your Praises, and Singing, and formal Worships, and Traditions the Lord abhors; for they are offer'd up in the first Nature, a Sa∣crifice of the Earth,Gen. 4. 3, 5. and savours of the Earth, and is not a Sweet Smell unto him, and therefore he hath no respect to it,Isa. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Prov. 15. 8. his Soul loathes it; a∣way with it, and they that offer it, for it is En∣mity with him; The Prayers and Sacrifices of the Wicked are Abominable: all Prayers or Sacrifices offered up from Cain, Dives or Hamon, or any in
that Nature, are Abominable to the Lord, and he will not accept them; for, to them he hath no Respect. Therefore all you high and lofty Ones, Hamon-like, be ye silent, and let your Mouthes be stopped, all you who act in Unrigh∣teousness; away with all your Profession, and now Repent, and Tremble before the Lord, ye Children of the Devil: come down all you high and lofty Ones, Howl and Mourn in Sackcloth and Ashes; for the Lord is coming to burn you up as Stubble before him; For, you are the Fruitless Trees that cumber the Ground, who are for the Fire;Mat. 27. 19. fair and flourishing with Leaves you are covered, but by Christ, the Light, ye are searched, and no Fruit is found on you, there∣fore from him you are cursed; for, Fruit he is come to seek for; therefore profess him no lon∣ger in words, but now Repent, and return from all your Unrighteousness; for, know you not, that no unrighteous Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God,1 Cor. 6. 9. no vain Person nor Drunkards, Swear∣ers, no Lyar, no Proud, no Covetous Ones, none who delight in Gaming or Pleasures, Spor∣ting in the day time and Rioting, Chambering and Wantonness, nor no unholy nor unclean thing must enter; for, all unrighteous Persons must be cast into the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone forever. Now read your selves, and your Portions, all you high and lofty Ones; for, thither you must go, and there you must lie for evermore (the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it)
with Dives and Hamon, and all the high and lof∣ty Ones, who must be cast in thither: for you are too high, fine & lofty to enter in at the straight Gate,Ester 3. as Dives was, and Hamon was; nay, you are Enemies and Persecutors of all those who enter in at the straight Gate, as Hamon and Dives, and the High Priests, Pharisees and Rulers were, and all the high ones, because they do not feed you with your earthly Honour, and respect no Person, but equalize all flesh; as the Lord doth, so do his People:Acts 10. 34, 35. But you proud ones think scorn to be compared, or to be equalized with your Fellow-Creatures, as Dives and Hamon did; but all you proud ones, remember your Father Dives his End; for, thither you must go, into the Ever∣lasting Burnings, as he did, whose Belly was his Godd,Luke 16. 19 & Phil. 3. 9. as yours is, whose End is Destruction, who mind earthly things, and then it will be too late for you to Repent; and then when it is too late, then you will wish, you had been as Lazarus was, so that at the End you might have en∣joyed the Happiness that Lazarus did; though now you are exalted above your Fellow-Creatures, living in Pride,Ezek. 6, 14. Idleness, and Fulness of Bread, which were the Sins of Sodom; but in this Day you shall be brought down, and all you Workers of Iniquity, Young and Old, Rich and Poor, Lord and Lady, and Beggars shall be all turned into Hell, without Respect of Persons:Isaiah 24. 2. Hebr. 10. 3, 33. then shall it be with the Mistress, so with the Maid; as with the Servant, so with the Master; and as with the People, so with
the Priest:Hebr. 11. 36, 37, 38. and all the Righteous Simple Ones, which you despise and scoff at, who are now to you Gazing-Stocks, and Reproaches, and Pil∣grims in the World, because their Kingdom is not of this World, then shall that be exalted, and received into Joy eternal;Luke 16. 22, 23. then shall you see a Separation betwixt the Humble and the Proud, as there was betwixt Dives and Lazarus; the Humble, and Lowly, and Despised Ones shall be exalted; and you high lofty Ones, who are De∣spisers, and Crucifiers of the Just, shall be abased, and cast into Hell; then Lord and Lady, Master and Mistress, and all your Earthly Honour, shall be laid into the Fire; then all your Worldly Wealth, Riches, and Earthly Inheritance and Heirships will be gone, wherewith you ruled as Lords in the Earth; then you shall find, that all your Gay Clothing and Rich Attire was for Pride, and not for Decency, and that many of your Fellow-Creatures wanted that for to co∣ver their Nakedness, which you spent upon your Lusts; then you shall be rewarded for grind∣ing the Faces of the Poor, for your Oppressions, and for Rackings, and Taxings, and your heavy Burdens, wherewith you oppress your Fellow-Creatures: For, you are the high Oakes and the tall Cedars, that oppress the little Scrubs, un∣der whom the Creation groans, both Man and Beast;Isa. 2. 12, 13, &c. but then you will be brought low, then all your Pleasures and Wantonness, Hauking, and Hunting, and Bowling, and Carding, and
Dicing, and all your Musick shall be turned into Weeping and Howling with Dives; Lazarus had none of this, but Dives had; but now La∣zarus hath Joy eternal, and Dives Wo and Mise∣ry everlasting; and then all your dainty Dishes, and Novelties, and Varieties, which have fed your Lusts, shall be turn'd into Fire and Brimstone, and the Spoile of the Creatures shall witness agaisnt you; and then you shall be stript off of all your Silks, and Velvet, and Purple, and Gold, and all your gay Attire, wherewith you decked and adorned your earthly Bodies, to make your selves seem Glorious in the Eyes of others, for the Honour and Esteem of the World; but then you will be as Naked as the Beggar, then you shall have no Waiting-Men, nor Waiting-Maids, nor Coaches, nor high and lofty Hor∣ses, nor curious Buildings, or great Houses, no more then the Beggar; then all your Bow∣ing and Crouching, and all your Heathenish Breeding shall be laid aside; then all your Priests and false Prophets,Ezek. 22. 28. Jer. 13. 1. Mich. 3. 5. which you extol now so high, because they daub you up, and cry, Peace to you, healing you up in Deceit, because you put into their Mouthes, shall stand you in no stead, but shall be Tormented with you Hypocrites in the Lake; and all your Covers will not serve, wherewith you hide your Sin, and cover over your Deceits, in saying, Your Pleasures, and Vain Talk, and Foo∣lish Jesting, and Tales and Stories, is Pastime and Recreation; then you would be glad of one Hour,
if you could get to repent in, as Dives would, but then it will be too late; for your Portion you enjoy in the Earth, whose kingdom is of this World: but the Son of Man in it had scarce where to lay his Head, and his Servants no certain Dwelling∣place; for their Kingdom was not of this World: such you call, Wanderers and Vagabonds, who have your great Houses, and strong Towers in the Earth; but all cannot hide from the Presence of the Lord, who will call you in Judgment, and reward you according to your deeds; when his own he doth exalt into the King∣dom which for them he hath prepared,Luk. 9. 5, 58.  Cor. 1. 11. Psal. 145 13. which is an Everla∣sting Kingdom; from which the Earth-worms are shut out, who say, The Earth is mine: Therefore now, before it be too late, consider of it, and let Dives and Hamon, and the rest of the Proud Ones be a Warning to you, and now repent, while it is called to day; now you have been told, now you are left without Excuse before the just impartial Judge; now prize your time, all who desire Mercy at the Hand of God, and Pardon for your Iniquities: for this is the Day of your Visitation,Luke 16. 13. wherein the Lord is handing forth his Mercy; and if you will not believe this, you would not believe Dives, if he should rise from the Dead. To the Light in all your Consciences I speak, which comes from Jesus Christ, the Light of the World,John 1. 9. who doth enlighten every one that comes into the World; which Light is his Witness in the Con∣science, against all Deceit, Ungodliness and Unrigh∣teousness of men; which Light in all your Consci∣ences is my Witness, to the which I am made ma∣nifest;
which if you love it, and to it hearken, it will let you see your selves, and the state and con∣dition wherein you live, and the filthy unclean Image of the Devil, which you bear, and your leprous spotted Consciences, because of the Lust wherein you are drowned: and the same Light, loving it, and following it, which checks and con∣vinces in the Conscience for that which is Evil, and of the least contrary to the Will of God; it will lead you to Repentance, and humble your hearts, and bring you down to know the Fear of the Lord, whose Power will rend your habitations, where∣in you have dwelt secure in your Sins: and this Light (loving it) will be your Teacher, and will let you see the Creation, and the Goodness thereof, and will teach you how to use it, & order it in its place, out of the Lust, to the Glory of God, and how to do good with it, so that there be no Want in the Creation, nor Cry of Oppression; but the Hungry will be fed, and the Naked clothed, and the Oppressed set free; and here is the Blessing restored to the Creati∣on: but while these things are under, and you live in the Lusts with your abundance, nourishing your hearts as in a day of Slaughter, the Curse is upon you, and War abundance: and you are the Adulterers and Adultresses, whose hearts are adulterated from God, committing For∣nication with the Creation; and the Grace of God (which should guide you out of the Lust and Ungodliness of the World)Tit. 211. 12. you turn into Wan∣tonness:James 4. and your Teachers (who cause you to err
by their Sorcery and Enchantments; and James,James 5. the Son of Thunder, utter'd forth his Voice against such;Isiah 3. and thus saith the Lord, Because the Daugh∣ters of Sion are Haughty, and walk with stretched-out Necks and wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as they go, making a tinkling with their Feet; therefore the Lord will smite with the Scab the Crown of the Head of the Daughters of Sion: In that day the Lord will take away all the Bravery of their tinkling Ornaments of their Feet, and their Cauls, and round Attire, like the Moon, and the Chains, and the Bracelets, and the Head-bands, and Ta∣blets, and the Ear-rings, and the Nose-jewels, the chang∣able Suits of Apparel, and the Mantles, and the Wim∣ples, and the Crisping-pins, and the Glasses, and the fine Linnen, and the Hoods, and the Vails: and it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet Smell, there shall be a Stink; and instead of well-set Hair, Baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a girding with Sack-cloth; and Burning in∣stead of Beauty. Now all you high and lofty Daugh∣ters of England, who are sporting your selves in the day time, and Scorning and Disdaining your Fel∣low-Creatures, read your selves, and your Porti∣ons; Howl and Lament, for a Day of Vengeance, of Rending, of Burning, of Famine is coming upon you; for the Land mourns because of Pride. James Parnell.
To the LIBERTINE, whose Liberty stands in the Flesh. WO unto thee, who art at Ease in the Flesh, devouring the Creation, and spending it upon thy Lusts, whose heart is run from God a Whoring after other Lovers, com∣mitting Fornication with the Creation, nourish∣ing thy heart,Ezek. 23. 30. Psal. 10. 39. James 5. 5. as in a day of Slaughter, satisfy∣ing thy Lusts in whatsoever thy heart runs af∣ter, and so art at ease in the Flesh, and feelest no Sorrow nor Grief; but the Harlot is exalted in thy Bosom above all that is called God,Rev. 18. 7. and thou hast cast his Law behind thy back,Hebr. 10. 29. living without the Fear of God, and walking despight∣fully against the Spirit of Grace;Mal. 2. 17. saying within thy self, He that doth Evil is Good in the sight of God; and where is the God of Judgment? Can we do any thing without God? Is it not by his Power we do all things? And can we do any thing contrary to his Will? Yea, thou shalt find, that all thou dost is contrary to his Will; and thou shalt find him a God of Judgment; for thy Sins have separated thy Soul from God,Isaiah 52. 2. and long (in his Love and Mercy to thy Soul) hath he forborn thee, and hath not cut thee off from off the face of the Earth; but hath still spared thee, and
waited to be gracious, though thy heart hath been wholy gone from him, and never regarded to do that which is pleasing in his sight, but instead of serving him thou hast served thy own lusts, with his good Creatures to which thou hast had no right, and he to thee hath been a merciful God; but will not the Lord visit for these things? yea, he will not alwayes strive with man, and though thou takes thy pleasure now, remember thou must come to Judgment, And lo, saith the Lord, I come quickly,Gen. 6. 3. Eccle. 11. 9. Rev. 22. 12 Gal. 6. 8. and my reward is with me, to give unto every one according to his deeds. And they that sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: And then thou shalt finde, that power thou hast had, and instead of using it to the Honour and Glory of God, thou hast hid thy Talent in the Earth, and lived wantonly upon the Earth, serving thy own will, dishonouring the Holy Lord of Glory and Righteousness; and then in the day of thy Judgment, thou shalt confess that the Lord hath visited thee time after time, and called thee time after time, handing forth his Mercy to thee; when thou hearkned, the Lord was with thee; when thou walked in his fear, he was not far from thee; but thou hast hearkned to the voice of the Serpent and false Prophet, which hath drawn thy heart from God, into the visible things of the Creation, which pass away, and hath pro∣mised thee Liberty and Peace in the same, and it being pleasing to thy lustfull earthly minde,
thou art become one with the Harlot, which ly∣eth in thy Bosom: and thus thou hast accepted the gift with which the Old Serpent tempted Christ,Mat. 4. 8, 9. and so art become a Servant of the Devill, of whom thou art brought in bondage of him, being evermore; and while thou art pro∣mising to thy self Liberty,2 Pet. 2. 19, 20, 21. thou thy self art a Servant unto corruption; and thus thy Lusts have separated betwixt God and thy Soul, and art become the Image of the Devil, yielding thy Members servants to uncleanness; and thus thou sets up a rest in the Devils Kingdom, wherein thou sports thy self, and art at liberty, eating and drinking in merriness; so if there were sorrow only in this World,1 Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 18, 19. thou art of all men most happy; then our Fathers that are fallen asleep in Christ are perished, and we are of all men most miserable, if there be joy only in this World; but out of the Liberty of the Chil∣dren of God thou art found, and by them seen to be in the fall, wallowing in the myre and lust, and so art unredeemed, living under the Curse; for this is the redemption from death to life,Rom. 8. and thou livest after the flesh, and are dead, the carnall minde ruling which is death, and is at enmity with God, for it is not subject to the will of God, and so long as this hath domi∣nion over thee, thou canst not obey God; for he that lives in the flesh, cannot please God, but if through the Spirit thou mortifie the deeds of the flesh thou shalt live;Rom. 8. 1. and here is the Liberty
of the Children of God, Who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: but their Liberty is not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit; for by the Law of the Spirit of the Life they are set free from the Law of Sin and Death: and from Christ, their Re∣deemer, they have received Power to become the Sons of God,John 1. 12. and in the same have dominion o∣ver the World, Flesh, Self, and the Devil, Death, and Hell; and this comes through the Cross, by which they are crucified to the World, and the World to them;Gal. 6. 14. and here is the Liberty of the Children of God, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; which Liberty no vulterous Eye can see, nor venemous Beast shall know, nor the rebellious disobedient One: Therefore do not deceive thy self in saying, thou art a Christian, and believest in Christ, and art a Child of God; for, They that are Christ's,Gal. 5 2. Rom. 6. 16. have crucified the Flesh; and to whom thou yieldest thy Members Servants to obey, his Servant thou art. To the Light of God in thy Conscience I speak, which if thou love it, and unto it hearken, and bring thy deeds unto it, to be tryed by it, it will witness (for God and his Children) against thee, to be a Child of the Devil, and his works thou dost, and thy Faith to be feigned, like the Hy∣pocrite, and doth not purifie thy hearts, and so is no more then the wickedest that is; for all say, that Christ dyed for them; but all cannot witness it:John 3 9. For he that believes is born of God; and he that is born of God doth not commit sin.
And this Light, loving it, will let thee see how thy Heart is turned from God, and that thou hast more delight in the things that perish, than in the Fear of the living God, which keeps the heart clean,Prov. 9. 13. and is the beginning of the pure Wisdom and Righteousness; and if thou honest∣ly communest with it, it will let thee see thy se∣cret Actions, and all thy hidden deeds done in darkness, that thou mayst come to Judgment and Condemnation for all these things; and except thou be born again, and become as a little Child, thou art no Child of God, neither canst enter the Kingdom of God; but art without, in the world's nature, in the state of Condemnation, in whom the Son of Perdition rules above all that is cal∣led God, sitting in the Temple of God, as God, and saith, He is God; and here he opposeth God in his Kingdom, and saith that is lawful, and for it pleadeth that which God saith is unlawful, and forbids: And he tells the Creature, and ma∣keth it believe, it cannot keep God's Com∣mandments, and that it hath not power to do that which God commands it, or to depart from Evil; and that none live but they sin; and Christ hath satisfied for all sin, though they sin daily; that man may use the Creatures as he pleaseth, seeing they were made for Man's Use: and the Spirit of God saith, He that saith he know∣eth God, and keepeth not his Commandments, is a Lyar, and the Truth is not in him: And as ma∣ny as receive him, to them he gives Power to become
the Sons of God:Rom. 2. 8. 1 John 3. 8, 9, 10. And the Law of the Spirit of Life makes them free from the Law of Sin and Death: He that commits Sin is of the Devil, and never knew God; and by this are the Children of God, and the Children of the Devil made manifest: And he that abideth in him, sinneth not: And he that lives after the Flesh cannot please God;Rom. 8. 8. for without Holiness none shall see the Lord. And thus the Devil, the old Serpent (who was a Lyar from the beginning) opposeth God in his Kingdom, daubing the Crea∣ture up in that which is Evil, making it a Habi∣tation in his kingdom, while it live upon the Earth, and then must take part with him in the Lake that is prepared for the Devil and his Ser∣vants, who doth not dare to call God a Hard Master, as if he would lay a Tax upon the Crea∣ture which it is not able to perform; and thus he deceives the Creature, and draws out of the Commands of God, and out of the Fear of God, which preserves from Evil; and so he draws into Carelesness and Slothfulness, and begets a liberty therein; and because of those things cometh the Wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedi∣ence,Col. 3. 5, 6. as it was in the beginning, when God said, That in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely dye the Death:Gen. 3. and the Serpent said, You shall not surely dye; for God doth know, that in the day you eat thereof, you shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. And thus he deceived them, and drew them out of the Commands of God, and out of the Fear of God, into the Disobedience, and so came the
Curse of God upon them, by hearkening to him, and entring into his Temptations, and then they found God Just and True, and the Devil a Lyar, whom they had believed; now read thy self. To the Light of Christ in thy Conscience I speak, which searcheth the Heart, and knows the secret Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, which will witness me, and condemn thee who walkest con∣trary unto it: Be not Deceived, God is not Mocked;Gal. 6. 7. such as thou sowest, such must thou reap; for God is a Just God, and will nto ac∣quit the Wicked: For thou art found a Sloth∣ful Servant, who hast hid thy Talent in the Earth; and think not that thou shalt receive the Reward of the Righteous and Faithful; for, if the Righteous scarcely be saved, what will become of the Wicked and Ungodly?1 Pet. 4. 18. There∣fore Repent, while its called to day, harden not thy heart, lest the Judgments of God come up∣on thee at unawares, and sweep thee away, and give thee thy Portion among the Slothful Hypo∣crites and Unbelievers: For, by the Light of God thou arr seen and found in the Sins of Sodom, and the Plagues of Sodom are coming upon thee; therefore be afflicted & mourn, and let thy Laugh∣ter be turned into Mourning, and thy Joy into Heaviness;James 4. 9. for to Judgment thou must come, and thy Liberty. To the Light of Christ in thy Conscience I am made manifest, which (if thou lovest it) will let thee see thy self, and tender thy Conscience, and
will lead thee into the Fear of God, following of it, and will humble thee, and bring down thy high and lofty Looks, and bring thee under Judg∣ment and Condemnation for thy Stiff neckedness, Disobedience and Rebellion against the Son of Righteousness, here will be thy Condemnation; out of thy own mouth will the Lord judge thee in Righteousness by the Light in thy Conscience, which he hath enlightened thee withal, which now thou kickest against, which will thy Torment be. This is a Warning from the Lord unto thee, and now thou art left without Excuse, in the Presence of the living God, by the Light of God; this is the day of thy Visitation, and the day of thy Judgment draws nigh,1 Thes. 5. 2, 3. now thou hast time, prize it: For the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the Night, to all the Children of Darkness, as it was to the Sodomites: and verily I say unto thee, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, then for thee, if thou dost not Repent, who hast tasted of the Love and Mercy of God, and hast trampled it under foot, and hast rebelled against the Spirit of Grace. Written from the Spirit of the Lord, as a Warning to all who are in the Fleshly Liberty; by a Witness of the True Li∣berty of the Children of God through Death, which Liber∣ty stands not in Time, nor in any thing in Time; for all things in Time perish with Time, but this remains when Time shall be no more; and his is Pure, Vnspotted of the World. J. P.
ALL you that Scoff, and Scorn, and Re∣proach, and Revile at the Children, Ser∣vants and Messengers of the Most High God, whom you nick-name QUAKERS; and un∣der the same Name Persecute them, as a Peo∣ple not worthy to live, and have no Ground for it, neither know any Evil by them, but all along their Lives and Conversations con∣demn yours, and therefore you Hate them, Revile them, and Reproach them in whom the Power of the Living God is made mani∣fest, the same which ever was,Eccles. 12. 3 Which Sha∣keth the Earth, and maketh the Strong Man to bow himself, and the Keepers of the House to Tremble: And the same Power which all the Children of God in all Ages witnessed, and passed through, which then by the same Generation Suffered, both by Magistrates, Pro∣fessors, Priests and People, who were and are Strangers to the Life of God, and his Power; and therefore Reproached, Scoffed, and Scor∣ned it, as you now do; but it is that the Scripture might be fulfilled upon you,2 Tim. 3. 3 Who are Despisers of those that do Good. Isaac (the Seed of the Promise) Trem∣bled, Gen. 27. 33. who was Mocked by Ishma∣el, the Son of the Bond-Woman, who was cast
out as the same Seed; and now by you Ish∣maelites, who are the Children of the Bond. Woman, who are cast out, and are found without, Mocking and Scoffing the Righteous Seed, Gen. 21, 9, 10. Gal. 4. 30. And Moses (a Servant of God) Quaked and Trembled; who counted it greater Riches to suffer Affliction with the People of God, then to en∣joy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season, Heb. 12. 21. Heb. 11. 26. and this you now call Madness and Folly, who know not that Godliness is great Gain, 1 Tim. 6. 6. And David (who was a King) Quaked and Trembled, and Roared, and Watered his Couch with Tears, Psal. 69. 12. Psal. 22. 14. Psal. 38. Psalm. 6. 6. And Drunkards made a Song on Him; And some shut out their Tongues, and wagged their Heads, and gaped upon him with their Mouthes, Psalm. 64. and Psalm. 122. 7. and this you sing in your Steeple-Houses like Hypocrites without knowledg, Psalm, 35. 16. and yet scoffe and scorn and reproach those in whom the same Power is made manifest, and yet you will say, as he said, you are not puft in mind, nor have no scornfull eye, &c. but he spoke the Truth, and you lye, Psalm. 131. 1. and thus you deceive your souls, and loves to have it so; your Leaders cause you to err, Isa. 9. 16. and Job a Servant of the Lord quaked, who by the same Generation was laughed to scorn, Job 4. 14. Job 12. 14. and Jeremiah, a Prophet of the
Lord quaked, who was then persecuted by the same generation, Jer. 23. 9. and Daniel a Prophet of the Lord trembled, who was cast into the Ly∣ons Den, because he would not deny his God, Dan. 10. 11. Dan. 6. 16. but by his power he was preserved, as we are now from those Lyons Whelps who would us devour; and Habbakkuk a Prophet of the Lord, his Belly Trembled, and his Lips Quivered, Hab. 3. 16. And Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ fell down and trembled, Acts 9. 4, 5, 6. who was reviled, reproached, and persecuted even to death, who was one that hazarded his life for the Name of Jesus, Acts 6. 26. and said, all the day long were they killed, and accounted as sheep to the slaughter, Rom. 8. 36. now these were all Qua∣kers, who then suffered with patience by the same Generation: now read what Generation you are of; for they that were after the flesh al∣ways persecuted them that were after the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. there was always a generation by which the righteous ever suffered since Cain, the first-born upon earth, in whose way you are found, who envy, who are in the wrath, Iude 10. you kill the just, and he lyes slain in the streets, Jam. 5. 5, 6. at whose hands his blood shall be required, Mat. 23. 35. and the Son of man was to eat his bread with quaking and drink his wa∣ter with trembling, Ezek, 12. 10. out of which life you are found, who are at ease in the flesh,
feeding without the fear of God, spending the Creatures upon your lusts, 1 Cor. 10. 7. Jam. 5. scof∣fing and scorning them who are not one with you in the same liberty, but fears before the Throne of God, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Rom. 13. 14. 1 Cor. 10. 31. and thus you erre, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Mat. 22. 29. therefore behold, ye Dispisers and Wonderers, and perish, I will work a work in your days, which though you see it, you shall not believe it, Acts 13. 41. Is it not apparent before your eyes, the wick∣ed man returns from his wickedness, and the ungodly from his ungodliness, and the drunkard from his drunkenness, and the prophane one from his prophaneness, and now seeks after God, and fears his powerfull name; and this you see and cannot believe, but despise, scoff and scorn the Power by which this Work is done; for it is no new thing but the same which was and is; you are in the same adulterous Genera∣tion, which cannot see the Signes which follow the Truth, Mat. 16. 3, 4. from whom the Gos∣pel is hid, whose eye is Darkned with the Godd of the world, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. and so speaks evil of the things you know not, Jude 11. putting Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, Evil for Good, and Good for Evil, Isa. 5. 20. you are the Scoffers that the Apostle fore-told of to be in the last times, Jude, 18. who are Despisers of those that are good, Incontinent,
Fierce, Traitor, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God, having a Form of Godliness, but deny the Life and Pow∣er, 2 Tim. 3. 3, 4, 5. and here you are both Priests, people and professors, who are Scoffing and Scor∣ning, Slandring Reproaching, Reviling, and Perse∣cuting the Righteous Innocent Servants and Mes∣sengers of the Most High God, who is uttering forth his Voice through them in Power, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, who will you call to Judgment, and convince you of all your ungodly Deeds, and all your hard Spee∣ches, which you have wrongfully spoken against him and his Power, and will reward you accord∣ingly, Jude 14. 15. Rom. 22. 21. Therefore to that which is of God in all your Consciences I speak, which is my Witness against your Ungodly Lives; which turning your minds to it, and unto it taking heed, will let you see, you speak Evil of the things you know not, loving Darkness rather then Light, because your deeds are Evil, John 3. 19. Therefore Fear and Dread the Lord God, and Repent; and take heed of Mocking, lest your Bonds be made strong, Isa. 28. 22. for God will not be Mocked; such as you Sow, such must you Reap, Gal. 67. Therefore fear before the Lord, and try all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thess. 5. 21. And despise nothing before you know it, lest you speak Evil of Gods Elect; for it is a fearful
thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God, Hebr. 10. 31. Therefore take this for a Warning as from the Mouth of the Lord; for no Ignorance is to be pleaded before the Throne of God. This was given forth in Vindication of the Power of God, which is now manifesting in his Sons and Daughters, lest the Simple (who are not yet acquainted with it) should stumble at the Name. By a Friend of the Truth, and a Lover of these People, which you who are out of the Truth scornfully call Qua∣kers; but the Scorners God will judge, and the Righteous God will bless, who work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling; for, saith the Lord, To such a one will I look, that is of a Humble and Contrite Spirit, and Trembleth at my Word, Prov. 16. 29. Phil. 2. 12. Isa. 66. 1, 2. JAMES PARNELL.
A SHIELD OF THE TRUTH Or the Truth of God cleared from Scandals and Reproaches, Cast upon it by Scandalous and Reproach∣ful Tongues,Hebr. 10 33. which the Devil in all Ages did make use of,Psal. 102. 6. whereby he Blasphem'd the Truth of God,1 Cor. 3. 13. striving to present it Odious in the Eyes the Ears of all People,Rev. 9. that so he might uphold his own kingdom:Rev. 12. But the Day hath made him manifest, and the Lord is come, and is coming to make War with him, and bind him, and cast him into the Bottomless Pit, and all who bears his Image, and under his Dominion is. To the READER. REader, to thee (whosoever thou art) I shall clear my Conscience, and to all people: To the Light of God in all your Consciences I
speak,Jer 31. 37, 38, 39, 40. 1 Pet. 2. 25. Rev. 14. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 15. 9. which is one in all, in the behalf of a despised Peo∣ple with men, yet not with God, who are scatred abroad, in several Countries, yet one in the Lord, whom the Lord hath chosen out of the Generation of the Children of this World, out of all Sects, Forms and Opinions, into the Light of Life to bear his Image, and so to bear his Cross; and because they have not the same Image with the Children of this World, but are chosen out from amongst them, their Fellowship, their Kindred and Ac∣quaintance, and Breeding,2 Cor 6. 14. 1 Pet. 4. 8. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ezk. 2. 2. Manners, Customs, Fa∣shions, Words, Wayes and Worships; for Light can have no Fellowship with Darkness; and so the Devil who goeth about like a Roaring Lyon, seeking whom he may devoure, who is the Godd of the World, who ru∣leth in the Children of Disobedience, hath stirred up all who bear his Image, who under his Dominion are to persecute, slander, revile and reproach all who bear the Image of GodRev 13, 14, 15. (who testifies against him and all who bear his Image) so as he hath done in all Ages, from the beginning, so it is now, that he may uphold his Image, and his Kingdom; so the Beast is making war with the Lamb, and now is the war begun, but the Lamb shall get the victory, praises, praises to our God forever. And so for the Turths sake, and the good of all tender Consciences, I shall clear my consci∣ence, in the clearing of the Truth from the Scandalls,Revel. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 14. false Accusations, and Reports which are cast upon it by the Priests and people who bear the Image of the Beast, left any who are unsettled and ungrounded in the Truth, should by giving ear to those false Reports, and Scandals, and Accusations, turne from the Light, and so lose
their Convincement, and get up into hardness of heart, and lose their part in the promised Land; for there are a company of Priests, in all parts of the Nation where the Truth comes, who are the Devils greatest Agents, who are daily plotting and inventing, and seeking every way, to blot the Image of God of the Nation, by Writings, by Printings, by Petitioning to Rulers and Magistrates, with all the false aspersions and scandals they can get together, to present the Truth of God odious to all people; and likewise in their Pulpits doe the same, as it was in the time of Christ and his Apostles: but we have but one Ruler and Governour to Petition to,Mat. 16. 21. Chap. 29. Acts 4. Acts 5. Isa. 33. 22 Rom. 8. 31. 33, to 37. Isa. 54. 81. and relye upon, from whom we have our Image, even God over all, who knoweth the hearts of all, who is our Witness, and our Justification, then who art thou that condemnest or layest any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? but he hath promised, No wea∣pon formed against him shall prosper; for his work he will carry on by his own unlimitted power, in despite of the Beast and his Image. And so Reader, I charge thee and all people in the presence of the Lord, before whom you must come to Judgment, to take heed of speaking evil of that you know not, lest you speak evil of Gods Elect; for it is a fearful thing to enter into the hands of the Living God;Heb. 10. 31. 32. Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43. for if those be cursed that doe not receive the Messengers of Jesus Christ, how much more them that revile them, and persecute them? He that hath an ear to heare, let him heare; for in as much as thou dost it to one of his, thou doest to him. J. P.
A Shield of the Truth, &c. 1. COncerning the Name QUAKERS, by which the World scornfully calls us. As for the Quaking and Trembling caused by the unresistable power of the Lord, Iown, which the holy men of God witnessed before us in all Ages.Gen. 27. 33. Heb. 12. 21. Jer. 23. 9. Hab. 3. 16. Dan. 10. 7. Isaac the seed of the Promise trembled: Moses the Servant of God Quaked and Trembled: Jeremiah the Prophet of the Lord, his Bones shook: Habakkuk his Belly Trem∣bled, and Lips Quivered: when Daniel heard the voyce, he fell down and Trembled: and David the King was as if his Bones were out of Joynt;Acts 9. 6. Psal. 22. 15. Job. 4. 14. Ezek. 12. 18. Prov. 19. 29. Prov. 3. 33, 34. Phil. 2. 12. and the Rest of the holy Men of God Quaked and Trembled, and so it was no new thing, but that which was from the beginning, which all the holy Men of God witnessed, though new to the World, who live in Darkness. And for this cause are we scornfully called Quakers; but the Scorners God will judge, and the Righteous God Will Bless, who work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling. 2. We are accused, to be the false Prophets, and false Teachers, and Deceivers that are foretold of in the Scriptures, to come in the last times: But saith Jesus Christ, You may Know them by their Fruits, and
so we desire to be Judged according to our Fruits. Jesus Christ said,Mat. 7. 15, 19, 17, 18, Beware of false Prophets, that appear to you in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly are Ravening Wolves; you shall know them by their Fruits: Do men gather Grapes of Thornes, and Figs of Thi∣stles? A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, nor a Corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit. Pride is a Fruit of the corrupt Tree, now see whether we or your Teachers be guilty of this? who go in double Cuffs, and Bott-hose-tops, with great store of Points and Ribbands, which are of no use, but for the satisfying of the Proud minde, and also following the new Fashi∣ons and Inventions of the World, they and their Wives and Children, decking and adorning themselves according to their Proud minds, to make the Creature seem something in its own eyes,1 Pet. 3. 3. and in the eyes of others; and those are the outward signes of Pride, which lodgeth in their hearts; And they are called of men Ma∣sters, and have the chiefest places in the Assem∣blies, uppermost Roomes at Feasts,Mat. 23. 5. 6, 7. and love Greetings in the Markets, such Christ declared against. See whether these be outward signes of Pride, yea or nay. But you will say, that one may have as Proud a heart in plain Apparrel. I answer, But where pride is, it will vent forth it self, either less or more, according to the outward ability of the Creature; but it shewes it selfe
the most in Apparel; but the Light of God makes manifest the Heart, where lies the Root. Covetousness is a Fruit of the corrupt Tree; see whether your Teachers be covetous, yea or nay, who have some Fifty, some Sixty, some and Hundred or two Hundred Pounds in the Year, more or less, as they can get it; and some have Money for Smoak passing up the Chimnies, and for Pigs, Geese, Eggs and Chickens, and many other such like things, which are too tedious to reckon; but your Hirelings will rec∣kon them when they come to take them, to seek for their Gain from their Quarter:Isa. 56. 11. and this Gain they make of the Letter, which was spoken forth freely by the true Prophets and Apostles of God:Acts 20. 23. Where the greatest Benefices are,2 Cor. 12. 14. there will they be; so are like the false Prophets which Ezekiel declared against, Who seek for the Fleece, and regard not the Flock. Now see whether your Teachers be Covetous, or we, who have left our Countries, our Lands, and Livings, and Possessions, and have forsaken all, and have not where to lay our Heads, but as the Lord provideth for us; neither covet any man's Silver nor Gold, Gifts or Rewards; for, freely we have received, freely we give; for we come not to seek yours, but you, God is our Wit∣ness, and our Justification; then who art thou that condemnest? Drunkenness is a Fruit of the Corrupt Tree;
now see whether we, or your Teachers, are guil∣ty of this; he that hath an Eye to see, let him see. Envy is a Fruit of the Corrupt Tree; now see whether your Teachers be guilty of this, who sue men at Law for their own Estates, and earthly things, and trifles, though they be of their own Flock; or we, who sue no man at the Law, but are sued by them, because we cannot maintain them in their Pride and Idleness by the Sweat of our Brows, contrary to the Scripture, which saith, He that will not Work, let him not Eat;Mat. 5. 4. and if they did administer to us spiritual things,2. Thes. 3. 10. they should reap our car∣nal. Now see if these be not the Ravening Wolves in Sheep's Clothing; for, so long as we put in∣to their Mouthes they cryed, Peace, Peace, and told us we were Christians, when we were Hea∣thens, and knew not God;Mich. 3. 5. so sewed Pillows under our Arm-holes; and appeared to us in Sheeps Cloathing; but now we that are redee∣med into the Flock of Christ, by Christ our eyes are opened, and now we see that we profited nothing by them, but were deceived by them, so we cannot put into their Mouthes, nor Maintain them any longer in their Deceipts,Ezek. 13. 18, 19. but testifie against them; and so they Sue us at the Law, and hale us before Magistrates, and take Tribble Damage, and appear Rave∣ning Wolves, and would destroy us and our Families, and would live upon our Estates by Compulsion, and an outward Law; and some
of us they cause to be put in Prison, and call us Hereticks, Deluders, and Deceivers, false Prophets, and yet could live on our Estates, and covet our Silver and Gold, and Estates, and by your Law and Justices Warrants straine upon them, and so seek ours, and would destroy us; like the false Prophets which Hosea declared a∣gainst,Hos. 6. 9 who as a company of Robbers wait for a man,2 Pet. 2. 3 so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent; and also the false Teachers, which Peter foretold of, who through covetousness, with feign∣ed words make merchandize of the People, or we, who are made merchandize of, though we take none of their stoln Wares, and make merchandize of none, God is our Witness. And see if these be not the false Teachers which Paul fore-told of to come in the last times, Covetous, Proud, Boasters, Blasphemers, Disobedient, Unthankful, Unholy, with∣out Naturall Affection, Truce-breakers, False-accusers, Incontinent, Fierce, Despisers of those that are good, Traytors, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God, having a Form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away. For of this sort are they that creep into Houses, who lead silly women captive, full of sin and corruption, and divers lusts ever learning, and never coming to the know∣ledge of the Truth: Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do they withstand the Truth: Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, 2 Tim. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Now see if your Teachers be not Lovers of
their own selves, who seek for the Fleece, and regard not the Flock; but feed with the Fat, aud clothe with the Wool, and live by the Sweat of others Brows, living at Ease, de∣vouring the Creation, and spending it upon their Lusts, they,Ezek. 34. and their Wives and Children, nourishing their Hearts as in a day of Slaugh∣ter; and of changable Minds, according to the Government of Man,James 5. that they may save and shelter themselves under the Power and Will of Man, as the false Prophets did, by which they stood, and were upheld; and the same that Prayed for the King and Realm, the same Pray now for the Lord Protector, and the State of England. Now see whether these be false Prophets, or we, who have forsaken our outward Livings, and Estates, and Countries, and Acquaintance, and come into Strange Countries, and lite among Dogs, and Wolves, and Heathens, as Christ saith,Mat. 10. 16, 17. he sends us forth as Sheep among Wolves, which are of the Priests Flock; and suffers our Bodies to be Stock'd, Ston'd, Re∣proach'd, Revil'd, Imprison'd and shamefully In∣treated, and love not our Lives unto Death for Christ's sake; he is our Witness and only Pro∣tector, in whose Power we stand and are upheld, contrary to the Will of Man. And see whether we or your Teachers are Covetous, as it is before proved; and Proud,
as it is before proved: And see if they be not Boasters, who boast that they are the Ministers of Christ, and sent of God, when as they are come but from Oxford and Cambridge, appro∣ved by the Will of Man: And boast of Gifts, and sell them for Money; when the Scripture saith,Acts 8. 20. The Gift of God is not to be bought with Money: And they boast, they are the mediate Means ordain'd by God; when as they are ordain'd by their Parents, or some other; and their Means are Mediate,Gal. 1. 16. and the Apostles Immediate;John 15 6, and the Way is but One, saith Christ; he that hath an Ear to hear, let him hear. And see if they be not Blasphemers, who say, They are the Ministers of Christ, and some of them Drun∣kards, some Proud, some Covetous, and are Evil Examples to all that follow them, contra∣to Christ, or his Apostles, who said, Walk as you have us for Examples;1 Tim. 2. 3. and here they abide not in the Doctrine of Christ,1 Tim. 2. 3. and so have not God, as in 2 John 9. And this is Blasphemy, to say, They are the Mouth of the Lord; and are the Mouth of the Devil, teaching Lyes and Blas∣phemies; telling the People that are of their Flock, They are Christians, and of the Flock of Christ; when as they are all manuer of unrighteous Per∣sons, who live without God in the World: and tell them, Their Children are the Flock of Christ, when they are sprinkled on the Face with a little Water; when as they grow up in all manner of Ungod∣liness,
without the Fear of God, or the Know∣ledge of God; and they are Heathen, that know not God; and this is Blasphemy, to say, Christ is the Head of Heathens, for he is the Head of his Flock: And they tell People, that a House of Lime and Stone is the Church,Jer. 10. 15. whenas the Church is the Body of Christ,Col. 1. 11. and this is Blasphemy:Vers. 24. Now see whether we or your Teachers, be more like Deceivers, Lyars and Blasphemers, and let every one's Life preach him forth, and judge him: and see if they be not Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God, who delight in Musick, in Bow∣ling, in Carding, and Dicing, and Hawking, and Hunting, and all manner of Pleasures & Delights. Now see whether they or we be like the Apo∣stles, who never used any such thing, but all their Delight was in the Work of Christ; but They that are of the Flesh, mind the things of the Flesh;Phil. 1. 18. and they that are of the Spirit,Rom. 8. 5. the things of the Spirit. Now see if they have not a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power and Life which the Apostles lived in; therefore from such turn away; And if you find that our Lives be contrary to what we profess, from us turn away also. But of this sort are they who creep into Houses, and lead silly People captive: Now see if they do not creep into Steeple-houses, and say, that's the Place, and no where else, and lead silly People captive, laden with Sins and divers lusts, ever lear∣ning, and never coming to the Knowledge of the Truth: Some learn thirty, some fifty, some sixty years, and above, and still full Sin, and as dark and
blind and ignorant of the Things of God as ever: And they will teach, You shall never be made free from Sin, so long as you are upon the Earth; and hereby they set up their Rest in the Devil's King∣dom. And if you do alledge, We creep into Houses; I answer, The Apostle witnessed the same where he said,Acts 20. 20. I have taught you publickly from House to House; And our Meetings are publick to any who will come amongst us, sometimes in no House, but in the Fields or Commons, as the Apostles witnes∣sed, Mat. 18. 20. and we find the Lord amongst us,Mat. 18. 20. being ga∣thered in his Name, according to his Promise: Now see by their Fruits, if your Teachers be not the Deceivers, which are foretold of in the Scrip∣tures, who as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do they withstand the Truth by all the Wayes they can, as it is before proved; for Jannes and Jambres were the Magicians of Egypt,Exod. 7. 11, 12. that imita∣ted Moses; so those University Men by their Ma∣gick Arts, Inventions and Imaginations, and studying old Authors, have gotten the Form of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles Words, to trade with, but deny the Life and Power, and so are Traytors to Christ, who are Men of corrupt Minds, and Reprobates concerning the Faith; but they shall proceed no further; for their Folly shall be made manifest to all Men: Now he that desis to see, may see, and let all who are wise hearted judge. But if you do alledge, They have been long, and
have reigned long, and we are new come up, and it is a New Way; and we come to breed Divisions and Dissention. I answer, The more is their Shame; and by that the more they are seen to be those that run and the Lord never sent them, therefore they profit not the People at all, who have reigned so long, and wrought no better Reformation in the Land,Jer. 23. 31. but it flows as much in Iniquity and all manner of Un∣godliness as ever, and the People that are taught by them, as ignorant and as dark to the Things of God as ever; and here they would keep them by an outward Power, but the Day hath made them manifest, and the Scripture fulfilled, which the Apostle spoak of, who said,1 Cor. 3. 12. It was the last Times then;1 Joh. 2. 20. and since they have continued, you may know them by their Fruits; they profess Christ in Words, but in Life deny him; and the My∣stery of Iniquity hath reigned a long time,Tit. 1. 16. and there hath been a time of cruel Darkness,Rev. 13. 3, 4. and all the World hath wondered after,Vers. 12. and worshipped the Beast and his Image, and he hath reigned, and by him the false Prophet hath reigned, which hath deceived the Nations; but now Light is ri∣sen out of Darkness,Rev. 16. 20. and shines forth now in theseJoel 2. 28, 29. latter Dayes in the Sons and Daughters of Men, according to the Promise of God, whereby the Wiles of Satan are made manifest to the Glory of God. And now is the Separation, the Sheep from the Goats, the Wheat from the Tares, and Christ is
come to set at Variance, Father against Son, and Son against Father, and Wife against the Man, and the Man against the Wife,Mat. 10. 3. and to turn the World upside down; and this is the Cause why the World rages, And this is the Condemnation of the World,Acts 17. 6. Light is come into the World,John 3. 19. and they love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil: and so to those, who are in Darkness, it is new; but we witness it is no new Way, but the same which was, is, and is to be forever; and the same Signs follow, but the adulterous Generation cannot see it, but they that believe shall see and be healed: And though the Beast and false Pro∣phet, and those that bear the Mark of the Beast, do now make War with the Lamb & the Saints, for to uphold their Kingdom; yet the Lamb, the King of the Saints shall overcome,Phil. 2. 10. and to him the Nations shall bow;Rev. 19. 20. and the Beast and false Pro∣phet,Isa. 30. 33. and all that bear the Mark of the Beast, in∣to the Lake for them prepared of old, shall go; and for this End we are come out of our Countries, and outward Habitations & Possessions, to preach to every Conscience the Eternal Truth as it is in Jesus, the Everlasting Gospel; as we have recei∣ved it freely, freely we give, and as we preach the Gospel, we live of the Gospel; and this is our End and no other End, God is our Wit∣ness. We are accused to deny the Scripture, which is false; for we witness the Life thereof, and by the same do we witness the Scriptures to be Truth,
and serviceable in its Place, & was written for our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World is come; and to us it is given to know, but to the World in Parables; and he that would go about to unfold the Parables to the dark Minds, by the Serpentine Wit and Imagination,1 Cor. 10. 11 he must be kept out of the Scripture;Luke 8. 10. and he who takes the Scrip∣tures, and makes a Trade of them, professing to in∣terpret them, and so gets a Living by them, which was spoaken forth freely, he is a Deceiver, and must be shut out of the Scripture: and who reads or takes the Scripture to talk or discourse of, and is ignorant of the Life, must be kept out of the Scrip∣ture; for all those run in with their Serpentine Wit & Imaginations, wresting them for their own Ends, adding and diminishing, to their own De∣struction, and so he must be shut out of the Scrip∣ture; for hence arise all these Sects and Opinions in the World, running into the Scripture with their Wit, Imaginations and dark Minds, one imagining one Way, and another another Way, and one of this Opinion, and another of that O∣pinion; but Opinion is no Assurance, but is fal∣lible, and every one out of the Way, because they want the Life, which is the Mystery; and this is the Difference between all Sects and Opinions and the Infallible Truth; and so they come not in by the Door, but are climbing up another Way, and so are shut out of the Kingdom; but the same which gave them forth, the same can open them, and to it they are no Mystery nor Parable, nor
need any Meaning; For they are of no private Inter∣pretation, nor came not in the old Time by the Will of Man,Joh. 10. 1. but Holy Men of God spake as they were mov'd by the Holy Ghost; neither can the Will of Men open them, but the same which spake them forth, the same can open them,2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. and spake them forth freely: So let him that hath a Dream; tell a Dream, and he that hath my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully. What is the Chaff to the Wheat, saith the Lord? So he that hath the Letter, let him speak the Let∣ler, and he that hath the Life, let him speak the Life: What is the Husk to the Kernel? And what should Swine do with Pearls,Jer. 23. 28. whose Life is Husks,John 1. 1. and there they feed? He that can receive, let him; the same which gave it forth, the same can open it: And he who saith, The Letter is the Word, is a Deceiver, and errs, not knowing the Scripture; for the Scripture saith, that In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God; and the Word of the Lord came to the Prophets,Jer. 1. 1. and they spake from the Word of the Lord;Jer. 2. 1. and the Word became Flesh, and dwelt among the Apostles, and they saw the Glory thereof, as the Glory of the on∣ly begotten Son of the Father, full of Grace and Truth; and the Word is quick and Powerful,Jer. 1. 4, 8. sharper then a two-edged Sword, and the Word is Immortal;Ezek 1. 3. and this the Apostles, in whom the Word dwelt,John 1. 14. bare witness of, and have left it upon record;Rev. 19. 13. and we witness the same, the Word is the same,Heb. 4. 12, 13. which was, is, and is to be forever: and who putteth the Letter for the Word is blind, and putteth the
Shadow for the Substance, and must be shut out of the Scripture; and he who saith, The Letter is the Light, is in Darkness, and errs, not knowing the Scripture, which declareth of the Light, which John came to bear Witness of, who was not the Light, but testified of the Light, which was the true Light which enlightneth every one that cometh into the World;John 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not, nor knows him not; and he came unto his own, and his own received him not; but as many as recei∣ved him, to them he gives Power to become the Sons of God; and this we witness, and by the same Light do we discern and testifie against him to be in Darkness and Blindness, and is a Deceiver, who puts the Letter for the Light, and so draws Peoples Minds off from the Light within them, to the Letter without them, seeking the Living among the Dead, thinking to find Life in the Let∣ter without them, as the Pharisees did, and will not come unto Christ,John 5. 39, 40. that they might have Life; and also they must be shut out of the Scripture, as the Pharisees were: And he also that saith, The Letter is the Rule and Guide of the People of God, is without, feeding upon the Husk, and is ignorant of the true Light,Luke 1. 73. & 19. 15. which was before the Letter was,John 16. 13. which all the Children of God were and are guided by,Rom. 8. 14. and spoak and speaks the Letter from which was before the Letter was; and with this the Let∣ter witnesseth: and who is guided by this cannot walk contrary to the Letter, nor deny it; but they
know how to use it in its Place, and see in what Condition it was spoaken, and it witnesseth with them both in Words and Actions;John 7. 15. and they that have this, have and need the Mystery within, though they cannot read the Letter without, nor ever learned, as it was with Christ, which con∣founded the Scribes and Pharisees;Mat. 11. 15. and they who are never so learned without,Mat. 13. 11. and can read and understand all Tongues and Languages without, and do not read the Scripture within, only feed upon the Husks, & are ignorant of the Life, which is the Mystery which is hid from the Wise and Prudent, and revealed unto the Ignorant, as it was from the Scribes,John 7. 48, 49. and Pharisees, and High Priests, and was revealed to those whom they counted Igno∣rant, and Cursed, and knew not the Law. And they who take the Letter to be their Rule can't walk according to it, because they are igno∣rant of the Light, which opens and leads into the Life, which they who spake them forth lived in; but Drunkards, & Swearers, and Proud, and Wan∣ton, and Covetous Lustful, Envious Ones, and all Manner of Unrighteous Persons will take the Let∣ter to talk of, and say, it is their Rule and Guide, but are out of the Life thereof, and so by it are condemned;Luke 15. 15, 16. and those are the Swine that are feeding upon the Husk without, and have gotten the Form, but are out of the Life and Power, and put the Shadow for the Substance, and so live in Darkness, and knows not whether he goeth: but they that read with the single Eymay understand;
for the Scripture is within, and was read within, before it was read without. Now Silence all the Study and Wisdom of Man. We are accused to Deny the Baptism. The Baptism we own, which is the Baptism of Christ with the Holy Ghost and with Fire; but we deny all other; for there is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,Mat. 3. 11. one God and Father of all; and they who would have one Baptism outward,Eph. 4, 5, 6. and ano∣ther Inward, would have two Baptisms, when the Scripture saith, the Baptism is but One; and whosoever have the Baptism Outward, are the same they were before; but the Baptism of Christ makes a New Creature, and this I witness; for I received Water upon my Face,Rom. 6. 3. as my Parents told me, which they called Baptism: but I grew up a Heathen, as all other Children do, and no New Creature, though my Parents were counted Be∣lievers among the World and their Priests;1 Cor. 12. 13. but now I witness the Baptism of Christ,2 Cor. 5. 17. by One Spi∣rit into One Body; and now I witness a New Creature; old things are past away, and all things become New: And now I see the other to be for∣mal Imitation, and the Invention of Man, and so a meer Delusion; and all are Heathens,Mat. 15. 4. and no Christians, who cannot witness this Baptism, who can witness this denies all other; for the Scrip∣ture saith, The Baptism is but One; and who can witness this are Believers, but who cannot wit∣ness this are no Believers; and so it is that Wa∣ter
or no Water availeth nothing, but a New Creature; for all by Nature are the Children of Wrath, and except they be born again, they cannot enter; and as for the Baptism of Water, which the Apostles used, it being a Figure for its Time, the Power went along with it, and the Disciples received the Holy Ghost when they were Baptized; but none can witness this, who set themselves of acting or imitating the Apostles, and so take it up by Imitation, and their Ground is the Letter, and are not guided to it by the same Spirit which guided the Apostles; and so they are the same after Water, as before; and so now Water (or no Water) availeth any Thing, but a New Creature; for Water was but for its time, though many in Darkness have now got the Form and are groping in it for Life, but want the Life and Power, and so from such turn away. We are accused to deny the Supper of the Lord. The Supper of the Lord we own,John 6. 54, 55, 56, 57. which is the Body and Blood of Christ,Acts 4. 32. which the Saints feed upon;1 Cor. 10. 16. and this is Eternal Food and Life: And here they all feed upon one, and are of one Heart and Mind; and here is pure and Eternal Union and Communion; and this is not Carnal, but Spiritual; for Saints are Spiritual, and their Communion is Spiritual and Eternal; and this we witness, who are of one Heart and one Mind, who are in the New Covenant, and herein we discern the Lord's Body: and here all Drunkards are shut out, and all Lyars,
Adulterers, Proud, Covetous, Lustful and Envious Ones, and all Back-biters, Revilers, Extortioners, and all Deceitful and Unrighteous Persons are shut out of the New Covenant,1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. and are without, feeding upon the Husk and Shadow, which is Carnal; for the Bread which the World breaks is Carnal and Natural, and only feeds the Outward Carnal Body, and goeth into the Belly, and so passeth out into the Dangil; and so likewise the Cup which they drink, and so the Communion and Fellowship of the World passeth away; but this is no Nourishment to the Soul, but still the Soul lyes in Death; and here is no Communion, but Natural, Outward and Carnal, of several Minds and Hearts, full of Filthiness and Uncleanness, which is the Table of Devils, eating and drink∣ing their own Damnation, not discerning the Lord's Body,1 Cor. 10. 21. which is Spiritual, which the Na∣tural Man discerns not: And here stands the Worlds Communion and Fellowship,1 Cor. 11. 29. which is Carnal; and cross but their Carnal Wills,1 Cor. 2. 14. and it is turned into Envy; and for Earthly Trifles, they will go to Law, and Cozen, and Cheat, and Defraud one another for Earthly Trifles, and like People, like Priest; but if they lye in wait for Re∣venge of one another, then they will not take their Sacrament,1 John 3. 17. as they call it: And here the Devil hath as great Hold; for he that envies is a Murderer; and here is the Difference betwixt the Worlds Communion and the Saints Commu∣nion, Life and Death:Rom. 8. 6. For to be Carnally-minded is
Death, but to be Spiritually-minded is Life: And here they are without, feeding upon the Husk and Shadow without, and would destroy the Life and Substance, where it appears, both Priest, Peo∣ple and Rulers; and so have a Form of Godliness, and deny the Life and Power, from such turn away; for it is a meer Delusion to take the Shadow for the Substance.2 Tim. 3 5. We are accused to deny all Prayer. The Prayers of the Wicked we deny,Prov. 15. 8. and God denies;Gen. 4. 3, 4, 5. for they are abominable: for Cain the wicked one, who was out of the Commands of God,1 Pet. 3. 12. who was the first Birth, he offered up a Sa∣crifice of the Earth,Jam. 5. 5. 16. but God had no Respect to it; but Abel,Prov. 15. 28. 29. the second Birth, who was the Righte∣ous, his Sacrifice God had Respect to; so the Prayers of the Faithful and Righteous God doth accept, and they avail, and what comes from his own,Exo. 40. 12, 13. which is the second Birth: his own is pure, & what comes from it is pure;Luke 1. 3. and God who is pure, doth receive that which is pure;Hab. 1. 13. but he receives nothing which is polluted or unclean;Mat. 12. 34. for he is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity;Job 14. 4. for his Sacrifice must be without Spot or Blemish:Gen. 3. 15. and that which comes from an unclean Heart is spotted,2 Sam. 2. 22 and defi∣led, and unclean; for nothing that is pure can come forth of an unclean Vessel: But who can witness the second Birth, and that the Seed of the Wo∣man hath bruised the Serpents Head, which is the first Promise, and Faith which purifieth the Heart,
then that which comes out is pure, proceeding from a pure single Heart; and this Prayer God receives, and he hath Respect to it, and this we own and witness, and this comes from the second Birth, which is pure; for the first Birth is unclean, and out of the Command of God, in the Fall, in the Wrath, in the Peevishness, and Perversness, and Frowardness, Cain-like, and the Seed of the Serpent is first in every one, and rules the Head; but the Promise is, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head: So you who are not come to this, are still in the Fall, and are not come to the first Promise, so all your self-acting and imitating, thinking to merit with your Prayers and Praises, Singings, and Duties, and Worships, and Tra∣ditions, which are all in vain; and you are sacri∣ficing to an unknown God,John 4. 22. a Sacrifice of the Earth from the first Nature, which God hath no Respect to; and the flaming Sword is set against that,1 Sam. 5. 22. to keep from the Tree of Life; for both Drunkards,Isa. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and Swearers, Lyars, Proud, Cove∣tous, and all Manner of Unrighteous Persons are offering up Sacrifices, and are in their Formal Worships and Duties, thinking that is sufficient to pacifie for their Sins, and yet do not repent: But saith the Lord,Prov. 23. 16. Bring no more vain oblations;Jer. 29. 12, 13. away with your New Moons and Sabbaths, they are A∣bomination, and my Soul loaths them:Mat 6. 21. When you spread forth your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you,Rom. 8. 26. yea, when you make many Prayers, I will not hearken; your Hands are full of Blood, wash you, make you clean, put
away the Evil of your Doings from before mine Eyes; cease to do Evil, learn to do well. So it is the Heart that the Lord requireth, and where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also: And saith the Apostle, We know not how to pray as we ought, but as the Spirit maketh Intercession with Sighs & Groans; & this is more acceptable to God from an honest single Heart, then the Long Prayer of the Pharisees. We are accused to be destructive to the Ministry. The true Ministry of Christ we own and wit∣ness, and the Ministers and Messengers of Christ we own and witness; but those who have gotten the Letter and Form to trade with, which was spo∣ken forth freely, and deny the Life and Power, those we deny & their Ministry; And all those who go to get human Learning, and are certain Years, as it were serving Apprentiship, pretending to stu∣dy Divinity, and when their time is expired, they go amongst ignorant, blind People, and get a cer∣tain Place, and a certain Wage, and so sell that which they studyed and got into the Brain, and those which receive it,Mich. 3. 10. get it into the Brain; and so they live upon Dust, which is the Serpents Meat, feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, both Priest and People, death feeding death, and with the Notion begets into the Notion, and feeding the Carnal Mind with the Carnal Letter; and this is the Cause why Drunkards, Swearers, Lyars, Proud, Covetous, Envious, Wrathful and Contenti∣ous Ones, and all Unrighteous Persons, have gotten the
Letter to talk of, or discourse of, though in the Ale-house or Tipling-house; but this Ministry works no Reformation, only hath the Form, and leads into the Form, and denyes the Life and Power, which is neither to be bought nor sold for Mo∣ney; so from such we turn away, who come by the Will of Man, and approved by the Will of Man, and are upheld by the Will of Man, and not by the Will of God; and their Call and Mi∣nistry we deny, which is mediate, and formal I∣mitation and the Invention of Man, and so a meer Delusion. And this is the Cause why the Land so overflows with Iniquity & all Manner of Ungod∣liness,Jer. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32. & no better Reformation wrought amongst them; their Ministry is so dark, and dead and cold, and yet the Land full of Teachers, and yet the Peo∣ple lost for want of Teaching;Isa. 35. 2. and so they spend their Money for that which is not Bread, and their La∣bour for that which profiteth not. But who can witness an Immediate Call by God,Mar. 16. 25. from their outward Callings and Countries,Amos 3. 7, 8. Lands, Livings and Possessions,Amos. 7. 14, 15. into several Countries to preach the free Gospel, as they have received it,Gal. 1. 11, 12. by the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit, and speak it forth as they are moved by the Holy Ghost,1 Cor. 1. 17, 18, 19, &c. and as the Spirit gives them Ut∣terance, freely, as they have received it freely; by which Ministry many are convinced,Chap. 2. and as they abide in it,2 Pet. 1. 21. are converted,Acts . 4. &c. as many in the Nation can witness, to the Honour and Glory of God, who are now New Creatures; and this Call
we own and witness, and this Ministry we own and witness, which is Immediate, and stands in the Will of God; and such covetno Man's Silver nor Gold, neither could be hired to certain Place, but travail from Place to Place, and have no certain dwelling Place; and such are the true Ministers of Jesus Christ, who make the Gospel free and without Charge:Acts 20. 33. And this we own and witness;2 Thes. 9. as in Acts. 6. and for the Testimony of this true Mi∣nistry, some of us are Imprisoned, some Stoned, some Stocked, whipped and shamefully entreated, as Vaga∣bonds, and Deluders, and Wanderers, and Raisers of Sedition,Acts 24. 5, 6. and Pestilent Fellows, and esteemed not wor∣thy to live in the Nation,Acts 21. 22. both by Priest, and People, and Rulers,Witness the Town of Cambridge, the Well∣head. who are out of the Commands of God, and are Vagabonds and Fugitives from God, who go in the Way of Cain to envy and murder the Innocent: And because we declare against all who come not in by the Door, but seek to climb up another Way, by their Study, Inventions and Serpentine Wisdom and Knowledge, and so are Thieves and Robbers; and those are they which are now to set up and extolled in England,John 10. 1. with great Augmentations and Benefices, by the Arm and Will of Flesh; now Heads of England, and such Ministers and their Ministry we deny; for the Hand of the Lord is against them: But this which we own is no new Call, nor no new Mini∣stry, but the same which was with the Prophets and Apostles, and all whom God sent, witnessed; and here is the Difference of the Ministers of the
World, and the Ministers of Christ; the one comes by the Will of Man, the other by the Will of God; & the one is upheld by the Will of man, the other by the Will of God, contrary to the Will of Man; and the one of the Letter, the other of the Spirit; and the one has the Form & Shadow, and the other the Life & Substance; and the Effects and Fruits of their Ministry make them manifest;2 Tim. 3. 5 but from such turn away, who have the Form, but not the Life and Power; for they are meer Deceivers and Witch∣es, bewitch People from the Truth, holding forth the Shadow instead of the Substance; and what is the Shadow to the Substance? Or, what is the Chaff to the Wheat? He that hath an Ear to hear, let him hear and understand. We are accused to deny all Magistracy and Govern∣ment. I answer, This is false; for we own it in its Place;1 John 3. 4. for whilst there is Transgression, there must be a Law; and while the Devil hath Power over Man, there will be Transgression: so the Law was added because of Transgression,Gal. 3. 29. and the Devil was the Cause of it; so there must be a Law without, to keep those who are without the Fear of God in Subjection, else they would de∣stroy one another, and Cain would destroy Abel;1 Pet. 2. 14. for this is the Devil's Work; and so for this End was the Law given forth, to curb Evil-Doers, and to preserve and encourage them that do well: And it was according to that in the Conscience, Just, Holy, and Good, according to the Will of
God, and serviceable in its Place. And true Go∣vernment, according to the Law of God,Rom. 7. 12. is ser∣viceable in its Place:Rom. 4. 15. And all Magistrates who fear God, and hate Covetousness,Rom 8. 1. and are guided by the Light of God in the Conscience,Gal. 5. 23. and ex¦ecute the Law in its Place,Rom. 8. 8. without Partiality and Respect of Persons,2 Sam. 23. 3. and such are serviceable in their Place;Prov. 28. 15, 16. and this we own, and honour, and are subject to for Conscience sake:Prov. 2. 28. but the Righ∣teous are from under the outward Law;Prov. 29. 10. for they are a Law unto themselves;Isa. 14. 15. neither is there need of any Law amongst them,James 2. 9. Who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for against such there is no Law: But they that walk after the Flesh, cannot please God; neither know, how to rule or govern, who cannot witness their own Wills subjected by the Law of God in the Heart, but are guided by their own Wills, and stand in their own Wills; and such wink at Deceit, and rule with Partiality and Respect of Persons, and so transgress the Law of God, which respects no man's Person; and also give forth Laws in their own Wills, which take hold of the Righteous,Hos. 14. 8. persecute the Righteous, & countenance & encourage the Heathen, who know not God; so Cain slayes Abel within them, and they suffer Cain to slay Abel without them▪ & the Wick∣ed and Ungodly have more Liberty in the Nation then the Righteous; and so the Land abounds with Iniquity, Oppression and Treachery, because such corrupt Magistrates wink at Deceits for Carnal Ends, and uphold Iniquity and Oppression, and
tread Truth under foot; and this is the Cause why the Land so abounds with all Manner of Ungod∣liness, and Deceit, Falshood, Tyranny, Oppres∣sion, and Persecution, and yet full of Magistrates and Officers: And corrupt Magistrates put corrupt Magistrates in Office; and so they bear with, and wink at one another, and feed and nourish up De∣ceit amongst them, unless they cross one ano∣ther's Will, and then they are as much in Deceit on the other side, seeking and perverting the Law for Revenge; and such as these uphold these corrupt Ministers and false Prophets, which the Nation swarms of;Hest. 3. and they can have a Law to maintain their Deceit,Dan. 1. 3. and uphold them in Oppres∣sion;Isa. 23. and so the Beast upholds the false Prophet,Isa. 5. 27. 29. and they combine together against the simple,Psal. 82. 1, 3. and so the Law is made a stalking-horse to deceive the simple; and they will pervert and wrest the Law out of its Place, and act contrary to their own Law against the Righteous: And such Magistrates and such Government we honour not, but deny and testifie against it, as the Prophets of God al∣wayes did; for by such Magistrates and Govern∣ment did the Righteous ever suffer; and for the same Testimony of a pure Conscience, I have, and do suffer by such corrupt Magistrates, and hun∣dreds more in the Nation, who are redeemed out of Transgression, who walk not after the Flesh,Zeph. 3. 3. but after the Spirit: And Haman,Hos. 4. 18. who stood in the corrupt Will, would have destroyed Mordecai, be∣cause he crossed his Will, and could not bow to
him; and also Pharaoh, and Nebuchadonozer, and Herod,Mar. 6. 17, &c. who beheaded John,Hest. 3. 8. who stood in their own Wills; but the Hands of the Lord they did not escape. And so corrupt Magistrates say, We deny all Magistracy and Government, as Haman did; but Christ comes to fulfil and end all outward Laws and Government of Man, and he himself will reign; for as Truth and Righteousness grows, the Law is fulfilled; and passeth away, and the Lyon and the Lamb lye down together; and this is the Cause why corrupt Magistrates beat down the Truth as much as they can, and so to uphold themselves; but God will deliver his own, and Pharaoh will he plague and confound: But such Magistrates as are guided by the Light of God in the Conscience, and rule and govern by it, with∣out Partiality or Respect of Persons, in Singleness of Heart, discharging their Consciences before the Lord, and executing the Law in its Place,Rom. 13. 3, 4. such Ma∣gistrates and such Government we own & honour in our Hearts; for such are a Terror to Evil-Doers, and for the Praise & Encouragement of those that do well; and such bear not the Sword in vain, but stand in the Will of God, which is a Cross to their own Wills, and rule for God, and not for themselves; and this Go∣vernment is of God, and not of Man, nor after the Will of Man; neither takes hold of any tender Conscience, nor oppresses it, but stands in the Place where it is set; and some such Magistrates there have been in the Northern Parts of this Na∣tion, who witness the Law of God set up in their
Hearts, and feared God, and hated Covetousness and testified against those who did not; and so cor∣rupt Magistrates sought to put them out: So let all who are single-hearted judge, who are destru∣ctive to true Magistracy and Government. We are accused to be destructive to all Superiority & Honour, Breeding and Manners, because we cannot put off our Hats, not follow the Fashions of the World, nor respect any Persons; but speak the plain Word THOU to any one, Rich or Poor. In the Beginning, when God made Man,Gen. 1. 26, 27, 28. he made him to be Lord over all Creatures, but not Man to be Lord over Man, yet he was to be Ser∣vant of God; and when he had disobeyed the Command of God, God spoak to Adam, and Adam spoak to him, and God Thou'd Adam, and Adam Thou'd him; and here was the plain Language betwixt God and Adam. And when God appea∣red to Moses in the Bush, God Thou'd Moses, and Moses Thou'd him; and this was the plain Lan∣guage which ever passd betwixt God and his Peo∣ple in all Ages:Exod. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. And thou that disdainest to be Thou'd,Acts 9. 5, 6. wouldst exalt thy self above God, who Thou'st God in thy formal Prayers, and scorns to take it thy self; therefore thou must come down as Lucifer did: But it is Lucifer in thee that is ex∣alted, who must not be honoured, but must be cast down into the Pit; and it is he who is Head in Man, who would be honoured,2 Thes. 2. 4. and would be superior, and would be above God, and calls this
Manners and Breeding, to bow to him and honour him; and he hath invented Wayes, whereby he is honoured and exalted and worshipped; and he calls this Manners and Breeding, and who can honour him the most, and exalt him the highest, those, he saith, are the best bred, and of the best Breeding, and those he calls Noblemen and Gentlemen; and the other he calls Yeomen, and common People, and Inferiors, though they all honour him, but they observe it not so much as the other; but their Minds are more set upon the Earth and Earthly Things, to get Wealth and Riches, and those he calls, Provident Careful People; but he that seeks Preferment in the World, and would be exalted and set up, seeks to get his Breeding in as excel∣lent Manner as he can,Obad. 3. 4. that so he may get in Fa∣vour with Lucifer that sits in the Courts and high Palaces; and so long as he pleases Lucifer, he will set him up; but both he and Lucifer must be cast down into the Pit together: And here is the Ground of the Worlds Superiority, Nobility, Gentility, Honour, Breeding and Manners; and here they Lord over one another by their corrupt Wills; and here is the Ground of all Tyranny and Oppression,Jam. 4. 1, 2, 3. Rackings and Taxings, and Wars, and Imprisonments, and Envy, and Mur∣der, and the Persecutions of the Righteous; all arise from proud Lucifer, the Lust in Man, who would be honoured; and all this is in the Fall, and under the Curse: But Mordecai could not bow to him in Haman; and therefore he sought to de∣stroy
him, and informed the King against him, and all the Jews in the Nation, and said, They were a scattered People, and their Laws were divers from all People, neither did they observe the Law of the King;Est. 6. 1, 2. then he set up a pair of Gallows for Morde∣cai; but Haman was hanged on his own Gallows, and is cast down to nothing, and Mordecai is exal∣ted in his stead: So there is a Time that Mordecai is despised, and Haman exalted; and there is a Time that Haman is cast down, and Mordecai ex∣alted:Gen. 25. 2. And there is a Time that Esau reigns over Jacob;Exod 11. 9. and there is a Time that the Elder serves the Younger: And there is a Time that Pharaoh rules and oppresses the Israelites; but there is a Time of Israel's Deliverance, and Pharaoh drowned in the Sea?2 Thes. 2. 4. So there is a Time that Anti-christ sits in the Temple of God,Rev. 19. as God, and saith he is God, and Christ lyeth low in the Manger; but there is a Time that he must be cast into the Pit, and Christ alone exalted. He that can receive it let him. But in all Ages the Children of God could not bow to Lucifer, nor his Image; and this was the Cause why Shadrach,Dan. 16. Meshach and Abednego were cast into the fiery Furnace; and this was the Cause why Daniel was cast into the Lions Den, but by the Hand of his God, whom he alone wor∣shipped and honoured, he was delivered and ex∣alted, and his Adversaries cast down in his Place: And this was the Cause why the Prophets were alwayes persecuted and imprisoned,Acts 7. 6. and the Apo∣stles, who came to turn the World upside down:
And this is the Cause, why the Ministers and Mes∣sengers of Jesus Christ are imprisoned,2 Cor. 5. 16, 17. stoned, stocked, whipped, and shamefully entreated, whom the Lord is pleased immediately to call from their outward Callings and Countries, and sends them abroad into several Countries to preach his Name, no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; and who knows him, must know him no more af∣ter the Flesh, but after the Spirit; and those come to turn the World upside down,Gal. 6. 14. being crucified to the World, and the World to them; and these cannot honour Lucifer, nor bow to Luci∣fer, nor worship his Image, though there was a Time when they did; but that was done in Egypt, when they knew not God; but now Lucifer and his Image is cast down, and Christ alone exalted, and the pure and perfect Law is witnessed,Col. 1. 18. which respects no Mans Person,Rev. 19. but God alone honoured and exalted; and this we witness;Rev. 19. for amongst us there are no Superiors after the Flesh, but Christ is the Head; and amongst those who were redeemed out of the World, there were no Supe∣riors, but only Christ the Head, and all the rest Fellow-Servants; and he that would be the great∣est, should be the least;1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. and he that respects Per∣sons, commits Sin:Acts 4. 32. And the Angel would not suffer John to bow to him, but said,Rom. 6. 4, 5. he was his Fellow-Servant; and this we witness, who are redeemed out of the Kingdom of the Devil, from amongst the Children of this World, into the Kingdom of the Son, who are crucified to the
World, and the World to us, by the spiritual Cross of Christ, in which we joy and glory, a∣mongst whom there is no Partiality, nor Respect of Persons, but all in Union in one, though Ten Thousand; and here God alone is King,1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Acts 4. 32. Rom. 6. 4, 5. and he alone is honoured, exalted and worshipped, no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for we have no other God in whom our Hearts de∣light: And here proud Lucifer and his Image is cast out; and here all his Honour is thrown down, and his Breeding, and Manners, and Fashions, and Customs, and Words, and Wayes, and Worships, which are after the Flesh, and not af∣ter the Spirit, whereby he sets up himself, and causeth his Image to be worshipped; and this is the Cause he rages in his Kingdom, wheresoever we come, and saith, We are destructive to all Superiori∣ry, and Magistracy; and Ministry, and Honour, Breeding, and Manners, and turn the World upside down; for he knows where Christ comes,Rev. 19. he comes to take his Kingdom from him, and cast him down into the Pit, and there he must be tormented quick, and all who bear his Image or his Mark; and these are some of his Marks, which he calls Nobility, Gen∣tility▪ Honour, Breeding, Manners and Civility. But true Nobility we own: the Seed of God is Noble, wheresoever it is born up, and who can witness to the Head of the Serpent bruised, and the Seed of God born up to reign and rule; there is true Nobility; there is true Genti∣lity, no more after the Flesh, hut after the Spi∣rit;
and this is to be honoured; for Honour is due to this, both in Magistrate or Minister, Fish∣erman or Ploughman,Rom. 13. 7. Herdsman or Shepherd, wheresoever it rules without Respect of Persons; and here, Fear to whom Fear, Honour to whom Honour; and this is no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: And here all the true Prophets of God were Noblemen and Gentlemen, sprung of the Noble Seed,1 King. 19. 19. though of the Nobles and great Ones of the Earth they were disdain'd,Amos 7. 14, 15. & re∣proached, because according to the World they were of low Degree, some of them Ploughmen, some Herdsmen,Deut. 32. 3. Deut. 37. 5. some Shepherds; and therefore they persecuted them and destroyed them, yet they were Gentile and bore all. Christ was No∣ble, sprang of the Noble Seed, though of the great Ones and Nobles of the Earth he was dis∣dained, reproached and scorned to be the King of the Jews, because according to the World he was of low Degree, and supposed to be a Carpenter's Son; so they spit upon him, and disdained him, and crucified him, yet he was gentile and bore all. The Apostles were Noble,Mat. 13. 55, 56, 57. sprung of the Noble Seed, though of the Nobles and great Ones of the Earth they were despised and disdained, and re∣proached, because according to the World they were of Low Degree, some of them Fishermen, and the like, and came to turn the World upside down; so they were despised, persecuted and killed, yet they were gentile, and bore all: But those were all Noble, sprung of the Noble Seed, and
so are all now who are of the same Seed; and those were all gentile, sprung of the gentile Seed, & those have the Nature, but not the Name; and to those belongs the true Honour, not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for they denyed the Honour of the World; and therefore Christ said, I receive not Honour from Men;Act. 7. and said to his Apostles, Be ye not called Masters,Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10, 11. neither call any Man Master upon the Earth; and though the Princes of this World exercise Doinion oe over another, yet it shall not be so amongst you; but he that would be the greatest amongst you, let him be your Servant; and said he, How can ye believe which receive Honour one of another, and seek not the Honour that cometh from God only?John 5. 44. And here the true Honour is no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: And here you who are giving and re∣ceiving out-side earthly Honour, you are in the Unbelief, out of the Doctrine of Christ, cringing and bowing, and honouring and exalting the Devil, and worshipping the Beast and his Image, which all the World wonders after and worships, Rev. 13. And as for Manners, and Breeding, Courtesie and Civility, Learn to do as you would have all to do unto you, and speak every one Truth to his Neighbour:Mat. 7. 12. And let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth,Ezek. 8. 16. but such as is good for the Use of Edifying; for evil Com∣munication corrupts good Manners; but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay, for whatsoever is more is Evil: And breed your Children so, and here is good Manners and Breeding, Courtesie and Civi∣lity;
and who are of the right Noble Seed have these Manners and this Breeding;Mat. 5. 37. but the Nobles and Great Ones of the Earth want these Manners and this Breeding, and both Priest and People of all Sorts, according to the World: And here is the Ground of all true Nobility, Gentility, Ma∣jesty, Honour, Breeding, Manners, Courtesie and Civility, no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for the Natural Man minds Natural Things, and the Spiritual Man Spiritual Things; but the Natural Man receives not the Things of God; and this we own and witness: And the Time is coming, and now is, that before this Seed every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue con∣fess, and the Kings and Nobles of the Earth shall be bound in Chains and Fetters of Iron:Rom. 8. 5. And here is also the Ground of the Nobility, Gentility,Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Superiority, Honour, Breeding and Manners of the World,Psal. 148. 9. which is after the Flesh, but not after the Spirit, sprung from proud Lucifer, the Lust that reigns in man, and is not Yea and Nay, but calls it Manners to say Nay, and take it, or do it; and so they have the Name, but not the Nature; and so are Bastards, and no Sons, who are not sprung from the Noble Gentile Seed; and to those Honour is not due, neither can we bow unto them; for if we should, we should set the Devil in the room of God, & give unto him that which is due to God, which when we were in Blindness through Ignorance we did,Rev. 13. and so worshipped the Beast and his Image,Rev. 14. 5. which all the World worships and
wonders after. For they that are Proud and Lofty which is the Image of the Devil; for the De∣vil is the Father of Pride▪ and in gay Attire, those the World worships, and wonders after, and ex∣tols, and exalts into High Places: But since the Lord hath opened our Eyes,Rev. 18. 6. this we cannot do, but testifie against it wheresoever we come, both in Words and Actions; and so we are destructive to the World's Superiority, Nobility, Gentility, Honour, Breeding and Manners, which is after the Flesh, and not after the Spirit; therefore the Devil hates us in the Nobles and Great Ones of the World;Mat. 22. 21. but we give unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and unto God that which is Gods, but we cannot give unto Caesar that which is God's, but Fear to whom Fear, Honour to whom Honour is due: He that hath an Ear to hear, let him hear, and understand; For, saith the Lord, If I be a Master, where is my Fear? If I be a Father, where is my Ho∣nour? Mal 1. 6. And now something concerning the Partiality that is among the Children of this World in their Breeding and Manners. First, Concerning the Word Thou or Thee, which all those which are their Priests and Teach∣ers know, that Thou is the proper Word to one particular Person, and is so all along the Scriptures throughout to any one, without Respect of Per∣sons; yea, to God himself: And the Word You is the proper Word to more then one, but not to
one; and so it is all along the Scriptures through out. As for Example; at all Times when the Apostles spake to Christ, they used the Word Thou or Thee, unto him, and when he spoak to more then one of them, he used the Word You or Ye; but if he spoak but to one, he used the Word Thou or Thee, as in Mat. 16. 14, 15, 16, 17. verses: And also Paul Thou'd King Agrippa, and King Agrip∣pa Thou'd him, as in Acts 26. ver. 27, 28. and so all along the Scripture: And so it is plain, that now it is an invention of Proud Lucifer in man to exalt himself, as it will plainly appear; for a∣mongst the Great and Rich Ones of the Earth, they will either Thou or You one another, if they be equal in Degree, as they call it; but if a man of low Degree in the Earth come to speak to any of them, then he must You the Rich Man, but the Rich Man will Thou him; nay, you shall find it so betwixt Priest and People; If a poor labouring Man come before one that you call a Minister, though he be one of his Hearers, & one who helps to maintain him,Mat. 20. 25. Prov. 22. 7. 1 Cor. 9. 19. according to his Ability, yet he must You the Priest, and the Priest Thou him: And here the Heathen Lord over one another by their corrupt Wills; but this is contrary to the A∣postles and Ministers of Christ, who made them∣selves Servants to all; and yet those will call themselves the Ministers of Christ: And the Word Minister signifies a Servant, and they are Ma∣sters; and so they have gotten the Name, but not the Nature, and so are Bastards, and no Heirs,
who are not sprung from the Gentile Seed, and yet they are hired as Servants of Men, and yet bear Rule by their Means,Je. 5. 30, 31. as Masters over those that maintain them: so that he that hath an Eye to see, let him see the Deceits of the professed Ministers of England. And now, as concerning the Putting off of the Hat, which is another Invention of proud Lucifer, whereby he is honoured and worshipped, and ex∣alted in man: but the Scripture doth not speak of any such Fashion used in any Age; but man hath found out many Inventions, since the Scripture was recorded: and now it is so, that it is a Fashion throughout the Land, whereby one man is exal∣ted above another; for if a poor man come be∣fore a Rich Man, it may be the Rich Man will move his Hat, that is called Courtesie and Humili∣ty; but the Poor Man must stand with his Hat off before him,Prov. 1. 23. Prov. 16. 4. and that is called Honour and Man∣ners, and due Respect unto him; but if the Rich man do bid him put it on, it is counted a great Courtesie, and he gets Honour to himself there, to be counted a Courteous man. But this Difference or Respect of Persons, was never ordained by God, but by the Devil, whereby he exalts himself in Man; but James the Apostle of Jesus Christ, witnessed against it, as in James 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and so on,Acts 10. 3, 3. and said, He that respects Persons commits Sin, for there is no Respect of Persons with God: and therefore saith James, Houle ye Rich men: and
here your professed Ministers abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, and so have not God, but the Devil; and his Ministers they are whom they ex∣alt.2 Jou 5. And now you shall see the Partiality of the Names in this your Breeding and Manners. First, from a Poor man to a Rich man, it is called Honour, and due Respect, and Manners; from a Rich man to a Poor man, it is called Courtesie and Humility; but amongst the Rich and Nobles of the Earth it is called Court-like Breeding; but of those of the lower degree, it is call'd Country-Breeding, and amongst the lower sort of the World it is called Neighbour-hood and civil Respect one to another: and so the Devil hath covers for all his Deceit;Isa. 30. 1. and so he is honoured and exalted both in Court and Country, but the highest in the Court, and there∣fore they have the highest Title: But We unto them that hide their Sins, and cover with a Covering, and not of the Spirit of the Lord. But this is the Riches of the World,Luke 16. 19. 20. and the Devil that makes so ma∣ny Degrees, as between Dives and Lazarus,Acts 17. 23. and Haman and Mordecai; for the Lord hath made all the Nations of the Earth of one Mold and one Blood; But we who are redeemed out of his Kingdom, he calls us Clowns and Fools; and saith our Religi∣on is built upon such small and frivolous things, and stumble at Strawes, and leap over Blocks; this saith his Wisdom; but it is even Death to him to bear these Strawes, especially where he is the highest exalted; for it puls down all his
Honour; and therefore do Rich men and great ones of the Earth, and Rulers, and Priests, and Pharisees, persecute and oppress us, and draw us before Judgment-Seats,James 2. 6. Esth. 3. and would root us out of the Nation, as Haman would have done by Mor∣decai and the rest of the scattered Jews, because they cannot bear those Straws: but I say, what∣soever it is that comes to be forbidden in the Con∣science, it becomes a Weight and a Burden, though it be never so small a thing in the eye of a Pharisee: So let none despise the Day of small things.Ezek. 4. 10. But some will call it Stubbornness, Obstinacy, Pride, and Presumption; but the same Nature would have called it so in Mordecai, who could not bow to Haman, as the rest did that sate by; and so let every one take heed of speaking Evil of that you know not, least you call Good, Evil; and Evil, Good; for the Wo is pronounced against such; but they that were after the Flesh, alwayes, in all Ages, persecuted them that were after the Spirit;2 Pet. 2. 12. And so it is, not many Mighty, nor many Noble,Jude 10. nor many Wise after the Flesh are called, but God hath chosen the Foolish things of this World to confound the Wise, and the Weak to confound those that are Mighty, that no Flesh should glory in his Presence 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 29. VVe are accused that we say, We are perfect without Sin. I answer; Man was perfect without Sin before the Fall, or else he could not have been the I∣mage of God; for God is pure and perfect, and he
made Man after his own Image,Gen. 1. 27. pure and perfect, without Sin;Gen. 5. 24. but when he sinned, he defaced his Image, and lost his pure Estate, and was drove out of Paradise, and became the Image of the Devil, for Sin is the Image of the Devil; and here all Sin is in the Fall, and who are in the Fall are in the Devil's Kingdom, which is impure, and imperfect, and unclean; but God promised, the Seed of the VVoman shall bruise the Serpent's Head;Gen. 3. 15. and Christ the Seed, said, he was come to preach Deliverance to the Captive,Luke 4. 18. and to heal the broken-hear∣ted, and to seek that which was lost,Mat. 10. 11. and to bring a∣gain that which was driven away; and this was his VVork to redeem to Man that which Man had lost. Now consider what Man hath lost; and I shall leave this as Querie with all both Priests and People, who deny Perfection from Sin here, Whether Christ is but a part of Redeemer, or a perfect and full Redeemer; and which is the Place betwixt Heaven and Earth, where man shall be made free or cleansed from Sin, if not upon the Earth? Seeing that no unholy, nor unclean thing can enter the Kingdom of God?Rev. 21. 27. But who can witness this, have passed through;1 Cor. 15. 5. Death, and that have none who plead for Sin, neither can they witness Christ come: But for some Simple ones sake I shall speak more clearly of this; for it is a great Delusion of the Devil, to keep People in Sin, to tell them, they shall never be made free from Sin so long as they are up∣on the Earth, and bring this Scripture to maintain it, He that saith, he hath no Sin, deceiveth himself, and
is a Lyar; but he tells them, Christ dyed for all, and if they can but lay hold on him by Faith, he will not im∣pute their Sins unto them, though they sin daily; for the Righteous man sins seven times a Day, and all the Holy men of God sinned; and so he takes Scripture to maintain his Kingdom, and this he delivers by the Mouth of his Ministers, which he sends a∣broad to deceive the Nations, leading People in Blindness, full of Sin and Corruption, ever learn∣ing, and never come to the Knowledge of the Truth, nor never shall do for them; and here he carries them on an easie delightsom way to the Flesh; but the End is Death; and so heals them up in their Sins with a feigned formed Faith which pe∣risheth;John 8. 13. and here they settle upon the Lees, and set up a Rest in the Devil's Kingdom, which is Sin; and here many are meerly blinded and hard∣ned, and all Tenderness of Conscience is done away: But you shall find that he that sooths you up in this Faith, is the gratest Enemy of your Souls; and whosoever witnesseth Christ their Re∣deemer, shall witness that he is come to destroy the works of the Devil, which is Sin, and to redeem out of the Fall, out of Sin, and out of the Devil's King∣dom which is Sin, and all Sin in the Devil's King∣dom which is in the Fall; but for this End Christ is manifest to destroy the Works of the Devil and to re∣deem out of the Fall; out of the Devil's Kingdom into his own Kingdom,Rev. 21. 27. and no unclean thing can en∣ter therein,Rom. 6. 6. but none can witness this Redemption but through the Death, and through the Cross
which Paul rejoyced in, by which he was crucified to the World, and the World to him, and had put off the Body of Sin, and was made free from the Law of Sin, which once warred against his Mind, which once he complained of, Which Scripture the Unlearned, which are Strangers from his Conditions, who read them with the carnal Eye, now pervert, and Wrest to their own Destruction;1 Cor. 4. 15. and this we witness who through the Lamb, our Saviour, do reign a∣bove the World, Death, Hell, and the Devil; but none can witness this, whose Eye is outward, looking at a Redeemer afar off, and still live in Sin; but who cannot witness this Redemption here, must never witness it; for, as the Tree falls, so it lyes: and Sin is the Mark of the Beast; and who lives in Sin, hath the Mark of the Beast, and bears his Image; and it is written, that the Beast and false Prophets and all that have his Mark and Image,1 John 1. 8. must be cast into the Lake that burneth,Rom. 3. 23. and must drink of the Wine of the Wrath of the Almighty, poured out with∣out Mixture. But as for that Scripture that saith, If we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us: All have sinned and fallen from the Lord; and he that hath Sin, and saith, he hath no Sin, deceiveth himself, and is a Lyar; but if he confess and forsake his Sin, God is faithful and just to forgive him his sin, and to cleanse him from all Unrighteousness: and this John witnessed;1 John 1. 5. and he that can witness this, is no Lyar if he say, he is cleansed from all Unrighte∣ousness, but witnesseth forth the Truth & a perfect
Redemption; and the same John said,1 Joh. 3. He that is born of God, sins not neither can he sin; because his Seed remaineth in him; and he that sins is of the Devil, and never knew God: By this are the Children of God, and the Children of the Devil made manifest; This John witnessed; he was no Lyar, neither did deceive himself, but spoak the Truth. And the same John said,1 John 5. 6, 7. God is Light, and in him is no Darkness, at all: If we say, we have Fellowship with God, and walk in Darkness, we Lye, and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Light, we have Fellow∣ship one with another, and the Blood of Christ cleanseth us from all Sin: This John witnessed; he was no Ly∣ar, neither did deceive himself.1 John 3. 3. And this John said,Act. 15. 9. He that hath Hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure; and Faith in God purifieth the Heart: Now try your Faith and Hope, who plead for Sin; for Sin lodgeth in the Heart, and while there is Sin the Heart is unclean; now here you may see, all your Faith is vain, and your Hope, which doth not purifie the Heart; and so it is feigned Hypocrites Faith, and not Faith in God, and so perisheth. And who can witness Christ dyed for them, have passed through Death: for none can live with him, but those that dye with him: and this is the true Baptism, to be baptized into his Death by one Spirit into one Body? and how can they that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? and who can witness this, hath Faith in him, which purifieth the Heart, and removes Mountains; and the pure in Heart sees God: And this the Apo∣stle
witnessed, and that he was made free from Sin, and more then Conqueror, through Faith in Christ Jesus; he was no Lyar, and said, that Christ was come to redeem unto himself a pure Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle: and though once they were Sinners,1 Cor. 6. 11. like the World; but they were washed and cleansed by the Blood of the Lord Jesus,Ethes. 4. 22, 23, 24. and the Spirit of our God;Col. 3. 9, 10. and had put off the Old man, and put on the New, which after God is created in Righteous∣ness and true Holiness; but this you are Strangers from who plead for Sin, and are such as call your selves a Church and are not, but the Synagogue of Sathan,Rev. 3. 9. in whom the Prince of Darkness reigns, which ruleth in the Children of Disobedience.Eph. 2. 2. And as for that, which blind People call Scripture, who sayes, The Righteous Man that is, sins seven times a Day: There is no such Scripture; for it is false: But though the Righteous fall, he riseth a∣gain by Repentance; and this the holy men of God wituessed: and though David through Lust disobeyed the Lord, and forgot his God; yet he rose again by Repentance,Psal. 101. and after witnessed that he walked in the midst of his House in the Pureness of his Spirit: and though Peter sinned through Weakness; yet he rose again by Repen∣tance, and afterward exhorted the Church, to be holy as God is holy; but this you cannot witness, who plead for Sin, and are not yet come to Re∣pentance, but deny Christ daily,1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. and are con∣vinced, but do not repent: but they who dwell in the Righteousness of Christ, sin not; for they,
that are alive in Righteousness,Rom. 6. 18, 20. are dead to Sin; and they that live in Sin, are dead to Righteousness; but how can they that are dead to Sin, live any longer there∣in? And this is the Devil which pleads for Sin, the Enemy of the Soul; for by Sin did he obtain his Kingdom, and so his Kingdom stands in Sin; and your Teachers, which tell you, you can never get out of Sin, nor be cleansed from Sin here, ERR, not knowing the Scripture,Mat. 22. 29. nor the Power of God; but deny the End of Christ's coming, and bring ano∣ther Doctrine, which they have from their Father the Devil; and so are the Deceivers, which Paul speaks of, who creep into Steeple-Houses,2 Tim. 3. 6, 7. and lead silly People captive,2 John 10. full of Sin and Corruption, ever learning and never come to the Knowledg of the Truth,Ezek. 22. 28. and so are not to be received,Jer. 14. 13, 14. but held as accursed; for they daub you up with untempered Mortar,Ezek. 13. 18. seeing Vanity, and divining Lyes, who say, the Lord saith, when he never spoak to them; they have healed the Hurt of the People slightly, and have sewed Pillows under their Armeholes, crying Peace, when there is no Peace, because they put into their Mouths, and they are not ashamed, neither do they blush; therefore they shall fall amongst them that fall, in the Day that I visit them, saith the Lord: And these are your Teach∣ers that make your Habitation in your Sin,Isa. 9. 16. while you are upon the Earth, and so your Leaders cause you to err; but when the Day of Account comes, wherein the Books must be opened, and every one judged out of the Books according to
their Works, by him who sits upon the white Throne, and all must be cast into the Lake that burneth, but those whose Names are written in the Book of Life; then you will find those the utter Enemies of your Souls, who perswade your Hearts in Sins; and he that hath no Sin, will be in the best Condition: and here all your feigned, formed Faith is unbottomed, and all your Priests found Lyars, Deceivers, and Antichrists, in whom the false Prophet ruleth, which deceives the Na∣tions, who must be cast also into the Lake that burneth,Rev. 19. 20. and there tormented for ever, and all that uphold him. We are accused to deny Christ come in the Flesh. We witness the same Christ which ever was, now manifested in the Flesh,Rom. 8. 3. and is appear'd in the Likeness of sinful Flesh,John 1. 14. to condemn Sin in the Flesh; which is the Word,2 Cor. 5. 16. which became Flesh, and dwelt amongst the Apostles; This Christ we witness, no more after the Flesh; but after the Spirit: and before We knew him after the Spirit, we had no Profit by him, but were in the State of Repro∣bation; and so are all now who profess him in Words and know nothing of him but by the Let∣ter without them:1 Cor. 2. 2. And such deny Christ come in the Flesh,Rom. 6. 6. 7. who plead for Sin, who live in Sin,1 Cor. 12. 13. and do not witness him come;Gal. 6. 14. but those who are cru∣cified with him, do live with him, and he in them;Gal. 5. 24. and none are Christians, of the Flock of Christ, but who are baptized into his Death, by one Spirit into one Body; and he that can witness this, is crucified
to the World, and the World to him: But who talk of Christ, to be their Saviour, and are still alive in the World's Nature, must first witness him a Condemner; for, his first Appearance is with Sword, and breaks the Peace, and maketh the War, and ends the War, and makes the Peace, and this Peace endures for ever; and so he is a Condem∣ner, before he is a Saviour;Luke 11. 21. and he is a Peace-braker, before he is a Peace-maker: But who are at Peace in their Sin, the Serpent is Head, and the strong man keeps the House, and Christ they do not witness come in the Flesh; but who endure the War, shall enjoy this Peace; and he that can wit∣ness Christ his Saviour, can witness this: but Silence all Flesh before the Lord; and let him that nam∣eth the Name of God, depart from Iniquity: for he that saith,2 Tim. 2. 19. he knoweth God, and keepeth not his Commandements,1 John 2. 4. is a Lyar; For, saith Christ, why call ye me Lord, and do not the things which I say? And none can call Jesus Lord, but by the holy Ghost: so it is plain, you know not God, who cannot keep his Commands; then how can you believe in him whom you do not know? We are accused that we judge People. It is written,1 Cor. 6. 2. The Saints shall judge the World: and for Judgment I am come into the World,John 9. 39. saith Christ, that those which see not, might see, and that they which see, might be made blind: and where Christ rules in his Saints he judges the World, as Paul witnessed,Gal. 6. 20. It is no more I, but Christ in me; and he is come to reprove the World of Sin, of Righte∣ousness,John 16. 8, 11.
and of Judgment: of Judgment, because the Prince of the Air is judged, who rules in the Chil∣dren of this World; and they cannot bear the righteous Judgment of Christ, but kick against it, and call him Devil; and so they kick against the Prick, which will the more torment them: And this is the Spirit of Truth which came into the World,Acts 1. 5. which the World cannot receive, because he testifies of it that the Deeds thereof are evil;Joh. 14. 17. and this is the Condemnation of the World, Light is come into the World,John 7. 7. and Men love Darkness rather then Light,John 3. 19, 20. because their Deeds are evil; and every one that doth Evil, hateth the Light, and will not come into the Light, least it should reprove them: yet they will say, Christ is meek, Love, and lowly: It is so, but not to Ungodliness: but he is meek to the meek, and lowly to the lowly, and Love to the Seed of God; and his Saints are meek and lowly, and bear all, both Scandals, Reproaches, Perse∣cutions, and Imprisonments; but to the Seed of the Serpent Christ is Judgment, and Wo and a Sword to that which is for the Sword; and a Con∣demner to the Wicked, and our God is a consuming Fire, and terrible to the Wicked, to consume the Proud and Haughty in their Imaginations: and here Christ is a Lyon,Rev. 19. 15. and he is a Lamb; he is a Con∣demner, and he is a Saviour:Rev. 5. 5. he that can receive him, let him:Hos. 5. 14. the Hungry & Thirsty he feeds with living Food; but the Fat he feeds with Judgment; and that which would not bear his Judgment, must never know his Peace, but is for Judgment,
and cryes out as the Devil did,Mat. 8. 29. who said, he was come to torment them before the time;Jer. 6. 14. but the Teach∣ers of the World have deceived the People long, crying Peace to them, because they put into their Mouths, and healing them up in their Sin, with a feigned formed Faith which works no Refor∣mation; so sewing Pillows under their Arme∣holes: and here the Devil hath reigned in Peace,Ezek. 13. 18. and now Christ is come with the Sword, to break his Peace, with Plague and Judgment, and now he rages, and stands up for his Life, in all both Priest and People;Rev. 12. and now the Beast makes War with the Lamb, but it is hard for him to kick against the Prick; for he must be bound and cast into the Pit, and there be tormented quick, and the false Prophet, and all who bear his Image. We are accused to deny the Church. I answer;1 Thes. 1. 1. The true Church which is in God, we own and witness through Death; but the Worlds Church we deny; for the true Church is the Bo∣dy of Christ, made of tryed Stones, elect and pre∣cious, washed and cleansed by his Blood and Spi∣rit, that he might present it a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle: but this is not a House of Lime and dead Stones, nor the People that meet in it; for all manner of Unrighteous Persons meet there, which is the Synagogue of Sa∣tan, and a Cage of unclean Birds, and like People like Priest; but who comes to be elected into the Church of Christ, which is spiritual, denies the World's Church, which is carnal; and the
World's Teacher, who is carnal, selling the car∣nal for carnal Money and Earth; for Christ him∣self is the Teacher of his Church,Isa. 54. 13. who feeds it with living eternal Food freely,John 14. 26. and it needs no other Teacher;Ephes. 4. 4. and this Church we own and witness; but all other Churches we deny;1 Cor. 8. 10. for the Church is but one: and the Temple of God we own, which is at new Jerusalem,Acts 7. the City of the living God; but all other Idols Temples we deny, which is the Invention and Imaginations of Man▪ and though God commanded Solomon to build him a Temple, nevertheless God that made the World, dwels not in Temples made with Hands; and when Christ the Substance came, he prophe∣sied against it; and also Stephen was stoned to Death when he prophesied against it: and this we wit∣ness whose Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, who are now stoned and persecuted by such as know not the living God, but worship Idols;1 Cor. 6. 19. because we speak against their Idols Tem∣ple, which God never commanded to be built, but was set up by the imagining, Idolizing Papists, and upheld by the blind Protestant, so called; and so they cast out the Papists, and uphold their Idols; and so the Inchanters, Diviners, and Sorcerers of England, lead silly People in Blindness to wor∣ship Idols, telling them, they are the Houses and Temples of God, which is a meeer Delusion. We are accused to deny the Sabbath. The Sabbath of the Saints we own, which is not for a Day,Heb. 14. 10. but Everlasting; and who dwells in
Christ witnesseth this Sabbath, which is the Substance, and the Shadow without is vanished; for saith Paul, let no man condemn you in respect of Meats and Drinks,Col. 2. 16. or of an Holy Day, or of new Moons, or of the Sabbath-Dayes, which are but Shadows of things to come: And so the World hath the Shadow, and the Saints the Substance; and you who have the Shadow, persecute them who have the Sub∣stance, as the Scribes, and Pharisees, and High Priests did, who had and upheld the Types and Figures of Christ, and persecuted him who was the Substance; so they that are alter the Flesh, persecuted them that are aftor the Spirit▪ But your Sabbath is a Shadow of Nothing; for the Jews Sabbath in the time of the Law, was upon the seventh Day, which was the last Day of the Week, but yours is the first Day of the Week, for which you have no Scripture;Gal. 4. 29. and they were not to do their own Wayes,Gen. 2. 3. nor their own Pleasure, nor speak their own Words upon the Sabbath Day;Isa. 58. 13. and here you transgress in the Figure, and walk in your own Wayes, and speak your own Words, and do your own Pleasures, both of that Day, and every Day. We are accused that we justifie our selves, and condemn all others. I answer; When we were our selves without the Spirit of God, and had a Form and Profession of the Saints Condition, which we did not possess, we sought to justifie our selves in our Profession, and earthly Wisdom, and to exalt our selves,
and be something in the Eyes of others; and here we were Pharisee, and yet feigned Publicans, saying, we were sinfull, but thought higher of our selves then others, though we were in the same Nature; and here our Justification was of our selves, and not of Christ; and here all you Phari∣sees, and feigned Publicans, both Priests and Pro∣fessors, who are in your earthly Wisdom,1 Cor. 1. 20. 1 Cor. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21. feeding upon the Letter: but as the Light of Christ arose in us, all our earthly Wisdom wherein we were exalted, became Foolishness, and Self was judged and denyed, and all that which was of Self, both Wisdom and Righteousness, wherewith we cover∣ed over our filthy, lustful, unclean Hearts, and so were as painted Sepulchres; and here are all Professors at this Day,Mat. 23. 27. who are feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, and are from under the Cross of Christ: but all would not hide from the Light of God; but as it arose it searched through all, and lay'd open all, and all our Covers became rotten, and fell from us; and so it will be with all Pro∣fessors, as the Light of Christ doth arise, and the Book of Conscience is layd open; for no Flesh must glory in his Presence: But, now we have no∣thing but what we have received of the Father through Death,1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31. and Christ is made over unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemp∣tion; and though we glory, we glory in the Lord; for we have nothing in our selves to glory of; and the Saints thought it no Presumption to call themselves the Sons of God, and said, they were of God, and all the whole World lie in Wickedness; and here the
same Spirit would have accused them;1 John 3. 7. & 5. 19. yet they were no Pharisees: and Christ thought it no Rob∣bery to be equal with God; yet he was no Pharisee, though of the Pharisees he was judged a Blasphe∣mer: and as he is, so are we, say the Saints; yet they were no Pharisees: and so, who are made the Sons of God, it is no Self-justification to witness it forth;Rom, 8. 16 21. Phil. 2. 6. John 10. 3. 1 John 4. 17. John 14. 6. neither those who are made free from Sin, to wit¦ness it forth, as the Apostles did; and to witness forth the Life and Power of Truth, and deny them that have gotten the Form, Notion, or Profession: And here Christ is the Witness and the Justification; for the Way is but one, and the Truth is but one; and they who dwell in the Truth, witness one with another; for the Light, of God owns its own, wheresoever it is; for God cannot deny himself: but they that are not with us, are against us, and out of the Truth, in the State of Condemnation; for all who are out of the Truth, are under the Curse in the Fall; and this Truth we witness,Mat. 12. 11. 1 John 5. 19. by the Spirit of the living God, through Death, the same Truth as ever was; and there is that in every Conscience, shall bear us Witness, yea in the Heathen, and condemn them that hate it, Jer. 3. 19, 20. We are accused to be one with the Ranters. I answer, it is false; for we abhor their Princi∣ples in our Hearts,Gal. 5. 13. James 1. 27. and deny any Liberty to the Flesh, or any light, or loose, or vain Conversation, which they live in, or any thing which is impure or unclean; for our Principles are pure and clean,
and are at Enmity with any thing that is impure or unclean; for Purity and Impurity cannot agree together: and it is our desire to keep our seles unspotted of the World; for that which is un∣clean, defiles, and from that we are seperated, who are the Sons and Daughters of the living God:2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. But some of them have tasted of the Love of God, and Grace of God, and have had Appear∣ances of God; but by hearkning to the Voyce of the Serpent, and giving way to the Lust, have turned with the Dog to the Vomit,2 Pet. 2. 22. Heb. 6. 6. Rom. 1. 26. and the Grace of God into Wantenness, casting his pure Law behind their Backs, and walking despightfully against the Spirit of Grace, and have crucified afresh the Lord of Life, and put him to open Shame; therefore hath the Lord given them up to their own Hearts-Lusts, and vile Affections, and their Consciences are seared as with an hot Iron; for it is written, It is impossible that those who were once enlightned,Heb. 6. 4, 5. and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again to Repentance: but they have de∣ceived many with their alluring Speeches, and have caused the Truth of God to be evil spoaken of, by their pernicious, lascivious wayes; but Wo, Wo be to them, for double shall be their Re∣ward: But God is our Witness,Mat. 8. 7. Rom. 8. 1. we deny and ab∣hor all things which are filthy or unclean; and though all the World condemn, it is without; For there is no Condemnation to those who are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not aefter the Flesh, but after the Spirit: And it is my tender desire towards all tender Consciences, that they may take heed of giving any Liberty to the Flesh, lest they loose the Ten∣derness of Conscience,Gal. 5. 13, 1, 16. Heb. 1. 13 and harden it by Lust and Uncleanness; for nothing but Purity will the Lord receive, for he is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity. We are accused that the Ground of our Religion is Popery. The Ground of the Religion made manifest to us, is God himself; for God is the Fountain of all Truth; and Truth is Religion, and Religion is Truth; and this Truth we witness made manifest by God, the Life of Truth; and here is the Religion which we witness forth;John 16. 13 James 1. 27. and here is the Ground witnessed forth from the Ground; and this Religion is pure, unspotted, and springs from the Light, which is pure, wherein there is no Deceit, neither can be; for it discovers all Deceit, and leads out of it, both within and without;Mat. 12. 28. but Deceit discovers not Deceit; for Satan divided against himself cannot stand; bt all Sects and Opinions arise out of Darkness, and the End is Confusion: and so as Darkness, is opposite to Light, and Death to Life, so are all Sects and Opinions against the true Religi∣on; and all will side together against the Truth, though they be opposite one to another in Judg∣ment, as Pilate and Herod did against Christ,Acts 4. 25. 26, 27. and the Scribes and Pharisees, and high Priests, and Sa∣ducees, and rude Multitude: So it is now, both
Papist and Protestant, as they call them, and all o∣ther Sects and Opinions, which arise out of the Fall; for though they differ in Judgment, yet they spring from one Root, and no Difference in Life; but the Light strikes at the Root, which is Darkness, and layes open the hidden things done in Darkness: so Darkness cannot endure the Light,3. 19. and this is the Condemnation of the World, who love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are evil. And this is the Cause why our Religion is spoaken against more then any Profession besides; all Drunkards, Swearers, Lyars, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Thieves, Murtherers, Proud, Cove∣tous, Lustful ones, and all Unrighteous Persons, will speak against it, and call it, Delusion, and Heresie, and Witchery, and all manner of Evil, which the Devil can invent; and those stand up for the Priests, and persecute the Truth, as it was in the time of Christ, and his Apostles times: and this will all Pharisees and Professors do,Mat. 26. Acts 17. 4. as they e∣ver did; for they can wink at one another, and bear with one another in Deceit; but Truth can∣not at all bear with Deceit, because there is per∣fect Enmity, as there was ever in all Ages, and it is no new thing. And here all your Sects and Opinions are shut out of the Light, and are in Darkness; and so is Confusion, both Popery, and all other: But the Truth is but one, and who dwels in the Truth,1 Thes. 5. 5. dwels in the Light, and are the Children of the Light;Acts 4. 32. 2 Cor. 5. 2. and there is no Con∣fusion, but all of one Heart, and one Mind, Epi∣stles written in one anothers Hearts, and there is
that in every Conscience which shall witness, it be the everlasting Truth which ever was, is, and is to be for ever,John 3. 20. both in them that believe, and in them that perish, though to the Condemnation of them that hate it; And this I witness by the infallible Spirit of the Lord, which cannot lie. And now I have discharged my Conscience before all People, in the behalf of the Truth of God; not that I would have any to speak well of it, but from the Ground of it; for the Love and the Hatred of the Unrighteous,Gal. 1. 10. is all one to me: but for some Simple ones sake I have laid o∣pen my self, and freely discharged my Consci∣ence, and I doubt not that my Labour is in vain;2 Cor. 6. 8. but whosoever owns the Truth of God, must own it through good Report and evil Report,Luke. 6. 22. and must be content to loose their good Name in the World, as both Christ and his Servants did; and the Servant must not be greater then his Lord. And now a few words to all you Heads and Ru∣lers and Magistrates, in what Degree soever, who have the Power in your own Hands, who by your Power persecute and imprison the Servants and Messengers of Jesus Christ, as Deluders, and De∣ceivers, Witches and Vagabonds, and have no Ground for it, but only by Hear-say, and the evil Thoughts and Imaginations of your own Hearts, and because they cannot please nor satisfie your corrupt, proud Wills, which is your Law, by which you persecute them, not weighing nor searching the Ground of things: You are they in
whom the Beast reigns, and his Image you bear which upholds the false Prophet, and Tyrannize over the Nations by his corupt Will, and cause them to bow to, and worship his Image; and you oppress and persecute those who cannot:Rev. 13. Rev. 1. 4, 9, 10. Mat. 23. 30, 31, &c, You must drink of the Wine of the Wrath of the Al∣mighty, poured out without mixture; for in the bloody Generation you are found, filling up the measure of your Fathers Wrath, upon whom must come all the righteous Blood, shed from righteous Abel, until now; and this I say in the Presence of the living God, by the Spirit of the living God, that all you who have had a hand in persecuting of them, Guilt shall follow you in the Conscience, until you come to Judgment: And therefore I charge you all by the Lord, to take heed of medling about Religion, or to lay your Law upon any tender Conscience; but see that your Law be according to that in the Conscience, which is pure and perfect; and medle with such Affairs as you are set about; and rather give Liberty to Re∣ligion, then take it away; as you own the Grace of God you will, and see that you discharge your Consciences there, lest that, while you are perse∣cuting the Truth, you neglect that which you are set about, for you will both persecute them, your selves,John 7. 51. and suffer the Bruits to stone, strike & buffet them, which is all contrary to your own Law: Nei∣ther when they are brought before you, can they have the Liberty of the Law, to clear such Accu∣sations as are laid against them; but you will hear
the Accusers, but not the Accused (and this is con∣trary to the Heathenish Law) and are more unjust then the very Heathen, who said, Doth our Law judge any one before it hear him? And so for Shame pro∣fess no more Love to Christ in this Nature, who execute your Law upon his Servants, upon such a fallible Ground which no Judge ought to do by the Law of God, especially about Religion; but to search out the Ground of the Matter on both side, before he judge: but this he cannot do about Religion, except he have the Spirit of the Lord; therefore take heed of medling about spiritual Matters, lest through Ignorance you call Christ Beelzebub, and persecute him as a Blasphe∣mer and Deceiver, as many of you have done, which is written in the Book of Conscience, and there you shall read it to your Sorrow. And all you blind People, who persecute, rail, and revile, and reproach the Truth of God, and have no Ground for it, but by hear-say, and the evil Thoughts and Imaginations of your own Hearts,Acts 19. 33. one imagining one Thing, and another another Thing, as the Multitude which gathered together against Paul, one crying one Thing, and another another Thing, and the most Part knew not wherefore they came together; and so it is the same amongst you; but it is good for you to know certainly what you speak against before you speak, lest you speak Evil of that you know not, calling Good Evil, & Evil Good, putting Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, against whom
the Wo from the Lord is pronounced, and it is writ∣ten in the Book of Conscience, and there you shall read it with weeping Tears;Jud. 10. Isa. 5. 0. Isa. 4. 15. Rom. 2. 5. therefore take heed of treasuring up Wrath against the day of Wrath; and remember you are warned. And now something to all you tender-hearted Ones, who are convinced by the Light of God in your Consciences, which tenders your Consciences for whose sakes I have laid open my self freely; & so I desire that you may mind that Light of God, to which I speak, which is my Witness, which hath convinced you, that it may be your Guide, which will lead you to Conversion into the Life, to wit∣ness with me against the World,Heb. 12. that my Labour may not be in vain: & look not out at Scandals, false Accusations or Reports for this is the Reward that the Righteous have received of the World; and Christ our Lord and Captain shewed the Example, as it is written, They who will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecution, and they that depart from Iniquity make themselves a Prey, but that which can't bear those things is not of God; but turn your Ear inward, to that Measure of Light in you, which is without Guile, that is gentle,Jam. 5. 10. that can bear all, as it did both in the Prophets and Apostles, and all the holy Men of God; This led them through good Report and evil Report, through Persecution, and through Death; and this is the Way to Life,1 Pet. 4. 2. and who enters must en∣ter this Way; and here is the Tryal of Faith, and the Tryal of Faith is more precious then Gold: So fear not, but be willing to give up, and to part
with all, though it be never so near and dear; yea, though it be thy Bosom-Friend and Darling; For he that loveth any Thing better then me,Mat. 10. 37. Heb. 11. 2, 26. is not wor∣thy of me, saith the precious Pearl. And he that will not forsake all and follow me, is not worthy of me. Moses thought it greater Riches to suffer affliction with the People of God then to enjoy the Pleasures of Pharoah's Court for a Season: For the Pleasures of this World, and the Afflictions of this World endure but a Time, and pass away: For all things visible pass away, but the Joy of the Righteous endures for ever; but if our Hopes were only in this World, we were of all Men most miserable; but he that endures to the End shall have a Crown of Glory,Rom. 8. 18. 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. Rev. 2. 10. Luk. 12. 32. Rev. 19. 1, 2. Mat. 20, 2. as Paul witnessed: So, Fear not little Flock, but be faithful, valiant and bold, for it is your Father's Will to give you the Kingdom; & a hundred fold shall you receive, of what you loose, whether Lands or Livings, Wife or Children, or whatsoever it is, the Promise is to the Faithful; and your Joy and Ad∣vancement shall be in the Destruction of your E∣nemies, when the Lord doth make your Enemies your Footstool; but this is witnessed through the War, and he that endures to the End of the War shall witness this: And this in my Measure I wit∣ness, and out of tender Love from my Soul to your Souls do I declare it, and desire that you may all endure to witness with me; for Love is Charity, and the Light leads through all: And so I rest in my Habitation, known to all who can read me in Spirit. J. P. Farewell.
THE WATCHER: OR THE Stone cut out of the Mountain Without Hands, Striking at the Feet of the IMAGE, Whose Head is Gold, and Breast of Silver, and Thighs of Brass, and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron and part Clay, Dan. 2. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Written by a Friend to all tender-hearted Ones, who hunger and thirst after God, who are groping and seeking in Forms for Life, to the di∣recting of their Minds, where and how to find the true Light, which leads into the true Life and Power of Godliness, the End of all Forms, where I rest with all who in Spirit read me, who am known to them w are without, by the Name, James Parnell, Reprinted for the Service of Truth.
This is a Discovery of the Ground & End of all Forms, Professions, Sects and Opinions, and also how they now are made as Friends, and joyn Hand in Hand a∣gainst the Substance the Life and Power of God, which is now made manifest in his Sons and Daughters (ac∣cording to his Promise, as hath been plainly manifest in several Meetings betwixt the People called Qua∣kers, and the People called Baptists, which is here described. And also a Description of the true Church, and the Gathering thereof by the Power and Spirit of our God, which is now made manifest in these latter dayes, which so gloriously doth shine forth in the Earth; so that all who have Desires to find the Way of Truth, need no longer walk in Darkness, and seek the Living amongst the Dead, where it is not to be found; for now Light is come into the World, & they that love and follow the Light, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; but such as do Evil, hate the Light, and will not come unto the Light, that the Light may reprove them; and this is the Condemnation of the World, who love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil, Joh. 8. 12. Joh. 3. 19, 20, 21.
TO THE READER. THOU that happens to be the Reader of this Book, know this, that my Mind and Intent in the pub∣lishing thereof, was in Relation to the Simple-hearted, who hunger and thirst after Grace and Godliness, to the directing and turning their Minds from the Darkness to the true Light of the Lord Jesus,2 Cor. 4. 4. which is not of the World, but comprehends the World, and makes manifest the many Wayes of the World, and the Snares, Baits, Traps and Nets that therein are laid, by him who is the God of the World, even the Prince of Darkness, who rules in all the Children of Disobedience; now whatsoever makes manifest,Ephes. 2. 2. is Light, the which Light will discover unto them whose Minds are turned to it, the Wiles and Subtilties of Satan; and so the Simple will come to learn Wisdom, and thereby be preserved from the subtile de∣vouring Serpent, and therein the Creature will come to see wherein consists its Safety and Preservation; and so Israel's Tent comes to be found: For I in the Light, standing above the World, comprehending the many Wayes that are in the World, and the Destructions there∣in, with the many Forms, Judgments and Opinions, one clashing against another, with their Janglings and Dis∣putes, with their Earthly Wisdom, which is at Enmity with God, and about those things which they are Stran∣gers to the Life and Power thereof, contending for that which fades and vanishes away, pulling down one Judg∣ment,
and setting up another, pulling down one Form and setting up another and thus are building Ba∣bel, Cor. 1. 19. and so are confounded with this Confusion by him who confounds the Wisdom of the Wise, and brings to nought the Counsel of the Prudent: And so I seeing many poor Creatures in this Distraction, tossed about with every Wind of Doctrine, and sucking at the Husk for Life, and so get into the Comprehension, a great deal of light, airy, notional Knowledge, which is all but a Chaff, which the Wind will scatter in the Day of the Lord, and so it will stand in no stead when the Lord comes to plead with all flesh; for nothing will stand in the Day of Tryal, but what comes through Death; thus I see many a poor Creature lost and tossed in this wide Wil∣derness, even this dark World, being Carried Captive by the Prince of the Air, not knowing the true Light to be its Guide into the Way of Truth, which is the Way of Life and Peace: Now in the Light, which was be∣fore the World was, I do comprehend the World, and the Ground and End of all Forms, Sects and Opini∣ons: And so for some Simple Ones Sakes, and the Tender-hearted, have I here laid them Open, and with∣all, directing the Mind how and where to find the true Light, by which these Things are seen, and read, and understood; and as it is loved and followed, the Mind will be brought into the Life and Power, out of these fading empty Shadows unto the Possession of the Sub∣stance, even the Stone cut out of the Mountain with∣out Hands, the End of all Forms, Shadows and Ima∣ginations; and thus doth the Stone which the Buil∣ders rejected, become the Head of the Corner; and thus the Creature is turned from the Power of Satan unto God J. P.
THE WATCHER, Striking at the Feet of the IMAGE, &c. IN the Dayes of old, the Holy Men of God (who were indued with the Spirit of God) did as they were acted and guided, moved and commanded by the Power and Spirit of God, which dwelt in them; and here was their RULE: And also the Serpent, as an Angel of Light, he acted and worked in his Instruments by the Power of Darkness, in Opposition to the Spirit of God, the Enmity being placed betwixt the two Seeds; and the more gloriously the true Light appear'd in any Age, Satan also reform'd himself, and appear'd accordingly in the Shape, and Form, and Likeness thereof, as it is now to this Day, but his was al∣waies but the Form and Likeness of the thing, but not the Thing it self: His is the false Light, the o∣ther, the true Light; and so the true Light all a∣long discover'd him, and made him manifest to those in whom it ruled: But thus by his Subtilty
and Deceit, he hath ever deceived the World, and blinded the World, so that he might keep his Kingdom, who is the God of the World: as for Example; Moses, a Servant and Messenger of the most high God, to whom God had revealed and made known himself, when he and Aaron were sent unto Pharaoh, to require him to let Israel ge free, for a Sign unto him, they cast down their Rod, and it became a Serpent; and the Magicians of Egypt they were brought,Exo. 10. 11, 12. and by their Sorceries and Inchantments they cast down their Rods, and they became Serpents, and thereby Pharaoh's Heart was hardned, and they would not obey, nor be∣lieve; And thus the Devil imitated and opposed the Truth, but Aaron's Rods swallowed up their Rods; so that it was manifest, that He that was with them, was Greater then he that was in the World. And also, when Israel had sin'd against God, and done that which is Evil in the Sight of God, the Lord God sent forth his Prophets and Messengers to declare the Word of the Lord amongst them, a∣gainst Sin and Evil,Jer. 20. 9. Pride, Deceit and Oppression, and all Ungodliness, Iniquities, Disobedience and Rebellion; and they had Visions and Reve∣lations; and the Word of God dwelt in them, by which they were led,Jer. 23. guided and acted: And Sa∣tan, he also wrought in his Instruments with a Spirit of Delusion; and he sent forth his Prophets with their Visions & lying Divinations, and false Dream; and they cried Peace, where the true Pro∣phets cried Wo;Jer. 5. 30, 31. and the People hearkned unto
them, and set them up; and the Prophets pro∣phesied falsly, and the Priests bore Rule by their meanes, and the People loved to have it so: But What will you do in the End thereof? saith the Lord, by the mouth of his Prophet Jeremiah, who de∣clared against it freely, and said, It was an horrible filthy Thing; and he was persecuted: And the true Prophets, who dwelt in the Light and in the Power of God, they saw them to be such as run,Jer. 23. 21, 22, 32. ver. 30. and the Lord never sent them, and therefore they profited not the Peo∣ple at all; and they stole the Word from their Neighbour, and they spoak a Divination of their own Brain,Jer. 14. 9. and not from the Mouth of the Lord, and say, the Lord said, when he never spoak to them; and they were light and vain, and daub'd the People up with untempered Morter, and sewed Pillows under their Arm-holes,Ezek. 22. 28. and healed the People slightly, crying Peace, Peace, where there was no Peace;Ezek. 13. 18. but they turnd them not from their Evil Wayes, nor from their Evil-doings, and the Lord was against them:Jer. 20. 9. Jer. 23. And the true Prophets of God (who dwelt in the Light) they saw them, and plainly & freely declar'd against them then, whe∣ther they would hear or forbear; and told them, They built up Sion with Blood, and Jerusalem with Ini∣quity, and the Heads judged for Rewards,Mich. 3. and the Priests preach'd for Hire, and the Prophets divined for Money, and yet, said the Prophet, will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us, as that none Evil can come upon us? And they saw them to be such as sought for the Fleeces, and regarde ot the Flock;Ezek. 34. but fed with the Fat, and cloathed with the Wool, and made a
Prey upon the Sheep; but the Prophets of the Lord did not spare them, but freely and publickly de∣clared against them; and they were persecuted, and imprison'd and destroyed by those who upheld & sided with the false Prophets, Priests, Hirelings and Deceivers: And they had then a Way of Wor∣ship unto God, with their New Moons, with their Sab∣baths, with their calling of Assemblies, and Prayers, and Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings, which were once prescribed by God unto Israel; but when their Hearts were gone from him, so that they walked not urightly before the Lord, then said he, Who hath  these things at your hands to tread my Cou?  were vain ; Icense is an the NewMons and Sabbaths, I cannot away with: It is Iniquity, even the  and your ap∣pin spread forth your Has, I wi  Eyes; whe you make ma∣ny Prayers, I will not hearken: your Hand are full of Blood; wish you, make you clean, ecase to do Evil, learn to do Well; seek Judgement, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widdow, Isa.  and saith the Lord, Is it such a Fast that I have chosen, a Day for a man to afflict his Soul, to hang down the Had like a Blrsh, and to spread Sackcloth and shes under him; wilt thou call this a Fast and an acceptable Day to the Lord? is not this the Fast which I have chosen, to break the Bands of Wickedess to  the heavy Bur∣dens, and to let the Oppresse  that you break every Yoak? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry,
and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out to thy House, when thou seest the Naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own Flesh? Isa. 8. 5, 6, 7. but this they did not do, therefore said the Lord, these People draw near me with their Mouths, and honour me with their Lips,Isa. 13. 26. but their Hearts are far from me; and thus the Devil deceived them, and blinded their Eyes in that Age, with a Pro∣fession and Form of Worship, but their Hearts he kept to himself; and this the Prophets saw in the ight, and testified and declared against it, and left it behind them upon record: and when the time came that Christ was born, the Pharisees, and Scribes, and chief Priests had the Letter, the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, and they could tell by them, where Christ should be born; and when Herod had assembled them together, he de∣manded of them, where Christ should be born, they said, in Bethlehem of Judah;Mat. 2. for thus it is written by the Prophets, &c. so the Priests and Pharisees then were the Keepers of the Letter, and they had the Types and the Shadows, and Figures of Christ, the Substance, and there they had a Life, and thought in them to find Eternal Life; but would not come unto Christ that they might have Life, but de∣spised him; and would not believe on him, be∣cause he came not in the Wisdom,John. 5. 19, 40. nor in the Pomp, nor Glory of the World, but testified a∣gainst it: and they were gotten up into Moses's Chair, but not into Moses's Life; for they tythed Mnt, and Anis, and Cumin, but omitted the weigh∣tier
things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, which they ought to have done, and not to have left the other undone: for that was a time when Tythes were due;Mat. 23. 2. ver. 23. for the Aaronical and Levitical Priesthood, to which Tythes did belong, was not yet changed until Christ was offered up; and they were fair-sayers, who said and did not; and the Hypocrites, who were hopt above the Light, and so were the Blind Leaders of the blind, with their fair sayings, and therefore said Christ, beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees; and they tur∣ned People from the Light,Mat. 25. 14. Mat. 16. 6. Mat. 23. 13. and denyed the Light, and so shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and would neither enter in themselves, nor suffer others that would; but had gotten a Wisdom and Righ∣teousness of their own, which blinded their Eyes, and covered their Sins, so that they could not see their Sins, nor him that was the Way, the Truth, and the Life, therefore did he pronounce so many Woes against them, and called them whited Walls and painted Sephulchres, who washed the outside, but were the Generation of Vipers and Serpents within: and thus Christ, who was the Light, searched them, and judged them who appeared fair on the Outside, but within full of Uncleanness; but they could not hide themselves from the Light, therefore they joyned against it, & the Saducees, & the Phari∣sees, chief Priests and Scribes, and the Herodians, and Pilate, and Herod, and the rude Multitude, all joy∣ned together against the Life;Mat. 16. 1. and they consul∣ted against him, and took Counsel against him,
how they might destroy him, and the Pharisees came to tempt him, and in snare him with Questi∣ons, that they might get some what against him to bring him under their Law; but he fore-saw their deceitful Hearts, their Plots, and confounded their Intentions, and brought to nought their Counsel;John 11. 47. 48. Mat. 26. 59. then they said, If we let this man alone, all men will go after him, and so they sought false Wit∣nesses and took Counsel against him, and crucified him, and let Barrabas go free; and thus the Devil blinded their Eyes (in that Age) with a strickt Profession, and their own Righteousness and Wis∣dom, so that they could not see the Light and the Life, but persecuted it, and sought the Living in the dead Letter; but if they had known him, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory: yet they were wise in their own Eyes, and despised those that followed him,John 7. 48, 49. and said, none of the Rulers be∣lieved on him, but an ignorant People that knew not the Law, that were accursed, because they were the Publicans and Sinners; and they themselves were the grea∣test Sinners, but they healed themselves up with their own Wisdom and Righteousness; and there∣fore said Christ,Mat. 9. 11, 12. Mat. 21. 31. Mat. 11. 5. they that are whole need no Physici∣an, but they that are sick; therefore he said, Publicans and Harlots should enter the Kingdom before them; but the Blind, the Deaf, the Lame, the Dumb, and the Leopardies came unto him, and believed on him, and were healed, and the poor received the Gos∣pel; but the Priests, and Professors, or the Pharisees, and Scribes, and Elders, and Rulers, could not be∣lieve
on him, that he was the Messias, but looked for another; and these were the most zealous in their Profession, and builded the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchres of th Righteous,Mat. 23. 29, 30. and said, If they had been in the Day their Fathers, they would not have been Partakers wi them in the Blood of the Prophets; and yet those were the chief Persecutors of Christ, the Substance of those things which they upheld in the Law and the Prophets; therefore they were Witnesses a∣gainst themselves, and filled up the Measure of their Fathers Wrath; and those professed Abra∣ham, and said,John 8. 39. Ver. 44. Mat. 23. 33. Mark 15. 15. Abraham was their Father, and yet denyed Christ, whom Abraham foretold of; but Christ told them, they were of their Father the Devil, and his Works they did and would do; and thus he judged them for all their Zeal and Profession, and said, how could they escape the Damnation of Hell? Then after he was sacrificed up, he appeared unto his Apostles, and sent them to preach the Gospel to every Creature; and here they did not run be∣cause the Prophets run, nor take up a Command without them in the Prophets Writings to do a thing, because the Prophets were commanded to do it, but they were also acted and guided by the same Spirit and Word of Truth which dwelt in them,John 14. 16, 17. John 16. 7, 8. which Christ before he was offered up, had pro∣mised, that he would send the Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, which the World could not receive, which should lead them into all Truth, and should re∣prove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judg∣ment;
and then after they had received the Holy Ghost, they went abroad preaching Christ, and shewing thereby the fulfilling the Law and the Prophets,Acts 2. Acts 4. which figured sorth and prophesied of Christ; and this they declared in their Temples and in their Synagogues, and they haled them out of the Temple, and out of their Synagogues, and brought them before Governors, Rulers, and Magistrates, and the chief Priests, and their Kin∣dred; and the chiefest Professors (which were the Pharisees) were the head-Actors therein; but never the less they went on boldly, being fil∣led with the Power of the Holy Ghost, without the Fear of Man, obeying God rather then Man: so they were not subject to the Authority of Man in that respect; but they were subject unto the Law of Man so far as it was subject to the Law of God: and so they went on preaching Christ; and many believed and were baptized, and received the Holy Ghost and were converted, and it was so that the multitude that believed was of one Heart and of one Mind; and they were so far of one being exalted over another, or seeking themselves, that not any of them said, that ought of the things which he possessed was his Own,Acts 4. 32. and the Works of God went on in much Power, the Ministers being acted & guided by the Holy Ghost: And also Ste∣phen, a man full of Faith and the Holy Ghost, he decla∣red against the Temple, which God had once commanded to be built, and said, Solomon built him an House, yet nevertheless,Acts 7. God that made the
World and all things therein, dwells not in Temples made with Hands, as saith the Prophet, Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my Foot stool, and where is the House that ye will build me? and where is the Place of my Rest? hath not mine Hand made all things? and he judged them and said, Ye Stiff-necked and Un∣circumcised in Hearts and Ears, ye do alwayes resist the Holy Ghost; as did your Fathers, so do ye; and they gnashed upon him with their Teeth, and fell up∣on him and stoned him: And when Saul was con∣verted and became Paul, his Message was for to turn Peoples minds from the Darkness to the Light; and then (saith Paul) when it pleased God to reveal his Son in me,Acts 26. 17, 18. that I might preach him amongst the Heathen, immediately, I conferred not with Flesh and Blood; and here was Paul's call to the Ministry, and they were made manifest to every Man's Con∣science,Gal. 1. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 4. 2. 2 Cor. 2. 15. Acts 17. 22, &c. and were a sweet Savour unto God, both in them that believed, and them that perished: And Paul declared against the Temple, and told them that worshipped there, they were too superstiti∣ous; and he went into their Synagogues on Sab∣bath-Days and reasoned with them; and they persecuted him, and haled him before Rulers and there complained of him to be one that prophaned the Temple,Acts 24. Acts 22. 22. Ephes. 5. 8. and a Ring-leader of the Sect of the Nazareans, and a pestilent Fellow, and a Raiser of Sedition; and many cry'd out, away with such a Fellow, he is not worthy to live: and thus they suffered by the zealous Professors in those Daies; but they whose minds were turned to the Light, they
were translated out of Darkness into the Light, and became the Children of Light,1 Cor. 12. 13. 1 John 3. 14. Col. 3. 9, 10. Rom. 6. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. and were baptized by one Spirit into one Body, and had passed from Death unto Life, and had put off the Old Man, and put on the New, the old Man being crucified with Christ; though some of them were Drunkards, some Swearers, some Proud, some Covetous, Idolaters, Adulterers, yet then they were cleansed, and washed, and sanctified, and justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God: and here was the Church which witnessed the Spiritual Baptism, into the Spiritual Body, of which Christ is Head; and they being thereby set free from Sin, their Union and Communion was here;1 Cor. 10. 16. 2 Cor. 5 17. 1 Cor. 12. 27. John 2. 27. 1 Cor. 1. 18. and the Bread which the Saints brake was the Communion of the Body of Christ, and the Cup which they drank was the Communion of the Blood of Christ; and they were in Christ new Creatures, all Members of one Body, and needed not that any man should teach them, because the Anointing was in them; and to them the Cross was the Pow∣er of God unto Salvation, though to the Greeks Foolish∣ness, and to the Jews a Stumbling-block; and in this Cross Paul rejoyced,Gal. 6. 14. by which he was Crucified to to the World and the World to him, and they were not conformed unto the World,Eph. 4. 4, 5, 6. but transformed by the Renewing of their Minds, and had one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one Way, one Teacher, one Life, and one Shepherd, and one Priest over the Houshould of God,Phil. 3. 2. and one God and Father of all, being united by one Spirit into the bond of
Peace, and their Conversation was in Heaven; and there were the Christians: And though there was a time that when Christ was preached after the Flesh,Phil. 1. 16, 17, 18. some preached Christ through Envy and Strife, and Contention, to add Affliction to Paul's Bonds; yet in all this he rejoyced that the Name of Christ was spread abroad; for there were many that believed not, that that was the Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, and was crucifi∣ed, as Paul himself had not, and as there are ma∣ny such to this Day, and so it rejoyced him that the Name of Christ was spread abroad; but after his Name was spread abroad, and many believed that that was the Christ,2 Tim. 3. 5. then the Apostle decla∣red against such who had the Form, but denyed the Life and Power, and said, from such turn a∣way; for as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do they withstand the Truth, being men of corrupt minds, and reprobates concerning the Faith; and said the Apostle,1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. 2 Cor. 5. 16. we preach Christ crucified unto the Jews a Stumbling block, and the Greeks Foolishness, but un∣to them which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God; and said the Apostle, hence know me no man after the Flesh; and though we have known Christ after the Flesh, hence know we him no more; but he that is in Christ is a Creature, old things are passed away, and all things be∣come new; and they that are Christs have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts; and the Apostl preached Christ within the Hope of Glory;Gal. 4. 24. Col. 26. 27. the Mystery which had been hid from Ages and Generations,
& they that could not witness Christ in them,2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 John 5. 10. John 5. 25. 1 John 3. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1 John 4. 11. Chap. 5. 19. were Reprobates: And here it was not sufficient for them to say, they believed Christ dyed for them; but he that believeth hath the Witness within himself, and he that believeth is passed from Death unto Life, and he that be∣lieveth is born of God; and he that is born of God doth not commit Sin: and those were they who were made Partakers of Christ's divine Nature; therefore saith John, As he is so are we in this Present World; and we are of God, and the whole World lyeth in Wick∣edness; and they that are of God hear us; and they that are not with us, are against us. And then the Apostle Paul he spoak of false Apostles that were gotten transforming themselves as the Apostles of Christ, and, No marvel, saith he, for Satan himself is trans∣formed as an Angel of Light,2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. therefore it is no great thing also if his Ministers be transformed as the Mini∣sters of Christ, whose End shall be according to their Works: and the Apostle Peter he fore told of such who through Covetousness, with feigned Words should make Merchandize of the People; and Jude he spoak of such who go on in the Way of Cain, and after the Error of Balaam for Gifts and Rewards; and saith John,2 Pet. 2. 8. Jud. 11.  John 2. 10. 19. it is the last Time, and as ye have heard that Antichrists shall come, even now are there many A¦tichrists, whereby we know that it is the last Times; went from us, but they were not of us. Now the false Apostles were such, as under a Pretence or Pro∣fession of true Apostles, deceived the ignorant, and brought in Heresies; and so Antichrist is one (that under the Profession of Christ) opposes Christ,
and draws from him in the Life, though under a Profession of his Name, and of Faith in him; and thus Antichrist got up,3 Thes. 3. 4. even that Man of Sin, that is exalted in Man above all that is called God, sitting in the Temple of God as God, and saith, he is God: and thus he deceiv'd them in that Age, as an Angel of Light, in a Form and Likeness of Christ; but a false Christ, who bewitched them from the Truth with a Form and Profession: and thus Antichrist hath raigned by the Power of Darkness, ever since the Apostles Dayes, over the World under a Gospel-Profession: yet I say not but that the Lord hath had a remnant in all Ages to himself, who were zealous and faithful in what they knew; but here hath been a Long time of cruel Darkness and Ignorance, and the Lord hath been a long Time as a Stranger in the Earth, and they that were accounted to believe on God or Christ, looked at him as a God a far off in the Heavens, without, far off, they know not where; yet they that said they believed that that was the Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, and that he dyed for their Sins, and rose again, and was sitting at the right Hand of God, &c. (as that which they call their Creed) so then they were baptized with Water, and called istians, whenas before they were called Hea∣then, and did not believe that that was the Christ that suffered at Jerusalem; but now called Chri∣stians and Believers, though they were nothing chang'd from the Heathenish Nature; and this was at the first coming in of the Profession of Christian
Faith and Religion into England; and those had the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, which are cal∣led Scripture, and so were the Keepers of the Let∣ters; and that they took to be their Rule to walk by, as they do now, but knew not THAT which gave it forth, to lead them unto the Life; but had the Letter and the Form, but could not walk according to it, being led and guided by a contrary Principle to that which gave it forth; so they gave their own Meanings and Imaginations upon it; so then all that were call'd Christs, were of the Christian Church and Faith, and so were counted Believers: Then they sprinkled the Chil∣dren of those Believers, and by that were they entertained into their Church and Faith; and thus came up Infants Baptism, for which there is no Scripture nor Example, either from Christ or his Apostles, and yet they call this an Ordinance of Christ, and thus they begin to add their own Traditions and Imaginations;Eph. 23. 14. and all are by Na∣ture the Children of Wrath, and a little Water on their Faces doth not change them from that, but they grew up in all manner of Unrighteousness, as Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Covetousness, Adulte∣ry, Idolatry, Pride, Wantonness; Envy, Murder, De∣ceit, Fraud and Maliciousness, the which were ca out of the Apostles Church, and they were wash∣ed from such things, and sanctified and regene∣rate into the new-Covenant, and reckoned such to be without, as now England's Church is upheld by: Then they had their two Sacraments (as they
call them) for which Word they have no Scrip∣ture; and Infants-Baptism is one, and that which they call the Supper of the Lord, is another; and they had the carnal Bread and Wine, as the Priests and People have now, and they give it to natural, carnal Men and Women; and the A∣postle saith, he that eats and drinks this unworthily, eats and drinks his own Damnation, not discerning the Lord's Body:1 Cor. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 10. 16. And the natural man receives not the things of God, because they are spiritually discerned: and the Bread which the Saints break is the Communion of the Body of Christ, and the Cup which the Saints drink, is the Communion of the Blood of Christ; and here is the Communion of the Saints, and the Sup∣per of the Lord, to which, he that hath not on a Wedding-Garment, is not admitted; but En∣gland's Priests know not what a Wedding-Gar∣ment is: And thus they planted their Church in England, and other places; and then Bishops were set up, and Arch-Bishops (for which Name there is no Scripture) and Deans, and Priests, and Deacons, and Popes, and one ruled over another; and the Popes bore rule like Kings; but they found ne∣ver a Pope in the Scripture; and the Bishops they bore Rule by their Means; and the Priests preached for , and the People loved to have it so; and thus An∣tichrist set up his Kingdom, under a Profession of the Gospel; and then Tythes came up for to maintain the Priests, contrary to any Rule in the Gospel: and then Universities were set up for to make Mi∣nisters or Priests (as they call them) for the which
they have no Rule in the Scripture: and thus they were set up by the Will and Tradition of Man, as they are still upheld, as the false Prophets alwaies were; and then they had their long Robes, like the Pharisees; but not like the Apostles; for from them they have no such Example; then they set up these Idols Temples, which the Blind and Ignorant now call Churches, or the Houses of God, for the which they have no Example from the Gospel-Ministers, for, God never commanded these to be built: and though Slomon built him one Temple; yet ne∣vertheless when the Substance came, he prophe∣sied of its Downfal and Destruction; and Stephen witnessed against it,Mat. 24. and was stoned to Death by those that upheld it; and Paul witnessed against it and was persecuted by those that upheld it; as many of the Servants and Messengers of God are now persecuted in these Idols Temples, and haled out and abused, and stoned and imprisoned by those that uphold them now, though these were never ordained by God: and then they got up into their Pulpits, the chiefest places in the Syna∣gogues (as they are now) and called of Men Ma∣ster and Doctor, and had the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and Greetings in the Markets (as it is now) and then they stole the Apostles Words, as the false Prophets stole the Word from their Neighbour, so did [and do] those; and put them into hap∣ter ad Verse▪ and took a Verse, and studied from it a  own Brain, and added to it, but not from the Mouth of the Lord; and so do the
Priests, now; but they run like the false Pro∣phets, and the Lord never sent them, therefore they profit not the People at all; and then with feigned or studied words, through Covetousness, they made Merchandize of the People, as they do now, and so made a Prey upon the Sheep, as they do now, and be∣gan to seek about for great Livings, and Fat Be∣nefices, and left a lesser and ran to a bigger; so there was their Beloved which they sought for, as the false Prophets, which sought for the Fleece and regarded not the Flock; but sed with the Fat, and cloathed with the Wool, and made a Prey upon the Sheep (as they do now) and cryed Peace to those that put into their Mouthes, and called them beloved Brethren, and Christians; but they that did not put into their Mouthes, they prepared War against them, and brought a Law upon them, and haled them before Courts and Benches, as they do now; and thus they sought their Gain from their Quarter, and ruled them with Rigour; so that until within these late years, the Priests raigned like Lords over the People, contrary to the Practice of the Mini∣sters of the Gospel, who made themselves Ser∣vants to all:1 Cor. 9. 19. And though they did ordain Bishops, they did not ordain that they should live of others Estates, or take the Tenths of the Increase of o∣thers Labours, and live like Lords over the People; but said, Tim. 3. a Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, vigilant, sober, and of good Behaviour, given to Hospitality, apt to Teach, not given to Wine, no Stri∣ker, not greedy of filthy Lucre; but patient, not a
Brawler, not Covetous one that ruleth well his own House, not a Novice, lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil: now try your Priest and Teachers by this Rule: But they stood not to this who were ordained by the Pope or by the Will of Man; but were lifted up with Pride and Covetousness, and greedy of Filthy Lucre, as they are now, and so came into the Condemnation of the Devil, as they do now: And thus your Priests old Fathers planted their Church, and so set every thing in Form and Tradition, according to their own Imaginations; and here is the Ground and Foundation of the Faith and Church of En∣gland so called; and here are the old Fathers, and the old Authors that your Priests have so much talked of, and prated of their ancient Fa∣thers, even the Popes and the Bishops: and though now in words they deny the Pope and the Papists, and the Bishops, and differ something from the Pope in Judgment; yet are in the same Forms, Cu∣stoms, and Traditions, and are upheld by the same Laws as they were when they were in the Popes and Bishops Loyns; and thus Antichrist hath long deceived the Nations, and ruled by the Power of Darkness, under a Notion or Profession of the Gospel and Faith of Christ; and one Ge∣neration hath gone, and another come, and have not known the Lord that bought them, but by the hearing of the Ear: and as those that saw him, knew him in whom he dwelt, bore Testimony and declared of him; so the Priests could tell the Peo∣ple
from the Records of the Holy Men of God what God is, and what Christ is, and what Faith is, and how Christ dyed for their Sins and rose again, and that Christ is a Saviour and a Redeemer; and what the Apostles spoak and writ unto the Church free∣ly, they get and speak unto the World for Gain and Lucre, and so cast the Childrens Bread unto Dogs, and so feed and puff up the dark Minds of Men with airy Knowledge, what they have gotten into their Brains from other Mens Words, and their own Imaginations, and so made and make the People believe, that they are the Means ordained by God: Now many may see by this what Lyars they are, and how they came up, and were ordained, and whose Rule, Practice or Example they follow in this they do,Look into their own Re∣cords, which they call the Book of Mar∣tyrs. and they will be found the Ministers of Anti-christ, and such as have long shut up, and do shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and would neither enter in themselves, nor suffer others that would; but so long as they had Power, would bind all un∣to themselves, and those that had any Appearance of Light, so that they came to see their Deceit, and separate from them, they would scarce suffer them to live amongst them; but praised be the Almigh∣ty, who hath so weakned their Hands, and shatte∣red their Foundation, and caused his Light so to shine out of Darkness, to cause them to be so manifest, so that all People who love Light better then Darkness, may now see how ignorantly and blind∣ly you have been led, as Strangers from the Father of Light, after the vain Traditions, Customs, Forms,
Ordinances and Imaginations of Man, with a vain Pro∣fession and feigned Faith, which you have gotten into the Notion, but still in your Sins and Iniqui∣ties, alive in the first Nature, under Death's Do∣minion, still Strangers from the God of Life; and from Christ, the Saviour and Redeemer of his Peo∣ple from their Sins; and thus you lye under the Power of Darkness and Delusion of Anti-christ, both Priests and People;Hosea 4. 9. Isa. 9. 10. for like People, like Priest, and so saith the Prophet, and your Leaders cause you to err by their Lyes and by their Lightness; and though you be full of Teachers, yet you are lost for Want of true Knowledge, and are still led Captive in your Sins and Iniquities, after those who have gotten the Form, but deny the Life and Power, ever learning, and never come to the Knowledge of the Truth in your selves, only dif∣fering from the Heathen in Name and Profession, Judgment or Opinion, but still alive in the same Nature, in the Fall under the Curse, the Chil∣dren of Disobedience, in whom doth rule the Prince of Darkness; and you must have a Law without to keep you in Awe and Fear of the same, as they have whom you account Heathen; but the Righteous need no Law, for because of Trans∣gression the Law was added; and you are fihting, killing and devouring one another, as they do whom you account Heathen; and you are Drunkards, and Swearers, and Lyars,Gal. 3. 19. as they are, and Scoffers, and Scorners, and Revilers, and Back-biters, and Whore∣mongers, and Adulterers, and Proud, and Covetous
Idolaters, and high-minded Oppressors, as they are, both Priest and People; and you are Idolaters, as they are, eating and drinking, and rising up to play; and you are Envious and Malicious, suing and rending, and teaing one another at the Law, both Priest and People, pulling down others to set up your selves; and you are dissembling, and cozenning, and cheating, and defrauding one a∣nother of the Earth, which is none of your own; and you are Persecutors, and Stoners, and Stri∣kers of the Innocent Children, and Servants, and Messengers of God; and what Sin is there a∣mong those whom you account Heathen, that is not amongst you, and doth abound; yea, those whom you account Heathen, may condemn you in much of their Practice. Oh! be ashamed & blush you Priests & Teachers of England, to see your Ministry & the Fruits of your Ministry, so laid open before you: and thus you are those who come near the Lord with your Lips & Mouthes, but your Hearts are far from him,Mat. 5. 9. in the Earth, or else you would walk more up∣rightly: But saith the Lord, In vain do you worship me, teaching for Doctrine the Commmandments of Men; but I know some Pharisees and Priests will be ready to say, We are not Drunkards, nor Swearers, nor such like; but I say unto you, You are Hypocrites, and your Hearts are full of Deceit, Envy, Wrath, and Bitterness, Covetousness, Pride and Earth∣ly-Mindedness, and self-Love, and self-Wisdom, and Persecutors, and the greatest Oppressors of the Truth, and Publicans, and Harlots shall enter the Kingdom before you: Jesus Christ, the Light,
marked out your Fore-Fathers, and found them to be such, though they were more strict and zealous then this Generation; and by the same Light you are sond in their Steps, and those Things both Christ and his Apostles judged to be without, and condemned them out of the New Covenant; for there no unrighteous Person can dwell, and there all Wars are ended,Mat. 20. 21. Isa. 54. 13, 14 Rom. 8. 1. and the Swords beat into pruning Hoks, and Guns into Plow-shares, and there is no Oppression nor self exalting, but he that would be the greatest, must be the least, and in Righteousness are they established, and they are far from Op∣pression, and the Lord alone is their Teacher; and there is no need of an outward Law; For to them there is no Condemnation, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; and there is no Respect of Persons, but all Members of one Body, of which Christ is Head, serving one another in Love: and here is the New Covenant, and the Children of the New Covenant, who are washed and made clean by the Blood of the New Covenant, but you are Aliens and Strangers from this Cove∣nant, who are in your Notions and Professions; therefore all you ignorant People who are led by these deceitful Priests and Pharisees, and disdin to be wiser then your Fore Fathers, now see who are your Fore-Fathers, and the Original of your Priests, and who is your Example; for you are out of the Life and Practice of the Apostles and the Children of Light, and by their Life are judged and condemned; for they were mortified
to that Life which you live in; neither did the Ministers of the Gospel Baptize Infants with Wa∣ter; neither did they Teach for Hire, or stand up in the chiefest Place in the Assembly; neither were they called of Men Master; neither had they the long Gowns; neither did they Respect any Place more then another to teach or preach in, except for Convenien∣cy; for they taught in dwelling-Houses,Acts 20. 17, 18, 20. and by the River sides, or in any open Place; neither did they give to the World David's Conditions to be sung in  Meter, neither did they give to natural Men and Women Bread and Wine, which you call a SACRAMENT; neither did they use to Church Women, as you call it, and take Money for it; neither did they take a Text of other Mens Words, and speak from it a Divination of their own Brain;2 Pet. 1. 21. neither did they study what or how to preach, but spoak as they were moved by the holy Ghost; neither did they teach People, The Letter was the Word, or, That the Letter was the Light, but they bore witness of God to be the Word, and hrist to be the Light;John 1. neither did they teach People That they could never be free from Si while they wre upon the Earth; but they preached Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, who came to take away the Sins of the World, and to redeem his People from their Sin, and to set them in the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, that he might redeem unto himself a pure Church, not having Spot or Wrincle, or any such Thing;Ephes. 5. 26, 27. neither did they teach People, That a House of Lie and Stone was the Church, or the House of
God; neither were they set up or upheld by a Law of Man,Gal. 1. or came by the Will of Man, or stood in the VVill of Man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and from him they received their Message and Command; neither were they brought up in Human Learning, at an University (as it is called) to learn Arts and Sciences, and take De∣grees, from Sir to Batchellor, and from Batchellor to Master of Arts, from Master to Batchellor of Divinity, from Batchellor of Divinity to Doctor of Divinity, and had so many several Gowns; but the Pharisees loved these Things, but the Ministers of Christ were not such, but most of them were ignorant, and unlearned in that Wisdom and Learning;Mat. 13. 11. but unto them it was given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom, but it was hid from the World and the wise Ones thereof; and now the wise Ones of the World say, That is the Means ordained of God, to come to the Knowledge of the Truth; and that is the Original, to wit human Learning, and deny all Reve∣lation or immediate Inspiration, and say, it is ceased; for all which they have no Scripture. Proof, for the Apostles never taught this Doctrine, nor prescribed this Way; therefore your Teachers are such as bring another Doctrine, and climb up ano∣ther Way, who are not to be received, but shut out for Thieves and Robbers,John 13, , who shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and will neither enter in themselves nor suffer others that would; and the Ministers of the Gospel never preach'd up Hebrew and Greek to be the Original,John 11. but they preached the Word to be the
Original; neither took Tythes; nor ever had a set Main∣tenance, or so much a Year, namely, forty, fifty, or sixty, or a hundred or two hundred Pounds a Year, more or less, to abide in one Place, neither sued any at the Law for any such Thing, but all their Care was to make the Gospel free, and without Charge; neither did they take of those that did not own them, as deny∣ed them,1 Cor. 9. 18. but shoke off the Dust of their Feet, and so left them; neither had they an Hour-Glass to limit themselves by, or had a Clark to say Amen: But your Priests will tell you, Now the Gospel is published, and the Churches are gathered and planted. Oh! with Shame might they speak it: what Churches have they gathered? here I have before laid down their Church, the Ground thereof, the Gathering there∣of, and the Planting thereof, and what they are, and also the Gathering of the Apostles Church, and the Planting thereof; so that here you may see the Difference betwixt the one and the other, the one a Form and Tradition and Profession, the o∣ther the Life and Power and Substance; and here also you may see what England's Church, which England's Priests have planted, now differs from the Heathen; and now set Drunkards aside, set Swearers aside, set Lyars aside, set Proud Ones aside, set Covetous Ones aside, set Railers aside, set Murderers aside, and Whoremongers aside, ses Wild Ones, Prophane Ones and Wanton ones aside, set Quarrellers, and Fighters aside, and Hypocrites, Dissemblers, and Persecutors aside, and Back-biters, Extortioners, and Lustful ones
(and such like) aside, and then see where England's Church is, which your Priests have made you be∣lieve they have planted; and let them eat no where but of their own Vineyard, and it will make them go about to plant a better Vineyard, or else to cast off their long Gowns, and fall to dig with a Spade; for some of them have sometimes brought that Place of Scripture to uphold their forty, or fifty, or an hundred or two hundred by the Year, where the Apostle saith, Who planteth a Vineyard, nd eateth not of the Fruit thereof?1 Cor. 19. 7. Now according to this the Vineyard must be planted first, before they can eat of the Fruit thereof, and set those aside that I mentioned, as aforesaid; for the A∣postles cast out such Weeds and wild Plants out of their Vineyard, and then see where their Vineyard is which they have planted, and let them only eat of the Fruit thereof, and not rob others Vineyards, and this is but Equity according to Scriptures Example; but they are such Greedy Dogs as the Prophet Isaiah declared against in his Time,Isa. 56. and such ravening Wolves & Foxes, as they live all upon the Spoil, & the Fruits of others Labours; and those that hunt them out of their Vineyards, and Barns, Flocks, and Heards; then they have a Law, even to de∣vour them and their whole Estates, and this is far from Gospel-Ministers;Mat. 7. 15 nay, Jesus Christ, the Light, saw their Fore-fathers, and marked them out to be the Ravening Wolves in Sheeps Cloathing, as these do now appear to any, but those that love to have it so; for so long as you put into their Mouthes,
they cry Peace, Peace, and speak you fair, and call you Christians and Beloved; but put not into their Mouthes, then they even prepare War, then they have Law for you to take treble Dammage from you, and so fulfil the Apostles Words: Oh what a horrible filthy Thing is here committed in the Land?2 Pet. 2. 3. Are not they plain Ravening Wolves, that would devour both Body and Soul? Now you People of England, consider where you are, and whom you follow, and whither you are going, and see now who are your fore-fa∣thers, and see now how you have walked by Tradition and Form, and have been blinded by a vain Profession and outside-Worship, and so have taken Anti christ for Christ, and the Ministers of Anti-christ for the Ministers of Christ, and have p Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness; and your Fear towards God hath been taught by the Precepts of Men;Isa. 29. 13. and they have taught for Doctrine the Tra∣ditions of Men, as I have before proved, how many things they have led you in by Tradition, without any Scripture-Proofs, though to you they have been Oracles of God; but now they are searched by the Light, they are made manifest to be vain Heathenish Traditions: and thus the blind have led the blind along, & many of them into the Ditch; but yet I say not but the Lord hath had his People in all Ages, those who were zealous, and faithful, and true-in what they knew; but I know the Priests have been long utter Enemies to God and his Truth, and the Tares have long covered the
Wheat, and in the time of Ignorance God wink'd, but now the Light shines out of Darkness, and now is the Separation and gathering the Sheep from the Goats, the Wheat from the Tares, and to convince the World of Sin, and of Righteous∣ness, and of Judgment, because the Prince of the Air is judged; and now the Lord doth require all every where to repent; and they that love the Light, will bring their Deeds to the Light, that the Light may prove them, whether they be wrought in God; and it is not to say, You will fol∣low your Fore-fathers, and go on the old Way; for such are they that hate the Light, and despise it, and love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil, and so having drunk old Wine do not straightway desire new;Jeh. 3. 19, 20. for they say, the old is better, and those are they that cry up the old Way, and cry, away with new Wayes and new Lights; And this is the Condemnation of the World, Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil: Light is new to them who have alwayes been in Darkness, and Truth is new to them who have alwayes lived in Deceit; but the Light is the same as ever it was, for it is unchangeable, and the Truth is the same, So People take heed of Obstinacy and wilful Blindness, and love not to be deceived; for now the Light plainly and clearly shines; and here your old Way is plainly laid open, what it is, and from whence it is, and also your Priests; and though they be more refined within these late
Years then they were before, it is, because the Light is more broaken forth within these late Years, so that many are come to see their Deceit, and declare against them, and now they are but the more subtiler and closer Deceivers, Satan transformed into another Shape more like the Light; but still they have not parted with their great Benefices, and Augmentations, or Tythes, nor the chiefest Place of the Assembly, nor their long Gowns, though they are almost ashamed of their Colour, nor to be called of Men Master, nor from seeking their Gain from their Quarter, nor from making a Trade of other Mens Words, nor from their lying Divinations, and saying, The Lord saith, when he never spoak to them, nor from stealing the Word into their Mouth, and saying, Hear the Word of the Lord, when they ne∣ver heard his Voice; neither turn the Wicked Ones from their Wickedness, nor the Proud Ones from their Pride, nor the Ungodly from their Un∣godliness, nor the Prophane from their Prophane∣ness, but are still prophane themselves, and still proud and covetous, and still shelter themselves under the Powers of the Earth, as their fore-fathers the false Prophets alwayes did, and still run when the Lord never sends them, but ordained and set up, and upheld by the Will of Man, therefore they profit not the People at all; but only have gotten a higher Notion to feed the Notionists withal, and so make more Pharisees, Hypocrites and Whited Walls; and they are more whited over
themselves to deceive the World, but the pure Light is so broaken forth, that they cannot hide themselves, and many see the Deceit of the Priests, and their Folly is a manifesting even to all, so that none need to be deceived by them, but the wilful, obstinate and blind, who love to have it so, who love Darkness rather then Light, which is their Con∣demnation, the Light which reproves them for their Evil Deeds, and therefore they hate it; for every one that doth Evil hates the Light, and this is his Condemnation; and no Ignorance here is to be pleaded; and these are they that uphold the Priests and the Pharisees; but all who have De∣sires to see, may see: And now here are the Priests or the Ministers (so called) of England laid open, with the Church of England, with their Form, Profession and outside Worship, with their Ground, and Original, and sandy Foundation, and to be within, differing from the Heathen but in Name, and Form, and Profession; therefore down it must, though the Powers of the Earth have long upheld them, more then any other Sect; so that they have continued so long, as they do not a little boast of, and thereby say, They are of God; but let the Magistrate look to his Office, and let the Minister alone with his Office, and then you shall see the professed Ministers of England, to be the weakest of all Sects and Forms; but Anti christ hath had his limited Time to reign over the Earth, but now the King of Righteousness is risen with a Sword in his Hand, and by his mighty Arm he
will overturn,Psal. 149. 8. overturn all, until it come into his Hand, whose own it is, and he will bind the Kings in Chains, and the Nobles in Fetters of Iron, and he will break the Powers of the Earth asunder,Rev. 19. 20. and all who oppose him; and the Beast and false Prophet shall be taken, and all that receive his Mark, and worship his Image, into the Lake shall go small & great, and there to lye for evermore; and this is the Stone which the Builders have rejected,Mat. 21. 42. 44. which now is become the Head of the Corner, and who∣soever falls upon it, shall be broaken; but on whom∣soever it falls, it will grind them to Powder; and this is the Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, which strikes at the Feet of the Image: And here is a Blow to the Foundation of the Priests & Church of England. Therefore now all People who are captivated under the Priests, turn your Minds within to the Light of the Lord Jesus, which reproves you in secret, when you tell a Lye, or use any Deceit, which shews you your Evil Deeds, and that your Hearts are not right towards God for all your Du∣ties, and Worship, and Profession, and that which calls for Uprightness of Heart, and an holy Life, and Change, and Reformation, and a New∣ness of Life, hearken unto this, it is the free Grace of God unto your Souls, and teacheth freely, and by this you will come to profit;1 Tim. 6. 6. Isa. 59. 1, 32. for it teacheth Godliness, and Godliness is great Gain, so that you will not need to spend your Money for that which is not Bread, nor your Labour for that which profiteth not, nor to be led Captive by your blind Guides, ever learning, and never come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, but still in Blindness and Darkness; for you have a Teacher within, which is a more sure Word of Prophecy,2 Pet. 1. 21. to the which you do well to take heed unto, as to a Light shining in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day-Star arise in your Hearts; this is the Measure of the Grace of God, even the free Gift of God, which God hath given you to profit withal, which will accuse you or excuse you before the Throne of God, to which I now leave you, having dischargd my Conscience concerning you, and so I proceed to the rest of Forms. Now within these late Years the Light of Christ beginning to stir in Peoples Hearts, so that many come to see themselves in much Darkness and Ig∣norance of these things which they read of in the Scripture, and also the Corruption of the Priests and Teachers, and what Reprobates they were concerning the Faith, and that they profited not the People at all; but they had heard them so long, and still blind and ignorant, so that many come to see their Folly, yet their Minds not being directed to the Light, which shewed them this, and should have led them out of this Condition, upon which they should have waited for Direction to have found the Way of Truth, but they run without to the Letter in their own Wills and Wis∣dom, and so would find out a Way by their own Wisdom & Imagination, and so went out to search the Scripture, but with a wrong Eye, giving their own Meanings and Interpretations upon the Scrip∣ture, and one cries, This is my opinion, and another
cryes, This is my Opinion, and another cryes, This is my Judgment; and thus they are confounded and divided into their several Judgments and Opinions yet all still in one Life and one Nature, but only conounded and divided in their Judgments of what the Prophets meant, and Christ meant, and what the Apostles meant; but it is as a Book seal∣ed, both to the learned and unlearned, and none is found worthy but the Lamb to open the Seals,Isa. 29. 11. who is the Light, wherein lyes the Ministry; so this is the Cause why they whose Minds are from the Light, are so divided and scattered in their Judgments and Opinions, and one sets up a Form in his Imagination, and another sets up a Form in his Imagination; and one runs abroad into the World with his Wisdom, and he will go preach up his Form and Judgment to be the Truth; and another he will cry down that Form for Delusion, and preach up his Form for a Truth; and so many Deceivers and false Spirits are entered into the World, and one cries, Lo here is Christ, if you can believe and be baptized, you shall be saved; So they that can say that is the Way, and that they be∣lieve Christ dyed for them, then they must be dipped in the Water, and that they call baptizing of them, and then they are of their Church, and then they call themselves Saints, though they are still in the old Nature, and so in the Fall, and in their Sins and Corruptions; and it is not the washing away the Filth of the Flesh that doth change them, but because they are come out from
the Priests, and turned into another Judgment and Profession, they think themselves Saints; and they read the Scripture of laying on the Apostles Hands,Acts 19. 6 and then the Disciples received the Holy Ghost; and so those Formalists and self-Actors lay on their Hands; but there wants the Holy Ghost; and thus they act, and form, and imitate and make the Form or Likeness of a Church; and they read of washing the Feet in the Figure, and so they dote upon the Letter, and wash one ano∣thers Feet; and they read of delivering up to Sa∣tan, one for Fornication,John. 13. 5. 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2 3, 4, 5. for the Destruction of the Flesh in the Name and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ; for in the Spirit Paul discerned it, for saith he, Though absent in Body, yet present in Spirit, I have judg∣ed already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath done this Deed; and so those Formalists and Imitators, if any differ from them in Judgment, they will also deliver him up to Satan, as they imagine, taking the Apostles Words, though they cannot tax him for any Thing, but his Judgment differing from them; but they want the Power; and here they are the Magicians, like Jannes and Jambres, opposing the Truth, and those are they that are called Baptists; and another Form, they are more spiritual in their Judgment, and they hold a spiritual Baptism, and not a Water-Baptism, and as many as hold with them, are of their Church and Faith; and thus they are divided into several Forms and Churches, and so have several Names, and there are several Judgments of one Thing,
under one Name; and here is the Confusion of Babylon, with their several Sects, Judgments and Opinions, and every one are professing the Name of the Lord, and stealing the Words of the Pro∣phets, Christ and his Apostles, and saying, The Lord saith, when he never spoak to them; and here is the Difference from another, only in Profession, Judgment or Opinion; but still in Babylon and Ba∣bylon's Fashions, Customs, and Traditions and Fel∣lowship, Manners and Breeding, which is all Hea∣thenish and at Enmity with God, being in the Fall, and thus they stand in the first Nature, in Pride, in Covetousness, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Fleshliness and Lustfulness, and Idle Words, Vain Talking, Foolish Jesting and Evil Communication, and to be short, still alive in the World's Nature, Strangers to the Holy God, and so under Death's Dominion▪ and here I comprehend all Forms, Sects, Judgments and Opinions by the Light which slayes Death, and takes away its Dominion unto its self, to whom it belongs, and doth see them and judge them to be out of the Light, in Darkness, and so in Confu∣sion; one clashing against another with their Judg∣ments and Opinions, and here are the Disputes of this World, and the one cryes, Lo here is Christ in this Form; and another cryes, Lo here is Christ in this Form, and none else, whenas Christ is within his Saints; and there is a false Christ, which they have set up in their Imaginations; and here are the False Prophets and False Christs that are gone out into the World, who have deceived many.
And here is the Ground of Forms, a setting up a Likeness of a Thing, a Figure or Image of a Thing, but not the Thing it self;Rev. 13. and here is the Beast, and the Image of the Beast, which all the World worships, and wonders after, even Satan, as an Angel of Light, in his several Shapes, Forms and Likenesses, to deceive the Simple; and here is the Form without the Life and Power; and here is the Building upon a sandy Foundation, which all must come down, who hear the Words,Luke 6. 49. and talk of the Word & are Sayers of the Words; & here is him that saith,Mat. 19. 20. he hath kept the Commandments and Ordinances, and yet his Heart from God after other Lovers, who is searched and found out by Christ the Light; and here is the Spiritual Babel with its Foundation, and Babel's Building, and Babel's Builders; and here is the Image, whose Head is Gold, whose Breast is Sil∣ver, and Thighs of Brass,Dan. 2. and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron and part Clay; but now is he come and made manifest, who strikes at Feet of Image, who is called the Stone cut out of Mountain without Hands, even Je∣sus Christ the Son of God, now after all this Pro∣fession of his Name and of Faith in him; but now he finds none in the Earth, who hath revealed him∣self in the poor despised ones of the World, and those who have been counted the blind and ig∣rant; and as you have read, the Poor receive the Gospel; the World was made by him, but the World knew him not; he came unto his own, and his own received him not;John 1. but as many as receive him, to them he gives Power to become the Sons of God,
to whom that Promise is fulfilled, which was pro∣mised in the Dayes of old, by the Father, That in the last Dayes,Acts 2. 16, 17, 18, 19. he would pour forth his Spirit upon all Flesh, and his Sons and Daughters should prophesie, and the Young Men see Visions; and if you will receive it, this is the Elias which was for to come in the Spirit, as he came in the Flesh, even the Life and Power of what hath been so long professed, which the Lord hath now manifested in his Servants and Hand-maids, whom he hath now sent forth abroad freely to call into the Supper of the Lord, even the Marriage of the Lamb, and to preach his Name, no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit,Mat. 22. 2, 3. and to preach him within, the Hope of Glory, the Ministry that hath been hid from Ages and Gene∣rations; and they that will be his Disciples, must deny themselves, and take up his Cross, & follow him, through evil Report, and good Report, through Persecu∣tion, and through Death; and who are faithful un∣til Death, must receive a Crown of Life, and reign with him for evermore in his Kingdom, of which there is no End, neither Beginning, over which he is made Heir and King, blessed be Jehovah; sing Halelujah to his Name, all ye that know him. And now, that his Name is spreading abroad, and his Message declaring by the Mouth of his faithful Messengers; those who have long talked of his Name, and so long professed his Name, know him not, neither believe on him, but are found Hypocrites, and Dissemblers, and blind Leaders of the blind, whited Walls, and painted
Sepulchres, but within full of Uncleanness, Hy∣pocrisie, and Deceit, even the Generation of Vi∣pers and Serpents, and those will not receive the Message, but make light of it, and say, they be∣lieve on a Christ at Jerusalem, and now in the Heavens far off, they know not where; and they cry, he hath done all for us, and hath satisfied for our Sins, and they shall not be imputed to us, say they; and they cry out, this is a new Light, and a strange Light, and we know not whence it is; but they say, they will keep to the Old Rule, the Scriptures (which they call the Word of God, and the Old Way) though they be meer Strangers to the Life of the Scriptures;Joh. 9. 39. but it is that the Scripture might be fulfilled upon them, as Christ saith, For Judgment am I come in∣to the World, that they which see not might see, and that they which see might be made blind; as their Fore-fa∣thers professed Abraham and Moses, and said, We know that God spake unto Moses, but as for this Fellow, we know not whence he is, John 9. 29. and they said, God was their Father, but Jesus Christ answered them, and said, If ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do the Works of Abraham;John 8. and he also said, If God were your Father, then would you love me; for I proceeded forth, and came from him; but saith he, ye are of your Father the Devil, and his Works you do, and will do: And thus are the Pharisaical Profes∣sors of these Times, marked out to be in the Steps of their Fore-fathers; for this is the same Christ that suffered at Jerusalem; but they are blind, and
cannot see, neither (indeed) do believe the Scri∣pture, nor walk according to it, but are in the old and broad Way of the World, wherein their Fore-fathers walked, and led many to Destruction; but if these did believe the Scripture, they would be∣lieve on this Light, which is come into the World, which the Scripture bears Testimony of, even the Spirit of Truth, which the World cannot receive; and some of them scoff, and scorn, and revile, reproach, and slander, and rail at the Messengers of Truth, and some strike them, and stone them, and buffet them, and stock them, and whip them, and imprison them, and despightfully use them, yet they are made able through the Power of him that hath sent them, for to go on in Boldness, but those Persecutors are not found worthy;Mat. 22. 4, 5, 6. Therefore the Lord will send forth his Armies, and destroy these Mur∣derers, and burn up their City; and these are they that have professed to be his near Kindred, Friends and Acquaintance, but now are found Strangers, who prophesied in his Name, and in his Name done many woundrous Works, and yet they must depart for Workers of Iniquity, he knows them not: Now read your selves you Wicked Ones, you Murderers, you Rude Multitude, you Priests, you Pharisees and Professors, you Formalists, Self-Actors and Imitators; for now all joyn Hand in Hand, and Gog and Magog joyn in Battel against the Lamb, and Pilate and Herod are made Friends; and you chief Priests and Pharisees, who are the Pro∣fessors
of these Times, and you Rulers, and you rude and brutish ones, and you Formalists and Se∣ctaries now at the coming of Christ in the Spirit, even the Substance of what you have long talked of, all joyned together in one, who formerly have been at great Division & Wars among your selves, but now you are made Friends, and muster up all your Strength against the Substance, even Jesus Christ, whom you (as your Fore-fathers did) call a Blasphemer, a Seducer, a Deceiver, and a De∣vil; and now the rude Multitude they stand up for their Priests, and they fall upon the Messen∣gers of Christ when they come into their Syna∣gogues, and they hale them out of their Syna∣gogues, and strike them, and buffe them, and despightfully use them, and stone them, as their Fore-fathers ever did; and the Priests they seek to Rulers and Magistrates, and hale them before them, and they persecute them, and imprison them, as their Fore-fathers ever did; and the Pharisees and ancient hypocritical rotten Professors, they side with the Priests, and go about railing and evil speaking of the Truth, learning and incensing Peoples Minds against it, with their Lyes, and Slanders, and Reproaches, to present it odious to all People; and also fawning, and crouching, and seeking to Magi∣strates, to act in their Wills, and persecute, as their Fore-Fathers alwayes did against the same Seed, and likewise, the Formalists and Secta∣ries do the same; and thus they that were
after the Flesh alwayes persecuted them that were after the Spirit; and yet these are ready to cry out, What Hard-hearted Jews wre those that cru∣cified Christ, and persecuted his Apostles; and if they had been in those dayes, they would not have been Par∣takers with them in the Blood of Christ and his A∣postles: Whenas they are now found the same Generation of Persecutors, persecuting the Righteous Seed, and so they fill up the Measure of their Fathers Wrath, that upon them might come all the Righteous Blood-shed from Righte∣ous Abel until now. And now the Priests and the Baptists can agree, and they joyn together; and the Priests call them, Honest Men; and the Baptists call them, Gentlemen of Divinity: And the Baptists and Inde∣pendents, they joyn together; and the Indepen∣dents and the Presbyterians they joyn together; all against the Life and Power, which the Lord hath now manifested in his Sons and Daughters, and hath sent them to declare and lay open their Hypocrisie and Deceit, which they have long covered with a Gospel-like Profession; but now all their Coverings are found too Narrow before the Light, which is come now into the World, to convince and reprove them of their Sin, of their Righteousness and of their Judgment; and therefore, now they have enough to do to joyn together with all their Strength and Wisdom, to put out this Light, and so they endeavour to sow their Tares in Peoples Hearts, and all the
Wayes they can invent to destroy the Work which now is begun; and as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do they withstand the Truth, according to the Prophesie of the Apostle, Being men of Corrupt Minds, and Reprobates concerning the Faith; which I have much experienced in seve∣ral Meetings, which I have had with the Teach∣ers of the Baptized People, which shall follow in order afterward. But the more they strive in their Wills and Wisdoms, the more doth the Work of the Lord Prosper, and go on, and flourish by his Mighty Power and Out-stretched Arm; and their Shame, and Folly, and Down-fal the more appears; and when they have done all they can, they shall be glad to lay down their Cronws; and bow unto this Truth, which they now so oppose; and every Tongue shall confess it, though to their Condemnation, who do now oppose and gain-say it: Wo unto such; they shall perish in the Gain-saying of Core. And the Time shall come, that when the Master of the House shall have shut the Door,Luke 13. 25. they shall knock, and shall strive to enter, and shall not be able, all who now oppose and reject the Counsel of the Lord, and will not hearken now they are called. And thus the LORD will exalt his SON in his Saints, when his ENEMIES shall be his Foot-stool, and be made to bow before him. And thus do all Sects, Judgments and Opi∣nions
joyn in one against the Life and Sub∣stance, they being all sprung from one Root, so make up all one Image, whose Head is Gold, Breast of Silver, whose Thighs are Brass, and Legs of Iron, and Feet Part of Iron and Part of Clay; and the Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, which strikes at the Feet of the Image. Now, the Head of the Image, which is of Gold, and those that have had a Light shining into them, and have had a Sight of many things, and have seen the Emptiness of many Forms, and have gotten the Thing in their Comprehension, and have a Notion above others of much of that which is now witnessed and possest in Life by the Faithful, and there have been exalted, and gotten up a Life therein, and a False Rest, but have lost the Light which once shined into them, by catching the Thing in their Comprehension, and so got it in the Notion, but did not obey nor suffer the Death of the Cross. And the Breast of the Image, which is of Silver, and the Thighs of Brass, are the rest of the Sects, and Opinions, and Forms, and Likenesses, which are more Glorious one then another; for, as I said before, Satan can imitate every Appearance of the true Light, in his Forms, Shapes and Likenesses; and the more Glorious the Light appears in any Creature, so doth he refine himself, and appear more Glorious to deceive the Simple: so that many (by the Light of God str∣ring in them) have come to see the Deceit and
Emptiness in one Form, and how they have been deceived therein, then presently the Deceit ap∣pears in another more Glorious Shape or Form, and calls that the Truth; and the Creature still looking without, from the Light within, it is in∣snared there again, still painted with the Scrip∣ture-words, and then the Creature thinks its a Saint in that Form, whenas its but a Painted Sepulchre, still in the Old Nature, and under the Power of the same Deceit; but the Cross tryes all; for, there all Forms and Professions miss and come short; so that many a Creature hath passed through many Forms, & hath thought it self a Saint in every Form; but coming, yea, but to see the Cross, which they are to take up before they can be the Disciples of Christ, and there have stumbled, and cryed out, It is Hard and Straight, and go away sorrowful, I know this is witnessed and answered in many Conscien∣ces; for, here every Man's Faith and Works come to the Tryal; and so to some the Preaching of the Cross is Foolishness, and to some a Stumbling-block, but unto them that believe and take it up, it is witnessed the Power of God unto Salvation; and such rejoyce in it with Paul, who are crucified to the World, and the World to them, upon whom the Ends of World are come: But it would be an easie thing to the Flesh, if that was all, to turn out of one Profession into another, and out of one Form and Judgment into another;1 Cor. 10. 11. but the Way to Life is through Death. And the Legs of the Image, which are of Iron,
is the Beast, or the Power of the Beast, upon which these stand, where lies their Strength. And the Feet of the Image, which is part of Iron and part of Clay, are the Priests and Pharisees, joyn'd to the Powers of the Earth, which upholds them; for, but for that, as I said before, they are the weakest of all Forms, and so they are the Part of Clay, and the Power that upholds them, is that part of Iron, which is the strongest of the Me∣tals: And the Watcher, or the Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, which stri∣keth at the Feet of the Image, is the King of Righteousness, even he that rides upon the White Horse,Rev. 19. 11, 12, 13, &c. out of whose Mouth goes a sharp Sword, whose Name is called the Word of God, who comes to strike at the Powers of the Earth, even the Kings of the Earth, who have given their Power unto the Beast,Rev. 17. 12, 13, 14. and joyn in War against the Lamb: but the Lamb shall Overcome; and he will overturn all, until it come into his Hand whose own it is: And the Beast and the False Prophet, that hath thus deceiv'd the Nations,Rev. 19. 20. & 21. 1. and all that receive the Mark of the Beast, and worship his Image, shall be ta∣ken and cast into the Lake that burneth forever, which was of Old prepared for them; and he will create new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwelleth Righte∣ousness, where there shall not be War any more; but he shall reign in Peace with his Saints for evermore. Oh! bles∣sed are all they that fight in this Banner, and here lay down their Lives, they shall take them up again with an Everlasting Crown, and reign for evermore, singing Hallelujah to their King; to
whom be all Praise, Honour, Power, Dominion and Thanks for evermore, Amen. And thus shall this Great Image be broaken to pieces by the Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, which will become a heavy Mountain, even a burden some Stone to all Nations; but upon this Mountain shall the True Church stand,Mat. 5. 14. as a City set on a Hill, that cannot be hid. And thus I have laid down the Ground and End of all Sects, Forms and Professions, with a Blow to this Great Image, with a Weapon, which is not Carnal, but Spiritual; he that can receive it, let him. And now concerning the CHURCH, which is now gathering and redeeming, not by the Will of man, nor by the Wisdom of many, but by the Will and Power, and Spirit of God, which according unto his Promise he hath poured down upon his Sons and Daughters now in these latter dayes, by which we are carried abroad in the Power of the Almighty, now to declare abroad his Powerful Truth, which the Lord has decreed shall prevail upon the hearts of the People, which is Glad-tidings of great Joy unto them that receive it; but unto the Stubborn, and Stiff-necked, and Rebellious, Tidings of Wo and Misery: And though the Messengers of the Gospel are by some rejected, reviled, reproached, scof∣fed and scorned, stocked, stoned and imprisoned, and de∣spightfully used, slandered and abused; yet neverthe∣less, blessed be the Name of the Lord, there are some found worthy, & do receive with much Joy
the Messengers of the Gospel;Rom. 10. 15. so that they know how Beautiful are the Feet of those that bring Glad-tidings, to the reviving the just Witness for God, and raising up to Life the Dead, and so the Living comes to Know and Praise the Lord; and so the Just comes to reign, and the Wicked comes to be judged, and the Mind comes to be turned from the Darkness to the Light, to which we do preach in every Creature, and to the same are made manifest, and known to them who do like to retain it in their Minds, and from whence we come, and the Testimony which we do de∣clare; but they that do not receive it, to them we are not known, and therefore are by them e∣steemed as Deceivers and Deluders, Vagabonds and Wanderers, and the like: yet at all this we do not Wonder; for we read, The Servant is not greater then his Lord; for, if they have called the Ma∣ster of the House Beelzebub, how much more those of his Houshold? and if they had known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory:Mat. 10. 24, 25. Yet ne∣vertheless, we have a Witness in every Consci∣ence, both in them that believe, and in them that perish, unto which we do clear our Consci∣ences, and leave all without Excuse by the same, which will answer for us in the Mighty Day, though to the Condemnation of those that hate it, wherein we have our great Joy above all our Suffe∣rings; but as many as receive this, to them he gives Power to become the Sons of God; and those are they, who are led and guided by the One Spirit of
which the World cannot receive, even the Com∣forter, of whom you have heard should come, by which they are separated out of the World, and redee∣med out of the Rudiments and Pollutions thereof, their Fashions, their Customs, their Words, their Wayes, their Manners, their Breeding, their Fel∣lowship, Love and Friendship, their Honour and Glory, and their Worship, and so are become Strangers to the World, and so are hated of the World, because they are not of the World; and the Enmity stands betwixt the two Seeds: but while they were of the World, the World loved them; but now they are gathered out of the World, and separated from the World, and te∣stifie against the World both in Words and Acti∣ons, therefore the Enmity is raised in the World, against the Righteous Seed; and those are they upon whom the Ends of the World are come, to whom it is given to know the Mysteries of the King∣dom, though to the World in Parables; and those are they that are come with a Mighty Arm and Power, to trun the World up-side down, whom the Lord hath gathered, and is a gathering out of the World by his own Spirit of Truth and Love, to walk in the Way of Truth, even the Way of Holiness,John 4. 23, 24. where the Ransomed of the Lord do walk, and serve and worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and such is the Father seeking to worship him, in whom he is, in doing his own Work, even to destroy the Old Creation, and create New Heavens and New Earth, wherein dwel∣leth Righteousness; and those are they that are
the New Creatures, in whom this New Work is witnessed, in whom the Father hath mani∣fested his Son, that in the Likeness of sinful Flesh he might condemn Sin in the Flesh, and to bind the Strong Man, and cast him out of his House, and spoil his Goods, and so to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to cut down the Man of Sin, e∣ven that Son of Perdition, who is exalted above all that is called GOD, sitting in the Temple of God as God, and saith, He is God; this is he by whom the World is deceived, who is the God of the World, even the Prince of Darkness, who rules in all the Children of Disobedience; and so saith John in the Light, The whole World lies in Wickedness; and unto this doth Christ come with a Sword, for to make War with him, and to take and bind him, and cast him into utter Darkness, and so to take his Kingdom from him, and to rule himself in Righteousness. And this is the King of the SAINTS, who is now come to redeem unto himself a Pure People, and to wash them & cleanse them from their Sias by his BLOOD, and so to wash away all Filthi∣ness both of Flesh and Spirit; and this is the Baptism by which they are received into his Church and Faith; and here is the Effect of his BLOOD wrought in MAN; and thus he doth and will manifest his Mighty Power, to purifie, and cleanse, and make Man a fit Temple for him∣self to dwell in: And thus is GOD with us, ma∣nifested in Flesh, and thus are the Saints Bodies
made the TEMPLES of the HOLY GHOST; and thus is the Word of Life and Reconciliation witnessed, to the raising up the Soul to Life, and reconciling the Soul to GOD; and those are they that are begotten and born again of the Im∣mortal Word, which dwelleth and abideth for∣ever; and here is the Houshold of God, the Houshold of Faith, and the Houshold of Love,1 Joh. 1. 1. who speak the things which they have heard, and seen, and tasted of the good Word of Life, which was in the beginning; and those are the Children of Light who are gather'd out of the dark Forms, Judgments and Opinions, into the Life and Power of Godliness, to walk in the Light of Life, wherein they are gathe∣red and united by the One Spirit of Love and Life, into One Body, of which Christ is Head: and here is the true Church, which the Lord is a gathe∣ring, and washing, and cleansing, and purifying by his Spirit, that he may redeem unto himself a pure Church,Ephes. 5. 27. not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing, whose Insides are washed and made clean through the Word,Joh. 15. 3. by which they are reconciled into the Love and Union which springs from the Life of God; and here is the Vine and the Bran∣ches; and here is the Communion of the Church, all feeding upon One Bread, all drinking upon One Cup; this is Christ, the Life of the Saints: and as many as are baptized into this Church, partake of this Communion; and those are they which have denyed themselves, and have born
the Cross of Christ, by which they are crucified to the World, and the World to them, who are gathered into one Covenant of Life, where all are Fellow-Servants under one MASTER; who serve one another in Love and Meekness: And here is the true Humility in the Heart wrought; and here is the true Washing of Feet without Hy∣pocrisie, which some are imitating without for LIFE, but fall short; for, the Heart the Lord requires. And thus is the Church of Christ gathered by one Spirit, and by the same circumcised and bap∣tized into one Light, and Life, and Power, where all dwell as MEMBERS of One BODY, of which CHRIST is the HEAD. And here is the Blessed Union and Communion in One; and here God is worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; and as CHRIST is spiritual, so is his BODY, and so are his Ordinances: And here are the true Christians, not those that only have the Notion of those things, but they that witness and pos∣sess this in Life; and they that believe, have the witness within themselves; and they that be∣lieve have passed from Death unto Life; and the Life which they now live in, is by Faith in the Son of God, which Faith is without Respect of Persons, who are the New Creatures, who are IN Christ Jesus, to whom there is no Condemna∣tion, who walk not after the FLESH, but after the
for, against such there is no LAW; for they are trans∣lated out of that NATURE for which the LAW was added;Gal. 5. 23. and are set free by the Law of the Spirit of Life, and are made Partakers of the Divine Nature of Christ, by which they are made Christians;Rom. 8. 2. 1 John 4. 17. and therefore saith John, As he is, so are we in this present World: and such now witness the Effect of the Blood of Christ wrought within them, and the End of his Coming, and the Be∣nefit of his Death, who are Dead with him, and risen through the Death of the Cross; and these are they that have escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge of the Son of God within them, Christ within, the Hope of Glory, or else no Hope of Glory;2 Cor. 13. 15. John 17. 23. for, they that cannot witness him so, are in the Reprobation, so saith the Apostle; and here is the Son in the Saints, and the Father in the Son; and thus are all made perfect in One: And here is the True Church, where there is but One Teacher, One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One Light, One Life, and One Way, One Shepherd and One Sheepfold, and One Priest over the Houshold of God, and One Hope, and One Language, One Family, and One God and Father of all: And they that cannot witness this, are Strangers to Christ, and Stran∣gers to his Cross, and Strangers to the Common-Wealth of Israel. And this is the Work which the Lord has now begun, and is carrying on by a Strong Arm and Migh∣ty Power, to redeem unto himself a pure Church; and Blessed are they that hearken unto his Voice: Here
all you Formalists, Imitators and Self-actors are shut out; here all you Proud Ones are shut out; here all you Lustful Ones, Fleshly Ones, and Carnal Ones are shut out; and all you that are conformed like unto the World in their Fashions, in their Customs, in their Words, in their Ways, in their Worships and Traditions, in their Love and in their Fellowship, who are seeking the Glo∣ry, and Honour, and Riches of this World; you are the Children of this World, under the Dominion of the God of the World, whose King∣dom is of this World: Here all you are shut out, who live at Ease, in your Pleasures, and live wantonly upon the Earth, in the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life; you are the Children of Babylon,James. 5. 5, 6. you kill the Just, and he lies slain in the Streets; but here you all are shut out of the New Covenant of Life in the Dark World, under Death's Dominion, of what Pro∣fession and Judgment soever; Aliens and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise; for, they that are not with us, are against us; and our Union and Society is in the Light of Life: But you must all suffer the Death of the Cross to the Life which you now live in,Mat. 12. 30. before you can witness this Redemption; for those that live with Christ, are crucified with him; therefore so it is, they that will take up Life, must first lay down Life; for, the Way to Life, is through Death: Therefore you must be stripped of all your Old Covers, naked and bare, that your Deceit and Shame may appear, which you have so long
covered with your own Righteousness, but now you must suffer the Shame of the Cross, if you would have part in Christ, and all your old Wisdom, Know∣ledge and Notions, which you have gotten into your Comprehensions, by your Conceivings of the Scripture-Letter, wherein hath been your Life, and Pride, and Exaltation, must all come to the Death of the Cross, that no Flesh should Glory in his Presence; but I say unto all you Pro∣fessors, Formalists, Notionists and Disputers, and Wise Ones of this World, If you will not take up and imbrace this Cross, Publicans and Harlots shall en∣ter the Kingdom before you; Therefore, not many Mighty, nor many Noble, nor many Wise after the Flesh are called;1 Cor. 25. 26. to the end. but he hath chosen the Foolish Things of this World to confound the Wise, and the Weak to con∣found those that are Mighty, that no FLESH should Glory in his PRESENCE; but CHRIST is made over unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, that they which Glory, might Glory in the Lord. And this I witness in my Measure, the things which I have seen, and heard, and felt, and tasted of the good Word of Life, which was in the Beginning, the same do I declare, and am known and read by the Children of Light. And now I shall proceed to several Passages that I have had with the People called Baptists, in several Meetings, that their Deceit and Delusion may be laid open to the Simple-hearted.
Upon the Thirtieth of the First Moneth, cal∣led March, in the Year 1655. I was at one Ashen's House in Fenstanton, in Huntingtonshire, where I was freely declaring the Truth of God to the Peo∣ple that came there together that Day, as I was taught & moved by the Spirit of Truth, by which the Holy Men of God spoak forth the Scripture, as they were moved; and there came several of the People, called Baptists, into the Room amongst us, amongst whom was one of their Teachers, called, Richard Elligood, who after a while stood up in his Will and Wisdom to accuse me, and said, That I had said, That God did not respect any Forms, and yet (saith he) you use the Form, and so use that which God hath no Respect to; But his first words were, Sir, (if you please) I will speak some∣thing to what you have said: To which I made An∣swer, Here needs no Complements: And then he runs on, as afore said; to which Accusation I reply'd, was False; and bad him prove what Form I used: And he said, The Letter: And I replyed, He that takes the Letter to talk of without the Life and Power, such sets up a Form, and makes a Form: But this would not satisfie his filthy Wisdom, which dar∣kened his Understanding; but because I spoak words which are mentioned in the Scripture, by the same Spirit that spoak forth the Scripture, by which I challenge the Scripture, from him and all such who have gotten it to talk of, but denies the Life, and are Strangers to the Life and Power; therefore with his contrary Spirit tasked me with a
Form, which by his Logick and deceitful Art would have proved, but could not, but his De∣ceit was laid open to the People, and many decla∣red against him; for a Form is this, as I said be∣fore, the Likeness of a Thing, but not the Thing it self, as they have the Likeness of a Church, which they have imagined from the Letter, with their El∣ders, Pastors and Teachers, but not the Church it self; and so they imitate the Scriptures, but live not in the Life of them that spoak forth the Scrip∣tures, neither are acted and guided by the same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, and so want the Life and Power, and those are the Formalists that make Forms and Likenesses, to deceive the simple, as the Devil hath the Form of an Angel of Light, but not the Life and Power, who appears to rule in those Formalists and Self-Actors, but the Day doth make him manifest, and therefore he rages; and then this Elligood denyed that I had the same Spirit that gave forth the Scripture, and he said, The Spirit might be tryed by the Letter; for he said, Many false Spirits are entered into the World; and I asked him, By what did the Apostle know that false Spirits were gone out into the World? and he re∣plyed and said, By the Spirit of God; then I replyed and said, If by the Spirit of God the Apostle knew that there were many false Spirits gone out into the World, then by the Spirit of God be tryed FALSE SPI∣RITS, and knew False Spirits from the TRUE; and here his Deceit was laid open to the People, and
he judged out of his own Mouth to be a Lyar, and to be guided by a false Spirit, who would try the Living by the Dead; and again he said, that one Spirit could not try another; for by that Judgment the Evil Spirit might try the Good Spirits; to which I replyed, By the Spirit of God all other Spirits are tryed, and also, that by the Light Darkness is discovered, but Darkness cannot comprehend the Light, neither disco∣ver the Light; and here again his Blindness, and Ignorance, and Deceit was much discovered to the People, although he fed himself, and would have shuffled it off by his Consequences and filthy Logick, but it the more laid open his Deceit; and presently the said Elligood was found with another Lye in his Mouth; for he said, that I said the Thing should be proved by every Man's Spirit, which was a very Lye; for I said, that the Baptism of the Spirit was the Substance of the outward Baptism, the which he denyed, and bid me prove it, and I said, I spoak to the Witness in every Man's Conscience, which his dark Mind could not comprehend, but with his dark Mind wrested my Words, and therefore said, that I said, it was witnessed by every Man's Spirit, but his Spirit was a lying Spirit, there tryed and made manifest to the People, and his Blasphemy against the Spirit of God, in calling Truth Error, and Error Truth, and putting Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness,Isa. 5. 20. because the God of the World hath blinded his Eye; and many witnessed against him, for his filthy Spirit was odious to many of the
Hearers; then afterward he again said, that I was a Deceiver, and his Proof was, that I was not obedi∣ent to the Command of Christ, to be baptized; and I told him, I was baptized; but he said, with Water? and he said, that was a Command of Christ to be bapti∣zed with Water, and I bid him shew me that Scripture, but he could not, but brought a Scripture in the Acts, where the Apostle commanded some to be baptized;Acts 10. 47, 48. and this by his filthy Logick and Con∣sequences he would have made a Command of Christ, but he could not deceive the Light which did him try, and make him manifest to the Shame of his Prosession, but he could not bring one Scrip∣ture to prove it to be a Command of Christ, to bap∣tize with Water; and then he shuffled to that Scripture where the Apostle said, Be ye Followers of us, even as we are Followers of Christ; and then he said, Christ was baptized, but he confessed, it was to fulfil all Righteousness; and I said, he was also circumcised; and he said, that was not for Exam∣ple, then not the Baptism; for both were to fulfil all Righteousness, to which End, he, the Substance came; but Christ himself baptized not with Wa∣ter, neither do they read that the Apostles were baptized with Water; then who is their Example? and how do they follow the Apostles in that, see∣ing they are baptized, and the Apostles were not? then he fled from that being there routed, and said, They might be Disciples before they could take up the CROSS of Christ, and I replyed with
Christ's Words, That they might take up his Cross be∣fore they could be his Disciples, which he denyed, and said, That Wicked Men upon that Account might take up the Cross of Christ, and that Christ required Wicked Men to take up his Cross; and I said, it was so, he did require them so to do; for by taking up his Cross, they come to deny their Wickedness; for they that bear his CROSS, live not in Wickedness; but this Elligood said, That Wicked Men could not take up his CROSS; for he said, Reproaches and outward Sufferings were the CROSS of Christ (for his Name's sake) but this was not the Cross by which Paul was crucified to the World, and the World to him; and saith Paul (where he was speaking concerning Wicked∣ness and Unrighteous Ones, to the Corinthians) Such were some of you, but you are now cleansed, &c. And here Wicked Ones and Unrighteous Ones took up his CROSS, which to them was the Pow∣er of GOD unto Salvation, though to the GREEKS Foolishness,1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. and to the JEWS a stumbling Block, amongst whom this ELLIGOOD is found, who is a Stranger to the CROSS OF CHRIST, who saith, REPROACHES and Outward SUF∣FERINGS are the CROSS OF CHRIST, whenas the CROSS OF CHRIST makes DISCIPLES, and they must be DISCI∣PLES before they can suffer REPROACH∣ES or PERSECUTION for the NAME OF CHRIST, and must depart from Iniquity,
before they be a Prey to the World for CHRIST's sake; for the VVorld loves its own, and they that take up the CROSS, do depart from Iniquity, which is before Reproach∣es or Persecution is suffered for the Name of CHRIST: And here ELLIGOOD is found the Lyar, who said, Wicked Men were not called to take up the Cross of CHRIST, whenas all are wick∣ed before they take up this Cross; and here EL∣LIGOOD is found to be no Disciple of Christ, who is such a Stranger to the Cross of Christ, who is a Lyar, and so are not the Disciples of Christ; for the Lyar is of the Devil, and therefore is ELLI∣GOOD. Then I knowing him to be one of the Baptists Teachers, I took out some Queries, which not long before I had sent them, but no Answer to them had I received, and I would have read them openly that the People might have heard, and also he that was one of their Teachers; but as I was reading, he not having Power over his own VVill could not bridle his Tongue, but disorderly run into many VVords, so that the People could not understand; and I spoak to him for it, and he said, He had not Time to stay, and further said, That he was not of the Society of these Baptists at Fnestanton, and yet he came with them and from them; and then I replyed, That be owned them to be the Church of God, and this he did, and then if he was not of their Society, he was shut out of the Church; and then he would have shuffled off with his Conse∣quences, and said, he dwelt for off, and then I re∣plyed
with the Apostles Words, Though absent in Body, yet present in Spirit;Acts 4. 32. and the Multitude that believed were of one Heart and Mind, and here was the Society of the Saints, and he being out of this Society, is shut out of the Church; and then he would have made it stood by his Logick, which only is to make a false Thing seem true; but it the more laid open his deceitful Heart and Shame to the Hearers, who severally witnessed against him, to speak nothing but Deceit; and then saith he, you call the Apostles Words Deceit, because he had often stoln the Apostles Words, to make his DECEIT seem TRUTH, by covering it with the APOSTLES Words, and this is a more subtil Deceit; and then in his Will he called me Deceiver, the which he was to prove, and all the People was silent, and there he uttered several Lyes, and laid open himself to be the Deceiver, as I had told him in going about to prove me a Deceiver, he would the more lay open his own Deceit, and prove himself to be the De∣ceiver; and the People did plainly see it so, and witnessed with me against him; for he did so utter forth his Folly and Deceit, that he made himself odious to many that were there; and at last he shuffled away, under Pretence he had far to go; but the Judgments of God he cannot escape; for his Damnation slumbreth not, who is an Opposer of the Truth of God. Then there was one Philips, an Old Man of the Baptized Party in another Room, who in Scorn and Wrath stood up and said, They knew the first
Principle of Religion before I was born, because one of my Queries to them was, What is the first Prin∣ciple of Religion? So I replyed to the Old Man, if they knew it, they should have answer'd; and then presently, as he was running on in many Words, he swore, as he lived and breathed, and Christ saith, Swear not at all;Mat. 5. 34. and here he was found not come to the first Principle of Religion, but out of the Doctrine of Christ, and so hath not God; so I told him of his Swearing, and he would have shuffled it off, but he could not; and I told him, He that seems to be Religious,2 John 9. and bridleth not his Tongue, his Religion is vain, and therfore he might own his Religion to be vain, who could not bridle his Tongue; and then in his Will he shuffled off, and said, He would not con∣fess his Sin to me, for I could not forgive Sin,Jam. 1. 26. in Scorn he spoak; then I said, Wo unto him that hides his Sin, and covers his Iniquity, but he shuffled away in much Confusion of Face, as they will all appear as by the Light they come to be searched and try∣ed, their Coverings will be found too narrow, and their Nakedness will appear to their great Shame and Confusion of Face, and they will be made to bow to the Truth, and lay down their Crowns at the Feet of Jesus; for he is risen and reigns in his Saints, to whom the Nations must bow, and eve∣ry Tongue confess to their Condemnation who do oppose him; but here now by the single Eye you may see the Emptiness of these Forms, and what a blind Hypocrisie this is of them, to wash the Outside, but leave the Inside full of Uncleanness, and so the Inside defiles the Outside.
A Copy of the Queries which were sent to the Baptized People in Fenstanton, with some more ad∣ded for them, or any whom they do concern, toanswer. Several Queries to you who are call'd Baptists, by your Teachers to be answered. Query I. WHat is the first Principle of Religion, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 2, What is the Bridle of the Tongue, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 3. What is the Church in God, and whether to it you become, yea or nay? 4. What is the Order in the Church, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 5. What is the Baptism into the Church, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 6. Whether you will own the Baptism of the Spirit, or the Baptism of Water, and which you will deny, seeing the Scripture saith, The Baptism is but One? Ephes. 4. 5. 7. And where Christ ever commanded Water-Bap∣tism?
8. Why did the Apostles baptize with Water? and why do you baptize with Water? and where, and when, and by what were you commanded? and where was any of the twelve Apostles baptized with Water? 9. And whether you do it because the Apostles did it, yea or nay? 10. What is the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and whether to it you are come, yea or nay? 11. Whether your Faith purifies your Hearts, yea or nay? 12. And whether you commit Sin, yea or nay? 13. How would you know there is a Christ, but by the Scripture? and how do you witness the Scripture is Truth? 14. And what is the Ground of your Faith? 15. What is the Redemption, and whether to it you are come, yea or nay? 16. What is the Communion of the Saints; and wherein it stands; and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 17. And whether you that break Bread, do discern the Lord's Body, yea or nay? 18. What was their Rule and Guide that spoak forth the Scripture? 19. Whether you have the same insallible Spirit that gave forth the Scripture? 20. Whether is the Scripture your Rule and Guide, or the Spirit that gave it forth? 21. Whether they that are guided by the Spirit that gave it forth, live not in the Life thereof, yea or nay?
22. Whether the Life of the Scriptures be perfect yea or nay? 23. And whether you are (or think to be) made perfect while you are upon the Earth, yea or nay? Or where do you think to be made perfect, if not upon the Earth? 24. And what is the Life and Power of Godliness; and whether in it you dwell, who have a Form, yea or nay? 25. Whether you are washed and cleansed by the Blood of the Lord Jesus, and the Spirit of our God, as the true Church was, yea or nay? 26. Whether you have put off the Old Man, and put on the New, as the true Church did, yea or nay? and what is the New Man? 27. And whether you have put off the Image of the Earthly, and put on the Image of the Heavenly? and how are they known the one from the other? 28. Whether you are not conformed like unto the World, so long as you follow their Customs and Fashions? 29. Whether you are come that you need no Man to teach you, as the true Church was, yea or nay? 30. What is the Cross whereby Paul was crucified; and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 31. What is the Watcher that strikes at the Feet of the Image; and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 32. What is the Word? and what is the Death that hath passed over all Men, even over those who had not sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression? and whether this Death you ever passed?
33. Whether you have passed from Death to Life, yea or nay? 34. Where, and when, and how received you the Command and Power to deliver any Saul up to Satan? and where is that Satan you deliver it up to? 35. What is the Tree of Life? and what is the Tree of Knowledge? and whether upon it you do not feed? and what is the flaming Sword that is set to keep from the Tree of Life? and whether it ye ever passed, yea or way? 36. What is the Beast that all the World wonders af∣ter and worships? and what is the Worship of the Beast? and whether any worships the only true God, but the true Church? and what is the Worship in this Church? 37. What are you Ministers of? and what do you minister unto? and what is the End of your Ministry? 38. And by what do you try the Spirits? and by what did the Prophets and Apostles try the Spirits? and whe∣ther yours is the same Tryr of Spirits as theirs was, yea or nay? 39. What is the Faith of the Saint? and what is the Faith of the Hypocrite? and how are they known the one from the other? 40. How and by what were you called to the Ministry which you profess? 41. What is the Gospel which you profess? and what is the Light of the Gospel which the Infidel cannot see? and what is an Infidel? and what is the Eye which the God of the World blinds in the Infidel? 42. What is the State and Condition of the Jew in∣wardly,
whose Praise is not of Man, but of God? and wherein doth he differ from the Jew outwardly? 43. What is the New Covenant? and where any in the New Covenant pay'd Tythes? and why do you cry a∣gainst the Priests, and their Tythe, and their Worship, and yet uphold them by paying them Tythes, and helping to maintain their Places of Worship? and whether this be not Babel, Yea or Nay? These Things I donot ask because I know them not, but that the Truth may be manifest, and the Deceit laid open; therefore answer by plain Scrip∣ture, or else all ye Formalists, Imitators and Self∣actors, bow unto the Truth, and be silent, and let your Mouthes be stopped, and thereby confess and yield your selves in an Error, and to have got∣ten the Form without the Life and Power, that the simple may no longer be deceived by you, taking the Shadow for the Substance. Read this openly in your Church, that all may hear and answer for themselves; from him who by one of you was called a Deceiver, yet true, who according to the World am called, James Parnel. A Copy of most of these Queries was sent to the chief Teacher of the Baptized People in Festanton and after a certain Time, these Words they sent me back again, as followeth:
A few Words to him that saith, that according to the World he is called James Parnel. WE have received your Paper, and according to your Desire, read it in the Congregation, unto which you desire our Answer by plain Scripture; to which we reply, That when you make good your Affirmation, that you are no Deceiver, but True, by plain Scrip∣ture, then shall we return you a further Answer to your Queries, From them who desire to serve the Lord Jesus Christ, John Denne, Edmund Male. Then after I had received this Libel, I return∣ed them this Answer at the Bottom of their own Paper. Answer, THis is plain Scripture, Though as a De∣ceiver, yet true; and if my Life and Conversation doth not prove the same, and make good my Affirmation, then in your Answer to my Queries you might have taxed me, and proved to the contrary: But this of you is but a plain Shuffle to blind the World, and shun the Shame, and still to blind the People, who are enslaved under your Deceit; but this will the more mani∣fest your Ignorance. Then not long after they return'd me this An∣swer, as followeth.
IT is not plain Scripture, Though as a Deceiver, yet True; As Deceivers, yet True, is plain Scri∣pture; the greatest Deceiver in the World might as well have brought it to prove himself no Deceiver, but true as well as you. For your Conversation, we know it not; we have nought to say to that: but this we know, that Wolves may come in Sheep's Cloathing; and this doth appear in you, in drawing People from the Truth, as namely, from Water-Baptism, which is a Command of the Lord unto Believers. As for your saying, We might have taxed you in our Answer to your Queries: We think you might plainly see your Folly in this: You affirmed nothing in them as your Judgment; how should we then tax you, and prove the contrary? And again, We made no Pro∣mise to Answer, and therefore you might have spared your Daring and False Words, to say, The People are Enslaved under our Deceit: And therefore, until you have made good what you have taken in hand by plain Scripture, by the Fruit of your Lips, by bringing the Doctrine of Christ, and owning his Command∣ments, we say, until then, we are exhorted, To let you alone: Let them alone; they be blind Lea∣ders of the Blind: you having been so plainly mani∣fest unto us. Rep. Here all People, who with a single Eye read, may see the Deceit of this People; for I spoak but of one, and therefore in that Respect
it is plain Scripture, though as a Deceiver, yet True: But these are they, who, if they could, would make a Man an Offender for a Word.Isa. 29. 21. My Conversa∣tion they cannot touch, and yet are not ashamed to say, The greatest Deceiver might as well have brought this Scripture, as I; & this is the Blindness of their Minds: And also say (because I deny Water-Bap∣tism to be an Ordinance, or a Command of Christ) that I am a Wolf in Sheep's Cloathing, which they do affirm to be a Command, but cannot prove it; and so are such as use their Tongues, and say, The Lord saith, when he never spoak to them: But surely, a Wolf in Sheep's Cloathing is to be known by the Life and Practice, but in this they are blind, and cannot discern, and so themselves are the Blind Leaders of the Blind; but I shall not let you alone, but make you manifest unto the World; neither did Christ let them alone, but pronounced Woes, and declared against them: And here I am sure you might see your Folly, who say I have been so manifest unto you; and said, You know not my Conversation, What a Confusion is this? But it is your Mother's Language. And also in expecting me to affirm my Judgment upon my own Queries; then what need I send them to you to Answer, if I Answer them my self? And here I am sure you might see your own Fol∣ly; for it is here plainly laid open; so that all who are led by you, are plainly seen to be ensla∣ved under your Deceit: And these words shall stand for Truth against you, which you call false,
who are the Blind, and so put Evil for Good, and Good for Evil: And the Doctrine of Christ I have brought, and his Commandments I do own from and against you, who are the Busie Bodies and Self-Actors, who have nought to do with him, nor his Commands. Therefore, Silence Decei∣vers; for here I have made good what I have taken in hand, which witnessed, shall be in your Condemnation. The Occasion of another Meeting betwixt the People cal∣led Baptists, and the People called Quakers. SEveral times when I have come to the Town of Cambridge, I have heard a Rumour of a Boa∣sting and Daring, that sprung from the People called Baptists, behind my Back, concerning a Dispute with me; yet I had received nothing from them, neither by Word nor Writing, to be certain of their Minds; therefore I being in the Town, sent them Word, That I heard a Voice of such a thing, but knew not the Certainty; therefore to let me know their Minds in Writing, if they intended such a Thing. So then one Hind, a Tanner in Cambridge, sent me this Note, as fol∣loweth, which Joseph Doughty had sent unto him.
The NOTE. Brother Hind, AS touching a Discourse with James Parnel, I shall be willing to do God and Men Service in it, to my Power given to me. First, Provided that it be somewhat publick; the Questions in Controversie may be stated in Writing. II. That the Questions may be such as may be Resolved and Answered according to Scrip∣ture. III. That the Questions agreed upon, may be delivered into the Disputants Hands Three Dayes before the Day of Dispute. IV. That to avoid Confusion in Multitude of Words, a short Form of Argument shall be u∣sed on both Parts. V. That some shall be chosen on both Sides, to see Order on both Sides observed in Discourse; and competent Judges also appointed. VI. That Censorious Rash Terms of Judg∣ing shall not be used. VII. That the Disputants shall declare be∣fore the People their Intent in Dispute. April, this 17th, 1655. John Doughty.
My Reply to this was as followeth, as not being willing to come under their Snares. Reply, THis is not to me, but betwixt Brother and Brother; so, if you two Brothers are agreed concerning this your Intent towards me, let me know your Mind in Writing now, while I am in the Town; for, while I was a∣broad, there was a Voice of such a thing, as from you; but to me you did not declare your Minds, neither in Word nor Writing; therefore now I am in the Town, let me know your Minds in Writing, that there may be no Boasting nor Daring in Secret; for, Truth is bold, and seeks no Covers. This from me to you I send, and do require your Answer, who am called James Parnel. This was writ on the Back-side of their Note, and sent back to Hind, who forth with flew into a great Rage against the Messenger in the Street; and said, That I yed in saying, That the Note was not to me; which any one who can read, may plain∣ly see it so, and him to be the Lyar for the Lake, and his seeming Religion to be Vain, who is still in old Cain's Nature, in Wrath and Bitterness, without a Bridle to the Tongue. Then the next Morning I received this from them, as followeth.
JAmes Parnel, This is to thee; my Intent towards thee is this; If thou art minded to dispute with me, ap∣point Time and Place publick, and if the Lord will, I will dispute with thee. And so on with his Proviso's, as aforesaid. Then my Reply was as followeth. TO thee, Joseph Doughty, I do reply; That thou must understand the Occasion of the Dispute to be sprung from thee or thy Party, as I did declare on the Back-side of thy other Paper; so if thou, or any of you, that made your Boasts or Darings behind my Back, or have any thing against me or the Truth, which I bear Testimony unto, or the Way which I walk in, I am rea∣dy now at all times, through the Power of God, to stand up for and defend the same, against thee, or any other who shall Object against, Oppose or Gain-say it, be it in the Towns Hall, or as pub∣lick as you will: And what I have at any time declared against you People, or your Profession, I shall be ready to maintain & justifie, by such Wea∣pons as I have, which are not Carnal, but Spiritual: and here is Time and Place from me declared. But to the End of all Disputes and Arguments I am come; for, before they were I am, and in the Light do them comprehend and judge to be out o the Light, in Babylon, and the Disputer and Arguer of  World. But still I say,
Against such I stand a Witness for the Truth, which I have received of God, and by his Pow∣er am carried abroad, to declare and preach abroad, to the directing and turning People's Minds to the true Light of the Lord Jesus, and there to come into the Love and Unity, where live the Chil∣dren of Light, the End of all Disputes and Ar∣guments; and this I am ready to Defend and Seal with my Blood: But I say, My Wea∣pons are not Carnal, but Spiritual. And as for these Provisoes of thine, they are rather for me to lay upon thee, according to Equity; for I am the Defender: But these things of thee I do not require, neither Three Dayes before-hand; but am ready at any time to stand to what I have here declared. And as for Confusion in Multitude of Words; which is thy fourth Proviso. Reply, Look thou to that on thy Part, and if thou canst tax me, thou mayest. And as for Order in the Discourse, for which thou wouldst have some chosen, which is thy fifth Proviso. Reply, Look thou to that on thy Part; for, my God is a God of Order; and if thou canst tax me thou may'st, and let that stand against me: But if there be Men of Power to keep the People of the World in Order, I am not against it. And as for Competent Judges, which thou wouldst have appointed. Reply, Is the Scripture thy Rule, and not thy
Judge, but thou must flee from that to the Judg∣ment of Man, which is changeable; or else, how come Disputes and Controversies? But to that Judgment I shall not stand; the Spiritual Man shall be the Competent Judge, and the Scripture shall witness. And as for Censorious Rash Terms of Judging; which is thy sixth Proviso. Reply, Look thou to that on thy Part; and if my Judgment thou canst find contrary to Scrip∣ture, thou may'st by Scripture disprove it: But what is that, that would not be judged? And as for Declaring before the People the Intent and Purpose in Disputing; which is thy seventh Proviso. Reply, If thou, who are the Disputant a∣mongst the People, hast any thing to say unto the People, thou may'st declare thy Mind accor∣ding to the Freedom of thy Mind, I shall not bind thee, neither shall I by thee be bound; but as the Lord puts into my Mouth, I shall declare unto the People what is my Mind and Intent, as his Spirit guideth me; so that for that I take no Thought. So here I have declared my Mind in Reply unto thy Writing, where thou may'st understand my Mind, if thou hast an Ear to hear, and an Understanding open: And if this doth not satisfie thee, and the rest of you; yet nevertheless,
cease your Boasting and Daring behind the Back for the time to come; and let this Witness for me to any Honest Heart, whether it be not Fair and Equal. And so I rest in the Unchangeable, James Parnel. So, it seems this pleased them; and so it was concluded to be of the Twentieth Day, called Fryday, of the Second Moneth, called April: So when the Hour came which was appointed, we were disappointed of the Meeting-Place which the Baptists had provided; for, they sent me word, they had provided a Place, but when we came to meet, it could not be had, and so we were disap∣pointed: Then we were in this Hind's House, and the Woman of the House much Fumed and Ra∣ged at us all the while we were in the House, which manifested what Spirit she was of, and that Water had availed her nothing; for she was no∣thing departed from the Old Nature: So then they would have had us to have met in the Yard, but there could be no Order for Multitude of Rude People and Brutish Schollars, which were as un∣tamed brute Beasts, like the Beasts of Ephesus, which Paul fought with after the manner of Men;1 Cor. 15. 32. so I passed to a Friend's House hard by, and there continued declaring the Truth, as I was moved, to the People, and there the idle Drones follow∣ed, even Babylon's Children, with their Turbulent,
Vain, Contending Spirits, Opposing and Gain-saying the Truth, like Jannes and Jambres, their Fore-Fathers, who must perish in the Gain-say∣ing of Core. So then word came, That the Bap∣tists were in the Shire-House, in the Castle-Yard, and had sent for me: and so I went up thither; and when I came there, the Goaler discharged me for staying there, and said, I caused Tumults, though I had not spoaken any thing to the People whereby to cause a Tumult; but the Generation of this World was alwayes Tumultuous, both about Christ and his Apostles, though they were known to be innocent and harmless, offering Violence to none; yet it was so with them then, and it is so now with the same Seed, where it is born up to Rule, because it is not of the World, but hated of the World; for the Enmity lodges in the World: The World is the Sea, with its tumultuous gathering together of the Raging Roaring Waves, casting up Mire and Dirt, foaming out its own Shame; and though an inno∣cent Person travail here, he must such Distracti∣ons expect, and tumults of Raging Waves about him, casting up such as they have; but he that made the Bounds of the Sea, can and doth deliver his out of the Compass of its Bounds, and then it cannot pass its Bounds; for, its Bounds it keeps: here is a Parable hid from the Wisdom of the World; but the same which gave it forth, the same will open it to the Unlearned. Then after the Goaler had spoak to me, they
made some way for me to come up to the Bap∣tists, who were there sitting upon the Bench like Judges; this Doughty and one Rix a Brewer, an old Pharisee in Cambridge; the one, a Baptist; and the other of the Independent Sect, so called; but two great Enemies one against another, in Oppo∣sition against each Sect, yet these two were joyn∣ed together as Friends against me; and thus sate Pilate and Herod together, like Judges, against the Innocent: So when I was gotten amongst the People, I would not meddle until the Goaler had given Freedom for me to stay there, as he had be∣fore discharged me; so, after a while, he gave leave, so that we would be short: Then this Doughty, the Baptist, so called, stood up, and put off his Hat to the People, after the Manner of the Heathen, with a Complement, pleading of the Shortness of the Time, and so begun with a Question; so I said, His Question might stand, and as he had Liberty to speak to the People, so would I; and then he would have hindred me, contrary to what was before agreed upon betwixt us by the Passages afore-said; so I got Liberty to speak something to the People, and declared what I was made a Minister of, according to the Will of God; and then I took out a Paper, and read unto the People the Occasion of my coming thither to meet the Baptists that day, and by the Conclusions therein I was to have Liberty to speak my Mind as well as he, and he was to ac∣cuse
me before the People, or the Truth which I bore Testimony unto; but he broak his first A∣greement, and flew to Question; so then, to sa∣tisfie the Simple-Hearted, I gave this Answer to the Unerstanding of the Simple. First, the Baptist's Question: Qu. The Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, which are called Scripture, whether are they the Words and Sayings of the Most High God? yea or nay. Answ. The Word of God, which is God, which dwelt in the Prophets and Apostles, from it they spoak forth the things which are recorded in Scripture. But this would not satisfie the Baptists, but cryed out, No Answer; and Doughty stood up, and put off his Hat, and beckened to the Young Priests and Schollars, and said, Judge, ye Gentle∣men of Divinity: And there was one Anger, a Drunken Priest, sided with the Baptists. Now, let all see, how contrary to their own Principles they acted; but some of the Schollars had so much Understanding, as to receive it for an An∣swer; but the Drunkards sided with the Baptists, and the Ruder Sort, who could not understand, though there were many simple Hearts, that with this Answer were satisfied; but the Wise must be catched in their own Craftiness: And several times I repeated this Answer over to the People, but the Baptist and his Party could not receive it, because it was in the Cross to their
Wisdom; But there was that which I spoak to which could and did receive it: Then Jos. Doughty the Baptist, and Henry Rix, the old Pharisee, joyned together, and with one Consent said, I durst not Answer it; and thus the Unclean Spirits joyned together, and made Lyes their Refuge: And af∣ter that I was repeating my Answer over to the People, Doughty stood up, and said, I spoak I knew not what; and then I taxed him with a Lye; and then he said, It was not to his Question: but I bad him prove that I spoak I knew not what; but he could not, but shuffled off, and said, I would flee from his Question, and there he stood: Then the Goaler called to depart; and Doughty stood up, and spoak to the Goaler, Not to suffer Me to stay after Him, lest I should seduce the People; there I stood up, and challenged him to prove me a Se∣ducer to the People; but he had nothing to say for that, but manifested himself to be a Seducer, and a Slanderer, and a Reproacher of the Truth of God, and so must take part with his Forefathers of the Wrath of God: Then I openly spoak to the People, That if any there could tax me, or lay any thing to my Charge, I was there to Answer; but none did or could there accuse me: So then I passed into the Castle-yard, then the wild brutish Schollars, who had plotted together (as I was af∣ter informed) to abuse me, and they flocked to∣gether about me like the Wild Beasts of the For∣rest, and there I was tossed as amongst the Raging Waves of the Sea, to & fro, and at last was hurried
into a House, where I got shut of those Caterpillars, which the Nation swarms with: But the Bapti∣zed Party passed away without Disturbance; so it appears, The World loves its own. Oh Cambridge! Is this the Fruit of thy Mini∣stry, which thou hast so long professed, which hath been so long preached in thee? Is this thy Divinity? And are these thy Preachers of Divinity? Nay, they are now found out (by the Light of God) to be the Diviners & Sorcerers, Witches and Magicians, that are only Opposers and Gain-say∣ers of the Truth, who must perish in the Gainsaying of Core; they are known by their Fruits, and the Fruits of their Ministry; and thy Well-head of Divinity is now found the Well-head of Sorce∣ry, Witchcraft and Spiritual Whoredom, and all Abomination and Uncleanness; the Day doth de∣clare it; and one Fountain cannot bring forth both Bitter Water and Fresh.Jam. 3. 11. Oh! Antichrist hath reigned long over poor, enslaved, captiva∣ted Souls; but now, Israel's Redeemer hath appear∣ed, and the Sun of Righteousness is risen with Healing in his Wings,Mal. 4. 2. and Antichrist's Kingdom is come and co∣ming to an End, and Christ himself will reign and rule in Truth and in Righteousness in his Ransomed Ones; and this is the Mighty King, and Redeemer of Israel out of Captivity, into a Land of Peace, and Love, and Unity, where the Ransomed Ones do dwell, with their Captain and their King, who doth deliver his own Lambs out of the Mouthes of Raging Wolves
and Dogs; Praises, Praises Everlasting, Eternal, to the Everlasting God of Life forever:Mat. 10 16. And thus we are sent as Sheep amongst Wolves; but in the Power of the Almighty we are sent forth, and the Arm of the Al∣mighty is with us, and doth deliver us from being a Prey to the Lyon's Whelps, which would us devour; and blessed are all they that receive our Testimony, it is Peace and Salvation to their Souls. Now, where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe?1 Cor. 1. 20. Where is the Disputer of this World? Hath not God made Foolish the Wisdom of this World, and hath chosen the Foolish Things to con∣found the Wise, and the Weak to confound those that are Mighty, that no Flesh should Glory in his Presence? Unto this Doughty I sent several of these Queries, which are before mentioned, but I re∣ceived no Answer. Another Meeting betwixt the People called Baptists, and the People called Quakers. UPon the fourth Day of third Moneth, called May, we were several of the Lord's People met together, in a Friend's Oarchard at Litleport, in the Isle of Ele, and there came in Three of the Teachers of the Baptized People, the chief of them was one John Ray of Wickombruck in Suffolk; and he came (as he said) with a Message, and that was, To Excommunicate two Persons that were there, namely, Samuel Cater and Ezekiel Cater
had formerly been Elders amongst them) out of their Society, whenas they were come out of their Society before, and owned the Substance, and denyed their Form and Shadow, without their ca∣sting out; but thou Ray to uphold-thy Form, didst there disorderly run into Words in thy own Will, and then wentst away, and wouldst not stay to prove what thou hadst done, but saidst, Thou wast to be at the Steeple-house shortly; so as I was moved, I spoak unto the People there present; and after a while, when I had spoken what was given me of the Lord to speak, I passed into the Town, and there I hear∣ing how the Baptist was railing on the Truth in the Steeple-house, I passed to the Steeple-house with some Friends that had formerly been of their Soci∣ety; and when I came there I found thee John Ray set up in the Seat of the Pharisee, the chiefest Place in the Assembly, speaking a Divination of thy own Brain, & not from the Mouth of the Lord, as thou confessedst open∣ly amongst the People, that none in these Dayes had any open Vision, or heard God speak imme∣diately; and here thou wast an open Lyar amongst the People; but here thou barredst thy self from the same Spirit that spoak in the Prophets and Apostles, and therefore art a Deceiver; for he that hath not the Spirit of Christ,Rom. 8. 9. is none of his; and so thou measuredst others by thy self; but I and Hundreds more of the Children of Light, do witness thee to be a Lyar and Deceiver in these Dayes, who comes not in the Name of the Lord, but in thy own Name, therefore the World re∣ceives
thee; but here out of thy own Mouth thou art judged and condemned out of the New Cove∣nant; for there God himself is Teacher; and thou that never heardst him speak immediately, and yet comest to preach his Word,Joh. 6. 45. Thou art a Stran∣ger unto God, and a Blind Guide, a Deceiver, and a false Prophet, who runs and the Lord never sent thee, therefore thou profits not the People at all, but art a Thief and steals the Words of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostls, and adds a Divination of thy own Brain, and so feeds the People with Notions and airy Knowledge,Mat. 2. 24. and casting the Childrens Bread unto Dogs, but the greater is thy Condemnation, who for a Pretence makes long Prayers, and wrests and perverts the Scripture to thy own Destruction, but think ot that thou shalt be heard for thy much Babling; for the Hand of the Lord is against thee. And there in the Seat of the Pharisee thou Ray hadst taken a Text of the Apostles Words, and added thy own Meanings, Uses, Applications and Divinations, thou Merchant of Babylon and Divi∣ner, where hast thou any such Example from the Prophets or Apostles?2 Pet. 1. 21. Acts 2. 4. Acts 4. 8. They spoak from the Mouth of the Lord, and as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and as the Spirit gave them Utterance, and they spoak with Power and Authority, and not as the Scribes, but thou dost speak in the Wisdom of the World, like as the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Priests, a∣mongst whom I number thee; and here thou art shut from the Apostles and their Practice, with thy Carnal Meanings, Uses, Applications and
Divinations; and this was thy TEXT, which thou hadst stoln out of the Apostles Writings, which were writ unto the Church, and thou applyedst them unto the World, and saidst,Text. 2 Pet. 20▪ 21, 22. For if after they have escaeped the Pollutions of the World through the Knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again intangled therein and overcome, the latter End is worse then the Beginning, &c. And from this thou raisedst thy Uses, Applications and dark Meanings, whenas neither thou nor any there which belonged to thee, or owned thee, that had ever escaped the Pollutions of the World, or ever had come to the Knowledge of Christ, but are still in Darkness and Blindness, in their Sins and Corruptions, in Covetous∣ness, in Pride and Wantonness, in Lightness, in Wrath, and in Anger, and Maliciousness, in Back-biting, in Slandering, and false Accusing, in Railing and Cursed Speaking, in Lying, and Blaspheming, only it may be have passed through the Water; But it is not the washing away the Filth of the Flesh,1 Pet. 3. 21. But here both thou and they are still, and these are the Pollutions of the World; but they that know and witness Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, witness the washing away those Sins and Pollutions; and thus thou wrests and perverts the Scripture to thy own Destruction; and then thou wentst on dreaming and flattering and daubing up the People with untempered Morter, saying, The Lord saith, when he never spoake to thee; and then thou runst on railing behind the Back of People that was not there, as thou often said, thou spoak it of none there; and thus
thou utteredst forth thy Folly, and it is like thou mightst belie those whom thou spoakest of; for I heard thee utter forth many open Lyes; and then thou runnedst on to thy Water-Baptism, to maintain it an Ordinance of Christ, and thou broughtst this Scripture in the 6th of the Romans, which the A∣postle spoak to the Church, Know you not that so ma∣ny of you as were baptised into Jesus Christ, were bap∣tized into his Death;Rom. 6. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Thou blind Hypocrite, was this Water-Baptism? They that are in Christ are New Creatures, and so are not those who are baptized with Water, but they are in the same Nature as they were before; and thou mayst read in Corin∣thians the twelft, what Baptism that was he spoak of there; for saith he, By one Spirit are we all bapti∣zed into one Body, &c. And they that are thus bap∣tized, are baptized into Christ; but as I said be∣fore, It is not the washing away of the Filth of the Flesh; and here is thy Folly and Ignorance laid open, who art so blind as to bring this Scripture to prove Water-Baptism to be an Ordinance of Christ; and again it saith, They were baptized into his Death; and in the same Chapter it saith, They that are dead are freed from Sin, and this thou denyedst, that any could be set free from Sin so long as they are upon the Earth; and thus thou deniest Jesus Christ and his Ordinances, who came to take away Sin, and to cleanse his People from their Sin; but praised be the Lord, we do witness a Freedom from Sin by Jesus Christ, who is the Lamb of God, who came to take away the Sin of the World, and to redeem
his People from their Sins, and to redeem unto himself a pure Church, not having Spot or Wrin∣kle, or any such Thing, and saith he,John 8. 36. 1 John 3. 1. If the Son hath set you free, then are you free indeed; and here is the Liberty of the Sons of God, and now are we the Sons of God; and now they that witness this, and confess it, such blind Hypocrites as thou call them Blasphemers, and so deny Christ come in the Flesh, and so are of Anti-christ: And one while thou affirmedst in thy Pulpet, that they that pressed & led People into Holiness, were no Decei∣vers, but they that led them into Sin and Evil were Deceivers, and then afterwards toldst the People, they never could be free from Sin, so long as they are upon the Earth; and thus thou wouldst settle them upon the Lees, and deny Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, who comes to cleanse from all Sin; and thus art thou judged out of thy own Mouth for a Deceiver. And thou also broughtst this Scripture to main∣tain Water-Baptism, where the Apostle said,Gal. 3. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Now let any, whose Understandings are enlightned by the Light of Christ, read this Scripture, and see if this mention Water-Baptism, and if any by Water-Baptism do now put on Christ, and by the Light judge thee to be a Lyar, and a Deceiver, and a Perverter of the Scripture to thy own Destruction, and all who believe thee, ex∣cept you repent. And then thou runedst on to prove the Letter to be the Word, by  or de∣spising
those that say that God is the Word, and that there is no written Word, when the Letter saith it self, that the Word is God; and then thou broughtst this Scripture to prove the Letter to be the Word, in 1 Pet. 1. 23. Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which liveth and abideth forever; for all Flesh is Grass, and the Glory of Man as the Flower of Grass, the Grass withereth, and the flower fadeth away, but the Word of the Lord endureth forever: And this is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto you; here thou dark Sot, thy Blindness and Ignorance is more laid open; is the Letter immortal, or any written Word immortal, or liveth or abideth for∣ever? or are any born again, but of God? and is not he that same immortal Word which the Scripture often bears Testimony unto,John 15. 3. and also in this Place; and Christ, the Lamb of God is the Everlasting Gospel, who preached the Word, and his Apostles were made clean through the VVord which he preached unto them; but this was not the dead Letter, in the which thou wouldst find Life,John 5. 39. and so art seeking the living amongst the dead, like the blind Pharisees, who thought in the Scripture to find Eternal Life, but would not come unto Christ that they might have Life; and here thou art in their Steps, though thou madest light of this Scripture, and saidst, That some added Ye to it, and said, Ye search the Scripture, for in them ye think to have Eternal Life, they are they that testifie of me but ye will not come unto me, that ye might have
Life; this was spoaken by Christ unto the Phari∣sees, who could not believe that he was the Christ, but thought in the Scriptures to find Eternal Life, but would not come unto Christ that they might have Life, and therefore he bid them search the Scripture, for there the Prophets had prophesied of him, and thereby they might know that he was the Christ, if they had searched with the single Eye; therefore without Ye, I say unto thee, search the Scriptures, for they are they that bear Testi∣mony of Christ to be the Word, and all that do search the Scripture with a single Eye, will find Christ to be the Word, and will believe it,Joh. 1. 24. and not be so blind as to put the Letter for the Word, as thou dost, who broughtst another Scripture with thy dark Mind, where the Apostle saith, Ye have a more sure Word of Prophecy, the which ye do well to take heed unto, as to a Light shining in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day-Star arise in your Hearts, 2. Pet. 1. 19. Here thou still the more manifests thy Blindness, who puts Darkness for Light, and Light for Dark∣ness, and so art under the Wo from the Lord, who puts the Letter for the Light, how doth the Letter shine? and what dark Place doth in shine in as a Light? here the ignorant may see thy Folly; and thus thou art a Stranger to the Light of Christ; which dwelt in the Children of God;Rom. 10. 6, 7, 8. and the Word is nigh in the Heart and in the Mouth, to which thou shewest thy self a Stranger, who draws Peo∣ples Minds from this Word in their Hearts, to the
Letter without, putting that for the Word, and so art a blind Guide and a Deceiver, who cryes, Lo, here without in the Letter, when the Apostle saith, Go not forth, the Word is nigh in the Heart: And thus thou opposest the Apostle, and drawest from his Doctrine, and bringest another Doctrine, and so art not to be received, but held as Accursed, as thou art, by the Children of Light;2 John 10. and some∣times thou calledst the Letter the Word, and some∣times a Story; and here was thy Confusion: And then thou runndst on with thy fauning dissembling Speeches, making a Shew oftentimes to the Peo∣ple of speaking more of a Matter, but for wearying their Patience: Oh, blush and be ashamed of thy Doctrine! now thou makest it appear what filthy Stuff it is, that art afraid it should weary Peoples Patience to hear it; if it was of God, it would not be wearisom to any Thing of God to hear it; but it was not of God, therefore I am sure it was wearysom and burdensom to the Spirit of God; and here thou art shut out with thy frothy Stuff and vain Complements, to be a Deceiver: And then thou saidst, If you please I will speak more, and thus thou markest out thy self for a Man-Pleaser; and the Apostle said, If yet I pleased Men, I should not be a Servant of Christ. Now read thy self where thou art, Gal. 1. 10. who art yet a Man-pleaser, who comes with such inticing Words of Mens Wisdom, so that the Preaching of the CROSS to thee is Foolishness, and the Prophets who had the Spirit of the LORD, and the WORD
of the Lord, they spoak, whether they would hear or forbear; and here thou art shut out, both from the Spirit of God, and the Word of God, which is one, who art a Man Pleaser; and if not a Ser∣vant of Christ, then a Servant of the Devil; and so I mark thee out, that all may know thee, and no longer be deceived by thee with the Shadow instead of the Substance, with thy inticing Words of Men's Wisdom: And thou told'st the People, Thou spoakest to the Reason of Man; whenas all Men in the Fall, their Reason is corrupted, and the Natural Man receives not the Things of God;2 Cor. 2. 14. Jer. 10. 14. for, Man by Nature is worse then a Beast; and there art thou, who art preaching to the Corrupt Reason of Man in the Fall, to judge of thy Corrupt stuff; for, I know there were none there that owned thee, but such like: But the Message of Paul was,Acts 26. 18. To Turn Peoples Minds from Darkness to Light; but thou strivest to draw People's Minds from the Light Within, to the Dead Letter without them, telling them, that was the Light, and that was the Word; and so thou bewitchest them with thy Lying Divinations, and bad them search that, and read often that, and cleave unto that: But I say, they that read that, and not by the Light within them, read a Parable; and it is unto them as a sealed Book, though they may, by their Carnal Wisdom, add their own Meanings; but that must be shut out of the Scripture; for,2 Pet. 3. 16. such are unlearned, and unfruitful in the Word, and so wrest the Scripture to their own Destruction:
But by this know, That I go not about to draw men from reading the Scripture, so that they read with this Single Eye, the Light, which gave it forth, so shall they that read understand; but to thee, this is a Mystery, and therefore thou went'st about to deny Christ in Man and God in Man, by way of Derision to those that witnessed forth Christ Within, God Within: And thou saidst, That he meant, he was in them, by his words; and thou brought'st this Scripture, If you abide in me, and my Words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you: In this Place (thou Serpent) he meant as he spoak; but Paul witnes∣sed Christ Within, and said, They that could not witness Christ Within, were Reprobates; and so art thou, who denyest Christ come In the Flesh:2 Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 2. 20. Col. 1. 26, 27. And Paul preached Christ Within, the Hope of Glory, the Mystery which had been hid, and so it seems is still from thee; therefore to thee this preaching is Foolishness, and as Fancies and Whimsies; but unto us that are saved, Christ, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God; by which thy Folly and thy Ignorance of Christ is here made manifest, and that thou never escaped'st the Pollutions of the World by the Knowledge of Christ, who denyes him as he is known to all who have escaped the Pollutions of the World by the Knowledg of him; & they that thus know him not,2 Cor. 13. 5. are in the Repro∣bation: And here art thou a Minister of Antichrist, who denyest Christ come in the Flesh. And then thou went'st on with thy Deluding Spirit, pressing the
Wicked to pray; yea, there were many there present of the People of the World, besides thy own Company, whom both thou and thy Com∣pany count as Heathen, yet thou didst press them much to pray, and to take unto them Words and pray; whenas the Scripture saith,Prov. 15. 8. The Prayers of the Wicked are abominable; and thus thou didst that which was abominable in the Sight of God, in praying thy self, and teaching the Wicked to pray, and to steal other Men's Words, and pray; for, neither you nor they have any Words, but what you steal out of the Scripture: for, thou hast shut thy self from that by which the Apostles preached, therefore thou thus runnest into Con∣fusion. And thou toldst the People of Deceivers, and nominated them to be such as denyed Baptism, and Ordinances of Christ, and the Scripture, and the Re∣surrection of the Dead, and Eternal Judgment: So when thou hadst done thy Divination and thy for∣mal Prayer, I stood up, and claimed the Order of the True Church,1 Cor. 13. 30, 31. That all might speak one by one, and if any thing was revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his Peace: And then, like Cain, thy Countenance fell, thou being struck with Guilt in thy Conscience, and fear surprised the Heart of the Hypocrite: and thou wast shuffling away, but I bad thee stand; for, said I, thou art a Deceiver, as I shall prove thee one before all the People; therefore stand to maintain what
thou hast said: But said I unto the People, The Prophets and Apostles, and the Holy Men of God, who spoak forth the Scriptures, they spoak from the Infallible Spirit of God, as they were acted, guided and moved thereby; but all who come with their Words, and pretending to preach, and not from the same Infallible Spirit, such are Deceivers, of which this man is one, who stands here in the Sat of the Pharisee, & he being smitten with Guilt, fetled to be gone, and several would have stopped him; but he said, He would be gone, unless they kept him in by Violence: And I said unto the People, Know this, that these things where∣with he marks out Deceivers, I own, so that I am none of those; for, the Scripture I own, and the True Baptism of Christ I own, and the Re∣surrection from the Dead I own, and Eternal Judgment upon the Wicked I own, so that I am none of those which he marked out; but this Man is a Deceiver, and so I shall prove him, if he will stay: But thou, Ray, wast ashamed of thy Ministry, and durst not stand to what thou hadst said, but plainly, like a Hireling, fled from thy Stage, and left thy Flock, like a Cowardly Serpent; I never knew Baptist so routed out of a Pulpit: But the Independents joyn'd with him, and the Priests rude Multitude stood up for him, and several would have been persecuting of me, but by the Power of God I was preserved and kept from the Hands of such Unreasonable Men,
But thus did all Sects ever joyn against the One Single Truth; but it is but that the Scripture should be fulfilled, That Gog and Magog should joyn in Battel against the Lamb; but the Lamb shall o∣vercome; and they shall lay down their Crowns before him; and his Enemies shall become his Foot stol; and he will tread them in the Wine-Press alone; without the City. Therefore Tremble all you Formalists, I∣mitators and Self Actors, who have gotten a Form, but deny the Life and Power, even Je∣sus Christ, whom you have crucified, which you shall be made to confess with Weeping Tears, where your Eyes behold him whom you have pierced. So after I had dassed out of the Steeple-House, when the Baptist was put to the rout, I stood upon a Grave in the Grave-yard, and there I called to the People, If any of them had any thing to Object against me, I was there to maintain and stand up for the Truth, to the which I had openly born Testimony in their Town; but none would come to my Face. And there was one Captain Cole there present, who had been counted an Independent Teacher, until his Flock forsook him, and owned the Truth; and he had railed against the Truth behind my Back, but he would not come then, and peak to my Face; and since he hath imprisoned one of his Neighbour's Sons, for obeying the Command of God, and coming to his House for a Sig. So I spoak the Truth unto the People, and proved this Ray openly to be a Deceiver among them; and
judged him out of his own Mouth; and so clear∣ed my Conscience, to the People, and so I came away with my Friends in Peace, having cleared and discharged my Conscience unto them, by which they are eternally left without Excuse, whe∣ther they would hear or forbear, their Blood will be upon their own Heads; and so I leave them. Now, upon the Day following, it happened, that a Friend of mine did speak with this Ray, who unto him did falsly affirm, that I said, I was the Head of the True Church, whenas I never spoak a∣ny such a thing; therefore I hearing of a Meeting of the Baptists that day, and that this Ray was there, I and several of my Friends went unto this Meeting; and when I came at the House, the Door was open, and I went in amongst them, and this Ray was speaking unto the People; and when he saw me, he stopt his speaking, and shut his Book, before I open'd my Mouth to speak, and bad me Be gone out of the House: And I said, Is thy Spirit limited? Is thy Spirit bound? And he bad me Be gone; and said, Why did I Disturb them? And I asked him, How did I disturb you? Was not I silent until thou spoak'st to me? But Guilt tormenting him within, he could not for∣bear me, but called for the Man of the House to command me out several times; but he was not amongst them, as they said, so this Ray was much vexed, and in much Wrath; and one of their Elders, named, John Tabram of Wickin, stood up,
and pushed me with his Hand upon my Breast se∣veral times in much Wrath, to have me out of the House, and I did not resist him; and he said, If I would not go out, they would send for the Officers. Now, let all People see what Weapons they make use of, when one comes soberly and civily without any Violence amongst them, and presently to be in such Disorder, and Confusion, and Rage, as they were, and threatning to send for the Offi∣cers, whenas there was no Violence offered by us: But here you might see what these People would do, if they had a Law to guard them, as the Priests have: Then there was one Man, that had been hearing of them, and he spoak, and said to this Ray, You say, They are Deceivers; and they say, You are Deceivers; now I would have you dispute it, that those that are ignorant might know which are the Deceivers: But Ray sleighted him, and said, Who art you? I know you not; and would by no Means have his Deeds brought to the Light to be tryed, but gets amongst the Blind, where he can∣not be seen. So then they brought the Woman of the House to me, and she bae Go out of her House, which I did not resist; and so I called to Ray, and told him, He was ashamed of his Doctrine, and so I shook off the Dust of my Feet for a Wit∣ness against them, and so left them; and then they shut their Door. But, Poor People! I do pitty you, to see how ignorantly and blindly you are led by the Deceit∣fulness
of Satan, to think that you are the Church of Christ and none else; whenas your Teachers dare not stand to maintain their Doctrine, but flee away when they should come to the Proof, and call for Officers when one comes in amongst you without any Carnal Weapon▪ is this the Doctrine of Christ, which you talk so much of, or of An∣tichrist? Surely if I had been a Deceiver, and he a Minister of Christ, then I could not have stopped his Mouth, but he would have stopped mine; for, the Ministers of Christ are able to stop the Mouthes of Gain-sayers; but his Mouth was stopped, yea, when he was busie at that he calls preaching too; but my Mouth he could not stop: And he was found the Deceiver, whom Truth put to Silence, who was ashamed of his Doctrine. Oh People! take heed how you reject so Great Salvation; for, this is the Day of your Visitati∣on: Now you are warned by one, who amongst you is counted a Deceiver, yet True, witnessed in all your Consciences, by that which will either Accuse you or Excuse you before the Throne of God, who am known to all the Children of Light.
The Excommunication of Ezekiel Cater and Samuel Cater out of the Baptists Society, by John Ray; with their Answer there∣unto. WE two, namely Ezekiel Cater and Samuel Cater, being met together amongst our Friends, upon the 4th day of the 3d Moneth, wait∣ing upon the Lord, there came three of the Tea∣chers of the Baptized People, among whom was one John Ray, a chief Teacher, who came, and said, He had a Message to deliver; but his Message was denyed; but he said, He would speak; and so disorderly ran into many words to this Effect. There being a General Meeting at Cambridge this Week,Excomm. John Ray. where the Church of Christ was met together; and there it was agreed upon by the Elders, That Samu∣el Cater and Ezekiel Cater, who were formerly El∣ders of the Church of Christ in this Town, namely Lit∣tleport; and being they have departed from the sweet Fellowship of the Church of Christ, &c. and after so many Admonitions would not be reconciled, should be de∣livered unto Satan, I was there appointed to be the Mes∣senger:
And so he ran on with his Excommunica∣tion, according to their Form, with their stoln Words. Reply, Now, for the Truth's sake, for which thou, John Ray, hast cast us out of your Society, we shall hereby clear our selves from what is or may be cast upon us in this Matter, by thee, John Ray, and the rest of thy Society, whom we know to be most bitter Slanderers of the Truth. This we deny, that ever we were Elders in the Church of Christ; you made us Elders in your Church, who call your selves Jews, and are not, but the Synagogue of Satan, out of which you have cast us, but not before we forsaked you: We, by the Light of Jesus Christ, through the Love of God, seeing both you & we setting ourselves of A∣cting & Imitating the Apostles in our Wills, with a blind Zeal for Life, but Strangers to the Life and Power, neither could witness the same Infallible Spi∣rit as they had, as you know we all confessed; and therefore we had nothing but what we got in∣to our Brains of their Words, and so got a Notion, with adding to our own Imaginations of them, and wresting the same with our Fallible Spirits; for, we durst not say, It was Infallible, as you also confessed your selves, then it must needs be fallible; for there are but two kinds of Spirits, and if not the Infallible, then the Fallible; and though we did the very same things, and spoak the same words, and not from the same Spirit, it
was all false, and as nothing, as they that swore, God lived, swore falsly; for, They that have not the Spirit of Christ are none of his; and his Spirit is In∣fallible in the least measure: And thus you are shut out in all that you can do of your selves, with your formed Ordinances. And this we know, We were also Strangers to the Cross of Christ, and the Light and Life, and Power of Christ, which the Apo∣stles lived in; and also the One Baptism of Christ, with∣out which none can be his Disciple; so we were only Jews outwardly, washing the Out-side, but with∣in as foul as ever, as you also are; yet we say not, but we had a Zeal in the same, though not according to Knowledge: But now the True Light is sprung in, through the Mighty Love of God towards us, so that we see the Weakness of our own Actings, and Formings in our own Wills for Lie, and now are made willing, through the Power of God, to lay down our Crowns at the Feet of Jesus, and to wait in what he hath given us of his Light; and we have ta∣sted of his powerful Word, through his gracious Love towards us, and now we have a Witness within our selves; whenas before we knew it not, but mur∣dered it, as you also do; and for this you have cast us out of your Society, but not for Fornication, as he was in that place of Scripture which you imi∣tate,1 Cor. 5. nor for making Shipwrack of Faith and a good Conscience; for we witness an Increase of both; but the Discerning and Power is wanting in you, and so you know not what you do: but know this, We are not falle to a looser Life, but to a more stricter severe
Life, for to serve the Lord Jesus Christ: But re∣member this, That if they that believed your Form to be the Truth, could but patter over a few words of Faith, and call it Theirs; and then, according to your Form, they were put into the Water, and taken out a∣gain, and then received into your Church and Communi∣on, though no change of Life or Nature; and this must needs be the Synagogue of Satan: And this I Samuel Cater can witness; for so I have Bapti∣zed, and ye allowed of it; but now my Eye is opened I do see it, and do testifie against it, That all I did so by, I deceived them, though then I confess it was Ignorance, and so was yours, but now you might see if you would; therefore it shall no more be called Ignorance, but Wilful Blindness. But I know you will alledge, You teach Godliness and Holiness: But I answer; You run, and the Lord never sen you, as we also did, therefore you profit not the People at all; and if you had not the Words of Godliness,1 Cor. 11. 14, 15. and the Form, then the Ministers of Antichrist would not be like the Ministers of Christ; but you are: But I say, Your Lives come short of what you profess; for, in them there is no Change, but they that are Earthly-Minded and Covetous, are so still; and your Lives are in Pride, Ambition and Arrogancy, puffed up with your Vain Knowledge and with Respect of Persons, and so are out of the Faith of Christ, and in Wrath and Anger, and Envy, and Bitter∣ness, and in Lying, and Slandering, and Backbi∣ting, and Lust, and Fleshliness, we formerly being
in the same Society do witness it now our Eyes are open, out of which Society you have cast us; and praised be the Lord that we have escaped the Snares of Darkness, by the bright Shining of his Light into our dark Hearts, to the which Light do we speak in you all, by it to read your selves, and judge your selves; for by it are you seen and judged to be in Darkness and in Confusion, out of the Faith and Society of the Saints; but these things do we not speak out of Envy or Revenge, but for the clearing of the Truth and our Consci∣ences from your Slanderous Tongues, and to lay open your Deceit and Way of Delusion to the Simple, that they may escape the Delusion which we were ensnared in, and that so you may pro∣ceed no further with it, that your Folly might be manifest unto all, as theirs was who withstood Moses. Ezekiel Cater, Samuel Cater, A Copy of the most of the Queries aforesaid were given to this Ray, but no Answer did he re∣turn.
A Word to all who are still in your own Forming, Self-Actings and Imitatings. YOU are acting in that Nature which is at En∣mity with God,Rom. 8. 7. which is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be: So all your For∣mings and Actings are in vain; for, they are not from Life, but from Death for Life, but Life comes from Death; for, in the Destruction of Death Life is obtained. Therefore to the Light of the Lord Jesus in all your Consciences take heed, which is the Witness for God, to which I speak in you all, which witnesseth for God against the Secrets of your Hearts, which reproves you in secret for your secret Actions and Deeds of Darkness; and it will search you through, and let you see what you can witness of the Work of God in your Hearts, for all this your long and great Professi∣on, and esteeming your selves of the Church and Faith of Christ, and Saints in Christ: So if you can witness yet the Earth-Quakes, and that the Earth is yet removed out of its Place, and Mountains removed by the Eye of Faith, and if the Vail of Darkness be yet rent.
Is not the first Man yet standing, and the first Image, and the Serpent's Head: For, while you are Strangers to the Light and your Minds are from the Light, you are wandred and strayed in the Pathes of Darkness, and so are the Chil∣dren of Darkness, in whom the Prince of Dark∣ness ruleth, even the Serpent, who is Head in Man;Gen. 3. 15. but the Promise is, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head: But you are acting in your own Wills and Wisdom; the Serpent is your Head; and you are not yet come to witness the first Promise fulfilled, but are still in the Fall, under the Power of Darkness, in the Disobedi∣ence, and Strangers unto the Cross, and so have no Part in Christ in that Nature: For, none come to have a Right in Christ, but through the Cross, for, As many as are baptized into Christ, are bapti∣zed into his Death; and they that are Dead with him, do Live with him; and they that are Dead, are free∣ed from Sin; and they that are in Christ, are New Creatures, old things are passed away, and all things become new: But they that are not in Christ, are still in old Adam, and so in the Fall, under the Curse, and under Death's Dominion, drove out from the Presence of God into the Earth; and Death reigns over all,Rom. 5. 14. from Adam until Moses, of what Profession soever. Therefore, now read your selves by the Light which comes from Jesus Christ, and shineth into your dark Hearts, and searcheth the Heart and
tryeth the Reins, and maketh manifest the Se∣crets; to which Light I am made manifest, and by it witnessed in you all, and unto it I do direct your Minds, for the turning of your Minds from the Darkness to the Light, all you that have a Desire to find the Way of Truth, in what Form soever, that thereby you may come to see how you have been wandred and scattered in the many ways of Darkness, in the Land of Darkness, in this cloudy & dark day, as Sheep without a Shepheard, being carryed about after the Voice of Strangers, from the Shepheard of your Souls: Therefore hear∣ken no more without, to those that cry, Lo here, or Lo there is Christ; and so draws your Minds with∣out, to seek for a Christ without, and a Redemption and a Sanctification without, & a Righteousness with∣out, and a God without; but turn your Minds with∣in; for it is to be found within, if ever you find it: For, there is no Way to come unto the true Knowledge of the Truth, or of God, or of Christ, but by that of God within; For what is to be known of God is manifest within; and the same which descen∣ded, the same doth ascend: And so the Way to God is to be found within, by the Light which manifests Death, and slayes Death. Do not you read the Parable of the Woman, that had lst the Piece of Silver,Luke 15. 8, 9. and could not find it un∣til she had turned into the House, and lighted the Candle, and swept the House, and then she found that which she had lost, and rejoyced with her
Neighbours. Now, the Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, and his Life was the Light of Men;Prov. 20. 7. John 1. 4. so turn in your Minds to the Light of the Lord Jesus, which if you love it, to bring your Deeds to it, it will let you see the Deeds of Darkness, and the Paths of Death, and it will al∣so search your Hearts, and make manifest your in∣ward Parts, and let you see what you have lost; and as you love this Light, and like to retain it in your Minds, and by it to be guided, it will lead you out of all the crooked and froward Wayes of Darkness into the Light of Life, and so to come to find and know the Voice of the true Shepherd, who is come to seek out and gather all his scatter∣ed Sheep out from amongst the Mountains and Valleys, and the many Wayes and crooked Pathes, wherein they have been scattered and strayed in the Land of Darkness,Jer. 23. 3. and to gather them toge∣ther into one Flock, into one Way, into one Sheepfold, and he alone will be their Shepherd; and this you shall come to witness; as you love this Light, and follow it, it will lead you out of your many Forms, and many Wayes, into one Way; out of your own Wisdom and Imaginati∣ons, wherein you have been building Babel; and this will strip you of all your own Righteousness, wherewith you have covered over your deceitful Hearts, and it will lay your Deceits before you, and bring you to Judgment; and if you love this Light, and follow i, and be willing to wait upon it, out of your own Wills, and Wisdom, and
Imaginations, and Carnal Thoughts, Reasonings, and Consutations, and self-Acting and Imitating; it will lead you to know the Voice of the true Shepherd within you from the Voice of the Stran∣ger, and so to know the precious from the vile; he who saith,John 10. I am the Light, he saith, I am the good Shepherd, who will bring you to know the Way and the Door into the Sheepfold, if you do not run out in your own Wills, and seek to climb up another Way; for the Way is but one, and he that saith, I am the Light, saith, I am the Way, and I am the Door into the Sheepfold; so if you turn from the Light and stumble at the Light, you stumble at all, and so fall; but if you love the Light, and be willing to follow the Light,2 Cor. 6. 8. it will lead you through all; and to deny your selves, and to take up his Cross unto your selves and to pass through good Report and evil Report, through Persecution and through Death, and the VVay will not be grievous, but joyous; and so you will come into the VVay, and in at the Door unto the Sheepfold, and so into the Fellow∣ship, and into the Life, and into the Power, and into the Faith of the Saints, where all live in Uni∣on in one, united by one into one Body, the End of all Jarring & Jangling, Divisions and Disputes; therefore said the Apostle Where is the Wise? where is the Disputer of this World?1 Cor. 1. 20. hath not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World: Therefore I do call you to come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, and touch no unclean Thing, and I will receive you, saith the Lord, and I will be unto you a Father, and ye shall
be my Sons and Daughters: Now you are called, and this is the Day of your Visitation; for now Light is come into the VVorld, and if you like to retain it in your Minds, happy are you; but if not, by it you are left without Excuse,2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. and it will judge you at the last Day; For he that loves the Light, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; but he that doth Evil hates the Light, which is his Condemnation.Joh. 8. 12. Now the VVay is plain to all simple Ones, who have a Desire to find it declared by a Friend and VVitness to the Eternal Truth, who am called, J. P.
THE Fruits of a Fast, Appointed by The Churches gathered against Christ and his Kingdom, who go about to mock God with their Outside Worship, and Appointed Fasts, and Dayes of Volun∣tary HUMILIATION. Or, A Declaration of the Persecution of a Messenger of the Lord, by a People who go under the Name of In∣dependents, in Essex, who have set themselves in the Enmity of their Spirits to oppose the Truth of God, calling it a Lye, and persecuting his Messengers as Deceivers and Wan∣derers; wherein their Persecuting Spirits are made manifest, and them to be in Cain's Generation, & Strangers to the Spirit of Christ, which never presecuted, and so are none of his, Rom. 8. 9. And also, Of the Unjust Dealings of Judge Hills, who sate upon Life and Death at the last Assizes at Chansford, which began upon the Eleventh Day of the Sixth Moneth. And also, Several Queries; that were sent to the Priests and Magistrates, which may be serviceable for them or any other to An∣swer, whom they do concern. By a Witness and Sufferer in Outward Bonds, for the Vnchan∣geable Truth of God, by Cain's Generation, who am known to them (in Colchester Castle) by the Name JAMES PARNEL. Printed in the Year 1675.
THE Fruits of a Fast, Appointed by the Churches gathered a∣gainst Christ and his Kingdom, &c. FIrst, I shall give unto the Reader a Declara∣tion of the Work of God in my Soul, and the Conversion of my Heart from Darkness unto his marvellous Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, and out of the Path of Death into the Path of Life, where I now walk in the Light of my God, with the Ransomed of the Lord, who are availing towards the Holy City; and also, the Cause of my coming forth into the World to de∣clare the Truth, for which I now suffer Bonds by the Persecuting Generation, wherein I once lived a Child of Wrath (as all are by Nature) and then I was loved of the World, while I followed the Vain Courses and Wayes of the World, where by Nature I was led in Imitation of others, be∣ing in that Nature which is prone unto the same, the time I was sent unto the Schools of Humane Learning, for to learn the Humane Wisdom, for which End the Schools are profitable; but for the attaining of Heavenly Wisdom and Know∣ledge, they are as far unprofitable; and many Books that are there read, are much for the Cor∣rupting
of Youth, and nourishing of the Wild Prophane Nature, which then ruled in me; and I was as Wild as others, during the time I fol∣lowed the School; and after I was taken from the School, I still continued in the same Nature, growing and encreasing in Sin and Iniquity, fol∣lowing the vain Courses of the Wicked World, and also was trained up in the Customary Way of the Worship of the World, which is held in the Idols Temple, every First Day of the Week, but no Conversion there was wrought, but all still continued in the old Nature, both Priest and People, Young and Old; and as was the People, so was the Priest, all walking in Darkness and Blindness, by Form, Custom and Tradition, but ignorant of the pure Light, which is the Guide and Teacher of the Faithful, which oftentimes did reprove in Secret, when I was alone; but then I knew not what it was; but oftentimes it did strike me into a Consideration of my Ways and Doings, and set Life and Death before me, so that I have sometimes promised within my self, never to do the like again; but the Promise being in the Will made, it did not stand; but when the Temptations came, the Careless Mind got out again, and led me still to delight my Heart in the Vanity which my Eye did see, and my Ear did hear, which all passed away with the using thereof, and left me to the Judgment which was due unto me for my Iniquity, which did follow me time after time, calling me to Repentance;
and the more I did incline my Mind, and draw nigh to it, it also did draw nigh to me; and so the Goodness of God led me to Repentance, and the Grace of God wrought in my Heart a Refor∣mation, and so I was found of him when I sought not; and thus he both wrought the Will and the Deed of his own good Pleasure, and plucked me as a Brand out of the Fire, to make me a Vessel of Honour to his Name: all Living Eternal Praises be to his Name forever; my Soul shall Praise and Magnifie his Name forever. For I may well say with Paul, of Sinners I was chief; for according to my Years, I was as perfect in Sin and Iniquity as any in the Town where I lived, yea, and exceeded many in the same; so that there was as little Hopes of my Conversion, as any in the Town; and yet, though it is a Place of many People, I was the first in all that Town which the Lord was pleased to make known his Power in, and turn my Heart towards him, and truly to seek him; so that I became a Wonder to the World, and an Astonishment to the Heathen round about: but they were such Enemies to Goodness, and so given up to Idolatry, that as much as be∣fore they had loved me in my Vain Conversation, so much the more they hated me in my Conversi∣on; yea, and they o my Family came to ensnare me,Psal. . . and lay wait for me to entrap me; but when they could not prevail, they stood afar off me, and Reproached me with Lyes, and proved my Greatest Enemies; yea, and my Relations
became my Adversaries, and laboured to destroy what God had begun in me, because that thereby I came under the Reproach and Shame of the World, because I could not conform to the World in their invented Fashions, Customs and Tradi∣tions, and their Words, Wayes, Fellowship and Worship; but was made subject to the Law of God; and could not Respect Persons, neither in Word nor Deed, then the Beast, which rules in Proud Flesh, was disturbed, who before ruled in Peace,Rev. 13. 38. while he was worshipped; but when I came to see proud Lucifer, the Lust in Man, to be the Beast, which all the World worships and wonders after, but those whose Names are writ∣ten in the Book of Life; therefore I could no longer follow the World in Blindness; for by the Power of God my▪ Eye was opened, so that I did behold their Idolatry, and therefore I could no longer be conformable to them, so that their Rage and Persecution arose against me, and I be∣came a Mock in the Streets; yea, and I was ac∣counted as one not worthy to live amongst them: yea, and they said, He that killed me, would do God Service: But he that had called me out from a∣mongst them, unto himself, that I might no lon∣ger follow the Vain Courses of the World, nor set my Delight on things below, but that I might serve him in Newness of ife, that in me his Workmanship might appear, to the Confounding f the Heathen, who know him not; He by his wer kept me, and gave me Strength to bear his
Cross, and despise the Shame; so that neither Foul Words nor Fair Words could cause me to Deny what God by his Grace had wrought in my Heart; but by his Power he carried me above the Raging Waves of the tempestuous Sea; so that I knew, that he that was in me, was greater then he that is in the World; yea, and out of my Kindred and Acquaintance I came, and be∣came a Stranger to them that lov'd not the Truth: Yea, and presently I came to see the Priests of the World by their Fruits, and the Fruits of their Ministry, which was cursed from God, and there∣fore profited not the People at all. But when the Lord by his Power had changed and converted my Heart unto himself, the Priests became mine Enemies, and said, I was deluded; whenas be∣fore, when I lived in the vain Conversation of the World, they took no Notice of me, either to Reprove me or Instruct me, but as they went on in a customary way, for Gain and Lucre, speaking against Sin in the general, but not reproving it in particular, but were as deep in it in their Lives as others: and so what they preacht down with their Tongues, they upheld in their Lives, and counte∣nanced in their Conversations; and so from them I turned, whom I saw had gotten a Form, but deny'd the Life and Power: and I sought for a People, with whom I might have Union; and there was a Peo∣ple with whom I found Union, a few Miles from the Town where I lived, whom the Lord was a gathering out of the dark VVorld, to sit down
together, & wait upon his Name; but we were the Objects and Reproach of the Country, and were accounted as the Off-scourings of the VVorld: but in all this we saw the Scriptures fulfilled, and that we might thus suffer if we would live Godly in Christ Jesus: and here was our Con∣fidence and Strength, which carryed us above our Sufferings, as knowing it was for the Name of Jesus. And thus I continued a certain time, counting it greater Riches to suffer Affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season: and about this time I was about Fifteen Years of Age. And afterwards I was called forth to visit some Friends in the North Part of England, with whom I had Union in Spirit before I saw their Faces: And afterwards I returned back to my outward Dwelling-Place, and remained in my outward Calling: And the Lord all this time still more & more perfecting & encreasing his Work in my Heart, which by his Power he had begun in me, and by his pure Pow∣er bringing forth his Truth in me, and making known his Will unto me, until by his Power He opened my Mouth to declare his Truth in the VVorld; and still I continued in my outward Calling, and also in the VVork of the Lord, as not being called far from my Dwelling-Place. And when I was betwixt Seventeen and Eigh∣teen Years of Age, I was moved in my Spirit to go to a Place about Fifteen Miles from my out∣ward Dwelling-Place (southward) amongst a Peo∣ple,
to whom the Lord was making known his Truth, not knowing when I went out of going farther then that Place; but when I was there, I was moved of the Lord to come on the Cambridge; and in Obedience unto the Lord I came to see what he had to do for me, not knowing one Foot of the Way, but as I was directed, neither knowing when I came there where to be receiv'd; but had heard before of Two of my Friends, that were there Whipped, caused by the Mayor that then was, only for declaring the Truth as they past through the Town, against the Deceit there∣of; neither did I know but it might be my Por∣tion also when I came there; but without con∣ferring with Flesh and Blood, I passed on my Journey; and he that called me forth, went along with me, and did direct me: And when I came there, I found those that were worthy, that re∣ceived me; and also, I found a Friend, whom the Corrupt Rulers had put in Prison for the same Te∣stimony which I also was sent to declare: & before I had continu'd there the space of Fourteen Nights William Pickering, the Mayor of Cambridge, commit∣ted me to Prison for publishing two Papers, the one against the Corruption of the Magistrates, and the o∣ther against the Corruption of the Priests, at the time of their Commencement, as they call it; and there they kept me in Prison the space of two Sessions, and tossed me from Prison to Dungeon, and had nothing to lay against me, whereby to
prove the Breach of any Law; but when I came to the last Sessions, they called a Jury to prove the Papers to be Scandalous and Seditious Papers; and they were nigh Two Hours about them, but could not prove it, but came and said, That they found nothing, but that the Papers were mine; which I had before own'd in the open Court, and there was my Name to them to testifie the same: And so they were crossed in their Intentions, and their Plots came to nought. Then they committed me back to Prison again, and after the space of Three Days they sent me away with a Pass, under the Name of a Rogue, yet durst not give me the Law which belongs to Rogues; but had me away with Clubs and Staves; and I could not see the Pass until I was Three Miles out of the Town, where I lodg∣ed that Night; and the next day there came a Justice of Peace from Cambridge, who knowing me to be Innocent of what was laid to my Charge, so he witnessed the Pass to be false, and took it back to Cambridge, and so I was set free. And not long after I went of Cambridge again, and went abroad, preaching and declaring the Truth freely in the Countries about, and many I found that received the Truth gladly, but more Enemies; yet nevertheless, Truth spread & conquer'd over its Enemies; and there I continued labouring in the VVork of the Lord about the Space of half a Year in the Countries about Cambridge; and from thence I was moved of the Lord to come into Es∣sex, where I heard of a People that was seking
the Lord; and when I came there, I found those that were worthy, who received the Truth glad∣ly; and there I continued, freely declaring and preaching the Truth from Place to Place, some∣times in the Synagogues, and was haled out by the Priests Party, that the Scripture might be fulfilled upon that Generation; yet nevertheless, I con∣tinued in constant Preaching of the Word to the Consciences of the People, freely and publickly in several Plains of the Country, notwithstanding much Opposition both of Priests, People and Professors, and much did the Truth prevail in the Hearts of the People, to the Glory of God the Father of Truth, which did make glad the Hearts of many, who have long expected this Day to ap∣pear; but the false Prophet began to utter forth his Lyes & Blasphemies against the Truth; & the Beast (by whose Power the false Prophet stands), began to rage and persecute; and the Ministers of An∣ti-christ stood up for their Kingdom, crying against Truth, striving to present it odiou in the Ears of the People; but when I came to their Faces, they fled like Hirelings, and left their Flock be∣hind, so that the Truth much prevailed, notwith∣standing their railing and raging, so that they be∣gun to appoint Meetings, purposely to set them∣selves against the Truth, to presen it to the Peo∣ple, as Error and Heresie; so that if by any Means they could by their evil incensing and leavening of the Minds of the People, turn away their Minds from hearkning to the Truth; and on the other
Side, they had the Earthly Powers to uphold them and strengthen them against whomsoever should come to gainsay them, and to lay their Law upon them; so I hearing of a publick Meeting that was appointed by the Priests and Professors of these Times, to be at a Town, call'd Great Coggashall, upon the 12th Day of the 5th Moneth, called Ju∣ly, as was declared in publick by the Priest of the said Town, to Fast and Pray against the Errors (as they said) of the People called Quakers, and also their Intent was to ensuare me, and to bring my Body into Bonds, if that I came amongst them for to defend the Truth, which afterwards appear∣ed; and although I did see their Intent towards me, I was made willing not only to be bound, but also to suffer for the Pre Eternal Truth, which I am made a Witness of; so I being pressed in my Spirit for to go amongst them and in Obedience to the same I went, and there was one Priest Willis, an Independent Teacher, who was set up in the Seat of the Pharisee, the chiefest Place of the Assem∣bly, there speaking a Divination of his own Brain, and not from the Mouth of the Lord; and therefore knew not how to divide the Word aright, but cryed against false Prophets and Deceivers, and he himself one of them; and when the Prist had done, I spoak unto the People in Vindication of the Truth of God, which the Priest had before reproached, reviled and blasphemed; but the Priests and the Rulers interrupted me, and  in∣to many Words, which bred much Disorder and
Confusion; and then another of the Priests got up into the Pulpit, and they bid me put of my Hat, and stand with my Hat off the Time the Priest was praying, which Worship I denyed, and therefore could not be conformable to it, and so I said, Before I should be subject to their Wills, I would pass out of the Meeting Place, and so I did, and many People came out after me; for I intended to declare the Truth in the Town, being I could not have Liberty in the publick Place: And as I was passing on the Way quietly towards my Friends House, he that is called Justice Wakering came rushing behind me amongst the People, and suddenly smote me with his Hand upon my Back, and said, He arested me in the Name of the Lord Protector, and so I turned me about, and looked upon him (but knew not that he was a Magistrate) so I asked him, Where was his Writ? and he said, He had one, but none he shewed me; then they hurried me into an House, and there some Friends engaged that I should be forth-coming when their Worship was done; and so I went unto my Friends House, and there spoak the Word of the Lord unto the Peo∣ple that there came together, and was also ready when their Worship was done, according to my Friends Engagement: And when I came before them, there were four Men called Justices, and six or seven Priests; yea, there were nigh nine or ten Priests that Day, that were gathered together against the Truth; and when I was come before them, he that is called Justice Wering, came
and plucked my Hat off my Head, and threw it away; then they fell to question me of many Things, to which I made answer, and many fri∣volous Questions they asked me, whereby to en∣snare me, which was neither just nor honest for Men of their Profession to do; so when they had satisfied their Wills in examining of me, they caused a Mittimus to be made, and committed me to the Common Goal at Colchester: And there were several of the chief Priests in Essex, that were Actors in this Persecution; Priest Willis, who is a Teacher of an Independent Company at Brantry; and Priest Sammes, a Teacher of an Indepndent Company at reat Coggashal; and Priest Sparow, a Teacher of an Independent Company ar Halstead; and Priest Stellum, a Teacher of an Independent Company at Tarling, yet are all Parish Priests, and are maintained by those that re not of their Church, and those were the Head-Actors in this Persecution; yea, and Priest Stellum speak to the Rulers in the publick Place, thereby to stir up their Spirits to persecute; and this was plotted amongst the Priests and their gathered Churches,Mat. 7. 15, 16. to appoint Meetings, thereby to ensnare the Innocent, and raise Persecution against the Truth; yea, and two of the Men called Justices, who were my chief Persecutors, are Members of the Independent Church; and thus the Churches gather them∣selves against Christ and his Kingdom; and now the Ravening Wolves in Sheeps Cloathing do appear, yea, their Fruits make them manifest,
and those are they who call themselves Jews, and are not, but the Synagogue of Satan; and those are the Builders, who have & do reject the Corner Stone, which is now become the Head of the Corner, and over their Heads is set, and Wo unto them on whom it lights. And after I was sent to Pri∣son, there I was kept close, and could not have my Friends and Acquaintance to come to see me with Peace and Freedom; and so when I was there, I wrote an Answer to the Mittimus, whereby I was falsly accused and imprisoned, and sent to the Men that committed me, for to clear my Con∣science unto them, and lay the Injustice and Cru∣elty before them, and leave them without Excuse in the Presence of the Almighty: And so when the Time came that I was to go to the Assize, they put me on a Chain amongst Felons and Mur∣derers, and joyned me to one suspected for Mur∣der; and thus I was numbred amongst Transgres∣sors, that the Scripture might be fulfilled; and thus six of us were hooked together upon a Chain, so that we could not go into a Bed; for four of us remained upon the Chain Day and Night; and thus I was led 18 Miles through the Country for a gazing-Stock unto the World; but Truth was preached in all this, and prevailed on the Hearts of the People, so that I could rejoyce in all, and triumph over mine Enemies: So when we were at the Assize-Town, which is called Chansford, the Judge came in upon the seventh Day of the Week; and upon the second Day of the next
Week I was brought into the Court before Judge Hills, who sate upon Life and Death, and there I stood for a gazing-Stock while, and then the Judge commaded them to take me away, and did not say any thing to me; for then I was singled from the rest, only had Irons upon one of my Hands; then upon the next Day Morning the Goaler sent his Man to take off my other Irons, and so in the afternoon I was had before the Judge without any Irons, and the Goaler took off my Hat, and cast it upon the Floor▪ and then the Clerk read a long Indictment full of Falshoods, and asked me if I was guilty, and I told him, I denyed all Guilt, and called for my Accusers, and the Judge said, I might see my Accusers, and told me, I might say Guilty or not Guilty, and I told him, I was not Guilty, so called twelve Men to try me, and the Fore-man was a Drunkard; and they bid me object against any of them, and I told them, I owned none out of the Doctrine of Christ, and all that swore were out of the Doctrine of Christ, and they had all sworn before my Face, and therefore I openly denyed by them to be tryed; yet nevertheless they went on with their Work; and Priest Willis was called, and he swore against me, and swore falsly too; and the two Men called Justices swore against me, and swore falsly too; and one of the Justices Men (so called) and another Man swore against me, and swore falsly too▪ yet all these false Witnesses were heard to the full what they would say aginst me, and thus the Leader of the People caused them to
err; for if the Teacher be a Swearer and a false Swearer, what may the People be? for Christ saith,Mat. 5. 35, 36, 37. Jam. 5. 1. 2 John 9. Swear not at all, but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay, for whatsoever is more is Evil; and the Apostle saith, In all Things my Brethren swear not at all, &c. and he that abides, not in the Doctrine of Christ, hath not God; and thus, like People, like Priest, all live without God in the World. And when their false Witnesses had spoaken what they could against me, they brought in the Letter which I had sent to the Men called Justices, in Reply to their Mittimus, and it was openly read in the COURT, and I owned, it; for my Name was to it, and the reading of it was much Satisfaction to many that understood it, and they also brought another Paper that I writ against the Idol's Temple and the Deceiver therein, both which shall follow in Order afterwards; and then when they were both read, Judge ills took them both, and repeated over unto the Jury all that he could gather by wrong Interpretation and Con∣struction against me, whereby to incense the Jury against me, and told them, If they did not find me Guilty, the Sin would lye upon their Heads, and he as it were passed the Sentence upon me before the Jury went forth, yea, and told them what they should do, whenas they had sworn before to speak the Truth, and nothing but the Truth; and I had charged them to take heed what they did, for I told them, None could judge betwixt Truth and Heresie, but by the Spirit of the Lord; but
when I would have spoken something to the Jury before they went forth, the Judge interrupted me, and would not suffer me (though one of the Jury desired it) neither would he suffer that the Jury should have the Papers that were brought in a∣gainst me, though I required it; but sought all that he could against me, true or false, although I had sent him a true Declaration of the Grounds of my Imprisonment, with Hands of four Witnesses to it, neither would he suffer that to be read: And that which I would have spoaken un∣to the Jury was, to clear it unto them, that it was no scandalous nor reproachful Words, to call a corrupt Magistrate, a corrupt Magistrate; and to call an Unjust Judge and Lawyer, an Unjust Judge and Lawyer; or a Persecutor, a Persecu∣tor; or a Deceiver, a Deceiver; all which was brought against me, and call'd Railing and Scandalous; for by that Account they might have taxed all the Prophets for Railing and Scandaling; for they open and often declared against the Corruption of the Priests and Rulers,Isa 56. 11. Ezek. 34. John 10. Luk. 13. 14, 15. Luk. 13. 31, 32. Joh. 3. 14. as you may read in many Places in the Prophets Records; Isaah called the Priests Greedy Dumb Dogs; and the Prophets cal∣led them Idol-Shepherds, and the like; and Christ call'd them Hirelings and the Rulers Hypocrites, and Herod a Fox; read Mathew 23. and see if you may not as well call that Railing; and yet in all this they did not rail nor scandalize any, but gave to every Nature its Name and due Reproof, whe∣ther they would hear or forbear; But this is the Con∣demnation
of the World, Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil. So, when the Jury came in, to bring in their Evidence, they could charge me with nothing; but the Paper I had writ in Reply to my Mittimus, after I was imprisoned; which Paper I had be∣fore owned in the open Court, with my Name to it: But the Indictment they could not charge me with; for it tended to a Riot, which I was far from, or any that owned me: But the Judge and the Clark both dishonestly strove to draw Words out of the Fore man of the Jury, which the rest did not consent to, neither could he speak their Minds; but others of the Jury were fain to speak themselves, but nothing was cleared against me: Then the Goaler was commanded to take me away; and when I was gone forth of the Court, they sent for me again; and the Judge imposed two Fines upon me, to the Value of about Forty Pounds; the one he said, was for the Contempt of the Magistracy; the other, for the Contempt of the Ministry; for he said, The Lord PROTECTOR had charged him, to see to punish such Persons as should Contemn either Magistracy or Ministry. But what a Ministry is this, that stands in need of an outward Magistracy, to uphold it against a People that come with nothing but Spiritual. Weapons, to defend themselves against Spiritual Wickedness, which now sits in high Places: But this Ministry is contrary to the Ministry of Christ, whose Wea∣pons
are not Carnal,1 Cor. 10. 4. but Spiritual. And also, several of mine Accusers stood upon the Bench, hard by the Judge, several time Whispering him in the Ear, and leavening and incensing his Mind against me; and I reproved one of them in the open Court for so doing, and yet these things were suffered. And also the Judge gave Charge unto the Goaler, To let no Giddy-headed People come to me (as he called them) which I never desired that any such should come; but thereby they take Occasion to keep my Friends from me, accounting them Giddy-headed People: But they are not Giddy-headed People, that own sound Doctrine; but they are Giddy-headed People, that cannot endure sound Doctrine, but have itching Ears, carried about with Reports and Hear-says, to speak Evil of the things they know not. But thus, without all Honesty they acted in the Enmity of their Minds against me; yet in all I was made to rejoyce; for, I see their Deceit was manifest to the Peo∣ple, and the Truth owned in many Hearts, so that my Sufferings were not grievous unto me, but joyous. But as the Judge's Dealings were Rigo∣rous and Unjust towards me, it was so much the more on the contrary to Barrabas; for there were three or four arraigned for Suspicion of Murder, and others for Fellony, yet he did deliver them, and there was not one that Dyed or was Branded, nei∣ther which I did desire; but only this I do de∣clare, to shew how the World loves its own, and how the same Spirit now rules in both Priest, People
and Rulers, that ruled amongst the Jews, who esteemed Barrabas above Christ, and numbred him amongst Transgressors: And so, in all this the Scrip∣ture is fulfilled, and the Day further appears to the Glory of God, the Father of Truth, who will ex∣alt his Truth by his own Power over the Heads of all its Enemies. So then they brought me back to Pri∣son again, where I still remain in the Peace and Freedom of my Spirit, which none can take away, though in the Hands of mine Enemies. Yet this▪ I know, That the Invisible God in working in Secret by his Power, and with a Strong Arm, carry∣ing on this great Work, which he hath begun in the Earth; yea, and he will bring down and overturn all, until it come into his Hand whose own it is, and he will exalt his Kingdom in the Hearts of his People, and his Son shal rule over the Earth; yea, and all his Enemies shall be his Foot-stool, and shall bow unto him, and be glad to lay down their Crowns before him, and acknowledge his Power; yea, and he will dash all the Forms, and false Likenesses and Images, which are set up by Man, in his Imaginations (calling them Churches) and he will dh them, and the Powers of the Earth in pie∣ces one against another, like a Potter's Vessel; though now they set at nought the Corner-Stone, yet then by it shall they be grownd to Powder: For, our God is a Con∣suming Fire; and who is able to stand in the Day of his Wath? Therefore it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God: Then Wo to all his Ene∣mies, or be that lifts up his Hand against his Maker, to Contrary what he hath decreed.
Here followeth a REPLY to my MITTIMUS, which was ad∣judged a Contempt of the Magi∣stracy. WHereas I, who am of the World called James Parnel, am committed as Prisoner, to be kept in the Common Goal, by a Mittimus sealed and signed by you four Men, who are called Justi∣es of the Peace, who write your selves Herbert Pellham, Thomas Cook, Dyonisius Wakering, William Harlackinden; wherein I find several Lyes, Slan∣ders and False Accusations cast upon me: there∣fore, for the Truth's sake, and for the Satisfaction of the Simple, I shall Reply to the same, and clear the Truth, and return the Venom upon your Venomous Spirits, from whence it comes, that you may be convinced of your Evil, and cease Fighting against Christ and his Kingdom. First Your Own, as followeth. WHerereas it duely appears unto Us, by Our own View, and also by the Examination of James Parnel,
who saith, He was born at Retford, in the County of Nottingham, Labourer, That He, the said James Parnel, with very many other Persons of his gathering together, did this Day in a Riotous Manner enter into the Parish Church at Great Coggashall, aforesaid; and there being a great Num∣ber of Christians met in the said Church, to hold and keep a Day of publick Humilia∣tion and Seeking of God; and being in order thereunto then exercised in the Di∣vine Worship and Service of God Al∣mighty, He, the said James, did then and there stand up, and told the Minister, He Blasphemed, and spoak Falsly; and used many other reproachful Words against the said Minister: And afterwards he depar∣ted the said Church, and went into the common High-Way, in the said Town of Great Coggashall, with a great Number of Persons, his Followers, who kept there Unlawfully together; and some of them gave out Menacing & Threatning Speech∣es, tending to the Breach of the Peace, and against the Law. And also, the said
James cannot give us a very good Account where he was last setled, or of his Life and Conversation; but doth further ap∣pear to us to be an Idle Disorderly Person. These are therefore in the Name of his Highness, the Lord Protector, to will and require you, To convey forthwith the said Iames Parnel unto the Common Goal for this County, there to remain until the next General Goal-Delivery, to be holden for this County, and until thence delivered by due Course of Law, unless he, the said Iames, shall come before us, or any two of us, or two some other Justices of the Peace for this County, and shall find very Able and Sufficient Sureties to be bound with him by Recognizance for his personal Appearance at the said next Goal-Delivery, there to Answer what shall be then object∣ed against him, and not to depart thence without License of the Court, and in the mean time to be of good Behaviour; and thereof fail not at your Peril. Dated at Cog∣gashall aforesaid, the Twelfth Day of Iuly, 1655. The Keeper of the said Common
Goal is hereby requir'd to receive and keep the said Iames, if he shall be brought unto him. Herbert Pellham, Thomas Cook, Dyonysius Wakering, William Harlackinden. A Reply to the aforesaid Mittimus. 1. Accusation. WHereas I am hereby accused, That I (who am of the World called JAMES PAR∣NEL) with very many other Persons, of my gather∣ing together, did this day in a Riotous Manner, enter the Parish Church of Great Coggashall, aforesaid. Reply, Are you not ashamed, who profess your selves Ministers of Law, Justice and Peace, to begin with Lyes, and make them your Refuge against the Innocent, tending to the Di∣sturbance of the Peace of the Faithful, whom you both ought and would Encourage and Coun∣tenance, if you were faithful Ministers of Peace and Justice, standing in the pure Counsel of God,
Ruling for God, and not for your selves, in all things discharging your Consciences unto God, without Partiality or Respect of Persons, as faith∣ful Ministers of Law and Justice: But contrary unto this you have acted in your corrupt Wills, turning your Swords against the Messengers of the Most High, and wilfully resisting the Truth of God, making Lyes your Refuge, as here doth plainly appear. For, upon the day aforesaid, I was at a Friend's House in Great Coggashall, where several Friends and Neighbours were come to see me, and there sate peaceably together, waiting upon the Lord, and I having heard of a publick Meeting at the Steeple-House in the said Town, of the Priests and Professors of these Times, as it was openly published by Priest Sammes, and the Priest of the said Town, in the said Steeple-house, upon the First Day last past, to that End, as I heard, and since did understand, for to Fast and Pray against, and lay open the Errors (as they said) of the People called Quakers, for the Returning of them who owned them, and the Establishing and Streng∣thening those against them that did not own them (to wit) the People called Quakers; so I being pressed in my Spirit for to go amongst them, in the Be∣half and Defence of the Truth of God, brought forth in these People, whom the World scorn∣fully calls Quakers, I also being made a Minister of the same Eternal Truth, through the Power of God, by which I am made able, and carryed on to declare it openly and publickly, to the
Confounding of the Heathen, and the reviving of the Witness for God in the Conscience, and also to suffer for the same, which I did believe the Priests did much Blaspheme and Reproach, striving to present it Odious to the People; so, in Obedience to the Lord I went out from amongst my Friends, not telling one of them whither I was a going (as many can witness) and one Friend followed me to the Door, and perceiving something of my Going, he asked me, If he might go with me? and I bad him, Use his Freedom to come after, but I desired to go alone; and so I went on the Way single: And when I came at the Steeple-house Door, which you Persecutors call a Church, & also account your selves another Church; and thus you set up Churches in your Imaginati∣ons, yet are Strangers to the True Church, which are no Persecutors; but when I came there, there were several Boys and Children that would have flocked in after me, and I bad them go in be∣fore me, rather then to go in Disorderly, whereby to occasion any Disturbance; and so I went in very Orderly, and stood very Orderly, not speaking one Word until their Priest had done, and was coming out of his Seat, as many can witness, though the Priest had been openly Reviling and Reproaching the People of God in particular, whom he scornfully called Quakers. Therefore, let all People, whose Understandings are enligh∣tened, judge in what Riotous Manner I entred
the place which you call a Church, and bear wit∣ness against you, who are not ashamed to make Lyes your Refuge against the Innocent: and also, what are the Weapons which you make use of, who call your selves Christians, but make Lyes your Refuge; and cover your Actions with Deceit? But was this the Practice and Nature of Christ? For, a Christian is Christ-like; and let all that profess Christ walk as he walked. But these are the Fruits of your publick Humiliation, who go about to mock God; but your End shall be ac∣cording to your Works. 2. Accusation. And whereas you say, Being in order thereunto, then exercised in the Divine Worship of God Almighty, He (the said James) did then and there stand up, and told the Minister, He Blasphemed, and spoak Fals∣ly; and used many other Reproachful Words against the said Minister. Reply, Until him (called Minister) had done the Divinatlon of his own Brain, from whence you derive your Divine Worship, and was coming out of his Seat, I did not speak one Word unto him, as Hundreds can witness; and the first words that I spoak, were not as you accuse me, but this I said, This is the Order of the True Church, that all may speak one by one; Cor. 14. 92, 30, 31. and if any thing be revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his Peace: Then
I spoak on in the Behalf of those People called Quakers, whom the Priest had before often and openly reviled; but so soon as I had spoak a few words, the Priest and several others disorderly ran into many words, & so interrupted me in speaking, that it bred much Confusion: Then the Priest asked me, What I would Object against him? I told him, In that he Reviled the People called Quakers; and said, they were built upon a Sandy Foundation, and so called them Shakers, and the like: But I told him, I would prove their Foundation not to be Sandy, and him to be the False Prophet: And so I declared of the Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, which strikes at the Feet of the Image, whose Head is Gold, and Breast of Silver, and Thighs of Brass, and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron & part Clay; and this Stone is become a great Mountain, upon which the Church is built, as a City set on a Hill cannot be hid; And this is the Foundation of the People that are called Quakers, not all that are called Quakers, but the Real People, whom the World scornfully calls Quakers: And this is be∣come a Stumbling-Stone, and a Rock of Offence to the Nations; and so it seems it is unto you, because you are the Worshippers of the great I∣mage, which you call the Divine Worship of your God: but God Almighty you know not; for he abhors all the Sacrifices of Cain, and his Generation, which was ever the Persecuting Ge∣neration, upon which must come all the Righte∣ous Blood-shed from Righteous Abel until now.
Therefore,Mat. 33. 32, 33. Wo unto you, ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers; How can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? And now you fill up the Measure of your Fathers Wrath. Ye Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in Heart and Ears,Act. 5. 7, 51. ye do alwayes resist the Holy Ghost; as did your Fathers, so do ye. But think not that you shall be heard for your much Babling, who for a Pre∣tence make long Prayers; but ye shall receive the greater Damnation. And the Lord will make your Diviners Mad, who have spoak a Divination from their own Brain,Isa. 44. 25. Jer. 14. 14. and not from the Mouth of the Lord; but cryed, Peace, Peace, where there is no Peace, because ye put into their Mouths, and so heal you sleightly; daubing you up with Untempered Morter; but you shall all fall amongst them that fall in the Day that I visit you, saith the Lord, ye Murderers and Cruci∣fiers of the Just. So when I had cleared the Foundation of the People called Quakers, as aforesaid, some of you accused me, That I owned no Church: And I said, It was False: Then some of you asked me, What Church I owned? And I answered, The Church in God; and more words I spoak about the Church: Then Willis, the Diviner, stood up in his Will, and said, I spoak nothing but Nonsense: And I bad him, Name one Word that was Nonsense, that I had spoaken: And he said, To say, the Church in God: Then I took out my Bible, and read unto him the first Chapter of the Thessalonians, and the first Verse, where the Apostle writeth to the Church of the Thessalonians, which is IN God the Fa∣ther:
Then Paleness struck the Face of the Di∣viner, neither would any of his Fellows stand up to justifie what he had taken in hand; and this was it wherein I said he Blasphemed, to say the Church in God was Nonsense, Then there was one Priest Stellum, a Magician of Egypt, who stood up in the Enmity of his Spirit, and accused me with several Lyes and Slanders, which hardened Pha∣roah's Heart, so that you Corrupt Rulers would not suffer me to clear my self from what he had accused me withal: But the Magician got up in∣to the Seat of Divination, and was going to his Abomination, and then the Rulers called to me, to put off my Hat; then I bad you call to the Priest, to put off his Cap, And thus may all see the Blindness and Igno∣rance of Priests and People, who are offended at a Hat, and not at a Cap: And this is as the Vain Traditions of the Pharisees, who observed the Washing of Pots and Cups, and such like things, making clean the Outside; which Scripture Priest Willis (who said, the Church in God was Non∣sense) brought in reference to the People called Quakers, because they do not put off their Hats, in Respect [or Worshipping] of Mens Persons: But let any, who hath Understanding, consider which is more Traditional, for a man to keep his Hat on his Head, for which End it is made, as also his Shoe for his Foot, his Glove for his Hand, or the putting off these things in observation or Cu∣stom,
and Reverencing mens Persons, for all which there is No Scripture, therefore a Vain Traditi∣on of Man; and thus they teach for Doctrine the Traditions of Man: Therefore, in vain do you worship God,at. 15. 7, 8, 9. who come near him with your Lips, and with your Mouths; but your Hearts are far from him, in the Unbelief,John 5. 44. seeking Honour one of another, and observing Vain Traditions and Customs, as did your Fore-fathers, whom Christ pronounced Wo against, who were his Persecutors, and in whose Steps ye are found; and therefore read your Portion. And thus, while you are crying against the Scribes and Pharisees, for observing vain Traditions and Customs, and their Strictness in their Observations, and yet Persecutors of the Just, you also are found the same, who are set up in the Chiefest Place of the Assembly, as they were; and called of Men Master, as they were; stand praying in the Synagogues,Mat. 23. as they did; preach∣ing for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, as they did; and are strict in your Observations, and calling of As∣semblies, and in your set Times of Worship, and ap∣pointed Fasts, and Dayes of Humiliation, and yet are Persecutors of the Just, as they were; yea, in the very Height of your Worship the Bitterness of your Spirits appeared: But is this such a Fast as God hath chosen? Nay; It is Abomination; his Soul loaths it: And he will judge the Cause of the Innocent upon you Hypocrites, and be a∣venged of you his Adversaries, and give you your
Portion with Unbelievers in the Lake that burns, prepared of old for Cain's Generation, in which you are found, by the Eternal Light of God, which cannot Lye, which will rise up in Judg∣ment against you at the Last Day, though now you stumble at it, and are offended at it; yet then shall you behold him whom you have pierced, though with Lamentation and Sorrow of Mind, when there is none to deliver you from the Wrath of the Almighty; and this is answered and witnessed in your Consciences. Then the Occasion of my passing out of the Steeple-house, was this; When I could not have Liberty to speak in the Vindication of the Truth against Gain-sayers, ye would have had me to have stood with my Hat off the Time the Priest was Praying, which Worship I denyed, and therefore could not be Conformable to it; and so I said, Before I would stay to fulfil your Wills, I would pass out of the Steeple-House: And many came out after me, but not of my calling, and many that I knew not, and yet you are not ashamed to say My Fol∣lowers. And again, That I went into the Common high Way, and there kept with the People unlawfully together, as you affirm, is a very abominable Lye, especially for Men of your Profession to tell, which many can witness against; for I was passing on the Way quietly without Disturbance towards my Friends House from whence I came, not purposing to stop until I came there; but that he that writes himself
Dyonisius Wakering came hurrying in amongst the People, and clapped me on the Back, and said, He rested me in the Name of the Protector, and there stopped me; and the first Words that I spoak, were, Where is thy Writ? And so the People ga∣thered about, and thronged much; but that any gave out menacing and threatning Speeches, I cannot say, neither whom they were spoaken against; but any that own me, it is well known, they are not Men of such boistrous Spirits, but rather are made willing to be revled, then to re∣vile; for from me no other Example they have, as Hundreds will acknowledge: But Wakering, if he was true to that of God in his Conscience, he would confess how I laboured in his Presence to still the People, when he had violently laid Hands on me, and given the Occasion; and so let all take Notice, that there was no Disorder nor Disturbance until the Magistrate came and laid violent Hands on me, tending to the Breach of the Peace, and against the Law; and this is the Fruits of your Hypocritical ast and voluntary Humiliation. 3. Accusation. And also you accuse me, That I could give no good Account of my last Settlement, or of my Life and Conversation. Reply, As for my Life and Conversation▪ let it preach forth it self, & them that can accuse me, let
them; and as for my Settlement it is in the Lord, where I have found an Habitation, and so am no Vagabond or Wanderer, though I challenge no Propriety in the Earth, because my Kingdom is not of this World, though you accuse me that I appear unto you to be an idle disorderly Person, and before you set me down James Parnel Labour∣er, and thus you utter forth your Folly with your changeable Minds; but I am a Labourer in the Gospel of God, in which Work none can tax me with Idleness, since I came into these Parts, but if I had been more idle in the same, ye would have been more pleased; for it is my great Labour and Diligence in this Work of the free Gospel, and the Prosperity thereof, in the overturning and laying open the Deceits of deceiving and deceived Men, that torments you, who are the Shelterers of the false Prophet, whom you carry in your Bo∣som, because he cryes Peace unto you, when the Lord cryes Wo; yet nevertheless, it is but for a Time; for the Hand of the Almighty is against you, and who shall deliver you? And when you have laid all these Lyes, Slan∣ders and false Accusations upon my Back, you commit me to the Common Goal for this County, as you say, in the Name of his Highness, the Lord Protector; and so you make his Name a Cover for your Lyes, and a Protector of Persecution and Oppression: But according to his own Declara∣tion, he took not upon him that Place and Title for that End, but by your Proceedings in his Name
it doth so appear, or else the Messengers and Ser∣vants of Jesus Christ would not be so persecuted, and cast into Prisons, and Dungeons, and Holes, in his Name, as they are: But what a Liberty of Conscience is this? and how will this stand in the Presence of the Almighty God, who will judge him that judgeth, as well as him that is judged? That all Sects, Forms, Judgments and Opini∣ons should be at Liberty, and be protected there∣in, and the dear Children of God persecuted, and imprisoned, and shamefully entreated as they are and all this done in the Name of the Lord Protector of England: Therefore in the Day of the Lord's Vengeance, he will be avenged of all his Adver∣saries from the least to the greatest, and who shall escape his Hand in the Day that he will deliver his own, and advance them above all their Ene∣mies, though here you his Enemies have cast me, you say, Until I shall be deliver'd by due Course of Law. Reply, What Law or Justice can I expect from such Unjust Lawyers and Judges as you are? For you that cast me in contrary and without Law; it's likely you will proceed contrary & without Law; for your own Law will bear Witness, and testifie against you to your Shame and Confusion of Face, though to this Libel you have set your Hands and Seals, who write your selves, Herbert Pellham, Tho∣mas Cook, Dyonisius Wakering, William Harlackinden. Here let your Hands bear Witness and testifie against
you for Enemies and Persecutors of the Just, who bind heavy Burthens, and lay them upon the Oppressed, but will not touch them with one of you Fingers, but the greater will be your Condemnation, when there is none to deliver you from the Hand of the Almighty, neither Rocks nor Mountains to shelter you, but the Refuge of Lyes shall be done away; therefore while you have Time prize it, and bring your Deeds to the Light, and own your Condemnation by the Light, that your Souls may be saved; now you are warned, and the Messenger of the Lord discharged, by whom you are warned, and the Truth cleared from your Lyes and false Accusations, which in the Enmity of your Spirits you have cast upon it: And so in the Liberty and Peace I rest and stand, where∣in Christ hath set e free, which none can take away, who am a Sufferer in outward Bonds for the Testimony of a pure Conscience, at Colchester-Castle▪ who am known to you my Persecutors by the Name, J. Parnel.
Here followeth a Copy of some QUERIES, that were sent with the fore-going Letter, to the Ju∣stices, so called. Several Queries to all you Magistrates and Of∣ficers, and Proud and Lofty Ones, who Rage, Persecute and Despise Men because they can∣not put off their Hats to you; and call it, A Contemning of Authority, and Mis-behaviour, and yet say, you are Christian-Magistrates, and profess the Scriptures to be your Rule: Now, try your selves, and prove your Practice by the Scripture, and by it Answer these Queries. Query 1. WHat Rule have you in the Scripture for the putting off the Hat? 2. What is that in Man, that would be honou∣red with the putting off the Hat, or bowing the Knee?
3. Why is it called Courtesie to put off the Hat to the Poor; and Honour, and Manners, and Due Respect to put off the Hat to the Rich? 4. Whether is this Respect of Persons, because of Advantage? yea or nay: or what makes this Difference? 5. Where is your Example for this amongst all the Christians under the Gospel, as you profess? 6. And what is that in Man that so swells, and causeth such Wrath and Rage to appear against another, for not putting off the Hat, if the put∣ting off the Hat or bowing the Knee be such a small Matter, as some acconnt it? 7. Whether is that right Authority or Justice in man, that commands his Fellow-Creature to put off the Hat before him, and so to stand until he suffer him to put it on; and if he doth not so stand, then to fall into Wrath and Rage, and say, He Contemns Authority? yea or nay. 8. Where is there any Law that commands a man to put off his Hat to one man more then ano∣ther? 9. And if there was a Law that did so com∣mand, whether he that obeyes the Law of God,James 2. 9. that commands No Respect of Persons, and dis∣obeys the other Law, do Contemn Authority? yea or nay. 10.Esther 3. Whether was that Authority in Haman to be obeyed (who was a Chief Ruler) and would have had Mordecai to have bowed unto him? 11. And what was that in Haman that made
him full of Wrath, so that he would have destroy∣ed Mordecai, and all the Jews in the Nation, be∣cause Mordecai could not bow unto him; and what Difference is there betwixt Haman and you in this Matter, who now are full of Wrath and Rage, and imprison those that cannot put off their Hats to you? 12. And whether was that Misbehaviour, or a Contemning of Authority in Mordecai, in not o∣beying the Kings Command to bow unto Haman, as you say it is in not putting off the Hat, or bow∣ing to you now; and wherein do you see any Dif∣ference betwixt these men now, and Mordecai in that Matter, seeing they suffer Imprisonment before they can do it? 13. And what Lordship and Authority was that,Mat. 20. 25. which they that were accounted to rule over the Gentiles, did exercise upon them, which Christ declared against to his Disciples, and wherein do you differ from them in that Matter? 14. And what Honour was that which the Pha∣risees received one of another,John▪ 54. 4. for which Cause Christ judged them to be in the Unbelief, and whether you be not guilty of the same? yea or nay. 15. And what is the Honour which comes from God▪ which Christ there spoak of; and whether it stands in the putting off a Hat? yea or nay. 16. What is the Beast,Rev. 13. 3, 8. which all the World worships and wonders after? and what is the Wor∣ship of that Beast, and his Image? and whether the
Power and Authority of that Beast is to be obey'd? yea or nay. 17. How is Justice to be honoured? 18. And whether a Man may not put off his Hat to a Magistrate, and yet envy him, and hate him in his heart? And whether many in these dayes do not so? And whether this be the Honour that a Magistrate ought to seek for? yea or nay. 19. And whether a Man may not honour Ju∣stice and Equity in is heart without putting off a Hat to a Magistrate? and he that so doth, Whe∣ther is he fit to be called a Magistrate, that calleth such a one A Contemner of Authority, and commits him to Prison for Mis-behaviour? And whether this be Justice or Equity? yea or nay. 20. And you that plead this Scripture, Be sub∣ject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake; Whether is it for the Lord's sake, that a Man would have his Fellow-Creature to stand with his Hat off before him, or for his Selfs sake; and whether then it is to be obeyed? yea or nay. 21. And he that for the Lord's sake, aud for Conscience sake, cannot so rob God of his Glo∣ry and Honour, as to bow to or worship any Crea∣ture, but God alone, who is the Creator; Whe∣ther ought he to be imprisoned for Mis-behaviour, or a Contemner of Authority? yea or nay, ac∣cording to the Law of Equity: And whether this is to be called Liberty of Conscience, according to the Law of England? yea or nay.
Now, all you that profess your selves Christians, and the Scripture to be your Rule; take the Scripture, and prove your Practice by the Scripture amongst all the Christians; or else, let the Life and Practice of the True Christians judge you and condemn you; and own your selves to be in Proud Haman's Nature, and so liable to Haman's Judgment: And hence forward look to your Office, to Rule for God, and not for your selves, and then you will not stand upon such frivolous things; for, it is a frivolous thing to look for the putting off the Hat, and is no Part of True Nobility or Christianity. Given forth for the Clearing of the Truth, to which the Nations must bow. James Parnel.
Here followeth a Copy of a Note that was written against the Idol's Temple, which was judged a Contempt of the Ministry. THis is the Idols-Temple, where the Worship of the Beast is upheld, down with it, down with it, 1 Cor. 8. 10. Rev. 13. 7, 8. Deut. 12. God that made the World and all Things therein, dwells not in Temples made with Hands, Acts 7. 47, 48, 49. Acts 17. 11. Neither is he worship∣ped in Idols Temples made with Mens Hands, Acts 17. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father is seeking such to worship him, John 23. 24. All the World wonders after and worships the Beast, but those who have their Names writ∣ten in the Book of Life, Rev. 13. 3, 4, 8. And they that worship the Beast, receive his Mark in their Foreheads, Rev. 13. 16. As sprinkling In∣fants, and worshipping the Works of their own Hands, Isa. 2. 8. And following the Imaginati∣ons of their own Hearts; such must drink of the
Wine of the Wrath of the Almighty, poured out without Mixture, Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11, 12. This Idols Temple that is made with Hands, is a Place for Night-Birds and Scrich-Owls to meet each one with his Mate, Jer. 34. 13, 14, 15. To the Dishonour of the only true God, that dwelleth in Temples made without Hands, at New Jerusalem, where the Tabernacle of God is with Men, Rev. 21. 3. Drunkards and Swearers, Revilers, and Scoffers, and Scorners, Proud and Wan∣ton Ones, Hypocrites and Dissemblers, Envious Haters, Backbiters, Persecutors, Lustful Covetous Ones, and Earth-worms, meet here; the Fearful and Unbelie∣ving, Peevish, Perverse, Contentious Ones meet in these Idols Temples, to satisfie their Lusts: And saith the Lord, these People draw near me with their Mouthes, and honour me with their Lips, but their Hearts are far from me; but in vain do they wor∣ship me, teaching for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9. But know you not that no Unrighteous Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. But must be cut down, and cast into the Lake that burneth, Rev. 21. 8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, such as you sow, such must you reap, Gal. 6. 7. And to whom you yield your Members Servants to obey, his Servants you are, Rom. 6. 16. For he that com∣mits Sin, is the Servant of Sin, and so is of the Devil, Joh. 8. 34. 1. Joh. 3. This is a Deceiver that stands up here every first Day
of the Week to deceive the People; he is Proud and Co∣vetous, and speaketh a Divination of his own Brain, but not from the Mouth of the Lord, and so makes the People light and vain, Jer. 14. 14. But the Lord is against him, hold him not up; for he ran and the Lord never sent him, therefore he profits not the People at all, Jer. 3. 1, 2, 3. But hath stollen the Letter, which is Carnal, with it to feed the Carnal, for Carnal Ends and Lucre, and so hath a Form, but denyes the Life and Power, and therefore from him turn away, 2 Tim. 3. 5. Therefore spend not your Money for that which is not Bread, nor your Labour for that which profiteth not, Isa. 55. 1, 2. For all the Children of the Lord are and shall be taught of the Lord, and in Righteousness shall they be established, and they shall be far from Oppression, Jer. 31. 34. Isa. 54. 13. 1 Joh. 2. 27. He that hath an Ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit saith, and be deceiv'd no longer. J. P.
Here follow several Queries that were sent to four of the chief Priests in Essex, with some more added, which may be serviceable for them, or any other, to answer, whom they do concern. SEveral Queries unto Priest Sammes, Priest Sparrow, Priest Willi, and Priest Stellum, and your gathered Churches, by you to be answered according to Scripture, which you pro∣fess to be your Rule. Query 1. How and by what were you called to the Ministry which you profess? 2. What is the Gospel which you pretend to preach? and how did you receive it? and whe∣ther your Gospel be free, and without Charge, as the Apostles was, yea or nay? 3. What do you minister from? and what do you minister to in the Natural Man? and what is the End of your Ministry?
4. What Rule have you in the Scripture to take a Text of the Apostles Words, and speak from it what you have studyed, with your Uses, Points, Tryals, and Motives, and Applications? 5. Whether do you speak by the same infalli∣ble Spirit, as they did that spoak forth the Scrip∣ture, yea or nay? 6. And whether he that hath the same infalli∣ble Spirit need study how or what to preach? 7. And whether it is not as lawful now for Fi∣shermen, Plowmen, or Herdsmen to preach, if they be called to it, and fitted for it, by the same Power and Spirit as they were in the dayes of old? and whether Christ is not the same Yesterday, to Day and orever, according to Scripture? 8. And whether any now ought to teach and preach in the Name of Jesus, but who are called to it and fitted for it the same Way as the holy Men of God were, spoken of in Scripture? 9. Whether do you own immediate Revelation now, yea or nay? 10. What is a Minister of Christ? and what is a Minister of Anti-christ? and do you distinguish the one from the other? 11. What Scripture have you to give unto the World David's Condition to be sung in a Meeter? 12. What Rule have you in the Scripture to abide in a certain Place, and to agree with the People fo so much a Year or preaching, as forty,
sixty, or an hundred or two hundred Pound, as you can get it? 13. How and by what are you gathered and u∣nited, who call your selves a Church? 14. And what is the Church in God? and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 15. What is the Baptism into the Church? and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 16. And what Scripture have you to sprinkle Children with Water? and to what End do you do it? 17. Whether you be of one Heart and Mind, as the true Church was, yea or nay? 18. Whether you have passed from Death to Life, yea or nay? 19. What is the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ? and whether to it you be come, yea or nay? 20. Whether he that believes is not born of God? and whether he that is born of God doth not commit Sin, yea or nay? 21. Why do not you maintain your Teacher, but let him rob the VVorld instead of robbing o∣ther Churches, and so is chargeable unto the VVorld? 22. VVhether do you own and hold up the first Priesthood, that took Tythes, or second Priesthood that took no Tythes? and which do you deny, seeing you pay Tythes, and you Teachers take Tythes, yea or nay? 25. Why do you own and hold up such that are alled of Men Master, and have the chiefest Place in
the Assembly, and stand praying in the Synagogue, and love Greetings in the Markets, which Christ himself cryed Wo against? 24. How is Christ the Light of the World? and how doth he enlighten every one that cometh into the World, if it be not in the Conscience? and whe∣ther that Light which comes from him be Natu∣ral, yea or nay? 25. How is the Light the Condemnation of the World, if it be not in the Conscience? 26. Ad how is it said, That he that doth Evil hateth the Light, and will not bring his Deeds to the Light, lest the Light should reprove him, if it be not in the Conscience? and whether that be a Na∣tural Light which reproves for Sin, Yea or Nay? 27. How did Paul turn Peoples Minds from Dark∣ness to Light, if it be not in the Conscience? and whether that Light was Natural which Paul was sent to turn the Minds of the Gentiles unto? 28. Whether that Light which shines in Dark∣ness be not one & the same with that which shines out of Darkness, Yea or Nay? 29. And whether the Light of the World be not a saving Light in the least Measure, Yea or Nay? and how can that be said to be Natural? 30. Whether the Light which John came to bear Witness of, was Natural or Spiritual? 31. How hath the Grace of God, which bringeth Salvation, appeared to all Men, if it be not in the Conscience? and whether it be Natural? 32. How doth it stand with the Impartial God
to give to one Man a Measure of Grace, and not to another, and yet requie Obedience from all? 33. Whether the sloathful Servant hath not a Talent as well as the faithful, though he hides it in the Earth? and what is that Talent? 34. What is the Account that God will re∣quire of every one in the Day of Judgment? and how can he call all justly to an Account, and re∣ward them according to their Deeds, if he hath not given to every one a Talent? 35. What is that which leads to Repentance? and whether that which leads to Repentance be not in the Conscience? and whether it be Natu∣ral, Yea or Nay? 36. And where do you read in the Scripture of a Natural Light to be in the Conscience? 37. What is the Redemption? and what is the End of Christ's Coming? 38. Whether the Redemption by Christ be not as full in every Respect, as the Fall by Adam? and what is the Fall by Adam? 39. And whether you do not go about to make the Commands of Christ unjust, who saith, Be you perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect? and you say, It cannot be while you are upon the Earth; then how is it your Rule? 40. Will you own a Purgatory? or where is the Place betwixt Heaven and Earth, where Man shall be cleansed, if not upon the Earth, seeing no unclean Thing can inherit the Kingdom of God?
41. Whether do they deny Christ come in the Flesh, that witness forth Perfection from Sin here, or they that tell People, They can never be perfect, or be wholely set free from Sin so long as they are upon the Earth? and whether such be not the Ministers of Anti-christ, Yea or Nay? 42. Where had you this Doctrine, to tell Peo∣ple, The Light in the Conscience is Natural, and that Christ hath not enlightened every one that cometh into the World? 43. And whether in this you do not bring ano∣ther Doctrine, in Opposition to the Doctrine of Christ, who saith, He is the Light of the World, and doth enlighten every one that cometh into the World? 44. And where had you this Doctrine, to tell People, They could never be wholly cleansed, or be set free from Sin, so long as they are upon he Earth? 45. And whether this be not in Opposition to the Doctrine of Christ, who saith, Be ye perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect? 46. VVhether God justifies any in their Sin? and whether Sanctification goes not before Justifi∣cation, Yea or Nay? 47. VVhether you do not seek Justification by VVorks, who put one another upon Prayer, and Duties, Observations, Ordinances, and Com∣mands, without the Light, in Imitation of the Letter? and whether these be not your own Works which are done out of the Light, Yea or Nay?
48. What is your own Righteousness? and what is the Righteousness of Christ? and how do you distinguish betwixt the one and the other? 49. And whether he that is justified by the Righteousness of Christ, doth not dwell in it, and it in him? and whether he that dwells in the Righteousness of Christ doth sin, Yea or Nay? 50. Whether any can walk according to the Scripture, but by the Light of Christ? and whe∣ther any that are guided by the Light of Christ, do, or can act contrary to the Scripture? and whether this Light be not a sufficient Guide, if it be owned and followed? 51. How is the Scripture left unto the World for a Rule, who know not the Light, seeing to them it is a Parable, and as a Book Sealed? 52. And what is the Word and whether there be any other VVord of God then one? 53. VVhat is the Death that hath passed over all Men, forasmuch as all Men have sinned? and whether this Death you ever passed, Yea or Nay? 54. VVhat is that which is lost, which Christ comes to seek▪ and what is that which was dri∣ven away, which Christ comes to bring again? and whether this is not to be witnessed and fulfil∣led in Man, Yea or Nay? 55. VVhat is the Paradice wherein Man was placed? and what was the Image of God, wherein Man was created? 56. And how was Man a living Soul? and whether all this is not to be restord unto Man, and
fulfilled and witnessed unto Man, while he is upon the Earth, Yea or Nay? 57. What is the Tree of Life? and what is the Tree of Knowledge? and whether upon it you do not feed? and what is the flaming Sword that is set to keep from the Tree of Life? and whether it you ever passed? 58. Whether the Natural Man can try and discern false Spirits by the Scripture? and by what doth the spiritual Man try and judge all Things? and whether by the same he did not try and dis∣cern Spirits? 59. And by what did the Holy Men of God, that gave forth the Scripture try and discern Spi∣rits? and whether yours be the same Tryer of Spirits, as theirs was, who say, You must try the Spirit by the Letter? 60. Whether you are not conform'd like unto the World, so long as you follow their Fashions and Customs? 61. VVhether you are not partial amongst your selves so long as you respect Persons? These Things I do not ask as if I knew them not, but for the Satisfaction of the Simple, and the clearing of the Truth, and Manifesting your Deceit to the World, by which you have deceived the World, who are the De∣ceivers of the World; therefore answer by plain Scrip∣ture, and your own Experience, or else let all Flesh keep Silence before the Lord, and let Guilt stop your Mouthes; for Railing, Reproaching, and Blaspheming the Truth
of God, which is made manifest in these People, whom you scornfully call Quakers, who by you and your Agents are persecuted: but where do you find that the Church of God was ever Persecutors, or ever made Use of Carnal VVeapons to defend them? J. P. Here followeth a Copy of a Letter that I was moved to write to Judge Hills after the Assize. A Few VVords nto thee that art set in the Seat to do Justice, and to bear the Sword of Justice in thy Hand, and hast turned the Edge of it against the Righteous, and laid it upon the Inno∣cent; and thy fair VVords will not shelter nor cover thy deceitful Actions, but thy deceitful Heart is made manifest, and thy Hypocrisie doth there appear;Sa. 5. 10. for thou hast hearkned unto the false Prophet, and by his enticing VVords thou art deceived, and so puttest Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, Evil for Good, and Good for Evil, and so art lyable to the VVo from the Lord, and hast persecuted Christ, and set at Li∣berty Barrabas; yea, and I was numbred amongst Transgressors, yet could not have the Liberty of Transgressors, as in many Things might be nomi∣nated;
but in short I shall declare it; First, That mine Accusers should stand in the Place as Judges over me, and their Accusations and false Witnesses to be heard to the full, and also to whisper and buz in thy Ears in secret, what they would against me, and also that thou that satest in the Seat as a Judge, to repeat over unto the Jury all that thou couldst gather by wrong Interpreta∣tion and Construction against me, but nothing of my Defence against my Accusations, but rather to drive out of their Minds, by thy evil incensing, what I had before declared in my own Defence; but thou, as it were, passedst the Sentence upon me before the Jury went forth; but thou thoughtst thou hadst pannelled a Jury, wherewith thou wast pleased to try me, according to thine own Mind and Will; for the Fore-man was a Drunkard, and the rest Swearers, out of the Doctrine of Christ; against all which I did object, and denyed by them to be tryed; but it was thy Will and Pleasure so to do; and when they come to bring in their Evidence, they had so much Understanding, that they charg'd me with nothing but the Papers which I had before con∣fessed to be mine, and owned them, but the In∣dictment they would not own to be Truth against me, though dishonestly both thou and the Clerk did draw Words out of the Fore-man of the Jury, which the rest did not consent to; and then in thy Will, with thy fair and deceitful Speeches, thou imposedst a Fine upon me, contrary to all Law
and Equity; but where Equity is not, it cannot be expected; for Oppression within, Oppression without; and he that cannot Witness the Sword of Justice set up in his Heart, knows not how to handle it without; for he that rules not by the Law of God in his Heart, rules in his own VVill, and is partial, and understands not the Things of God; but what pleaseth his VVill, that he che∣risheth; and what crosseth his VVill, that he would curb: and the VVill of Man is opposite to the VVill of God; therefore the Cross of Christ is of Use to them that know it, but a stumbling Block to the VVorld; but he that rules in his own VVill is no Minister of God; he that respects Persons is not fit to bear Rule for God; he that seeks himself is not fit to bear Rule for God; all which appeared, and was openly manifest in thee in the open Court, as in those Things before mentioned, and many other which are now out of Mind; but for the clearing of my Conscience unto thee, I was moved to write, that thou mightst see what thou hast done, and be left without Excuse of Ig∣norance in the Presence of the Almighty; for contrary to the Light of God in thy Conscience thou hast acted, by which thou standest Accued in the Presence of the Almighty, and if thy Conscience accuse thee, God is greater: But if thou hadst stood in the Place where thou art set, to judge of legal Matters about natural & temporal Things, thou hadst had the less to account for; but in medling to judge about Spiritual Mat∣ters, is Authority which the Scripture (which thou
callest thy Rule▪ doth not allow thee; for the Na∣tural Man perceives not the Things of God, because they are spiritually discered; therefore in this the spiri∣tual Man judgeth thee, and thy Condemnation is great; therefore lay these Things to Heart, and put them not far from thee; or to the Light of God in thy Con∣science I do speak, which eternally will witness me, & condemn thee in the Presence of the Almighty, who hast taken upon thee to judge and condemn those whom God hath justified. Thereore consi∣der what advantageth it thee, or what will it ad∣vantage thee, when thou comest to give an Ac∣count before the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, the Judge of all the Quick and the Dead, if thou hast now Power to keep this Body in Prison until thou hast the Life of the Creature, which I am freely made willing to give up, rather then to deny the Truth of my God? And if I should pay one Pen∣ny for the Liberty of my Body in this Cause, would be as much as if I paid the whole Fine, which thou hast unjustly laid upon me; for therein I should own my self a Transgressor where I am not guilty; and also a bought Liberty is Bon∣dage to my Spirit, but my Liberty under thy Bonds, is Bondage to thee, which Liberty thou canst not rob me of, with all that thou canst do; for it is the Free-Gift of God, which none can take away, though thou wilt not allow me in thy Bonds to have the outward Liberty that thou allowest to Thieves, and Murderers, and Fornicators, that is, to have my Friends and Acquaintance to come
to see me, wherein the very Heathen will condemn thee, who when they had committed Paul to Pri∣son, said, Forbid none of his Friends and Acquain∣tance to come to see him, Acts 22. 24. Therefore now read how thou exceedest the Heathen in Per∣secution and Injustice, though I am a free-born Subject in England; therefore let the Life of all the Christians condemn thee, who never were Persecutors. And this of the Lord I was moved to write, which is the Word of the Lord unto thee, whether thou wilt hear or forbear, in the Peace of my Conscience I do rest in the Will of God; known to thee by the Name, James Parnel. And now a few Words unto you, who call your selves Gathered Churches, & go under the Name of Independents, in Essex. YOU are gathered by the Will of Man, and are joyned by the Will of Man, and so stand in the Will of Man, and are upheld by the Will of Man, by which you are begotten, but still a∣live in the World's Nature, in the World's Cu∣stoms, Fashions and Traditions, in the World's
Fellowship, Words and Wayes, and Rudiments; only differing from others in Judgment, Opinion or Profession, wherein is your Life, in high No∣tions, and feigned Apprehensions, and false Ap∣plications, and glorious Expressions, and custo∣mary Duties, and vain Traditions, which all appertain to the great Image, which all the world worships, by which they are deceived, whose Head is Gold, and Breast of Silver, and Thighs of Brass, and Legs of Iron, and Feet part Iron part Clay: and in the same Nature ye are found with the world, the Day doth declare it, and you to be the Ene∣mies and Stangers to the Light, which is not of the world, which is now come into the world, testifying against the world, and the Deceit of the world, and the Deceivers in the World, and the Profession of the world; And this is the Con∣demnation of the world, that Light is come into the world, and men love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil: In which Evil you are found, despising and setting at nought the Corner-Stone, and standing in the Enmity of your Spirits, and joyning with the Powers of the Earth to persecute the Life and Power which now is manifest in the Earth, and is come to discover your Empty Shadows, Forms and fair Shews of Godliness, but without Life and Power, which you have set up in your Imaginations, and there∣by are deceived and blinded, and led in Blind∣ness, so that you cannot see the Light, nor re∣ceive
the Substance now it is come and made ma∣niest; but stand up in your Wills and wisdom to oppose the same, and persecute it in the Enmi∣ty of your Spirits, as if you hoped to kill the Heir, that the Inheritance might be yours: And there∣fore, Because you do despise this Day of your Visitation, and reject and sleight the Glad-tidings which now are come to them that dwell upon the Earth; and revil and reproach, persecute and slander the faithful Messen∣gers of the Gospel, rejoycing your Hearts in their Suf∣ferings by you and amongst you; therefore the Lord will raise up a People out of the Dust, and gather them from far, to bear Testimony unto his Name, and bear witness against you, yea, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of the Son; and you, and such as you, shall be cast out into Tophet, pre∣pared of old for Hypocrites and Unbelievers. There∣fore now read your Portion, ye stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, who do al∣wayes resist the Holy Ghost; as did your Fathers so do ye; but the greater will be your Condemna∣tion, who go about to mock God with your Will-worship, with your Calling of Assemblies, and Solemn Meetings, with your appointed Fasts, and Dayes of Voluntary Humiliation, with your Long Prayers, and Feigned Duties; all which are done out of the Light, and so are your own Works, acted by Self, for Self: But who has required these things at your Hands? It is all Abomination to the Lord; his Soul loaths it:
For, your Sacrifices are are as Cain's; for, you are found in Cain's Nature, Envying and Perse∣cuting the Righteous; yea, the Witness lieth slain in your Streets. Therefore VVo is unto you who go on in the Way of Cain; for, upon you shall come all the Righteous Bloodshed, from Righteous Abel until now: And your Profession stinks in the Nostrils of the Lord; for you have lifted up your Hands against him and his Anoin∣ted, and opened your Mouths in Blasphemy and False Reports against the Truth; yea, you are blind, and stumble at the Noon-day; you come near the Lord with your Lips, but your hearts run a Whoring after other Lovers, and you know not the Only True God, that dwells in Temples made without hands, whose VVorship is in Spirit and in Truth; but would limit the Unlimited under your VVills, as if he were not a God of Might, but that you could controle him with the Arm of Flesh: But, Be not deceived, God is not mocked; such as you sow, such shall you reap; and your End shall be according to your Works:Gal. 6. 7. For, our God is a God of Judgment and Justice, and will avenge the Cause of the Innocent upon you his Adversaries: Yea, and though your Teachers do cry Peace, Peace unto you, because you put into their Mouthes, and so daub you up with Untempered Morter, that you cannot see your VVouud, and so heal you sleightly: Yet you shall know, that our God is
a God of Truth, and his VVord shall stand fore∣ver; and their Sorcery shall appear, and their Witchcraft shall be laid open, and the Cup of For∣nication (wherewith they have made drunk and deluded the Nations) shall be taken from them, & the Cup of the Wrath of the Almighty given them to drink their Reward: And then shall you behold the Harlot, with whom you have committed Fornication, who now lies in your Bosoms, Bewitching you with a Golden Cup, with whom you have defiled your Garments, then to be cast into the Bottomless Pit, where you shall all be tor∣mented together, who now partake of her Pleasures: and thus shall you fall among them that fall, in the Day that I visit you, saith the Lord. J. Parnel.
A Few Words to all my Dear Friends in and about the County of Essex. AND all you my dear Friends, you scattered and despised Ones, in and about the Coun∣ty of Essex, whom the Lord by his Powerful Word is now gathering out of Darkness, into his Marvelous Light; out of the Kingdom of this world, into the Kingdom of his dear Son, whom he is separating unto himself to walk before him in Holiness, that you might know him, and he might know you in the Light of his Countenance, whose Faces he hath turned towards Sion, to seek after a Land of Rest unto your wearied Souls, which have been tossed to and fro, from Mountain to Hill, in this Cloudy and Dark Day, seeking Rest, but finding none: But now is the Day of Beauty broaken forth nigh you, even in you; Yea, and Glad-tidings is come unto your wearied Souls, by which a pure Love is begotten in you to the Everlasting Truth, which hath been freely de∣clared amongst you by the Messengers of the Most High, who have reached the Witness for God in your Consciences, which doth seal the same up∣on
your Hearts, which your Teacher is, and un∣to it you hearken, and are obedient: In which Light all stand still, and behold the Work which the Lord hath begun amongst you; and you shall have no Cause of Discouragement, though the Sea doth rise, and the Raging Waves do swell, as if they would swallow all up; yet it is limited by the Unlimited, and it shall but foam out its own Shame. And as I had a Time to preach the Truth amongst you, to the Convincement of many; so also now I have a Time to seal the same with Patient Suffering in the Bonds of the Gospel, that you may see, That it is no other but what we are made able and willing to seal with patient Suffering, yea, with our Blood, if we be called to it, as many of us have done in this Nation, though it be called A Land of Liberty, but it is for Iniqui∣ty; but Truth and Equity are Strangers in it, and therefore are persecuted: But you that are found worthy to receive these Strangers, happy are you: And though the Raging Sodomites com∣pass you about, for to cause you to cast out these Strangers, that they may work their Wills upon them, yet be Faithful, and fear them not; but cast out your Darlings before them, and stand in the Faith of the God of Truth and Equity, and you shall see the Sodomites struck with Blindness, that they shall not be able to prevail against you; but when they are weary with striving, they shall be made to sit down in Sorrow; and so shall it
be fulfilled which of old was prophesied, that No Weapon formed against the Faithful shall prosper; but, Wo unto them that lift up their Heel against them. Therefore I charge you all in the Name of the God of Truth, Be Faithful, Valliant and Bold for the Truth received: and as you have received it, so walk in it; that you may profess no more in Word, but what in Life you seal; that the Light may be prea∣ched forth in your Lives, and shine forth in your Con∣versations, to the Glory of the Father of Lights, and the Confounding of the Heathen, who profess God in VVords, but in Life deny him: And be wil∣ling that Self shall suffer for the Truth, and not the Truth for Self (for the Truth was ever sealed with Persecution since Gain's Generation had a Being upon the Earth) and so own the Cross, and despise the Shame; and give up your selves to suffer for the Truth received, all you that would follow the Lamb to the Land of Rest, and through many Tryals you will wax strong and bold, and confident in your God; for, God is not known what a God he is, until the Time of Tryal. And all keep your Meetings in the Name and Fear of the Lord God, waiting for his Power, in the Obedience to his Light, which in your Consciences doth reprove you when you do amiss, that in it you may wait, and watch over the Foes that are of your own House, that you may know the Warfare begun in your Hearts against your Spiritual Enemies; and so the God of Power manifest himself amongst you by his Mighty Power, bringing down all that in you which opposes him,
and would not that he should reign over it, and exalt his own Seed in your Hearts, and establish you in Righ∣teousness, that his Image you may bear; and He shall be your God, and Ye shall be his People. And so, in the Unchangeable Truth, I rest, in Unity with all the Faithful, in the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, though in Out∣ward Bonds for your sakes. Known to all that can read me in Spirit, JAMES PARNEL.
Goliah's Head Cut off with his OWN SVVORD In a Combat betwixt Little David, the Young Stripling, who stands in the Power and Strength of his GOD; and great Goliah, the Proud Boaster, who stands in his Own Strength, glorying in the Arm of Flesh, and con∣temning and despising Little David, because of his Youth. In a REPLY to a Book set forth by an Unnamed Author, under Pretence of an Answer to Thirty Six Que∣ries, propounded by Iames Parnel, whom he in Scorn calls, The Young QVAKER. And also, an Answer to several Counter-Queries, propounded by the same Unnamed Author, whom I understand to be one Thomas Draton, a Teacher of the World at Abby Rippon, in Huntingtonshire; wherein his Folly and Ignorance is much laid open, and the Pride and Deceit of his Spirit much manifested; and also, he that takes his Part, who writes himself W. P. who knows not the Power of God, and there∣fore glories in the Length of Time, and the Multitude of Years. But Solomon, who was a Wiser Man then Great Goliah, said, That the Ho∣nourable Age is not that which is of Long Time, neither that which is measured by the Number of Years; but Wisdom is the Gray Hair, and an Vn∣defiled Life is Old Age. And therefore, let not the Wise Man glory in his Wisdom, nor the Strong Man glory in his Strength; for, it is Vanity. JAMES PARNEL. Printed in the Year 1675.
GOLIAH's HEAD Cut of with his Own Sword, &c. The Title of the aforesaid Book. An Answer according to Truth, that trembles not, nor quakes, nor quaileth, given to thirty six Queries, propounded by James Parnel (commonly called the Young Quaker) to an ancient Country Minister; with some Counter-Queries by the said Minister, unto the said Young Quack and his Fellows. Reply, HEre thou mayst be ashamed to stile thy self an ancient Minister, who manifests such an Ishmael's Spirit, who with reproachful Words makest a Scoff at the Power of Truth,Heb. 12. 21. which the Mini∣sters of God in all Ages witnessed,Jer. 23. 9. which made them to quake and tremble:Job. 4. 14. And though the Truth neither quakes nor quaileth,Ezek. 32. 10. yet all that owned the Truth▪ owned and witnessed quaking and trembling which Truth thou manifests thy self but a Professor of, and a Stranger to the Pow∣er, and a Despiser thereof; and therefore, out
from among the Ministers of Christ thou art rai∣sed; and thy Answer is not according to Truth, but a Lye, as shall further be made to appear here∣after, by him whom thou callest the Young Quack; and it seems, Fear surpriseth the Heart of the Hy∣pocrite, so that thou art ashamed to own thy Work with thy Name. Priest, And whereas thou saist, Courteous Reader, we are forced, notwithstanding so many Pamphlets ex∣tant against the People called Quakers, to give Answer to thirty six Queries of James Parnel's, the Young Quaker. Reply, Although thou hast boasted thy self an ancient Minister, and contemnest me as a young Boy, yet here it appears, that thou art glad of o∣thers to help thee to answer my Queries, as these Words before mentioned do testifie; and yet it is but a Pamphlet, as thou and thy Helpers do confess, that those many are that are extant a∣gainst the People called Quakers: And then thou runst on in Way of Reproach and Scorn against me, because of my Youth; but the Wisdom of Solomon answereth you, That a poor and wise Child is better then an old foolish King, who will no more be admonished; and therefore, when you think of your Age, consider also your Folly, and let that stop your Mouthes from professing your selves Ancients, who manifest such a light scornful Spi∣rit, and hate to be reformed. Priest, And whereas thou saist, Thou doubtest not but his Queries are the Dictates of others, deceiving
and being deceived, which yet they put under the Boy's Name, for the Credit of their Cause. Here also, without Doubt, thy unbelieving Heart is manifested, who without Ground measu∣rest others according to thine own Heart, who be∣cause thou makest Use of the Dictates of others, as here doth plainly appear, therefore censurest others, which doth not add Credit to thy Cause, because thou boasts of thy Age. Priest, But according as thou believest, so be it to thee, yet nevertheless, thou shalt find, that the Truth I shall maintain against thee, who with thy Unbelieving Heart art deceiving and being deceived; and then thou runnest on in the Pride of thy Spirit, accu∣sing of me to be Ignorant of the Truth of God, because (as thou sayst) of the false wording of my Queries. Reply, But with Shame mightst thou speak it; for openly hast thou manifested to the Understand∣ing Reader thy self to be a meer Stranger, both to God and his Truth also, who wouldst limit the Truth of God to an human Art, which many of the Children of God had not, and therefore the Power of God was the more manifested: And when Peter and John were brought before the lear∣ned Men, to wit (the chief Priests and the Rulers) and they wondred at them, because they percei∣ved they were unlearned Men; and thus with thy Wisdom, and thy great Learning, thou art shut out of the Truth in the natural; but by this I do not own thy Accusation to be Truth against me; for I have a Copy of the Queries of my own Hand∣writing,
which was the Original of those that were sent to thee, which will bear Testimony a∣gainst thee, to be a false Accuser, and how thou thy self hast wronged them and misworded them, because they were in the Cross unto thy Wisdom; and to maintain this, thou bringest a Story in E∣rasmus; nevertheless, the Story which thou bringest doth not at all touch me, but may fitly be returned into thy own Bosom, where it shall le: Then thou and thy Agent do beseech the Rea∣der to read without Partiality, which if he do, he will judge no otherwise of you, then as I have declared, but will see how you have uttered forth your Folly, and foamed out your Shame, in going about to contradict the truth: And at the End of this your Epistle to the Reader, I find W. P. which I judge to be one of thy Agents to this your shameful Work, to which thou darest not own thy Name. My first Query. Where, and how, and by what wast thou called to the Ministry which thou professest? Pr. Answ. And in thy Auswer thou goest about to plead many Excuses, whereby to flee the An∣swering of my Queries; saying, It is easier for him that is yet in Darkness to propound Doubts and Queries, then for some of the Children of Light to auswer them on a suddain. Which to prove, thou quotest Daniel; and that our Saviour (thou say'st)
himself refused to answer the Pharisees Interogatories, till they had first answered his, Mat. 21. 23, 24. And albeit thou say'st, Thou might'st put me off with Solo∣mon's Words, Prov. 26. 4. Answer not a Fool accor∣ding to his Folly, lest thou also be like unto him. Reply, I did not propound the Queries unto thee, as any Doubts of mine; but that thou in thy Answer thereunto, mightst either prove thy Practice by the Scriptures unto them that are in Doubt thereof, or unto them manifest thy self to be a Deceiver; which last thou hast plainly done to the least Child of Light: and therefore it doth not follow, that I am in Darkness, or that thou art a Child of Light. Neither didst thou suddainly answer the Queries, though they concerned thy own Condition, and therefore this Place in Daniel doth not at all stand for thee; for, it was for Daniel to tell and interpret Nebu∣chadnezzer's Dream; which was a hard thing for any to tell, unless it was immediately revealed to them by God's Spirit, as it was to Daniel; but all the Magicians and Learned Men could not find it out by their Arts: But most of these Queries unto thee were concerning thy present Condition and Practice; and herein thou mani∣festest thy self to be in Darkness, who thus wrests the Scripture out of its Place, for thy own Ends. And also, Daniel was a Man that Feared the Lord,Dan. 10. and Trembled at his Power; which now thou deny∣est and scoffest at; and yet art not ashamed to
take Daniel's Words for a Refuge against the Light. And as for that Scripture in Mat. 21. 23, 24. it shall be returned into thine own Bosom; for, it is thee, and such as thee, who are set up by the Will of Man, and Authorized by the Authority of Man, who joyn with the Pharisees and Scribes of these Times, and combine together with the Earthly Powers to call us to question, By what Authority we go abroad, preaching the Truth from Place to Place, and Crying against Deceivers, and where we had our Commission, because we receive it not from Man, as you do; but do witness the same Power and Authority as the Ministers of God did in all Ages, and the same Commission; for, they received not their Commission from Man, but were immediately called, and immediately fitted, and sent forth into the Work of the Ministry, freely to give, as freely they had received; and were persecu∣ted by them that were set up by the Will of Man, which also we do witness; and therefore the Scripture afore-mentioned belongeth unto thy Generation, who were ever Persecutors. And if by propounding Queries thou judgest me to be in Darkness, then much more thou judgest and condemnest thy self; for, for my Thirty Six Queries, thou hast propounded me an Hundred: And here also thou accountest me a Fool, as by the Scripture thou quotest in Prov. 26. 4. and therein manifests thy self so much the greater
Fool, in propounding so many Queries to me, whom thou account'st a Fool: And thus the Pride of thy Heart hath deceived thee. Pr. Answ. And whereas thou sayest, Thou wast Inwardly called to the Ministry, by the Motion and Gifts of God's Spirit, long before I was born, which (thou sayest) hath been God's Ordinary Way; which to prove, thou quotest Job 32. 8. 2 Chron. 20. 14. Amos 5. 7. 15. Mich. 3. 8. Rep. Though it hath been and is God's Ordi∣nary Way, by his own Power and Spirit, to call and fit his own Ministers for his own Work, as those Scriptures afore-mentioned do prove; which we also do witness, and do come no other Way; yet these Scriptures do not at all prove where, and how, and by what thou wast called: and Jaha∣ziel, and Amos, and Micha, which those Scrip∣tures aforesaid bear Testimony of, to be thus called, were men that spoak the Word of the Lord freely, against Sin and Transgression, and False Prophets and Hirelings; and their Lives sealed their Testimony: And these Scriptures al∣so bear Testimony, how, and where they were called, from their Outward Callings, to speak the Word of the Lord; and so, from those Scrip∣tures thou art shut, and hast nought to do to take them into thy Mouth; for, they do not prove that thou wast thus called from thy Labour; for, thou wast brought up all thy Dayes in Idleness, and at a University (as you call it) to learn Arts and Sciences, without which Those were Called
and Fitted. And for any other Call, then as the Common National Ministers are called (who deny both Immediate Revelation and Inspirati∣on) thou hast brought no Proof that will stand for thee, but only thy own bare Words, where∣in thy Life and Practice will condemn thee; for, it is one with the National Priests, and thou art maintained and upheld by the same Power as the National Teachers are, neither dost go from Place to Place, reproving Sin in the Gate, as Amos and Micha did, who were thus called; nei∣ther dost speak freely as they did, & therefore are a False Prophet, who sayst, The Lord saith, when he never spoak to thee; but runnest, and the Lord never sent thee; and therefore thou profittest not the People at all, as is manifest by the Fruits of thy Ministry, and thus thou wast a Deceiver before I was born, and the Lord hath Raised me up to Tell thee of it. Qu. 2. Whether is thy Call and Means, which thou professest, Mediate or Immediate? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say'st, It was both: For, (say'st thou) Besides the Immediate aforesaid, thou wast ordained a Minister by the Superi∣ours and Governours of the Church, as the Elders and Pastors of the Churches were formerly by Paul and Bar∣nabas, Acts 14. 23. But thou say'st, Thou doubtest whether James Parnel well was called either way to be Teacher; if so, let him prove it by an Infallible Te∣stimony.
Rep. Those that have an Inward Call to the Ministry do not stay for an Outward Call by Man, but go forth in Obedience to the Word of the Lord: Whosoever was called to the Ministry of the Gospel, it was Immediately, and not Medi∣ately; but thine Mediately, by the Will of Man, and not Immediately, as before is proved; and also out of thy own Mouth art made manifest: For thou say'st, Thou doubtest whether I was called either way; But if thou wast Called and Guided by the Spirit of the Lord, thou wouldst know, without Doubts, whether I was so called, yea or nay; for, the True Ministers were Epistles writ in one anothers Hearts: And they also know the False Prophets, and the False Apostles, and the False Ministers, and declared against them, as I do against thee; and without doubt I do know thee to be a Deceiver by an Infallible Testimony; and those that thou speakest of in Acts 14. 23.2 Cor. 3. 2. whom Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders,2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. they did not ordain them Ministers of the Gospel, neither sent them abroad to preach the Gospel, neither allowed them an Hundred or Two Hundred Pounds by the Year, as thou hast; but they chose out those that were strong in the Faith, and set them to watch over the Weak: But those Churches were gathered by the Power and Spirit of God, and were turned from Darkness to Light, and were washed, clensed and sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. But out of your Church cast Drunkards,
and Swearers, and Lyars, and Proud, and Co∣vetous Ones, and Adulterous, and Idolaters, and Quarrellers,1 Cor. 6. 11. and Fighters, and Scoffers, and Scorners, and Backbiters, and Envious Ones, and Prophane and Wanton Ones, and the like, who are neither Washed nor Sanctified; and then see where will be the Church of England, and the Pastors, Teachers and Elders and all: Then you that profess your selves to be the Church of Christ will be found the Synagogue of Statan, whose Mi∣nister thou art. And also, Paul and Barnabas, who ordained them Elders, were Men endued with the holy Spirit of the Lord, and were immediately called and chosen to the Ministry, and had a Spi∣rit of Discerning to know who were fitted for the Eldership, and all this was done without an Uni∣versity, or serving Seven years to learn Arts and Sciences, or taking Degrees, without which you can do nothing: And also, those Superiours and Governours, have nothing but what they have gotten by Art and Study, and reading of others Experiences; but are ignorant of the Power of God, neither know whether there be any Holy Ghost, yea or nay, but by the hearing of the Ear; but scoff▪ and scorn, and persecute those that now do witness these things; and they them∣selves were also first ordain'd by the Will of Man. And thus thou hast but so much the more manife∣sted thy self of the World, in going about to prove thy self a called Minister by the Scripture, which doth altogether witness against thee.
And whereas thou wouldst have me to prove my Call by an Infallible Testimony: I tell thee, Without an Infallable Testimony I do not go, nei∣ther without an Infallible Testimony do I desire to be received or owned; and to this the Infallible Spirit of Truth bears Testimony in all the Chil∣dren of Truth: And thou that hast not an In∣fallible Testimony, either with me or against me, are still in Darkness, and knowest not the Truth, then far unfit to be a Teacher to others. Qu. 3. Whether thou art guided by the Same In∣fallible Spirit that gave forth the Scripture? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say'st, That we our selves teach, That all Men are taught and gui∣ded by that Spirit at times: And secondly, thou say'st, Thou praisest God for it, thou art guided and assisted by that Spirit which is alwayes Infallible: And thirdly, thou say'st, Thou doubtest whether any of those that are called Quakers are alwayes guided by that Spirit. Rep. Here all that are guided by any Measure of that Spirit may easily see the Lyes and Con∣fusion: for thy first is a Lye, That any of us do teach, that all Men are taught and guided by that Spirit at Times; for I deny that thou art, who art now taken with a Lye in thy Mouth, which all that understand our Doctrine will witness against: And 2dly, That thou art guided hy an Infallible Spirit, is a Lye against the Holy Ghost; for no Lye comes from that Spirit: And again thou belyest the Spi∣rit
of Truth to say, Thou art guided by it, and yet canst not give an Infallible Testimony, whether those thou call'st Quakers are guided by an Infal∣lible Spirit, Yea or Nay, but art in thy Doubts; but that Spirit is without Doubts which now judgeth thee to be a Lyar;John 8. 44. and thy God thou praisest to be the Devil, the Father of Lyes, who must both be tormented together. Qu. 4. Whether they that are guided by that Spirit need study how or what to say? Pr. Ans. And in thy Answer thou sayst, Timothy had that Spirit in a greater Measure then James Par∣nel; yet Paul saith thus unto him, as in 1 Tim. 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. And thou saist, If the Apostles had been put to preach upon a short Text or Theam, me∣thodically, as by long Practice in the Church is expected from you, they must oft times have studyed for it, as thou conceivest; though if you were left at large, to speak as the Spirit of God moves you, and gives Mat∣ter in, thou hopest, some of you by God's Assistance should speak as to good or better Purpose, then any who now pretend to the Spirit's Actings. Rep. Here thou hast sufficiently manifested thy Spirit, and thy Ignorance of the Spirit of God, to any who understand the Things of the Spirit of God; and all these Scriptures which thou hast brought concerning Timothy, doth not at all prove that he that is guided by the Spirit of God, need study how or what to preach: But Paul exhorted Timothy to the Gift that was in him, which was gi∣ven
him by, or for Prophesie; for in so doing, he should save himself, and those that heard him, which you never do by the Fruit of your Study, but rather destroy them, witness the Fruits of your Ministry these many Years in this Nation, who have wrought no better Reformation among your Hearers; and also this Scripture doth not at all prove that Paul bad Timothy study old Authors, and Heathenish Commentators, as you do; nei∣ther to Study Arts and Sciences, as you do, who with your Philosophy and vain Deceit,Col. 2. 8. do spoil the Peo∣ple; for thou hast manifested thy self to be al∣together ignorant of the Spirit of God, who by thy own Conceivings judgest the Spirit of God to be insufficient to instruct and teach the Apostles what to speak at all Times, without Study, when as Christ himself exhorteth them, to take no Thought what to speak, for it should be given them in the very same Hour; for saith he, It is not you that speak,Mat. 10. 19, 20. but the Spirit of your father that speaketh in you (which Spirit speaketh not without Method, which Spirit you Teachers of the Church of England are great Strangers to, who think that the Spirit of God can be limited to a Text or a Theam, as thou confessest you are; but thou Ly∣ar, where is now thy infallible Spirit, who thus speakest thy own Conceivings? And therefore be ashamed hence-forward to pretend to an Infalli∣ble Spirit, who hast here so openly manifested thy Ignorance of it and its Movings, so that if thou wast left at large to speak from that Spirit in thee,
and wast shut out of thy Library, and from any Text or Writing, thou wouldst plainly manifest thy self to be one of the dumb Dogs that could not bark,2 Pet. 3. which Isaiah, from the Spirit of the Lord, declared against, without Study: For I do believe, that if thou and the rest of the National Teachers, whom thou confessest, are tyed to a Text or Theam, could tell how to please the Peo∣ple, and get Gain without studying or speaking from a Text, you would for the Credit of your Cause (as thou saist) for I know nothing that tyes you to it, but your own Covetous Ends, to make a Gain of these Scriptures, and to deceive the Ignorant with feigned Words,Isa. 5. 6. whom Peter without Study foretold of; and therefore, thou Hy∣pocrite, pretend no more to an infallible Spirit, but with the rest of thy Brethren, confess thou art void of it, as many of them have done; for in such Pretences thou art but the greater Deceiver, and thy Folly doth the more appear. Qu. 5. Whether is it as lawful now for Tradesmen, Shepherds or Plowmen to preach, if they be led by the Spirit of God, as those that spake forth the Scripture? Pr. Ans. And in thy Answer thou saist, If this was wholly granted, James Parnel cannot claim any Interest therein, as thou conceivest (for thou saist) he is neither Tradesman, Plowman, nor Shepherd, nor will take any Course to maintain himself by this Labour; for he hath been tryed. But herein James Parnel can plainly tell thee,
thou art a Lyer; for he followed a Trade with his Father, until the Lord by his Spirit called him from it, into his own Word; and so I obeyed the Word of the Lord, and left my Father with his Trade, as James and John did their Father in the Ship; For he that will not forsake Father and Mother, Lands and Livings: Wife and Children, and all for Christ's sake, is not worthy of him; in which Work neither thou nor any other can tax me for Idle∣ness; but I believe my Labour and Diligence in the same is more offensive to you Deceivers, then if I had been Idle: But he that would call me from this Work that I am set about, into the Work of Man, I should answer him, God must be served before Man; for if it had not been the Will of God to call me forth into his Work, I should still have served my Earthly Father, sooner then any other Man, notwithstanding the Evil Thoughts and Conceivings of such like as thee, who art gi∣ven up to believe Lyes, and tell Lyes; but where is now thy infallible Spirit, who speakest by thy own Conceivings, and thus the Thoughts of thy Heart deceive thee: And as for my Mainte∣nance, I need not a Law, to compel it as thou dost; neither am chargeable to the World, as thou art, who by a Law of Man takest nigh three hundred Pound by the Year of them; therefore in this thou mightst have laid thy Hand upon the Mouth; for thou and hundreds more of thy Brethren ne∣ver followed any honest Calling, whereby to get
an honest Livelyhood, without being chargeable to the World, but were from your Youths brought up at Babylon's Schools, learning her Witchcraft and Sorcery, thereby to deceive the Nations, and through Covetousness with feigned Words make Merchandize of them, which you now spare not. Pr. Ans. And secondly, thou grantst, That if Men be made of God spiritual, whether Shepherds or Plowmen first, they may teach: But thirdly, thou sayst, every Man that hath the Spirit in some Measure, doth not at∣tain to that Height, Growth and Degree that they did, who gave forth the Scriptures, and therefore may not as law∣fuly nor as infallibly teach as they did; and thou sayst, Nor canst thou discern clearly, that the best amongst them called Quakers, have yet reached that Degree or Dispensation of the Spirit: And after much dis∣sembling Speeches, thou manifests thy light and frothy Spirit, still despising me because of my Youth, but thy Words are not worth mentio∣ning. And thus when thou openest thy Mouth con∣cerning the Spirit, thou manifests thy Folly and Ignorance of the Spirit, so that a Babe may compre∣hend thee, and tell thee of thy Folly: And when thou thinkst of thy Beard or Age (as thou sayst) Con∣fusion of Face may cover thee; For though every one that hath the Spirit in some Measure, doth not attain to that Height, Growth and Degree that they did, who gave forth the Scripture, yet it doth not follow that none do attain to that Height Growth & Degree;
and they that have attained to the same Spirit in a Measure, and by the same Spirit are moved and called forth, may as lawfully and as infalli∣bly teach as they did (in their Measures) for the same Spirit is infallible in the least Measure, and its call is lawful; and thus thou shewest, thou wast never called norled by it, who art so ig∣norant of it; and as here also doth further ap∣pear, in that thou confessest, Thou discernest not the People called Quakers; and therefore are blind, and from thee the Secrets of God are hid; and it doth not follow, that they are ever the less spiritual, but rather more (because thou canst not discern them) who pretend'st thy self a spi∣ritual Man: And thus they are attained to that Degree, they can discern thee to be a Blind Guide, and Deceiver of the World; and there∣fore is thy spirit the more against them, for all thy Flattering and Dissembling Speeches from thy hypocritical Heart, who bendest thy Tongue like a Bow against them, uttering forth Lyes in Hypocrisie, and with thy scornful spirit Reproa∣chest me with Lyes: but it was thy Generation that Quaked for Fear of the Downfal of their Kingdom, and therefore persecuted me, and im∣prisoned me; yet their Fear did not overtake me; for, I was made as willing to Suffer, as they were to Afflict, as knowing it was for his Cause, who will make you all to Quake and Trem∣ble who lift up your Heels against him. And as
thou comparest Cambridge to Jericho, so the Curse of Jericho shall come upon it, for its Whoredom, and Sorceries, and Stiff-neckedness against the Lord and his Anointed. And though thou thus Scornest me and Despisest me, because of my Youth, yet it is because thou knowest not the Scripture, nor the Power of God. Qu. 6. Whether any are the Ministers or Messen∣gers of Christ, but those that are guided by his Spirit, and abide in his Doctrine, as the Holy Men of God were in Scripture, and whether the Wind doth now blow where it listeth? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer to the first Part, thou grantest, That none are the True Ministers and Messengers of Christ, but those that are in some measure guided by his Spirit, and abide in his Doctrine. But secondly (thou say'st) Men may think, that they have that Spirit, and yet be led by the Lying Spirit, as Zedekiah, who smote Michaiah, was, 1 Kings 22. 24. Rep. Herein thou markest out thy self for a Deceiver, who pretendest to the Spirit, & it is the Lying Spirit, as is before proved; and so art shut ont from the Ministers and Messengers of Christ, who art not guided by his Spirit, and therefore abidest not in his Doctrine, as is before proved by thy Ignorance of the True Spirit: And there∣fore thou, and such False Prophets as thou, thus smite at and persecute us, that are called
Quakers, because the Lord is pleased to bestow his Spirit upon us, whereby we are able to de∣clare your Deceit, and manifest your Lying Spi∣rits, who have professed your selves the Ministers of Christ, yet Strangers to his Spirit, and Oppo∣sers of his Truth, like Jannes and Jambres, who are Men of corrupt Minds, and Reprobates con∣cerning the Faith, 2 Tim. 3. 8. Pr. Answ. And to the second Part of the Query, thou say'st, That the Wiud blows where it listeth, if it be not stopped; yet are there many false Winds, which blow likewise from a Deceitful Spirit; which to prove, thou quotest Ephes. 4. 14. That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro with every Wind of Doctrine; and sayest, Mind this, James. Rep. This I do mind, and still see how thou markest out thy self with thy Deceitful Spirit; for, if the Wind doth blow where it listeth, which thou acknowledgest; then what is that in you professed Ministers, which goes about to stop it with Gain-saying and Persecution, and would limit the Spirit of God unto a Text or Theam, from which you with your deceitful spirits do raise Uses, Points, Tryals and Motives, &c. whereby many poor Creatures are tossed to and fro, and carried about with your airy spirits, with the Sleight and cunning Craftiness of your Brains, whereby you study to deceive, as thou mayest read in the latterend of the Verse which thou hast quoted, Ephes. 4. 14, which here shall stand against thee: And so, many are the Children
which are tossed to and fro by you, although they have both Beards and Age (as thou sayest) yea, some are Thirty, some Forty, some Fifty, some Sixty, yea, Eighty, and never yet come to the Knowledge of the Truth; and thus with Feigned Words, through Covetousness, you make merchandize of the People, beguiling Unstable Souls: But think not, that all you False Prophets, with the Beast that upholds you, can stop or quench this Spirit, which now bloweth where it listeth; for, with all the Sleight and Craftiness that you can use, you shall be made to fall before it, and the Fruits of your Labours shall be given you. Qu. 7. Whether thou wilt own Immediate Revela∣tion now? yea or nay. Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou sayest, The Apostle teacheth you to pray for the Spirit of Wis∣dom and Revelation, in the Acknowledgment of God: Which to prove, thou quotest Ephes. 1. 17. but sayest, There are many False Lights and Delusions of Satan, who too often transforms himself as an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. which (thou sayest) are en∣tertained by unwary men for the Illuminations and Re∣velations of God's Spirit, as appears in Zedekiah a∣foresaid; which to prove, thou quotest Ezek. 13. 6. 2 Thess. 2. 11. Rep. Here again thou hast marked out thy self, and also belyest the Apostle; for that Scripture in Ephes. 1. 17. only makes mention how the A∣postle prayed for the Ephesins that believed;
but it doth not at all prove that the Apostle taught you that are of the World to pray; For, the Pray∣ers of the Wicked are Abominable; and the Apostle would not teach such to pray.Prov. 15. 8. And though in thy Answer, the substance of my Query is con∣fessed; yet it doth not serve to prove that thou dost witness it in thy self, or own it where it is possessed; who wouldst bar it from Youth, and limit it to Time and Age, and so shewest thy Ig∣norance of it, and that by the False Lights and Delusions of Satan thou art deceived, who in thee ruleth as an Angel of Light: And so, thou art one of those unwary men, who takest a Ly∣ing Spirit for an Infallible Spirit, as is both here and often before proved; who art found in Ze∣dekiah's steps, and so art one of those False Prophets which the Prophet speaks of, who sayest, The Lord saith, when he never spoak to thee, as is be∣fore proved. And how long have you professed Ministers of this Nation fed the People with Ex∣pectations and Hopes, That you would confirm what you have spoaken unto them, which is not yet come to pass, neither likely; and thus you have decei∣ved them by your Lying Divinations, for your dishonest Gain: and therefore, for this Cause God hath given you up to strong Delusions, that you should believe a Lye, that you all might be damned who believe not the Truth now it is come unto you, but still take Pleasure in Unrighteousness, as in those Scrip∣tures aforesaid, which thou hast quoted against thy self, and so they shall stand.
Qu. 8. What is the Gospel which thou art a Minister of? and whether thy Gospel be free, and without Charge? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou sayest to the first Part, That the Gospel which thou preachest, is the same which Christ and his Apostles taught, which (thou sayest) is summarily contained in these four Ver∣ses, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. wherein the Apostle speaks of the Grace of God to be their Teacher, to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Justly and Godly in this present World, &c. And to the second Part, thou sayest, The Apostles Gospel was not every way without Charge; which to prove, thou quotest 2 Cor. 11. 8. And again, thou say'st, Nor hath Christ, or any of his Apostles, imposed it up∣on you, that the Gospel should be altogether without Charge unto them which have it taught; which to prove, thou quotest Rom. 15. 27. And again, thou sayest, Nor is James Parnel's Gospel, be it Right or Wrong, without Charge: If he doth not take more then it is worth, if duly examined, it is well. Rep. Thy Spirit is much against James Parnel, as Zedekiah's was against Michaiah; yet here he can prove thee to be a Lyar, and not only against him,John 1. 29. but of his Lord also; and therefore, if thou belyest the Lord, how much more the Servant? For, Christ Jesus, the Lamb of God, was the Gospel which the Apostles preached, which was free, and not chargeable to any, thugh he was and is a Burdensom Stone to them that believe not in him; yet not Chargeable. And therefore,
thou Blasphemer, how darest thou to open thy Mouth thus against the Lord and his Anointed, who are still in thy Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, who art pleading for the Earth, and art a Stran∣ger to the Free Grace of God; and therefore, these Verses, which thou hast set down, shall stand to witness against thee, which thou sayest containeth the Gospel which thou preachest: But the Apostles Gospel could not be contained in Paper and Ink; for the Heavens could not contain him; for, He ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things. And also, of thy Gospel thou ma∣kest a Trade and a Gain, being many Years at an University, as thou callest it, to learn to preach it; all which the Apostles did not: and so thou brin∣gest another Gospel, and so art not to be Recei∣ved, but held as Accursed, as thou art, who art not ashamed to presume to say, Thy Gospel is the same with the Apostles; and thou dost here yield thy Gospel to be chargeable; but this Scripture in 2 Cor 11. 8. doth not at all prove the Apostles to be chargeable, who saith, He took Wages of other Churches to do them Service;Gal. 1▪ 9. for it was but for his Necessities; and it was freely communicated to him, and therefore no Charge: But now, you professed Ministers, instead of robbing other Chur∣ches, you rob and oppress the World, Ruling over them by a Law, with Force and Cruelty; for the which you have no Scripture-Rule, but amongst the False Shepherds. But whom do you spare, whether you do them Service or nay, if you can
but get it either by Fair Means or Foul? And therefore in this thou, before many others, mightst well have laid thy Hand upon thy Mouth. For, whereas the Apostle there took some Necessaries, which were freely communicated to him by the Churches, thou takest nigh Three Hundred Pounds by the Year of the World, by a Law of Man, and none wilt spare who come within thy Bounds, whether thou dost them Service or nay. And that Christ, or any of his Apostles, have not imposed it upon you, that the Gospel should be altogether without Charge, it is true; for they never intrusted you with it, though for Lucre sake you have run, though he never sent you, and speak a Divination of your Brain, but not from the Mouth of the Lord, and so pro∣fit not the People at all; but like Ravening Wolves, make a Prey upon them; but your End shall be accor∣ding to your Works. But they that are intrusted with the Ministry of the Gospel, have this Charge imposed upon them, As they have received Freely, Freely to give: The Apostle Paul also sheweth the same Example, whose Care was, to make the Gospel Free, and without Charge; and said, Wo unto him, if he preached not the Gospel; and therefore, because he would not make the Gospel Charge∣able, he took Necessaries of some, and spared others; and this was Wisdom (which you Earth-Worms are void of) and thus, he that is taught in the Word, may communicate to him that tea∣ches in all Good Things, and yet without Charge▪ he that can receive it let him: The Workman is
worthy of his Meat. And in that thou taxest James Parnel; he hath not been chargeable to thee, nor to thy Generation, neither doth any of him complain, though thou judgest him according to thy own corrupt Heart; yet the Answer of the Just Witness in my Conscience shall be for me, before the Righteous Judge of all Hearts, when you Hire∣lings and False Prophets shall with the Mountains to cover you, and the Rocks to fall upon you, and hide you from his Presence, who will give you your Reward in the Lake that burneth, with the Beast that now upholds you in this your Wickedness. Qu. 9. Whether thou dost hold up the First Priest∣hood, that took Tythes; or the second Priesthood, that took No Tythes; and which thou dost deny, seeing thou takest Tythes? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou sayest, Melchizedeck, whose Priesthood was the First Priest∣hood, took Tythes; and the Levitical Priesthood, which was the second, and not the first, took Tythes also: so that (thou sayest) there is no Priesthood, mentioned in the Scripture, that took no Tythes. Then thou queriest, How thou or any dost deny either of those Priesthoods by taking Tythes? which to prove, thou quotest Gen. 14. 20. Hebr. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. Rep. Hear, thou Serpent! Although thou thus twinest about to cover and shelter thy Deceit un∣der other Wings, it will not at all serve to prove, that thereby thou dost not deny Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, who is the Everlasting High Priest
forever, after the Order of Melchizedeck, which is the Unchangeable Priesthood, the End of the Changeable, which took Tythes, and so the End of Tythes, as is proved by that Scripture which thou hast quoted, Hebr. 7. and chap. 8. 1. where∣in the Apostle speaks how Abraham paid Tythes to Melchizedeck of the Spoils which he got in the War, which was a Free Gift, without ei∣ther Law or Compulsion: neither did stand for a Law or Rule to the Generations following, until the Law was given to Israel after the Flesh, and the Changeable Priesthood established; which, I say, was the First Priesthood, to which Tythes were due; for it was so the Command of God, that the Tythes should be paid unto the Changeable Priest∣hood; and they were to have a Store-house, where∣in the Tythes were to be put; and the Widdows, and the Fatherless, and the Strangers were to come, and be filled within their Gates, that there should not be a Beggar in Israel: Which Statute is now rejected by you, who now so gape for Tythes; for ye, in∣stead of doing this, do Grind the Faces of the Poor, and Oppress the Widdows, the Fatherless and the Stran∣gers, if they do come within your Bounds, and so make Beggars rather then otherwise: So that if you profess Tythes by this Law, it will witness against you; and also, in so doing you deny Christ Jesus come in the Flesh, who, when he was offered up, was the Everlasting Offering, and the Everlasting High Priest over the Houshold of God; and so the Fulfilling and the End of the Changeable,
who took Tythes by a Command: And so, saith the Apostle, the Priesthood being Changed, there must of Necessity be a Change of the Law; and so the Command was disannulled, and Tythes ended; for, saith the Apostle, Hebr. 8. 1. Now, of the things that we have been speaking, this is the sum, We have such an High Priest, that is set on the Right Hand of the Throne, &c. Now, Tythes were one thing,Here thy 6th Query is answer'd. and the Priesthood was another thing, and the Law (by which they both were upheld) was another thing, of which the Apostle had been speaking, of which he saith, This is the Sum, Christ Jesus, the High Priest, that is set on the Right Hand of the Throne; and so the Fulfilling and the End of these things before-mentioned, of which Tythes is one: so, by this New Covenant he hath made the First Old; now, that which decayeth or wax∣eth old, is ready to vanish away: Now, mark then, which Priesthood the Apostle here accounts first, because thou accusest me, that I know not which was the first, and which was the last: But by this it is proved, that you that now so gape for Tythes under the Profession of the Gospel, are razed out from Melchizedeck, who once took Tythes, only of the Spoil which was taken in the War, which was a Free Gift unto him (which now you have not) and also are raized from the Changeable Priest∣hood, which was the first to which Tythes were due, by a Command for its time; and also, do deny Christ come in the Flesh, who is the End
and Fulfilling of those things, which, without Command, for Lucre sake, you now uphold and cry up; and so are found only the Mini∣sters of Antichrist, who Oppose the True Christ (where he is witnessed and heldforth) yet under a Profession of his Name; therefore he will pro∣fess unto you Workers of Iniquity that he knows you not, when you knock, and are not able to enter. Qu. 10. Where is thy Rule in the Scripture, for the Ministers of the Gospel to take Tythes? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou much endeavourest to shelter and cover thy self by the Scripture; but it will not hide thee, nor stand for thee, to prove that the Ministers of the Go∣spel ever took TYTHES, or that unto them Tythes belonged, as any who readeth thy Answer with Understanding, may see, and also see thy Shufflings, who runn'st into the Old Co∣venant to maintain Tythes due to the Ministers of the New Covenant, which is the End of the Old, as in my last Reply is plainly proved, and thou out of both to be shut; and there∣fore thou say'st, It is sufficient for thee, and other Ministers of the Gospel, that there is no Command∣ment in the Gospel against the taking of Tythes, which (thou say'st) we must produce, ere we can make the thing unlawful. Rep. Now, all People may consider how they
have been blinded and deceived by you professed Ministers of the Gospel in this Nation, wo upon such slender Grounds as these, have and do take the Tenth of the Increase of the Fruits of the Peoples Labours, who many of them themselves do rent and hire what they have, whereby you have and do live at Ease, in Pride, Idleness and Fulness, sporting in the Day time, and living in Pleasures and Wantonness upon the Earth, contra∣ry to any Rule or Example in the Scripture, from the Ministers of the Gospel; and therefore this your Ground and Foundation which thou hast here laid besides the Scripture, to uphold Tythes con∣trary to the Scripture, will not stand, and there∣fore your Building must fall; for although there were no Command in the Gospel against the ta∣king of Tythes, yet it doth not prove, that the Ministers of the Gospel are to take Tythes, be∣ing it was never allotted them; but that by the Gospel Tythes are disannulled, and the Priesthood changed, and the Law by which they both were established, is fulfilled and done away, is clear by the Scripture, and therefore unlawful now for any to practise without a Command from God, as be∣fore is proved in my last Reply, and thou to be a Lyar, who say'st, I could not prove it by clear Scrip∣ture, that Christ or his Apostles have taken away that Maintenance; and therefore that Scripture which thou hast quoted in Mt. 23. 23. shall stand and witness against thee; for when Christ spoak, that was before he was offered up, and then the Law
of Tythes was not yet fulfilled, and therefore not disanull'd; and therefore strictly to be observed, until Christ, the Everlasting Sacrifice was offered up; and then the Apostles said, The Priesthood being changed, there must of Necessity be a Change of the Law, and so Tythes ended, as before is proved, and therefore not for the Ministers of the Gospel to take them as their Maintenance; and that Scripture which thou hast quoted in 1 Cor. 9. shall stand and witness against thee; for the whole Chapter doth not at all prove Tythes due to the Ministers of the Gospel, as any who read the Chap∣ter with Honesty will witness; for it doth not at all mention Tythes, but only speaks of the Apo∣stles Power, that as they had planted Vineyards, so they might eat of the Fruit thereof, and as they preached the Gospel, so they might live of the Gospel; and this the Apostle writ to those, whom he sad, were the Seals of his Ministry; but where are the Seals of your Ministry? are they not the World who lye in Wickedness? where is the Vineyard that ye have been planting these many Years? Is it not still full of Bryars and Thorns, and Weeds, and wild Plants, which bring forth no Fruit, but cumber the Ground? But keep in your own Vineyards, and rob not o∣thers, and then you will not be such Thieves as you are, but it will make you plant better, or else to fall to some other Trade; and the Apostles Pow∣er was not of Man, nor by Man, being he was not set up by Man; but yours is of Man, and by
a Law of Man, by whom you are set up, and by whom you stand, as here in thy Answer thou hast confessed; and yet the Apostle refused to use this Power, and yet said, Necessity was laid upon him to preach the Gospel; but what Power do you refuse, be it right or wrong? and if that Earthly Pow∣er should be taken from you, which you have, what would become of your Gospel? Nay, some of you have said, that down with the Maintenance, and down with the Ministry; and therefore forever stop thy Mouth from taking the Apostle's Words for a Cloak for thy Covetousness, who himself cast out such from the Ministry, 1 Tim. 3. and therefore thou knewst, that none of these Scrip∣tures would serve for thy Ends and therefore thou wouldst shelter thy self under the Powers of the Earth, by whom thou art set up, whom thou say'st, did give to the Ministers of the Gospel in this Na∣tion, and elsewhere, and to their Successors forever, the Tenth of all their Grounds, and caused them to be setled by a Law; and thou askest, If this was not a lawful and pious Gift, and suitable to what was paid in the Old Testament. Rep. This I do deny to be lawful, but altogether unlawful; for that hath made so many pretended Ministers as there are, who for Greediness of the Gain and Pleasure,Thy 6th uery is an∣swered in this Reply. have pretended to the Things which you never had in you, neither know an Thing of them, but by others Declarations, which for your own Ends you have wrested to your own Destruction and others, and so through your Phi∣losophy
and vain Deceit have spoiled the People, and by feigned Words through Covetousness, have made Merchandize of them, and so have deluded and led in Blindness the People these many Years, only for your own Carnal Ends; and that this is suitable to what was paid in the old Testament, I also do deny (and if it was, what is that to you? that which was given in the Old Testament is disanul∣ed by the New, and therefore no Rule for you) and also that was given by the Lord to the Levites, who had no other Inheritance in the Land, and the Lord gave that which was his own, and he gave a strict Command that it should be paid, which stood in Force so long as the Priesthood en∣dured, as is proved by the Scriptures, which thou thy self hast quoted, which shall here stand against thy self, Levit. 27. 30, 31, 32. and Numb. 18. 24. But the Lord did not give it since to the pro∣fessed Ministers of England; but thou sayest, Man gave it, and therefore gave that which was none of their own; for it is unjust for any Prince or Ruler, to give away the Labour or Inheritance of his Subjects unto them that never laboured for it, and unto these, who under Pretence of the Go∣spel do delude and beguile the Souls of his Sub∣jects, for their dishonest Gain, as you professed Ministers of England do; and therefore they whose Eyes are opened do see you, and therefore account it a Sin unto God to uphold you, or put into your Mouthes, whom the Lord is against, and therefore you even prepare War against them;
and it is neither pious nor lawful for any Prince or Governour, to force any of his Subjects by a Law, contrary to their Consciences: And also the In∣heritance of the Levites was stated by a Law of God, and yours by a Law of Man; and they were ordained and set up by God, but you by Man, by whom you are upheld and maintained contrary to Scripture; so they came by the Will of God, and you by the Will of Man; and they were maintained by the Will of God, and you by the Will of Man; and they were of God (as all his true Ministers are now) and you are of Man (as all the rest false Prophets and false Ministers ever were) so that there is much Difference betwixt you and them, and betwixt the Interest that they had in Tythes, and the Interest that you now claim; so that they that robbed them, robbed God, as in the Scripture which thou hast quoted, Mal. 3. 8. which shall stand against thee: And if the Ground of your Interest was well searched, it would be found, that you have it from the Pope and his Up∣holders, whose Supremacy your selves deny in Words to blind the World, but in Practice you own it, and claim it: And again, if this which thou speakest of, was given to the Ministers of the Gospel, then you that are Hirelings and the Mi∣nisters of Anti-christ, have no Right nor Title in it; and the Ministers of the Gospel, they also do deny it, whose Care is to make the Gospel, free, and without Charge, and therefore cannot oppress any; neither will their Consciences serve them
to take the Increase of others Labours, by Law or Compulsion; and therefore it is most just, that the Labourer, should in Peace enjoy the Fruits of his Labours, and such idle Drones as you (who nei∣ther labour for God, nor for the Good of Man; but are the Destroyers both of Body and Soul) should not eat, according to the Apostle's Rule in 2 Thes. 3. 10. And thus unto it you have no legal nor civil Claim (as thou callest it) but your Birth∣right is as a Mess of Pottage; neither is your Claim and Title as lawful as a Son's is to the Inheritance of his Father (as thou sayest) but you climb up another Way, and so are Thieves and Robbers, John 10. 1. Qu 11. Whether ever the Ministers of Christ had, or stood in need of an outwrd Law, to compel Peo∣ple to maintain them, as thou, and such as thou now have and do. Pr. Ans. And in thy Answer thou confessest, That those tha are Righteous or truly spiritual, need no such compulsive Law to force them; for they are a Law unto themselves; but thou say'st, That the greatest Part of the Professors in the visible Church, alwayes were, and yet are Earthly-minded, and neither do nor can rigt∣ly value Spirtiual and Heavenly Things. Rep. But in all thy pretended Answer, thou dost not at all resolve the Substance of my Query, but rather in thy Silence in it, dost yeild thy self out of the Practice of the Apostles; and by thy own Confession it is manifest, that neither you profes∣sed
Ministers nor your Auditors are Righteous, nor truly Spiritual; for you stand in need of a compul∣sive Law to force People to maintain you, and the People stand in need of a compulsive Law, to force them to maintain you, which thou confes∣sest the Righteous need not: But though you have a compulsive Law, the Righteous will not main∣tain you; and thus out of thy own Mouth thou art judged, and the rest of thy Brethren, to be the false Prophets, who profit not the People at all: And again, thy own Confession proves it, that the greatest Part of your Church is Earthly-minded, and no Wonder, while the Teachers themselves are so; and thus your Church is the Synagogue of Satan, which is built up of such Professors; and there∣fore blush and be ashamed of your Ministry. Oh! what have you been doing these many Years? who have wrought no better Reformation; and herein your shew your Ministry to be Earthly, who have no better Seals then Earthly-minded Professors, who stand in need of a Law to compel them to maintain you; and this is as true a Say∣ing as any thou hast in thy Book, that the great∣est Part of the Professors in your Church are Earth∣ly-minded; but in that thou accusest the Church in the Apostles Dayes to be the same, thou art a Lyar and a false Accuser, neither can'st bring any Proof in the Scripture to maintain what thou say'st but it will witness against thee; for the Mulitude that believed were of one Heart and one Soul, so tha thy sold their Possessions and laid it at the Apostles Feet,
and it was distributed to every one, according as they had need; the Ministry took such Place in them: & whereas there were two found that were Earth∣ly-minded, yet there needed not a Law of Man to compel them: And the Law of Man also was a∣gainst the Apostles, as it is against these now that walk in the same Steps, yet they do not need a Law of Man to force a Maintenance for them from Worldly or Earthly-minded Professors, as the false Prophets and Deceivers alwayes did, who were alwayes sheltered and upheld by the Will of Man, because they could wink at their Iniquity, and cry Peace to them, as thou here dost, because they put into thy Mouth;Ezek. 22. 22, 28. therefore thou flatter∣est them,Mat. 6. 25. and daubest them up, but it is with un∣tempered Morter:Mat. 12. 11, 12, 13, 14. But the Commission which Christ gave to his Ministers, was, Take no Thought, but into whatsoever City or Place they entered, they were to enquire who were worthy, and if they were not willing∣ly received, they were to shake off the Dust of their Feet, and so leave them; but is it not well known, that all your Care is, to take Thought where to get a fat Living, instead of inquiring who is worthy▪ & there if you have but Authority from man, you will have it, whether they receive you, yea or nay; so with Shame mightst thou bring any Example from the Apostles, or the Church in their Dayes, who were men that coveted no man's Silver, nor Gold, Apparel, but had forsaken all for the Gospel's sake: And many of the Church suffered the spoiling of their Goods willingly by your Fore-Fathers,
the Chief Priests, and Scribes, and Pha∣risees, who were their Persecutors,Acts 20. 33. as you are now of them,Heb. 10. 34. who the Gospel do own (and your Pro∣fessors also) who, as thou say'st do not rightly value Spiritual Things, such as are holden forth by the true Ministers and Messengers of God (nei∣ther can) because, by such Blind Guides as thou art, they are kept in Blindness and Darkness, lest their Eyes should be opened, and they come to see you, and decline from you, who were never tyed to you by any Command of God; and there∣fore you are glad to make use of a Law of Man, contrary to the Practice of Christ and his Apo∣stles. And as for the express Provision, which the Lord made for his Ministers and Messengers in the New Testament. I Reply, When Christ gave them their Com∣mission, he said also, In whatsoever House they ente∣red, they were to eat such as was set before them: For, saith he, the Workman is worthy of his Meat: And this is all the express Provision that thou canst find allotted to them in the New Testament; and this was without any Law of Man too; for, there was no need of any: for, if they did not Willingly Receive them, they were not to Eat with them, but to shake off the Dust of their Feet against them; and that was all the Law they were to take against such, which were Earthly-mind∣ed, and Regardless of them: But this will not serve you, because your selves are Earthly-mind∣ed,
and therefore will have it of every one, whe∣ther they receive you, yea or nay, or else you have a Law of Man to take Tribble Dammage: And, instead of eating such as they will set before you, you will have the Tenth Part of what they have by Compulsion, you are such Devouring Greedy Wolves. And what was before allotted to the Priests in the Old Testament, is before suf∣ficiently proved to be nothing concerning you, who profess your selves Ministers of the New Te∣stament. And as for those Scriptures which thou quotest in 2 Chron. 31. 5, 6, &c. are also as nothing to my Query, but are before answered in my last Re∣ply; but yet these shall stand to witness against thee to be a Lyar: For, let any who reads these Verses see, if there the Israelites did shew any Earthly-mindedness, or stood in need of a Law to compel them, after they knew the King's Mind (as thou accusest them) And thus, thou canst find nothing, either in the Old or New Testament, that will cover thy Deceit, but altogether witness against thee; and therefore again thou fleest into thy old Shelter, which is the Will of Man, by which thou art set up and upheld, therefore a False Prophet and a Deceiver, who abidest not in the Doctrine of Christ: And it is no Pious nor Just Act for them, as I said before, to take away the Fruits of their Subjects Labours by a Compulsive Law, to give unto such Earth worms as thee, who care not how you get it, so you get, as thy
own Mouth confesseth; for thou sayest, It is a Competent, though not a Liberal Maintenance; and yet thou canst take it, and plead for it too, yea, and of Worldly-minded People, which is alto∣gether contrary to the Apostles Practice; and so thou fulfillest the words which before I have spoa∣ken of thee: And whosoever deny you of Tythes, do not Unjustly detain them (as thou say'st they do) being you have no Right to them by any Law or Command from God, or Example in the Scripture, as before is proved; but only claim a Title by the unjust Supremacy of the Pope, by which your Fore-fathers, the Persecuting Bishops, were upheld; and therefore, we, called Quakers, do teach People them, you to deny, which is not contrary to the Practice of Christ or his Apostles (as thou accusest us) for, saith Christ,Mat. 7. 15, 16. Beware of False Prophets, that appear in Sheep's Cloathing, but inwardly Ravening Wolves: By their Fruits they are known, and by which sufficiently you are here marked out; and the Apostles bid, From such turn away▪ as in 2 Tim. 3. 5. And again, the Apostle John forbids to receive such as abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, or to bid them Good Speed, 2 John 9, 10. And here both Christ and his Apostles sufficiently taught People to deny you; and here thou art proved a Lyar, who thus falsly accusest us, call'd Quakers, in this to act contrary to the Practice of Christ or his Apostles: and so, here thou, and the rest of the professed Ministers of this Nation,
are sufficiently manifest, what you are; so that all men may see your Folly and Deceit, but those who are blind, and love to have it so; and so the Scripture is fulfilled upon you, Jer. 5. 30, 31. Qu. 12. Whether ever the Ministers of the Gospel took any Necessaries of the World, as thou, and such as thou, do all your Tythes and Maintenance? yea or nay. Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou sayest, Yea, they have; which to prove, thou quotest Acts 28. 1, 9. where thou say'st, Paul took Necessa∣ries of the Barbarians: yet this not serving thy turn, thou runnest to old Histories, which thou callest Ecclesiastical Records, and say'st, They fr One Thousand Five Hundred Years do testifie the same: but yet doubting of this, thou say'st, as thou saidst before, It sufficeth you, that there is no Law nor Command of God to the Contrary; nor are Examples (thou saist) needful for every thing, as to prove, that Christ called any Shoemaker or Cobler to be a Prophet. Rep. But here again thou hast marked out thy self to be a False Prophet, who runnest, and the Lord never sent thee, and therefore thou eachest for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, for the which thou hast no Scripture, and therefore runnest to Old Stories, to which I am not to give any Credit, be they never so old, being they are not accor∣ding to Scripture (and therefore not Ecclesiasti∣cal) for, the Oldness of the thing doth not make
it Truth, though you have long thereby deceived the Ignorant. And as for that Scripture, which thou quotest in Acts 28. 1, 9. then Paul was a Prisoner, and he and the Souldiers that kept him, and the rest of the People, were driven there by Storm upon the Sea, so that in that Case the Barbarians took Pit∣ty of them, and received them; but there were many besides Paul and the Centurion, to whom Paul was committed, who were to take Care of him: and also, that which the Barbarians did, was Freely, and that which Nature bound them to, being they were in that Strait, which was done to many besides Paul, who were Heathens: So that this doth not at all stand for thee, who art in thy own Country, and yet takest all thy Tythes and Maintenance of the World by Compulsion; nei∣ther will this Excuse serve to shelter you Hirelings and Deceivers, to say, That there is no Law nor Com∣mand of God to the Contrary; for, it is False; for, Christ commands his Ministers expresly, Freely to give, as Freely they had received; and also charged them, Where they were not Freely Received, to depart thence, shaking off the Dust of their Feet, as before is pro∣ved. And also, Oppression the Law of God is against; and to take the Tenth, or Encrease of the Fruits of the Peoples Labours, is a sore and great Oppression, which the Land groans under, and therefore a Sin; and yet the Gift doth so blind your Eyes, that you cannot see all this; but think, because there is no Scripture for you, there∣fore
none against you. And though there needs no Example so prove any Shoemaker or Cobler to be a Prophet (as thou confessest, though in Scorn) for it is a thing that none doth, who understands the Scripture, being there is sufficient Proof, that he called other Tradesmen; yet there is a Need, that you might find so much as a Scripture-Proof or Example for your Tythes and Maintenance (who profess it to be your Rule) being it is a great Oppression of the Land; and yet saist thou, It doth suffice you, that there is no Law or Command to the Contrary: Therefore this shews your Avarici∣ous Minds, who are so willing to be blind in this thing; but it will not, neither doth so easily suf∣fice those that are oppressed by You, though You regard it not, according to the Prophet Ezekiel's words, You seek for the Fleece, and regard not the Flock, but make a Prey upon the Sheep; and so, with this stop thy Mouth, and own thy self amongst the False Shepherds and Hirelings, Eze. 34. John 10. Qu. 13. Whether ever they had a Set Mainte∣nance, or so much a Year for Preaching, as, Forty, Six∣ty, One Hundred, or Two Hundred Pound, as thou and such as thou have. Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou canst not bring one Scripture for thy Rule, to prove this your common Practice; but fleest to the Reords, that thou saist, are to be found in several Parts of Christendom (as thou call'st it) where I do not in∣tend
to seek for them, to see whether these things be true or no, which thou speakest of them; but, as I said before, will conclude them to be false in this thing, being the Scripture is altogether against it, so that thou canst not find one Scripture to ju∣stifie it; but say'st, if we say, Where do you read of this in the Scripture? thou answerest as far off again to the same Purpose still, without any Scripture-Proof; and therefore I shall leave it for any Un∣derstanding Reader of thy Book to judge, and see how weak you are, if you had not a Law of Man to uphold you, who have not one Scripture that will strengthen the Foundation of your Mi∣nistry, which is your Maintenance: Then how have you deluded the People, to make them be∣lieve, that the Scripture is your Rule, when it is al∣together against you? Let the Honest-Hearted judge. Qu. 14 And whether such be not the Hirelings, which care not for the Sheep? yea or nay. And whe∣ther such be not the Greedy Dogs which the Pro∣phet Isaiah Freely Declared against, Isa. 56. 11. and make a Prey upon the Sheep, which Ezekiel declared against, Ezek. 34. and are the Ravening Wolves which Jesus Christ declared against, Mat. 7. 15. and are such as through Covetousness make Merchandize of the People, which Peter, a Minister of Christ, declared against, 2 Pet. 2. 3. and such as go after the Error of Balaam, for Gifts and Rewards, which Jude, a Servant of Jesus Christ, cryed Wo against, Jude Vers. 11?
Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, after many Excuses, thou plainly confessest, Thou canst not justifie all of your Calling, and therefor thou wilt an∣swer for thy self: And First (thou st) Thou art none of these Hirelings; for he is not an Hireling which takes the Wages allotted to him for his Wrk; for then thou dost accuse Kings and Governours  be Hirelings. who take Tribute and Custom, yea, and the Apostles, and Christ himself: which to prove, thou quotest 2 Cor. 7. 8. and Luke 8. 23. but thou confessest, That he is one that sets his Heart upon the Wages only, and delights not in the Work, but is weary of the same, and longs for the Shadow or Rest; which to prove, thou quotest Job 7. 1, 2, 3. Rep. Here, thou impudent Lyar, for all thy Shuffings and thy Coverings, thou canst not hide thy self, but out of thy own Mouth shalt be judg∣ed, though thou here plainly denyest thy Bre∣thren, and thinkest it enough to answer for thy self, thy Cause is so bad; for, thy Wages is not alotted by God, neither hast thou any Scripture-Rule to prove them (as is before proved) and therefore it follows, that thy Heart is set upon thy Hire, for which sake thou undertakest that Work which thou professest; and it is for thy Hire's sake that thou art not weary of thy Work, or else thou would not own that which is so contrary to the Scripture: so that thou canst not bring one Scripture Proof for this thy Practice, and that it is thy Hire that thou delightest in, is sufficient∣ly apparent, by thy thus gaping for it, and seeking to defend it, though altogether contrary to Scrip∣ture.
And as for the Work thou and thy Brethren profess, you are as Idle in it as you can, so that you can but hold up the World's Custom, and blind the People, that still you may Rule over them by your Means; and thus it may plainly be seen wherein is your Delight; and so out of thy own Mouth judge thee to be neither Con∣scionable nor Faithful, who art not ashamed thus to seek to justifie thy self in thy Deceit, whenas thy own Mouth confesseth, that it is not a Liberal Maintenance, and that thou canst take it, and plead for it: and therefore this Scripture, which thou quotest in Job 7. 2. shall stand and witness against thee, who, as a Hireling, agreest with the People for so much a Year, and, as a Hireling, lookest for thy Wages at the Year's End; but of thy Work there is no Profit to any: and so with the Shadow thou deceivest them for Gain, which doth so blind thy Eye, that thou think'st all are like thee, though they take that which is Freely administred to them for their Temporal Necessities; which is not an Agreeing with the People for so much a Year, and to take it by a Law, whether they will a∣gree with you, yea or nay; which Weapons Christ or his Ministers never made use of: And there∣fore, thou Lyar, how darest thou to accuse Christ or his Apostles to take Wages for their Work? Did Christ heal the Sick, or the Diseased, and the Lame, and the Blind, or Teach the People, for Money or Wa∣ges? Oh thou Blasphemer! forever stop thy Mouth from naming his Holy Name, who dost
so slander him: Well mayst thou accuse and slander his Servants and Messengers, which so impudently dost it to him, who is our Lord and Master. But as for Paying Tribute to Kings and Governours in their Places; it is allowed of by Scripture, which thine is not; and they are set about Temporal Affairs, and are the Ordinance of God for that Purpose, for to Govern and Protect the People in Bodily peace and Quietness; which if they neglect, will be laid to their Charge: But thou and thy brethren pretend to Spiritual Affairs, and therefore are to have your Rule and Example from Christ and his Ministers, who were set about Spiritual Affairs; the which thou canst not, but wouldst creep in∣to any Hole, to hide thy self and thy Brethren from the Light; but by it are You found out, and seen to be the Deceivers, who out of the Doctrine of Christ are found, and therefore not to be Owned nor Received. Pr. Answ. And Secondly, thou saith, Thou art no such Greedy Dog, whatsoever Foul-mouthed Curs do Bark to the contrary; for (thou saist) thou Contentest thy self with thy Legal Sallary, which yet (thou saist) is not contrary to Evangelical (wherein thou hast al∣ready been proved a Lyar sufficiently.) Rep. Here thy Foul Mouth thou hast opened wide, who accountest the Prophet Isaiah a Fol-mouthed Cur, who this Language first did speak unto the False Prophets, in whose St s thou art found, and therefore unto thee the same Language belonged, who seek'st for thy Gain from thy
Quarters, as they did: And what has thou else manifested but Greediness of Gain all along? who rather then thou wouldest yield thy Error in it (though thou couldst not produce one Scripture that would stand for it) yet thou runnest to Old Histories and Records, thereby to maintain it, con∣trary to Scripture: Therefore with Shame and Confusion of Face mightest thou say, Thou Con∣tentest thy self with thy Legal Sallary, who hast nigh 300. Pounds by the Year, and yet thou wouldst have more, if thou couldst get it, thou art so Gree∣dy, as may be well understood by thy Saying; That in former Time, that the Bishops and Pastors had not only a setled Maintenance of that Value, but of a great deal more, which is an unheard of Thing in all the Scripture; and therefore thy own Mouth confes∣sest what greedy Dogs you Priests have been since your Beginning, and yet with the Deceit of thy Heart thou wouldst still cover; but the Day doth make you manifest, to be such who run, and the Lord never sent you, and threfore you profit not the Peo∣ple at all: Therefore what is thy Teaching and Warning of the People, which thou here boasts of, and therefore art found one of the Dreamers, and Studyers, and Mutterers, who speakest a Di∣vination of thy own Brain, and not from the Mouth of the Lord, and so feedest the People with Wind and Air; therefore silence thou Deceiver, for going about to excuse thy self from tese things as if thou wast more holy then thy Brethren; for in so doing, thy Lying and Hypocrisie doth but
the more appear; and therefore this shall serve to prove thee a Lyar in all the rest of thy Excuses, and it is not Uncharitable nor Censorious to tell thee so, though thou so accusest me; but a Lye n thy Mouth is no Wonder. Qu. 15. Whether ever thou labouredst with thy Hands, to make the Gospel free, and without Charge, as Paul a Minister of the Gospel did. Pr. Ans. And in thy Answer thou dost not at all resolve my Query; but shufflest to and fro to hide thy self, and excusest thy self by pleading Paul's Power, in 1 Cor. 9. 6. And say'st, That Christ your Master did not injoyn you so to do, which to prove, thou quotest Luke 10. 7. and Deut 25. 4. and al∣so pleadest that in 2 Tim. 2. 4. and also pleadest a Liberty by the Councils and Synods in the Church in for∣mer Ages, &c. Rep. Yet all this doth not prove that ever thou labour'dst with thy Hands to make the Gospel free and without Charge, which any who read these Scriptures may see, and by thy Silence in the same judge thee guilty, and to be out of the Apostles Practice; & therefore these Scriptures will witness against thee (which thou hast quoted) for thou art not as Paul & Barnabas were, neither wast called to the Ministry as they were; neither preachest freely, as they did; neither labourest with thy Hands, as Paul did, but only makest a Trade and a Gain of the Apostles Words for thy own Ends; and therefore what hast thou to do to mention Christ
or his Ministers, who art so plainly found out of their Practice, or to call Christ thy Master, who art thy self called Master, and so robbest him of his Honour, and art not in his Doctrine, who saith, Be not ye called Masters) and so art none of his, and therefore hast nothing to do with that Liberty which he hath given to his faithful Labourers, whom he himself hath called into his Vineyard: And as for that Scripture in Luke 10. 7. it is not against Labour, but for Labour before thou canst have thy Hire; but thou would'st have it, and be maintained in Idleness by others Labours, as the Clergy-men (as thou callest them) in En∣gland are, who are no Ministers of Christ, who are called of Men Master, and so are out of his Do∣ctrine, in the Steps of the Pharisees, whom the Wo is unto; and therefore in this, these Coun∣cils and Synods (as thou callest them) in your Church in former Ages, have acted contrary to Scripture, in ordaining that you should not work, and labour with your Hands for your selves and your Families, but that you should live in Pride and Idleness, by the Sweat of others Brows, to be maintained as you are, which Ordinance is not of God, but of Man, by which you stand: And how hast thou before falsly accused me for not working, though I am not chargeable to the World, and now thou art striving by Scripture, wresting and false applying, and all the Wayes thou canst, for to excuse thy self from labouring
with thy Hands, as the Apostle did, though thou and thy Family are altogether chargeable to the World; all which Scriptures shall stand against thee; for they all maintain working before the Benefit of the Work comes to them, be it spiritu∣al or temporal; for the Ox treads not out the Corn without Labour: But what Corn have you Cler∣gy-men trodden forth? and what spiritual things have you sown? and what Gospel have you preach∣ed these many Years in England? do not the Fruits of your Ministry condemn you & witness a∣gainst you, to be such as run, and the Lord never sent you? and so the Curse follows you, and is upon your Ministry, and therefore profits not the People at all, but as Drones live upon the painful Labour of others; yea, though you do not labour with your Hands, yet who more entangle themselves in the Affairs of this World▪ then you that call your selves Clergy-men, both by aw and cunning Craft, and Deceit, and Bargaining and Oppressing thereby to make your selves Rich with the thing of this Life; yea, what Things is there in this Na∣tion to get Riches by (though never so unbeseem∣ing Spiritual Men) but you have a Hand in it▪ and therefore none of those spiritual Souldiers which Paul speaks of in 2 Tim. 2. 4. therefore si∣lence thou Deceiver for medling with the Scrip∣tures with thy Babylonish Language (as Prohibit, Mechanick, Synod and Clergy) which are the Words of Man's Wisdom, and contrary to the
plain Language of the Scripture, out of which thou art shut, in Babylon, where thou wast bred with thy Clergy (as thou callest them. Qu. 16. Whether thou dost not walk in the Steps of the Scribes and Pharisees, who art called of Men Master or Doctor, and hast the chiefest Seat in the Synagogue, and uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and Greetings in the Markets, contrary to the Practice of the Apostle, and so art under the Wo which Christ pronounced against such, yea or nay? Pr. Ans. And here thou wouldst shuffle off with Questioning instead of Answering (and sayest) What if Christ gave the Name of Master to Nicodemus? John 3. 10. and Luke th Name of Doctor to Gama∣liel? in Acts 5. 34. (and thou say'st) Is it then the giving or taking of these Names, which Christ for∣biddeth, or the arrogant using of them, out of an high or prod Spirit that desires to be Idolized? And thou confessest the Word Rabby signifies Doctor or Master, which Names (thou say'st) were familiarly given▪ both in the Old and New Testament, which to prove thou quotest Eccles. 12. 11. Eph. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Rep.The 89th and 90th Query are answered in this Reply, and thy 92d Query also. Here thy Blindness doth appear, and thou wilt need no other Proof against thee but thy own Words, though here thou would'st go about to slahder Christ and his Apostles, whom thou art not worthy to name, neither dost thou thereby answer my Query, but would'st justifie that which Christ cryed Wo against, and therefore a Minister of Anti-christ art found, to which the
Wo belongs; for that Scripture in Joh, 3. 10. doth not prove that Christ called Ncodemus Ma∣ster, as thou would'st fain slander him; neither doth that, Acts 5. 34. prove, that Luke gave Gamaliel the Name of Doctor, but in Way of Declaration, what he was accounted amongst the Jews, as any that read with Understanding may see; yea, thou thy self canst not deny it, but that thou would'st be glad of any Thing to shelter thy Deceit; but Christ expresly forbids his to be called Master; and there∣fore it is concluded, That you take these Names unto your selves from an Arrogancy and Pride of Spirit, that you might be idolized as is well known how you swell and are puffed up in Wrath & Rage, if you be not so called by those you account your Inferiours; or else you would not own it, being Christ hath so expresly forbidden it to his Mini∣sters, and you professig your selves to be his Mi∣nisters, and the Word Minister signifies Servant; and Pul, who was his Minister said, He made himself Servant unto all, but you would be Masters over all,2 Cor. 9. 19. bearing Rule by your Means, though hired as Servants, yet more Unreasonable and Unjust; for you will have it of them you do no Work for; and also whatsoever thou sayst Doctor or Master signifies, Christ hath forbidden it; and there∣fore in using of it, thou art out of the Doctrine of Christ, and the Wo is unto thee, and the more for wresting the Scripture to maintain it, and up∣hold it which Christ hath cryd down; and it is well known by them that are not wilfully blind, that
Master or Doctor are Names that are given & taken amongst you Clergy-men (as you call your selves, as Titles of Honour, witness your Degrees in your Nurseries of Deceit, which you call Universities as first Bachellor, then from Bachellor to Master of Arts, & from that to Bachellor of Divinity, and from that to Doctor of Divinity, which highest Title is given to thee, and therefore it is no Wonder that thou so pleadest for it▪ but the least Child of Light will judge these Traditions to be upheld by the Pride and Arrogancy of the Flesh, that would be idoli∣zed, but the Old Man must needs plead for his Life; neither do these Scriptures in Eph. 4. 11. and 1 Cor. 12. 28. at all advantage thee; for neither Doctor nor Master is mentioned in these Scriptures; and thus thou art ignorant of the Let∣ter, then far unfit to be a Teacher of others, which thou dost assume to thy self by the Name of Doctor, according to thy own Meaning. Pr. Ans. And as for the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and uppermost Rooms as Feasts, some (thou sayest) that are Worthy, were allowed them by Christ himself, which to prove, thou quotest Luke 14. 7, 8. &c. Mrk 5. 22. and by Luke, Acts 13. 15. and Chap. 18. 8. 17. And as for Salutations, they are allowed, (thou sayst) as well in the Market-Places as any where else. Rep. This is the truest Word that thou hast yet spoaken in one Respect, though from a false Spirit; for your Heathenish Customs and Salutations are allowed of no where by the Scripture, neither
hast thou brought any Proof to the contrary; and it is also easily discerned, you rather chuse them in the Markets, or in Publick, to be seen of Men, that you might be accounted Courteous, and look∣ed upon for your Breeding▪ witness your Congying and Bowing, with your Hats off in Admiration, and Idolizing of one anothers Persons, wherein you exalt your selves above the Angel, who would not suffer John to bow unto him, but said, he was his Fellow-Servant;Rev. 22. 8, 9. therefore let this judge you, and condemn you in these Practices, which by you are used from an ambitious and inordinate Desire of them, and therefore are the most unworthy, as thou confessest the Scribes and Pharisees were; and therefore art out of thy own Mouth judged, al∣though thou would'st cast it upon the Quakers, as thou callest them; but we can justly clear our selves, and cast it into thy own Bosom; for we use no such Heathenish Customs, yet we can justly say with John, We are of God, and the whole World lyes in Wick∣edness, which thou accountest an exalting of our selves,1 John 5. 19. and in that thou belyest Christ and the Scriptures, in saying he allowed these Things to any (which he cryed down) thy Impudency doth the more appear, that thou wouldst not stick to bely us, whom thou callest Quakers; for none of these Scriptures, which thou quotest to uphold the chiefest Seats in the Synagogue and uppermost Rooms at Feasts, do at all concern the Matter, but only Luke 14. 7, &c. which Christ spoak as a Parable to the Pharisees, who loved the uppermost
Rooms at Feasts, which also may fitly be applyed to you now,How thy 9th Query is answer'd. who take the uppermost Room, and think Scorn to take the lowest, which may easily be discerned by you, with an Impartial Eye, or else you would not own these Things which Christ declared against to his Ministers,Mat. 20. 25. 26, 27. and also taught that he that would be the greatest,Jam. 12. should be the least; and the Apostle forbids all Respect of Persons; and Christ shewed an Example of Humility to his Mi∣nisters, when he washed their Feet,John 13. and condemned the Pharisees,John 5. 44. who received Honour one of another, which thou art here pleading for; then if thou beest not in their Steps, let the Understanding judge. Qu. 17. Wht is the Church? and whether it be not a Delusion to the People, and a Dishonour to Christ, to call a House of Lime and Stone, a Church? Pr. Ans. And in thine Answer thou pleadest it a Custom in most Ages, and by a Trope of Figure; but thou confessest the Word Church is first and properly a Congregation of Saints, or of such as profess so to be, as in 1 Cor. 1. 2. And in the second Place thou say'st, This Word is used for a Place where such a Congregation use to assemble, which to prove, thou quotest Cor. 11. 23. and Ver. 18. and Chap. 14▪ 5. 23. com∣pared with Ver, 19. 28. Neither is this any Delusion to the People (thou sayest) nor more Dishonour to God, then to use this Phrase, the House of God, which to prove, thou quotest Isa. 60. 7. and Eph. 42. 4. Therefore here we seek a Knt in a Bulrush, thou sayest.
Rep, And thus thou Blasphemer valuest thy Blasphemy, covering it with Lyes, that thou might'st still keep the People in Blindness, who makest such a light small Matter of it, to put a House of Lime & Stone for the Body of Christ, which is the Church: And thus you have long fed the People in Blindness with your Vain Customs and Traditions;Col. 2. 24. and they put you out of your Cu∣stoms, and you are vexed and troubled, as the Heathen was at Paul and Silas, and said, They came to turn the World up-side down: And then, to co∣ver your Blasphemy and Lyes,Acts 17. 6. you have Tropes and Figures, which is the Wisdom of Man to co∣ver Lyes; and thus you Learned Ones make use of your Learning to make Lyes in Hypocrisie, con∣trary to the Scripture; for the Types and Figures in the Scripture figured forth something to come: But your Steeple-houses are no Figures of Christ, nor his Body (which is the Church) And when the Substance is come, of what Use is the Figure? For, the Temple which God commanded Solomon to build him, which was called the House of God (where them that feared the Lord worshipped him) was a Figure of Christ; but when Christ the Substance came, he prophesied of its Destru∣ction, Mat. 24. And Steven after him declared against it; and by them that upheld it, was sto∣ned to Death, Acts 7. 47, 48, 49, &c. And Paul de∣clared against it; and by them that upheld it, was persecuted, Acts 17. 24, 25. Acts 19. 26. 2. as we are by You now, that uphold Your Idols
Temples, that figure forth nothing but the Ima∣ginations of Man, neither were ever comman∣ded by God to be built, as Solomon's Temple was, which for its Time was called, The House of God; but the Prophet Isaiah saw the End of it, when he spoak that in Isa. 66. 1, 2. But that you should call your Popish Houses, The House of God, which were built by the Papists, and such like, without any Command of God, thou hast no Scripture-Proof to maintain it; neither are those fit Exam∣ples to bring to prove it, as the Schollars, and the Schools, and the Jews, and their Synagogues; What doth this at all prove, that you should call Your Idols Temples as the Body of Christ, which was made of Living Stones, Elect and Precious? For, the Scripture all along witnesseth, That the Church is the Body of Christ, which is the Saints, as this Scripture doth witness, which thou hast quoted, in 1 Cor. 1. 2. but it doth not at all prove thy Lye, that the Church is a Congregation of such as profess to be Saints; for it is more then a Profession, though with a Profession You have long deluded the Peo∣ple: Yet many there are that profess Christ in Words,Titus 1. 16. but in Life deny him, who are no Saints, nor the Church of Christ, though thou art Blind and seest no Difference; yet according to thy own Meaning, You do not call Your Assemblies, and the Places where your Assemblies meet, all one; for you call your Meeting Places, Churches; and the People, a Congregation▪ and so, here out of thy own Mouth thou art judged: Yet it would be as much
Blasphemy, to call your People a Church, as the Place where they meet a Church: For, it is well known, That all manner of Unrighteous Persons meet there, as thou confessest the greatest Part of the Professors are Earthly-minded, as in thy Answer to my Eleventh Query; and I am sure the Chiefest of them are blind, and led by Customs and Traditions, as thou here makest it appear, who thy self hast been a Teacher so long, and now goest about to justifie it lawful to call a House of Lime and Stone, a Church; which thou goest about to prove by Wresting the Scripture: But let any with a Single Eye read these Scriptures, which thou hast quoted in thy Answer,Cor. 16. 19. concerning the Church,Col. 4. 15. and see if they do at all mention any House to be a Church, but only the Saints,Acts 20. 16. whose Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; for, They commonly met in Dwelling-houses: But You call none Churches▪ but yo Steeple-houses, which hath been your Custom long; and it is well known, how the ignorant People, that go to them, have long Idolized them as the Huses of God, and looked upon them to be far more Holy then any other Place; and have Envied, and Hated, and even Murdered those in their Hearts, that should say to the Contrary; and You Priests have been their great Agents in it, though you have known in your Consciences to the con∣trary: Yet you know, That where the Peo∣ple are the most Blind, You are the more Idoli∣zed, and set up: and it is Your greatest Grief,
where the Light appears, as is openly manifest by the Chief Priests, who now Rage and Rail against the Light, where it appears, and Persecute them that hold it forth, that you might, if it were possible, put it out, and still uphold your Father's kingdom, which is in Darkness; and then you think you are safe, and all will be yours: But your Calamity will come on a suddain, and your Downfall is nigh at hand, 1 Thes. 5. 2, 3. Qu. 18. Whether thou, and such as thou, be not the Creepers into Houses, who would confine all to your Steeple-houses? yea or nay. Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou grantest, That Paul speaks of Seducers, that creep into Houses, &c. as in 2 Tim. 3. 6, 7. But whether this best suits with your manner of Teaching or ours, thou saist, judge ye; for, thou saist, you do not creep into the Churches, who have the DOORS set wide open, and have your Congregations or Assemblies pub∣lickly called together by a Bell. And then thou ventest forth a deal of frothy Stuff, and saist, Why must your Houses of Lime and Stone be called Steeple-houses, more then the Glazier's Hall or the Bull-and-Mouth near Aldersgate, be called a Glass-house, a Chimney-house, or a Store house, or a Stable-house? But thou askest, Where did Christ or his Apo∣stles reproach the Synagogues with Reproachful Names, as we do your Churches? Rep. Here thy Malicious and Scornful Spirit is
much more made manifest, together with thy Folly and Ignorance; so that I am able to judge thee, and the rest of the Parish-Preachers, to be those Creepers into Houses that Paul there speaks of, 2 Tim. 3. 6, 7. who have led silly Women and People captive these many Years, full of Sin, and led away with divers Lusts, who have learn∣ed, some Forty Years, some Fifty, some Sixty, yea, some Eighty, and yet Strangers to the Truth, yea, as Blind and Carnal as ever they were, so that they take a House of Lime and Stone for a Church, and a House of God, as you have taught▪ And ask them, Why they call it so? and they will answer, It was called so before they were born, & will be after they were dead. Then judge ye, whether these Creatures be not blind & carnal, and led by your own Customs and Traditions; and you are their Teachers, who would bear Rule in your Steeple-houses, so that none should speak but your selves; if they do, you have a Law to lay upon them, contrary to the Order of the True Church, as in 1 Cor. 14. 30, 31, 32. That all might speak one by one; and if any thing be revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his Peace: But this is called Disorder amongst you, that call your selves Saints, and are not, but the Synaggue of Satan, and by thy own Confession, are led together by a Bell, for which you have no Rule in the Scripture; and so you lead them by Custom and Tradition: And also, thy own words here prove what I said in my last Reply,
That you do not call your Assemblies, and the Places where your Assemblies meet, both by one; for, here thou callest the Place a Church, and the People the Congregation, as I said before. And thou Blind Guide, where dost thou read in the Scripture of Church-Doors? Be ashamed, and blush, thus to presume in thy Blasphemy: And therefore howsoever thou hast taken these Houses to be, wherein Deceivers creep, as before is pro∣ved, and have taught the People so, to put them out of Jealousie of You to be the Deceivers, doth not at all excuse you from it; for the Apostle himself taught in Private Houses,Acts 20. 20. and Chambers, and Private Places; and therefore, by that Ac∣count thou wouldst tax the Apostle to be a De∣ceiver, if he was here, as thou dost James Parnel, and those whom thou scornfully callest his Gang: But where dost thou find such a Word in the Scripture, which proceeds out of thy Malicious and Evil Heart; but thy Reproaches unto us are Riches (and thy Shame.) And the Reason why those Houses near Alders∣gate (which thou so spittest thy Venom at, because the People of God have used to meet there) may not be called (as thou in Contempt dost term them) as well as your Stone Houses be called Steeple-houses, is, because they have Names fit∣ting for them already, for to distinguish them from other Places; & so also the word Steeple-house is the sittest Name to distinguish your Meeting Places from others; and also▪ to take from them that Holy
Name which only belongs to the Body of Christ; and also, to wear out that Idolatry of the People's Minds, which they through long Custom have born to those Idolatrous Places: Neither do we any more Reproach them in so saying, then Christ and his Apostles did, in calling the Jews Meeting-Place Synagogues, though thou highly dishonour∣est Christ in calling them Churches, which signi∣fies his Body: Have you no other Names to be∣stow upon your Stone Houses and High Places, but most blasphemously to call them by the Name of God's and Holy Men, whom you are not worthy to name, as you call your Colledges (which are Synagogues of Satan, and Cages of Unclean Birds) by the Name of Immanuel, and by the Name of Christ, and Trinity, and the like: If you had cal∣led them by the Name of Glazier's Hall, or Bull-and-Mouth, or Synagogue, and the like, we should not gain-say it: And therefore, in this the Jews wil condemn you, who did not presume to call their Meeting-Places by such holy Names, as you presumptuously do, which is and hath been a great Provocation of the People to Idolatry, to idolize the Places because of their Names, which were given to them by the Ppists, who ignorant∣ly worship Names; and you cast out the Papists for Idolatry, and yet uphold their Idols. There∣fore Wo unto you Blind Guides, and Deluders of the People; your Wickedness is had in Remem∣brance before the Lord.
Qu. 19. Whether it was the Practice of the Apo∣stles to take a Text of the Prophets Words, and from thence to raise Uses, Points, Tryals and Motives, as thou and such as thou do, who make a Trade of their Words? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say'st, That it hath been the Practice of the Church and her Teachers these many Hundred Years (for the which thou hast no Scripture-Proof) And secondly, thou say'st, That none will deny that this is an useful and profitable Way of Teaching (which is an abominable Lye, which I and Hundreds more can testifie against) And thirdly, thou say'st, It may be proved out of the Scrip∣tures, that all this hath been done by Christ and his Apo∣stles (which is another Lye) and these are the Scriptures upon which thou would'st ground thy Lyes, in which they will witness against thee, as Luke 4. 18. and Mat. 22. 31. Act. 8. 35. and for to maintain thy Uses, Points Tryals and Motives, thou quotest Rom. 15. 4. 2 Tim. 3. 16, 17. John 8. 31. and 13. 35. and Mat. 25. 34. Rep. Oh thou Lyar, thy Lyes will not cover thee, nor the Scripture stand for thee, who art found out of the Life and Practice of them that gave them forth, who art one of the lying false Teachers, who have deluded the People these many hundred Years, which deluded Ones are your Church,Col. 2. 8. amongst whom you have used your Philosophy and vain Deceit, by which you have long spoiled them, so that the greatest Part of the
Professors therein are Earthly-minded, by thy own Confession; and I am sure, that another Part are Drunkards, and Swearers, and Adulterers, and Scoffers, and Scorners, and Proud and Envious Ones,2 Tim. 4. 3. and the like; and now where are the Fruits and Profitableness of your Teaching? There∣fore for Shame stop thy Mouth for boasting of your Church and her Teachers, and saying, None will deny the Profitableness of your Teaching;Hos. 4, 9. for like Peo∣ple, like Priest, as the Prophet said; and you are the Heaps of Teachers that deceive the World, and draw itching Ears after you (who cannot endure sound Doctrine) with your feigned enticing Words of Mens Wisdom: but the Teacher of the true Church is but one, which is its Head, even Christ, who speaks with Power and Authority (and not as you Scribes) whose Teaching is a profitable Teaching, as is much witnessed in these latter days to your great Shame & Grief,Mat. 7. 29. who have been the professed Teachers of the Church of England these many Years; neither do any of these Scriptures prove, that ever Christ or his Apostles took a Text of Scripture, and by human Art and Study did raise Uses, Points, Tryals, and Motives, as you do, which is a commendable Teaching by the Wiscones of the World,1 Cor. 1. 18. who know not the Wisdom of God; but to them the preaching of the Gross is Foolishness,1 Cor. 2. 4. as was accounted amongst the Greeks, because the Apo∣stle came not with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom (as you do, to please Men) but in Plainness of Speech spoak the Word of the Lord faithfully, and also
said,Gal. 1. 10 If he yet sought to please Men, he should not be the Servant of Christ; but this is all your Care, whose Trust is in Man, and not in Christ; and in all those Scriptures, when Christ or his Apostles spoak of a Text of Scripture out of the Old Te∣stament, it was to shew the fulfilling thereof, or to witness to what they had said; but you will take these Scriptures for to give your Carnal Meanings and Interpretations of them, and so from them speak a Divination of your own Brain, for Gain and Lucre; and this is the Use you make of these Points, as thou callest them, which the Scriptures before mentioned will not at all maintain, and yet thou canst impudently quote this Scripture in Mat. 6. 25. 34. which forbids taking Thought what to eat, what to drink, and wherewithal to be cloathed, when it is so publickly known, that it is your greatest Care, and that which thou hast been here much labour∣ing to maintain all along, to prove it lawful for thee to take nigh Two Hundred or Three Hundred Pounds by the Year of the World; yea, and for a Law to compel them, if they refuse to give it; and yet thou art not ashamed to say, That thou dost not go in the Way of Balaam for Gifts and Rewards; and the chiefest Scripture which thou hast here quoted, will witness against thee, as 2 Tim. 3. 16, 17. which saith, The Scripture was given by Inspi∣ration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Re∣proof, for Correction, and Istruction in Righteousness, that the Ma of God may be perfected, throughly fur∣nishd unt every good Work; but thou hatest to be
reproved, and callest them foul-mouthed Curs, and the like, that do reprove thee; and thou teachest for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, as to call a House of Lime and Stone a Church, and the like, as is before proved. And how have you by all your Doctrines, Re∣proofs, Correction and Instruction these many Years perfected any, when as the Professors there∣in are Earthly minded (as thou say'st) and you that are Teachers therefore the most of all; and most of you deny Perfection in this Life: And though thou with thy Tongue professest it, yet in Life denyest it, which is worst of all, and so I take thee. Pr. Answ. And though thou hast been so plead∣ing for thy Way, yet thou say'st, You would change it for a better, if any can shew it you, and make your Hear∣ers believe, that it would be more Advantageous for them; but thou say'st, This Trade of interprting the Scrip∣turs is an Old and a Good Trade, which to prove thou quotest Job 33. 23. Psal. 10. 2, 3. Prov. 1. 6. Acts 8. 3. Rep. Here thou blind Guide, thy Nakedness is open to the World, and thy Hearers may consider it, who have looked upon thee as their Teacher these many Years; and yet thou thy self still to learn which is the best Way, whenas there is but one true Way, then thou who art Ignorant of this true Way,Jer. 32. 39. must needs be in a false Way; then how hast thou deluded thy Hearers these many Years, and also belyed thy self in thy Book; and
if the Teacher be ever learning, then what must the Hearers of such an one be? let the Wise-heart∣ed judge; and I believe and know, that your Hearers would soon believe the same, if the Preachers of Truth might have Liberty to speak, when they come amongst you; but if any come in that Intent, you are ready to set your People upon them, to hale them out with Force, and al∣so you have a Law to cast them into Prison, as many of us do witness at this Day; and there∣fore thou Lyar, the Convincing of your Hearers of a better Way, is not your greatest Care, but rather your greatest Fear, lest any should be drawn from you, and so your Trade come to fail (as thou callest it) but this I know is your greatest Care, that any Body would shew you a better Way to get Money by, and also perswade your Hearers in∣to it (or else thou think'st you are never the bet∣ter) and then you would leave interpreting the Scripture, which now thou callest a Good Trade; but thou Merchant of Babylon, where do any of these Scriptures which thou hast quoted, prove or term interpreting the Scripture, a Trade? though you Merchants of Babylon make a Trade of it, to get Luere by, and so call it a Trade, who think Gain is Godliness; but well may others accuse you for making a Trade and a Gain of the Scriptures, while y your selves confess it; and thus thou wrests the Scripture for thine own Ends, and paintest thy Work with Scripture, for to make the Igno∣rant believe it is grounded upon Scripture: Oh,
be ashamed to take it into thy Mouth, to make a Trade of it, which was freely spoken forth by the Holy Men of God, as they were moved by the Ho∣ly Ghost; and thou makest the People believe, it is of some private Interpretation; and so thou makest Merchandize of the People, and so out of thy own Mouth art judged to be a Lyar, who be∣fore denyedst it. Qu. 20. Whether thou dost speak as thou art moved by the Holy Ghost, as they did who spoa forth the Scrip∣ture? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say'st, That thou hast answered to this already, that thou usually dost speak at the Motion or Assistance of the Holy Ghost, thou praisest God for it. Rep. But thou Hypocrite, I have also in this alreadly proved thee a Lyar, and thy God to be the Father of Lyes, who is the God of the blind World,2 Co. 1. 4. 4. in which thou art a blind Guide, and an Enemy to the Holy Ghost, where he is witnessed to rule; and this James Parnel, and those thou callest his Fellows, can discern in thee, though thou art blind, and canst not them see. Qu. 21. What Scripture hast thou for sprinkling In∣fants with Water on their Faces? And whether all are Christians, and in the Faith of Christ, that are so done by? Or what doth it profit? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer the Deceit of thy Heart thou utterest, so that the simple may easily
discern thy Folly, and also see how thou and the rest of thy Brethren have deluded and bewitched the Nation; for thou say'st, Thou holdst not the Baptism of Infants absolutely necessary, but lawful only; and to prove the Lawfulness of it, thou say'st, It is sufficient that thou hast no Command in the Scrip∣ture against the Sprinkling of Infants in the Face with Baptismal Water; but thou say'st, Thou hast the Commandment of Governours, and thou art commanded to be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. Rep. Here the People now may see how they have been long deluded, for thy own Mouth ut∣ters it; for when as many of the People of this Nation, who follow you blind Guides, have per∣swaded themselves, through your evil incensing and leavening of their Minds, to this Day, this to be absolutely necessary to Salvation, and that their Children could not be saved, if they dyed without it: And now thou comest to the Tryal, to prove it, thou confessest, It is not necessary, but lawful only, and that is, because there is no Command of God against it, thou say'st, neither a Command for it, but by Man; and thus you have long deluded the Nations with your own Inventions, for the which you have no Scripture; then how is it your Rule? Here you run besides your Rule, teaching for Do∣ctrine the Commandments and Traditions of Men, which the Scripture is against,Here thy 53 d Query is answered. and therefore against In∣fants Baptism, Mat. 15. 9. Col. 2. 22. 23. which by thy own Confession, is but an Ordinance of
Man; but God is to be obeyed rather then Man, and you do it not for the Lord's sake, but for to please Man; for the Lord doth not require it at your Hands: And now all the ignorant People, who have been in this bewitched by you, may see your Blindness, who have long made them believe that it was an Ordinance of Christ, that their Children should be sprinkled (and one of the Points of Salvation, as you call them) and now nothing but an Ordinance of Man, which will not stand for thee neither; for in that thou lyest also, to say, It is the Commandment of thy Governours; for in that they leave every one to the Liberty of their Con∣sciences, and all Laws and Ordinances afore-time to the contrary, are made by this null and void; And now, doth the Holy Ghost teach thee to lye? Oh thou Lyar and Blasphemer of the Holy Ghost, who said'st, That usually thou speakest by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, and now art taken in a Lye; Oh, Satan is high in thee, and thy Wickedness is great: And which dost thou call thy Baptismal Water? this also is the Deceit of thy Heart, and that which is not of Faith is Sin,Rom. 14. 23 therefore Infants Baptism; for you say, Your Faith is grounded upon Scripture, then where is your Scripture for Infants Baptism; and thus out of the Doctrine of Christ you are found, acting and doing your own Works: And therefore, the rest of thy pretended Answer I shall leave to the Impartial Reader to judge of, wherein thou hast much manifested thy Ignorance and Blindness; and in vain hast thou quoted any Scripture; for if any
of it would stand for Infants Baptism, then it would be necessary, which thou confessest it is not; and therefore thou Serpent, why wrestest thou the Scripture, thus to uphold that which is not neces∣sary: And whereas thou speakest of the Promises made in the Seed (but that Seed is not the Seed of the Serpent, which rules in all you Children of Disobedience; therefore) what hast thou to do with the Promises; and where dost thou prove that Infants Baptism is the Seal of the Covenant, or the Badge of the Kingdom, as thou termest it; but thou Lyar,Here thy 54 th & 55 th Query is an∣swered. read what the Seal is, in Eph. 1. 13. and with that stop thy Mouth. And whereas thou speakest of Christ's calling little Children; what of that, Christ baptized none; therefore silence Babler: And how are your Children sanctified from the Womb (as thou say'stJohn 4. 2 John was) whenas all are by Nature the Children of Wrath,Ephes. 2. 3. and except they be born again they cannot enter;John 3. 3. and therefore thou manifests, that your Church is made up of Unrege∣nerate Persons, into which, thou say'st, they are ad∣mitted by Water; and 20. or 30. Years after they are thus baptized, you preach Repentance to them, and this is the Cause why the Professors therein are Earthly-minded, as thou complainest; and there∣fore no Christian Parents, but blind carnal Crea∣tures, who think it profits their Children to be admit∣ted into such a Church; and as the Children grow up, they show what Seal you have given them, which is more like the Mark of the Beast, then the Seal of the Covenant; and therefore your
Prayers, which thou talkest of, are an Abomination, and avail not: And thus hast thou foamed our thy Shame and Folly to the Sight of all, but those who are blind, and love to have it so; for here is one of the main Points of your Religion proved a meer Delusion. Qu. 22. What is the Estate and Condition of Christian? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou hast stolen the Apostles Words, which he speaks concerning this Matter; and saith, There are Three Ages, Steps and Degrees of Christianity; and the first Age, Step and Degree (thou confessest) is In Christ, and be∣gotten of the Father in the Hatred of Sin and Love of Righteousness, and by him brought to the Knowledge of Redemption from all Iniquity, and Renovation in all Righteousness. Rep. Here thou hast destroyed the whole Faith of your Visible Church; for they generally be∣lieve, That they shall never be wholely set free from all Iniquity, nor be perfect in Righteousness, while they are upon the Earth: And if this be the lowest Estate of Christianity, to be In Christ, and Redeemed from all Iniquity, and Begotten by the Father, and Renewed in all Righteousness (which is Perfection in Righte∣ousness) then by thy own Confession, None of them are Christians, neither Thou, who art a Tea∣cher of them; for, thou hast been openly found
in Sin and Iniquity, as in Lying, Covetousness, Lightness, Scornfulness, Oppression and Deceit, as be∣fore is proved. And now thou art again found a Lyar, in saying, That we know not the First Estate of a Christian from the Last: But we are able to discern thee, yet un∣come to the First, and therefore far off the Last, although in Years an Old Man, yet a Child can tell thee thy Confusion. Therefore stop thy Mouth, thou Deceiver, and sit thee down and con∣sider, how thou and thy Brethren have for these many Years deceived this Nation; and labour thy self, and Repent in Dust and Ashes, lest the Lord in thy Destruction make thee an Example to all thy Brethren-Deceivers. Qu. 23. What doth the Faith, which thou profes∣sest, differ from the Faith of the Hypocrite? and what is the Faith of the Hypocrite? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou saist, Thy Faith is a Trust in the Lord Jesus, to be holpen up again from the Fall, or to be saved from the Hand of thine Ene∣mies, or of all that hate thee, and so to be renewed through him, to be enabled to serve him cheerfully, and without Fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the dayes of thy Life: And thou saist, This Faith bring∣eth forth Obedience, and purifieth the Heart, and maketh you conformable to Jesus, so that thou hopest for no Be∣nefit by his Death unless thou dyest with him to all known Sins; but the Faith of the Hypocrite seeketh alwayes something by or through Christ then what it should seek
(to wit) the putting off the Old Man, and the putting on the New, which is created after God in Righteousness and true Holiness: And herein, thou saist, doth thy Faith differ from the Faith of the Hypocrite, and per∣haps from James Parnel's. Rep. Yea, it doth; for my Faith is, that there is no putting off the Old Man, and putting on the New,John 15. 5. but by and through Christ; which is no more then what I should believe: And thy Faith, which is contrary is the Faith of the Hypocrite, which will perish, yea, and out of thy own Mouth I shall prove it; for, by thy own Confession thou art still in the Fall, in saying, That thou trustest in the Lord Jesus, to be holpen up out of the Fall again: Hereby it is concluded, that thou art still in the Fall; for, if thou wast hol∣pen already out of the Fall, then thou wouldest have the End of thy Hope: But, 'tis like, this Faith thou hast professed these many Years, and hast been a Teacher so long, and yet it hath not brought thee out of the Fall; and therefore it is but a Borrowed Faith: And most of those Expressions, thou hast stolen out of Luke 1. 71, 72, 73, 74, 75. which hath not purified thy Heart from Lyes and Deceit; neither art thou in Obedience or Conformable to Jesus Christ, who abidest not in his Doctrine, but teachest for Do∣ctrine the Traditions of Men; neither art thou dead with him unto all known Sins; for this is one, to depart from his Doctrine, and such hath not God: and this is proved against thee in many
things, as in taking thy Tythes and Maintenance of the Peoples Labours, which many of them, it is like, do want it themselves, which is a great Sin and Oppression: and secondly, in Sprinkling In∣fants, which is a great Delusion to the People; and many other things, which are before proved against thee, which that in thy Conscience can∣not but testifie against. And thou Hypocrite, durst thou trust the Lord to save thee from thine Ene∣mies, & hose that hate thee, & yet durst not trust him with thy Maintenance without the Law of Man, to Compel it from the People, contrary to their Wills: Thou Hypocrite, is not this a known Sin? The Power of Man was all the False Pro∣phets had to trust to, who departed from the Lord; and here out of thy own Mouth thou art found a Lyar and Deceiver, and therefore the Hypocrite thy self, whose Trust is not only in Christ, and so thou differest from him thou callest James Parnel. Qu. 24. Whether all that thou givest Bread and Wine to, which thou callest a Sacrament, do Discern the Lords Body? yea or nay. Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou saist, Thou hopest most of those, to whom thou givest Bread and Wine, have some Understanding of the Body and Blood of Christ; for thou saist, thou hast declared the Mystery of both more distinctly and evidently then e∣ver thou readst in our Writings: And then by thy vain Philosophy thou goest about to justifie the
Word Sacrament, for the which thou hast no Scrip∣ture; and many of your Blind Dluded People do not know what it means. Rep. But all this is no true Ground to believe thy words to be Truth; for, thy Hope is alrea∣d disproved, and found to be Deceit; and thy Lying Tongue hath been many times reproved, as before thou boastest, that thou uually spoakest by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, and then wast presently found in a Lye, so that there is no Credit to be given to thy Words, without a suf∣ficient Proof; for here also thou may'st easily be proved a Lyar; for, out of thy own Mouth both thou thy self, and thy Church, were proved to be no Christians.: Then for your Discerning the Body of Christ, or declaring the Mystery from your own Experiences, yea, and though thou couldest declare the Mystery from others Words, who experienced it, they that hear thee could not discern it without a Single Eye, which appeareth they have not, who are still Earthly-minded, by thy own Confession: And dost thou profess here now to have such a Spiritual People, and yet durst not trust them for thy Maintenance, without a Compulsive Law? This also manifests thy self to be Earthly-minded, and so ignorant of the My∣stery. And thus every way, thou Deceiver, thy Confusion is seen, and by the Truth art thou o∣verwhelmed, and catched in thy own Crafti∣ness.
Qu. 25. And whether dost thou not give Bread and Wine to Natural Men and Women? yea or nay. Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou confessest, Thou dost give to Natural Men an Women (and also to Spiritual Ones) as, thou saist, Christ himself did to all the Twelve Disciples, Luke 22. 14, 15. &c. where∣of, thou saist, Judas was one; and the Apostle for a time, thou saist, gave the same to those that professed Repentance, Faith and new Obedience, but fell away afterwards; which to prove, thou quotest 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. 1 John 2. 19. Rep. Here, thou Murderer of Souls, by thy own Confession thou confessest the People to eat and drink Damnation to themselves, not discer∣ning the Lord's Body, which the Natural Man and Woman cannot do; and as for Spiritual Ones, thou hast none in thy Flock; for thou confessest, they are Earthly minded: And for what Christ did, is a Mystery to thee, and that which might be done for the fulfilling of what was before decreed, which is nothing for thee to imitate: And did not Judas eat and drink his own Damna∣tion? Neither doth these Scriptures prove that the Apostles did the same as thou dost; for he was far absent from them when he writ this Epistle to them, as a Warning to take heed what they did: neither doth that in John prove any thing to this Purpose; for thine can fall no lower then they are, who are not yet Christians, neither thou that tea∣chest them, as is before proved out of thy own
Mouth. And though here thou confessest, they are a Mixt Multitude, yet thou makest no Diffe∣rence when thou takest thy Tythes, neither appear∣eth it when thou givest them that thou callest a Sacrament. Qu. 26. Can any be set free from Sin so long at they are upon the Earth? and where must they be clensed, if not upon the Earth? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou in words confessest, That man may be Wholely set Free, and that thou knowest no other Place of Purgation; and also boastest. That thou hast held forth this Doctrine long before the Quakers came, as thou callest them. Rep. But I find, in Life thou still denyest it, neither art thou thy self come up to it, nor any that are taught by thee; and therefore I hold thee the greater Hypocrite and Deceiver, then if with the rest of thy Brethren thou didst in words deny it, unless in Life thou didst seal it; for, Profession without Life and Power, hath ever been a Dishonour to Truth and Religion: Therefore silence Deceit, and cause not the Truth to be blasphemed. Qu. 27. What Scripture hast thou for thy Rule, to give David's Conditions, to be sung in a Meeter? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou canst bring no Scripture-Proof to maintain what thou dost; but saist, All are not of the World whom we take to be of the World (to wit) who are no Quakers, thou saist.
And secondly, thou saist, Israel in the general, to whom David gave his Psalms to be sung, were the greatest part Unregenerate, and men of the World. Thirdly, thou saist, He gave them in Meeter or Measure to be sung, as the Learned in the Hebrew Tongue know well. Rep. All are of the World that are not Chri∣stians, which neither thou nor thine are, as before out of thy own Mouth is proved; and also, all that own not Quaking and Trembling by the Power of God are also of the World, and know not God; for, all the Holy Men of God, and David for one (as is before proved) witnessed Quaking and Trembling;Ezek. 12. 10. Jer. 10. 25. Mat. 12. 30. Ex. 19. 16. and the Son of Man was to eat his Bread with Quaking and drink his Water with Trembling: And so you that despise Quaking and Trembling are Heathens, that know not God: And also, the Way is but one; and they that are not with us are against us: But All Israel Trembled before the Lord, who were not of the World, as thou belyest them, who were the Lord's chosen People, in the Figure, whom he had chosen out of the World: though when they forgot their God, they were defiled with the World. Neither canst thou bring any Scripture-Proof to maintain, that David gave forth his Prayers, his Prophecies, his Quakings, his Roarings, his Cryings, and his Lamentations o be sung in a Meeter, as thou saist the Learned Ones know; but thy Learned Ones may be Lyars, like Thee, and therefore I have no Ground to be∣lieve them, seeing also that I have a Proof to the
contrary; for by your own Confession, they were turned into English Meeter by Sternhold and Hopkin∣son; and therefore stop thy Mouth thou Lyar. And fourthly, Thou askest what Condition David was in, into which every Man may not come in Time? And fifthly, thou say'st, Are not David's Psalms Part of the Holy Scriptures which are permitted to all Men, and are profitable for all Men to read. And sixthly, thou say'st, The Jews did read all the Old Testament in Publick with a singing Voice, as the Learned know. And seventhly, thou say'st, Did not the Lord by his Servant Moses teach all Israel a Song of his own making? as in Deut. 31. 19, 20, 21, 22. Deut. 32. And thou say'st, We will not deny but David's Psalms may have the same Effects, even upon the Wicked, &c. which is false, for we will deny it, for the Wicked have no∣thing to do with them; for unto the Wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou shouldst take my Covenant in thy Mouth; and here thy Heart hath deceived thee; neither doth this prove that the World may sing David's Con∣ditions in a Meeter, because it is possible to come into his Conditions, but then they must come out of the World; but I do not perceive that you have a Desire to come into his Conditions, who deny Quaking and Trembling, which was Part of his Conditions: But those that do come into his Conditions, need not take his Words, to sing in a Meeter; but the same Spirit that taught him to praise the Lord, will also teach them, which it seems you are Strangers to, and therefore sing
Lyes in Hypocrisie. And as he said, He was not puffed in Mind, nor had no scornful Eye,Psal. 131. 1. you also say (you are not) and as he said, He roared all the Day long, and watered his Couch with his Tears,Psal. 8. you also [sing] you do so: And thus the Ignorant People are led by you, to exercise themselves in Things that for them be too high; and you that lead them, cause them to err; And therefore, Wo unto you blind Guides, and Deceivers of the People:Isa. 3. 1. Isa. 24. 11. Neither are David's Psalms, nor the rest of the Holy Scriptures, for Drunkards, Swearers, Lyars, and such like Persons, to make a Song on; for to such they are sealed; and the same that gave them forth, the same will open them, and they that can so read them may, and so they are profitable: And how the Jews did read the Old Testament in publick (as thou sayst) doth not at all prove that you should sing David's Conditions in a Meeter, who are far Strangers to them; so here thou might'st have been silent from such Carnal Reasoning; but that thou art glad of any Thing to cover thy De∣ceit, because the Scriptures will not. And that Song that was given by the Lord to Moses for Israel to sing, it was not in Meeter, neither other Mens Conditions, but it was a Song the Lord had ap∣pointed them to sing, suitable to their Conditions, but still this doth not prove, that the Lord gave you David's Conditions to sing in a Meeter, from your light Minds, as you do; therefore silence De∣ceiver, and let the Scripture alone in its Place, and strive not to make the Lord the Author of your
Deceit: And thou say'st, His Prayers may teach them to pray; but he saith, The Prayers of the Wicked are Sin: And thus thou wouldst teach them to pray by Tradition, and not by the Spirit; for they that pray by the Spirit, need not others Prayers to teach them, though ye that are ignorant of the Spirit have nothing else: And thou say'st, His Hymns may teach them to land the Lord; but the Pro∣phet saith, The Dead cannot praise the Lord, but the Living; and none can praise the Lord but those that know him; but the Wicked know him not, and therefore their Prayers and Praises is Deceit, though for a Cloak they steal their Words that knew him; and thus thou wise Man, thy Wis∣dom perisheth: And thou say'st, His Afflictions may order, support and comfort them, when they are in the like Conditions: I say, till then let them alone, and then you will know how to use them; but while ye are blind, ye do abuse them, and are Ig∣norant of the only Comforter and Supporter, which David witnessed in Affliction: And thou say'st, His Prophesies and Promises may be the strengthning of their Faith; Thou blind Hypocrite, what Faith have the VVicked, who know not God? while thou thy self, that art a Teacher, hast not Faith to trust him for an Earthly Maintenance; what then hath his Promises strengthned thy Faith, who hast sung them and read them these many Years? Neither are his Promises to the VVicked, but up∣on Reformation; For, No Peace to the Wicked, saith my God: Neither doth his Zeal to God, nor Love
to Righteousness at all provoak them, as you teach them to use them, in a Customary VVay, to make a Song of them, and therefore are not profitable to them, because they do abuse them; where thou hast sufficiently discover'd thy Weakness and Ignorance in thy Opinion, with which thou slan∣derest us, but it is thy own. Qu. 28. What is the Word? And whether is it Visible to the Carnal Eye, or Invisible? And where the Scripture speaks of any other Word of God then one? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou goest about to prove the Word to be four-fold, and condemnest me of Ignorance in it, and say'st, There is first an Essential, Eternal, Powerful and Living Word, by which all Things were made, Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. And to prove another Word, which thou callest the Ingi∣ven and Inspoken Word, thou quotest Jer. 2. 1. and 4. 11, 13. And to prove another Word of the Lord, thou quotest, 2 Tim. 3. 16. Rep. Here thy Ignorance of God is not hid, who by thy Wit and deceitful Wisdom, wouldst make four of one; but all these Scriptures which thou hast quoted do not prove any other then one, which Word was in the Beginning, by which all Things were made, which thou confessest to be Eternal, Powerful and Living; and that Word which came unto the Prophets, was as a Fire and a Hammer, to beat the Rocks in Peices, then was it not Pow∣erful and Living, and one and the same with that
the Apostle speaks of, which is Qik and Power∣ful, and Sharper then a two-edged Sword; and this is the same Word of Life which the Apostle spoak from and published, which was from the Begin∣ning; and this was the same Word which was published, which David there speaks of; and by this Word were the Prophets all begotten and born again, and this Word is Invisible, hid from the Carnal Eye as thou thy self confessest, though in Confusion: But that Scripture which thou quo∣test in 2 Tim. 3. 16. to prove a written Word, doth not mention any such Thing; but if thou mean∣est, that the Scriptures are that written Word, I answer, There are many Words in the Scripture, but the Word is but one, of which the Scriptures bear Testimony: And thus thy Ignorance is ma∣nifestd, and returned into thy own Bosom. Qu. 29. What is the End of Christ's Coming? and what is the Redemption? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou goest about to prove that manifold, which is but one, and so runnest into thy sundry Divisions in thy Imagina∣tions; and though thou accusest James Parnel, that he knows it not, yet he is able to discern thy Confu∣sion; for in one Place thou say'st, There is a Re∣demption from all Sin, and another Redemption from all Evil (and this thou callest two-fold) and thou say'st, There is a Redemption from the Curse of the Law, and another Redemption from the Guilt of Sin, which also thou callest two-fold.
Rep. How many Redemptions wouldest thou here make of one, thou blind Guide? Can any be redeemed from all Sin, and not from all Evil? and from the Curse of the Law, and not from the Guilt of Sin? And is not all this One, and by One, and fulfilled in One? But it may easily be concluded, that thou canst witness none of this; for so long as thou art in the Fall, thou art under the Curse of the Law and the Guilt of Sin, as before out of thy own Mouth is proved; and they that can witness this Redemption; are Christians indeed, and cleansed from Earthly-mindedness; all which thou nor thy Church are not, as before out of thy own Mouth is proved; but are still in your Iniquity, upholding the Works of the De∣vil, and are not saved from your Enemies, that are of your own Houses; neither is the Righte∣ousness of the Law fulfilled in you; neither are your Souls delivered out of the House of Bondage; neither is Jesus your high Priest, who set up yourselves to be Priests in his stead, holding up the Change∣able Priesthood, which took Tythes, and so deny Christ come in the Flesh, and therefore shall be judged by him, whom thou confessest is the Judge of the World, all which thou saist is the End of Christ's Coming. Qu. 30. Whether thou wilt own, that Christ hath enlightened every one that cometh into the World? and whether they that know that Light, need any man
to teach them? and whether thou leadest up any under thy Ministry, that they need not thee to teach them? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou confessest, That Christ doth enlighten every one that cometh into the World, because the Apostle affirms it, John 1. 9. And secondly, thou confessest, That they which have attained to the true Knowledge of this Light, need not that any Man should teach them; for, they are suffi∣ciently taught of God, thou saist, Jer. 31. 34. But thou saist, Thou denyest that we are so taught, or in such a Measure: but, thou saist, till that full Light shines in you, you may have other Helps and Teachers; which to prove, thou quotest 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, &c. Rep. But thou Deciver, thou runnest, and the Lord never sent thee, who hast been a Teacher of the People and a Professor of the Light so many Years, and hast not yet brought any of thy Hearers to the Knowledge of the Light; yea, thou num∣brest thy self amongst them whom this full Light doth not yet shine, but stand in need of other Helps and Teachers; then, thou Hypocrite and Dissembler, How shouldest thou teach thy Hear∣ers the full Knowledge of the Light (as thou saist they will witness for thee) whenas thou thy self standest in need to be taught it, by thy own Con∣fession? Therefore it may well be resolved, that thou knowest not that Christ hath enlightened evey one that cometh into the World, neither wouldest confess it, but that the Apostle affirms
it in that Scripture which thou hast quoted in Joh. 1. 9. yea, that Scripture which thou quotest in Jer. 31. 34. doth witness against thee and thy Hearers to be yet Strangers to the Promises: Therefore, thou Hypocrite, How hast thou Belyed thy own Conscience, in saying, That thou wouldest bring thm to the Knowledge of the Light, that they should not need thee nor any man to teach them? when∣as that is it thou openly strivest against; for then, thy Diana would bring thee in no Gain, which is thy greatest Care to uphold; and this is witnes∣sed in thy Conscience, for a Truth against thee: Yea, and this Scripture, which thou quotest in 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. will witness against thee, to be a Belyar of the Apostle; for, that speaketh of the Word Within, which shines as a Light in a Dark Place, which thou art not yet come to know, & therefore thou denyest the Truth: But I tell thee, We are in that Measure of Light, so that we are able to com∣prehend thee, and shew thee thy Confusion and Deceit: Therefore silence from bringing the Pro∣phets or Apostles for thy Proof; for, they testifie against such as thee, who pretendest to teach o∣thers, and to be a Guide to the Blind, a Light of them which are in Darkness, and an Instructer of the Fool∣ish, and art not yet taught thy self; but art dark and blind, and ignorant of the Light, and wantest Instruction thy self, by thy own Confession: Therefore, what an impudent Lyar art thou, who before saidst, Thou usually spoakest by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, and guided by an Infallible Spirit, and
now not come to that full Knowledge of the Light, that thou needest no man to teach thee; but the Prophets and Apostles were come to that before they were made Teachers; and they by the Ef∣fect of their Ministry, turned many from Darkness to Light,Acts 16. 7. Eph. 1. 5. 1 Joh. 2. 22. and brought them to the Knowledge of the Anointing, so that they needed no man to teach them: Therefore silence, thou Deceiver; for thy Blessings are Curses, and therefore profit∣test not the People at all. Qu. 31. Whether they be not the Deceivers, that cry, Lo here, and Lo there; that draw People to look at a Christ in a Heaven, far off, without them; or at a Jerusalem, far off, without them; whenas, they that cannot witness Christ in them, are Reprobates? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer, thou confessest, That they that cannot witness Christ in them, are in a Reprobate Condition: But thou confessest, That thou wilt not say, that all who speak of a Christ within them, shall be saved: Yet thou grantest, That those Teach∣ers, who point only at a Christ without them, or to any other spiritual Kingdom of God then what must be with∣in, saying, Lo here is Christ, and Lo there is his King∣dom, may be both Deceivers and deceived themselves for the present. Rep. Herein thou condemnest thy Brethren to be Deceivers and deceived, who are set up, upheld and maintained by the same Earthly Power as thou art, who are such as cry all, Lo here, and Lo there, without, and wholely draw the People's
Minds without, from the Light within them, that should lead them to the Knowledge of Christ and his Kingdom, incensing them that it is Na∣tural and Insufficient; and though thou dost here pro∣fess to the contrary, yet art out of thy own Mouth judged to be out of the State of Salvation, who only proessest Christ within, yet art found as deep in Sin & Deceit, and as void of Christ or his Light, as the rest of thy Brethren, who art doting with∣out, as before out of thy Mouth is sufficiently proved, and so thy self art the greatest Deceiver, only the Serpent's Subtilty more refined; but that thou accusest us, that we cry, Lo here among the People called Quakers, Christ alone is to be found; thou art a Lyar, and speakest not from an Infalli∣ble Spirit, but from a Lying Spirit, which many can witness against; yet they that are of God hear, as he that can receive it, let him. Qu. 32. Whether they be not out of the Faith of Christ, that receive Honour, or respect Persons? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou say'st, Men may receive Honour, and yet be in the Faith of Christ, which to prove thou quotest Phil. 2. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 8. 23. and many other, which do not at all concern the Mat∣ter of my Query; yea, thou sayst, Men may re∣spect Persons, and be in the Faith, which to prove thou quotest Acts 26. 25. 2 Kings 3. 14. Psal. 15. 4. But thou confessest, It is a great Hindrance to the Faith and believing in the true Word, for Men to seek
the Honour of Men, more then the Honour that comes from God, John 5. 44. Ad thou say'st t is also a Blos & Blemish to the true Believers, to resp the Ungodly, that are great and rich in this World, efore the true Saints that are poor; yea, thou say'st, It is a plain Denyal of the Faith and a good Consciene also, to re∣spect Persons in doing of Justice, whether for Favour or Reward, Exod. 23. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, . Rep. All these Scriptures which hou hast here quoted, do not at all justifie the Earthly Honour which you Earthly Ones give and receive one of another; neither were these Things written to the World, as thou makest Use of them; neither did those whom the Apostle speaks of, seek after, or receive Earthly Honour, as you do, who are cal∣led of Men Master, who are set up in the chief Seats of the Synagogues, and love Greetings in the Markets, and uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and all the Earthly Honour as may be, all which Christ declared a∣gainst to the Pharisees, and judged them to be in the Unbelief, in whose Steps ye are found, and therefore in the Unbelief also; neither doth any such Earthly Honour belong to any Vertue or Grace;Joh. 5. 4. 42, 43, 44. Acts 26. 31, 32. Acts 24. 5. Acts 22. 22. for Christ hath declared against it; but they that honour God, them will God honour: neither do any of these Scriptures which thou hast quoted, justifie the Respect of Persons, which the Apostle declared against in James 2. neither did Paul respect the Person of Festus, when he cal∣led him Noble Festus; for in that he did not adore his Person, nor bow to, nor worship it: but Festus
did that which was Noble towards Paul, and judg∣ed him not worthy to suffer Bonds according to their Law, which few of the Rule's of these Dayes will do, but rather will wrest and pervert their Law to their own Wills, to persecute those that not are in Paul's Condition, and guided by Paul's Spirit, and such they now call Pestilent Fellows, and Raisers of Sedition, and adjudge them not worthy to live amongst Men, though they have nothing more against them, then the Heathen had against Paul: And notwithstanding, all this doth not justifie your Adoring, Worshipping and Re∣specting Mens Persons, having them in Admira∣tion for Advantage sake, yea, though Wicked Corrupt Men, though you do not see it, because the Gift blinds your Eye; for they that are Proud and Persecutors, are Wicked and Corrupt, and by such you are set up, upheld and maintained, and therefore adore and worship their Persons, ha∣ving them in Admiration because of this Advan∣tage; but the poor Saints are both by you and them persecuted and despised; and you joyn toge∣ther against them, because they cannot worship the Beast and his Image,Rev. 13. 6. as you do; and thus out of thy own Mouth art thou judged; and that Scripture which thou quotest in James 2. will witness against thee, and that also in Exod. 23. For it is well-known, that you professed Ministers have been the greatest Actors ever, in stirring up the Rulers to persecute the Innocent; yea, any in whom the Appearance of God was manifested,
in Testimony against your deceitful Wayes; and the Rulers through Favour and Respect to you, have and do act in their corrupt Wills, contrary to all Law or Equity against such, and have op∣pressed the Strangers as Vagabons and Idle Fel∣lows, though the Law of the Nation allows them Liberty, being free-born in it, which to this Day is witnessed in divers Places of the Nation, which that of God in your Consciences will also witness; and such as those deserve neither Honour nor Respect, but must perish in their Iniquity; but in that thou accusedst us to deny deserved Honour and Respect to be lawful, is a very Falshood; for we honour and respect Justice, Grace, Vertue and all Goodness in our Hearts; but you that are blind, put Injustice for Justice,Isa. 5. 20. and Evil for Good, and turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousnes, Jude 4. Qu. 33. Wilt thou own Trembling and Quaking now; yea or nay? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou seemest to own it in Words, also stealing others Expressions out of the Scripture, to answer my Query; but thy Life doth not steal it, neither dost thou own it where it is witnessed, but makest a Scoff at it, as before is proved; and thy Ignorance of the same may easily be discerned (in thi thy Answer) by any who have tasted of the Power of God, who are come to the Earth's Trembling and Quaking; and whereas thou denyest to tremble and shake, as John Gilpin and others did, comparing them with
the Man possessed with the Unclean Spirit, in Mark 9. 20. and to be a Quaker alwayes thou denyest. Rep. Thou never wast a true Quaker yet, as may easily be discerned, by this thy Discourse of it, who judgest by Reports, and comparest the Power of God unto as Unclean Spirit, which Power made the Devils to tremble in John Gilpin, unto which thou art not yet come, though John Gilpin from that departed, and followed the Deceit, and so was led into deep Deceit and Imitation, and so gave Occasion to such as thee, who wait for Oc∣casion to blaspheme the Truth, and speak Evil of the Things thou knowest nothing of, but by Re∣ports, which if the true Fear of God was in thy Heart placed, thou durst not do; therefore thou and John Gilpin shall receive your Reward, where thou shalt quake forever, if thou dost not speedily repent, and own the Truth which in thy Consci∣ence is witnessed: But those other of ours, whom thou accusest, thou dost not nominate, and there∣fore accusest thou knowest not who; but any such Foaming at the Mouth, and the like, which thou here speakest of, we do deny, and return it into thy own Bosom, who art foaming out thy own Shame. Qu. 34. What is the pure Religion? and whether in it thou dwellest? Priest. Answ. And in thy Answer thou hast no∣thing to say, but what thou stealest out of the Scri∣pture, from their Experience who spoak it forth;
and thou quotest that in Jam. 1. 27. which saith, The Pure Religion and Undefiled before God, is this, to visit the Widdows and Fatherless in their Affliction, and to keep themselves unspotted of the World; and thou also quotest that in Mat. 23. 33, 38, 39, 40. and saist, It is to love the Lord our God with all our Hearts, Mind and Might, and our Neighbour as our selves; and in this Religion (thou say'st) thou desirest to dwell, and walk, and remain forever, without being shaken. Rep. But thou must be much shaken before thou comest into this Religion; for thou hast not yet proved that thou art yet in it; but these Scriptures which thou hast here quoted, will witness against thee to be a Stranger to it, though it is an easie thing for to set down others Declarations, when they are be ore thee: But how dost thou keep thy self unsported of the World, whenas thou art drowned in, and art so greedy of it, that thou carest not how thou gettest it, so thou gettest it, as before is sufficiently proved out of thy own Mouth, and hast been all along labouring contrary to Scrip∣ture, to justifie thy taking of Gifts and Rewards of the World? And how dost thou Visit the Widdows and Fatherless, unless it be for thy Tythes, or that they have, to maintain thee; and so, rather to add Affliction upon them? or, What dost thou do in this kind, but thou hast a Self ed in it? Let that in thy Conscience judge thee. And if thou didst love the Lord God with all thy Heart, thou wouldst not have thy Heart so in the Earth, thus to Delude and Deceive Peoples Souls
for Gain and Lucre, and to take away the Fruits of their Labours by Compulsion (if they will not give it thee) though thou dost nothig for them, as before is proved against thee, to thy Shame and Confusion of Face. And thus thy Heart is adulterated from God into the Earth, and the Love of God abides not in thee,1 Joh. 2. 15. who art in Love with the World. And dost thou love thy Neighbour as thy self, when for Selfs sake thou woldst destroy him, both Body and Soul? And thu I need no other Weaon to cut off thy Head, then what thou thy self bringest. Qu. 35. What is the Difference betwixt the Jew Outwardly, and the Jew Inwardly? and how shall we know the one from other? Pr. Answ. And in thy Answer thou sayst, he Jew Outwardly dsires to make a fair Shw in the Flesh, or External Man, with his outward Circumcision or Re∣formation, Gal. 6. 12, 13. in Voluntary Worship, and not sparing the Body, Col. 2. 23. he observes the lesser Commands, and leaves the Greater undone, Mat. 23. 23. and in one Point he goes beyond us (thou sayst) he payes Tythes exactly; he makes clean the Out-side of the Cup and Platter, and makes all foul within, Mat. 23. 15, 26▪ &c. Rep. And so here is enough to manifest, that thou art the Man; for, here thou hast plainly read thy self, and out of thy own Mouth shalt thou be judged, without Contending or Reviling, as thou accusest us; for thou hast been striving
all along hitherto to set out thy self, and make a fair Out-side, like a Reformation, though the Hypocrisie of thy Heart thou couldst not thereby hide from the Light: And who are more strict in Voluntary Worship? But you can pamper your Bodies; which shows your Zeal is not so hot And instead of observing the Lesser Commands, and leaving the Greater undone, you leave all undone that will not stand for self; and preach up and uphold these things for Commands, for which you have no Scripture, and so preach for Doctrine the Commandments of men,Mat. 15. 9. as the Outward Jew did: But if one ask you for your Proof for these things, thou say'st, It sufficeth you that there is no Command to the Contrary; yea, for thy Self-covetous Ends thou art not ashamed to fetch up old Commands (that were fulfilled, and so ended) for a Cover for thy Deceit, as here also thou wouldest seem to do in accusing us for not paying Tythes exactly, as the Pharisee did, which I know is the great Grief of thee and thy Brethren, because we put not into your Mouthes, and therefore ye even prepare War against us:Mich. 3. 5. But when the Pharisee said, He paid Tythes, they were then due; for the Priesthood, to which Tythes belonged, was not yet fulfilled, and therefore not changed, and therefore it was his Duty so to do: But you Priests have so blinded the Pharisees and Professors of these Times, that they are so ex∣act in paying you Tythes,Ez. 22. 28. & putting into your Mouths, because you daub them up, crying Peace to them,
though they have no Command from God for it; and you take it as exactly: but you have but few such, that you dare trust without a Law; for (as thou saist) The greatest Part of them are Earthly-minded (like their Teachers) And how hast thou been cleansing thy Out-side of the Cup, as if thou wast unblamable in this Outward Righte∣ousness, and so holy in thine own Eyes, that in words thou professest Perfection, and as if thou knewest the highest Estate of Christianity, and wast in the pure Religion, without Spots, and guided by God's Spirit, usually speaking by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, but even condemn∣ed thy Brethren, and wouldest not answer for them; but saidst, Thou wast none of these Hirelings, nor Greedy Dogs, &c. but yet could not keep thy Tongue from uttering forth the Foulness of thy Heart, which hath overwhelmed thee all along, and out of thy own Mouth hast been proved a Lyar. And thus thou art plainly dealt with, and judged out of thy own Mouth; and the Scrip∣tures aforesaid, which thou hast quoted, shall stand and witness against thee. Pr. Answ. But the Jew Inwardly (thou say'st) trusts in the Lord Christ, and hath no Confidence in the Flesh. But this thou dost not; for then thou wouldst trust him for thy Maintenance, and not stand in need of the Arm of Flesh, upon which thou re∣lyest: Neither dst thou first make clean the In∣side
of the Cup, that the Outside may be fair also, as thou saist the Inward Jew doth; but though thou hast bin much labouring with feign∣ed words of thy own Wisdom and Self-Justifica∣tion to deck and adorn the Outside, painting it with Scripture-Words and Expressions, yet thy Inside is so foul that it defiles the Outside also; so that it makes thee odious to all but the Blind; and manifests thy Heart to be yet uncircumcised from Sin, and a Stranger to the Inward Cross, by which thou art not crucified to the World, nor the World to thee; for then it would not suffice thee to take the Tenth Part of the Encrease of the Labour of the Labourers, by the Will of Man, without any Command from God, as thou dost, living at Ease (like a Drone) upon the same; and therefore thy Heart is far off Uprightness; all which the Inward Jew (thou saist) doth witness: And thus, in a word, thou seest there is as much Difference betwixt the one and the other, as be∣twixt Saul and Paul, a Perseutor, and an Executor of Christ's Doctrie and Way: And thus, in a word, thou hast marked out thy self, and art found out of the Way and Doctrine of Christ, Persecuting, Despising and Gain-saying those that abide in i: And thus by thy Fruits art thou known, as thou saist, the one may be known from the other. And thus, Proud Goliah, thy Head is cut off with thy Own Sword.
Qu. 36. Whether they that profess themselves the Ministers of Christ, and cannot give Account of their Ministry and Faith, but act contrary to the Scripture, the Doctrine and Practice of the Ministers of Christ, and teach People so, be not such as abide not in the Do∣ctrine of Christ, but bring another Doctrine, and so re the Witches, Magcians, Deceivers, Antichrists and False Teachers, who are not to be received, but de∣nyd? Pr Answ. And in thy Answer thou confessest, That they which are truly such in Doctrine and Life, as this Query describes, may be truly termed spiritual Witches and Magicians, and must be rejected as False Teachers and Antichrists. Rep. Here thou hast passed the Sentence unto thy own Condemnation; for, thou art the Man, as sufficiently is proved, both out of thy own Muth and the Scriptures, which thou thy self hast quoted, as aforesaid: And so, henceforward let all People take notice, That thou Thomas Draton of King Rippon in Huntingtonshire, art a spi∣ritual Witch and Magician; and they are to re∣ject thee, as a False Teacher and an Antichrist, as here out of thy own Mouth is plainly proved: And this Him thou callest James Parnel, doth te∣stifie, and deny thee with thy Sorcery, Ribbons, Stones, Waters, Glasses, Powders, Charms and other like Enchantments, which thou, who art given up to believe Lyes, impudently wouldest cast upon him, and thoe thou callest his Confe∣deracy, who abhor all such Abomination, and there∣fore
return it into thy own Bosom, from whence it comes. Priest, And thus (thou say'st) by clear Scripture and Experience, thou hast answered the bold Queries of him who is known to the World to be but a Boy or Strip∣ling. Rep. As thou begann'st with a Lye in thy Mouth, so also thou endest with a Lye; for by plain Scrip∣ture and true Experience thou hast not answered these Queries; for in many Things thou may'st find no Scripture at all in the least to countenance thee, then thou pleadest old Stories and Records, and say'st also, It sufficeth thee that there is no Scrip∣ture to the contrary; but thou shalt know, that in any Thing that thou dost, in which the Scripture will not stand for thee, it will in the same stand against thee; and also when thou didst wrest any Scripture for thy own Ends, it was made Use of to witness against thee in the same; and how hast thou answered by thy own Experience, whenas thou stolest the Apostles Declaration, and set it down, even Word for Word, to prove the Estate of a Christian, whenas it was proved out of thy own Mouth, that thou art not come to witness in Possession the lowest Estate of a Christian; and thus thou might'st have been ashamed to boast of thy Age, who art found such an impudent Lyar, as to say, by clear Scripture and true Experience thou answer∣edst these Queries (which are not so bold as true) in which all that are not wilfully blind will wit∣ness against thee; and thus him thou contemnest
as a Boy or Stripling, is made able to cut of thy Head with thy own Sword; and therefore hence∣forward, let Shame and Confusion of Face cover thee, for boasting of thy Age, who yet knowest not, That the Wisdom and Power of the Almighty, stands not in the Number of Years, or the Arm Flesh, but the Righteous are as bold as a Lyon, Prov. 28. 1. And now to thy Counter-Queries, as thou callest them, which for a Complement, thou biddest me give thee Leave to propound, but meanedst not to stay to know whether I did so or nay. First, Concerning Honour and Respect to be given to Men. And to the Substance of this Query, I answer, That Christ himself cryes down all Earthly Ho∣nour and Admiration, and Respect of Man's Per∣son, and only attolerates the Honour that is of God, and cometh from God, and belongs unto the Seed of God, which is not known amongst you Children of this World, whose Honour and Glory is of this World, in whom the Seed of the Serpent rules Head, to which no Worship nor Honour is due, the which all the World wonders after, and wor∣ship the Beast and his Image; but none of these Scriptures which thou hast quoted, do at all main∣tain your Heathenish Breeding, Worship, Honour Manners and Respect, as you call it; but now he is risen and reigns, to whom all Nations must bow,
to whom alone belongs all Honour, Priase Domi∣nion and Thanks; therefore silence proud Flesh, that wouldst go about to rob him, it's you that are offended in him, and persecute him, because he cannot bow unto you; and as for that Scripture, Honour all Men, I answer with another Scripture, which thou hast quoted, Psal. 15. 4. In whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned: Here all Men are not ho∣noured, but in the Lord; therefore you that abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, must not be received not bidden God speed: And as for that Scripture. Lev. 19. 2. which thou quotest in thy seaventh Que∣ry, I answer with Solomon's Words, Wisdom is the gray Hair,Wis. 4. 8, 9. and an Undefiled Life is Old Age; and this is not without Honour, though by the World con∣temned. Qu. 9. And to thy 9th Query, Whether stand∣ing bare with the Head uncovered before the Magistrate, be not a decent Posture, since it is a Posture that the Apo∣stle requires in the Behalf of God, which to prove thou quotest 1 Cor. 11. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Answ. I answer, No Man must be honoured in Respect to his Person; and the Honour of Justice and Equity lyeth not in the putting off the Hat, or keeping it on, but it is a Heathenish Custom, con∣trary to any Scripture-Rule or Example, and there∣fore not a decent, but an unseemly Posture (as thou callest it) for Men so to adore one anothers Per∣sons; and that Magistrate that seeks for, or owns such a Thing, stands in his own Will, and is par∣tial, and rules not for God, but for himself, and
such God doth not stile as Gods upon Eearth (as thou saist) but rather Unjust Stewards; and thou blind Guide, read in the 3d Verse of the Chapter aforesaid and see what is the Head of the Man;Jam. 1. 2. but thy Head is the Serpent; and according to thy own Meaning, most of ye Priests condemn your selves in this, who commonly have your Heads covered with Caps, when you pretend to pray or prophesie. And that Scripture, 1 Tim. 6. 11. which thou hast quoted in thy 10th Query, and Rom. 10. 10. which thou hast quoted in thy 11th Query, was not spoken to the World who accounts Man in gay Cloathing, and a Gold Ring, as a Superiour, and a Man in vile and poor Rayment as an Inferiour, and accordingly preers them and respects them, contrary to Scripture, and you Leaders cause them to err; threfore wrest not the Scripture for your own Ends, lest it turn to your own Destruction, 2 Per. 3. 16. Qu. 12. Whether the Pronoun of the second Person singular, may not out of the Hebrew and Greek be as wll redered You as Thou, especially, since in the plu∣ral Nuhr it is alwayes rendered Ye, and not Thee; and the Dutch Tongue, whence we borrow muh of our Lnguge hath You? Answ. Here thou Son of Babylon, who art with thy Carnal Reason in thy Languages confused, who stumblst at the plain Language (Thou) what is that in thee that cannot bear the Word Thou, which is the single proper Language to a single Person, as
well as You, which thou confessest is a borrowed Language; and thus the Hebrews, and the Greci∣ans, and the Romans, and the Dutch will condemn you, who are content with their Natural Lan∣guage. Qu. 13. Whether it hath not been ever accounted Rude and Rustical in this Nation, for Inferiour Men to speak unto others their Superiours by the Word (Thou) and not You, and also to stand with their Hats on, un∣less Leave were given them so to do. Answ. Thou blind Sot, thou hast laid thy self naked to the World (with thy Rude and Rustical Query) it was never accounted so but by Dives's Nature, which is swelled with Pride and Arro∣gancy; yea, that which would be above God, which must come down into the Pit: Is not God the Superiour of all? then why do you give un∣to him that Rude and Rustical Language? (as thou callest it) here thou manifests thy self amongst the Heathen, who know not God, who exercise Lord∣ship and Authority one of another; and so you rule in your own Wills,Mat. 20. 25. and would not suffer your Fel∣low-Creatures to put their Hats on their Heads, but as you give them Leave, and so are out of the Doctrine of Christ, with your Rude and Rustical Spirits: And was not (THOU) the Language betwixt God and Adam,Gen. 3. 11, 12. Exod. 10. 11, 12. and betwixt God and Moses, and so all along the Scripture to one particu∣lar Person; then whether or nay is thine a Rustical Proud Spirit, that canst not receive the Lan∣guage thou givest unto God: And thus thou hast
sufficiently foamed out thy Shame; and I am sure now thou speakest not by the Motion of the Holy Ghost. Qu. 14. Whether ever Christ or his Apostles taught us to alter or violate the Civil Speeches and Cu∣stoms of the Nation where we live, by which our Reve∣rence to others is expressed, and accordingly expected, if not commanded also? And thou quotest 1 Cor. 10. 32. Answ. Christ is not your Teacher; for, out of his Doctrine ye are found, in the Pride of your Hearts, contemning his Speech and Lan∣guage, & are not contented with your natural Lan∣guage, but borrow of others; in which Custom we are not to follow you, out of the Language of the Scripture: and so here, by thy Query, you express no Reverence of God, because to him you use the Word [Thou] which you do account an Uucivil Speech. Therefore now see what is that which takes Offence at that which God accepts; it must needs be of Proud Lucifer: and that same took Offence at the Apostle, who said, Give No Offence; yet the Truth is a Stumbling Stone and a Rock of Offence: Therefore now see how thou stumblest at the Noon-day, Isa. 59. 10. Thy next is concerning Salutations at your Meetings with others, or Departings from others. Unto which I Answer, That your Heathenish Customs, Traditions and Salutations I do deny, and know them to be contrary to Scripture; for,
saith it, Let him that nameth the Name of God depart from Iniquity: Therefore, you that are in Iniqui∣ty do take his Name in Vain, and make a Cu∣stom and By-word of it amonngst your selves, when you meet with or depart from one aother; and so your Children learn it at you, and by Imitati∣on use his Name before they do know whether there be a God or nay. And to that in Ruth 2. 4. and to that in Psalm▪ 129. 8. which thou hast quoted in thy Fifteenth and Sixteenth Query, I Answer; They that there named the Name of the Lord, knew him; and that in the Psalm will witness against You, that You have nothing to do to name his Name, nor to have such words spoaken to you, who know him not: And read what God saith to the Wick∣ed in Psal. 16. And why call ye me Lord, and do not the things which I say? But the Salutations of the Saints Iown, who are not by Custom lead, Luke 6. 46. Qu. 17. And to Mat. 10. 12. and Luke 10. 5. which here thou hast quoted, I answer, That you are no Ministers nor Messengers of Christ, who are found out of his Doctrine, therefore Peace is not given you to speak; but, as False Prophets, you speak it to that which is for Death, because that puts into your Mouthes;Mic. 3. 5. and even prepare War against those that do witness the Son of Peace.
Thy next is concerning Meat, Drink and Apparel. And to thy first Query of that I Answer; All the Creatures of God are Good in their Places, and all things for the use of Man, who dwells in the Moderation; but cursed to you, who live under the Curse, in the Lust, under whom the Creation groans, who know not the pure Wis∣dom, that made all things, to teach you how to use all things to the Glory of God,1 Cor. 10. 31. and there∣fore are out of the Right. And thy 23d and 24th Query is here answered: But you are they whose Kingdom stands in Meats, and Drinks, and Apparel, who are taking thought what to eat, what to drink, and where-withal to be cloathed, Matthew 6. 15. Qu. 22. And to this Query, Where hath God enjoyned men to drink Water in any Part of his Word? I Answer. Thou mayst be ashamed to boast of thy Age, who askest such a Childish Query: I might as well ask thee, Where God enjoyned men to drink Beer? For, Water is the Original of all Drinks; for, in the Dayes of Old, Water was the Common Drink: Hast thou not read of Jacob's Well, where Christ drank? then Who art thou, that despisest Water? It is a Sign thou servest the Lust. But if any drink Water, who know the Goodness of it, what is that to thee? Who enjoyns thee to drink Water?
And in thy Twenty Fifth Query thou answer∣est thy self. Qu. 26. And this Query is, Whether one may not Satisfie the Flesh, even in Over-fasting and Over-watching the Body? Which to prove thou quotest Col. 2. 23. Answ. But I perceive thou wilt have a Care of that, who hast been pleading so much for the Body, which is the most thou mindest; thy Zeal is not so hot: But they that dwell in the Power of God are free from this, and yet know how to keep uder the Body, and not satisfying the Lust; But you that know not the Creator, trust in the Creature. Qu. 27. And here thou askest, Whether are not the Saints to sanctifie their Meats and Drinks by Prayer and Thanksgiving, before and after they eat and drink? Which to prove, thou quotest 1 Tim. 4. 5. and Rom. 14. 16. Answ. To the Pure all things are pure; but thy Prayers are Abomination, who art in the Lust. But which of these Scriptures maintains your Custom after Meat? But the Saints receive no∣thing of God,Tit. 1. 15. Mal. 1. 2. but with Thanksgiving and Glory to God; but your Blessings are cursed. And here is thy Twenty Eighth Query answered also. Qu. 29. Whether the Apostle's Interdiction be ab∣solutely against all Ornaments, or Comparatively only? And thou hast quoted a Scripture in 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. which answereth thee, where thou may'st read what Ornaments he approves of; and here thy
Thirty, Thirty One, and Thirty Two Query is answered. Answ. But Moderation in every thing Iown; but what is waste is for the Lust, both in Kings, Princes and Great Personages (as thou callest them) but with us there is no Respect of Per∣sons, neither taking thought what to eat, what to drink, or wherewithal to be cloathed, as the Children of this World do, amongst whom thou art found; but our Kingdom is not of this World: And Israel after the Flesh was a Figure of Israel af∣ter the Spirit; therefore now read their Adorning, if thou canst; and remember, No Creature was made for the Lust, though Lustful Men Abuse them. Thy next is concerning Pride. And thy first Question of this is, Whether Pride doth lye in Apparel (though there may be much Wastefulness, Vanity and Ostentation committed therein) or inward∣ly, in the Heart and Mind of the Poor, as well as of the Rich? and thou quotest Mark. 7. 21, 22, 23. Answ. The Scripture which thou hast quoted, doth answer thy Question, where Pride lyeth; but Apparel is a dead Thing, and no Pride in it, but the Vanity and Wastefulness (which thou con∣fessest is committed therein) figures forth the Pride of the Heart; and where Riches are, this is shown (therefore you Priests look at home, and judge
your selves) though Poor and Rich be both in one Nature before the Regeneration, Ephes. 2. 3. Qu. 34. Whether one of the greatest Things that puffs up the Hearts of Men, be not knowledge? whether it be true or false, and imagined only? and thou quo∣test 1 Cor. 8. 1, 2. Answ. You that are Carnal and Fleshly, are puf∣fed up with your Fleshly Notional Knowledge, and in that you steal from others Experiences; but the true Knowledge of the Spirit puffs not up, but judges down that which would be exalted; but this unto thee is a Mystery, because thy Know∣ledge hath blinded thy Eye, who art confused in thy Imaginations; so read thy self in the Scrip∣ture aforesaid, which thou hast quoted. Qu. 35. Whether another Thing that exalts a Man in Pride, and makes him despise his Brethren (and per∣haps, those that are better then himself) be not a Con∣ceited and Self-chosen Holiness, seeing such a Proud Saint is brought in Isa. 65. 5. which Thing also (thou sayst) is verefied in the Pharisee and the Publican? Luke 18. 15. Answ. Thou hast here answered thy self, with these Scriptures, wherein thou may'st read thy self who thinkest thy self more holy then thy Brethren, and wouldst only answer for thy self, and not for thy Brethren, though thou art found in the same Practices; but thou blind Pharisee, he was not a Saint, which was spoken of in Isa. 65. 5. but he was a Saint, which said, We are of God, and the whole
World lyeth in Wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. And here also thy 36 Question is answered, with the Scrip∣ture which thou hast quoted, 1 Tim. 3. 6. who art a false Teacher, doting about Questions. Qu. 37. And here thou askest whether a Young Man be not the proest of all other, to be thus seduced and puffed up? and thou quotest 1 Tim. 3. 6. Answ. Thy Spite is much against Youth; but him thou shootest at, thou canst not hit, because thou art blind, and canst not divide the Word a∣right; but thou may'st plainly have read thy self in that Chapter aforesaid, and find, that thou art the Novice, who knowest not the Truth, but de∣spisest the Young Man because of his Youth, which is contrary to Paul, 1 Tim. 4. 12. And thy next is to maintain Swearing. Qu. 38. And thy first Query of this is, Whethr it be lawful now, in the New Testament to take an Oath before lawful Authority, to put an End to Controversies? and thou quotest Heb. 6. 16. Answ. This which thou goest about now to up∣hold, manifests thee an Enemy to Christ and his Doctrine, who saith, Swear not at all; for (saith he) it hath been said in the Old Time, thou shalt not forswear thy self, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine Oath; but I say unto you, Swear not all; but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay; for what is more, is Evil: Now here he doth not only forbid false Swearing, but also all Swearing, Mat. 5. 33, 34, &c. and also the Apo∣stle
James doth the same, in Jam. 5. 12. both which Scriptures thou hast quoted in the 39th Query; and so here out of the Doctrine of Christ, again thou art found in the Evil; and all you that cannot believe one another without Swearing, and so are more then Yea & Nay and what is more is Evil (saith Christ) now read your Condemnation: And as for that in Heb. 6. there the Apostle was speak∣ing by Way of Comparison, how the Lord made a Covenant, and confirmed it with an Oath, which is Christ Jesus, the Everlasting Oath, who saith, Swear not at all; and the Apostle brought a Com∣parison from Men in Strife and Controversie; but this doth not at all maintain Swearing now; for Strife and Controversie is out of the Doctrine of Christ, and such run into the Swearing, and into the Evil, amongst whom thou art found upholding the Evil, and opposing Christ's Doctrine, and so art found in the Condemnation of the Devil, Jam. 5. 12. This was not the Saints Practice; for in the New Covenant, neither Strife nor Swearer is; and thus you Leaders cause Men to err, by uphold∣ing that which Christ is against; and here thy 39th Qry is answered. Qu. 40. Here thou askest, Whether Paul himself did not swear in these Words, 2 Cor. 11. 10. (as the Truth of Christ is in me, &c.) Answ. Oh thou Enemy of Truth, that would'st here scandal and accuse Paul for Swearing, that so thou might'st uphold Swearing▪ but by what doth he here swear? this is plain Language.
And thy next is concerning Outward Material Church∣es, and the publick Exercises therein. Most of these Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my 17th Query, wherein I have declared why I object against your Steeple-houses, which thou callest Churches. Qu. 44. Here thou askest if such Meetings may not be mixt Assemblies, of Learned and Unlearned, of Believers and Unbeliers? and thou quotest 1 Cor. 14. 23. Answ. But the Unbelievers are not owned by the Believers, though they come amongst the Be∣lievers, as in 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. then the Ministers are far off, being maintained by Un∣believers, as thou art; for though thou confessest the greatest Part are Earthly-minded and World∣ly-minded, thou yet art maintained by them, and I am sure, they that come into the true Faith, which purifieth the Heart, come out from amongst you, so that you are not much mixed; for you are all one Nature, like Priest, like People. And in thy 47th and 48th Query, thou askest, f Christ and his Apostles did not frequent the Syna∣gogues? Answ. Yea, they did, and so do we your Idol-Temples; but therein the Jews will condemn you, who suffered them to speak, as in that Scrip∣ture which thou hast quoted in Acts 13. 14, 15. which shall stand and witness against you, who will
not suffer us to speak in your Steeple houses, but suf∣fer your Flocks to hale us forth, & fall upon us like Wolves, and your Magistrates to hale us to Pri∣son; therefore read your Condemnation, you Per∣secutors: And thy 49th Query is answered already with the other aforesaid. Qu. 50. Here thou askest, If the Prophet did not complain to God against the Prophaners and Destroyers of the Synagogues, in Psal. 74 4, 5, 6, 7. Answ. The Scripture which thou hast quoted doth answer thee, but it doth not uphold your Idols Temples, who worship you know not what, where∣in you teach for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, and there are found in the Steps of the Pharisees, of∣fering up your Abominations, as Christ marked you out in Mat. 6. 5. where he meant as he spoak, and all you do there is for self, and not for God; for he saith, In vain do you worship him, Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9. And here thy 51st Query is answered; but take Notice, your Steeple-Houses are not the Houses of God, as before is proved. Qu. 52. Is it unlawful to call, either Baptism, or the Supper of the Lord, a Sacrament or oblieging Mystery▪ since that Name imports no more, and you cannot deny but that both these are mystical Things, and ablieging My∣steries, to the washing away of Sin, and the following of Christ into his Life and Death? Answ. Is thy Baptism now become an oblieging Mystery to the washing away of Sin, which in thy Answer to my 21st Query, thou saidst, was not abso∣lutely necessary, but lawful only? can it wash away
Sin, and yet not be necessary? but this is all thou knowest of that Mystery that washeth away Sin, or Desire after it; for where Sin is washed away, this Confusion stayes not behind. Yea, I do de∣ny that there is any Thing in your sprikling In∣fants, or your Bread and Wine (which doth pro∣fit) as is manifest by these that receive them of you, who never yet were washed from their Sins and Pollutions, or ever tasted of the Death of the Cross; but the Baptism I own, and the Supper of the Lord I own; but the Word Sacrament I de∣ny, for the which you have no Scripture, whatso∣ever thou say'st it doth import. And thy 53d, 5th and 55th Queries are an∣swered in my Reply to thy Answer to my 21st Query, and thy 56th and 57th Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my 25th Query. Qu. 58. Who is there among you who are called Qua∣kers, or the other Sectarians your Fore-fathers, that hath rightly declared the Mystery of Christ's Body and Blood in your Dissentings from us? since none of you have declared this according to our Lord's Intent? Joh. 6. 33. Answ. As for Sectarians (as thou callest them) they are in your Generation; and art not thou a∣shamed to call them our Fore-fathers, whenas they now joyn with you against us, yea, and in this ve∣ry Thing, wherein they are blind as you are? but the Mystery we know, and have declared to the Comfort of many a restless Soul, who never could find true Comfort in your dark and dead Forms, as Thousands in the Nation will witness; and
this we have declared according to our Lord's in∣tent; therefore thou Lyar and Slanderer, stop thy Mouth, and take not his Name in vain; and that Scripture in John 6. 33. which hou hast quo∣ted, will witness against thee, in that thou would'st uphold; and thy 59th Query is answered with thy 6th and 57th. And thy next is concerning the present Ministers and Teachers, and their Maintenance. Qu. 60. Were there no Ministers in this Nation, that held forth the Truth amongst us, till you and your Asso∣ciates rose up, since we have our Lord's Promise, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church, and Behold I am with you to the End of the World? Qu. 61. What is become then of all your Fore-fathers, their and ours, who dyed since the Apostles Dayes, till your rising up with a pretended Spirit? Answ. Thou Carnal One, hast thou nothing to do, but to raise the Dead to dispute about? But to answer a Fool, I say, They are gone, as the Just and Righteous Judge hath disposed; but now he calls all every were to Repent, his Trumpets are sounding a Warning; and there were none that preached for Hire that held forth Truth in the Life and Power of it, but made a Trade and a Gain of the Letter, from it speaking a Di∣vination of their own Brain, as you do now; and those were your Fore-Fathers: But if you had the Lord's Promise, That the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against you, for the Lord will be with you; then what need you a Law of Man to set you up, up∣hold you and maintain you? Therefore it follows, the Lord is against you, and his Promises do not belong unto you, who dare not trust him, and therefore are but Pretenders: and this the Spirit of Truth in us can tell you. Qu. 62. If there were some taught of God before you were called, why are they not owned by any of your? Answ. Thou art not one that art so taught; for thou art found out of his Doctrine, therefore with that stop thy Mouth, and do not belye us; for, who receive and obey the Truth we do own, whatso∣ever they have been. And here also thy Sixty Third and Sixty Fourth Query is answered. And thy Sixty Fifth, Sixty Sixth and Sixty Seventh Query is answered in my Reply to thy An∣swer to my Nineth and Tenth Query. Qu. 68. Is the Teaching-Priesthood to cease, till the Spiritual Melchizedeck comes unto us, to bless us after the Slaughter of all our Enemies, with the Hea∣venly Bread and Wine, Gen. 14. 18, 19. Hebr. 2. 1, 2, 3. that you say the Priesthood of Aaron, wih the Law annexed of Tythes, is ceased under the Gospel? Answ. Yea, so it is ceased; and those Scrip∣tures do not prove to the contrary; but that is Hebr. 7. doth affirm it, as is before proved: But in that you uphold it, in taking Tythes, you deny the Spiritual Melchizedeck; and if that be the Teaching-Priesthood, which thou meanest, it is al∣ready ceased to many, who are come to see the
End of it; but the Gift blinds your Eyes, and therefore you still uphold it; and lead the Blind into the Ditch; and so the Wo is to you, and not the Blessing: and this Scripture in Ephes. 4. 11, 12, &c. doth not at all maintain you. And here also thy Sixty Nineth Query is an∣swered. And thy Seventy, Seventy One, Seventy Two and Seventy Three Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my Fourteenth Query. Qu. 74. Did ever the Church of Rome cast grea∣ter Reproaches upon the Protestant-Ministers, then you do? and are you not Jesuited by some of her E∣missaries, that you would have them all, one with ano∣ther, rooted out at once; yea, can the Devil himself de∣sire more in this kind? Answ. I see no Difference in the Ground be∣twixt the Church of Rome and You; for they are Bloody Persecutors, and upheld by a Persecuting Law, and so are you (who call your selves Prote∣stants) and therefore no Reproaches to call you Persecutors, Hirelings, False Teachers and Greedy Dogs, as the Prophets of old called your Fore-Fa∣thers, in whose Steps you are found, as is before proved: But howsoever thou with thy Lying Spi∣rit termest us of the Jesuits, both thou and thy Brethren have bin in this sufficiently prov'd Lyars. Therefore by the Sword of the Lord you must all be rooted out,Zach. 13. 7. yea, you must all fall together;Ezek. 21. 9, 10, 11. he will make a Grievous Slaughter from the Least
to the Greatest; for his Hand is stretched out a∣gainst you, and therefore your Father the Devil bestirs himself amongst you, to stand up for his Kingdom: And where did ever the Church of Rome persecute any, sparing the Life, more then you do? Therefore let Guilt strike you, and put not the Devil so far from you, whenas he fights for you: But Carnal Weapons we shall not use a∣gainst your to root you out;2 Cor 10. 4, 5. but our Weapons are Spiritual, and Mighty through God, to the pulling down of Strong Holds: Therefore Tremble, all ye Ene∣mies of God. Thy next is concerning the Inward Light. Qu 75. Is there not a False Light, as well as a True Light? And thou quotest 2 Corinth. 11. 13, 14. Answ. Thou hast answered thy self with this Scripture; and I have already proved, that this False Light rules in thee as an Angel of Light, who art a Minister of Antichrist, transforming thy self as a Minister of Christ, but out of their Life and Practice art found, and therefore guided by a False Light, which is an Evil Eye and Dan∣gerous Darkness, so that thou canst accuse others, but canst not see the Falsness & Deceit of thy own heart, but thinkest that thou speakest by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, whenas therein thou hast suffici∣ently been proved a Lyar; and thus Satan rules in
thee, and makes thee believe he is God, 2 Thes. 2. 4. And here is thy Seventy Sixth Query an∣swered also. And that Scripture which thou quotest in Mat. 6. 23. shall stand and witness against thee. Qu. 77. Are we not therefore to try mens preten∣ded Light by the Law and Word of God? And thou quotest Isa. 8. 20. Answ. You neither know the Law nor Word of God, and therefore relie upon the Law and Word of Man, contrary to the Law and Word of God, and yet pretendest to the Light, and the Law, and the Word of God, and so by it art try∣ed, and found to be a Deceiver, who puttest the Letter for the Word, and the Letter for the Law, both which are within; but according to thy own Meaning, thou art out of the Light, who attestest many things contrary to the Law and Testimony, as before is proved. Qu. 78. What may men think of your pretended Light, who hate so many of your Brethren in the Mini∣stry of England? And thou quotest 1 John 2. 9. Answ. The Thoughts of Man are Vain; and wouldest thou have the Light tryed by that? here thou errest from the Law and from the Testimo∣ny, and so confirmest my former Answer: There∣fore cease thy False Accusing from the Evil Thoughts of thy Heart; for none of my Brethren in the Ministry of God do I hate: But I deny that thy Brethren are mine; for, you are sprung of
another Seed, and so are become another Genera∣tion, in which the Righteous Blood hath been shed, and therefore Murderers; unto whom be∣longs this in 1 John 2. 9. and Chap. 3. 15. where you may read your selves. Qu. 79. Is there not another Light to go before the Light of Christ, seeing the Wise Men, that came from the East, were guided unto Christ by a Star? Matth. Chap. 2. Answ. Thy Ignorance of Christ and his Light thou hast here manifested, and so confirmest my Reply to thy Answer to my Thirtieth Query, that wouldst not have confessed, that Christ doth enligh∣ten every one that cometh into the World, had not John so plainly affirmed it in Joh. 1. and that thou never yet sawest his Star, who thinkest that it is not his Light: Therefore thou that wouldst set up ano∣ther ight before the Light of Christ, art a De∣ceiver, and a bringer in of False Lights. Qu. 86. Is not the sure Prophetical Word a Light, that shines in a dark Corner, till the true Day-Light a∣rises in your Hearts? 2 Pet. 1. 10. Ans. But it is the Light of Christ that leads unto Christ, the Perfect Day; which Light shi∣neth in Darkness, and Darkness comprehends it not; and therefore thou lookest without, for ano∣ther Light, before the Light of Christ, John 1. 5. Qu. 81. Whether the Life of Christ be not the True Light, that men are to wait for, and wherein the true Children of Light are to walk? And thou quotest John 1. 4. and Ephes. 5. 9.
Answ. Thou hast here answered thy self; for his Life is the Light of Men, which they must wait to know within them, to guide them; and thou that wouldest set up another Light, before this Light, art a Deceiver: And this is the Light which now is come into the World,John 3. 19. 20. testifying a∣gainst the World, and manifesting you to be the Deceivers of the World, who have long set up False Lights to draw from this True Light the Minds of People. Therefore, now you can no longer hide your selves from this True Light, you stand up to Oppose it where it is set up; and some call it a Natural Light, and an, Insufficient Light; but it is your Condemnation. Thy next is concerning Prophets and Prophetesses. Qu. 82. Whether some men may not be acted with a Spirit of Falsod and Delusion, even then when they think they prophesie by the Spirit of God, as Zezeki∣ah was? 1 King. 22. Answ. This is already aswered in my Reply to thy Answer to my Sixth Query; and thou in di∣vers places to be thus acted. Qu. 83. Whether the Lord did ever send forth Boyes or Striplings to be his Prophets and publick Tea∣chers; seeing John the Baptist, who was born to be a Prophet of the Most High, and was filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb, was not sent forth to preach and prophesie till he was 30. Years old? Luke 1. 15.
Answ. How often have I made thy Folly and Ignorance in this to appear? and that thou mightst be ashamed to Boast of thy Age, who so often hast erred, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, who wouldest limit it to Time and Age, in which I have before sufficiently answer'd thee. And now, I say, The Lord sent forth Je∣remiah when he was but a Child;Jer. 1. 6, 7. and Out of the Mouthes of Babes and Sucklings the Lord hath per∣fected his Praise:Psal. 8. 2. Therefore henceforward stop thy Mouth from despising any because of their Youth;Mat. 21. but know this, That whomsoever God calls to his Ministry, he by his Power and Wis∣dom doth fit them for the same; and contrary to the Reason of Man doth the Lord work: There∣fore, it thou wast not blind, thou wouldest not so much look at the Creature, but at the Power of God in the Creature: But,Mat. 1. 25. as it is written, He hath hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and revealed them unto Babes. And here thy Eighty Fourth Query is also answered. Qu. 85. Whether Lord will break his own Or∣ders and Commands, expresly set down in his Word, where he saith (as you already heard) by Paul? 1 Tim. 3. 6. Answ. And unto this I have already answer'd as to thy Thirty Seventh Query: Therefore thou Blasphemer, stop thy Mouth, and be ashamed thus to accuse the Lord, because he is pleased to make his Power known in Babes and Youth; for,
Timothy, To whom Paul writes this Epistle, was himself but a Youth, as Paul wrtes, 1 Tim. 4. 11, 12. and there read thy Rebke. Qu. 6. Where did Christ or his Apostles send forth Women to be publick Prophetesses, as you have done ma∣ny, and some of them not long since Inamous for Lewd∣ness of Life? Answ. Oh thou Impudent One! How dost thou provoak the Lord to Indignation against thee, that darest lay any such thing to the Charge of God's Elect? Oh thou Lyar! Whom dost thou accuse of Lewdness? We abhor thy words; for all Lewdness & Prophaness we testifie against, wheresoever it doth appear, or any thing contra∣ry to the Pure Divine Light, which now is thy Conscience, and many other Consciences, doth bear witness for us, against thee, who ar given up to believe Lyes, and report them: There∣fore read thy Portion in Rev. 21. 8. and read an Answer to thy Query in Joel 2. 28. where the Lord saith,Rom. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. the Sons and Daughters shall prophesie: And none other do we own, but who immediate∣ly are carryed forth by the Spirit of the Lord, without the Commission of Man; therefore thou falsly accusest us, who saist, we send orth any. Qu. 87. If you be extraordinary Prophets Imme∣diately Inspired, as many of you pretend to be, where are the Miracles which such inspired Men wrought in Times past? Answ. But that we are so inspired, thou dost
not believe (as may easily be discerned by thy querying) and therefore unto thee no Sign shall be given, who art in the Adulterous Generation, who cannot see the Signs that follow the Truth, Mat. 16. 4. Qu. 88. What have you foretold by way of Pre∣diction, which hath accordingly come to pass, as the Prophets, Apostles aud Inspired Men were wont to do? Answ. If thou canst tax us to the contrary, thou may'st; we bear not witness of our selves; but he that believeth hath the witness within himself. And as for thy Eighty Nineth, Ninetieth, Ninety One and Ninety Two Queries, they are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my Six∣tee Qnth uery. And thy Ninety Third Query is answered in my Answer to thy Query concerning Salutations. Qu. 94. Whether is a Multitude of Disciples and Followers a sure Sign that his Doctrine is from Heaven, who is followed; seeing the Way is broad that leads to Destruction, and many there be that find it? And thou quotest Mat. 7. 13. and 2 Pet. 2. 22. Answ. Many are called, but few chosen; and many for a time followed Christ, so that a Ruler said, If we let this Fellow alone, all men will go after him;John 11. 48. which is the Cry of you and your Rulers now against the Messengers of Truth:Mat. 7. 14. And hast thou never read of the Multitudes that followed Christ, but few there be that enter, because strait is the
Gate: But divide England into Parts, and see if the greatest Number belong not unto you, who are in the broad Way; your lives preach you forth: Therefore now thou shouldst have first asked thy self this Query, and said, Is it I? and so have laid thy Hand upon thy Mouth, Qu. 95. Seeing this Age is Earthly minded, and willing to serve God with that which costs them nothing, contrary to the Pious & Nobe Spirit of David, 2 Sam. 24. 24. is it any great Wonder that your Doctrine against Tythes should find so many willing, yea, greedy Entertainers of it, as it hath done since it was first broached? Answ. The more is your Shame, who are Tea∣chers in this Age, that are so Earthly-minded, who have so long taken their Money for that which is not Bread,Isa. 55. 2. and their Labour for that which profitteth not:Jer. 23. 21, 22, 23. Do You not herein mani∣fest your selves to be such as run, and the Lord never sent You, and therefore You profit not the People at all, but they are still Earthly-minded? How have You then sown Spiritual Things? But I shall prove that the Earthly minded Ones still stick unto you; for you have a Law, made by the Will of Man, so that if they refuse to pay You, and forsake You, then by it You cast them into Prison, and by Your Law take Tribble Dammage; and this they know, and therefore consult with their Earthly Minds, that it is better to pay the Lesser then the Greater, though the Lesser is a greater Oppression: & thus many deny the Truth,
though▪ they are convinced in their Consciences thereof: Therefore that which leads any from You, to take up this Cross, to own the Truth, and deny You of Tythes, the same crucifies the Earthly Mind, and leads to suffer for Conscience. And the Noble Spirit of David condemns You; for whereas he refused upon Gift, You take upon Gift;Now there is much Dif∣ftrence be∣twixt ser∣ving God and your Bellies. and if They will not give it You, You will take it by Force; therefore this Scripture affords Witnesses against You: But hereby thou confessest, our Doctrine costs them nothing; then how saidst thou before, That James Parnel's Gospel was not without Charge? and thus out of thy own Mouth thou art proved a Lyar. Qu. 96. Did ever Christ or the Apostles disturb the Priests and Ministers of those Times, while they were teaching the People, as many of you and yours have done? Answ. Both the Prophets, Christ and the A∣postles declared against the Deceivers, False Pro∣phets, False Priests and Hirelings; and the Apo∣stles were haled out of the Synagogues and out of the Temple, as Christ told them, John 16. 2. as we by the same Spirit do now against You, whom we find in the same Steps; and here thou art an∣swered, if this be it thou callest Disturbance: But it is because You would bear rule by Your Means, and suffer nothing to be published that is against You, or strikes at Your Diana. Qu. 97. Doth the Gospel ordinarily call any man from his outward Calling, whereby he should maintain
himself and his Family? And thou quotest 1 Cor. 7. 20. Ephes. 4. 28. Answ. Yea, it doth; and the Scripture holds forth the same, that they were ordinarily called from their Outward Callings, to preach the Go∣spel to every Creature: Neither doth either of these Scriptures, which thou hast quoted, prove to the contrary. And how many Scriptures didst thou quote in thy Answer to my Fifteenth Query, to prove that the Ministers of the Gospel might forbear Woking, and not to entangle themselves with the Affairs of this Life, yet in all could not prove thy self a Minister of the Gospel? and now thou questionest the Truth of the Scripture, be∣cause neither thou nor thy Brethren were called according to Scripture: But whomsoever the Lord calls unto his Work, he doth take Care both for him and his Family; but You, that are not cal∣led by him, dare not trust him without a Law of Man. And in thy Ninety Eighth and Ninety Nineth Query, thou seemest to accuse us with some that turned from the Truth, and yielded to the Deceit of their Hearts, and so gave Occasion to such as thee, who wait for Occasion to Blaspheme the Truth; but is is no new thing, but the same which the Scripture declares of in divers places: therefore saith Christ, Offences must come, but Wo unto them by whom they do come: For, there were then many such as thee in that Age, who (as thou dost) waited for Occasion to blaspheme the
Truth: But if thou hadst been then, how would'st thou have accused Christ, who had but Twelve Apostles, and one of them betrayed him, and then hanged himself; and another denyed him? Therefore let this stop thy Mouth for speaking E∣vil of the things thou knowest not. And as for Spencer and Gilpin, whom thou here nominatest; the Truth is sufficiently cleaed of them in other Books; and the Priests have owned them, as they did Judas, which is the Name of all that turn from the TRUTH, after they have recei∣ved it. Qu. 100. Have so many fallen into Distraction or Madness in any Sect or under any Doctrine, as there hath done amongst your Hearers, especially where the Number of Disciples was no more? Answ. Look at Home, and answer thy self, witness your UNIVERSITIES, as you call them; for it is the Fruit of Your Studies, who would find out that by Your Wit and Wisdom which the Lord hath hid from You: And all that You cannot settle in Security and Blindness, You lead them into Madness, Confusion and Distraction, if they do not in time forsake you, as many will witness at this day, That they are led by You into such a Wilderness, that they know not which way to get out, neither do You know how to direct them; for You are in Con∣fusion your selves, and so the Blind leadeth the Blind into the Ditch: Therefore this might
have stopped thy Mouth from Falsly Accusing us. But I remember, TRUTH was ever accoun∣ted MADNESS and FOLLY by the Blind World, who know not that Godliness is Great Gain. And in thy Ninety Fourth Query thou wast Questioning the Truth of our Doctrine because of the Multitude of Disciples, and now by the Fewness; and thus thou Contradictest thy self. And then, after much of thy Filthy Stuff, which all along thou hast vented forth of thy old Bottle against us (which upon thee I have re∣turned again, from whence it came) thou seem∣est to accuse our Book, but dost not shew where∣in, and therefore I pass it by, as knowing thy Lying Spirit: And then thou stealest the Apo∣stle's Words for a Cloak for the Deceit of thy Heart, 2 Corinth. 13. 7, 8, 9. which the Apostle spoak from a True and Upright Heart, but thou from a False Deceitful Heart, as all along hath been sufficiently proved, and thy Prayers to be Abomination, and that thou hast nothing to do to name the Name of God in thy Mouth, who art a Worker of Iniquity and a Stranger unto God, who art found out of his Doctrine; and therefore with this Scripture I shall mark thee, 2 John 9. 10. that all may know thee, and turn away theit Ears from thee, who art not to be re∣ceived, but denyed; and therefore, whosoever receiveth thee or thy Doctrine, the same depart∣eth
from the Doctrine of Christ: And therefore, let this be a Caveat to all People, to whom it shall come, and look upon thee to be as Anathema Ma∣ranatha, Cor. 16. 22. Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord (through a Friend to all Souls, witnessed in all Consciences by the Eternal Light of God, by which I am known and received) in the Behalf of Israel, against the Armies of the Aliens, who muster up themselves against the Lord and his Authority; by a Friend to the Common-Wealth of Israel, who is known to the World by the Name JAMES PARNEL. Who is a Sufferer in Outward Bonds for the Testimony of the Everlasting Truth, in Colchester-Castle, 1655.
A WARNING FOR All People. ALL People Repent, and turn to the Lord from the Evil of your Doings; for the Day of the Lord is at Hand, wherein the Lord will judge the World, and give to every one according to their Deeds, whether they be Good or Evil; yea, He is coming with Ten thousand of his Angels, to be avenged of the Heathen,Jude 14. 15. and them that know him not: Now all that live in Sin and Filthi∣ness, it appears you know him not; for if you did, you durst not live in your Lusts, heaping up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, wherein the Lord will appear as a Consuming Fire against all Ungodliness, Rom. 1. 18. God is against you dissembling Professors, who a∣dorn the Outside, serve God in Notions, Words, & otside Forms, but the Heart is not upright with God, you are in the Earth, in your Covetousness which is Idolatry; and the Lord abhors the out∣side
Worship, when the Heartis not answerable, and calls such Whited Walls, and Painted Sepulchres, Hypocrites Serpents, Generation of Vipers, and the Wo is to such, how can you escape the Damnation of Hell? Mat. 23. God is against you Proud Lustful Ones, who make it your greatest Care to deck your selves in proud Attire, inventing new Wayes & Fashions to make your selves glorious in the Sight of Men, that they may worship you and honour you, but consider not that you are but Dust, and God will lay your Ho∣nour in the ust, for he is risen, to whom all Worship and Honour is due; and he will bring down yur Haughtiness and your Pride, and will exalt the Humble and Meek,Ez. 34. 16. and will seek that which was lost, but will destroy the Fat with Judg∣ment. Repent ye Lofty Ones, and turn to the Lord, and humble your selves before him, that you may be hid in the Day of his fierce Wrath, lest he take you away, and there be none to deliver; for the Day of the Lord will burn as an Oven, and they that are proud▪ and they that do wickedly, will be as Stubble, and it will leave them neither Root nor Branch, Mal. 4. 1. God is against you, Drunkards, who make it your Trade to pour in strong Drink, abusing the Creature which God hath given to be used mode∣rately,
for the Health, and not for the Lust, there∣in you shew your selves worse then Beasts; you should be reasonable Creatures, but your Hor∣ses may teach you, who will not drink but when they are dry, nor more then satisfies their Thirst; Wo unto you that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of Strength to mingle strong Drink;Isa. 5. 22. Wo unto you that rise up early that you may follow strong Drink,Isa. 5. 11. and continue until Night, till you be enflamed; The Wo is upon you that put the Cup to your Neighbours Mouth, to make him drink, that his Nakedness may ap∣pear, and shameful Spewing cover him, and this is your Glory, which is your Shame, and you tell it to others; you shew your selves to be of the Generation of Ham,Gen. 2. 23. the Father of Canaan, who was accursed for such Practices, and the Curse is upon you while you live here; therefore repent, and live no longer in these Abominations and Fil∣thiness, your Healths are Abomination unto the Lord, you are ignorant of his saving Health; the Wants of the Poor cry out against your wilful Pra∣ctices, which are your Condemnation. God is against your Swearers, who make it your Practice to take the Name of God in vain, and live in open Breach of God's Commandments, who are not ashamed to prophane the Name of God in open Streets and Houses where you come; yea,Jer. 23. 10. Beause of this the Land mourns; Repent, re∣pet; the Curse is towards you Prophane Ones, you that regard not the Commands of Christ, who
saith,Mat. 5. 34. to 37▪ Swear not at all, but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay; for whatsoever is more cometh of Evil: How will you stand before him at the Day of Judg∣ment, whom you now openly contemn; Oh Re∣pen betimes, the Day is at Hand when it will be too late, wherein you will wish you had never been born, God is against you Lyars, who make a Trade and Gain of Lying and Dissembling, for Earthly Profit, to make your selves rich, and to cover over your Deceit with Lying and Dissembling; and so your Houses are full of Deceit,Jer. 5. 26, 27▪ and you sell your Birth right for a Mess of Pottage, as Esau did, who was hated of God; and here you live in the Fll, cursed from God, in the First Nature, in Lying, and Cheating, and dissembling, stri∣ving to ensnare and oppress one another in Bar∣gaining by your Lying and Dissembling;Rev. 2. 12. but the Invisible God,Rom. 2. 6. who knows the Secrets of your Hearts, whom you think not of, is coming to re∣ward every one of you according to his eeds, eve∣ry one shall be judged out of his own Mouth, and God ound a Just God; therefore repent, while it is called to Day, and to the Light of God in your Consciences turn your Minds, by it to be guided, and it will lead your Hearts out of the Earth and Earthly Things, from coveting the Earth, and will lead you to deal Justly and Honestly in Singleness of Heart to speak the Truth one to another, and to
let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay Nay, and to do as you would be done by; and this is honest and godly ac∣cording to the Light of God in every Man's Con∣science: Now prize your Time while you have it;1. Thes. 5. 2. for the Day of the Lord is as a Thief in the Night to all the Children of Darkness; to the Light of God in all your Consciences I speak, which if you love,Joh. 3. 19, 20. it will be your Teacher, but your Condemnation it is if you act contrary to it;Prov. 21. 8. for he that loves and makes a Lye, is for the Lake that burneth. God is against you Scorners, who take Delight in scorning your Brethren, you shew your Folly to all Men, you that sit in the Seat of the scorn∣ful, you that raise false Reports against the sim∣ple, and tell them to make your selves and your Companions to laugh,Luke 6. 25. your Laughter shall be tur∣ned into Mourning; yea,Isa. 28. 22. Wo to them that laugh now, for they shall mourn; ye forget your selves what you are,Prov. 1. 22. take heed be not Mockers, lest your Bands be made strong, and when you cry, there be none to deliver▪ Repent, How long will you Scorners take delight in Scorning and Fools hate Know∣ledge? Cease from Sports and Pastimes ye wan∣ton Ones, making your selves merry in your Sin, your idle talking and foolish Jesting, your unclean filthy Words are Abomination to the Lord;1 Cor. 10. 6. and every idle Word must be accounted fr,Col 3. 6. your Re∣velling, and Rioting, Carding and Dicing,Prov. 16. 4. and
all your invented Sports, sitting down to eat and drink, and rising up to play, which is Idolatry, and the Wrath of God is against such Practices;1 Cor. 10. 7. for Man was not made to fulfil his own Lusts,Col. 3. 6. but to serve the Living God,Prov. 16. 4. who made all Things for himself, and the Wicked for the Day of Judg∣ment. Repent and take Heed, and search the Scriptures, and see if the Saints used any such Pra∣ctices, or spent their Time after that Manner, but had the Flesh crucified with the Affections and Lusts thereof;Gal. 5. 24. for he who lives after the Flesh, cannot please God,Rom. 8. for God is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity, and nothing that defiles must enter into his Kingdom,Hab. 1. 13. Rev. 21. 27. God is against you blind Guides, you Priests of England, who are the Teachers and Leaders of this People, who live in this Filthiness and ungodly Practices, without the Fear of God, going on in the Way of the Heathen, who know not God, and yet you profess your selves the Ministers of Christ, and work no better Reformation in them, yet are maintained by them, and are their Leaders and Examples in all this Filthiness, flattering of them, and leading them in Blindness, Crying Peace to them, because they put into your Mouthes, and so daub them with Untempered Morter, telling them, they are Christianso and of the Flock of Christ; and so through Covetousness,Mich. 3. 5. with feigned Words make Mer∣chandze of them;Ez. 22. 28. but your Judgment of a long Time lingereth not,2 Pet. 2. 3. nor your Damnation slumbereth not
All you blind Guides, who lead the People in Blindness, in their Sins and Corruptions, every one their Hearts adulterated from God, commit∣ting Fornication with other Lovers; and this you see and do not regard, but seek for the Fleece, and feed with the Fat, and cloath with the Wool,Ezek. 34. and make a Prey on the Sheep,Jer. 3. 32. and cause them to err by your Lyes and Lightness,Ier. 6. 15. and call your selves the Ministers of Christ, and are not ashamed, neither do you blush; Therefore you shall fall a∣mongst them that fall, in the Day that I visit you, saith the Lord. JAMES PARNEL.
To My Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, In the CITY of LONDON. TO ye Translated Ones my Love from the Life doth flow; You that are trans∣lated and renewed in Heart and Mind; You that are separated & redeemed from amongst the Children of this World, and the Polutions and Anominations that they live in; in whom the Works of the New Creation, wherein dwel∣leth Righteousness, is established; who are Beau∣tified Within, who are Adorned Within, who are Comely Within, who are Purified and Cleansed Within by the Precious Blood of the Lamb, with whom You are crucified, who are in him, who have put on the Wedding Garment, and are ad∣mitted to the Table of the Lord, and are Parta∣kers of the Holy Union.
Oh ye Blessed of the Lord, ye Bbes and Chil∣dren of the Most High, who dweeth in Purity and reigneth in Majesty, who ath established and set up his Throne in Your Hearts; in You is my Joy and great Delight; ya, I remember You when ye were tender, and springing up, but by Waiting upon the Lord You ave renewed Your Strength, and the more is my Joy made full in You, and Ye are made Precious in my Sight, Ye that are inward Jews, of the Heart-Circumci∣sion, redeemed frm Kindreds, Tongues, Lan∣guages and People, who are come to the Heaven∣ly Jerusalem, there to worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, whom he hath chosen to bear his Holy Image, which hath been so much defaced in the World, and In You to exalt and glorifie his Name of Holiness amongst the Heathen, and them that know him not, now in this Day, wherein he is visiting the Earth with Judgment, and with Mercy, and with a Mighty Power, to call to an Account the Inhabitants of the Earth: And bles∣sed are You that have hearkened unto his Voice; Ye shall sing and rejoyce when others shall weep, and mourn, and howl: Though amongst them your Portions are Scoffings, Scornings, Mock∣ing, Deridings, Back-bitings, Revilings, Per∣secutions, Stripes, Imprisonments, yet have You learned to account these as Riches, who know the Comforter within You and Your Re∣deemer to live with You; I do rejoyce in all these things, being now made Partaker of them,
I am not unknown unto You; my Voice Ye know of Old. O how do I long to see Your Faces, but in that I am straitned for a time! My Life is bound up in many of Your Hearts, which makes me I cannot forget You; my Spirit cannot be separated from You, though my Body is kept in Strait Bonds; but the Straitness will be broaken, when he hath perfected his Praise in them, who is my only Keeper and Supporter. O ye Simple Doves, who sit without Guile in Your Mouthes! O how I am ravished with the Love of You, when I behold You in Spirit! You that have given up unto the Death, to the Fa∣mine, to the Sword and to the Fire, and have patiently submitted unto the Father's Will, and willingly sacrificed up your Darling; Your Faith is unto You imputed for Righteousness: and the God whom You have trusted and believed in, will make You rich in him, and give You Sub∣stance incorruptible, and an Inheritance that ne∣ver fades; in measure You can set to Your Seals of what is written unto You. But some have hearkened unto the Evil Spi∣rit, which hath brought Evil-Tidings of the Good Land; and such have turned Back into E∣gypt, and joyned with the Magicians thereof to harden Pharaoh's Heart against the Innocent, and filled the Mouthes of the Heathen with Blasphe∣mous Speeches: But let them go on; He that is filthy, let him be filthy still; for, he cometh
quickly whose Reward is with him, to give unto them according to their Doings: But all things work together for the Good of You who stand in the Faith, who are not moved with the Winds that blow, nor the Storms that come against You, who eye the Hand of Providence in all these things, which bringeth Good out of Evil to You wards, who abide in the Truth, and stray not. So, as You have tasted, felt, known and ex∣perienced of Him, so trust Ye in Him, and remain in Your sure Confidence, which is begotten in You by his Word; and be Ye as Lights in the dark World both by Word and by Conversation, that in all things Ye may be approved by the Father's in Your Consciences, as Faithful and Obedient Children, every one in Your Calling, wherein you are called, that the Price thereof You may obtain in the End of Your Race. O lift up your Heads, and look up to the Father, and see how he hath tendered You, and how his Love hath been tendered towards You all along, who hath not left You without Instructors and Nursing-Fathers, who have watched over You with tender Care: In much Love & Tenderness am I drawn forth towards You little ones, which springs from the Root of the Vine, because you bear my Father's Image. Long have I waited to write to You, and lately I had an Opening of You, which caused me to visit You with this Epistle; for, Ye
have been oftentimes in my Remembrances though I could not write; and now You must read me in that Love which Tongue cannot ex∣press, and in that Epistle which is written in Your Hearts without either Paper or Ink, by the Im∣mortal Word of Life, and there my Name You will know. So, the Lord God Almighty, the Keeper of Israel, over shadow you, and in his Holy Pre∣sence keep You Pure and Innocent, that You may pour forth his Praise in the Earth, and shine as the Sons and Daughters of Sion; into whose blessed Protection I You commit, and do lye down with You, who am a Sufferer in Outward Bonds by the Will of Man for the Innocent Seed's sake, but at Liberty with the Faithful, who am called Written from Colchester-Castle, the 12th of the 11th Moneth. JAMES PARNEL.
TO FRIENDS IN Essex. FRIENDS, TO that of God in all your Consciences I do speak, which there doth witness for God, which is according to the Mind of God, bearing Witness against what is contrary to the Mind of God, and approving of what is according to the Mind of God, which in your Hearts is pla∣ced to be your Teacher, to teach you to do the Will of God, and how to walk up to the Mind of God, and to distinguish betwixt Truth and Error, and betwixt the Precious and the Vile, and betwixt him that serves the Lord and him that serves him not; which Light enlightens your Undestandings, and lets you see the Land of Darkness, where the House of Bondage is, where the Righteous Seed lyeth oppressed, and where the Man of Sin doth rule, and Death hath Dominion; which Light is your Guide out of the House of Bondage, and out
of the Land of Darkness, and out of Death's Do∣minion, and slayes the Man of Sin, and separates you from the Children of Darkness, and out from among them leads you, to seek after another King∣dom, where all Things are added, wherein is wit∣nessed the perfect Day, where Sorrow and Sighing flees away; but then out of your selves you must come, your own Wisdom and Reason for to deny, and whatsoever springs from self, which is at En∣mity with the Light, and opposeth, argues and contends against the Light, which by the Light is condemned; but if you hearken unto self, then you stumble in the Way, and many stumbling-Blocks lye before you & Thon and Bryars catch hold of you, and in the Mire your Feet do stick, and there you toyl and moyl in Thraldom, and many Hardships and Impossibilities do appear before you, and Doubts, and Fears, and Questionings, and Murmurings, Repinings and Unbelief rise in you, and many Temptations btake you soetimes to return back and dye in Aegypt, sometimes after the Delights and Flesh-pots of Aegypt, sometimes that God hath utterly forsaken you, sometimes to question the very Truth of God, and ready to call it a Lye; and here is the wavering and unstable Mind, all which ariseth ou of Darkness, where self stands, all which comes by hearkning unto self: Therefore unto the Light (the Messenger of God) keep your Minds, whch brings the Message of Peace, and glad-Tidings of Salvation, unto which keep close, & own it lone to be your Teacher
Guide and Counsellor, in all the Way you are to pass, and in all Things that you are to do, stand∣ing in the Denyal of self, with all its Ends, and own the Light, which leads int Singleness to God, out of Ends; and all stumbling-Blocks it will remove, and through the Bryars and Thorns it will you lead, and in the Mire you shall not stick, but the crooked Way shall be made streight, and the rough and hard Way plain and easie; for in the Light is none Occasion of stumbling, but keeps your Feet from erring and straying & your Tongues from Evil speaking, as you hearken unto this, which when you are going to the right Hand, or to the left, cryes, This is the Way, walk in it: This is the Word in you from whence comes Faith, which makes all Things easie and possible; but without Faith it is impossible to please God; and Faith is the Gift of God, and so is this Word of Truth, from whence Faith springs, which judgeth down all Murmurings, Doubtings and Repinings, and all Carelesness, Lightness, Lustings and Earthliness, and condemns the Ground from whence all these Things do spring: And here the Ministration of Con∣demnation is witnessed, which in its Time is glorious, through which comes the Ministration of Peace, which doth the other exceed; but take Heed of getting these Things in the Comprehension to talk of; but let the Time of Silence and Patience have its Work, in which wait for the fulfilling of these Things, that within you may read them, and the Life it self may shew forth it self, which
dothadorn and honour the Truth, and so you be∣come the Vessels of Honour; but out of Faith∣fulness this is not witnessed; For it is the Willing and Obedient that shall eat the Good of the Land. Therefore Friends, see how you stand in Faith∣fulness to what in your Measures is made known unto you; for Faithfulness is of great value, and Faithfulness is as well in secret as in publick, knowing that all Things are publick unto God, who will jdge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ; therefore he that is faithful over a little, is appro∣ved of God, and shall be made Ruler over much; but he that is sloathful is cast out, and from him taken that which he hath: These Things you have read without, but now learn within, and read your selves, and you need not be Deceived; for by the Light your Hearts are searched, & by it all Things are made manifest by which you are either appro∣ved or disapproved unto God in all your Words and Actions; therefore by this set a Watch over all your Thoughts Words and Actions▪ that the Righ∣teous judge may be set up in your Hearts, which judgeth down Deceit and iniquity, and establish∣eth Righteousness in the Earth, and Truth and Equity in the inward Parts, and cleanseth the Heart from Evil, that this alone may guide you and act you forth in all your Wayes and Doings; and then self hath no Part, but all Things are done in the Cross unto sel, in Singleness unto God, and he alone is glorified and the Fear and Awe is placed, and the Tongue is bridd, and
the Will curbed, and the Heart cleansed, and kept clean; for it is that which goeth out that dfileth: Therefore I say unto you all, Watch, that the Pure may exercise your Minds, which is the Cross to the Carnal, which crucifies the Carnal, and mortifies the Deeds of the Flesh, and establisheth Purity in the Heart, and brings forth the Fruits of the Spirit; which is Love in a pure Life, that here you may come to live, and walk, and grow toge∣ther in Unity in your Measures; for that which se∣parates from the Unity is self, which causeth Love to wax cold, but in the Love of God abiding, self is denyed; for where self is owned, the Love of God is denyed: So here is the Enemy of your own House, that you are to war against, and in the Light (which discovers self) is your Power and Strength; and as you receive the Light, you re∣ceive Power to deny self in its Appearances, which Power reconciles your Hearts together, and works you into perfect Friendship & Unity, which stands not in the Will, but in the pure Nature, which is the Cross to Will, which Nature the World can∣not bear, which Nature breaks the World's Fel∣lowship, Love and Friendship, all which stands in their corrupt Wills, wherein stands all their Cu∣stoms, Fashions and Traditions, and all their Wor∣ship and Profession, out of which also ariseth Per∣secution against you who dwell in the pure Na∣ture, and the single pure Language, which their corrupt Wills cannot bear nor savour; but look not out at what they can do unto you, knowing
that the uttermost is but to take the Life of the Body; but eye the Lord your God in it, and count it your Riches that you are found worthy to suffer for Righteousness sake; for through many Tryals and Tribulations you come forth pure unto the Lord, and strong in the Faith. So the Lord God of Power be with you, and by his mighty Power keep you low, and watchful in your Conditions, that your Eternal Good you may mind above all Things under the Sun, that every one in the Truth received you may walk and grow, daily dying unto the Things that perish, that in the Life of God you may come to dwell, out of the Creatures, and then the true Use of them will be given you, and the pure Wisdom, as it was in the Beginning, when Man was in the Right to the Creatures, and here Paradice will be found; but he that believeth maketh not hast, but by pa∣tient continuing in well-doing, you will reap if you faint not, wherein I bid you you Farewel. Dear Friends, It was the Love of God in me, which run forth to the Seed in you, which con∣strained me to write unto you, and visit you with this Epistle, now my bodily Presence is by the corrupt Will of Man barred from you, yet my Spirit doth not cease in your Behalf, that the Lord by his Power (by which he hath awakened you out of Sleep, and caused his Witness to answer to his Truth) would bless and prosper this his happy
Work in your Hearts, to the bringing forth his precious Seed to rule and have Dominion, that so his glorious Light may shine forth in your Con∣versations, and his Beauty appear in your Image, that the Heathen may be ashamed, and ear before the Lord your God: And here my Friends is my Comfort in the midst of Bonds; yea, if this Body was to be sacrificed up, it would not abate my Joy that I have in you, in whom the Work of God prospers: Therefore I do charge you all in the Presence of the living God, whom ye do profess, in his Fear to abide diligent and circumspect, that you grieve not the Spirit of God, nor cause his Holy Name to be blasphemed, lest you add Af∣fliction to the Bonds of the Gospel. From Colchester Castle in the 9th Month, 1655.  This from a Friend, who is known in Spirit, who for the Innocent Seeds sake suffers the Bonds of the Gospel. JAMES PARNEL.
Another Epistle to Friends. FRIENDS, TO the ight of Christ Jesus in You all bring Your Deeds, by it to be tryed and proved; which Light in You all is the HeartSeacher and Tryer, which as you take heed unto, it will not let you be idle, or sloathful, or careless, nor let You set l in a Formal Way or Carnal Security; but will let you see the Ground and End of all Your Actions and Actings; and will prove and try Your Hearts, and let You see how Your Hearts stand towards God, and what therein is Head and Ruler; so that none of You may be acted by a False Spirit, which begets into a False Liberty, out of the Cross; but that your own Wisdom and Reason (which argues against the Light for a Liberty out of the Cross) may all come unto the Death of the Cross, to be mor∣tified; for all that in You which would not be tryed by the Light, springs from the Enmity a∣gainst the Light, and is for Condemnation by the Light, to which Light in You all I speak, which is the Cross to Your Wills, that by it You may try all Your Wayes and Actions. For, all You that are Bowing, and Crouching, and Uncovering to the Creature; You are still in the Old Nature, where old things are not past away, but are still following the Customs of the dark World, worshipping the Beast which all the
World wonders after and worships; for, that i the Beast, even proud Lucifer, the Lust in Man, which would be honoured, and bowed to, and exal∣ted, which▪ so swells in Wrath, and Rage, and Persecution against those that cannot worship bow to nor honour it, to which No Worship nor Honour is due; for▪ Dust is the Serpents Meat: And from this Beast in Man did this Persecution ever arise against this Righteous Seed, which could not ho∣nour nor worship him, as you may read (Rev 1.) All the World wonders after the Beast, but those whose Names are written in the Book of Life; and those were and are persecuted by the Beast, and cold not nor cannot scarce buy or sell. And that in You which honours and worships the Beast, or proud Nature in Man, is that which would not bear or suffer the Rage or Persecution of the Beast, but would serve two Masters; and so, while you are seeking to please the one, you displease the other, and so beguile your own Souls, and are a Sare to others; and this Heart is not right unto God: bring your Ends (in so doing) to the Light, and you shall see it so, which ight will not deceive you, but undeceive you, as you take heed unto it, and are willing to be led by it, which will lead you in∣to the True Worship of the Only True God, whose Wor∣ship is in Spirit and in Truth: And by this Light you will see, that to Him alone All Honour, Glory, Worship, Dominion and Thanks belongs: And Him that Honours God, him will God Honour: But this Ho∣nour is not of Man; for, saith he, I receive not
Honour of Man. And here all Men are honoured in the Lord; but out of the Lord none are ho∣noured: And they that are Proud, and High, and Lofty, are out of the Lord; for that is one of the seven Abominations. And here, by the Light, all Respect of Persons is condemned, and the Lord honoured in all, and all in him; which Light condemns the Language of Babylon, and begets into the plain single Language, which the Beast-like Nature cannot ear nor savour; But if you seek to please Men, you are not the Servants of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. And all you that still follow the Fashions of the World (wherein is Excess) either in Meat, Drink or Apparel; you are still alive in the World's Nature, being conformed like unto the World, and are not obedient unto the Light which convinceth you of the Vanities of the World, and the Fashions thereof, therefore by the Light in your selves, which condemns all that in you which would be exalted and esteemed in the World, which would be like the World, and have the Praise of the World, which is to be condemned with the World by the Light which is not of the World: And so Pride comes to be rooted out of the Heart, and You crucified to the World, by the Light, which let you see the Vanity of the World, and the Fashions thereof, which ass away, which are not to be Touched, Tasted nor Haded.
And all the Customary Words of the World, which are by the Light condemned, which by the Light are seen to be invented from that Nature which knows not God, whereby God is dishonoured who calls to all who will follow him, To come out from amongst them, and be you separate, and touch no Un∣clean thing, and I will receive you, saith the Lord. Therefore touch not their Customs, but keep out of their Fashions and Traditions; for they are all Unclean; and own th Crss, and despise the Shame; and follow the Light out or Babylon, and it will lead you into the pure Religion, which is unspotted of the World; and so will crucifie you to the World, and the World to you: But that in you that plea∣deth that Scripture, Custom to whom Custom, that is it which is willing to remain blind in Custom to save its Life, which by the Light is declared and condemned with the World, which would keep in Friendship with the World, and in the Love of the World, all which is at Enmity with the Light, and is for Condemnation by the Light. Therefore, to the Light turn your Minds, that by it you may judge all such Carnal Ends and Reasonings, which would uphold these Carnal Customs, contrary to the Light, which gave forth the Scripture, by which you may see what Custom the Apostle there spake of in Rom. 13. 7. as you may read in Matth. 9. 9. how he sate at the Recit of ustom; but this doth not at all uphold the Cu∣stoms of the Heathen, that are Vain.
Therefore to the Light take heed, that it may be your Teacher and Counsellor, that from it alone you may Act and Speak, and so will you find the Witness within your selves for what you Act and Do. And all you that still pay the Priests Tythes and Offerings, and are convinced of the Deceit of the Priests,; you do deny Jesus Christ, the Son of God come in the Flesh, who is the Everlasting High Priest, the End of Tythes and Offerings accor∣ding to the Law; and do uphold Babel and the Merchants of Babylon, and are throwing down with the one Hand, and building up with another; who cry against the Priests in words, as to be proud and covetous, and yet put into their Mouthes for a Peace sake with them; and so, while you put in∣to their Mouthes, you Uphold them; for their Maintenance Upholds their Ministry: And here you flee the Cross, and are Men pleasers, because you would not suffer for the Truth you profess, and therefore are denyed by them that dwell in the Truth. But you that for Conscience cannot pay the Priests Tythes, keep to that of God which convin∣ces you in your Consciences, and it will carry you out to suffer for Conscience sake; and so you will have your Peace with God in your Conscien∣ces, though by Men persecuted. Or if you be cal∣led to Answer at their high Courts or Benches, keep∣ing
to the Principle of God in your Consciences, you may appear before their Highest Judges; and cast Slavish Fear aside, and stand in the Fear and Counsel of God, and to their Faces Answer for the Truth in Boldness against their Deceit, and let the Truth confound them. And give up your Bodies freely to suffer for the Truth of Jesus, that the Heathen may know, That the Truth is in You. And deny all those that receive Fees or Gifts in their Heads, and keep to the Counsellor within: If any Man wants Wisdom, let him ask it of God, where you need not go out to Man. And all you that give Money to Repair the Idols Temples, and are convinced in your Consciences of the Idolatrous Worship that is therein upheld, you are guilty with the Idolatrous Worshippers, who do uphold their Idolatrous Places, and so uphold their Idolatrous Worship; and here you cannot wash your Hands of their Idolatry, but are defiled with them so long as you Uphold their Idolatrous Places. Therefore to the Light bring all your Deeds▪ that by it all such Actions and Practices may be con∣demned, and you separated from the Idolatrous Ge∣neration; and keep clean from its Polutions: and suffer willingly the Spoiling of your Goods for the Name of Jesus. And if you be called before Magistrates to take an Oath, keep to that which condemns all
Oaths, which saith, Swear not at all, but testifie the Truth from your Consciences in the face of all men; and so you abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and out of the Condemnation; for, They that Swear, fall into Condemnation, saith the Apostle James, Chap. 5. 11. And though in the Time of the Law and the Prophets on Oath for Confirmation among men then was the End of all Strife; but Christ Jesus, the Oath of God, the Fulfilling and End of the Law and the Prophets, saith, Swear not at all, but let your Yea be Yea, and Nay, Nay; for, what is more, is Evil: And such as stumbles at this Language, accounts the Cross Foolishness, and is for Death by the Cross, And if you be crucified with Christ, you shall reign with him. And so, to the Light in you all I leave you, by it to be directed how to walk up to the Mind of God, and own the Truth before all men, every one of you faithful in your Measures, there to grow out of the World, and the Deceit of the World, to be kept clean from the World, in the Fear of the Lord, using the World as if you used it not, and then are you my Friends, and of my Kindred. And this I was moved to give forth, for the Directing of your Minds, lest any of you should be choaked with the World's Spirit, which I see working amongst you, which would keep Peace and Friendship with the World; that by the Light of
Christ Jesus (where with you are all enlightened) you may search out this Worldly Spirit, which is in you, working against the Light, that by the Light it may be rooted out; for, of a Truth, you cannot serve them both; but while you are seek∣ing to please the one, you displease the other: Therefore keep to that which separates from the World; for, if God be on your side, who can be a∣gainst you? In which Confidence I rest, in Unity with the Faithful, in whom is my Joy and Com∣fort in the midst of Bonds. Written from Colchester. Castle, in the 9th Mo∣neth, 1655. JAMES PARNEL.
AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS. ALL ye Friends of the Light, though we, who are your Ministers and Messengers o Light, are in Prisons, Holes and Dungeons cast, and kept by the devilish corrupted will of man, & suffered by God, the Father of Light, for the Fulfil∣ling of the Scriptures upon that Gneration which was prophesied of by the Ministers and Messen∣gers or Light in the dayes of old, who suffered in the like nature, by the same Generation, for the same Testimony; and though yet the Lord suf∣fers the same Generation to act in their Nature a∣gainst us, and fill up their Measure of Wrath, it is for the Manifestation of his Truth, and Exalt∣ing of his Name of Power; and through all this are we known and made manifest unto You, who be in the Light; and the Heathen do come to know and confess, That he is Greater that is with us, then all they that rise up against us; and in
all this do we Rejoyce, and through our Sufferings are Crowned, and do get Victory over the world without as within: And though we are here kept the Lord's appointed Time, yet (Friends) eye the Lord in all these things, and look not out at Man, or what Man can do, either for or against, but eye God in all his Works, and in all his Instruments, and there will be no Cause of Dis∣couragement; for, the discouragements, and fears, doubts and questioning spring from the Carnal, ad know not the Eternal: But an Eternal Witness we have in all your Consciences, which by the Word of Power is awakened in you, by which we are known, by which we are owned, by which we are witnessed and received into your Hearts, wherein our Unity stands with you who are faith∣ful unto it, by which we are remembred unto you though far Absent in Body: And this Witness we have in the World, though they do not receive it, nor like to retain it in their minds, therefore they do not receive us, but as the witness lies slain in them, therefore do they strive to slay us: and this is their Condemnation, which will witness unto God against them out of their own Mouthes: And thus we are a sweet Savour unto God both in you that Believe, and in them that Perish. There∣fore, you that do believe, unto this Witness ake heed, and mind its Answer in Your Cnsciences, that it may Your Consciences exercise in Unity unto God, that You in the Sence of it may be kept, to be taught and guided by it into the Cross
to Your Wills, that the Will of God may guide You, and not Your own; that so the Living Witness may be born up in You, to live, and re∣joyce, and be your Head, and that which hath been Your Head may be bruised; and so, Friends, your Hearts come to be established and confirmed in the unchangeable Truth, unto which You are called, that You might be the Children of Truth, to bear the Image of the Father of Truth. So, all who own this Voice, unto the Witness in your Consciences and your Minds keep close, that upon the living Substance you may feed at the Ta∣ble of the Lord, and there partake of the Union and Communion of Saints, every one in your measure dwelling, the things come to be cleared up unto you, and the Shadow vanished. Keep at Home every oen in Your Tents, and let the Candle stand upon the Candle-Stick, that the whole House may be enlightened, lest the Thief get in at a secret Corner, and trouble you, and rob you, and cast a Vail over your Light. So, while you have the Light, abide in it, and in it you will see more Light; and sweep clean within, and search every Corner, and suffer not an Enemy in the House, and let not any evil thing remain in your Light; Cast out that which hath been in the Bosom; and let the Lamb be there, who saith, He that loves any thing better then me, is not worthy of me: So, unto the Light bring all; for, Wo unto him that hides from the Light, the Day will make him manifest.
Oh wrest not above the Life; feed not upon any below the same; follow the Light, which leads your Minds unto the Son; for, in him is Peace, yea, True Peace, which cannot be broa∣ken; yea, He is the Bond of Peace: If you a∣bide in him, he will abide in You, and You shall bring forth Fruit plentifully, and he will refresh You with the Heavenly Dew, and Ye shall lou∣rish as in a Summer's Day, yea, as Plants of Righ∣teousness; but the Spring comes first. Oh, how Pleasant and Beautiful is the Spring in a Barren Field, where Barronness and Deadness flee away; as the Spring comes on, the Winter casts her Coat, and Summer nigh: Oh, wait for to see and read these things within. You, that have been as Barron, and Dead, and Dry, without Sap, unto You the Sun of Righteousness is risen with healing in his Wings, and doth begin to o∣ver-shadow You, and shine into Your Coasts: For this is the Day wherein the Lord is come to visit You, yea, to You that have long sate in Dark∣ness, now Light is sprung up. Oh mind the se∣cret Springs and the Tender Plants. Now, You are called to dress the Garden; let not the Weeds and Wild Plants remain: Pee∣vishness is a Weed, Anger is a Weed, Hastiess is a Weed, Self-Love is a Weed, Self-Will is a Weed, Secret Envy and Malice are Weeds, Pride is a Wild Plant, Covetousness is a Wild Plant, Lightness is a Wild Plant, Vanity is a Wild Plant, Self-Knowledge is a Wild Plant, and
Lust is the Root of all, and these things have a Room in your Garden, and have been tall and strong, and Innocency, Truth and Equity have been left, and have been deep in the Earth, and could not be found until the Sun of Righeousness arose, and searched and sought out that which was lost, and brought again that which was driven a∣way. Therefore stand not idle, but come into the Vineyard, and work; Your Work shall be to Watch, and keep out the Fowls of the Air, and the Unclean Beasts, and the▪ Wild Bears, and the Subtil Foxes; and he that is the Husband-man will pluck up the Wild Plants and Weeds, and make Defence about the Vines, and he will tell you what to do, and he will be nigh you, who is the Father of the Vineyard: Now, read within, or else you stumble; and what is not clear to You, wait for the fulfilling; He that believes, makes not haste. But You that are covered with Leaves, the Son will search You; You must come to the Fall of the Leaf, and to a Time of Deadness and Win∣ter, before the Life appears, and living Springs be opened; Your Garments You must cast off, and then the Son will cloath You, but not be∣fore You are naked, no, not so much as an Apron of Fig-Leaves must You have to cover Your Na∣kedness; for, Shame must come upon all Flesh, and the Harlot must be laid bare, and no Eye shall pitty him.
SOME QUERIES Sent to the Masters of the Colledges IN CAMBRIDGE, TO Answer in Plainness of Speech, in WRITING. Query I. WHether Hebrew, Greek and La∣tine be the Original of Tongus▪ yea or nay; and whether▪ that the Original to open the Scriptures? yea or nay, Qu. II. Whether there was not an Original that gave forth the Scriptures, before Tongues were? yea or nay. Qu. III. And what was the Original, before many Tongues were? and what was the Tongue? Qu. IV. Whether any be made Minister of the Lord Jesus Christ by the Will of Man? yea or nay.
Qu. V. And whether any in the Time of the A∣postles, or the Prophets of God, or Jesus Christ, did ever serve a Set Time; for many Years, to learn Na∣tural Tongues, and give So much for their Learning, and then afterwards sent forth to preach, and to have so much for their Preaching? Whether such be not made Mini∣sters by the Will of Man? yea or nay; seeing there a∣riseth so much Persecution by the means of these Men in this Generation, Hailing out of the Synagogues; Stocking, Whipping, Stoning, Striking and Imprisoning, which are the Fruits of all such as are born after the Flesh, con∣trary to Christ's Doctrine, who saith, Love your Ene∣mies; Are they Enemies? Love them? Qu. VI. And where did God command that which you call an Ordinance, as to Sprinkle Infants? shew a plain Scripture for it. Qu. VII. Is the Priesthood changed which re∣ceived Tythes, according to the Law, which had a Command to take Tythes? and is the Law changed by which the Priesthood was made? and is the Command dissanulled by which the Priesthood took Tythes? yea or nay. Qu. VIII. Did Abraham ever pay Tythes to Melchizedeck but once? yea or nay: and was it out of his Substance, or out of the Spoils? and if out of the Spoil which he had got with the Sword, and that only once, and no more, what Ground is that for this Gene∣ration of Priests (so called) to take Tythes Yearly of the Labours of the People? Qu. IX. Did ever any of the Apostles take
Tythes; or any of the Believers in Christ Jesus pay Tythes? shew it out of their Declaration. Qu. X. And is not this a False Doctrine of them which have come from the Colledges, that have told the People, The Bible is the WORD; whenas it wit∣nesseth to the Contrary, and declares, that God is the Word? John 1. 1. Qu. XI. And is not this a False Doctrine of them that have told the People, the Letter hath been the Light; whenas the Letter saith, Christ is the Light? Qu. XII. And is not this a False Doctrine of them that have told the People of a Sacrament, which there is no Scripture for? And have told the People, The Steeple-house hath been the Church; whenas the Scripture saith, The Church is in God, 1 Thes. 1. 1. And is not this contrary to the Scripture? Qu. XIII. Have you that Spirit that was before Scripture was given forth, which gave them forth? yea or nay. Qu. XIV. Have you heard God's Voice immedi∣ately from Heaven and Earth? yea or nay. Q. XV. Do you own Trembling inward and Trembling outward? yea or nay. Qu. XVI. Is that Witchcraft and the Spirit of it, that scoffs and scorns at them that do Tremble? And is not that the Power of God that makes the Devils to Tremble? yea or nay; and shakes down that which must be shaken, and removes that which must be removed; is this the Power of God? yea or nay.
Qu. XVII. And whether ever any th did Tremble at the Word of God, and witnessed the sha∣king of those things that must be shaken, and the remo∣ving of thse things which must be removed, did Scoff and Scorn at any? yea or nay. Qu. XVIII. And whether such as do Scoff and Scorn, Beat and Imprison, and Hale out of the Syna∣gogues such as Trembled at the Word of the Lord, be not out of Christ's Doctrine, who saith, Love your E∣nemies? yea or nay. Qu. XIX. And whether such as have the Chief Seats in the Synagogues, and stand Praying there, and are called of Men Masters, which Christ cryed Wo a∣gainst, Mat. 23. whether he justifies such now, and sends forth such now, which he once cryed Wo against? yea or nay. Qu. XX. And whether such as bear Rule by their Means, and seek for their Gain from their Quarters, and seek for the Fleece, and cloathe with the Wooll, and make a Prey upon the People, and are Hirelings, which the true Prophets of the Lord were sent to cry against; whe∣ther such be approved of the Lord now, and justified and set up now, which he sent his Prophets to witness and cry against, and disproved, as in Jer. 5. 30, 31. Isa. 56. 10, 11. Ezek. 34. Mic. 3. Qu. XXI. And whether such as go in Cain's Way and Balaam's Way, which the Lord sent his Apo∣postles to cry against, which were disapproved of him; whether suh be approved of God now, which were dis∣proved and cryed against then, which go in Cain's Way,
and Balaam's Way, as it is manifest? For they that do not give them Maintenance, they sue them at the Law, or cast them into Prison, as is witnessed in many Places in this Nation. Qu. XXII. What is the First Principle of the Pure Religion? Qu. XXIII. Doth Christ Enlighten every one that comes into the World? yea or nay. JAMES PARNEL.
To you who be call'd JUDGES, JUSTICES, RULERS ant OFFICERS. WHO Fine and Imprison Men, because they cannot put off their Hats to you, and call it a Contemning Authority, and Mis-behavi∣our, and Evil Deportment, and yet say, The Scrip∣ture is your Rule, and profess your selves Christians, and to believe on Jesus Christ: Now by the Scrip∣ture try your selves and your Practice, and let the Lie thereof judge you; where do you ever read that Pharoah King of Aegypt, who oppressed the Children of Israel, and knew not the Lord, did command Moses or Aaron to put off their Hats, or Fine or Imprison them if they would not, or told them they Contemned Authority, or called it Mis-be∣haviour or Evil Deportment, as you do; or ever Da∣rius, or Nebuchadnezzar, or Belthaser, or any of the Heathensh King Princes, Rulers, Judges or Go∣vernours in the Time of the Law or Gospel, com∣mand such a Thing? Where did ever Herod, who beheaded John, or Pilate, or Festus, or King A∣grippa, command any such Thing? Now if you cannot find one Example amongst all these Hea∣then,
for this your Practice, let the Lise and Practice of the Heathen judge you and condemn you; for you are not fit to be reckoned or numbred amongst the Christian Kings, Judges, Rulers and Governours, as Joseph, who was made Ruler over Egypt, or Mo∣ses, who was Judge over all Israel, or Joshua, or Jehtah, who was Chief Judge, or David, or Solo∣mon; nay, they were Men fearing God, and hating Covetousness, and far from Oppression: Therefore now behold your selves, and be ashamed of your Pride & Arrogancy: and though there was a Time that Pharaoh in his Will oppressed the Children of Isra∣el, yet there came a Time that he felt the Hand of the almighty God, & thereby was Israel delivered, and he drowned in the Sea: And though Nebu∣chadnezzar made an Image, and would have all to bow unto it, or else be cast into the fiery Furnace, yet there came a Time that he lost his Kingdom: And though there was a Time that Haman was ac∣cepted, and Mordecai despised, and Haman made a pair of Gallows for Mordecai, because he could not bow unto him, yet there came a Time that Haman was hanged on his own Gallows, and Mordecai exalted in his stead: Now read your selves and your Portions; for in Haman's Nature your are found Lording over your Fellow. Creatures by your cor∣rupt Wills, as it doth appear by your Sternness and Cruelty in Fining of them, and Imprisoning of them that cannot bow unto you, nor put off their Hats unto you; might not Haman upon the same Account have taxed Mordecai for contemning Au∣thority,
and for Evil Deportment, as well as you, seeing it was a Decree of the King? And might not Nebuchadnezzar have so accused Sahdrach, Me∣shach and Abednego, seeing it was a Command of the King? And might not the Priests, Captain, and the Rulers have done the same to John and Pe∣ter upon the same Account, as you now do? But whether was it by the Authority of God, or their own Wills, that they commanded these Things? and thereby try your selves, & see what you would do if you had a Law to shew for what you do, as they had, seeing you act thus without Law; and have no Law to shew for it, though you do it in the Name of the Lord Protector of England, and so make him the Protector of Tyranny and Oppression and Cruelty, as ever was heard of in any Age, which is contrary to his own Proclamations; and I do believe he would be ashamed to own his Name to such Practices; for if he should, he makes his own Promises Vows, and Proclamations of none Effect: And this the Lord God of Heaven and Earth hath suffered long, but his Sword is drawn and furbished, to cut you down all you high Oaks & tall Cedars, who oppress the little Shrubs, and him too whom you call Lord Protector, if he wink at, and suffer such Things to be done in his Name, contrary to the Name which he hath taken upon him; and you shall know, that there is a∣nother Lord Protector, to whom all Glory Ho∣nour, Dominion and Thanks belong, whose dread∣ful Hand you shall feel, whom your Tongues shall
confess to be Just, though with weeping and wail∣ing and gnashing of Teeth, because you have rob∣bed him of his Glory and Honour, and taken it un∣to your selves: And though in the Old Covenant they bowed to one another, yet when Christ, the New Covenant came, who is the End of the Old, he spake unto his Disciples, and said, The Hea∣then exercise Dominion and Lordship one over another, but it shall not be so amongst you, but he that will be the greatest shall be the least,Mark 10. 42. for one is your Master. Now here is the New Covenant, out of which you are found, amongst the Heathen, Lording over your Fellow-Creatures by your corrupt Wills; and yet you dare take upon you the Name of Ju∣stice, and the Name of Christians, whenas again Christ said unto your Fore-fathers, How can you be∣lieve that receive Honour one of another:John 5. 44. Here you are found in the same Generation, in the Unbe∣lief, out of the Faith, and so No Christians; for Christ saith, I receive not Honour of Man, but you do,Ver. 41. and Imprison Men, and persecute them if they do not give it you, and so are not like Christ, there∣fore no Christians, but Heathens; for Christians are like Christ, being made Partakers of his own Divine Na∣ture;2 Pet. 1. 4. and let all that profess Christ walk as he walk∣ed; bu this you do not: Therefore be ashamed of your Profession, who so exceed the Heathen in Presumption, seeking Honour to your selves, by Tyranny and Persecution,Rev. 13. Exercising the Power of the Beast, which all the World wonders after and wor∣ships, but those who have their Names written in the
Book of Life, whom you persecute, because they cannot bow to now worship the Image of the Beast, which you uphold; and so you fulfil the Prophecy of John, where it is said, The Kings of the Earth shall give their Power unto the Beast, and they shall make War with the Lamb:Rev. 19. So you, as Kings on the Earth, over your Fellow Creatures, rule by the Power and Authority of the Beast, and make War with the Lamb, to exalt your selves in his Throne; but the Lamb shall overcome, and the Beast and the false Prophet that had deceived the Nations; and all that bear his Mark,Rev. 17. & worship his Image, into the Lake shall be cast, even Tophet which was prepared of Old for the Kings of the Earth: But here is the Patience of the Saints; here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus, which is without Respect of Persons; but tremble you Careless Ones, that are at Ease, your Plagues shall come upon you in one Day, when you are not aware, who are kil∣ling and persecuting the Just and Innocent, under Pretence of Contemning Authority, because they cannot worship the Image of the Beast; and thus you rule by the Power and Authority of the Beast, winking at Vice, Deceit and Iniquity, strength∣ning the Hands of the Evil-doers, and persecute the Righteous, and tread Truth under Foot; and thus you bear the Sword in vain: And here is the Abomination that stands in the Holy Place, where it ougth not, Injustice set in Justice's Place; for I, deny any Thing to be Justice, or done by the
Authority of God, but what is according to the Law of God, which respects no Man's Person, but convinceth them to be Transgressors that do; and Justice saith, I receive not Honour of Men: Now here you have gotten the Name, but want the Nature, and so know not the Honour that be∣longs to Justice, but threaten, persecute and im∣prison Men, that come before you, and do not ho∣nour you with Cap and Knee, before they receive Justice from you; and how can they honour Justice before they see it? but instead of doing them Justice, you do them Injustice, and exercise the Power of the Beast upon them; but will not the Lord be avenged on such a People as this? yea, He is coming with Ten Thousand of his Angels to ren∣der Vengeance upon the Head of the Wicked and Disobe∣dient; For Truth and Justice now is risen and a∣rising, and it is you that are not subject thereun∣to, but stand in your own Wills to oppose it, and are setting up and exalting your selves, even in∣to the Throne of God; but remember Lucifer, for it is he that is exalted in you; and though you be exalted as high as the Heavens, and set your Nests among the Stars, thence will the Lord fetch you down, and cast you into Hell, as he did Luci∣fer, Dives and Haman, and the rest of your Fore∣fathers, ye proud Ones: Therefore Repent, and let the Oppressed go free, lest the Lord shorten your Dayes, and cut you off amongst the Wick∣ed with the Blast of his Mouth; for now you are
warned in your Life Time, and left without Ex∣cuse, by a Servant and Messenger of the Lord, whom he hath sent to give Warning before his Judgment. JAMES PARNEL. He that seeks himself and his own Honour, shall not prosper, though he rule in his Will for a Time; but him that honours God, him will God honour.
To all You Magistrates, Rulers AND OFFICERS, Who Call Men to SWEAR, and Imprison them if they will not. You are the Oppressors of Tender Consci∣ences, and do not allow Liberty of Con∣science, and so break Your own; and also You have a Law against Swearers, & yet by Your Law seek to compel men to swear: Oh! blush, and be ashamed of your Profession, who thus Un∣justly act: How dare You call Christ Your Lord and Master, and do not the things that he saith? for, he commands, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by the Head, because you cannot make one Hair white or black, nor by any other thing; but let your Yea be Yea, and Nay, Nay; for what is more, is Evil: And so here You run from the Doctrine of Christ, and hinder others, who both swear your selves, and would compel others, by Fining of them and Imprisoning of them; and thus You run into the Evil, and would have all
with You in the Snares of the Devil: And now, if you do run unto the Scripture to maintain Swearing, and say, They swore in the Time of the Law: I Answer, Christ Jesus, who is the End of the Law, faith, Swear not at all; and if you do alledge, That Moses, a Servant of God, swore; I Answer, But Christ Jesus, the Son of God, saith, Swear not at all; hear him: And if you do alledge, That David, a Man of God, swore; I Answer, But this is the Son of God, and David called him Lord, who saith, Swear not at all; him You are to hear: And if You do alledge, That Saul swore in the War; I Answer, He, who comes to End all War and Controversie, who brings Peace and Good-will towards Men, he saith, Swear not at all, who is the Son of God; hear him: And if You do alledge, They swore in the Time of the Prophets; I Answer, Christ Jesus, the Fulfilling and End of the Prophets, saith, Swear not at all: And if You do alledge, That they Swore in the Old Covenant; I Answer, Christ Jesus, the New and Everlasting Covenant, saith, Swear not at all; but let your Yea be Yea, and Nay be Nay; for what is more; and here You are shut out of the New Covenant, in the E∣vil, and so in the Kingdom of the Devil; for, in the New Covenant no Swearer can come: And if you do alledge that Scripture where the Apostle said, An Oath for Confirmation amongst Men, to them it was the End of all Strife; I Answer, He brought this as a Comparison confirming the Covenant
that God had made, and confirmed it with an Oath; but the Apostle brought it not to main∣tain Swearing or Oathes; but he spoak it con∣cerning Jesus Christ, the Oath of God, which is the End of all Oathes, Controversie and Strife, who saith, Swear not at all: And in the Old Co∣venant they did use Oaths for the End of Strife and Controversie, and to Confirm things amongst them; so the Apostle brought that then as a Comparison; but Jesus Christ, the New Cove∣nant, which was confirmed by an Oath, and now is the End of all Oaths, and Controversies and Strife, who now saith, Swear not at all: The A∣postle he declared against Strife and Controversie, and he declared against Swearing; for, the Apo∣stle James saith, Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not at all; neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, nor any other Oath; but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay, lest you fall into Condemnati∣on: And here You are in the Condemnation, and out of the New Covenant, and draw from the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostle, who are in the Oaths and Swearing, and compel others to swear▪ Therefore the greater will be Your Con∣demnation. And if You do alledge that Scrip∣ture, where the Apostle said, Be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake; I Answer, Obey God rather then Man for the Lord's sake, who saith, Swear not at all; and Why call you him Lord, and do not the things which he saith? There∣fore,
away with Your Profession of Christ, and of Faith in him, and are so Faithless as to depart from his Doctrine, and compel others to follow You; hence You are found Traytors to him, and Hypocrites, whom the Lord will judge, with your Hypocritical Feigned Faith, who cannot be∣lieve one another without Swearing, and so think all like your selves; but as many as believed, were of one Heart and Soul, which was the End of all Strife and Controversie; and they made No Swearing amongst them, who were in the Faith. Therefore, all You Magistrates, Rulers and of∣ficers, who are Swearing, and Compelling men to Swear, now read your selves by the Light of Christ, which searcheth Your Consciences, and with it judge your selves; and Fear the Lord God, and Tremble before him, who do so oppose his Commands, and do Despight against the Spirit of Grace; for, no Ignorance in this thing can you plead: For, it is plain by the Light of God in your Consciences, that you do Evil; there∣fore I charge You in the Presence of the Living God, To take heed of Oppressing any Tender Consciences, or Forcing any Tender Conscien∣ces, or Fining them, or Imprisoning them for Obeying God rather then Your Wills; for, if you do, to be sure the Plagues and Woes of God shall come upon you, and great shall be your Con∣demnation.
And if you ask, How shall you do to End Contro∣versie, and to Confirm a Truth? I Answer, They that for Conscience sake dare not Swear, they for Conscience sake dare not Lye, but speak the Truth so far as they do know, with∣out Hypocrisie; for, that that judgeth Swearing, that also judgeth Lying, Hypocrise and Deceit; and so by one Truth its confirmed: And as for those that are without the Fear of God, who scruple not at Swearing, they scruple not at Ly∣ing; for they that will tell a Lye in such a Case, will also Swear and Lye: Therefore, whom you find thus Deceitful, you may also exercise the Law upon them as upon False Swearers, without Winking at them; and that will bring them into Awe and Fear of the Law, though they be out of the Fear of God; and for this End was the outward Law ordained: And thus you will be a Terror to the Evil-doers, and a Praise to them that do Well; for, if all did Well, what needs there a Law? And so, as you stand here in all things which be∣long to your Places, discharging your Conscien∣ces in Equity and Justice, without Partiality, and then will you do that which is wholsom and good in the Sight of God, and he will bless your Proceedings; and thus you will be worthy of double Honour, not with the Flattering Titles of Men, or Respect to your Persons, in Admiration, because of Advantage; but you will witness the True Nobility, and deny all Flattery or Deceit,
but your Honour will be of God; for, Them that Honour God, them will God Honour; if you stand, I say, in that Counsel of God, out of your own Wills, Ruling for God, and not for your selves, but for the Punishing of the Wicked, and the cleansing the Land of Evil doers, that God may be Honoured by your Faith, and Faithful, and Just and Equal Proceedings. And so, I rest a Friend to the Tender Consciences, and am subject to all Wholsom and Good Laws & Ordinances of Man for the Lord's sake, and do honour all such Ma∣gistrates in my Heart, who observe this Govern∣ment without Flattery or Hypocrisie; but I find some so worthy in the Nation, in whom there is no Hatred, and the Unjust strive to put them out, and so the and must needs abound with Corruption and Evil, Deceit and Hypocri∣sie, and all Ungodliness, as it doth, seeing these that are in Offices, who ought to suppress those things, do countenance those things, and lay their Law upon the Innocent and Righteous; and so, as much as in them lieth, to exalt Iniquity, and beat down and tread Truth under Foot: But the God of Truth is arisen with a Mighty and a Strong Arm, which they are not able to overcome; but the more they stir, the more it conquers, who is come with a Fan in his Hand, and will thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather his Wheat into his Garner, and burn up the Chaff with Unquenchable Fire; and thus will he sweep away the Seed of Evil-Doers, and
Refuge of them with the Beesom of Destru∣ction; and so will he cleanse the Land of Evil-doers, and make all you Careless Ones, that are at Ease in your Lusts, all you Corrupt Unjust Judges, Rulers and Officer, who are Partial in your Judgments, and receive Gifts in your Hands, and regard not the Cause of the Just; your Cala∣mity is coming on, and your Destruction is nigh at hand; and God is a Just God, and will not ac∣quit the Wicked. Now you are Warned, and a Servant of the Lord Discharged, by whom you are Warned, whom he hath sent to sound his Trumpet in Eng∣land, which goeth before his Judgments, who am known to the World James Parnel. THE END.
