R1204A 99832188 36660
A Line of Time REVEALED. There is a God in Heaven that Re∣vealeth Secrets, Dan. 2.28. and Psal. 25.14. By Henry Revit a Lover of Sion, Living at the Che∣quer in Bow-Lane with Mr. Barnes. LONDON, Printed for the Authour, 1699:
H. R.'s Line of Time, Revea∣led to him by the Revealer of Secrets. There is a God in Heaven that Revealeth Secrets. Dan. 2.28. and Psa. 25.14. 1. FRom the Ejection of Adam out of Paradice, to the Birth-day of Christ, 4000 Years, which ended at Day-break, or Light, Sept. 12. old Stile; The day after the Aequinox of Autumn. 2. From thence to the begin∣ning of the Time; Times, and the dividing of Time, which was the duration of the Reign of the Man of Sin; 437 Years. 3. The Time of his Kingdom;
Or of the Witnesses Sack-cloth Prophecy: 1260 Days Propheti∣call; which makes 1697 Years. Then his Limited Right to hold & possess the Riches and Glory he had done, Ended: and All became the Ten Hornes. Reve: 17.16. Now he is doing his Mysterious and last Work 4. The Time of preparation for the New Jerusalem from thence just 30. Years, which will make 17.27 ended at the time before named. 5. The binding of Satan; & the Time of the New Jerusalem for her great Amplitude and Glory 1000 Years: which are Synchro∣nall; And make 2727 Years. 6. The short space of Satans liberty after will be 272 Years; &
neither more, nor less. And which will make 1999. Years. 7. Then at Day-break or light, Sept: 12. old Stile; will enter the Year of the World. 7000. An: D. 3000. here the line of Time ends. And yet neither the Day, nor Hour of Gods Judging and Burn∣ing the World is known hereby. N. B. 1. By this Line of Time, we may understand the Vision of Dan. And the Revelations, (in good part.) 2. By it we may understand, what the Romish Traditions are. 3. By this we may see what is the true sense of the Evening. And the Morning, before the Sun Rise, be∣ing
the fourth, or the fifth day. Soli Deo laus & gloria. Deus in Monte Videbitur. The Second part, or a Prophecy of what the great God will do here∣after, in this time of preparation or 28 Years yet to come, account∣ing from the Year of our Lord 1697. 1. He will bring into the Truth Such as have been Mislead & are deceived. 2. If we will now doe our duty, we shall see Trading Good, Silver and Gold, plentifull, &c. Bliss, Peace, and prosperity, for many Generations: And the blessings of King David, and Solomon will be on the Kings of New Sion: And also
the Crown and Miter will (D. D.) be a great blessing to the whole Church of Christ. 3. God will make Tyrants, and Tyrannical Cities, and Nations know his power, and hand, for his Saints Witnesses, and Martyrs sake. 4. Kings must be Nursing Fa∣thers, and Queens Nursing Mo∣thers all the World over. 5. The Ten Hornes must, and will Take away the power, and Do∣minion of the Man of Sin; and the Pseudoprophetess, & so fulfil Rev. 17.16. 6. Jews, and Gentiles will Em∣brace the Gospel: And the Jews must return to their own Land.
H. R.'s Prayer for the persecuted Wit∣nesses and Members of Christ, in France & other places. O Most Mercifull and Omnipotent Lord God, Remember thy poor, and persecuted Witnesses beyond the Seas: Repair the Ruins and Desolations which their Enemies have made amongest them. Reduce such as are bani∣shed, Enlarge those that are Imprisoned; Re∣lieve such as are Impoverished: Strengthen with might in the inward Man, such as are now Martyrs for Religion, as thou O Lord hast thy Martyrs of Old. Comfort all such as are Comfortless, and yet do Endure the same for Conscience sake; Restrain the fury of their cruel Enemies; And suffer them not to abuse thy Saints and Witnesses as they have bar∣barously done, for thy Great Name Sake, and for thy promises Sake, in and through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen, Amen. FINIS.
