R1640 99831146 35608
Robin HGarlan▪ Containing his Merry Exploits, and the several Fights which he, Little John, and Will. Scarlet had, upon several occasions. Some of them never before Printed. Entred according to Order.
NTENTS. ods progress to Nottingham,  he slew fifteen Forresters. ood newly revived, or his meeting  with his Cousin Scarlet. in Hood & the jolly Pinder of Wake▪ shewing how he fought with Rob. Hood, , and Iohn, a long Summers day. obin Hood and the Bishop, shewing how  robbed him, and made him sing Mass. Robin Hood and the Butcher, shewing how he robbed the Sherriff of Nottingham. Robin Hoods▪ rescuing Will Stutly from the Sheriff, which was going to hang him. Robin Hood and the Begger, shewing how he rescued three brethren that were going to be hanged for stealing Deer. Robin Hood and Queen Ratherine. Robin Hood and the Tanner, shewing how the Tanner was kin to little Iohn. A famous battel between Robin Hood and a Curtal Fryer, neer Fountain-Dale. Robin Hoods preferment, shewing how he took a Ship at Sea with 12000 pound in her▪ Robin Hood and the Shepherd, shewing how the Shepherd beat him and little Iohn. Robin Hoods Golden prize, shewing how he robb'd two Priests of five hundred pound. Robin Hoods Chase, or a merry progress between him and King Henry. Little Iohn and the Four Beggers. Robin Hoods Delight.
ROBIN HOOD'S Garland. Robin Hood's Progress to Nottingham, where he slew Fifteen Forresters. To the Tune of, Bold Robin Hood. RObin Hood he was a tall young-man, derry derry down, And fifteen Winters old, And Robin Hood he was a proper young-man Of courage stout and bold: hey down, derry derry down. Robin hood he would unto fair Nottingham, derry derry down, With the General for to dine, There was he aware of fifteen Forresters, And a drinking Beer, Ale, and Wine: hey down, derry, derry, down. What news? what news? said bold Rob. Hood, derry, derry, down, What news fain wouldst thou know? Our King hath povided a Shooting match, And i'm ready with my Bow: hey down, &c. We hold it in scorn, then said the Forresters, derry derry down,
That ever a Boy so young, Should bear a Bow before our King, That's not able to draw one string: hey down, &c. I'le hold you 20 mark, siad bold Robin Hood, derry derry down, By the leave of our Lady, That i'le hit a Mark a hundred Rod, And i'le cause a Hart to dye: hey down, &c. We'l hold you 20 Mark, then said the Forre∣sters, derry derry down, By the leave of our Lady, Thou hit'st not the Mark an hundred Rod, Nor causest an Hart to dye: hey down, &c. Robin Hood he bent up a Noble Bow, derry derry down, And a Broad Arrow he let flye, He hit the Mark an hundred Rod, And he caused an Hart to dye: hey down, &c. Some said he brake Ribs one or two, derry derry down, And some said he brake three, The Arrow in the Hart would not abide, But it glanced in two or three: hey down, derry, derry, down.
The Hart did skip, and the Hart did leap, derry, derry down, And the Hart lay on the ground, The Wager is mine, said bold Robin Hood, If it were for a thousand pound: hey down, derry, derry, down. The Wager's none of thine, then said the Forresters, derry, derry, down, Although thou be'st in haste, Take up thy Bow and get thee hence, Lest we thy sides do baste: hey down, &c. Robin Hood he took up his Noble Bow, derry, derry, down, And his Broad Arrows all amain, And Robin he laught and began to smile, As he went over the plain: hey down, &c. Then Robin Hood he bent his Noble Bow, derry, derry, down, And his Broad Arrows he let flye, Till fourteen of these fifteen Forresters Vpon the ground did lye: hey down, &c. He that did this quarrel first begin, derry, derry, down, Went tripping over the Plain,
But Robin Hood he bent his Noble Bow, And he fetcht him back again: hey down, &c. You said I was no archer, said bold Ro. hood, derry derry down, But say so now again, With that he sent another arrow, Which split his head in twain: hey down, &c. You have found me an archer, said Ro. Hood▪ derry derry down, Which will make your Wives for to wring, And wish that you had never spoke the word, That I could not draw one string: hey down, &c. The People that lived in fair Nottingham, derry derry down, Came running out amain, Supposing to have taken bold Robin hood, With the Forresters that were slain: hey down, &c. Some lost Legs, and some lost arms, derry derry down, And some did lose their blood, But Robin hood he took up his Noble Bow And is gone to the merry green-wood: hey down, &c.
They carried these forresters to fair Notting∣ham, derry derry down, As many there did know, They dig'd them Graves in their Church∣yard, And they buried them all on a row: hey down, derry derry down. Robin Hood newly Revived: Or, His Meeting and Fighting with his Cousin Scarlet. To a delightful new Tune. COme listen a while you Gentlemen all, with a hey down down a down down, That are in this Bower within: for a story of gailant Robin Hood, I purpose now to begin. What time of the day, qd. Robin hood then, with a hey, &c. Quoth little John, 'tis in the prime, why then we will to the green-wood gang, For we have no Victuals to dine. As Robin hood walkt the Forrest along, with a hey, &c. It was in the midst of the day, there was he ware of a deft young-man, As ever walkt on the way. His Doublet it was of silk, he said, with a hey, &c.
His Stockings like Scarlet shone, and he walkt on along the way, To Robin Hood then unknown. A Herd of Deer was in the Bend, with a hey, &c. All feeding before his face, now the best of you i'le have for my Dinner, And that in a little space. Now the Stranger made no mickle ado, with a hey, &c. But he bends and a right good Bow, and the best Buck in the Herd he slew, Forty yards him full fro. Well shot, well shot, quoth Robin hood then, with a hey, &c. That shot it was in time, and if thou wilt accept of the place, Thou shalt be a bold Yeoman of mine. Go play the Chiven, the Stranger said, with a hey, &c. Make haste and quickly go, or with my fist, be sure of this, I'le give thee buffets store. Thou hadst not best buffet me, qd. Robin hood with a hey, &c.
For although I am forlorn, yet I have those will take my part, If I but blow my Horn. Thou wast not best wind thy horn the stranger said, with a hey, &c. Beest thou never so much in haste, for I can draw a good broad Sword, And quickly cut the blast. Then Robin hood he bent a very good Bow, with a hey, &c. To shoot, and that he would fain, the stranger he bent a very good Bow, To shoot at bold Robin again. O hold thy hand, hold thy hand, qd. Ro. hood, with a hey, &c. To shoot it would be in vain, for if we should shoot the one at the other, The one of us must be slain. But let's take our swords and our broad Buck∣lers, hey down, &c. And gang under yonder Tree, as I hope to be sav'd, the stranger he said, One foot I will not flee. Then Robin hood lent the stranger a blow, with a hey, &c. Most scar'd him out of his wit, thou never felt blow, the stranger he said, That shall be better quit.
The stranger he drew out a good broad sword, with a hey, &c. And hit Robin on the crown, that from every hair of bold Robins head, The blood ran trickling down. God a mercy good fellow, qd. Rob. hood then, with a hey, &c. And for this thou hast done, tell me good fellow what thou art, Tell me where thou dost woon. The stranger then answered bold Rob. hood, with a hey, &c. I'le tell thee where I did dwell, in Maxfield was I bred and born, My name is young Gamwel. For killing of my Fathers Steward, with a hey, &c. I am fore'd to this English Wood, and for to seek an Vncle of mine, Some call him Robin hood. But art thou a Cousin of Robin hoods then? with a hey, &c. The sooner we should have done, as I hope to be sav'd, the stranger then said, I am his own Sisters Son.
But Lord what a kissing and courting was there, with a hoy, &c. When these two Cousins did greet, and they went all that Summers day, And little Iohn did meet. But when they met with little Iohn, with a hey, &c. He there unto him did say, O Master where have you been, You have tarried so long away? I met with a stranger, qd. Robin hood then, with a hey, &c. Full sore he hath beaten me, then i'le have about with him, qd. little Iohn, And try if he can beat me. Oh no, oh no, quoth Robin hood then, with a hey, &c. Little Iohn it may not be so: for he's my own dear Sisters Son, And Cousins I have no mo. But he shall be a bold Yeoman of mine, with a hey, &c. My chief man next to thee: and I Robin hood, and thou little Iohn, And Scarlet he shall be.
And we'l be three of the bravest Out-laws, with a hey, &c. That is in the North-Country, if thou wilt have any more of bold Ro. hood In the second part it will be. Then bold Robin hood to the North he would go, with a hey, &c. With valour and mickle might, with Sword by his side, which oft had been try'd, To fight and recover his right. The first that he met was a bonny bold Scot, with a hey, &c. His servant he said he would be, no, quoth Robin hood, it cannot be good, For thou wilt prove false unto me. Thou hast not been true to Sire nor Cuz, with a hey, &c. Nay, marry the Scot he said, as true as your heart, i'le never part, Gude Master be not afraid. Then Robin hood turn'd his face to the East, with a hey, &c. Fight on my merry men stout, our case is good, qd. brave Robin hood, And we shall not be beaten out.
The Battel grows hot on every side, with a hey, &c. The Scothman made great moan, qd. Jocky, gude faith they fight on each side Would I were with my Wife Joan. The Enemy compast brave Robin about, with a hey, &c. 'Tis long e're the Battel ends, there's neither will yield, nor give up the field, For both are supply'd with friends. This song it was made in Robin hoods days, with a hey, &c. Let's pray unto jove above, to give us true peace, that mischief may cease And War may give place unto love. Robin Hood and the jolly Pinder of Wake-field, shewing how he fought with Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John, a long Summers day. To a Northern Tune. IN Wakefield there lives a jolly Pinder, in Wakefield all on a Green, in Wakefield all on a Green, There's neither Knight nor Squire, said the Pinder, nor Barron that is so bold, nor Barron that is so bold.
Dare make a trespass to the town of Wake∣field, but his Pledge goes to the Pinfold, but his Pledge goes to the Pinfold. All this beheard three witty young-men, 'twas Robin Hood, Scarlet, and Iohn, &c. With that they spyed the jolly Pinder, as he sat under a Thorn, &c. Now turn again, turn again, said the Pinder, for a wrong way have you gone, &c. For you have forsaken the Kings High-way, and made a path over the Corn, &c. O that were great shame, said jolly Robin, we being three, and thou but one, &c. The Pinder leapt back then thirty good foot, 'twas thirty good foot and one, &c. He leaned his back fast unto a Thorn, and his foot against a Stone, &c. And there he fought a long Summers day, and a Summers day so long, &c. Till their Swords on their broad bucklers, were broken fast unto their hands, &c. Hold thy hand, hold thy hand (said Rob. hood) and my merry men every one, &c. For this is one of the best Pinders that ever I try'd with sword, &c.
And wilt thou forsake the Pinder his craft, and live in green-wood with me, &c. At Michaelmas next my Covenant comes out when every man gathers his fee, &c. Ile take my blew blade in my hand, and plod to the green-wood with thee, &c. Hast either meat or drink, said Robin hood, for my meery men and me, &c. I have both bread and beef, said the Pinder, and good Ale of the best, &c. And that's meat good enough, said Ro. hood, for such unbidden guest, &c. O wilt thou forsake the Pinder his craft, and go to the green-wood with me, &c. Thou shalt have a Livery twice in the year, the one green, the other brown, &c. If Michaelmas day were once come and gone, and my Master had paid me my fee, &c. Then would I et as little by him, as my Master doth by me, as my Master doth by me.
Robin Hood and the Bishop Shewing how Robin Hood went to an Old Womans house, and changed Cloaths with her to scape from the Bishop, and how he rob'd the Bishop of all his Gold, and made him sing a Mass. To the Tune of, Robin Hood and the Stranger. COme Gentlemen all, and listen a while, with a hey down down an a down, And a Story i'le to you unfold; i'le tell you how Robin Hood serv'd the Bishop, When he rob'd him of his Gold. As it fell out on a Sun shining day, with a hey, &c. When Phoebus was in his prime, then Robin Hood, that cher good, In mirth would spend some time. As he walked the Forrest along, with a hey, ▪c. Some pastime for to spy, there was he aware of a proud Bishop, And all his company. O what shall I do, said Robin hood then? with a hey, &c. If the Bishop he doth take me,
no mercy he'l show, unto me I know. Then Robin was stout, and turn'd him about, with a hey, &c. And a little house there he did spy, And to an old Wife to save his life, He loud began to cry. Why who art thou, said the old Woman, with a hey, &c. Come tell it to me for good, I am an Out-law, as many do know, My name it is Robin Hood. And yonder's the Bishop and all his Men, with a hey, &c. And if that I taken be, Then day and night, he'l work me spight, And hanged I shall be. If thou be Robin Hood, said the old Wife, with a hey, &c. As thou dost seem to be, I'le for thee provide, and thee I will hide From the Bishop and his Company. For I well remember on Saturday-night, with a hey, &c.
Thou bought me both shooes and hose, Therefore i'le provide, thy person to hide, and keep thee from thy foes. Then give me soon thy Coat of Gray, with a hey, &c. And take thou my Mantle of Green, Thy Spindle and Twine, unto me resign, and take thou my Arrows so keen. And when that Robin hood was so array'd, with a hey, &c. He went straight to his company, With his Spindle and Twine, he oft loo behin for the Bishop and his company. O who is yonder, quoth little Iohn, with a hey, &c. That now comes over the Lee, An Arrow I will at her let flye, so like an old Witch looks she. O hold thy hand, hold thy hand, said Rob the with a hey, &c. And shoot not thy Arrows so keen, I am Robin hood, thy Master good, and quickly it shall be seen. The Bishop he came to the old Womans hou with a hey, &c.
And he called with furious mood, Come let me soon see, and bring unto me that traytor Robin Hood. The old woman he set on a milk-white steed, with a hey, &c. Himself on a Dapple Gray, And for joy he had got Robin Hood, he went laughing all the way. But as they were riding the Forrest along, with a hey, &c. The Bishop he chanced to see, A hundred brae Bow-men bold, stand under the Green-wood-tree. O who is yonder? the Bishop he said, with a hey, &c. That's ranging within yonder wood▪ Marry, says the old woman, I think it to be, a Man called Robin Hood. Why who art thou, the Bishop he said? with a hey, &c. Which I have here with me, Why I am an old Woman, thou Cuckoldg Bishop▪ lift up my Leg and see. Then woe to me, the Bishop he said, with a hey, &c.
That ever I saw this day: He turn'd him about, ut Robin hood so stout call'd to him and bid him stay. Then Robin took hold of the Bishops horse, with a hey, &c. And ty'd him fast to a tree, Then Little Iohn sised his Master upon, for joy of that company. Robin Hood took his Mantle from's back, with a hey, &c. And spread it upon the ground. And out of the Bishops Portmantle, he soon told five hundred pound. So now et him go, said Robin Hood, with a hey, &c. Said little Iohn that may not e; For I vow and prote, he shall sing as a Mass before that he go from me. Then Robin Hood took the Bishop by the hand with a hey, &c. And bound him fast to a tree, And made him sing a Mass God-wot, him and his Yeoman-dree. And then they brought him through the wood, with a hey, &c.
And set him on his Dapple Gray, And gave the tayl within his hand, and bid him for Robin Hood pray. Robin Hood and the Butcher. Shewing how he robbed the Sherriff of Not∣tingham. Tune of, Robin Hood and the Beggar. COme all ye brave gallants, & listen a while with a hey down, down, an a down, that are in this Bower within, For of Robin Hood, that Archer good, a Song I intend to sing. Vpon a time it chanced so, with a hey, &c. bold Robin in the Forrest did spy, A jolly Butcher, with a bonny fine Mare, with his flesh to the Market did hye. Good morrow, good fellow, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. what food hast, tell unto me, And thy trade to me tell, and where thou dost dwest, for I like well thy company. The Butcher he answered jolly Robin, with a hey, &c.
no matter where I dwell, For a Butcher I am, and to Nottingham, I am going my flesh to sell. What's the price of thy flesh, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. come tell it soon unto me, And the price of my Mare, be she never so dear for a Butcher fain would I be. The price of my flesh, the Butcher reply'd, with a hey, &c. I soon will tell unto thee, With my bonny Mare, & they are not dear, four Mark thou must give unto me. Four Mark I will give thee, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. four Mark it shall be thy Fee, Thy money come count, and let me mount, for a Butcher I fain would be. Now Robin he is to Nottingham gone, with a hey, &c. his Butchers trade for to begin, With a good intent, to the Sheriff he went, and there he took up his Inn. When other Butchers did open their shop,
with a hey, &c. bold Robin he then begun; But how for to sell, he knew not well, for a butcher he was but young. When other butchers no meat could sell, with a hey, &c. Robin got both Gold and Fee, For he sold more meat for one Penny, than others could do for three. But when he sold his Meat so fast, with a hey, &c. no butcher by him could thrive, For he sold more meat for one penny, than others could do for five. Which made the butchers of Nottingham, with a hey, &c. to study as they did stand, Saying, surely he was some Prodigal, that had sold his Fathers Land. The butchers they stepped to jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. acquainted with him for to be, Come brother, one said, we be all of one trade▪ come will you go dine with me?
Accurst of his heart, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. That a Butcher will deny: I will go with you my Brethren true, and as fast as I can hye. But when to the Sheriffs house they came, with a hey, &c. to Dinner they hyed apace, And Robin he the man must be, before them all to say Grace. Pray God bless us all, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. and our Meat within this place, A cup of Sack so good, will nourish our blood, and so I end my Grace. Come fill us more Wine, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. let us be merry while we do stay, For Wine and good chear, be it never so dear I vow I the reckoning will pay. Come Brothers be merry, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. let us drink and never give o're, For the shot I will pay, e're I go my way, if it cost me five pound or more.
This is a mad blade, the Butchers then said, with a hey, &c. says the Sherriff, he is some Prodigal, That some Land has sold, for silver and gold, and now he doth mean to spend all. Hast thou any horn'd Beasts, the Sheriff then said, with a hey, &c. good fellow, to sell unto me: Yes that I have, good Master Sheriff, I have hundreds two or three. A hundred Akers of good free Land, with a hey, &c. if you please it to see, And i'le make you as good assurance of it as ever my Father made me. The Sheriff he sadled a good Palfrey, with a hey, &c. And with three hundred pound in Gold, Away he went with bold Robin Hood, his horned-beasts to behold. Away then the Sheriff and Robin did rids, with a hey, &c. to the Forrest of merry Sherwood, Then the Sheriff did say, God bless us this day, from a man they call Robin Hood.
But when that a little further they came, with a hey, &c. bold Robin he chanced to spy, A hundred Head of good Red Deer, come tripping the Sheriff full nigh. How like you my Horn'd-beasts, good Master Sheriff, with a hey, &c. they be fat and fair for to see, I tell thee good fellow, I would I were gone, for I like not thy company. Then Robin he set his Horn to his mouth, with a hey, &c. and blew but blasts three, Then quickly anon, there came little Iohn, and all his company. What is your will master, said Little Iohn, with a hey, &c. I pray you come tell it to me, I have brought hither the Sheriff of Notting∣ham. this day to dine with thee. He is welcome to me, then said little Iohn, with a hey, &c. I hope he will honestly pay; I know he has gold, if it were but well told, will serve us to drink a whole day.
Then Robin took his mantle from his back, with a hey, &c. and laid it upon the ground: And out of the Sheriffs Portmantle, he told three hundred pound. Then Robin brought him thorow the wood, with a hey down down an a down, and set him on his dapple grey: O have me commended to your wife at home, so Robin went laughing away. Robin Hood his rescuing Will Stutly from the Sheriff and his Men, who had taken him Prisoner, and were going to hang him. To the Tune of, Robin Hood and Queen Katherine. WHen Robin hood in the green wood liv'd, derry derry down, Vnder the green-wood-tree; Tydings there came to him with speed, Tydings for certainty, hey down, derry derry down. That Will Sutly surprized was, derry derry down, And eke in Prison lay, Three Varlets that the Sheriff had hired,
Did likely him betray. I, and to morrow hang'd must be, derry derry down, To morrow as soon as it is day, But before they could this victory get, Two of them did Stutly slay. When Robin Hood he heard this News, derry derry down, Lord he was grieved sore, I and unto his merry men said, (Who altogether swore) That Will Stutly should rescued be, derry, derry, down, And be brought safe again, Or else should many a gallant wight For his sake there he slain. He cloathed himself in Scarlet then, derry, derry, down, His men were all in green, A fairer shew throughout the World, In no part could be seen. Good Lord it was a gallant sight, derry derry down, To see them all on a row,
With every man a good broad Sword, And eke a good Yew Bow. Forth of the green-wood are they gone, derry derry down, Yea all couragiously, Resolving to bring Stutly home, Or every man to dye. And when they came the Castle neer, derry derry down, Whereas Will Stutly lay: I hold it good, says Robin Hood, We here in ambush stay. And send one forth some news to hear, derry derry down, To yonder Palmer fair, That stands under the Castle-wall, Some news he may declare. With that steps forth a brave young-man, derry derry down, Which was of courage bold, Thus he did to the old man say, I pray thee Palmer old. Tell me if that thou rightly en, derry derry down,
When must Will Stutly dye? Who is one of bold Robin hoods men, And here doth Prisoner lye. Alas, alas, the Palmer said, derry derry down, And for ever woe is me, Will Stutly hanged must be this day, On yonder Gallows-tree. O had his noble Master known, derry derry down, He would some succour send, A few of his bold Yeomandree, Full soon would fetch him hence. I that is true the Young-man said, derry derry down, I that is true, said he, Or if they were neer to this place, They soon would set him free. But fare thou well thou good old man, derry derry down▪ Farewel, and thanks to thee: If Stutly hanged be this day, Reveng'd his death will be. He was no sooner from the Palmer gone,
derry derry down, But the Gates was opened wide, And out of the Castle Will Stutly came, Guarded on every side. When he was forth of the Castle come, derry derry down, And saw no help was nigh, Thus he did say unto the Sheriff, Thus he said gallantly. Now seeing that I needs must dye, derry derry down, Grant me one boon, says he, For my noble Master ne'r had Man That yet was hang'd on the tree. Give me a Sword all in my hand, derry derry down, And let me be unbound: And with thee and thy men i'le fight, Vntil I lye dead on the ground. But his desire he would not grant, derry derry down, His wishes were in vain, For the Sheriff had sworn he hang'd should be And not by the Sword be slain.
Do but unbind my hands he says, derry derry down, I will no weapons crave, And if I hanged be this day, Damnation let me have. O no, O no, the Sheriff he said, derry derry down, Thou shalt on the Gallows dye: I, and so shall thy Master too, If ever in me it lye. O dastard Coward Stutly cries, derry derry down, Thou faint-hearted Peasant slave, If ever my Master do thee meet, Thou shalt thy payment have. My noble Master thee doth scorn, derry derry down, And all thy owardly crew, Such silly imps unable are, Bold Robin to subdue. But when he was to the Gallows come, derry derry down, And ready to bid adieu: Out of a Bush leaps Little John, And steps Will Stutly too.
I pray thee Will before thou dye, derry derry down, Of thy dear friends take leave, I needs must borrow him a while, How say you Master Sheriff? Now as I live the Sheriff he said, derry derry down, That Varlet well I know, Some sturdy Rebel is that same, Therefore let him not go. With that Little John so hastily, derry derry down, Away cut Stutly's bands, And from one of the Sheriff his men, A sword twitcht from his hands. Here Will, here take thou this same, derry derry down, Thou canst it better sway, And here defend thy self a while, For aid will come straight-way. And there they turn'd them back to back, derry derry down, In the middle of them that day, Till Robin hood approached near, With many an Archer gay.
With that an Arrow by them flew, derry derry down, I wist from Robin hood, Make hast, make hast, the Sheriff he said, Make hast, for it is good. The Sheriff is gone, his doubtless men, derry, derry, down, Thought it no boot to stay: But as their Master had them taught, They ran full fast away. O stay, O stay, Will Stutly said, derry, derry, down, Take leave e're you depart, You ne'r will catch hold Robin Hood, Vnless you dare him start. O ill betide you, quoth Robin Hood, derry, derry, down, That you so soon are gone, My Sword may in the Scabbard rest, For here our work is done. I little thought when I came here, derry, derry, down, When I came here to this place, For to have met with Little John, Or seen my Masters face.
Thus Stutly was at liberty set, derry, derry, down, And safe brought from his foe, O thanks, O thanks to my Master, Since here it was not so. And once again my fellows all, derry, derry, down, We shall in the green Woods meet: Where we will make our bow-strings twang Musick for us most sweet, hey down, derry derry down. Robin Hood and the Begger. Shewing how Robin Hood and the Begger fought: and how he changed cloaths with the Begger; and how he went a begging to Nottingham: and how he saved three bre∣thren from hanging for stealing of Deer. To the Tne of, Robin Hood and the stranger. COme light and listen you Gentlemen all, hey down down and a down, That mirth do love for to hear, and a story true, i'le tell unto you, If that you will draw near. In elder times when merriment was, with a hey, &c.
And Archery was holden good, there was an Out-law, as many did know, Which men called Robin Hood. Vpon a time it chanced so, with a hey, &c. Bold Robin was merry dispos'd: his time to spend, he did intend, Either with friends or foes. Then he got up on a gallant brave Steed, with a hey, &c. The which was worth Angels ten, with a mantle of green, most brave to be seen He left all his merry men. ndriding towards fair Nottingham, with a hey, &c. Some pastime for to spy, There was he aware of a jolly Begger, As e're he beheld with his eye. An old patcht Coat the Begger had on, with a hey, &c. Which he daily did use for to wear, and many a bag about him did wag, Which made Robin Hood to him repair. God-speed, God-speed, said Robin hood then, with a hey, &c.
What Countrey-man, tell unto me, I am Yorkshire Sir, but e're you go far, Some charity give unto me. Why what wouldst thou have, said Rob. hood, with a hey, &c. I pray tell unto me, no lands nor living, the begger he said, But a penny for charity. I have no money, said Robin hood then, with a hey, &c. But a Ranger within the wood, I am an Out-law, as many do know, My Name it is Robin hood. But yet I must tell thee bonny begger, with a hey, &c. That about with thee I must try, thy coat of gray, lay down I say, And my mantle of green shall lye by. Content, content, the begger he cry'd, with a hey, &c. Thy part it will be the worse; for I hope this bout to give thee the rout, And then have at thy Purse. The begger he had a mickle long staff,
with a hey, &c. And Robin had a nut-brown sword, so the begger drew nigh, & at Robin let fly, But gave him never a Word. Fight on, fight on, said Robin Hood then, with a hey, &c. This Game well pleaseth me, For every blow that Robin did give, The Begger gave buffets three. And fighting there full hard and sore, with a hey, &c. Not far from Nottingham town, they never fled, till from Robins head The blood ran trickling down. O hold thy hand, said Robin hood then, with a hey, &c. And thou and I will agree, if that be true the begger he said, Thy Mantle come give unto me. Now a change, a change, cry'd Robin hood, with a hey, &c. Thy bags and Coat give me, & this Mantle of mine, i'le to thee resign, My Horse and my bravery.
When Robin had got the beggers cloaths, with a hey, &c. He looked round about, methinks said he, I seem to be, A begger brave and stout. For now I have a bag for my bread, with a hey, &c. So have I another for Corn, I have one for Salt, and another for malt, And one for my little Horn. And now I will a begging go, with a hey, &c. Some charity for to find, and if any more of Robin you'l know, In this second part it's behind. Now Robin he is to Nottingham bound, with a hey, &c. With his bags hanging down to his knee, his stuff and his coat, scarce worth a groat, Yet merrily passed he. As Robin he passed the streets along, with a hey, &c. He heard a pittiful cry, three brethren dear, as he did hear, Condemned were for to dye.
Then Robin he hyed to the Sheriffs house, with a hey, &c. Some relief for to seek, he skipt and leapt, and capered full high, As he went along the street. But when to the Sheriffs house he came, with a hey, &c. There a Gentleman fine and brave, thou begger said he, come tell unto me, What is it that thou wouldest have? No meat nor drink, said Robin hood then, with a hey, &c. That I come here to crave, but to beg the lives of Yeomen three, And that I fain would have. That cannot be thou bold begger, with a hey, &c. Their fact it is so clear, I tell to thee, they hanged must be, For stealing of our Kings Deer. But when to the Gallows they did come, with a hey, &c. There was many a weeping eye, O hold your peace, said Robin then, For certainly they shall not dye.
Then Robin he set his Horn to his mouth, with a hey, &c. And blew but blasts three, till a hundred bold Archers brave Came kneeling down to his knee. What is your will Master? they said, with a hey, &c. We are here at your command, shoot East, shoot West, said Robin then, And look that you spare no man. Then they shot, East, and thy shot West, with a hey, &c. Their Arrows were so keen, the Sheriff he, and his company, No longer could be seen. Then he stept to these brethren three, with a hey, &c. And away he them had tane, the Sheriff was crost, and many a man lost That dead lay on the plain. And away they went into the merry green∣wood, with a hey, &c. And sung with a merry glee, And Robin took these brethren good To be of his Yeomandree.
Renowned Robin Hood: Or, His Famous Archery truly related, with the Worthy Exploits he acted before Queen Katherine, he being an Out-law-Man, and how she for the same obtained of the King his own, and his fellows pardon. To a new Tune. GOld tane from the Kings Harbengers, down a down a down, As seldom hath been seen, down a down a down, And carried by bold Robin Hood, for a present to the Queen; down a down a down. If that I live one year to an end, thus gan Queen Katherine say, Bold Robin Hood I will be thy friend, and all thy Yeomen gay. The Queen is to her Chamber gone, as fast as she can wen, She calls unto her lovely Page, his name was Richard Patrington. Come hither to me thou lovely Page, come thou hither to me:
For thou must Post to Nottingham, as fast as thou canst dree. And as thou goest to Nottingham, search all those English Woods, Enquire of one good Yeoman or another, that can tell thee of Robin hood. Sometimes he went, sometimes he ran, as fast as he could wen: And when he came to Nottingham, there he took up his Inn. And when he came to Nottingham, and had took up his Inn, He calls for a pottle of Rhenish Wine, and drinks a health to his Queen. There sat a Yeoman by his side, tell me sweet Page, said he, What is thy business, or thy cause, so far in the North Country. This is my business, and my cause, Sir, i'le tell it you for good, To enquire of one good Yeoman, or another, to tell me of Robin Hood. I'le get my horse betimes in the morn,
by it be break of day, And I will shew thee bold Robin hood, and all his Yeomen gay. When that he came at Robin Hoods place, he fell down on his knee; Queen Katherine she doth greet you well, she greets you well▪ by me. She bids you post to fair London Court, not fearing any thing, For there shall be a little sport, and she hath sent you her Ring. Robin took his Mantle from his back, it was of the Lincoln green, And sent it by this lovely Page, for a present to the Queen. In Summer time when leaves grow green, it is a seemly sight to see, How Robin hood himself had drest, and all his Yeomandree. He cloathed his men in Lincoln green, and himself in Scarlet red, Black hats, white feathers all alike, now bold Robin hood is rid.
And when he came at Londons Court, he fell down on his knee, Thou art welcome Locksly, said the Queen, and all thy Yeomandree. The King's gone into Finsbury field, marching in battle ray; And after follows bold Robin hood, and all his Yeomen gay: Come hither Tepus, said the King, Bow-bearer after me, Come measure me out with this Line, how long our mark shall be. What is the Wager, said the Queen, that must I now know here, Three hundred Tun of Rhenish Wine, three hundred Tun of Beer. Three hundred of the fattest Harts that run on Dallom Lee: That's a Princely wager, said the King, that needs must I tell thee. With that bespake one Clifton then, full quickly and full soon; Measure no mark for us most Soveraign Liege, we'l shoot at Sun and Moon.
Full fifteen score your mark shall be, full fifteen score shall stand: I'le lay my Bow, said Clifton then, i'le cleave the Willow Wand. With that the Kings Archers led about, while it was three and none, With that the Ladies began to shout, Madam, your Game is gone. A boon, a boon, Queen Katherine cries, I crave on my bare knee: Is there ever a t. of your Privy-Counsel, on Queen Katherines part will be? Come hither to me Sir Richard Lee, thou art a Knight full good: For I do know by thy Pedigree, thou sprang'st from Gowers blood. Come hither to me thou Bishop of Hereford∣shire, for a Noble Priest was he, By my Silver Miter, said the Bishop then, I'le not bet one penny. The King hath Archers of his own, full ready and full light, And these be strangers every one, no man knows what they height.
What wilt thou bet? said Robin hood, thou seest our Games the worse: By my silver Miter, said the Bishop then, all the money within my purse. What is in thy purse, said Robin hood, throw it own on the ground: Fifteenscore Nobles, said the Bishop then, it's neer an hundred pound. Robin hood took his bag from his side, and threw it down on the Green: Will Scadlock went smiling away, I know who this money must win. With that the Kings Archers led about, while it was three and three, With that the Ladies gave a shout, Woodcock beware thy knee. It is three, and three, now said the King, the next three pays for all: Robin hood went & whispered to the Queen, the Kings part shall be but small. Robin hood he led about, he shot it under-hand, And Clifton with a bearing-Arrow, he clave the Willow-wand.
And little Midge the Millers Son, he shot not much the worse, He shot within a finger of the Prick, now Bishop beware thy Purse. A boon, a boon, Queen Katherine tries, I crave that on my bare knee, That you will angry he with none, that is of my party. They shall have forty days to come, and forty days to go, And three times forty to sport and play, then welcome every one. Then thou art welcome Robin Hood said the Queen, and so is little Iohn, So is Midge the Millers Son, thrice welcome every one. Is this Robin hood the King now said? for it was told to me, That he was slain in the Pallace gate, so far in the North Country. Is this Robin hood? quoth the Bishop then, as it seems well to be, Had I known he had been that bold Out-law I would not a bet one penny.
He took me late one Saturday-night, and bound me fast to a tree; And made me sing a Mass, God wot, to him and his Yeomen three. What and if I did, says Robin hood, of that Mass I was full fain: For recompence to thee, he says, here's half thy Gold again. Now nay, now nay, says little John, down, a down, a down, Master that may not be, down, a down, a down, We must give gifts to the Kings Officers, that Gold will serve thee and me: down, a down, a down. Robin Hood and the Tanner: Or,  Robin Hood met with his match. A merry and pleasant Song, relating the gal∣lant and fierce Combate fought between Arthur Bland a Tanner of Nottingham, and Robin Hood the greatest and most no∣blest Archer of England. The Tune is,  Robin Hood and the Stranger. IN Nottingham there lives a jolly Tinker, with a hey down, down a down down,
His name is Arhur a Bland, There is never a Squire in Nottinghamshire, dare bid bold Arthur stand. With a long Pike-staff upon his shoulder, with a hey,  &c. So well he can clear his way: By two and by three, he makes them to lee, for he hath no list to stay. And as he went forth in a summers morning with a hey, &c. Into the Forrest of merry Sherwood, To view the red Deer, that range here & there, there met he with bold Robin hood. As soon as hold Robin hood did him espy, with a hey,  &c. He thought some sort he would make: Therefore out of hand he did him to stand, and thus unto him he spake. Why, what art thou, thou bold fellow, with a hey,  &c. That ranges so boldly here, In sooth to be brief, thou look'st like a thief, that comes to steal our Kings Deer. For I am a Keeper in this Forrest,
with a hey,  &c. The King puts me in trust, To look to his Deer, that range here and ther therefore stay thee I must. If thou beest a Keeper in this Forrest, with a hey,  &c. And hath such a great command, Yet thou must have more partakers in store, before that you make me stand. No, I have no more partakers in store, with a hey,  &c. Or any that I do need; But I have a staff of another Oak graft, I know it will do the deed. For thy sword and thy bow, I care not a straw with a hey,  &c. Nor all thine Arrows to boot, If thou get'st a knock, upon thy bare scop, you canst as well shite as shoot. Speak cleanly, good fellow, said jolly Robin, with a hey,  &c. And give better terms to me: Else i'le thee correct for thy neglect, and make thee more mannerly.
Marry gap with a wenion, qd. Arthur Bland, with a hey,  &c. Art thou such a goodly man? I care not a fig for thy looking so big, mend thou thy self how thou can. Then Robin hood he unbuckled his belt, with a hey,  &c. And laid down his bow so long, He took up a Staff of another Oak-graft, that was both stiff and strong. I yield to thy weapon, said jolly Robin, with a hey,  &c. Since thou wilt not yield to mine, For I have a Staff of another Oak-graft, not half a foot longer then thine. But let me measure, said jolly Robin, with a hey,  &c. Before we begin our fray, For i'le not have mine to be longer then thine, for that will be counted foul play. I pass not for length, bold Arthur replyed, with a hey,  &c. My Staff is of Oak so free, Eight foot & a half, it will knock down a Calf, and I hope it will knock down thee.
Then Robin he could no longer forbear, with a hey,  &c. He gave him such a knock, Quickly and soon the blood ran down, before it was ten a clock. Then Arthur he soon recovered himself, with a hey,  &c. And gave him such a knock on the crown, That from every hair on Robins head, the blood it ran trickling down. Then Robin hood raged like a wild Boar, with a hey,  &c. As soon as he saw his own blood, Then Bland was in hast he laid on so fast, as though he had been cleaving of wood. And about, and about, and about they went, with a hey,  &c. Like two wild Boars in a chase, Striving to aim, each other to maim, leg, arm, or any other place. And knock for knock they lustily dealt, with a hey,  &c. Which held for two hours and more, That all the wood rang at every bang, they ply'd their work so sore.
But if thou wilt forsake thy Tanners trade, with a hey,  &c. And live in green Wood with me, My Name's Robin hood,  I swear by the wood I will give thee both gold and fee. If thou be Robin hood,  bold Arthur reply'd, with a hey,  &c. As I think well thou art, then here's my hand, my names Arthur Bland we two will never depart. But tell me, O tell me, where is little Iohn, with a hey,  &c. Of him fain would I hear, For we are ally'd by the Mothers side, and he is my Rinsman neer. Then Robin hood he blew on the beagle horn with a hey,  &c. He blew both loud and shrill, But quickly anon, appear'd little Iohn, come tripping down a green hill. O what is the matter, then said little Iohn, with a hey,  &c. Master I pray you tell, Why do you stand with your staff in hand, I fear all is not well.
Hold thy hand, hold thy hand, said Robin hood with a hey,  &c. And let our quarrel fall, For here we may thresh our bones to mash, and get no coyn at all. And in the Forrest of merry Sherwood, with a hey,  &c. Hereafter thou shalt be free, Godamercy for nought, my freedom I bought I may thank my good staff, and not thee. What trades-man art thou, said jolly Robin, with a hey,  &c. Good fellow I prithee me show, And also me tell, in what place you do dwell, for both these fain would I know. I am a Tanner bold Arthur reply'd, with a hey,  &c. In Nottingham long have I wrought, And if thou come there, I vow and do swear, I will tan thy hide for naught. Godamercy good-Fellow, said jolly Robin, with a hey,  &c. Since thou art so kind and free, And if thou wilt tan my hide for naught, I will do as much for thee.
O man I do stand, and he makes me to stand, with a hey,  &c. The Tanner that stands me beside, He is a bonny blade, and Master of his trade, for soundly he hath tan'd my hide. He is to be commended, then said little John, with a hey,  &c. If such a feat he can do: If he be so stout, we will have a bout, and he shall tan my hide too. Hold thy hand, hold thy hand, said Robin hood with a hey,  &c. For as I do understand, He's a Yeoman good, and of thine own blood for his name is Arthur a Bland. Then little Iohn threw his staff away, with a hey,  &c. As far as he could it fling: And ran out of hand to Arthur a Bland, and about his neck did cling. With loving respect, there was no neglect, with a hey,  &c. They were neither nice nor coy, Each other did face with a lovely grace, they both did weep for joy.
Then Robin hood took him by the hand, with a hey,  &c. And danced about the Oak-tree: For three merry men, and three merry men, and three merry men we be. And ever hereafter so long as we live, with a hey,  &c. We three will be all one: The wood it shall ring, and the old wife sing, of Robin hood, Arthur,  and Iohn. The famous Battel between Robin Hood and the Curtal Fryer, neer Fountain Dale. To a new Northern Tune. IN Summer time when leaves grow green, and flowers are fresh and gay, Robin hood and his merry men, were disposed to play. Then some would leap, and some would run, and some would use Artissery: Which of you can a good Bow draw, a good Archer to be? Which of you can kill a Buck, or who can kill a Doe? Or who can kill a Hart of Greece,
five hundred foot him fro. Will Scadlock he kill'd a Buck, and Midge he kill'd a Doe, And little John kill'd a Hart of Greece, five hundred foot him fro. Gods blessing on thy heart, said Robin Hood that shot such a shot for me, I would ride my horse an hundred miles, to find one could match thee. That caused Will Scadlock to laugh, he laughed full heartily; There lives a Fryer in Fountain-Abby, will beat both him and thee. That Curtal Fryer in Fountain-Abby, well can a strong Bow draw, He will beat you and your Yeomen, set them all on a row. Robin Hood took a solemn Oath, it was by Mary free, That he would neither eat nor drink, till the Fryer he did see. Robin Hood put on his Harness good, and on his head a Cap of Steel, Then
oad Sword and Buckler by his side, and they became him weel. took his Bow into his hand, it was made of a trusty Tree, ith a sheaf of Arrows at his Belt, to the Fountains-Dale went he. nd coming to the Fountain-Dale, no further would he ride, here was he ware of a Curtal Fryr, walking by the water side. he Fryer had on a harness good, and on his head a Cap of Steel, road Sword and Buckler by his side, and they became him weel. obin Hood lighted off from his horse, and tyed him to a Thorn, arry me over the water, thou Curtal Fryer, or else thy life's forlorn. he Fryer took Robin Hood on his back, deep water he did bestride, nd spake neither good word nor bad, till he came at the other side. ightly stept Robin off the Fryers back,
the Fryer said to him again: Carry me over this water, fine fellow, or it shall breed thy pain. Robin hood took the Fryer on's back, deep water he did bestride, And spake neither good word nor bad, till he came at the other side. Lightly leapt the Fryer off Robin hoods ba Robin hood said to him again: Carry me over this water thou curtal Frye or it shall breed thy pain. The Fryer took Robin hood on's back aga and stept up to the knee, Till he came to the middle stream, neither good nor bad spake he. And coming to the middle stream, there he threw Robin in: And chuse thee, chuse thee fine fellow, whether thou wilt sink or swim. Robin hood swam to a bush of Broom, the Fryer to a wigger-wand: Bold Robin hood is gone to shore, and took his Low in hand.
e of the best Arrows under his Belt, to the Fryer he let flye: e Curtal Fryer with his steel buckler he put that Arrow by. oot on, shoot on, thou fine fellow, shoot as thou hast begun; thou shoot here a Summers day, thy mark I will not shun. obin hood shot so passing well, till his Arrows all were gone: hey took their Swords and Steel bucklers, and fought with might and main. om ten o'th clock that day, till four i'th afternoon: en Robin hood came to knees of Fryer to beg a boon. boon, a boon, thou Curtal Fryer, I beg it on my knee, ive me leave to set my Horn to my mouth, and to blow blasts three. hat will I do, said the Curtal Fryer, of thy blasts I have no doubt, hope thou'lt blow so passing well, till both thy eyes fall out.
Robin Hood set his Hom to his mouth, he blew but blasts three; Half a hundred Yeomen with Bows bent, came ranging over the Lee. Whose men are these, said the Fryer, that come so hastily? These are mine, said Robin Hood, Fryer what's that to thee? A boon, a boon, said the Curtal Fryer, the like I gave to thee, Give me leave to set my Fist to my mouth, and to whute whutes three. That will I do, said Robin Hood, or else I were to blame, Three whutes in a Fryers Fist, would make glad and fain. The Fryer he set his Fist to his mouth, and whuted whutes three, Half a hundred good Bay Dogs, came running the Fryer unto. Here's for every man a Dog, and I my self for thee, Nay, by my faith, quoth Robin Hood, Fryer that may not be.
Two Dogs at one o Robin Hood did go, the one behind the other be; Robin Hoods Mantle of Lincoln green, off from his back they ore. And whether his men shot East or West, or they shot North or South; The Curtal Dogs so taught they were, they caught the Arrows in their mouth. Take up thy Dogs said Little John, Fryer at my bidding be; Whose man art thou, said the Curtal Fryer, comes here to prate to me? I am little John, Robin Hoods man, Fryer I will not lye, If thou take not up thy Dogs soon, i'le take up them and thee. Little John had a Bow in his hand, he shot with might and main, Soon half a score of the Fryers Dogs, lay dead upon the plain. Hold thy hand, good fellow, said the Curtal Fryer, thy Master and I will agree, And we will have new orders taken, with all the hast that may be.
If thou wilt forsake fair fountains-Dale, and fountains-Abby free: Every Sunday throughout the year, a Noble shall be thy fee. And every holy-day throughout the Year, changed shall thy garments be, If thou wilt go to fair Nottingham, and there remain with me. This curtal Fryer had kept Fountains-dale, seven long years and more: There was neither Knight, Lord, nor Earl, could make him yield before. The Noble Fisherman: Or; Robin Hood's Preferment: Shewing how he won a prize on the Sea, and how he gave one half to his Dame, and the other to the building of Alms-houses. The Tune is,  In Summer time. IN Summer time when leaves grow green, when they do grow both green and long, Of a bold Out-law call'd Robin hood, it is of him I sing this song. When the Lilly-leaf and the Cowslip sweet doth bud and spring with a merry chear,
This Out-law was weary of the wood-side, and chasing of the Fallow Deer. The Fisher-men brave more money have then any Merchant two or three: Therefore I will to Scarborough go, that I a Fisher-man brave may be. This Out-law call'd his merry men all, as they sat under the green-wood-tree, If any of you have gold to spend, I pray you heartily spend it with me. Now, quoth Robin,  i'le to Scarborough go, it seems to be a very fair day, Who took up his Inn at a Widdow-womans house, hard by upon the waters gray. Who asked of him where wert thou born, or tell to me where dost thou fare? I am a poor Fisher-man said he then, this day intrapped all in care. What is thy name thou fine fellow, I pray thee heartily tell to me: In mine own Country where I was born, men call me Simon over the Lee. Simon, Simon,  said the good wife,
I wish thou mayst well brook thy name, The Out-law was ware of her courtesie, and rejoyced he had got such a Dame. Simon,  wilt thou be my man? and good round wages i'le give thee, I have as good a Ship of mine own, as any sails upon the Sea. Anchors and Planks thou shalt want none, Masts and Ropes that are so long, And if that you thus furnish me, said Simon,  nothing shall go wrong. They pluckt up Anchor and away did sail, more of a day then two or three, When others cast in their baited hooks, the bare lines into the Sea cast he. It will be long, said the Master then, e're this great Lubber do thrive on the Sea, He shall have no part of our Fish, for in truth he is no part worthy. O woe is me, said Simon then, this day that ever I came here, I wish I were in Plumpton Park, in chasing of the Fallow Deer.
For every Clown laughs me to scorn, and by me set noting at all, If I had them in Plumpton Park, I would set as little by them all. They pluckt up Anchor and away did sail, more of a day then two or three, But Simon espyed a Shi of War, that sailed towards them valorously. O woe is me, said the Master then, this day that ever I was born, For all the Fish that we have got, is every bit lost and forlorn. For you French Robber on the Sea, they will not spare of us one man, But carry us to the Coast of France, and lay us in the Prison strong. But Simon said, do not fear them, neither Master take you any care, Give me my bent Bow in my hand, and never a French-man will I spare. Hold thy peace thou long Lubber, for thou art naught but brags and boast, If I should cast thee over-board, there's but a simple Lubber lost.
Simon grew angry at these words, and so angry then was he, That he took his bent bow in his hand, and to the ship hatch go doth he. Master tye me to the Mast he said, that at my mark I may stand fair, And give me my bent bow in my hand, and never a French-man will I spare. He drew his Arrow to the very head, and drew it with all might and main, And straightway in the twinkling of an eye, doth the Frenchmans heart the arrow gain. The Frenchman fell down on the ship-hatch, and under the hatches down below, Another Frenchman that him espyed, the dead corps into the Sea doth throw. O Master loose me from the Mast he said, and for them all take you no care, And give me my bent bow in my hand, and never a Frenchman will I spare. Then straight they boarded the French ship, they lying all dead in their sight, They found within the Ship of War, twelve thousand pound in money bright.
The one half of the Ship, said Simon then, i'le give to my Dame and children small, The other half of my Ship i'le give to you that are my fellows all. But now bespake the Master then, for so Simon it shall not be, For you have won it with your own hands, and the owner of it you must be. It shall be so as I have said, and with this gold for the opprest, An habitation I will build, where they shall live in peace and rest. Robin Hood and the Shepheard. Shewing how Robin Hood, little Iohn, and the Shepherd, sought a sore Combat. Tune is,  Robin Hood and Queen Ratherine. ALL Gentlemen and Yeomen good, down, a down down, I wish you to draw near: for a story of gallant bold Robin hood, Vnto you I will declare. down, a down down. As Robin hood walkt the Forrest along, down, a down down, Some pastime for to spy, there was he ware of a jolly Shepherd,
That on the ground did lye, down a,  &c. Arise, arise, said josly Robin, down a,  &c. And now come let me see, what is in thy bag and bottle I say, Come tell it unto me: down a,  &c. What's that to thee, thou proud fellow, down a,  &c. Tell me as I do stand, what thou hast to do with my bag & bottle? Let me see thy command: down a,  &c. My Sword that hangeth by my side, down a,  &c. Is my command I know, come and let me taste of thy Bottle, Or it may breed thée woe: down a,  &c. The Devil a drop thou proud fellow, down a,  &c. Of my bottle thou shalt see, until thy valour here be try'd, Whether thou wilt fight or flee: down a,  &c.
What shall we fight for, cries Robin Hood, down a,  &c. Come tell it soon to me, here's twenty pound in good red Gold, Win it and take it thee: down a,  &c. The Shepherd stood all in a maze, down a &c. And knew not what to say, I have no money thou proud fellow, But bag and bottle i'le lay: down a,  &c. I am content thou Shepherd swain, down a,  &c. Fling them down on the ground, but it will breed thee mickle pain, To win my twenty pound: down a,  &c. Come draw thy Sword thou proud fellow, down a,  &c. Thou standest too long to prate, this Hook of mine shall let thee know, A Coward I do hate: down a,  &c. So they fell to it full hardy and sore,
down a, &c. It was on a Summers day, from ten till four in the afternoon, The Shepherd held him play, down a, &c. Robin's Buckler proved his thiefest defence, down a, &c. And saved him many a bang, for every blow the Shepherd gave, Made Robins sword cry twang: down a, &c. Many a sturdy blow the Shepherd gave, down a, &c. And that bold Robin found, till the blood ran trickling from his head, Then he fell to the ground: down a, &c. Arise, arise, thou proud fellow, down a, &c. And thou shalt have fair play, if thou wilt yield before thou go, That I have won the day: down a, &c. A boon, a boon, cryed bold Robin, down a, &c.
If that a man thou be, then let me take my beagle-horn, And blow but blasts three: down a,  &c. Then said the Shepherd to bold Robin, down a,  &c. To that I will agree: for if thou shouldst blow till to morrow morn I scorn one foot to flee: down a,  &c. Then Robin he set his horn to his mouth, down a,  &c. And he blew with might and main, until he espyed little Iohn, Come tripping over the Plain: down a,  &c. O who is yonder thou proud fellow, down a,  &c. That comes down yonder hill? yonder is Iohn,  bold Robin hoods man, Shall fight with thee thy fill. down a,  &c. What is the matter, says little Iohn, down a,  &c. Master come tell to me: my case is bad, crys Robin hood, For the Shepherd hath conquered me: down a,  &c.
I am glad of that, cries little John, down a,  &c. Shepherd turn thou to me, for about with thee I mean to have, Either come fight or flee: down a,  &c. With all my heart thou proud fellow, down a,  &c. For it shall never be said, that a Shepherds hook, of thy sturdy look, Will one jot be dismaid: down a,  &c. So they fell to it full hardy and sore, down a,  &c. Striving for victory; I will know (says Iohn) e're we give o're, Whether thou wilt fight or flee: down a,  &c. The Shepherd gave Iohn a sturdy blow, down a,  &c. With his hook under the Chin, beshrew thy heart, said little Iohn, Thou basely dost begin: down a,  &c. Nay, that is nothing, said the Shepherd, down a,  &c.
Either yield to me the day, or I will bang thy back and sides, Before thou goest thy way: down a,  &c. What dost thou think thou proud fellow, down a,  &c. That thou canst conquer me, nay, thou shalt know before thou go, I'le fight before i'le flee: down a,  &c. Again the Shepherd laid on him, down a,  &c. The Shepherd he begun; hold, hold, cry'd bold Robin, I will yield the wager won: down a,  &c. With all my heart, said little Iohn, down a,  &c. To that I will agree, for he is the flower of Shepherd Swains, The like I did never see: down a,  &c. Thus have you heard of Robin Hood, down a,  &c. Also of little Iohn; ow  hepherd-Swain did conquer them, The like  never know: down, a down, a down, a down.
Robin Hood's Golden Priests. Shewing how he robbed two Priests of Five hundred pound. Tune is,  Robin Hood was a tall young-man. I Have heard talk of bold Robin hood, derry derry down, And of brave little Iohn, Of Fryer Tuck,  and Will Scarlet, Loxsly and Maid Marrion, hey down, derry derry down. But such a tale as this before, derry derry down, I think there was never known, For Robin hood disguised himself, and to the Wood he is gone: hey down,  &c. Like to a Fryer bold Robin hood, derry derry down, Was accountred in his array, With Hood, Gown, Beads, and Cruisi, he past upon the way, hey down,  &c. He had not gone past miles two or three, derry derry down,
But it was his chance to spy, Two lusty Priests clad all in black, come riding gallantly, hey down,  &c. Benedicite, then said Robin hood, derry derry down, Some pitty on me take, Cross you my hand with a silver groat, for our dear Ladies sake, hey down,  &c. For I have been wandring all this day, derry derry down, And nothing could I get: Not so much as one poor cup of drink, nor bit of bread to eat: hey down,  &c. Now by my Holy-dame, the Priests reply'd, derry derry down, We never a penny have, For we this morning have been rob'd, and could no money save: hey down,  &c. I am much afraid, said bold Robin hood, derry derry down, That you both do tell a lye,
And now before that you go hence, I am resolved to try: hey down,  &c. When as the Priests heard him say so, derry, derry, down, then they rode away amain, But Robin Hood betook him to his heels, and soon overtook them again: hey down,  &c. Then Robin Hood laid hold on them both, derry, derry, down, and pull'd them down from their horse, O spare us Fryer, the Priests cry'd out, on us have some remorse: hey down,  &c. You said you had no money, quoth Robin hood derry, derry, down, wherefore without delay, We three will fall down on our knees, and for money we will pray: hey down,  &c. The Priests they could not him gain-say, derry, derry, down, but down they kneel with speed, Send us, O send us, then quoth they,
some money to serve our need: hey down,  &c. The Priests did pray with a mournful cheer, derry, derry, down, sometimes their hands did wring, Sometimes they wept and cry'd aloud, whilst Robin did merrily sing: hey down,  &c. When they had been praying an hours space, derry, derry, down, the Priests did still lament, Then quoth bold Robin,  now let us see, what money heaven hath us sent: hey down,  &c. We will be sharers all alike, derry, derry, down, of the money that we have, And there is never a one of us, that his fellow shall deceive: hey down,  &c. The Priests their hands in their pockets put, derry, derry, down, but money would find none, We'l search our selves, said Robin Hood, each other one by one: hey down,  &c.
Then Robin hood took pain to search them, derry derry down, And he found good store of gold: Five hundred pieces presently upon the grass he told, hey down,  &c. Here is a brave show, said Robin hood, derry derry down, Such store of gold to see, And you each one shall have a part, 'cause you pray'd so heartily: hey down,  &c. He gave them fifty pounds a piece, derry derry down, And the rest for himself did keep, The Priests durst not speak one word, but they sighed wondrous deep, hey down,  &c. With that the Priests rose up from their knees derry derry down, Thinking to have parted so: Nay stay, said Robin hood, one thing more I have to say e'r you go, hey down,  &c.
You shall be sworn, said bold Robin hood, derry, derry, down, Vpon this Holy Grass, That you will never tell lyes again, which way soever you pass, hey down,  &c. The second Oath that you here must take, derry, derry, down, All the days of your lives, You never shall tempt Maids to sin, nor lye with other mens Wives: hey down,  &c. The last Oath you shall take, is this, derry, derry, down, Be charitable to the poor, Say you have met a Holy Fryer, and I desire no more: hey down,  &c. He set them on their horses again, derry, derry, down, And away then they did ride, And he return'd to the merry green-wood, with great joy, mirth, and pride: hey down,  &c.
Robin Hood's Chase: Or; A merry Progress between Robin Hood and King Henry: shewing how Robin Hood led the King his Chase, from London to Lon∣don; and when he had taken his leave of the Queen, he return'd to merry Sherwood. To the Tune of, Robin Hood and the Beggar. COme you Gallants all, to you I do call, with a hey down, down a down, that now is within this place, For a Song I will sing, of Henry the King, how he did Robin hood chase. Queen Katherine she then a match did make, with a hey,  &c. as plainly doth appear, For three hundred Tun of good red Wine, and three hundred Tun of Beer. But yet she had her Archers to seek, with a hey,  &c. with their Bows and Arrows so good, But her mind it was bent, with a good intent, to send for bold Robin hood. But when bold Robin hood he came there, with a hey,  &c.
Queen Katherine she did say, Thou art welcome Loxsly said the Queen, and all thy Yeomen gay. For a match of shooting I have made, with a hey,  &c. and thou on my part must be, Rob. If I miss the mark, be it light or dark, then hanged will I be. But when the Game it came to be played, with a hey,  &c. bold Robin then drew nigh; With his mantle of green, most brave to be seen, he let his arrows flye. And when the Game it ended was, with a hey,  &c. bold Robin wan it with grace; But after the King was angry with him, and vowed he would him chase. What though his pardon granted was, with a hey,  &c. while he with them did stay, But yet the King was vexed at him, when as he was gone his way. Soon after the King from the Court did hie,
with a hey,  &c. in a furious angry mood, And often enquire both far and neer, after bold Robin Hood. But when the King to Nottingham came, with a hey,  &c. bold Robin was in the wood; O come said he, and let me see, who can find me bold Robin Hood. But when bold Robin Hood he did hear, with a hey, &c. the King had him in chase; Then said little John 'tis time to be gone, and go to some other place. Then away they went from merry Sherwood with a hey, &c. and into Yorkshire he did hye; And the King did follow with a hoop & a hal∣low, but could not come him nigh. Yet jolly Robin he passed along, with a hey,  &c. and went straight to Newcastle town, And there stayed he hours two or three, and then he for Barwick was gone.
When the King he did see how Robin did flee, with a hey,  &c. he was vexed wondrous sore; With a hoop & a hollow he vowed to follow, and take him or never give o're. Come now let's away, then cry'd little John, with a hey,  &c. let any man follow that dare, To Carlile we'l hye with our company, and so then to Lancaster. From Lancaster then to Chester they went, with a hey,  &c. and so did good King Henry: But Robin away, for he durst not stay, for fear of some treachery. Says Robin,  come let us to London go, with a hey,  &c. to see our noble Queens face, It may be she wants our company, which makes the King so us Chase. When Robin he came Q. Katherine before, with hey,  &c. he fell upon his knee, If it please our Grace, I am come to this place, for to speak with King Henry.
Queen Katherine she answered bold Robin a∣gain, with a hey,  &c. the King he is gone to merry Sherwood, And when he went he to me did say, he would go to seek Robin hood. Then fare you well my gracious Queen, with a hey,  &c. for to Sherwood I will hye apace, For fain would I see, what he would with me, if I could but meet with his grace. But when King Henry he came home, with a hey,  &c. full weary and vered in mind; And that he did here Robin had been there, he blamed Dame fortune unkind. You are Welcome home, Queen Katherine cry'd, with a hey,  &c. Henry my Soveraign Liege: Bold Robin hood,  that Archer good, your person hath been to seek. But when King Henry he id hear, with a hey,  &c. that Robin had been him to seek, This answer he gave, he's a cunning Knave, for I have sought him this whole 3 week.
A boon, a boon, Queen Katherine cry'd, with a hey,  &c. I beg it here of your Grace, To pardon his life, and seek no more strife, and so endeth Robin Hood's Chase. Little Iohn and the four Beggers. A new merry Song of Robin Hood, and little Iohn; shewing how little Iohn went a beg∣ging; and how he fought with four Beg∣gers, and what a Prize he got from these beggers. To the tune of,  Robin Hood and the Beggar. ALL you that delight to spend some time, with a hey down, down a down, A merry song for to sing, Vnto me draw near, and you shall hear, how little Iohn went a begging. As Robin hood walkt the Forrest along, with a hey,  &c. And all his Yeomandree: Says Robin,  some of you must a begging go, and little Iohn it must be thee. Says Iohn,  if I must a begging go, with a hey,  &c. I will have a Palmers Weed,
With a staff and a coat, and bags of all sort, the better then I shall speed. Come give me now a bag for my bread, with a hey,  &c. And another for my cheese, And one for a penny if I get any, that nothing I may leese. Now little John is a begging gone, wirh a hey,  &c. Seeking for some relief, But of all the Beggers he met on the way, little Iohn he was the chief. But as he was walking himself alone, with a hey,  &c. Four Beggers he chanced to spy, Some deaf, and some blind, and some came behind, says Iohn here's brave company. Good morrow (said Iohn) my brethren dear, with a hey,  &c. Good fortune I had you to see, Which way do you go? pray let me know, for I want some company. O what is here to do? then said little Iohn, with a hey,  &c.
Why rings all these Bells, said he, what dog is hanging? come let us be ganging that we the truth may see. Here is no dog hanging, one of them said, with a hey,  &c. Good fellow I tell unto thee, But here is one dead will give us Cheese and bread, and it may be one single Penny. We have brethren in London,  another said, with a hey,  &c. So have we in Coventry, In Berwick and Dover,  & all the world over, but ne'r a crookt Carl like thee. Therefore stand thee back thou crooked carl, with a hey,  &c. And take that knock on the crown, Nay, said little Iohn,  i'le not yet be gone, for a bout will I have with you round. Now have at you all, then said little Iohn, with a hey,  &c. If you be so full of your blows, Fight on all four, and never give o're, whether you be friends or foes. Iohn nipped the dumb, and made him to roar▪
with a hey,  &c. And the blind that could not see, And he that a Cripple had been seven years, he made him run faster then he. And flinging them all against the wall, with a hey, &c. With many a sturdy bang, It made Iohn sing to hear the gold ring, which against the walls cry'd twang. Then he got out of the beggers cloak, with a hey, &c. Three hundred pound in gold: Good fortune had I, then said little Iohn, such a good sight to behold. But what found be in a Beggars bag, with a hey, &c. But three hundred pound and three? If I drink water while this doth last, than an ill death may I dye. And my begging trade I will now give o're, with a hey, &c. My fortune it hath been so good: Therefore i'le not stay, but I will away, to the Forrest of merry Sherwood.
But when to the Forrest of Sherwood he came with a hey,  &c. He quickly there did see, His Master good, bold Robin hood, and all his company. What news, what news, then said Robin, with a hey,  &c. Come little Iohn tell unto me, How hast thou sped with thy beggers trade? for that I would fain see. No news but good, said little Iohn, with a hey,  &c. With begging full well I have sped, Three hundred and three, I have here for thee, in silver and gold so red. Then Robin hood took little Iohn by the hand with a hey,  &c. And danced about the Oak-tree, If we drink water whilst this day doth last, then an ill death may we dye. So to conclude my merry new song, with a hey, &c. All you that delight to sing, ▪Tis of Robin hood that Archer good, and how little Iohn went a begging.
Robin Hood's Delight: Or, A merry combat fought between Ro. Hood, Little Iohn, and Will. Scaret, and three stout Keepers in Sherwood Forrest. To the Tune of,  Robin Hood and Queen Ka∣therine: or,  Robin Hood and the Shepherd. THere is some will talk of Lords & Kts. down a down down, And some of Yeomen good, But I will tell you of Will. Scarlet, Little Iohn,  and Robin Hood. They were Out-laws as it is west known, down a down down, And men of a noble blood; And many a time was their valour shown, In the Forrest of merry Sherwood. Vpon a time it chanced so, down a down down, As Robin would ave it be, They all three would a walking go, Some pastime for to see. And as they walkt the Forrest along, down a down down, Vpon a Mid-summer day. There was he aware of three Forresters, Clad all in green array.
With brave long Fauchions by their sides, down a,  &c. And Forrest-Bills in hand, They call'd aloud to those Out-laws, And charged them to stand. Why who are you, cry'd bold Robin, down a,  &c. That speaks so boldly here? We three belong to King Henry, And are Keepers of his Deer. The Devil thou art, said Robin Hood, down a,  &c. I am sure it is not so: We be the Keepers of this Forrest, And that you soon shall know. Your Coats of green lay on the ground, down a,  &c. And so will we all three, And take your swords and bucklers▪ round, And try the victory. We be content the Keepers said, down a,  &c. We be three and no less, Then why should we of you be afraid, And we never did transgress. Why, if you be the Keepers in this Forrest, down a,  &c.
Then we be three Rangers good, And we'l make you to know before you do go, You met with bold Robin hood, &c. We be content thou bold Out-Law, down a, &c. Our valour here to try, And will make you know before we go, We will fight before we will flye, &c. Then come draw your swords, you bold Out-laws, down a, &c. And no longer stand to prate, But let us try it out with blows, For Cowards we do hate, &c. Here is one of us for Will Scarlet; down a, &c. And another for little Iohn, And I my self for Robin hood, Because he is stout and strong, &c. So they fell to it full hard and sore, down a, &c. It was on a Mid-summers day, From eight a clock till two and past, They all shew'd gallant play, &c. There Robin,  and Will,  and little Iohn, down a, &c. They fought most manfully, Till all their wind was spent and gone,
Then Robin aloud did cry, &c. O hold, O hold, crys bold Robin, down a, &c. I see you be stout men: Let me blow one blast on my beagle-horn, Then I'le fight with you again, &c. That bargain is to make, bold Robin hood, down a,  &c. Therefore we it deny: Though a blast upon thy beagle-horn, Cannot make us fight nor flye, &c. Therefore fall on, or else be gone, down a, &c. And yield to s the day, It shall never be said that we were afraid Of thee, nor thy Yeamen gay, &c. If that it he so, crys bold Robin, down a, &c. Let me but know your names, And in the Forrest of merry Sherwood, I shall extol your Fames, &c. And with our names, one of them said, down, &c. What hast thou here to do?
Except that thou will fight it out, Our names thou shalt not know. We will fight no more, says bold Robin, down a,  &c. You be men of valour stout, Come and go with me to Nottingham, And there we will fight it out. With a Butt of Sack we will bang it out, down a,  &c. To see who wins the day, And for the cost make you no doubt, I have gold and money to pay. And ever hereafter so long as we live, down a,  &c. We all will brethren be, For I love those men with heart and hand, That will fight and never flee. So away they went to Nottingham, down a,  &c. With Sack o make amends, For three days space they wine did chase, And drank themselves good friends: down, a down, a down, a down. FINIS.
