R962 R7799 12028219 52699
THE REMONSTRANCE AND DECLARATION of the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and Freeholders, in COLCHESTER, Now in Armes for the King and Kingdome. Printed in the Yeere 1648.
The Remonstrance from Colchester. PEtitions (the birth-right of Sub∣jects) are by Law our addresses to our King, (Gods Vicegerent) by custom our approches to the Houses of Parliament (His Ma∣jesties great Counsell;) by them wee used humbly to present our modest desies, and were wont to receive answers (as Gideons fleece the dew) without noyse, yet satisfactory; but that was denied our first Petition, and before our second could bee ready, our brethren of Surry by theirs ecchoed our prayer to both Houses of Parliament, but received their answer (as the Jewes their Law) in thunder and lightning, a two edged sword the tongue, and the report of Muskets the voyce which spake nothing but wounds and death. We therefore thus admonished, resolved thus to pre∣sent our greevances to the World, and our petitions to heaven, for a blessing upon our intended indevours. Our greevances are these: 1. First, the distraction and threatned ruine of our glorious Protestant Church, the neglect and abuse of Re∣ligion, the destruction of our Vniversities, (the springs of all Learning, Divine and Humane) occasioned by the fierce and ignorant Separatist, set up and maintayned as Rulers both in Church and State, by the prevalency and violence of a rebellious and destructive Army, un∣der the command of the I.. Firfax, and countenanced
by the seeming authority of a pact, unfree, and over-a∣ed Houses of Parliament. 2. Nex, that contrary to the oath and duty of A∣legeance, (from which no power can, nor yet hath pre∣tended to absolve us) our Soveraigne Lord the King is by the designe of the sayd Arm, drawn from his house at Hampton Court, to the Isle of Wight, and there by the power of Col. Hammond and others of the Army, im∣prisoned, and detayned from his Parliament; by which act the sayd Hammon and all adhering to him, are ac∣cording to the Votes passed in both Houses 16. March 1641. Enemies to the pece of the Kingdome. 3. A third, is the violent and unchristian separati∣on of the King, his royall Consort and Children, at once depriving his Majesty of the two first blessings bestow∣ed on man. 4. The forcing the Queene and Prince of Wales to seek in a Forraign Nation, what in their own they could not enjoy, liberty, safety, and support. 5. The exercise of Martial law while the Courts of Ju∣stice are open, and sitting at Westminster, the obstruct∣ing justice in our Courts of Judicature, and by the pri∣vate Committee of Indemnity perverting judgement, and exercising arbytrary power, which is a subversion of our ancient Lawes, and an introducing of a tyrannicall government, as was resolved by both Houses in the ca∣ses of the Earle of Strafford, and Archbshop of Canter∣bury, and writ in their bloud. 6. Sixtly, the present mischiefe and future danger to the whole Kingdome, by reason that the publique af∣fayres of highest concerne, are managed and carryed on by a few particular men in a private Committee at Dar∣by
house, wherein (contrary to the selfe-denying Ordi∣nance) the prime Actors are chiefe Officers of the Ar∣my, and have by our unhappy differences, possest them∣selves of the most beneficiall Offices and imployments of the Kingdome; and the other places of profit and commodity, are by their designe conferred on others, members of the Army and houses of Parliament, to purchase their complyance and Votes in all matters agi∣tated in the houses of Parliament: by reason wherof all motions for his Majesties returne to his Parliament (the first step to our desired peace) have been eyther totally rejected, or by them politikely delayde, because peace would determine both their power and profit. 7. The estates of Delinquents, the Lands of Bishops, Deanes and Chapters, (designed by severall Ordinan∣ces for discharge of publique debts) are by the houses and power of the Army shared and divided among themselves, while the publique debts be unsatisfied, the common soldier unpayd, the maymed unreleeved, the widow and children of the slain unprovided for, and all left burdens to the Common wealth. 8. That the Army consisting of meane, ignorant, and illiterate men, (only guilt with hypocrisie divine and ci∣vill) under pretence of tender consciences (the better to induce and tolerate all heresies) have expelled and sup∣prest all learned Orthodox Divines, and Church Go∣vernment, and crying liberty, liberty, have subjected our persons and estates to arbitrary Law and tyranny; and by rape imbracing the legislative power, cuckolds the body politick, giving Laws to the whole Kingdome, and yet by Petitions and Remonstrances make both Hou∣ses Father (as their owne) the adulterous issue.
9. That this Army assuming to themselves the mo∣deling and settlement both of Church and Sate, at Windsor in April last, in their Counsell did consult these three Questions. First, whether shall wee joyne with the Levellers, and new modell both Church and State. Next, whether with the moderate Party, treate, and receive the King with more qualified and limited po∣wer. Thirdly, whether depose the King, disinherite the Prince, crowne the Duke of Yoke, and appoynt a Pro∣tectour. The first was held to promise most of libety and profit; but threatened greatest danger in effecting, and difficulty in continuing. The second was said to be easiest obtained and continued, because nighest to the present frame and costitution already setled, but would bing them litle of profit, and lesse of Soveraignety. The third (like Benjamin, last in birth, but first in the the Parents affections) was held not difficult to be acted but to be maintained, for it would require both the ex∣pence of much bloud and money, and the Kingdome to react Yorke and Lancaster, under the names of Wales and Yorke. To this L: G. Crumwell answered it was the better, for that would necessitate the continuance of our Army, which secures our persons, will enforce our reasons, make just our demands, and faci∣litate their grant. For the bloud that will flow from the cheape vaines of Common Souldiers, whereof England hath plenty▪ and wee will not want. For the money, London is our bancke, and from their purses it shall draine to our coffrs. Commissary Ireton, L. G. Crumwels Son in Law said,
the worke was halfe done, for wee have already oted no ad∣dresses to be made to the King, and him guilty of crymes enough to depose him, and by imprisoning his Person, have fitted him for a private life, and by it taught the people that he is subject to the dispose of both Houses of Parliament whose Ordinances are onely powerfull by our swords, and therefore our Actions shall be legall by their vote. Further the Prince (said he) is linckt with his Father in crime, and therefore cannot be svred in punishment; he hath been Genrall in a Westerne Army, warring (as his Father) against the Parliament, a crime that as it rendred the Father fit to be deposed, so doeth it the Sonne unfit to succeed in the Govern∣ment. And that the discent of the Crowne purge not him (as it did Hen. 7.) let us in the Fathers life time Crowne the Duke of Yorke, now in our power, whose tender yeares have preserved him innocent, and presents him ftter for protection and our designe, and should any blame our severity towards the King and Prince, others will commend our clemency towards the Duke of Yorke. Upon the rsult of this Counsell, L. G. Crumwell in the House of Commons tel Mr. Speaker, that it was time to set on foote our great designe, and that such as should not concurre in Votes with us, be not continued of us. The motion being mis-timed, and divers of his par∣ty absent, it was only wondred at by Mr. Knightly, and dyed with the words. The Sceane now alters from Westminster to Carisbrooke Castle, and the King that could not be removed by Votes, must now by poyson, the Actor Col. Hammon, Major Rolfe, &c. all Mem∣bers of the Army, yet must wee by cursed Excise that insenceibly devours the poore by insupportable month∣ly Taxes, that impoverish the rich, contrary to Law and our Allegiance, contrary to our Protestation and Co∣venant (inforced upon us) we must traiterously maine∣taine and pay this Army that traiterously contrive and indeavour the disposall and murder of our Soveraigne Lord the King, the subversion of our Protestant Church, our Fundamentall and knowne Lawes.
We therefore declare to the world that God bles∣sing us, we will with hazard of our lives and fortunes disband and discipate this Army, the suppressors of the pure Protestant Religion, the imprisoners, and would be the murtherers of their Soveraigne Lord the King, and grand oppressors of the Common-wealth; then free from imprisonment our said Soveraigne, and him (God willing) restore to his lawfull Government, just Rights and Throne in Parliament, this done we shall joy∣fully and readily deposite our justly assumed armes, and on our knees beg what his Majesty hath often most gra∣tiously offered, and will undoubtedly grant his most Royall and gratious pardon to all his misled Subjects, willing to returne to their Allegiance, and forward to bring the King back to his owne house. We therefore hereby earnestly desire and request all loyall and well-affected Subjects, aswell Members of both Houses of Parliament as others, to be heerein ay∣ding and assisting to us. First, by not recruiting the For∣ces of the Lo. Fairfax; next, by withdrawing all ayde and assistance from his Army, by with-holding Excize and Monthly taxes allotted for their pay and support, and to give us with their prayers such assistance as their ali∣geance, and opportunity shall advise, and we trust that the God that judgeth rightly will crowne our loyall action with happy successe, and our successe with a glorious Peace, which is heartily prayed for, and shall (God willing) be resolutely fought for by us, his Ma∣jesties Loyall and faithfull Subjects in Colchester. FINIS.
