S2537 S2538 99832393 36866
NINE BOOKS OF PHYSICK AND CHIRVRGERY Written by that Great and Learned Physitian, Dr SENNERTUS. The first five being his Institutions of the whole Body of Physick: The other four of Fevers and Agues: With their Differences, Signs, and Cures. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Lodowick Lloyd, at the Castle in Corn-hill, 1658.
THE INSTITUTIONS OR FUNDAMENTALS Of the whole Art, both of PHYSICK AND CHIRURGERY, Divided into five Books. Plainly discovering all that is to be known in both; as the Subject and end of Physick; the Nature of all Diseases, their Causes, Signs, Differences, Events and Cures. ALSO The Grounds of Chymistry, and the way of making all sorts of Salves, and preparing of Medi∣cines according to Art; nothing of the like nature in English before. Written first in Latine by that Great and Learned Phy∣citian D. Sennertus, Doctor and Professor of Physick. Made English by N. D. B. P. late of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge. London, Printed for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at his Shop next door to the Sign of the Castle in Cornhill. 1656.
To the Lovers of the Study of Physick, especially those who desires to attain to the true knowledge thereof. OF all the Arts and Sciences that the Sons of Men so much covet after, there is none so pleasant and profit∣able as Physick; Physick doth not onely teach thee to preserve thy selfe from the assaults of those manifold Enemies which Nature is li∣able unto, but it teaches thee to restore Health when lost, and to heal thy selfe though wounded by thy greatest adversary; besides in the Anatomical part it enter∣tains thy fancy with the wonderfull work of Nature
where the unsearchable wis∣dom of the Creator is as le∣gible, as in those things we count more sublime and Ce∣lestial; which if consider∣ed, Physicians cannot be so Atheistical as the world re∣ports them to be. I under∣took not this work out of design to prejudice the Col∣ledge, by making that En∣glish, which they would have remain in Latine; nor to advantage my self by any private gain, but to benefit those who are unskilled in the Latine, but lovers of the Study. I say for the benefit of such, have I put this into En∣glish. Although by my Pro∣fession
I am otherwise obli∣ged: its something unsuitable to my spirit to have that Mo∣nopolized into the hands of a few, which should be in com∣mon to all: such is the practise of Physick, yet would I not have those to Administer, who are ignorant of the In∣stitutions of Physick, as too many have done of late, to their own and others detri∣ment: He that can but well digest this Book, his under∣standing will sufficiently be inriched in the very inside of the whole body of Physick, and will need no other foun∣dation to go upon, being the best that ever the Doctors
met with for their own in∣formations. I shall not need to acquaint thee with the Authors Method, that thou wilt find by the Contents of Chapters before the Book, nor of the Authors worth, for that thou wilt sufficient∣ly understand by his works, which speaks aloud in their Masters praise, whose fame and worth is well known to the Common-wealth of Learning throughout the world. If thou meetst with any Errata's in thy reading, thou art desired to correct them, the Translators absence some∣times from the Press occasi∣oned them.
The Contents of the Chap∣ters of the five following Books. BOOK. I. CHAP. I. OF the nature of Physick. pag. 1 Of the division of Physick. p 2 Of Health. p 3 Of Temperaments. p 6 Of innate heat. p 10 Of Spirits. p 12 Of the natural constitution of or ganick parts, and the common unity of parts alike, and not alike, called si∣mular and dissimular parts. p 14 Of the faculties of the soul, and of the differences of actions in Mans Body. ibid Of the natural faculty, and first of nutrition and aug∣mentation. p 15 Of Generation. p 20 Of the vital faculty p 23 Of the animal faculty, and first of the external senses. p 25 Of the internal senses. p 27 Of the intellective faculty. p. 29 Of the desire and moving faculty. ibid Book. 2. Part. I. Of Diseases. OF the nature of a disease. p 31 Of the differences of diseases. p 32 Of diseases of intemperature. p 33 Of diseases of the whole substance, or of the hidden qua∣lities. p 34 Of organick diseases. p 35 Of diseases of confirmation. p 36 Of diseases of number. p 38 Of diseases of magnitude. ibid Of diseases of composition. p 39 Of diseases of solution of unity. p 40. Of the accidental and common differences of diseases. ib
Of the times of diseases. p 44 Book 2. Part. 2. O Of the causes of iseases. p 46 Of things which are the causes of a disease, and first of non-naturals. p 49 Of internal causes of diseases, and first of fullnesse of blood. p 52 Of flegm. p 53 Of choller. p 54 Of melanholy. p 55 Of the serous humor, and of wind p 56 Of humors according to the opinion of later Phisicians and of Chymists. p 57 Of the generation of stones and worms p 58 Of the causes of diseases of intemperature without matter. ibid Of the causes of distemper with matter p 59 Of the causes of Diseases of the whole substance. p 60 Of the causes of organick diseases. p 61 Of the causes of diseases of solution of unity. p. 63 Book 2. Part 3. Sect. 1. OF Symptomes. Of the difference of Symptomes. What a Symptome is. p. 65 Of the causes and differences of Symptomes in ge∣neral. p 66 Of the differences in general, of actions hindred. p 68 Of the Symptomes of the natural faculty. Ibid Of the Symptomes of the vital faculty. p 71 Of the Symptomes of the external senses. p 72 Of the Symptomes of the internal senses. p 73 Of the Symptomes of the motive faculty. p 75 Of the Symptomes wherein all, or most part of the animal actions are hurt. p 77 Of the Symptomes of the changeable qualities of the body. p 78 Of the Symptomes of excressions and retensions. p 79 Book 2. Part 3. Sect. 2. Of the causes of Symptomes. OF the cause of the Symptomes of the natural faculty. p 81 Of the cause of the Symptomes of the vital faculty. and of the hinderances of respiration. p 95
Of the causes of the Symptomes of the external senses. p 97 Of the causes of the Symptomes of the internal senses. p 103 Of the causes of the Symptomes of the moving faculty. p 108 Of the causes of Symptomes wherein all, or most animal actions are hurt. p 113 Of the causes of Symptomes, which happen to qualities changed. p 116 Of the causes of Symptomes in those things which are sent forth and retained. p 118 Book 3. Part 1. Sect. 1. Of signes in general, of the difference and Heads of Signs. OF the Necessity and benefit of the method of signs: p 122 OF the differences of Signs. p 123 Of the Heads of signs. p 125 Sect. 2. OF knowing the temperature of mans body, and of his principal parts of the signs of a wholesome bo∣dy. p 127 Of the signs of bodies differing from their best constitu∣tion. p 129 Of the signs of the constitution of the Brain. p 132 Of the signs of the constitution of the heart. p 136 Of the signs of the constitution of the Liver. p 138 Of the signs of the temperature of the Testicles. p 139 Of the signs of the constitution of the Stomach. p 140 Of the signs of the constitution of the Lungs. p 141 Book 3. Part 1. Sect. 1. Of Urines. OF the abuse of inspection of Urines p 142 Of the difference of Urine; and first of the substance of Urine. p 143 Of the Conteints in Urine. p 145 Of the causes of the various consistency of Vrine. p 147 Of the causes of colours in Urines. p 148 Of the causes of an oyly Urine, and the other differences p 150 Of the causes of smell, quantity, and such like accidents. p 151
Of the causes of Contents in Urines of those that are sick. p 152 Of the causes and changes in Urines. p 154 What is to be observed in the inspection in Urines. p 156 What may be discerned and foretold by Urine. p 157 Book 3. Part 3. Sect. 4. Of Pulses. WHat a Pulse is. p 158 Of the simple differences of Pulses. p 159 Of the compound differences of Pulses. p 160 Of an equal and unequal Pulse. p 161 Of the order and harmony amongst Pulses. p 164 Of certain things necessarily requisite to distinguish Pulses by. p 165 How to know the differences of simple Pulses. p 166 How to know the respective differences of Pulses. p 167 Of the causes of Pulses in general. p 168 Of the causes of the simple differences of Pulses. p 171 Of the causes of the respective differences of Pulses. p 172 Of the causes of varying of Pulses. p 174 What the simple differences of Pulses signify and pre∣sage. p 176 What the other differences of Pulses signifie and presage. p 177 What Pulses presage health or death. p 179 Of signs to be observed from the Tongue. p 179 Book 3. Part 2. Of the Diagnostick Signs. OF the signs of causes in general. p 182 Of the Signs of causes and of humours in particu∣lar. p 184 Of the Signs of Diseases. p 187 How to know the parts affected. p 189 How to know Symptomes. p 194 Book 3. Part 3. Of the Prognostick Signs. OF the several kinds of prognostick signs. p 195 Of those kinds of signs by which the times of disea∣ses may be known. p 196 Of the signs of times of diseases in particular. p 198 Of the signs by which we may foretel the events of a di∣sease. p 199
How to presage of life and death, from the error and faults of actions. p 22 Of the signs of life and death, which are taken from ex∣cretions and retentions. p 207 Of the signs of health and of death, which are taken from the mutations of the qualities of the body. p 212 Of knowing the times, longitude, brevity and event of a Disease. p 214 How many mutations there are of Diseases, and the man∣ners, and what a Crisis is. p 215 Of the causes, differences, manner and time of judge∣ment. p 216 Of critical days. p 218 Of the causes of critical days. p 219 Of the signs of Crisis in general. p 221 Of the signs of differences in Crisis. p 222 The signs of Crisis to come, by excretion and imposthu∣mation. Ibid Through what places there will be excretion, and where there will be imposthumation. p 223 Of the time of the Crisis. p 225 Book 4 Part 1. Sect. 1. WHat things appertain to the Doctrine of the preservation of health; and how many kinds there are of necessary causes for the preserva∣tion and efence thereof. p 227 Of Aire. p 228 Of Meat. p 231 Meats from Plants. p 232 Meats from living creatures. p 239 Of rink. p 261 Of the passion of the mind, and of the exercise and rest of the body, p 266 Of sleeping and waking. p 267 Of hathes. Ibid Of Exretions and Retentions, and of Venery. p 268 Book 4. Part 2 OF those things which are to be observed by all, for the preservation of health. p 270 Of the cure of little ones not yet born; and of the diet of women with child. p 272
Of the diet of Infants, and thence forwards, until twenty one years of age. p 274 Of the diet of middle age. p 275 Of the diet of old men, p 280 Of the diet of such as are out of temper, and of Neuters. p 282 Book 5. Part 1. Sect. 1. Of the Materials for cure of Medicines. VVHat a Medicine is. p 285 Of the faculties of medicines in gene∣ral. p 286 Of the first faculties of the medicines. p 289 Of medicines proper to every part, or of corroborating medicines. p 293 Of extenuating and preparing of humours. p 297 Of Emollients, relaxing, rarefying, &c. p 298 Of medicines easing pain and causing rest. p 301 Of drawing and repelling medicines. p 302 Of ripening things, and such as generate quitture; also of such as generate flesh and brawny flesh; of such as dry and cleanse green wounds, and cause cicatrising; and of such as generate Seed and Milk. p 303 Of such things as make the skin red; of such as cause blisters, and of such as cause scabs or pustules; of burning things of Corrosives, Putrifactives, and of such things, as take away hair, and extinguish milk and seed. p 305 Of medicines purging through the paunch. p 307 Cholagogues, or the milder purger of Choler, p 308 Stronger purgers of choller. p 310 The milder purgers of flegm. p 311 The stronger purgers of flegm. Ibid The milder purgers of melancholy and black humours. p 313 The stronger purgers of melancholy and adust humours. Ibid Hydragogues, and such as evacuate Aqueous humours. p 314 Of Medicines that cause vomits. p 315 Of Medicines causing Urine. p 316 Of Medicines causing sweat. p 317 Of Diaphoreticks, and medicines discussing wind Ibid Of provoking courses, expelling the secunine, and a
dead child. p 318 Of Medicines that break the stone. p 319 Of Errbines, Sternutatories, and Apophlegmatismes. Ibid Of things causing spittle, p 320 Of Medicines killing and expelling worms. Ibid Of Druggs good against poyson. 321 Of the manner of finding out the vertue of Medicines. ib. Book 5. Part 1. Sect. 2. Of Chyrurgery. OF Chyrurgery in general. p 323 Of putting together, and binding in general. p 325 Of swalling Ibid Of Cerots or Bolsters. p 326 Of Splents. p 327 Of Binders. p Ibid Of fit placing of a member that is bound. Ibid Of Coaptation of broen bones. p 328 Of restoring of bones that are out of joint. p 330 Of the putting together of the soft and fleshy parts. p 331 Of correcting of bones that are represt or set awry p 333 Of disjunction in general, and of dissection of soft parts. p 334 Of Section of bones. p 337 Of burning. p 339 Of drawing of things out of the body, which were sent into the body from without. p 340 Of drawing out of things generated in the body accor∣ding to nature, but retained in the body beyond the limits of nature. p 343 Of taking away the corrupt parts of the body. p 344 Of freeing and taking away things generated in the bo∣dy contrary t nature. p 345 Of restitution of parts that are lost, or of the Chyrur∣gery of imperfect parts. p 346 Book 5. Part 2. Sect. 1. OF the method of healing; and of Indications in ge∣neral. p 348 Of Indicants. p 350 Of the concord and discord of Indicants. p 353 Of Indicants. p 354 What mristue causes indicate and peculiarly of purg∣ing
a juice in the body which causes ill digestion. p 360 Of the time fit for the purging of a disease. p 363 Of the preparation and concoction of humours. p 365 Of the quatity of purgation. p 371 Of the ple by wch purgation ought to be made p 372 Of the ue administration of purges. p 374 Whether it be lawful to sleep, having taken a purge. Ibid Whether it is be after purging to use cleansing and ab∣stergent meoines. p 375 Of evacuation by rine. Ibid Of evacuation by sweat. p 376 Of particular evacuations. p 378 Of the abating abundance a blood with Leaches, Cup∣pinglasses, Scarrifications, &c. p 379 Of opening a Vein. p 382 Of revulsion. p 85 Of derivation. p 38 Of repulsion. ibid Of interceptings. p 389 Of discussing. p 390 Of softning and ripning of matter. p 391 Book 5. Part. 2. Of shewing how to Cure. OF diseases of Intemperature. p 392 Of curing diseases of the whole substance. p 394 The cure f diseases of confirmation. p 395 Of the cure of diseases of number. p 397 Of curig of diseases of magnitude. p 398 Of curing diseases in situation and connexion. p 39 Of the cure of solution of continuity. p 400 Of the cure of oppressing and urging Symptomes. p 402 Book 5 Part. 2 Sect. 3. Of the Vital Indication. WHat doth indicate Dyet in those that are sick. p 404 What things belong to Dyet. p 45 How many sorts there are of Dyet, and which agrees to which seases. p 406 Of the right administration of a dict of sick persons. p 407
Book 5 Part. 3 Sect. 1. OF preparing and compounding of Drugs in general, of necessity and profit of preparing and compounding of simple Medicines. p 409 What things are necessary for the Artificial preparatîon and composition of Medicines. p 411 Of the weights of Medicines. p 412 Of Physical measures. p 414 Of Dozes of Medicines. p 416 Of the Dozes of Purges. p 417 Book. 5. Part. 3. Sect. 2. OF operations necessary for the preparation and composition of Medicines. Of the parts of Pharmacopaea. p 419 Of the kinds of heat. p 420 Of the first rank, or form of operations of breaking, sleeking, or making plain, shaving and filing: p 421 Of the second rank and form of operations: p 424 Of the third manner of operations. p 428 Sect. 3. OF the forms of Medicines. p 429 Of the division of medicines. ibid Of Decoctions. p 433 Purging decoctions. p 436 Of infusions and other purging potions. p 437 Of medicinal wines, drinks of Honey and water sodden together, of wines mingled with honey, of Oxymel, of medicinal vinegar, decoction, or barley-water; also of clarified juices. p 439 Of distilled water, and spirits. p 443 Of oyles. p 444 Of Syrrops and Julops. p 445 Of Emulsions and Ahes, mixtures bringing, or causing milk, and of strengthning things. p 448 Of tinctures, and extracts, and liquid dissolutions. p 450 Of conserves, preserves, and medicinal jûices p 451 Of Electuaries. p 453 Of Eclegmays and Lohochs. p 455 Of Boles. p 457 Of Powders and Trags, or Comfits. p 458 Of Salts. p 459 Of Crosses. p ibid
Of flowers and sublimates. p 460 Of precipitates. ibid Of Glasses, Regons, of certain chymical powders p 461 Of Comfits, little round cakes and morcels, and such like. ibid Of Troches. p 464 Of Pills. p 465 Of Suppositors. p 468 Of Clystors. p 470 Of Injections into the womb, and of Pessaries p 472 Of those things which are injected into the Yard and Bladder. p 473 Of the washing of the mouth, and Gargarismes. ibid Of medicines that draw away flegm. p 474 Of medicines that rub and cleanse the teeth. p 475 Of medicines put into the nose, and to provke snee∣zing. p 477 Of sweet smells, perfumes, and odcrifierous Balsomes. p 478 Of those things which are put into the ears. p 479 Of liquid medicines for the eyes. ibid Of oyles and balsomes. p 480 Of linements and oyntments. p 481 Of Cerots and Emplaisters. p 482 Of Cataplasmes. p 485 Of medicines to take away hair, Salves made of Mustard, and medicines causing wheales, or pustles in the body, Vesitatories, or medicines that cause blisters. p 486 Of Epithems (which are something moister then Plai∣sters) Medicines made of Vinegar and Roses, and of medicines applied to the Temples to stop fluxes of Rheume) from falling to the eyes. p 427 Of medicines applied plaister-ways to mitigae paine, and of little bags. p 489 Of Embrocations, Lotions, and Baths. p 490 Of Sopes p 491 Of Cauteries. p 492
THE FIRST GROUND OR FUNDAMENTALS Of the whole Art of PHYSICK, AND CHIRURGERY. BOOK I. CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Physick. THE word Medicina, The name of Physick. sithence it is derived  Medendo, that is, helping such as are sick; doth properly belong indeed to the Therapeutical part on∣ly; which part being the most necessary, was first in∣vented and garnished, and in this sense the word was formerly taken. The Defi∣nition of Physick. Yet afterwards when that part was added, which shewed the preservation of present health; the same ancient Appellation was still retained, and is now attributed to the
whole Art. Physick is an Art (as far as it is possible) of preserving mans present health, and restoring it when it is lost. Physick is most properly set down amongst the Arts, The Genus of Physick. because it propounds to it self, not knowledge onely, but effecting somewhat; namely, gaining of health. For the distinction betwixt Disciplines are taken from their next end: neither doth Physick observe the other principles that are requisite in a Science. The Subject of Physick is mans Body, The Subject of Physick. as it is indued with health, and obnoxious to diseases. And this Subject hath one excellency peculiar to it self, beyond the Subjects of all other Arts; in that they do nothing, onely they perform obedience, and undergo the operation of the Artificer; but this hath a certain in-bred power striving for health of its own accord. The End of Physick is Health; The End of Physick. and that is the true and last aim of it, the first mover, and that for which it is; but the scope or means, and that to which it aims is to heal, as J. C. Scaliger in his first Book of Plants teacheth; for although the Physitian do not alwaies obtain his chief end, since it is impossible to cure all that are sick, yet the hysitian hath performed his Office, if he have omitted none of those things that are in the power of Nature and Art. For out of those two the Excellency and Dignity of Physick is manifested; The Excel∣lency of Physick. for it is imployed about mans Body, of all natural Bo∣dies the most noble. The end it aims at is health; then which (amongst all things that may be called good by Mortals) nothing is better; and that which alone is sought by it self. Whereas all the rest of the Arts aim at nothing themselves; but perform all things because of some outward end. CHAP. II. Of the Division of Physick. SEEing that the end of Physick, The divisi∣on and parts of Physick. is to preserve present health, and to restore it when it is lost; it is properly divided into the Preserving and Curing part; yet there are also higher things pertaining to these parts which are necessary to be known by the Physitian, and they are to be added. For sithence a Physitian cannot heal unlesse he know the Subject whereon he ought to work, and since all Arts begin from the knowledge of their end: first he should acquire the knowledge of mans body, wherein he ought to work, and wherein health doth consist, 'tis necessary he should understand; and since that a disease is repugnant to health, he ought to know the nature, differences, causes and effects of a disease; and by what rules to find these in every individual. And so Physick is con∣veniently
divided into five parts, the Physiological, Pathologi∣cal, Semeiotical, Hygieinal, and Therapeutical. Physiologie handles the subject and end of Physick; Physiologie and so treats of mans body, and shews the constitution thereof, and all its parts, their uses and actions, and the faculties of the mind. Pathologie teacheth the nature of diseases and Symptomes, Pathologie their differences and causes, and explains all things whatsoever, by which mans body recedes from a natural constitution. The Semeiotick part shews the Signs, Of signs of sickness and health. whereby we may know whether a man be sick or well, and by which we may discover disea∣ses and causes that lie hid in mans body, and the events of diseases. The Hygieinal part shews, by what rules present health may be preserved, Of pre∣servation of health. and how a man may beware before-hand (as much as is possible) lest he should fall into a disease. The Therapeutical part teacheth, by what means health is to be recovered; and how diseases with their causes and symptomes may be repelled and taken away. Of curing diseases. If there be any other besides these which are counted parts of Phy∣sick, they are not principal, but lesser, into which these are sub-di∣vided, such are the Diatetical, Chirurgical, and Pharmaceutical parts, and such like. CHAP. III. Of Health. FIrst, as for the Physiological part, indeed very many dispose of it, and place it otherwise, What Phy∣siologie handles. Of things called Na∣turals. and in that comprehend things called Natu∣rals, without which our bodies cannot subsist whole, and they ac∣compt them seven, Elements, Temperaments, Humours, Spi∣rits, Parts, Faculties, Actions; but since the handling of them as they are such, is properly the work of a Physitian; they are considered by a Physitian in this place, as they conduce to the know∣ledge of the subject, which is mans body; to the explication of the end, which is health: to which also we are willing to order the hand∣ling of them. And indeed, to it belongs, principally the description and knowledge of all the parts of mans body; which since it is more copious then to be contained in a Compendium, that is to be sought in Anatomical books; but especially by seeing bodies dissected: after∣wards followeth the explication of the end of Physick which is health. But since that all men do then think themselves wel, The defin∣tion of health. when they can rightly perform the natural and necessary actions of life, Health is defined fitly to be a power of mans body to perform those actions which are according to nature, depending on the natural constituti∣on
of all the parts: for health doth not consist in the action it self, since that those who sleep, or are quiet in what manner whatsoever, and cease from certain actions, are sound, and as Galen hath it in the 2 cap. of the differences of diseases; not to operate, is to be well, but to be able to operate: nor is he onely well who performs his na∣tural actions; but also he that doth them not, so that he be able to do them: And so the formal reason of health is, a potency of body to perform natural actions; but because Galen in the place above-mentioned, makes health to be a natural constitution of all the parts of the body, and in the first Chapter of the Differences of Symptomes, a framing made according to nature fit for operation, or a natural constitution of all the parts of the body, having power to undergo those things which are according to nature; therefore it comes to passe, that that position or constitution is rather subject to the acti∣ons of a Physitian, then to the power of acting. The subject of health is a living body, The Subject of health. or the parts of a living bo∣dy, as to that, to which alone the power of acting belongs; but those which live not, and have no power to perform natural actions, those are neither said to be sick nor well. But the cause of health, The effici∣ent cause of health. or that whereby a body and its parts are said to be sound, is a natural constitution of them: But seeing there is a twofold constitution of a body, and of all its parts, the one Essential, which consists of matter, and substantial form; the other accidental, which follows the former, and is such a dispo∣sation of qualities and other accidents in the several parts of the body, by which the essential form may exercise all its acti∣ons, and according to its diversity, it acteth variously: Health doth not consist in the essential but accidental consti∣tution; for the mind cannot be hindred or hurt, but remains alwaies the same and unchanged; so that it have instruments constituted in the same manner. The Essential constitution also, so long as a man lives, is immutable, and at length is changed by death; but the accidental constitution of the body is subject to many altera∣tions, whence the same soul in the same body acts one way and ano∣ther way. And because the parts of the body are several, the natural consti∣tution of them also is not the same. The defini∣tion of simi∣lar and dis∣similar parts. The parts of the body are two-fold, similar, and dissimilar. Similar parts are such whose par∣ticles have the same form, and are alike to the whole, and to one another; and indeed, some are truely and exactly such, wherein no difference can be found, neither by accurate sense, nor by reason: such are a Bone, a. Gristle, simple flesh, a very small vein, Fat: Others are so onely to the sense, which although at the first sight they
seem such; yet if they are viewed more diligently, they are percei∣ved to be composed of more, as flesh of muscles, substance of Veins, Nerves, Arteries. Dissimilar, are such as are compounded of more, Of a Dissi∣milar. Whether a similar part be opposite to an orga∣nick. which are also called for the most part organick. For although, if we may speak properly, an Organick is not opposite to similar, but a dissimilar or compound, and similar may be organick also, as you may see in bones, which have their organick constitution: Yet because singular parts, for the most part, do not perform a whole and en∣tire action, which Galen requires in an organick part strictly so taken, hence it comes to passe the Physitians, for the most part, op∣pose an organick to a similar. But the constitution of similar parts, The consti∣tution of si∣milar parts milar parts even as of those which con∣sist of Elements, and other mixed bodies, consists in the lawful mix∣ture of the four primary qualities. But besides that temperature of primary qualities, Occult qualities. other quali∣ties also are in them which are more occult, arising from their forms, which parts all of them possesse, as is manifest by their sympathy and antipathy with other natural bodies, and by seve∣ral actions, and kinds and manners of actions, which are beyond the force of Elements. The natural constitution of organick parts, The consti∣tution of dissimilar parts. consists in a com∣position fit to perform actions; namely in number, magnitude, conformation, composition or scituation. There is a common unity in them both, as well similar as dissi∣milar and organick: for not onely the whole body, but every part thereof, whether similar or organick, ought to be whole and entire. And if our bodies obtain these three things, it is sound, if either be wanting, it becomes sick. Yet, there is a certain latitude of health, The lati∣tude of health. nor do all men acquire the same perfection of performing actions; but in regard of age, sex, and other circumstances, some do perform all or certain actions better then others, yet all of them neverthelesse are sound; but Physitians call all those that deviate from perfect health, Whether there be a Neutral disposition. and yet are not sick, Neuters; and place a neutral constitution, as it were, in the middle betwixt the sick and well. For although, if we rightly weigh the matter, there is no such thing as middle disposition, differing from health and a disease, and every man is either sick or well; yet Physitians consider Neuters, not as the mean betwixt sick and wel; but as differing from perfect health peculiarly, and distinguish Neu∣ters from those that are sound, not as differing in kind, but in re∣spect of more or lesse.
CHAP. IV. Of Temperaments. BUT that the nature of health may be the more manifest, some∣thing shall be spoken particularly of this three-fold constitution of a body which is necessary to health; What a Tempera∣ment is. and first, for what belongs to the constitution of similar parts, as they are such, that is a Tem∣perament, which is a quality arisen from the mutual action and passion of primary qualities, and resulting out of them separa∣ted and joyned together. But not the form it self of a mixt sub∣stance; sithence it is subject to the senses, acquired by change (or motion) subject to alteration, and hath its rise from the primary qualities; Nor is it onely a harmony (although there be a certain proportion of qualities in a Temperament) since it is the imme∣diate instrument of actions, which doth not belong to a bare pro∣portion which is an accident. But from the Temperament, A Tempe∣rament of a mixt body two-fold. things are said to be temperate or intemperate; and indeed, any thing is said to be temperate two wayes, either simply and absolutely, and in its own kind, or in relation to some other; for if there be that proportion of qualities, that they wholly concur in equal strength, such a Temperament is said to be simply and absolutely such, and such a Temperament is commonly called a Temperament ad pondus, To weight. or according to weight, (as if it were weighed in a ballance) and is of an Arithmetical pro∣portion; But if there be a certain inequality of qualities in relation to their strength, To Justice. it is called a Temperament to Justice, and this is called a Geometrical proportion; although, if you strictly regard the proportion of the qualities amongst themselves, it is then an In∣temperament, not a Temperament. Now this Temperament (as we call it) wherein there is not an equality of primary qualities, takes its denomination from that quality, which doth exceed the rest, whether it be one or two. And the action which proceeds from the Temperament, is ascribed to the qua∣lity that doth predominate; although the rest are no wayes to be ex∣cluded from having a share in the action. Of these Temperaments some are simple, Temper te to Justice two-sold. Simple. others compound; Simple, is when one quality onely exceeds its contrary, and therest are equal, whereof there are four kinds, according to the number of the primary qualities; Hot, wherein heat doth rule over cold the moisture and drowth being equal; Cold, where cold overcom∣meth the heat, but the moisture and driness are equal; Moist, wherein moisture exceeds drinesse, the heat and cold being equal; Drinesse,
wherein drowth dryes up moisture, the heat and cold as before being equal. But when two qualities exceed their contraries there ariseth a compound Temperament: Compound. The latitu∣de of Tem∣perament. whereof there are likewise four kinds ac∣cording to the combinations, (as far as possibly they may com∣bine) of the four primary qualities: to wit, Hot and Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, Cold and Dry. In every one of these there is a great latitude, and in the simple Temperament some have more, some lesse of heat or cold by much then other. In compound Temperaments some one, sometimes both qualities, exceed the rest in an extraordinary, yet different manner. Any thing is said to be Hot, Cold, Moist, or Dry, How many wayes any thing is said to be hot, moist cold, and dry. not only sim∣ply regard being had to the universal nature of mixt bodies, where∣in if you consider a middle sort of body exceeding in neither, and in respect of this you accompt all others that differ from it Intem∣perate, and from the quality excelling is called, Hot, Cold, Moist or Dry; but besides this, there is made a comparison to three: First, the comparison is made to the next Genus, or kind in nature, as if in the whole sort of living Creatures, you appoint one living Creature to be temperate, all others in respect of that, are called intemperate; Secondly, a comparison is made with a middle sort of the same kind, so a Boy is said to be hot, an old man cold; Thirdly, respect is had to every individual, that so this compa∣red to that as being Hotter, is Cold, but compared to a colder is hot. Man, for whose sake these things of Temperaments are spoken, In man there is a twofold Tempera∣ment. since his body is not simply mixed but organick and living, there is required in him a double Temperament, one of the body, as it is absolutely and simply mixt; The other as it is living. This is lost by death, and is often changed by old age; but that remaineth sometimes in the dead carcass after death; yet at length by putre∣faction and corruption of that which is mixed tis dissolved. In that also, according to Heat, Cold, Drowth and Moisture, there is a great diversity of parts. But the matter which is proper to living Creatures in all, is Heat and Moisture. Again the Temperament of a living man is twofold, Tempe∣rament, In∣nate, In∣fluent. the one Innate, the other Influent. Innate, is that which is imbibed in the living parts of man, & by reason of the Innate heat is inherent in him from his first being. Influent, is that which floweth from the principal parts, and is communicated to the whole body. And that it is not the same with Innate, is manifest from those that fall into a Swoun; when the body becomes extreme cold, and yet the Innate Temperament is not changed. These three Temperaments though
they may be considered severally: Yet they concur to constitute one Temperament of a sound man. And, therefore although with∣out all doubt, amongst all other living Creatures man is of the most temperate, so that other living Creatures, as also me∣dicines compared to him, are said to be Hotter, Colder, Moister, or Dryer; Yet simply and absolutely he is not temperate; The Tem∣perament of a man, of what sort it is. for common∣sense tels us, that Heat in man is predominate over the other qua∣lities; for the Temperature of a man to perform his actions best is Hot and Moist, and our lives consist of Heat and Moisture: on the contrary, coldness and driness lead us to death, and by how much sooner a man is cooled and dryed, by so much sooner he grows old and dyes. Yet, The diffe∣rences of the Tempe∣raments of man. that heat and that moisture have their degrees. For if the heat exceed the cold and the moisture the drowth moderately, that Temper is best and is accompted Temperate. All others differing from this are called either Hot and Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, or Cold and Dry; although all in general are Hot and Moist. These differences of Temperaments are commonly explained by the names of Sanguine, Sanguine, Cholerick, Phlegma∣tick, Me∣lancholy. Cholerick, Phlegmatick and Melancholy Temperaments. These differences and appellations may be admit∣ted of, if they are not taken from the diversity of excrementitious humours, in various bodies; but from the variety of blood, which is the nutriment of the body. For those whose Blood is temperate, Occult qualities. or moderately hot and moist, are called Sanguines: Those who have hotter and dryer blood, and their bodies from thence become hotter and dryer, are called Cholerick Persons: Those who have colder and moister, and their bodies from thence grows colder and moister, are called Phlegmaticks: Those who have cold and dry blood, and their bodies from thence become cold and dry, are Melancholians. But we must not rest at the Primary qualities; for there are others more noble and more abstruse, the causes of many actions, and of Sympathy, and Antipathy, with other alterations that must be granted; although in this humane imbecillity, for the most part, they are unknown to us. The Astrologers, The opi∣nions of the Astro∣logers. that they may some way expresse the various Constitutions of Bodies, according to the occult diversities of Stars, call some Solar bodies, born under the influence of the Sun; so Jo∣vial under Jupiter; others Martial, Venereal, Mercurial, Saturni∣nal, as being born under one of those; and also admit of mixt con∣stitutions born under several Planets; nor indeed absurdly altoge∣ther,
since there is a great agreement and consent betwixt Superior and Inferior bodies. But since there are divers parts of a body, and each part hath its peculiar Temperature, not onely proceeding from the mixture of Elements; but some are hotter, some have lesse heat in them; neverthelesse they agree together, to make the Temperament of the whole, which is hot and moist; and so heat with cold, moisture with dry things are equal'd. So that from thence there proceedeth a certain Harmony, and the Temperament of the whole, is mode∣rately hot and moist. But to constitute that Temperament of the whole, The Tem∣perament of the whole wherein it depends. the noble parts of the body perform more then the rest, and most especially the Heart, the Fountain and Treasury of the native heat, and vital spirits. From whence all the parts of the body receive the influent spirits and heat. Next to it the Liver, which furnisheth the whole body with aliment, namely bloud; afterwards the Stones; then the Brain, the shop of Animal spirits; last the Stomack, the place for the first Concoction. Concerning the Temperament of several parts, The Tem∣perament of the parts of the body. The Hot Parts. the most Tem∣perate is the skin; especially that in the Palm of the hand, to which as to the mean, the other parts being compared, tend to heat, cold, drowth or moisture. The Hot parts are the Heart, of all the parts the hottest, the Foun∣tain of native heat, and Closet of vital spirits. Also the Liver, flesh of the Muscles, Spleen, Reins, Lungs, Veins and Arteries, Fat also and fatness. The Cold, are Bones, Gristles, Ligaments, Tendons, Nerves, Cold. Membranes, Spinal Marrow, the Brain. The Moist parts are Fat, the marrow of the bones, the Brain, Moist. the marrow of the back, the Duggs, the Stones, the Lungs, the Spleen, Reins, flesh of Muscles, the Tongue, Heart and softer Nerves. The Dry, are Bones, Gristles, Ligaments, Tendons, Membranes, Dry. Arteries, Veins, hard Nerves. There is a certain difference of Temperaments in mans body by reason of Sex and Age: As for what belongeth to Sex, The Tem∣perament of Sex. Females are colder then Males, as having contracted a colder nature from their principles of generation, lest that the blood necessary for future ge∣neration by a stronger heat should be consumed. The Temperament is also changed according to age; to wit, The Tem∣perament of ages. the age which is principally ordained for certain internal changes by heat and moisture. Authors for the most part divide mans life into three ages, Child-hood, Manly-age, and Old-age; or Youthful,
Age of perfection, Declination; or if you please, into the first, middle, and last age; to which differences other ages, spoken of by Authors, may be referred. The first age therefore is our Infancy, which remaineth till the seventh year; the second our Child-hood, which for the most part continueth to the fourteenth year of our age: then our youth∣full age from the fourteenth to the five and twentieth, when our growth for the most part in stature ceaseth. And sometime Hip∣pocrates in his first Book of Aphorisms and fourteenth chap. ac∣compts these ages before mentioned, ages of growth. From thence to the five and thirtieth is our manly of flourishing age; from thence to the forty eighth year is our prime or most principal age, then begins old age; which hath its degrees also, for each age hath its Temperament, Infants and Boys are hot and moist; youthful age is most Temperate, and obtains the most convenient temper for humane actions; the flourishing manly age, or prime Viril age is hot and dry; lastly old age by reason of the wasting of the Ra∣dical moisture, and defect of the promigenial Innate heat is cold and dry; and by how much the older, by so much the colder and dryer. CHAP. V. Of Innate Heat. THat those things may the better be understood which we spake concerning Temperaments, Innate heat. we will say something of primi∣genial heat; for these things are the chief Instruments of the Vege∣tative soul. By the innate heat we do not understand that heat which belongeth to the mixt body, as mixed; but that heat which is proper to living Creatures; the which with the radical moisture is the next and immediate subject and domicil of the Soul, diffu∣sed through all the parts of the body. Nor by heat and moisture do we understand the bare quality, but the quality, with the Subject; to wit, a body hot and moist; the matter namely or Subject wherein heat is, and the quality from whose predominancy the Subject hath its name; to wit, the most pure, subtile, and hottest portion of the si∣milar parts, and especially of the Spermatick parts. This heat is otherwise called both by Physicians and Philosophers, by the name of the within seated spirit, or the native spirit; and it is more con∣veniently called, the within seated spirit, then the innate heat. For although in all the substance be hot; The In∣nate heat. yet heat is not sensibly perceived in all bodies, but onely in living Creatures, and the more perfect of them, which by touching are perceived to be hot.
This Innate heat consists of three things, Whereof the Innate heat con∣sists. which make up its ssence, Radical moisture, the within seated spirit, and heat; hence ernelius defines it to be the Primigenial humidity spread rough all the body, by the innate heat and spirit. And these ree, Heat, Spirit, and Moisture are linked together by the nearest conjunction in the world; for since that heat ought to be (as it were) Governour and Ruler of our lives, it is onely of an aëricus or spi∣ual nature, and so by it self moveable and separable, or apt to be disperst, it could not subsist alone, but that life might be prolonged,  ought to subsist in a more stable, moist and durable body, more ermanent; namely, not a thin and watry body, but a fat and oylie body which is inserted within the fibers of the similar parts, and is called the radical moisture. Concerning the nature and original of the innate spirit and heat, Of the original and nature of the In∣nate heat. there is a great controversy amongst Physitians and Philoso∣phers, and 'tis disputable, whether it be Elementary, or of another nature; And although in such an obscure thing, since very learned men disagree, it be very hard to determine any thing, yet I think theirs to be the more probable opinion, who consent with Aristotle in his second Book of Generation of living Creatures, and third Chapter; That Innate heat is not Elementary, nor hath its original from fire or other Elements; nor yet is it of a Heavenly na∣ture, but proportionable to the stability of Stars. For eve∣ry specifical form requires its peculiar domicil and proper subject, and the more noble form requires the more noble habita∣tion, and a more Divine power then Elementary, requires a more noble manfion then a body that is composed of Elements. Moreover, more noble actions, The sub∣sect of the Innate heat. and Sympathy and Antipathy are in it, which purely from Elements cannot proceed; & again this Innate heat and inborn Spirit, in many Plants is preserved in winter time, and in the midst of frosts safe and secure; Moreover this Innate heat, and radical moisture is founded in the parts which are fashioned in the first generation of an embryon; but the greatest plenty of it is in the heart, which from thence is called by Galen, the fire-fewel of the Innate heat. This inborn heat, is the chiefest instrument of the soul, The use of the Innate heat. by which it perfects, undergoes all the actions of life and whatsoever healthy thing in us, and profitable in generation, in nutriment, or in ex∣pulsion of a disease, is performed by that. From this benefit and excellency of Innate heat, The In∣nate soul is not a soul. some have taken it and the Soul for the same thing, and have called it the Essence of the vital faculty; the faculty governing us, the substance of the soul, and the Au∣thor of all our actions; but since the Innate heat is neither the
soul, nor the chief cause of our actions, it is onely the chief in∣strument in performing the actions of the soul, in operation, which is not corporal. This Innate heat doth not remain alwaies the same, The chan∣ging of the innate heat but is chan∣ged in the course of our age. For at our first coming into th world, it is most, and age increasing, the radical moisture wasted by degrees, and drieth up. So that in the end the radical moi∣sture being clearly gone, the heat also wanting wherewithall to sup∣port it self, goes out, and a natural death followeth. CHAP. VI. Of Spirits. BUT although every part of the body have this heat innate in it yet that alone sufficeth not to undergo all actions, Influent Spirits. but requires heat and spirits flowing from elsewhere; by which it may be stirred up and cherished; for by it self it hath no power to perform all acti∣ons, but soon languisheth, and so is scattered and vanisheth, ex∣cept it be daily stirred up, nourished, and strengthned by the spirits of the principal parts, especially the heart. Although the name of Spirit may admit of various significations yet in this place it is taken for the purest, What the influent spirit is. finest, thinnest, hottest, most moveable body, proceeding from the most purest and subtilest part of the bloud; and although the name of Spirit be attributed to the Innate heat, yet it especially belongs to those that are most flu∣ent and moveable. The Use of Spirits. These Spirits are the bond by which the body and soul are united, and the chief instrument of performing our actions, and being wrought in the principal parts of the body are conveyed through their channels into the whole body, and are joi∣ned with the Innate heat, that they may help the powers and fa∣culties to perform their actions. Spirits are not the Ve∣hicle of the faculties. But that is false which some teach, That the Spirit is the Vehicle of the faculties, and that the faculties and power of performing, are carried by these Spirits from the prin∣cipal parts; for the faculties of the soul are unseparable proprieties, and the soul is fitted with its faculty in all its parts, nor doth it take them from any other parts, but there useth them, where it hath fit instruments. These Spirits are of three sorts, Spirits how many forts. Natural, Vital, Animal. The Natural are generated in the Liver, and are said to flow from thence into all the parts of the body; but although the name of Spirit may in some measure be attributed to the most thin and subtile parts of the blood, which oftentimes comes forth out of the Veins with the blood: yet there is not a little difference betwixt them and the
other Spirits, properly so called; The natu∣ral Spirit. and so properly doth not deserve the me of Spirits, as the rest do, since they are not the proper instru∣ents of our actions, nor the bond of the soul, which uniteth it th the body, and is not generated in any peculiar cavity as the ital Spirits are. Its use. The use of the Natural Spirits are to strengthen e Innate Spirit in all its parts, that it may supply the Vital Spirits th matter, and may serve for the more convenient distribution of blood through the Veins. The Vital Spirit is generated in the heart, The Vital Spirits whence ge∣nerated. of the thinnest and purest blood, or the natural Spirit, commonly so called, and aêr, by hp of respiration drawn, & by the dilatatian of the Arteries in the left Ventricle of the heart, and being there freed from all fuliginous vapours is distributed through the Arteries into all the parts of the body; but the Blood out of which this Spirit is generated, for the most part is conveyed through the arterious vein, from the right Ventricle of the heart into the Lungs, and from thence with aër drawn by breathing in is carried through the arterious vein into the left Ventricle of the heart. Their Uses Now this Spirit with its innate heat in the heart, is not onely the chief instrument of the actions of the heart, but is distributed through the Arteries into the whole body, and stirreth up, cherisheth, increaseth, and strengthneth the innate heat in all the parts, and doth, as it were, give action and perfection thereunto, whence it is called by some, the Influent heat; besides which it affords matter fit for the generation of the animal spirits. Thirdly, The Ani∣mal Spirt. there are Animal spirits really different from the Vi∣l, for they are generated in a peculiar place, namely the Brain, and om thence through peculiar Channels, to wit Nerves, are disper∣d over the whole body; nor can the Vital Spirit perform what the Animal can, fince it is a living part, orespread with a Vital Spirit. Neverthelesse being toucht may be deprived of sense and motion rough the defect of the Vital Spirit. They are generated of the urest part of that blood, Where and whence ge∣nerated. which is contained in the comers or ca∣ities of the brain, which comes from the mixt vein and artery, nd is orespread with the vital and natural Spirit, the purest part eing poured out through little branches and small furrows in the bstance of the brain; for in this, and not in the Ventricles of the brain, the purest and most subtile part of the blood is changed into animal spirits. Its Uses. The Animal Spirit serves for the use of living eatures; namely to perform internal and external senses; as al∣, it serves for motion in Animals, and its presence occasioneth he faculty of the soul, actually to perform the operations of the nternal and external senses, and it perfecteth animal motion, and an occasion local motion.
CHAP. VII. Of the natural constitution of Organick parts, and the com∣mon Unity of parts alike, and not alike, called similar and dis∣similar parts. THe natural Constitution of the Organick parts, The natu∣ral consti∣tution of the Orga∣nick parts. consist  the due composition, and a convenient knitting of the  milar parts into one form, fit and profitable for action for making up whereof these things ensuing are necessary. First, Their Number. a certain number of the parts compounding, whic in some are lesse, others more, according as the instrument are more or lesse compounded, till at length there is made up a perfect instrument, which can perform perfect actions. Secondly, Magni∣rude. a due magnitude of the parts compounding, being neither bigger nor lesser then they ought. Thirdly, Confor∣mation. due framing: which comprehends first a convenien figure; secondly, cavities and pores, that in case a part be no solid, but porous, it may contain the just number and magnitude of those pores; thirdly, a certain disposition of the secundary qua∣lities, namely, that some parts may have a sharp superficies, some parts light, others heavy, some soft, others hard, some coloured others not; light colour, or dark colour, according as the nature and use of the part requireth: Site and connexi∣on. Fourthly, situation and connexi∣on, that every part may be in its own place, and may agree with others. Lastly, it is requisite that there be a common unity, a well of parts alike, as disalike, which is a coherence and growing together of divers bodies into one; Unity. which if it be wanting and ta∣ken away, the natural action is hindred. CHAP. VIII. Of the faculties of the Soul, and of the differences of actions i mans body. AFter that we have shewed wherein health consists, The actions and differ∣ences of the faculties of the mind. and what i requisite for the performing of actions, now we are to explain what are the differences of the faculties of the mind, and of actions in a body. Physitians (whom we here follow) divide Actions (for thei purpose) into Natural, Vital, and Animal, according to the three principal members, the Liver, Heart, and Brain, by which all Actions in the body are governed. For Physitians purposes are not the same with Philosophers, to inquire or search the kind
or differences of Souls of living creatures, which appears by the di∣inct manners of life, which is in Plants, in brute beastes, living treatures, and man, but onely ought to find out in man the dif∣erences of actions, whose actions it is their businesse to preserve, and if offended to restore; and moreover a Physitian doth not so much consider the faculties themselves, which hurt not, as the Or∣gans and instruments, and then distinguish actions according to the differences of them. CHAP. IX. Of the Natural faculty; and first of Nutrition, and Augmentation. THat we may begin with the natural faculty, The prin∣cipal natu∣ral facul∣ties. I mean the Natu∣ral faculty so called peculiarly by Physitians, (for as it is taken generally it is opposed to preternatural, and so the Vital and Ani∣mal faculties may be called Natural;) The Natural faculty by the Philosophers, is called a growing or flourishing power. All its actions tend to the preservation of its kind, or else of the Indivi∣duals of its species. Now to the preservation of its individuals be∣longs Nutrition, and Augmentation, to the preservation of its kind Generation belongs. The nourishing faculty whose action is called Nutrition, Nutri∣tion, or al∣teration. is that which turneth aliment into the substance of the body living, and restores what is taken away, and performs this work during all ones life time. The faculty increasing whose action is called Augmentation is, Augmen∣tation. that which extendeth the body to its due and just bigness, whose office is most performed in our growing age, and is extended till it compleateth and perfecteth its due magnitude. The generating faculty whose action is called Generation is, Genera∣tion. that by which man by his kind continues to perpetuity, which by Individuals cannot be done. And these three faculties being as it were the Princes, The ser∣vile facul∣ties, Attra∣ction, Re∣tention, Concocti∣on, Expul∣sion. have others as it were their servants added to them; The Attractive, the Retentive, the Alterative or Digestive, the Expulsive. The Attractive draweth profitable nourishment to the parts; The Retentive, reteins it so long there till it be digested. The Digestive altereth aliment, changeth it, & renders it fitting for that which is living. The Expulsive faculty rejects that as excrementi∣tious, which is dull and unfit to be converted into the substance of the body.
The Attractive, Retentive, and Expulsive faculties perform their actions principally by the benefit of the fibers. Attraction is made by the right fibers placed along the length of a member; Re∣tention by the oblique or flanting fibers; Expulsion by those that passe overthwart; but Digestion or Concoction are performed by the Heat of the member. But in the other parts of the body, the same faculties want not the help of the fibers, but perform their operations only by the help of the Innate heat which is in each part. But although aliment in nourishing be in a capacity to be like to the body yet actually it is unlike at the first; and therefore is changed by little and little untill it be rendered like to that into whose substance it is to be turned, which is performed by several Concoctions. Concoction is either private, One Con∣coction is publick, another pri∣vate. and is appointed onely for nou∣rishment and use of the part where it is made; or publick, which is made for the common use of the whole body. That is made in the several parts: this in the Stomack, Liver, and Spleen. Hence there is commonly accompted three Concoctions necessary for nou∣rishment of the body: The first is that which is made in the Sto∣mack, the second in the Liver, from which that of the Spleen is not to be excluded; the third in the several parts of the body. There are other actions which passe through the Fabrick of the whole bo∣dy, such as that of the Vital spirits in the Heart, the Animal in the Brain, and that of milk in the Duggs, the generation of seed in the Stones, unless you will refer this to the Generative faculty; not by reason of the part wherein it is generated, but by reason of the end for which it was instituted (namely) publick use. The first Concoction is made in the Stomack, The first Concoction is made in the Sto∣mack. which first pre∣pares Nutriment for the whole body: To which for this reason, not onely the power of Concoction, but also a double Appetite is given; Natural, by which it desires nourishment necessary for it self; Animal, by which it requires nutriment for the whole body. The Natural Appetite doth not sensibly want nutriment; Appetite two-fold. Natural. Animal. but as the other part by a natural instinct requires and draws nutriment. But the Animal Appetite hath an exquisite sense joyned to this de∣sire, living in the upper Orifice of the Stomack, by which it can perceive not onely its own wants, but the wants of all the body besides. For after the whole body is emptied, it draws out of the Veins, and the Veins which require to be filled again, suck up∣ward again from the Stomack, and their sucking is again re∣ceived in the Orifice of the Stomack, The first preparation of meat. in the mouth. whence ariseth the Animal Appetite, which is two-fold, Hunger and Thirst. But be∣fore Food descend into the Stomack, it is first prepared in the
mouth, where it is chewed into pieces by the teeth, moistened by the spittle and by the heat of the mouth, and of the tunicle which is common both to the Ventricle and the mouth, it is altered by attraction. The meate chewed and so altered in the mouth by the motion of the tongue, is sent down through the gullet into the stomack, which by the help of the oblique fibers is there reteined and imbrace, untill by the Digestive faculty and proper heat of the stomack and the ad∣acent heat it be changed into one form and masle, not unlike to the scum of Ptisan, and is called Chyle. Meat being taken, The Chyle. that ani∣nal appetite ceaseth, or hunger and thirst ceaseth, to wit the twitch∣ing and plucking for want of Aliment ceaseth; but the natural ap∣petite is not satisfyed, except perfectly nourished and refreshed with the blood of its own body. The Chyle generated in the stomack is sent down through its lower orifice into the first guts, by which, with their digestive force which they have by reason of their com∣munity with the stomack, is here somewhat wrought and perfected. But seeing that all nourishment is proper for nourishing certain parts of the body; Nature in this concoction separates nourishment, The excre∣ment of the first con∣coction twofold: thick. whence their ariseth a double sort of Excrements, the one thin, the other thick. The thick which is called the ordure of the paunch, whilst the Guts contract themselves up by the circular or transverse fibers, and the Muscles coming in the Guts by the paunch, the paunch is prest and the siege is thrust out, and voided through it. The other thin and watry which is not forthwith sent out through the paunch, but continues mixed with the chyle, Watery. that it may the more easily passe through the narrow Veins of the Mesentery, of the Port and of the Liver, afterward it is separated by the veins and expelled by Urine. The Chyle being separated in the Guts from the thicker dregs, is drawn by the Meseraick Veins, and is somewhat altered by them, The second concoction in the Liver. and first it receives the rudiments of blood, and hence it is carryed to the branches of the gate Vein, and Liver; and there by the innate heat and power of the Liver is turned into blood, which action is Sanguification, or turning into blood. The Liver reteins a part of this so gotten blood, that it may by it be nourished, the rest through the hollow Vein, in which some part of it is hitherto re∣teined and perfected, it distributes it through the whole body. That the purer blood may be generated in the Liver, the Spleen draweth to it self from the trunk of the Meseraick Veins, The use of the Spleen. before the Chyle be carryed to the Liver by an inbred faculty through the splenick branch of the gate Vein, the more earthy and thicker part of the Chyle, and generates blood, though not so good blood, yet fit
and proper for its own nourishment, and for the nourishment o the more ignoble parts of the lower Ventricle, that thereby the pun and better part of the Chyle may be drawn through the branch  the right side of the gate Vein, called the Mesentery to the Liver and there purer blood might be generated; and so in one work the Spleen serveth to cleanse the blood from dreggs and generate worser sort of blood; For the Spleen is not appointed only for th drawing and evacuating the Melancholy blood from the Liver. Th beginning of the Splenick branch, which ariseth not out of th Liver but the gate Vein; The Symptomes of Diseases in the Splee do shew the constitution of it to be neer that of the Liver, and the is a connexion of the Spleen with the stomack by Vessels. But the which cannot be turned into blood by the Spleen, by convenien passages is evacuated, and the thick and dreggish matter for th most part is sent through the paunch, either with the excrements o without them through the Haemerod Veins, and trunk of the gat Vein; yet sometimes 'tis evacuated by Urine. The acqueous matte most commonly is drawn through the Splenick arterics to the Vein and purged out there; yet sometimes that also is expelled by th paunch, by sweats, by the stomack. In Sanguification in the Liver, two excrements are generated Yellow Choler and Urine. The excre∣ments of the second concoction. Yellow cho∣ler. The Yellow Choler is gathered into the bladder of the Gall, and from thence the most part is sent into the Guts, and the sharpness of it stirs up the expulsive faculty to do its office, to stir the dreggs of the paunch, and is cast out with the ordure. But the serous matter and the aqueous humor is drawn by the Veins, through the emulgent vessels, and is transmitted through the Ureters to the bladder; Urine. by which afterwards it is cast out, and is called Urine. The Urine therefore consists, first of aqueous and potulent matte sent with the Chyle to the Liver, but unprofitable to nourish the body, Urine con∣sists of three things. afterwards of a clammy or salt excrement of blood, and thirdly of natural contents in sound bodies, but in bodies diseased of many other things which are mingled with the Urine. And so Urine is properly called an excrement of the second concoction, to wit, where∣in the serous part of Urine is separated from blood, and mixed with potulent matter, affords Urine. Blood thus separated and cleansed from its excrements, The parts of the masse of blood. neverthe∣less is said to contein in it self many humours; Nor is that masse of blood so elabourated and wrought in the Liver, and conteined in the Hollow Vein plainly Homogeneal or of the same kind, but some parts in it are Temperate, others colder, others hotter, others dryer, others moister; The most Temperate in its kind is called blood, the hotter and dryer part by reason of its consanguinity with choler
is called Cholerick blood, the colder and moister is called Pitui∣tous blood, the colder and dryer is called Melancholy blood. Yet all these parts of blood are conteined under the form or essence of blood, and are profitable for the nourishment of the body. Nor do the humors in a sound body constitute a masse of excrementitious blood, neither in the Veins of a man most healthy are these humors Choller, Phlegme, Melancholy, acounted excrements. Hence ariseth the decision of the question, whether our body's be nourished by blood only, or by the four humors; For when Aristotle Tays that animals that have blood in them are nourished by blood only, he intended the whole masse of blood; but Physitians when they say that our bodies are nourished, not only by blood but by other humors, by blood they understand the most temperate part of blood, or one part of the masse of blood, and this they would have, that not only that part, but the rest of the masse, to be profi∣table for the nourishment of the body. But that our bodies are nou∣rished by excrementitious humors, no man in his wits ever said. The third concoction. The blood being perfected in the Liver, is distributed through the branches of the Hollow Vein over the whole body, to nourish it and all its parts: That change by which it is assimilated to other parts, is called the third concoction, which is performed by the in∣nate heat, in each part. Four se∣condary hu∣mors. In this concoction the blood before it assi∣milates the parts, receives some external dispositions, and is chan∣ged into four humors called secondary humors. The first is called Innominate, or without a name, The first In nomi∣nate. when the blood passeth through the capillar Veins, and admits of a sensible mutation by reason of the heat of the external parts, and in the Spermatick parts turns white, in the fleshy parts remains red. 2 The second is Dew, The second Dew. namely that blood which passeth without the orifice of the Veins. 3 The third is called Glue, The third Glue. The fourth is cambium or ex∣change. The excre∣ments of the third concoction two-fold; thick, thin. because while it is still more concocted it becomes clammy and thick. 4 The fourth is called dry Exchange which turneth into the substance of the part, and exchangeth and changeth its nature with it. This third concoction hath also its excrements; one thick, to wit filthiness in the skin, which is collected in the garments, also in the brain, eyes, and ears; the other thin, which is dissolved by insensi∣ble transpiration, sometimes also it is evacuated by sweat. For al∣though all things are rightly performed in the body, and the nou∣rishment be well concocted, and moreover nothing external and violent befal the body, as Baths, Heat, Violent exercises, no sweat passe through the skin in the night; yet because even in the most healthy all things are not ever exactly performed, and many de∣viate from their best condition as to health, and moreover many
errors are committed in diet; Nature useth to expel such superflui∣ties by sweats. Another office of the natural function is Augmentation or in∣creasing, Augmen∣tation. by which mans body, out of nourishment taken and assi∣milated to the parts, is extended in all its dimensions, and acquires magnitude convenient to perform actions. Nutrition and Aug∣mentation how they differ. Although this function ariseth from the same soul with nutrition, and is perfected with the same Instrument, Innate Heat; hath the same matter out of which it proceeds, blood; the same subject, a living body; yet it ariseth from another efficient determinate cause, to wit, from the increasing fa∣culty; it differs in form, which in nutrition is a coagulation of ali∣ment, but in augmentation there is a motion of Extension of the whole & of every part therof; it differs also in regard of the end, which in Nutrition is only a restoration of that which is taken away; but in Augmentation an acquiring or a getting of a greatet magni∣tude to exercise perfectly all the necessary actions of our life; and lastly in time, for Nutrition dureth the whole time of our lives, Augmentation to a certain time in our life. For man as other living creatures doth not alwayes grow, but to the certain time of his age; which comes not to passe by reason of the soul, which al∣wayes reteins its force and strength, but by reason of the body, espe∣cially of the bones, which in processe of tims are so hardned, that they are not apt to any farther extension of growth. CHAP. X. Of Generation. BUT since man although he be nourished, cannot live perpetu∣ally and in individuals, as other living Creatures also cannot indure to perpetuity; The gene∣rative power. the generative power is granted and given by the Creator of all things, that mankind might be preser∣ved, and the third kind of Natural actions is Generation, which by ejaculation of seed begets his like. For although this faculty and Action be common to plants, yet in man and other more perfect Creatures it requires greater preparation, and distinction of sex, as male and semale concur in Generation, and it is necessary that both of them do some way help and conduce to Generation, and the male not in himself but in another, The distin∣ction of Sexes. The instru∣ments of generation. but the foemale in her self doth generate. For the male ejaculates his prolifique sperm into the female womb, which mingled with hers, is cherished by the same, it is also nourished, and reteined until it hath the shape of a perfect man. For which purpose the Creator hath made necessary Instruments for both Sexes, for the male Testicles, Vessels prepa∣ring,
and conducting sperm, and a yard necessay to ejaculate it into the part most fit to receive it, for the Females, Stones, semi∣nary vessels, and the womb. There are two principles which concur to the Generation of a Child, the seed of the male and female, and the menstruous blood. The Prin∣ciples of generation. Seed. The seed is a body hot and moist, & full of that divine Spirit of the first Principles (or Elements,) and proportionable to the Quint∣essence or Element whereof Stars were made, fit for the propagation of the Soul, and generation of a living Creature like it self; and is ge∣therated in the Stones, whither the purest part of the blood & Spirits, and heat, is sent through the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, from the remote parts of the body, and is changed into a white frothy or slimy matter; The male and female seed both confer, seeing the same Instruments are appointed (by nature) for generating and semitting of sperm, and the same cause efficient, and the same matter in each; for the forms of each alike do manifest themselves in the off-spring, Blood. although the power and force be greater in the male then the female. But the menstruous blood is only the material prin∣ciple; wherefore it is ordered by the Creator, that at the time when semales are apt and fit for procreation; which for the most part is from the fourteenth till the five and fortieth year of their age, that blood which the other parts wants not, each month is sent to the womb to supply what may be wanting for a little one, or if the fe∣male be not great, may be by it evacuated. Menstru∣ous blood. This menstruous blood of it self is not offensive, nor is it expelled because it is hurtful, but because it aboundeth in quantity; but when it becomes pernicious, 'tis by reason of its remaining too long in the body & by its comix∣ture with other humours. The forming of the young is caused by the Soul, The forma∣tion of the young. which is in the seed, and there shews it self in two actions, in putting life into the conception, and forming of all the parts: and the Soul, as Scali∣ger writeth out of Themistius, is its own architect, which builds a convenient domicill for its own habitation; But it receiveth this power from the Creator, whose Instruments and hands as it were the Souls are, and he hath given this energy to them at the Creati∣on of them, then which nothing can be more wonderful to be thought on. The Generative faculty, hath two others whereby it performs its Office; The Alterative and Formative. The Alte∣rative. The For∣mative. The Alterative is that which changeth the generative matter into the substance of the young, and all its parts; the formative is that which Forms all the members and gives them their quantity, figure, number, place, and the rest. The Instrument, which the Soul and formative power useth, is the for∣mative
or plastick heat, or that Spirit proportionable to the Ele∣ment of the Stars, for the seeds being received into the womb are mingled together, reteined, cherished, and the power which lyes hidden in the seed is stirred up by the innate heat of the womb, and then a Conception is said to be made, Concepti∣on. and then begins a sending forth of the instruments of the body to be made, & then is it called a Conception, which commonly is said to continue til the seventh day. But first of all, The order of frame∣ing. Firs the membrances, whereof are framed two. Chorion, Amnios. The Secon∣dine. The Sper∣matick parts are described together. Theumbili∣sall vessels. The Veins belonging to the Na∣vel. Two Artc∣ries. Urachus. The time of formati∣on. the membranes about the Child are formed, by which the seed is shut in, and the Spirit and heat thereof is covered, and as it were intrenched. They are two in number, the first is called Chorion, and covers the whole Child, and is fastened to the vessels belonging to the Navel, & by their intervening the whole cleaveth to the womb: the other coare doth immediately cover the Child and is called Amnios. These two coats in the birth seem to be one as it were, and come forth after the Child, and are therefore called the Afferbirth. But the solid and Spermatick parts shall be explained in the first place, and afterwards according to their nobleness, and as necessity requires, the rest shall be perfectly shewn. The Infant in the womb doth not take that nourishment, which it receiveth by the mouth, but from the Mother, for the receiving whereof there are appointed by nature four vessels belonging to the Navel; namely a Vein which is a branch which comes from the Gate-vein, which is as it were the infants nurse, two Arteries branches arisen from the Iliak Vein, by which the Infant breaths (although later Authors, who teach us that the vital Spirits by which the Child breaths proceed not from the Mother, but from the Childs own heart, do assign another use to the said Iliak branches; to wit, that the Vital Spirits should be carried from the heart of the Child to the exterior parts thereof, namely the Secondines) and the Urine-passage which is carried from the bottom of the bladder unto the Navel. The time from the conception to the bringing forth, Physitians divide into two parts; the first is called the time of formation, from the conception till the time when first the Child begins to move; the second the time of adorning, which is the time from its motion till its coming forth. Of adorn∣ing. Hippocrates in his book of the Nativity of a Child, makes the time of Females formation to be two and fourty dayes, but males thirty dayes, which is to be con∣ceived from their more imperfect formation; but afterwards nature more elaborately frames the parts, which are not framed in males till three months, nor in females till the fourth month. When all the members are framed and rendred more firm, the In∣fant
begins to spring and kick, in males in the third, in females in e fourth month as tis commonly reported, so that the time of rmation being doubled is the time of quickning, The time of motion. the time of mo∣on being trebled is the time of bringing forth. Yet one quickning  more obscure, another more manifest, which about the middle of time of a Womans going with Child, as all Women commonly perswade themselves, is first perceived. The time that Women go with Child although it be uncertain and various; yet for the most part, The time of birth. it is nine months end or the be∣ginning of the tenth month, that a natural birth happens: for the most part such Children as live come into the World at that time, and that time for humane birth is most natural. But before half a years time experience tells us, that a Child can hardly be brought forth and live; and if it so happen that before the scaventh month be ended, a Child be borne and live, it is a great rarity and very strange. But in the seaventh month because the perfection is finished of all the parts, the Child may live, and especially, which, as Hippocrates in his book of beginnings says, is of two hundred and ten dayes, that is, about the end of the seaventh month brought forth. But Hippo∣crates says that a Child borne in the eighth month cannot live. Yet others say, that some that are borne in the eighth month may live. After the tenth month, the Child being great wants nourishment and roome to be in, although we read some are delivered after the tenth month, yet that is seldome. The time of legiti∣mate birth. For a legitimate birth (accor∣ding to the Law of Nature) is then when there is not roome enough for the Child to live and move in, nor aliment enough to satisfy him, for then 'tis time to shake off his shackles those tunicles, and in∣deavour to make away for its own birth, and the Mother finds paines, and the womb strives to put out that bagg, and by its expul∣sive faculty sends forth the young, which thing the Voluntary endea∣vour of the mother much helpeth, which is done by her contracting her Spirits, and depression of her Midriff and squeesing the muscles of the paunch. CHAP. XI. Of the Vital Faculty. THE Vital faculty which Physitians call the second faculty, al∣though some would refer it to the Animal, The Vital faculty dif∣fers from the other faculries. some to the Natural faculty, and others think it to be mixed of them both; Yet since it differs not only from those actions, which are performed by the na∣tural and Animal faculties, but also goes forth by its own organs, nor doth it move hither and thither by the assistance of the Animal
Spirits, but by its own proper Spirits, which from thence are called Vital Spirits, it is deservedly to be esteemed a peculiar faculty, di∣inct from the Vegetable and Animal faculties. There are three sorts of Vital faculties, Its actions are three. and so many motions of the heart wherein they relide. The first is the generation of the Vital Spirit and heat; The second is the Pulse; The third is the Irascible faculty. The first to wit, Generati∣on of Vital Spirits. A Pulse. Its defi∣nition. Of Dila∣ting. Of Contra∣cting. is the generation of the Vital Spirits, and influent heat; The second, without the which the first cannot perform its office is the Pulse, namely the motion of the heart and of the Ar∣teries, consisting in dilating and contracting, that so the Vital Spi∣rits may be generated and distributed, and the natural heat may be preserved in its natural harmony: By Dilatation the heart is filled, and attracts to its self air, with blood from the right Ventricle, by the Venous Artery (which goes from thence to the heart) and at∣tracts from the lungs air and blood by help of the Arterial Vein into the left Ventricle of the heart; for the generation and refresh∣ing, and restauration of the Vital Spirits and heat. By the Systole or Contraction of the Heart, it distributeth the Vital Spirits and Arterious blood through and by the help of the great Artery into the whole body, and sends the fuliginous excrements to the Lungs by the Arterial Vein. In like manner the Dilatation of the Artery through its little Orifices, terminating in the skin, attracts to it self ambient air to form and cool its heat; the Orifices that are termi∣nated neer the Heart, draw from it the hottest and thinnest blood, full of Vital Spirit; But as the mouths of the Arteries with the Ori∣fices of the Veins, do draw the purest and finest Spirits to fostet and cherish their heat, but by Contraction they expl fuliginous excre∣ments, which action is called a steaming through or transpiration, which is made through the hidden Pores of the skin, and by the Latines is called Transpiratio. In the third place the Irascible faculty belongeth to the Vital faculty, The Irasci∣ble faculty. from whence, Anger, Joy, Fear, Sadness, and terrour, and other passions of the mind arise. And that its residence is in the Heart is most evident, because the motion of the Heart and the Pulse of the Arteries are most evidently changed in the passions of the mind. Respiration is also added to the Vital faculty as principally ne∣cessary to further its action, Breathing. and hath the same end and purpose, as the Pulse hath, and is instituted for the benefit of the Heart. It is per∣formed principally by the Lungs, and the Lungs are as it were the fan or bedows of the Heart, and are the primary Instruments of breathing, and are indued with a peculiar power of moving them∣selves,
even as the Heart is, differing only from the Animal faculty. Nor are the Lungs moved only by the motion of the breast, but by their proper force and power. The motion fo the Lungs. And although the motion of the Lungs and Breasts are made together; yet neither are the cause of the others motion, but they therefore move together, because they con∣spire to bring one end to pass: for the Lungs are steched that air may come into them, as into a pair of bellows drawn wid, and are so much dilated and extended, as the dilating of the Beast will give way to; and on the other side the Breast is dilated more or lesse, as there is more or lesse air to be drawn in As the Pulse consists of two motions Dilatation and Contraction, A two-fold motion of respirati∣on. Inspira∣tion, Exi∣ration. so Respiration is performed by a doube motion, Inspiration, and xspiration. By inspiration, the Lungs and Breast being exended the air by the mouth and nostrils is drawn in: by expiration the Lungs and Breast being contracted, the hotter air and fuliginous vapours are sent forth at the mouth and nostrils. CHAP. XII. Of the Animal Faculty, and first of the external senses. THE Third sort of faculties and actions in man, The Ani∣mal facul∣ty. Physitians call Animal faculties, which either are resident in the brain, or de∣rived from it, and takes necessary helps or the prformance of its acti∣ons from adjacent parts. They distingui the Aminal faculties, into the sensitive, motive, and Princes, and under the sensitive only the external senses are comprehended; under the Princes, the internal and rational power is involved: we will handle them in this order; first we will treat of the external senses, afterwards of the internal and rational faculties, at last of the appetite and moving faculty. The exter∣nal senses are five. The external senses are those by which we perceive and judge sensible external objects, without the precedence of any other facul∣ty. But that a perception may be made four things ought to con∣cur, first the mind perceiving, secondly the instrument which is double; first the Spirit, secondly the member, wheein the sense is; thirdly the object or perceptible things, fourthly the medium inter∣ceding betwixt the instrument and the object. The external snses are five, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, The five external senses. Seeing. Touching or Feeling. The Sight is an external sense, discerning and knowing by the benefit of the Eye, the several kinds of visible things; whose adae∣quate Instrument is the Eye; the Eye consists of divers Tunicles, the adnate or conjunctive, the Horny, the Grapy, in the middle whereof is a round hole, which is called the Pupil, and is the inlet
and window as it were of visible Species; then the Tunicle in man∣ner of a Net, the Pannicle without a name, the Cobweblike and the Vitreous Membranes; three humors, the watery, Crystalline, and Vitreous; a nerve optick and muscles. The object of sight is what∣ever is visible, to wit, colours, which are visible in potentia, in that they are capable of being seen, but in action to be visible light is required. The medium is any transparent and diaphanous body. Hearing is an external sense, Hearing. perceiving by the benefit of the eare any sound that is audible; the adaequate instrument, or that without which a sound cannot be heard is the Eare, but especially as Galen teacheth in his first Book and third Chapter, of the causes of Symptomes, the term and exrremities of the Auditory Pores, where the end being dilated, the Auditory Nerves receive part of the sound. The Object is whatever is audible, or sound: the medium which it is conveyed through, is water and aire. Smelling is an external sense discovering smells by the benefit of the Nose, Smelling. or mammillary processes. Its adaequate instrument are the Nostrils, but principally the mammillary processes; Its object odours, the medium by which odours are conveyed, is aire, and water. Tast is an external sense, Tasting. perceiving savours by help of the tongue; Its proper Instrument is the Tongue, a thin flesh soft and spungy, like to no other part of the body; the Object is savours, the medium a spongy skin, or porous cover of the Tongue, and spitly moisture. Touch lastly is an external sense, Feeling. discovering by the benefit of a membrane all Tangible bodies. But though the skin be the chiefest instrument of the sense of feeling, and covereth the whole body, that it may descry external objects and injuries happening to the body, and the skin in the hand be the chiefest rule to try all tangibles: yet there is no adaequate Instrument of touch; since it is more largely diffused, and other parts are likewise indued with that sense. But the adaequate organ that is of touch is a membrane; For wheresoever a membrane is there may be a touch, and where∣soever a membrane is not, there cannot be a touch, and the skin it self obtains that whereby it is sensible, as it participates of the fibers and little membranes of the Nerves.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Internal Senses. THE Internal Senses are those, The Inter∣nal Senses are three. that are conversant about sen∣sibles revealed by the external senses; and they are three, accor∣ding to the diversity of their functions and operations, which are administred by them; The Common sense, the Phantasie and the Memory. The common sense is an internal sense, The com∣mon sense. perceiving all external objects by the help of the external senses, discerning them asunder, judging of their absense, and bringing sensible Species to the Phan∣asie. The Phantasie is an Internal sense, The Phan∣tasie. which considereth more dili∣gently, and longer retaineth the sensible Species received from the common-sense, and those Species that are formed by it self. The Memory is that which receiveth and retaineth the sensible Species, which are known by the Phantasie, The Me∣mory. and when occasion re∣quireth exhibits and brings them forth again. But there are two acts of the memory, the one is called by the name of the faculty of the memory, the other is Reminiscence. The memory is a prompt apprehension or repetition of any thing heretofore known and per∣ceived, as it was perceived and repeated and that readily. Remini∣scence. Remini∣scence is that which out of the remembrance of one or more things spoken of, by regression comes to remember that, which before could not come readily into the mind. The principle and immediate Instrument of all the internal senses, and of all principal actions is the brain, which other things shew, but this especially; That if that be hurt these actions are hurt, and be∣cause that in curing these, the remedies must be applyed to the brain. Now all these action are performed in the substance of the brain, nor are those faculties distinguished by their seats or places in the brain, neither are their distinct operations performed in distinct places of the brain. For there is not sufficient reason given why the common sense should be seated in the former part of the brain: for although it be the Center where all the external senses meet and con∣cur; yet the Nerves that are subservient to the external senses, take not their beginning from the fore most part of the brain. So no evi∣dent reason can appear to perswade why the Memory should be se∣parated from the Phantasie, and by consequence from the reasonable faculty; and why the Phantasie in the former, the Rational in the middle, and the Memory in the hinder part of the brain should be
placed; for the Imagination and Memory are conversant about the same things though after a different manner; But although often∣times one of these faculties being offended the others remain un∣prejudiced, as oftentimes the Memory is lost, the imagination, and rational faculties not hurt, and on the other side the apprehension and ratiocination offended, and the Memory sound and perfect; yet that cometh not so much to passe through the diversaty of organs, parts of the brain from whence those actions arise, as by the change of their proper dispositions, and of those things which are required to perform those actions. The affections of those senses hitherto explained are sleep and watchfulness. The af∣fections of the senses are two. Sleep. Sleep is a cessation of the natural and commonsense, & of the external senses ordained for the health of living Creatures, by detaining of the Animal Spirits in the brain, & hindering them from flowing to the Instruments of sense and motion. The causes that bring it to passe that the Animal Spirits flying into the brain, are there detained, and are as it were smitten and cease, are several, whereof some perform it by taking them away, as watching, labour and other things in the like nature; or by rendring them lesse moveable and, benumm'd, or as others conceive by penning in, and stopping their way as vapours ascending after taking of meat and drink, or as it were pleasingly and contentedly stopping, inviting from motion to rest, which sweet melodies, murmuring streams, gentle rocking and the like occasion; The end of sleep is the re∣freshing and strengthning of the Spirits and external senses, by taking away their motions and operations, and from hence comes a reco∣very of their strength and vigour. Watchfulness is opposed to sleep, Watching. and it is nothing else but the efficacy or force of sense, or solution rather of the senses, proceeding from the hinderance of the free flowing of the Animal Spirits into all the members of the body. Man waketh or is stirred up out of his sleep after a two-fold manner; Either of his own accord, when con∣coction is performed, the vapours that hindred the Spirits coming forth are discussed and separated, or sharp vapours are carried to the brain and trouble the Amimal Spirits, that they cannot freely flow into the instruments of the senses; or by an external cause, when from a more violent external cause, as Clamour, or touch, the sensitive faculty being stirred up converts its self to perceive. Nor do the organs of the senses wholly want Animal Spirits in sleep, but some stil remain in them, sufficient to discern more vehement objects.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Intellective Faculty. AT length we come to the understanding or rational faculty, whereby a man is elevated above other living Creatures, and is neer to, and as it were like unto his maker. The understanding abstracts things from their matter, and without considerations of matter, without quantity, without figure, knoweth things, under∣sands things freed from their matter; it is almost capable of infi∣iteness, it reflects back upon its self, and knoweth it self, and under∣standeth that it doth understand, and because of that it hath an un∣atiable desire of the knowledge of eternity and blessedness. It per∣orms its functions without all corporeal instruments; yet it hath eed of the Phantasie as its object to understand, and the Imagina∣tion supplies the mind with intelligible matter; And therefore al∣though it have not its seat in the brain, as in its organ by it self; yet because it worketh by the help of the Phantasie, and it behoveth the understanding to watch the Imagination, by accident and by the consequence its seat is appointed, where the imagination is, na∣mely the brain. The reasonable soul comprehends two faculties, The Under∣standing. The Will. the Intellect whereby we apprehend things, and the Will whereby we are carried to chose things which we understand under the notion of good; And things, as they are beings, we know them; and as they are good, we desire them. CHAP. XV. Of the desire and moving faculty. BEsides the knowing faculty, Appetite two-fold, sensitive; rational. there is given to man an appetite and force of moving; The Object of mans appetite is good, whether it be really so, or seemingly so. The appetite is two-fold, sensitive and rational: sensitive is that which desires that which seems good to the senses, rational is that which desires that good, that seems so to reason, and the motions of the sensitive faculty are often resi∣sted by the motions of the rational faculty, and there ariseth strife & discord betwixt the sensitive & rational faculty. Out of the appetite, as its actions, arise the affections and passions of the mind, as we call them. Voluntary Animal motion follows the desire, Voluntary motion. for after that an ex∣ternal object is brought by the external senses, and common sense to the Phantasie, it is known as profitable, and acceptable, or as hurt∣full,
displeasing. Love, or hatred followeth this knowledge, or th desire of what is pleasing, and flight of what is displeasing. Motio presently follows the desire in brute beasts, but in man there is t Judgment of the intellective faculty, which values what is truly go and what hurtfull. The motive faculty. Then the motive faculty follows that motio which is commanded by the rational or sensitive faculty, as the o or the other over-ruleth, by the contraction of the muscles the ad quate Instruments of motion, which draw the tendons, these t bones, and they being moved, the members and whole body is ca ried from place to place, either to accept of what is grateful, or to re∣sist and fly from what is hurtful. But although a muscle be the adaequate instrument of motion yet the chiefest part of it consists of fibers or smal strings, The In∣strument of motion. which be∣ing contracted, the muscle is contracted and motion performed Although their are four different motions of the muscles, while they are contracted, or extended, or moved transverse, or remai streight, as Galen says in his first Book of the motion of muscles an eighth Chapter, or as others explain it, contraction, conservation o contraction or tonick motion, relaxation, and perseveration of re∣laxation: yet contraction only, to which tonick motion belongs, is the proper action of the muscles; but extension which is a passion rather then an action, is not the immediate cause of motion; for whilst a muscle contracted by its opposite muscle is extended, it suf∣fers, it doth not act.
THE SECOND BOOK. PART I. OF DISEASES. CHAP. I. Of the nature of a Disease. WHereas we have hither treated of those things that are incident to the body according to Nature, Thingspr∣ter-natural how many. and so have discoursed about health; now I will speake of those things that are preter-natural or contrary to Nature, (for I do not intend to make any distinction betwixt these) They are in number three, a Disease, the cause of a Disease, and Symptomes: in the handling whereof the Pathological part of Physick is delivered. And first for what belongs to a disease; Although as the name of health is generally attributed to all things that happen to a man ac∣cording to nature, so the name of a disease is given to all things that befal a man contrary to nature, and those are said to be morbi∣fick: yet if we may speak properly, these three, a Disease, the cause of a Disease, and Symptomes, as they differ in the thing, so they may be discerned by their names also. But whereas a disease is conrrary to nature; The formal reason of a disease. but health is that power of acting which is to be performed according to nature: a dis∣ease is an impotency of performing natural actions; and as those who are apt to do those things which are according to nature, are said to be sound; so those are deservedly said to be sick, who are un∣apt to perform those actions. Moreover the Subject of a disease, as also of health, The Sub∣ject of a disease. is only the living parts of a body, as being those to which alone a power of un∣dergoing natural actions is given; But all those things which are not in the number of the living, as humors and other things, which are not able to perform natural actions in a man, cannot be the subject of a disease. The cause of a Disease or of impotency to perform actions, is an
ill constitution of the parts, The causes of a dis∣ease. The defini∣tion of a disease. The Galeni∣call defini∣tion of a disease. as the cause of health is a right disposi∣tion of the same. Hence a Disease is defined to be an impotency of the living parts of man to perform natural actions, arising from their constitution contrary to nature. Although according to Galen also to be sick, is not to be able to operate, and so this definition is not contrary to the sense of Galen: yet that out of the definition of diseases, differences, and profitable observations may the better be drawn, Galen retains the same terms of the definition, but places them otherwise, and in the second Chap∣ter of the differences of Diseases, defining a Disease saith; That a constitution of a vitious function contrary to nature is the cause thereof, and in his first Chapter of the differences of Symptomes calls it a disposition contrary to nature, by which action is hurt. Namely as health is a certain quality, or harmony in the qualities in magnitude, number, figure, and other things neceslary for the constitution of each part, by reason whereof the body is disposed, and made fit to perform natural actions. So a Disease is such a qua∣lity by reason of which the same body is rendred unfit to perform the same actions. Diathesis what it is. For the word Diathesis taken generally signifies every quality according to which a man is well and ill disposed, whether it be easily or difficultly taken away. And therefore as certain later Physicians will have it, A Disease is not only a privati∣on. a Disease is not simply the want of health, and nothing positive, but such a want as proceedeth from a disposition contrary to that disposition, on which health de∣pends, which is wholly something positive, and when a part is wounded or diminished, a quality and disposition is brought into it contrary to that which was present there before in time of health: as a hand that is wounded, is otherwise difposed then that which is well, and that which hath four fingers, otherwise then that which hath five. In brief; a Disease consisteth not only in privation of a good constitution, but in a contrary and vitious constitution. CHAP. II. Of the differences of Diseases. THE differences of Diseases are two-fold; The Essen∣tiall diffe∣rences of diseases. Essential or Proper, which are taken from the essence it self of a disease, and so agree to one kind that they cannot be common to another; or accidental, which are taken from those things which follow the essence of a dis∣ease, and from other circumstances. But because as 'tis said be∣fore, there is one natural constitution of the similar parts, as they
are such and another of the organick, and a common Unity in them both: the regression from that natural constitution of every one affords several kinds of Diseases. First therefore, Diseases of the similar parts. the proper Diseases of the similar parts are Dis∣eases of Intemperature, when that due proportion of the primary qualities is not observed, but when one doth excell the other three, or two overrule the other two, contrary to nature. Moreover there are found in similar parts Diseases of hidden qualities, or of the whole substance, as they call them; when there is not only in the constitution of the similar parts, a due con∣gruity of the primary qualities, but a certain disposition also of the occult qualities is requisite. Secondly, Diseases of Organick parts. there are so many signes of Organick Diseases as we have said, are requisite for the composition, and constitution of an Organ; namely four, Diseases of Confirmation, of Number, Magnitude and Composition. Lastly, the third kind of Diseases, Common to both. which are common to them both; They call solution of Unity, or continuity. CHAP. III. Of Diseases of Intemperature. DIseases of Intemperature, as is said, Diseases of Distemper. are when that due pro∣portion of primary qualities is not observed, which ought to be, but either one overcomes the other three, or two the other two. Whence one distemper is said to be simple, another com∣pound. Simple is that wherein one quality exceedeth, and this ac∣cording to the number of the four qualities is quadruple, hot, cold, moist, dry. Compound is that wherein two qualities exceed, and this according to the quadruple mixture of the primary qualities is four-fold, hot and moist, hot and dry, cold and moist, and cold and dry. And so in the whole there are eight Diseases of Intempe∣rature. But these distempers are again distinguished divers wayes, Distemper without and with matter. which distinctions neverthelesse produce not new kinds but differences, which are found in many differing in kind. For first, one distemper is with matter, another without matter. Intemperature with mat∣ter is when it hath a humour joyned with it, and is cherished by it; Distemper without matter, is that which is cherished by no preter∣natural humour, as when heat is sent into any part from the fire or heat of the Sun. Moreover one distemper is equal, another unequal: Equal in∣tempera∣ture. equal is that which is a little and equal in all living parts, and affects them all a∣like,
Unequal. and equally: Unequal, is that which is more intense in one part, and more remisle in another, and affects one more, another lesse. For since that the members of our body are constituted of many particles, it may come to passe, that all may not be equally affected by the altering cause, but some more, others lesse, whence an unequal distemper ariseth. But if the action thereof proceed so far, until that all are altered and affected equally, that is an equal distemper; Whence an unequal distemper is joyned with pain and trouble, as being that wherein the part is as yet to be altered; but in an equal distemper no pain, nor molestation is perceived, as be∣ing that wherein the part is already altered, and the Intemperature becomes as it were familiar and domestick. CHAP. IV. Of Diseases of the whole substance or of hidden qualities. IT is a controversie amongst Physitians, whether there are any other. Whether there are any Disea∣ses besides those of In∣tempera∣ture. Diseases in the similar parts, besides those of Intempera∣ture. Truly the ancient Physitians make no mention of them; but the Moderne do and principally Fernelius in Lib. 1. Pathol. Cap. 2. and Lib. 2. of the Hidden causes of things, Cap 9. and afterwards he largely endeavours to prove that there is yet another kind of Dis∣ease besides Intemperature in the similar parts, and that is two∣fold: the one is of the whole substance; the other in the matter, which may be seen in the fore-quoted places. But 'tis not our pur∣pose largely to reckon up the opinions of others, for this Epitome will not permit it. But that we may briefly propound our opinion, There are Diseases of hidden qua. lities. The reoson. we determine that there is another kind of Disease in the similar parts, besides Diseases of Intemperature, being so perswaded for these reasons; first, because every agent which acteth, desires to make the patient like it self. But there are agents from the whole substance or such things, whose actions can be reduced into no manifest quality, and which are be∣yond the power of Elements, as elsewhere is proved: It necessarily follows that those agents from the whole substance, whilst they bring in Diseases, and act in our bodies, do not change the primary, but Occult qualities, and introduce Diseases agreeable, and correspon∣dent to their nature. Also because contraries may be cured and re∣sisted by their contraries: But the whole substance, or things acting in Occult qualities cure many Diseases; It necessarily follows that their are such Diseases to which such Medicines are opposed: and un∣lesse there should be certain Occult Diseases, in vain are Medicines
invented which act in the whole substance. Thirdly, since there are actions hindred or hurt which neither can be referred to any Disease commonly known, nor to any external error, as may ap∣pear in the plague and other Venemous Diseases, hence we may well conclude that there are other Diseases of Intemperature, from whence these kind of mischiefs happen. But which and what those Diseases are is likewise controverted. We setting aside the opinions of others determine, Which are Diseases of the whole substance. those Diseases of the whole substance, or of hidden quality, to be those which consist in a certain occult, and malignant disposition of the simi∣lar parts, and to be no other then such whose mischiefs cannot be re∣ferred to the primary, qualities, and such as the agent cause excites, which is endued with a malignant, venemous and occult quality, and which are cured not by primary qualities, but by those things which are said to act in the whole substance. But Diseases of matter which Fernelius brings there, Whether there be ary Diseases of matter. are no new Diseases of similar parts, but either Organick Diseases, as softnesse and hardnesse in parts, wherein they ought not to be such, or Symp∣tomes, or causes of Diseases. CHAP. V. Of Organick Diseases. THE second kind of Diseases, are of the Organick parts, Organick Diseases. which in general are called Evil composition; namely when the natural constitution of the parts, as they are Organick is vitiated, which although it may agree also to the similar repears, yet it happeneth to them not as they are such, The diffe∣rence of Organick Diseases. but as they are Or∣ganick. Again the differences hereof are so many, as there are qua∣lities belonging the natural constitution of an Organick part; Ne∣mely, first a definite number of the parts constituting, then a con∣venient magnitude of the same; Thirdly a due framing, or confor∣mation; which comprehends a decent figure, cavity, or solidity, and smoothnesse and roughnesse, and such like qualities. Lastly,  is also necessary that every part may enjoy its own natural place, and be joyned with those which it ought. Therefore from all and every of these things, which belong to the constitution of an Organick part, sithence a regression may be made to the state that is contrary to nature, there ariseth so many kinds of Organick Diseases also, namely Diseases of Number, ∣nitude, conformation and composition; But if you would divide Diseases of conformation into those three or more, which belong unto them: namely Diseases of figuration, of cavities, and of super∣ficies,
and secundary qualities, there will arise six kinds of Organick Diseases; which moreover, if you are pleased to divide Diseases  composition into those of situation and of connexion, there wi arise seven kinds of Organick Diseases. CHAP. VI. Of Diseases of Conformation. A Digression from the natural conformation causeth Disease of conformation, How many Diseases of Conforma∣tion. but seeing that three things are require to the natnral conformation of an Organick part, a conve∣nient figure, hollownesse of passages, smoothnesse and roughnesse of the superficies, there are also three kinds of Diseases of conforma∣tion constituted in figure, cavity, and superficies: But because other qualities are required also in some Organick parts, besides smooth∣nesse, and roughnesse; namely that some may be soft, others hard some thin, and full of pores, others thick, some coloured; other void of colour, some dark, others perspicuous, and the change  these qualities breed Diseases, because when these qualities a changed, the Actions of those parts are hindred. A Disease in regard of figure is when the natural figure of a part is so vitiated, Diseases in figure. that by reason of it the action of the part is hurt; na∣mely when those, which are straight are made crooked, or other∣wayes disposed contrary to nature; those are affected with such Dis∣eases which we call crook legged, when the legs bend inward, crook∣legged outward; such as are disfigured with the small pox, splay∣footed; to these belong crook backed, and flat-nosed persons. Moreover Diseases of conformation are when the passage, How many Diseases f Jassages. through which matter passeth from one place to another, such as are the throat, wind pipe, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Ureters, Guts, Pores o the Skin, Cavities, and Receptacles, such as are the stomack, blad∣der, womb, when they are affected. As for Diseases of the passages, they consist either in number, or multitude, or differ from the na∣tural condition in magnitude; Excess and Defect in multitude, in magni∣tude. The diffe∣rence of opening of Vessels. and again both of them either in ex∣cesse or in defect. Excesse in multitude of passages, is when there are more pores, o wayes then there ought to be according to nature. Defect in num∣ber is, when they are Fewer then they ought. Excesse in magni∣tude is when any way or passage is dilated more then it ought; De∣fect in magnitude is when tis become straiter then is fit. To excesse belong those infirmities which are called Anastomasis, Diapedesis, and Diairesis.
Anastomasis is when the mouths of the vessels are opened and dilated too much. Anastom Diaped. Diairesis. Diapedesis is when the Tunicles of the vessels are become so thin, that the humours may as it were sweat through them; Diairesis is when from some cause that happens by Ero∣sion or by breaking, some passage is opened which ought not. That Diairesis, which is made from some incident cause, or by breaking, is called (in Greek) Rexis, that which happens by Erosion is called Diabrosis. Defect on the other side according to the variety of causes that occasion it, is five-fold, Obstruction, Constipation, Coalescence, The diffe∣rences of narrowness of Vessels. Obstruction Constipa∣tion. Compression, Descension. All which in general are called strait∣ness of passage. Obstruction, which the Greeks call Emphraxis, is when some passage is stopped either by plenty of humours, or thickness of them, or clotted blood, or Gravel, or such like. Constipation which the Greeks call Stenochoria, is when a passage is stopped by some tumour in it, Compressure which the Greeks call Thlipsis is when a part is pressed together by some external matter. Coalescence is when (after an Ulter) the sides of the passage grow together. Coalescence Subsidence in the Greek Sunizesis, is, Conjuncti∣on and Con∣striction. when the parts of the vessels consent as it were in pressure and squeezing of themselves together, to which no constriction is added, when from some ex∣ternal causes, or by reason of cold the passages are contracted. Diseases of cavity are either in multitude, or magnitude: Diseases of Cavity. in mul∣titude it seldome happens unless from ones nativity, there happen more or less passages in the body then there ought. In Magnitude passages offend either in excess or defect: excess of magnitude is too great dilatation of the receptacle, or cavity; defect in magnitude is when they are too strait, which is either from our first original, or afterwards, from repletion, compression, subsidence or con∣striction. Thirdly, Diseases of the superficies, Diseases of Superficies. are ruggedness and smooth∣ness, for when according to nature, some parts are rougher, and others smoother; if those which should be more rough become smoother, or those that should be smoother become more rugged, and so any action be thereby hindred from thence, ariseth Diseases of the superficies. Softnes and hardnes, as we said before, Softness and Hard∣ness. Rarity, Density. may be referred to these Diseases, as when the bones which ought to be hard are become soft, or the tendons are so hardned, that they cannot be contracted. Also Rarity and Density, when a part which ought to be full of pores lose them, and become thick.
Hitherto belongeth colour in the eye, Colour in the face. for although colour be not necessary for the conformation of other parts, yet that the eye may become the fit instrument for sight, it is necessary that it be so fashioned, that it may be fit to receive (for such there are) visible species▪ Therefore it is requisite that the horny coat, and the watry, crystal, and glassy humors of the eye be not only cleer and transpa∣rent, Darknesse. but without colour. If the eye lose this natural constitu∣tion, and that those parts which ought to be perspicuous and void of colour, are darkened or coloured, the sight is hindred, and visi∣ble species either are not received, or are received in a colour differing from their own. CHAP. VII. Of Diseases in Number. THE second sort of Diseases of Composition or Organick Diseases are Diseases in number; Of Disea∣ses in num∣ber. for when there is a certain number of the parts compounding to make up the natural composition of every organ, how often soever that is not observed a Disease in number doth arise. A Disease in number is two-fold, The diffe∣rence of a Disease of number. Abound∣ing. either in defect, when that is wanting which should be present, or in excesse, when that is present which should be wanting. That which aboundeth is either to nature, as the sixth finger, or preter-natural, as stones, and Worms are according to Galen; which nevertheless is disputable. Nor indeed are such things, since they are substances, as such Diseases; but as some conclude causes, by which an aptness and a certain disposition against nature is brought into the part, whether it be in respect of number, or passages, about which authors disagree. Deficiency in number, Wanting. is when there is a Disease by which either a whole part perisheth, or is wasted: those which are wholly want∣ing are cleerly according to nature, nor can it be a defect against nature; such a Disease may they be said to have who want their number of fingers, or of teeth. CHAP. VIII. Of Diseases of Magnitude. THirdly, Diseases of magnitude. amongst Organick Diseases, are Diseases of Magni∣tude, when the natural bignes of the part is so altered, that for that reason it cannot perform its natural action. Diseases of Magnitude are two-fold, either when there is an in∣crease or a Diminution of Magnitude, according as the whole or
part be increased or diminished. To the increasing of magnitude belong all tumors, and growth of parts contrary to nature; to di∣minition belongs leanness and wasting of parts. But because Diseases in Magnitude, and in Number, are some∣times complicate, therefore they are thus to be distinguished; If a whole part be wanting or abound, it is properly called a Disease in number. But if only some particles of a part be wanting, or that it be bigger then it ought, it is called a Disease in magnitude. Se∣condly, if with a portion of any organ many particles are taken away, a Disease is deficient in number, and diminished in Mag∣nitude. CHAP. IX. Of Diseases of Composition. THE last kind of Organick Diseases are Synthetical, Diseases of Compositi∣on. common∣ly called Diseases of Composition; but although Avicen doth account all Organick Diseases, Diseases of composition, yet in this place we do not, we only take them for a peculiar kind of Orga∣nick Diseases. Since that two things are to be considered in Diseases of compo∣sition, situation and connexion; Twofold. Diseases of composition are of two kinds, the one is when the parts do change their situation, Diseases in site. In Con∣nexion. which is called a Disease of place: The other is when they are not knit together as they ought, but they are separated which ought to be joyned together, and the contrary, as when the eyebrowes grow together, which are called Diseases of connexion or vicinity, others call them Diseases of consent, society, colle, iate. The most common Disease in place, is a loosing of a joynt, Luxation. the Greeks call it Exarthrosis, when the joynts or heads of the bones go out of their hollow places or cavities. Yet other parts besides the bones go out of their places, which happeneth in ruptures, when the paunch or guts fall down into the Cods, or when by great wounds the guts come forth: also in the falling out of the womb, or of an eye. Another kinde of Disease of composition is, when the parts are separated, that ought to be joyned together; which happeneth if the bonds by whose intervene they are linked together are loosened, made longer or broken, which happeneth sometimes in the womb and other parts of the body; or it happens if those are joyned toge∣ther, that should be parted a sunder; as when one is tongue-tyed, or the eye-lids grow together, or two fingers grow together, or the fundament be closed.
CHAP. X. Of Diseases of Solution of Unity. THE third kind of Disease is common to similar and Orga∣nick parts, Diseases of Solution of continuity. and is called Solution of Unity, when the parts which ought to be one, and continued, lose their continuity and are divided. There are many differences of Diseases of Unity, principally taken from the part affected, Their dif∣ferences. and the causes dissolving Unity. Those things which dissolve Unity, some of them cut and prick, others erode, others bow and break, others beat in pieces. But the parts which are dissolved are either soft or hard; if a soft part be dissolved by a thing that cutteth, A wound. it is called by the Greeks Trauma, by the Latines Vulnus, i. e. a wound. But if a soft part be dissolved by a sharp instrument pricking, A pun∣cture. Contusion. it is called a Puncture. But if a soft part be offended by a blunt weapon and a hard one, and be straitned within it self, it is called a Confusion, the Greek Thlasis and Thlasma. If a soft part be broken by any thing that bendeth it, Rupture. 'tis called a Rupture, and in the nervous parts peculiarly, it is called a Spasme. But if there be solution of continuity in a hard part or bone from any other cause then Erosion, Fracture. namely from cutting or contusion, it is called a fracture, Caries. in Greek Agma and Catagma; but if by Ero∣sion it is called Caries, in Greek Teredon, i. e. rottenness in bones. If continuity be dissolved in soft parts by Erosion, An Ulcer. it is called Elkos in Greek, in Latin Ulcus (Anglice an Ulcer.) Lastly, An Apo∣spasme. if there be solution of Unity of compound parts, and those which naturally are different from each other in kind are nourished and grow together, they are called Apospasmes, as when the skin from a membrane, the membranes from the muscles, and a muscle from a muscle are separated. CHAP. XI. Of the Accidental and common differences of Diseases. HItherto we have spoken of the effential differences of Dis∣eases: The acci∣dental differen∣ces of Dis∣eases. there remains the accidental differences, which are taken from those things which follow the essence of a Dis∣ease,
or from the subject, and causes, and other circumstances, and are also common to many. First, a body sometimes is sick of one disease, One dis∣ease. sometimes of an∣ther: and that is said to be one disease which onely seizeth on one part, and offends its actions, or when one disease afflicts the whole body; but there are many diseases, Many dis∣eases. which in a different manner affect many and different parts of the body. A disease which occupieth one part of a body, is either simple, A disease simple; compound. or compound. Simple, is when no other disease is joyned with it. Compound, is when it is coupled with one, or more other diseases, in the same part, whether they are of the same nature, or of some other; but diseases which are knit together, not with other dis∣eases, but with some grievous symptoms, are not properly called complicate diseases; Fernelius calleth them diseases of fellowship, Diseases of fellowship. Solitary. even as he calleth those that are neither joyned with any other dis∣ease, nor with any grievous symptom Solitary diseases. As for diseases that are not joyned together in one part, there are many, they are divided by Fernelius into separated, and implicite; con∣nexed and consequent. Separated are such as consist in divers parts, Separated. which neither have common use, nor action, neither do they communicate the af∣fect by turnes from one part to another: as, the Podagra, or Gout in the foot, the Ophthalmie, or Inflamed Eye. Those are called implicite diseases which afflict divers parts which have one common use, and action, Im plicite. as if divers parts of the breasts are afflicted. Moreover, he calleth them connexed and consequent diseases, Connexed. when one disease is the cause of another, which principally com∣eth to pass when one part communicates its effects to an∣other. Secondly, from the manner of generation and subsistence, Making. some are called diseases Making, others Made. Diseases Making are such, Made. that although they are produced out of their cause, and now are; yet they cannot subsist without their efficient cause, but their cause retreating, they also withdraw from their subject. Made diseases may continue, though their efficient cause be ta∣ken away. Thirdly, in respect of the subject, Univer∣sall. Particular. one disease is called Univer∣sall, which afflicts the whole, another particular, which affects any part of the body, another externall which occupieth the out∣ward parts of the body; another internall which possesseth the in∣ward parts thereof. Some diseases also are congruous, such as are
agreeable to the Temperament and constitution of the body; O∣thers are Incongruous, and disagreeable to the Temperament, and constitution thereof. Of Age. Fourthly, in respect of age, some are diseases of Infants, others of children, Sex. others of boyes, others of youths, others of young men, others of middle aged men, and others of old men: as also in Relation to sex, some of Males, others of Fe∣males. Fifthly, By the be∣ing of a thing. By consent. diseases some are by Idiopathy, or Essence, others by sympathy, or consent. A disease by essence is that which hath its beginning, from a cause begotten in that place wherein the disease is stirred up. By sympathy, or consent is that which is stirred up by matter severed from the part, where the disease is. Sixthly, Lgiti∣mate. Spurious. some diseases are legitimate, others Spurious, Legiti∣mate are such as proceed from one simple and onely cause; Spuri∣ous are such as proceed from mixt humours. Seventhly, some diseases are inherent to man from his first be∣ginning, others happen to him after he is begotten. Those which come from our first beginning, Hereditary are twofold; first, hereditary whose causes, and dispositions are derived from the seed and menstruous blood of the parents to their children; and cause a disease, in them which they were troubled with; secondly, from ill conformity some evill may happen to the child, Congenite. from its first beginning, although the parents ware not troubled therewith; and therefore all diseases communicated to man from his generation are not Hereditary. They seek a knot in a bull-rush, who think such recess from the naturall state and condition, Whether a Congenite deformity he a dis∣ease. ought not to be called a Disease, but a sault; and they conceive that not every defect, and regression from the naturall state; but those onely they think, ought to be called diseases of defect, which are defects of perfections which they once had. But a Disease is not only a privation of perfection once had, but to be had, which agreeth to every one of the Species: and as a man is said to be sound, which hath that perfection in all the parts of the body, which ought to be in mankinde; so he may be said to be born sick, to whom any of those perfections are wanting. Eighthly, Contagi∣ous. Not con∣tagious. Common. some diseases are Infectious which transfuse their seed, and pullution into other bodies, and affect them with the same disease. Not Infectious, are such as cannot infect others with their venom. Ninethly, some diseases are spread, as when many diseases of divers kinds invade. Some are common, wherewith many are af∣fected at the same time, with the same disease. These again are di∣vided
into Endemiall, and Epidemicall. Endemiall Endemiall are (as it were) native, and genuine diseases, which often frequent one place, and afflict the inhabitants of one region by reason of their common and domestick cause: such is the Scurvy to the inhabitants of the Baltick Seas. Epidemicall, are such as infect many from one cause, Epidemi∣cal. Diseases of the severll times of the year. but not genuine to that people at the same time. Tenthly, in respect of the time of the year, some are Vernall, some Estivall; some Autumnall, and others Hibernall, namely, such as are agreeable to this or that season of the year. In respect of the time of the day, some are called Diurnall, others Noctur∣nall. In the Eleventh place, some diseases are called great, Great. others small. A great disease is said to be such, either by its self, or by accident. A disease is said to be great by it self three wayes; first, How ma∣nifold. in regard of dignity, when it hurteth the organs, and instruments, that are most necessary for the preservation of life, and in this sense, Diseases of Intemperature, amongst Diseases are of greatest digni∣ty; Next those Diseases of solution of continuity; next to them diseases of composition: 2. By it self a disease is said to be great, in respect of its going back from its naturall state, for by how much the more it recedes from that, by so much is it the more ve∣nement: 3. It is said to be great in respect of ill Manners, as when an ill quallity is joyned with it. By accident it is said to be great, in respect of the best part which it possesseth, in which regard a disease which otherwise was small, is said to be great, as a wound in the heart, or in the brain, which in musculous flesh, were not dange∣rous. 2. When it hurts the faculty that governs our body. In the twelfth place from the manner, a disease is benigne, Benigne. or maligne: Benigne is when besides its own nature, no grievous symptom is joyned. Maligne, Maligne. is when it hath worse symptomes joyned with it, then the nature of the disease affords of it self, from some occult qualities. Thirteenthly, in respect of duration, some diseases are short, Short. Long. some long, which soon terminate, or continue long, before they come to amend. Fourteenthly, some are acute, others not acute, Acute. Not acute. and all acute diseases are short, but all short diseases are not acute. That a disease may be said to be acute, tis requisite that it may not onely be terminated in a short time, but may have some grievous symptoms joyned with it, Which a∣cute. that may speedily not without danger end it in health or death; For an acute disease is that which swiftly with violence, and danger comes to its height. Acute diseases are again
distinguished into very acute, How ma∣nifold. simply acute, and such as degenerate from acute. The very acute terminate by the seventh day; the simply acute end by the twentieth day; such as degenerate from acute are extended beyond the twentieth, even to the fourtieth day; But all those diseases that are extended beyond the fourtieth day, are Diurnall, and Chronicall. Fifteenthly, Salutary. Deadly. in regard of the end, some diseases are salutary, which terminate with the health of the sick, others mortall, which destroy the sick; and both either absolutely, or secundum quid. Simply and absolutely, those are Salutary that terminate with the perfect health of the sick; Mortall, are such as kill the sick; on the other side, salutary and deadly may be such, secundum quid, when they terminate in health; but not sound and perfect health. Sixteenthly, Continual. some diseases are continuall, which continually afflict, and intermit not, in the whole term of their duration. Intermitting, Intermis∣sive. Ordinate. Inordi∣nate. are such as have certain periods, and do sometimes intermit, or cease between while. Seventeenthly, some are ordinate, which afflict at certain times, which the Greeks call at Periods, as Tertian, Quartan Feavers: Inordinate, are such as observe no certain periods. CHAP. XII. Of the Times of Diseases. SUch as age is said to be in living creatures, time is said to be in diseases. The times of dis∣cases. For as animals are first generated, thence increased, and come to their perfection and state, and then waste, and lastly dye, so diseases have their beginnings, encrease, vigour, after∣wards they decline, are lessened, and at length vanish. The times of diseases are two-fold, Universal. Universall, and Particular. Universall times are said to be such wherein the course of the whole disease is included; for since there are diseases which have certain Intervals, Particular. and again new fits, or certain extentions, and remis∣sions; Particular times are limited by the end of the fit. The Universall times are four. Universal times how many. Begin∣ning. Increase The beginning, The augmen∣tation, The state, and Declination. The beginning is that time, when the morbifique matter of the disease is yet crude, and no signes of concoction appear. The augmentation is when the symptomes become grievous, and the signes of concoction begin to appear in such diseases, as tend to recovery of the sick, or contrary signs in those that are mortall. The state is when the greatest contention is betwixt Height. a disease,
and nature, and when all the symptomes are most vehe∣ment. The Declination is, when a disease beginneth to abate, Declina∣tion. being conquer'd by nature. But all diseases have not these four times, but such as tend to health onely; in deadly diseases, the sick (nature being overcome) may dye either in the beginning, increase, or state, for such come not to the declination, for no man ever dyed in the declination of a disease. In the same manner Particular times may be limited, Particular times. and every course hath its fit, which course Remissness, or an Intervall fol∣lows. A fit hath its beginning, increase, state, and declination, which Particular times may happen during the Universall times. The end of the first part of the second Book.
THE SECOND BOOK. PART. II. Of the Causes of DISEASES. CHAP. I. Of the Causes of Diseases. SEeing that nothing can perfectly be known unless the causes thereof are known whither can diseases be avoided unless the causes are shun'd; neither can the same be taken away, unless the causes if they are present, be first taken away: We will now treat of the cau∣ses of Diseases. Although by the Philosophers there are rightly constituted four kinds of causes, The sorts of causes. the Materiall, Formall, Finall, and Efficient; yet here we are to speak onely of the Efficient causes of diseases; for the form, such as accidents have, is already explained. Diseases have not matter unless it be the subject wherein they are inherent; The Phy∣sitian treats of efficient cause. The causes of diseases are four∣fold. The prox∣imate. The remote the end also is not since they arise from the want of perfection, and therefore Physitians when they handle the cause of diseases under∣stand the efficient cause onely. But Efficient causes of Diseases are considered either in respect had to a disease and a body, or absolutely, and as they are things which can take upon them the nature of mortifique causes. If cau∣ses as they are referred to a disease, or its effects, they are considered thus; first, one cause is proximate and immediate, another remote. The proximate is that cause betwixt which and the disease nothing intercedes. The remote is that betwixt which and the disease there comes another neerer cause. The proximate (since nothing
can come to pass without a cause) is in all diseases; but the  is not so. Secondly, since that of those causes which conduce to the gene∣ration of a disease, and indeed such as some matter doth exeite, Contain∣ing. some are neerer, others more remote, and oftentimes there is a long rank of them: Physicians call some causes containing, others antecedent, others primitive. A cause containing, which is also named consummative, Contain∣ing. is that which proximately adheres to a disease in a body, and cherisheth it, and which being put the disease is, being taken away, the disease is taken away: so a stone is the cause containing of ob∣struction of the bladder. A humour in a turnour is the cause of increasing of Magnitude, but a cause containing and immediate, is not absolutely the same, for as much as all diseases have a proxi∣mate cause, since nothing can be done without a cause, but they have not all the cause containing; namely, thes oke of a sword is the proximate cause of a wound, but not the cause containing. And those diseases only have a cause containing, which are joyned with matter, and are cherished by it as tumours, obstructions, pu∣trid Feavers. Yet you are here to be admonished that these things which are here spoken of a cause containing, as also of the differences of other causes, are all spoken of in respect of a disease, defined by Galen, per dispositionem, or casually as they say; for in respect or this, not all but some diseases only have a cause containing. But if a disease be defined formally and through impotency, all diseases whatsoever have a cause containing, namely some vitious dispsi∣tion of body. The ante∣dent. The antecedent causes are certain dispositions lying hid in the body which go before a disease, and out of which a disease may arise. For although that be most properly called a cause which doth now act; yet Physitians call those things causes which as yet pro∣duce not any disease, so that they may produce them. Antecedent causes are defined not by the act, but by the power of effecting, so some vitious humour which lyeth lurking in the body, produ∣ceth not a disease as yet; yet it may gonerate one, The pri∣mitive. How cau∣ses differ. The mani∣fest evi∣dent. The mani∣fest exter∣nall. that is called the antecedent cause thereof. The primitive causes which anciently they called Prophasis, are such as move the antecedent in a body, and give occasion that they may become proximate causes; such are watchings, cares, ange, too much exercise, and motion, and such like. But primitive causes and evident are not the same, for every Proatarcktick is evident or manifest, but every evident and manifest is not a Primitive, as a sword is the evident cause of a wound, but not the primary; for an
evident or manifest cause is whatsoever produceth a disease in a ma∣nifest manner, whether it be immediate or remote, but the primi∣tive can never be the proximate, but alwayes requires preceding preparation of the body, and a neerer cause in the body which it may move. Nor is the primitive cause the same with the external; for ex∣ternall is only in respect of the body, and every thing which is with∣out the body, after what manner soever, it produceth a disease, it is called an externall cause, but Primitive is spoken in respect to other causes, and is that which stirreth up and moveth the hidden causes of the body, either within the body or out of the body; whence Sleep, Watchings, Passions of the mind, and other causes which are in the body, are named primitive, not externall. Thirdly, Evident causes. Occult. some causes are evident, others hidden, and obscure: evident and manifest are such as are obvious to the senses, neither is there need of any other signes to know them by. Occult and hid∣den are such as lurk in the body, and require signes to be known by. Fourthly, Internall. Externall. some causes are internall, others externall; internall are such as are within the body, externall are such as are without the body. Fifthly, Perse By acci∣dent. some causes are by themselves, others by accident. Causes by themselves are such as produce dieases by their own proper force and violence, and not by the assistance of other causes; so fire heateth, water cooleth. A cause by accident is when it per∣forms ought by the intervening of another cause, and not by its own force; so cold water by accident is the cause of heat, whilst by its binding, and closing the pores of the skin, the hot exhalati∣ons are detained within, which otherwise would evaporate by in∣sensible transpiration. Also some causes are common, Common. Proper. Positive. as Air, Meat and drink, when many use them in one place; others are proper which are peculiar to certain men. Lastly, some causes are positive, others privative; positive are such as by their presence produce an effect like themselves, Privative. after which sort water cooleth. Privative are such as by their absence pro∣duce an effect like themselves; so heat returning to the internall parts, and leaving the externall, is the cause of refrigeration of the outward parts.
CHAP. II. Of things which are the Causes of a Disease, and first of Non-naturals. MOreover the efficient causes of Diseases considered absolutly, or as they are such; all things are the causes of Diseases, which can hurt the natural constitution, and turn it into a preternatural: and such things are either without the body, or within it. Things that are without our bodies, are either necessary, External Causes. and to be suffered by all, and none can avoid them; or not necessa∣ry, but may be avoided. Of the first sort are those things cal∣led non-naturals, and are in number six, Air, Meat and Drink, Necessary. Unnecessa∣ry. Non-natu∣ral things. Sleeping and Waking, Exercise and Rest, Repletion and Inani∣nation, and the Passions of the Mind; whereof the four latter are rather to be called evident then external. Things befalling us not necessary, are those that wound us, knock us, or in such like manner hurt our bodies, which befall us by chance, which are not included within a certain number. But both those, as well necessary as unnecessary, Four ranks of things non-natu∣ral. Those which are taken. Which are carried. may be re∣duced to four heads; those things which are taken in, those which are carried; those that are put out and retained; and lastly, those that befal us externally. Under the notion of those things which are taken, are com∣prehended Air by breathing, Meat and Drink, and Medicine in∣wardly taken. By those things that are carried about, we comprehend all the motions of the body and mind, of what kind soever; such as the perturbations of the minde, anger, griefe, joy, sleep, wa∣king, rubbing the body, navigation, the course of our lives, and such like. By Excretion and Retention is understood whatever is thrown out of the body; such are the Ordure, Urine, Which are retained and reje∣cted. all sorts of Hu∣mors, Seed, Menstruis; for these as those that are emitted, alter the constitution of the body, belong to those which are called Excretions; and the same when they are deteined, are referred to Retentions. Moreover those things that externally happen to us, Those which hap∣pen out∣wardly. compre∣hend them that encompasse us, as the Air, Baths, and those things that are applyed to our bodies; as Garments and Cove∣rings, Oyls, Unctions, and such like. Lastly, those things that by force and impulsion befal us, as Wounds, Contusions, and
such like; but since there is no certain number of them, we will onely speak of non-naturals, as they are the causes of Disea∣ses. First from the air is made a great alteration, Air. as being that wher∣in we continually live, and without which we cannot live a mo∣ment; for it alters us in a twofold manner; namely, as we draw it in by breathing, and as it encompasseth us, and by the Pores penetrates us, and communicates that distemper which it hath to our bodies; The effect of hot Air. for the hot Air heats our bodies, dissolv humours, melts, attenuates, increaseth choler, and whets, in∣flames the spirits, so begets hot Diseases; for by calling forth and dissipating the natural heat, it weakens the concoction. The cold Air, Of Cold. Of moist. on the contrary, cooleth, condenseth, closeth the Pores, thickens the humours. The moist moistens the body, hapeth up superfluous humours, drives out the natural heat, generates crude distillations, especially joyned with cold. But if joyned with heat, Of dry. it is the greatest cause of putrefaction. Dry Air dries our bodies, and being joyned with heat, burns them. First the constitution of the Air depends upon the season of the year, The con∣stitution of the Sea∣sons of the year. Of Wind and of Si∣tuation. Pestilent Air. whereof the Spring is temperate, the Summer hot and dry, Autumn cold and dry, Winter cold and moist; and hence several Diseases happen at the several seasons of the year; of which Hypocrates in the third of his Aphorismes, 4, 5, 6.7, 8, 9.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23. The winds also conduce to the alteration of Air; so do Countries and Situati∣ons, of which Hypocrates 3. Aphorisme, 15, 17. And in his Book of Air, Water, and Places; and it doth not onely affect our bodies with primary qualities, but impresseth in us a ma∣lignant and pestilent disposition (if it be infected therewith) and can communicate to us those effects which it hath, and so ex∣cite malignant and epidemical Diseases in us; of which is spo∣ken in the doctrine of malignant and pestilent Fevers. Secondly, Meat and Drink. It offends in quanti∣ty. Meat and Drink, if either it be taken in too great measure, or be unwholsome, or if any fault be committed in the taking of it, may be the occasion of many diseases. Dyet then offendeth in quantity, manner of taking it, and quality; for if too great a quantity of meat stuff the stomach, it cannot be well concocted, but sendeth aboundance of vapours to the braine, which offend it, and is the cause of divers fluxes of Rhumes; and when the error of the first concoction is not cor∣rected in the second, that Crudity is the occasion of many Dis∣eases which arise afterwards in the whole body; and as an im∣moderate
quantity of meat and drink, is the occasion of many Diseases. So the want of them is hurtful; for thereby the good humours of the body are wasted, and the body dryed, 1. Aphor. 14. In an impure body it stirs up ill humours, Manner of using. whence divers parts are ill affected; for it is hurtful to eat meat whilest any is unconcocted in the stomach: variety of meats is also hurt∣ful. As for the qualities of meats, Quality. those which have in them cer∣tain qualities, by which they can alter our bodies, are called medicamental, and they are changed into humours of a like qua∣lities with them, and in a sound body cause a like distemper; and in a sick body may introduce an unlike and contrary di∣stemper; to wit, if they are contrary to the preternatural di∣stemper, but if they agree with it, they encrease it. Meats dif∣fer not onely in the first qualities, but also in others, nay in the whole substance; some thick, others thin; some much, others little; some cause good Asiment, some bad; of which Galen in his books of the faculties of the Aliments, and in his book of good and evil Juice treateth; and we shall speak more in our fourth Book. Thirdly, sleeping and waking moderately preserve health, Sleeping and wa∣king. im∣moderately destroy it, 2. Aphor. 3. For too much sleep hindreth the natural evacuations and excrements, and dulls the heat of the body, and so is the occasion of cold diseases, and principally of Distillations. On the other side, too much waking dissi∣pates the Spirits, dryes the body, and whilest the humours are kindled and become adust, they are of themselves the causes of hot distempers; and whilest they dissipate the Spirits, the na∣tive heat is weakned, and the radical moisture is consumed, and by accident are the causes of cold diseases. Fourthly, there is the same reason of exercise and rest; Exercise for idlenesse and too much rest fills the body with Excrements, dulls the native heat, and renders the body slow and feeble; on the other side, too much exercise dissipates the Spirits, consumes the body, and by consequence cooles the whole body, hinders concoction; the veins and vessels often break, stirs up untimely humours, heats them, and causeth fevers; and especially if the body be full of vitious humours, they being stirred are carried through the whole body, and stir up fevers and other distem∣pers and symptomes. Fifthly, Passions of the mind, the affections of the mind make great alterations in the body; in anger the Blood and Spirits become extream hot, and are hurried to the external parts from the internal, whence
they inflame the whole body, and often kindle Fevers, and raise other Symptomes. Too much joy may so dissipate the Spirits, that it is observed one may die therewith; in fear and trembling the Spirits and heat desert the exteriour parts, and fly to the heart, and suffocate the heart; sorrow by degrees dissolveth the Spirits, cooleth the Body, dryes, spoils concoction, causes watch∣ings, and begets melancholly diseases. Lastly, Excreti∣ons and retentions. those things that are reteined in, and sent out of our bodies, are the causes of Diseases; for if the profitable humors be untimely sent out, it debilitates the body, and consumes it; but if the excrements are retained, diseases are bred that are like unto them. CHAP. III. Of the internal causes of Diseases, and first of fulnesse of Blood. INternal things which are the causes of diseases, Internal things, the causes of diseases. either are gene∣rated in the body according to nature, or are found in the be∣dy contrary to nature; those which are generated according to nature, are those three of Hypocrates, conteining, conteined, and doing violence; or as others would have it solid, humid, and spirituous; those are called preternatural humours, which are found in the body contrary to nature; as stones, gravel, wormes, and all things that are generated in the body differing from natural; whereunto belongeth those things that are sent into the body, and there stick and remain, as darts, bullets of lead, and such like. But these things are made to be the causes of diseases, How many wayes. either as they are in their whole kind, contrary to nature; or as they of∣fend in qùantity, quality, motion, or place. The fault of humours in Specie is divided into Plethorick and Cacochimick; The fault of humors twofold. Plethorie. for humours are either apt to nourish the be∣dy, or not fit: plenty of the one s called Plethorick, of the o∣ther Cacochimick; for Plethory is when blood and humours profitable for the nourishment of the body abound, Plethorie towfold. To the vessels. To the strength. and are be∣yond mediocrity. This plenitude is twofold, either as to the vessels when blood so abounds, as that the vessels wherein it is contained are stretched beyond their ordinary bigness; the other as to the strength, when there is more blood then the strength can bear; to which Horatius Augenius adds this mixt of them both, to wit, when there is so great plenty of blood as stretcheth and extendeth the veins, and so great pains, that the strength cannot bear it,
Chacochimy is an excesse of other humours besides blood, Chachochi∣my. namely, when natural excrementious humours offend in plenty, or preternatural excrementious humours abound, and whilest either these or those putrifie, and bring in a strange nature. The seat of Plethory and Chaco∣chimy. Both pure and spuri∣ous. Pure Ple∣thory. Pure Cha∣cochimy. Spurious. The causes of Pletho∣ry. The seat of Plethory is only in the veins; but Chacochimy is not onely in the veins, but also out of them, and in the whole body, or some parts, especially the bowels. But sometimes Plethory and Chacochimy are mixed, whence both are divided into spurious and legitimate; pure Plethory is, when there is too great plenty of pure blood and humours, with∣out any vitious ones. Pure Chacochimy is, when there is too great plenty of ill humours, and no good blood with them; but when good juyce aboundeth, and ill humours are mixed there∣with, it is called a spurious Plethory, or Chacochimy, accor∣ding as blood and ill humours do more or lesse abound. There are many causes of Plethory, as plenty of Dyet sup∣plies matter to cause it; nourishment of good juyce, and great plenty of such nourishment: the Efficient causes are Constitu∣tion of the Body, and principally of the Heart and Liver, hot and moist, and youthful age, which may be occasioned in the Spring time, and a temperate constitution of the Air, idlenesse, moderate sleep, a life without care and paines, suppression of ac∣customary evacuations of blood, Chacochimy according to the variety of excrementitious hu∣mours is manifold; The kinds of Chaco∣chimy. for sometimes phlegm, sometimes choller, sometimes melancholly, and adust melancholly, and sometimes serous humours abound; of which humorsthere are again various differences. CHAP. IV. Of Phlegm. THere are divers kinds of Phlegm which are commonly di∣vided into natural and preternatural. The kinds of Phlegm Natural Phlegm. Natural is a cold and moist juyce, or blood not perfectly concocted; but if we rightly observe the matter, this humour is not properly to be reckoned amongst the excrementitious humours, because the blood is crude, and may be turned into the aliment of the parts. Of the preternatural Phlegm there are four kinds, unsavory, The kinds of preter∣natural Plegm. Unsavory. sharp, vitreous, salt. Unsavory Phlegm peculiarly and principally may be called a Crude Humour, which for want of concoction hath not ac∣quired that perfection which it ought in the stomach; and
therefore can no where in mans body be turned into good sub∣stance. Acride Phlegm is also crude and called so from the taste it re∣lishes of to them that void it, Acride. and proceeds from the defect of heat. These two kinds proceed from the same causes, which accor∣ding to greater or lesser power they have of introducing coldness and crudity; so sometimes this, sometimes that kind is genera∣ted: such are cold meates, hard to be digested; too great plenty of meat and drink, and taken at unseasonable times, a cold constitution of the stomach, and the adjacent intrails which way soever occasioned. Salt Phlegm, Salt. so called from the savour, and is occasioned by the mixture of a serous humidity, and a salt with Phlegm: whence it is not simply cold, but mixed with heat and drinesse; and as there is more or lesse of the salt humour mixed, so is it more or lesse hot. Lastly, Vitreous. Phlegm is vitreous, so called by Praxagorus, because in substance and colour it somewhat doth resemble melted glasse; this is exceeding cold, clammy, and thick. CHAP. V. Of Choller. CHoller is threefold, The kinds of Choller. Alimentary, Natural, and Contrary to Nature; but the first is not an Excrement, but the hot∣ter and dryer part of the Masse of Blood, of a different na∣ture, from that which is in the bladder of the Gall. Excremen∣tious Choller is twofold, Natural, and Contrary to Nature. Natural is yellow, Yellow Choller. and is generated by Nature; and that onely is properly called Choller: it is an Excrement of the second con∣coction, and generated in the Liver, and collected into the Bladder of the Gall; it is generated out of the hotter and dryer parts of nutriment. Preternatural is that which is not generated in our bodies ac∣cording to the law of Nature, Preterna∣tural. whereof for the most part we ac∣count four kinds, Vitelline, Leekeblade colour, Verdegrease co∣lour, and Woad colour, or a blewish green. The Vitelline is so called from the yolk of an Egge; Vitelline. it is yel∣low, hotter and thicker; it is generated of yellow and burnt Choller, whence it is sometimes called rosted Choller: And there is another kind of Vitelline Choller, but not so properly so called, which is neither so hot nor so yellow, which is com∣pounded of Phlegm and yellow Choller.
Leekgreen Choller, so called, Leekgreen because it represents their green∣nesse, which is often voided with the Excrements of children by the panch, and is often generated in the stomach by corrupt nu∣triment, and sometimes also in the Veins, and about the Liver, out of the Vitelline, from the great heat of the Liver, and 'tis of a venemous nature, and it is hot and very biting, the likest to Verdegrease. The Aeruginous which comes neer to the colour of rusty gree∣nish Brasse, is generated out of corrupt aliment, Aerugi∣nous. when the heat is more vehement in the Stomach, in the Liver and Veins from the inflamation of the Liver, and the too great heat of the Veins. Lastly, Woad colour, Blewish green. or a blewish green Choller is more deep in sense then the Leek colour, and is caused by more adust Aeru∣ginous Choller. Aliment hot and dry, Causes of Choller. affords matter fit for all the kinds of Choller, and especially sweet and fat things. A constitution hot and dry, hath regard to the Efficient cause, and those things that adde to it are youth full age, Ait that is hot and dry, watch∣ing, anger, too much exercise of the body. CHAP. VI. Of Melancholly. THe third is the Melancholly humour, Melan∣cholly. which commonly is distinguished into Alimentary and Excrementitious; but Alimentary is nothing else then the colder and dryer part of the Masse of Blood. The Excrementious is twofold, Natural and Preternatural; Twofold. Natural. Natural is that thick and feculent Excrement, which in sangui∣fication which is made in the Spleen, as is abovesaid, is collected and separated for the generation, whereof much meat conduceth, 'Tis of a terrestrious and thick juyce of every sort, especially be∣ing hardned with salt and fuliginous vapours, old Cheese, Cab∣bage, all sorts of pulse, as Pease, &c. a cold and dry constitution of air, cares, fear, sorrow. The black Melancholly which is generated contrary to nature, Preterna∣tural. although it be sometimes also called by the name of melancholly; yet Physitians for the most part call that Excrement which is na∣turally generated, black Juyce, not black Melancholly; but that which proceeds from adustion is called black Melancholly; and that Excrement is naturally cold and dry; but this Preternatural hot and dry, the worst of all humours.
But adust Melancholly is commonly accounted threefold, Its kinds. One is that which is occasioned by adust blood, and is coun∣ted the least; the second is that which is generated of Melan∣cholly humours if they are burnt. The third is that which pro∣ceeds from adust colour, which is of all the worst. Hence it is manifest, that although all which can generate Melancholly hu∣mours, or yellow Choller, conduce to the generation of black Choller: yet the generation of black Choller, principally de∣pends upon the too great heat burning the humours. CHAP. VII. Of the Serous Humour, and of Wind. AMongst the humours that are the causes of diseases, Serous what. we are not to slight Serous Humours and Wind; by Serous Humours we sometimes understand all thin humours and watery: sometimes peculiarly we mean not those onely which are watery, but have a saltnesse joyned therewith, which Galen calls A salt serous moisture: the greatest part of this serous humour turns to Urine, and is ejected by it; yet some part thereof is mingled with the Blood to clarifie it, and make it more easie to be distributed: and lastly, through the Pores of the skin, or insensible transpiration, or sweat is emitted. Of this serous humour there is found but small quantity in the Veins in sound bodies; yet sometimes for some causes Preter∣natural, there is found greater quantity. The matter that breeds it, are Meats that contein much Whey in, and watery juyce in them, Its cause. much Drink, Obstructions and Distempers of the Bow∣els, by reason whereof this serous matteris not rightly separated, it is deteined and gathered together, because the reins do not draw enough, and by reason of the weaknesse of the expulsive fa∣culty, and the suppression of its passages by Sweat and Urine. Of humours oftentimes are generated Vapours and Wind, Wind. which are the causes of many evils; windy meats afford matter for wind; so doth much drink, especially when yellow and black Choller is spread over the stomach. Also wind is generated from debility of heat, which rusheth out of the abundance of matter, that it cannot overcome it all; and that is such, either simply and in its own nature, or in respect of the matter, from the plen∣ty whereof, although it be otherwise strong enough, it breaks out.
CHAP. VIII. Of humours according to the opinion of latter Physitians, and of Chymists. ALthough some Chymists plainly reject these things that have hitherto been said, The opini∣on of Chy∣mists about humours. according to the opinion of the Galenists; and having rejected them, they have in their stead and place put the names of Salt, Sulpher, and Mercury; yet they have no reason for it; for as Galen in his first Book of Places affected, and second Chapter writeth, That that which put, we are diseased; and which taken away, we are freed; 'Tis taken for granted by all to be the cause of a disease; but we see the hu∣mours being present we are diseased; and being taken away, we are freed; therefore humours are the causes of diseases. Yet this we grant, that humours are not confined to the first quali∣ties, but that they have in them secondary qualities; such are, bitter, acide, salt, sharp, which may offend and hurt the body no lesse then the primary, as Hypocrates of anci∣ent Physick teacheth, which he calleth the Powers and Efficacies; also the force and strength of humours. Whence Galen also, and o∣ther Physitians, call them Salt, Nitrous, Aluminent Humors, which plainly manifest themselves in many diseases, as the Gout, Scurvy, Cankers and others. Venemous humours. And so such humours are not to be rejected, but to be explained by the principles of Chymists; and such things as have affinity with themselves: and hence ve∣nenate humours bred of poyson and poysonous matter, do not seem so properly to be referred to Choller, Phlegm, Melancholly; although in colour it seems to have some affinity with some of these, yet their nature is far different, and therefore are to be described by their Powers Hyppocratically. The Me∣lancholly humour explained. Lastly, of the Melancholly and black humour. It is to be noted, that by it selfe it is thick, earthy, feculent, or salt, and for the most part 'tis so much moystened by many serous and wate∣ry humours, that it becomes like unto Lee, which consist of wa∣tery adust, and salt parts; and therefore it is called by some Water.
CHAP. IX. Of the generation of Stones and Worms. BEsides Wormes there are other things found and generated in the body, Stones. which are the causes of diseases: as stones and worms; that Stones for the most part are generated in all bodies; experience and the observations of Physitians do ma∣nifest. They are generated of feculent matter, earthy, slimy, muddy, and of moisture apt to putrifie; which when the passages are straiter and narrower in the body, sticks, and of its own accord tends to coagulation and concretion. Wormes also may be generated in most parts of the body, Worms. out of corrupt and putred matter, containing in it Seed, or some proportionable principle to Seed, namely, some vital principle. CHAP. X. Of the causes of Diseases, of Intemperature without Matter. HItherto we have explained the causes of Diseases general, The eauses of hot di∣stemoen. now we will handle them severally. And First, for Dis∣eases of Intemperature: Galen accounts five sorts of Diseases of distemperature by heat; Motion of the body and mind, Exercise. which causes heat by too much stirring of the humours and spirits. Putrefaction which is the cause of heat, because in putrefaction the internal heat, Putrefa∣ction. is called forth by the external, and being outward, is more sensibly hot. Hot things touching our body, The proxi∣mity of a hot thing. and impressing their qualities on our bodies. Co∣stivenesse of body, and Retention of the hot steeme which should passe through our Pores. Lastly, mixture with some hot thing, or hot things taken into our bodies, as Air, Meat, Drink, hot Medicines. Galen in his fourth Book of the Causes of Diseases of Distemperature by cold, Costive∣ness. reckons these. The presence of cold things, the quantity and quality of meats and drinks condense∣ing & rarifying, Mixtures of a hot thing. Causes of a cold di∣stemper. idleness and immoderate exercise: all which, and if there be any other, may conveniently be reduced into four ranks. For, whatsoever brings a cold distemper to the body, do it either by altering, and by its proper force cooling the bo∣dy; such are cold things, whether outwardly applyed to the body, or taken inwardly, or suffocating the innate heat; such are those things that prohibit the ventilation and blowing of the
fuliginous vapours; or extinguish the heat by their too great a∣boundance, Dissipation or dissipate the same by overmuch exercise of the body or mind, a hot constitution of Air, and such like, or through want of food, which poverty may occasion, or by let∣ting too much blood. Hence it is manifest, that the causes of hot Distempers when they are in excesse, become the causes of cold Distempers, Drawing away food. Moist. by dis∣sipating, extinguishing, or suffocating the innate heat. The causes of overmoist Distempers, may be reduced unto two, the proximity to moist things, or those things that hinder transpitation, and so retain the cold steem of the body. Dry distemper is occasioned by the contrary causes, to wit, Dry, by alteration of drying things, and want of aliment. Compound distempers are from compound causes; Of com∣pound di∣stempers. and if the causes of simple distempers are joyned together, there ariseth a compound distemper: yet complication of causes is not always necessary for production of compound distempers; since there are many causes which have in them double qualities, which therefore, if they have equal strength and force, cause a com∣pound distemper; so that the body be so disposed, as it be fit to receive the actions of them both alike. CHAP. XI. Of the causes of distemper with matter. SInce every humour hath its peculiar Temperature, The causes of distem∣per, with matter. and com∣municates it, and impresseth the part which it adheres to, The blood which is hot and moist, heats and moistens; yellow Choller which is hot and dry, heats and dryes; Phlegm which is cold and moist, causeth a cold and moist distemper; Melancholly which is cold and dry, causeth a cold and dry di∣stemper. The matter which is the cause of distemper in the affected, A collecti∣on of mat∣ter. either is collected by degrees, or else falls on it on a suddain; 'Tis collected either through the error of the Aliment, or default of the part; through the fault of the part it is collected, when ei∣ther the faculty of concoction is weak, and doth not rightly ela∣borate the Aliment, and from thence causes excrements, which either the expulsive faculty can expel, or the weaknesse of expul∣sion is such, that it cannot expel; that too great quantity, or some disease of conformation, and straitnesse of the passages, suf∣fers not the Excrements to be cost forth; But by default of the Aliment the matter is collected, when that is not good, but
such, by reason whereof great store of excrements are generated, or slimy and viscious humours are produced, that the expulsive faculty cannot expel them. A flux is either when humours are drawn to a part, A flux made by drawing. or sent to a part. Attraction is principally through heat and pain; not because they draw, but because they afford occasion for humours to flow to the part, to which you may adde, for the supply of vacuity. But humours flow to the parts affected, Transmis∣mission. though they are not drawn for two reasons; first because the humours collected in the vessels, by their own violence begin to flow into some part, ac∣cording to its situation, and its respect to the vessels. Secondly, because the parts which have strong expulsive power, tire, or de∣cay in their strength, or quality, or being burthened with plen∣ty of humours; unlade themselves, and lend that which is trou∣blesome to another part; either the whole body sends forth venc∣mous humours, or else some parts. Yet that there be made a flux, there is required not onely the part flowing, but the part receiving, which is either weak, or apt and disposed to receive fluxions. CHAP. XII. Of the causes of Diseases of the whole substance. DIseases of the whole Body, Causes of diseases of the whole substance. or of Occult qualities which are in the similar parts, besides diseases of intemperature, are all produced from causes of the whole substance, or acting in a hidden manner; such are all venomous, malignant things, and such as act in a hidden manner: Of such causes some are produced in the Body, some happen to it from without. Those which are in the body are humours and excrements, Internal. if they contein in them malignant and venomous qualities; as pu∣trified Blood, Seed, and other corrupt humours. As for external causes, External. First venomous and malignant Aire. Secondly, Virulent and contagious Diseases. Thirdly, Poyson drunk, or after what manner soever taken into the Body. Fourthly, Poysons which come by the smitings, or bitings of venomous creatures, or some other way communicated to the body externally. Venom is either generated in the Air, or else the Air receives it from some other thing; Aire. It receives it from some other thing by malignant exhalations and vapours, from Cattel, Marish grounds, dead Carkasses, and other such like exhalations. Poyson is
generated in the Aire, by reason of its hot and moist constituti∣on, or the occult influences of stars. Contagion is a Granary, or if you please, Contagion an Affect contrary to nature, which is communicated to another body, from a body affected likewise contrary to nature. This Infection is twofold, either by touch, when the body which is infected tou∣cheth that body which is next to it; or at distance, when a bo∣dy far distant from another, by that which it emits, it infects the distant body. Poysons taken into the body, are either Plants, Poysons taken. Poysons from with∣out. or living Crea∣tures, or Minerals, or poysonous Metals. Poysons which happen externally to the body, are the biting of venomous Creatures, Stroakes, Exhalations, or venomous Unguents and Powders. CHAP. XII. Of the causes of Organick Diseases. NOw for the causes of Organick Diseases, and first the figure of Conformation is vitiated either by it selfe, or by acci∣dent. By it selfe it is vitiated first in the womb, The causes of the fi∣gure viti∣ated, through some error of the formative faculty. Secondly, out of the womb through vi∣olent motion, either of those things that happen externally, or those which are with us, or in us, or by the errors of our Mid∣wives, Nurses, or Chyrurgions. Thirdly, by too great repletion and encrease, and on the contrary, by Inanition, or Defect of Aliment, and lesning the due magnitude, or in default in num∣ber. By accident the figure is hurt, when any parts grow not, as they ought, but another way, through loosening of Nerves, Convulsion, Inflammation, or swelling, a Scyrrhus or hard bunch on the Liver, the cutting of a Nerve or Tendon, or by some hard skin growing in them. Moreover to what belongs to Diseases in the Channels of the Body. Diseases in the Channel, are either in excesse or defect; Diseases of the pas∣sages. in excesse the passages are too much dilated by something, filling them contrary to nature, and stretching them sometimes too much; But straitness of the passages is either from our first forma∣tion when our stomachs are narrower then they ought, or by re∣pletion, or when in an Empyema, an Impostumation or Ulcer is generated in the brest, and there broken, and flowes, and makes it narrower; or whilest a stone groweth in some hollow part; or by compressure, when from what cause soever a hollow member
lying under its Cavity is pressed too close, or by the closing of its outsides, or by constriction, when by too much use of binding things the stomach is contracted. Diseases of the passages since they are in excess or in defect; The causes of Diseases of passages Anastoma∣sis. Diaresis. An Anastomasis is caused first by the too great quantity, or the quality of humours initating the expulsive faculty, or the mouth, of the vessels opening themselves; moreover sometimes by Medicines, and other things which have power to relax and loosen the mouths of the vessels. A Devision is made by some gnawing or cutting cause, such may be sharp humours, or fretting Medicines, either stretching them too much, as too great store of humours, Diapedesis. or else breaking them, as violent motion, clamours, heavy burthens, knocking. An opening the Tunicles of the ves∣sels is by moistning and rarefying things. The causes of defect and strait∣nesse of passages. Obstructi∣on. Constipa∣tion. Coales∣cence. Compres∣sion. The causes of the defect of passages, or of narrownesse of them are five; Obstruction, Constipation, Cealescence, Compres∣sure, Subsidence. The cause of obstruction is, first, that which is conteined in a passage, and is not generated, for such are thick or viscide humours, clots of blood, quitture, hard dung, stones, worms, and too great abouncance of humours. The cause of Constipation is hard flesh; as when there is a Tumour, the flesh growes in the passage; Coalescence is cau∣sed when after a wound the walls of the passages grow toge∣ther. Compression is made by things externally hapning, which have power by weight and violence, or otherwise, to pesse the passages, and have strength to force them inward, as divers tumours and bones out of joynt, are amongst the internal causes; amongst the external, Bones, Conusions, Stroakes, and such like; Subsidence. Subsidence is when the outsides of the passages, by too much moisture are made looser then they ought: to which some adde Constriction, by cooling and astringent things. The causes of Diseases on the outside, The causes of Disea∣ses in the Superfici∣es. or extremities of the body, are such as make it rough or smooth; rugged things make it rough, so does gnawing things, and such as dry overmuch, as sharp humours, and medicines endued with such qualities, sharp vapours, Wind, Smoak; sharp Meates, things endued with contrary qualities make the body smooth. Moistning things make the body soft, contrary to nature; drying things make it harder, the mixture of black humours, and such as give a tincture, spoyles the clearnesse of comple∣xion.
The cause of Diseases of defect, Causes of Diseases in number. in number are either from a mans birth; namely defect of matter, or imbecillity of the facul∣ty, drawing matter, being not able to retain and elaborate the same, or error of formation: Or else after one is born, by out∣ting, burning, gnawing, putrefying, and too much cooling; either natural things abound contrary to nature, and that from our beginning, the cause whereof is either too great plenty of profitable matter, and the strength and error of the formative faculty; or after our birth, as is a Membrane, a Tubercle, the cause whereof is plenty of good matter, and by it occasion is gi∣ven of breeding an Ulcer; or somewhat contrary to nature a∣boundeth, as Warts, Stones, and such like; the cause whereof is peccant matter. Magnitude is encreased contrary to nature, Of Mag∣nitude en∣creased. either accor∣ding to some dimensions only, or according to all. First, it is encreased by things contrary to nature; as by wind, as in a Timpany, and a windy Tumour; or by water, as in a Dropsie; or by the falling of one part into another, as when one is bur∣sten. Augmentation is made according to all the dimensions, by the spreading of humours over all the substance of the body, which comes to passe either by reason of profitable humours, which happens to fat people, and in the encrease of certain parts; or from an unprofitable and Excrementitious, which happens in divers kinds of tumours. Magnitude is lessened by weakness of virtue, Diminish∣ed. and want of suste∣nance, or by cutting, burning, gnawing, putrefaction, refrige∣ration. Lastly, parts change their places by reason of the loosenesse, Of chan∣ging place. or solution of unity of those parts wherein they are conteined, or contraction of ligaments, or when they are violently put out of their places. The vicinity and connexion for the most part is hurt by the same means; namely, Of Con∣nexion. if the parts by whose intervening they are knit together, are loosened, broken, or wounded. CHAP. XIIII. Of the causes of Diseases of Solution of Unity. THe causes of Diseases of Solution of Unity, Causes of Diseases of Solution of Unity. Of cutting although they are very many, yet all may be reduced into five ranks; for all things that dissolve the continuity of any part, either cut, or gnaw, or knock, or bend and break, or burn: those that cut are all sharp bodies, which whether edglings, or wound with the
point, as all kinds of weapons and darts, thorns, the biting of living Creatures, and such like. All sharp things erode, as hu∣mours, Eroding. and all sharp, eroding, putrifying, burning medicines. Those that are heavy, and great, and blunt, knock, as stones, woods, Knocking and break∣ing. Eating. dashing the body against hard things; which if they happen to a part that can give way to it, they bruise it; if they happen to a hard part which cannot yeild, they break it; they knock and break those things that fill the part, as plenty of hu∣mours, and store of wind, or they powerfully dry or violently di∣late the part, as dancing, and all loud singing, and heavy bur∣then oppressing, to which belong immoderate cold. Lastly, hot Irons burnt, Burning. and other mettals, and hot and fiery things. The end of the Second Part of the Second Book.
Book. II. PART. III. OF SYMPTOMES. SECT. I. Of the Differences of Symp∣tomes. CHAP. I. What a Symptome is. THE name of Symptome, The word Symptome. although sometimes it be taken generally for every thing which befals the body contrary to nature; so that both Diseases, and causes of Diseases are comprehended under the notion of Symp∣tomes. Yet Physitians take not this name so generally; But by Symptome understand something different from a Dis∣ease, and a cause of a Disease,; and so a Symptome is an affect, or accident contrary to nature in those things which are necessa∣ry to perform natural actions, without the constitution of the parts, some other thing contrary to nature following: Its defini∣tion. or 'tis an accident different from natural, and changing the natural con∣stitution
of the body, which to perform natural actions, is no necessary; whether the action it selfe be hindered, or some acci∣dent contrary to nature in the humours and excrements, or e∣ven in the living parts, so that it hinder not their actions; for a Symptome may consist even in the living parts. For example heat caused by a Bath, or exercise, so that there be not any effect which can hinder action. CHAP. II. Of the causes and differences of Symptomes in general. SO that in respect of the causes, Its divisi∣on. a Symptome is properly divi∣ded into a Symptome of a Disease, a Symptome of a Cause, and a Symptome of a Symptome; for they labour in vain who endeavour to draw all Symptomes from Diseases. A Symptome of a Disease is that which immediately fol∣lows a Disease, A Symp∣tome of a Disease. A Symp∣tome of a Cause. no other affect contrary to nature comming be∣tween, as when an ill concoction follows a distemper of the sto∣mach, which is called in Greek Cylosis. A Symptome of a cause is when the action is hurt, although the faculty, and its organ be well; the faculty being hindered by an external fault, as when the Liver, though sound, cannot sanguifie, by reason of vitious chyle; Whether hurt by ex∣ternal meanes be Symptomes they trouble themselves exceedingly here, who endea∣vour to deduce every Symptome from a Disease, and actions hindred, which happen without a Disease, no way worthy the name of a Symptome, but think them worthy to be called certain natural differences, or imbecilities, since that they are accoun∣ted to perform nothing beyond their own strength: but they plainly erre in the matter, for that any work: may be perfected, not onely the agent, and that rightly disposed, but also the pa∣tient which receives the operation of the agent, is required: For as in voluntary actions; as for example, in gesture, or lifting of a weight, the businesse is in the free will of man, but that some work may be performed in the body; as for example, Sangui∣fication, Nourishment. It is necessary that the patient be joyn∣ed and coupled with the agent, but since the action of him that moves, and the patient moveable is but one motion, and dif∣fer onely in reason, as Aristotle teacheth, in the second Book of his natural Philosophy, Chap. 3. Title 23. Diservedly there∣fore in natural actions, when that is not performed which ought to be, especially in natural concoctions, all that which either is hurt, or frustrated, is deservedly called a Symptome, whether it be done by reason of the agent, or of the patient; for although,
in respect of the agent, it be impotent. Yet some fault doth happen by reason of the patient; and therefore it is the office of a Physitian if he will govern a mans body aright, to govern as well the patient, as agent in such actions. A Symptome of a Symptome is that which follows another preceding Symptome, A Symp∣tome of a Symptome. A division of Symp∣tomes. no other affect contrary to nature com∣ming between. Moreover there is a common division of Symptomes into an action hurt, errours of excretion, and retention, and qualities changed, namely such as doe not hinder the actions of our bodies. Actions hurt are of two kinds, Manner of actions hurt. the one is so called when the faculty is hurt; The other by reason of some external fault, as is said. When the faculty is hurt, the action is said to be hurt; How many ways are actions hart when the facul∣ty is hurt. since the agent is not right, or since the instrument (for the faculties of the mind cannot be hurt) is affected contrary to nature. That the natural constitution of the part, which is the next instru∣ment of the faculty is vitiated, which being spoyled, the mind cannot perform its actions. Again, some divide the faculty hurt into the faculty hurt alone by its selfe, and into certain actions hindred. The faculty hurt by it selfe they say is, when the next instrument which it useth, in performing whereof that action is ill affected: as for example, when the Bladder doth not expel Urine, by reason that the Fibers which are used in expelling, are ill disposed. Again, to the good constitution of the instrument is required not only as abovesaid, constitution of the part, as it is mixed, temperatenesse, and innate heat, but spirits, and influent heat, which being deficient, the faculty cannot rightly perform its actions, as most plainly appears in the senses. But they then say the faculty is hindered, when the next instrument of the fa∣culty is well, yet the faculty is hindered in its action, by some Organick Disease; as when the expulsive faculty in the Bla∣der will not send forth Urine, though it be well, by reason of ob∣structions of the Uriters, occasioned by the Stone. On the other side, if the agent and instrument are in all re∣spects sound, and they be well constituted; Through some exter∣nal error. yet neverthelesse for some other cause, which is without the constitution of the part, the faculty is frustrated in acting, and is hindred that it cannot perform its action. The action is said to be hindered by some external error. To external error first belongs the patient or object, betwixt which and the agent, there ought to be a proportion; for if
the patient be not fit to receive the operation of the agent, a perfect action is not brought forth. Hitherto belong all these things by which actions are performed, or without which they cannot be performed, as time, place, and order in some, and moreover the use and necessity of actions. The other two kinds of Symptomes, The cause of excreti∣ons, and retentions, and of qua∣lities chan∣ged. to wit, the fault of ex∣cretion and retention, and the qualities changed by hurting of the natural actions, depends on them, and the humours procee∣ding from them; for from evil concoction proceeds ill excre∣ments: and hence also the qualities of the body are changed; for such as the humours are in the body, such colours, smells, tasts, and such like qualities the body sends forth. CHAP. III. Of the differences in general of actions hindered. MOreover of actions hindered, The diffe∣rences of actions. Abolished. Diminish∣ed. Depraved. there are accounted common∣ly three differences; namely, actions abolished, dimini∣shed and depraved; an action is said to be Abolished when it ceaseth: to be lessened when nature acts weakly, and imperfectly, and performes its actions either in longer time then is fit, or else never acquires that perfection which it ought, or if there be any other manner whereby it may deviate from its perfection; but an action is said to be depraved as often as it is performed otherwise then it ought to be, and erroneously. But not undeservedly ought we to adde to these; Increased. Action en∣creased, which is performed more strongly and violently, then ought to be in its kind; such are too much watchings, strong breathings, and pulsations, much hunger and thirst, and other such like, which exceed mediocrity. CHAP. IV. Of the Symptomes of the Natural faculty. BUt that we may handle the kinds of Symptomes severally, The diffe∣rences of Symptomes of natural faculty. first the Symptomes of the natural faculty respect nutriti∣on, augmentation, or generation; which again have their servants, attraction, retention, concoction, and evacuation, and indeed every action is abolished, or weakned, or made worse, or encreased. Whence arise great variety of the Symptomes of the natural faculty, First, Nutrition taken a∣way. for what belongs to the action abolished, which they call the third; nutrition is taken away to our senses, or rather
it is diminished in an A trophy, when it will not nourish well, Depraved. and in leanness either of the whole body, or some parts thereof, but the nutriment is depraved in a Cachexy, or ill habit of the body, Itch, Scabs, Leprosie, and such like affects thereof. Symp∣tomes of concoction of the Sto∣mach. The appe∣tite en∣creased and depraved. Thirst. Symp∣tomes of swal∣lowing. Symp∣tomes of retention. Those Symptomes which happen in the first & publike conco∣ction, which is in the Stomach, are first appetite, and truely first when the appetite is dejected,; when a man desires not meat, whereunto belongs also daily abstinence from meat. Secondly, appetite is lessened. Thirdly, encreased, as in a Boulomia, or insatiable desire to meat. Fourthly, Depraved, as in a Mala∣lachia. As the desire of Meat, so desire of Drink is either encrea∣sed, diminished, depraved, or abolished. Secondly, the Symptomes of swallowing are, when it is taken away, as when a man can swallow nothing; or 'tis lessened, when one swalloweth with difficulty; or depraved, when we swallow with panting, trembling, twitching. Thirdly, the fault of the retentive faculty, is when the Sto∣mach cannot retain meat as it ought, or cannot retain it at all, or not long enough, when occasion requires; or offends in all these: the Stomach doth not rightly retain meat, when it em∣braceth it, with panting, or with twitching, or with trembling, or shaking. If meat be not retained, or not long enough retar∣ned, it turneth into corruption, or is distributed with uncon∣cocted meat, or ejected by ordure, as in a Lyentary. If the embracing of the meat be weak, swimmings, or flatulencies are occasioned. Fourthly, the errors of concoction in the Stomach, The errors of conco∣ction. Symptomes of expulsi∣on. The Hic∣cock. Loathing. or the er∣rors of the Chyle are Crudity, slow, or dull concoction, or cor∣ruption of the meat. Lastly, the Symptomes of expulsion are Hiccock, mutation in the uppermost parts of the Stomach, whereby it strives to put and cast out that which is offensive, and sticks in the orifice thereof. Disposition to vomit, or loathing, or abhorring of meates is a depraved mutation in the Stomach, when it is streightned in the lower part of it, and dilated in the upper, and stirs to cast forth upwards what offends it, but cannot cast it forth. Vomiting is a depraved motion in the Stomach, Vomiting. whereby the things which are contained in the Ventricle of the Stomach are cast out at the mouth of it. Choller is a depraved motion in the Stomack, Choller. whereby the peccant matter is evacuated by both Orifices.
Belching is an excression of Wind from the Stomach out of the Mouth, Belching. with noise. To the expulsion which is made by this concoction; those vitious Symptomes belong which happen to the guts. Alientary. Alienta∣ry, which is a flux of the panch contrary to nature, whereby meat and drink is cast out unchanged. A Caeliack affect, A Caeliak affect. A Diarhaea. which also is a Flux of the Belly, is, when Crude and unconcocted Chyle is ejected. A Diarhaea, is a plentiful and often emission of excrementiti∣cus humours by the panch. A Dysentary is an avoiding of the excrements of the Belly con∣trary to nature, A Dysen∣tary. wherein the biting matter is cast forth with blood, twitching and pinching of the Guts. A Tenesme, A Tenes∣mus. which is an immoderate and continual desire, yet in vain, of going to stool, where nothing is ejected from the body, but a little slimy matter and blood. The contrary fault is the suppression of the panch when it is dull, A slow panch and shut. An Illiak. and putteth forth nothing in a long time. To these belong the Illiak, which is, when the dung, which ought to be ejected by the panch, that being closed, 'tis cast out of the mouth with the meat. For the other publike concoction, Symptomes of Sangui∣fication. which is made in the Li∣ver, Sanguification is either abolished, when for the most part there is no change of the Chyle, and in stead of good blood, se∣rous, and Petuitous is generated, or else it is diminished, when halfe raw blood is elaborated; or it is depraved, when hot and a∣dust blood is generated. The Symptomes which belong to the evacuation of the ex∣crements of the second concoction, Symptomes about ma∣king Wa∣ter. Iscury. Dusury. A Stran∣gury. Inconti∣nency of Urin. Diabetes. Bad milk. are an Iscury, or suppression of Urine, or stopping of Water, or a Dusury, or difficulty in ma∣king Water, a Strangury, or dropping of Urine, when it comes away drop by drop, and that there is a continual irritation to expel Urine. Incontinence of Urine, is when it goeth from us against our wills; Diabetes, or plentiful making Water, is when whatsoe∣ver is drunk cometh away by Urine, not changed at all, or alter∣ed very little. Hitherto belong the Symptomes which belong to the genera∣tion of milk, when too much, or none, or not enough is gene∣rated, or it proves scurvey, and is coagulated and curd∣led. Hitherto we refer the Symptomes, Gonorhaea. Flux of Months. which belong to the other concoctions, as the running of the Reins, suppressions of
Courses, diminishing, dropping, flowing in too great plenty, the Flux of the Womb. Increasing is hindered, when either the whole body, Symptomes of encrea∣sing. or some part is not encreased enough, and ceaseth to encrease before it comes to its just magnitude, or it encreaseth too much, and grows to too great a bigness. Lastly, there are some hurts of the generative faculty, Symptomes of genera∣tion. for ge∣neration is either taken away when no Children are generated, or diminished when few and weak ones are begotten, or depraved when Monsters, or a Cripple, or any way an imperfect thing is begotten: and because to the generation of mankind, there is re∣quired male and female joyned; hitherto belongs impotency in men, extinction of lust in women, barrennesse and other Symptomes of this kind. CHAP. V. Of the Symptomes of the vital faculty. FOr the Symptomes of the vital faculty there is a palpitation of the heart (a Lypothymy, Palpitati∣on of heart or an absence of Spirits for a short time) or an Aphyxy, or no Pulse. Palpitation of the heart is when there is a depraved motion of it, swifter then it ought to be, when the heart leaps and strives to fly from that which troubles it. A Lypothymy, A Lypo∣thymy. or want of vital spirits is when the Pulse beats swift on a sudden, and then ceaseth to beat at all, or is suddenly taken away with a small, slow and weak Pulse, to which some add an Eclusie, or absense of the vital soule. A Syncope again is a motion depraved, A swoon∣ing. Absence of Pulse. when the Pulse is much lesser, slower, and weaker then a Lypothymy. An Asphuxy is a total absence, as it were, of the Pulse, and the highest degree of swooning, and neerest to death: of the other preternatural differences of Pulses we will speak in another place. Respiration, which is caused by the heart, Respirati∣on hurt. Taken a∣way. Depraved. Shortbrea∣thing. Shorter. Shortest. either is wholly ta∣ken away, Which Symptome the Greeks call Apnoia, or is de∣praved, which they call Dyspnoia; besides these, the respiration is either too great, or too small; too often, or too seldome; too swift, or too slow; equal, or unequal. And lasty, of swift and slow breathings, there are some differences, according to more and lesse; for the first degree is a Dusopme, the second is an Asthma, the third is an Orthopnie, when the sick are forced to fit upright to breath.
Of the Symptomes of the external senses. FOr as much as belongs to the external senses, Symptomes of sight: first of the sight, that either is wholly lost, as in blindness, & the Disease called Amagrosis, or it is diminished in the disease, which is called Ambluopia and dimnesse of sight, or Muopia which is to see as Mice do; that is, to discern objects which are neer us, and seeming lesse to us then they are. Deprava∣tion of sight. Nutolopea is when any one sees well by day, but very bad in the evening and not by night, or the sight is depraved. When these things which are white seem red, or yellow, those things which are strait, crooked, those things which are whole, seem halfe, and perforated, those things which are single, double; when Cobwebs appear before the eyes, and Flyes, and Gnats, when shinings and glistnings appear, which the Greeks call Marmarugase. The hearing is either taken away, Symptomes of hearing. which disease is called Deaf∣ness, when the diseased can neither hear a great nor smal sound, or it is diminished when loud sounds are heard, but with diffi∣culty, small sounds not at all; which disease is called hardnesse of hearing; the Greek name Barucoia, Ducecoia, Hypocopho∣sis; or it is depraved when there is a hiding in the ears, which disease the Greeks call Ecos and Sorigmos, i. c. a hiding, a whist∣ling, a hissing. The smel is hurt when it is abolished, Symptomes of smelling diminished, or depraved; when things seem to stink, have in them no ill smell. Moreover the taste is either plainly taken away, or else dimi∣nished or depraved, Of tast∣ing. when a thing seems to taste otherwise then it doth. The touch is either wholly lost and can feel nothing, or is di∣minished, Of feeling which is called Numness, or 'tis depraved, as in pain, or itching, hitherto also belongs want of sense in the teeth.
CHAP. VII. Of the Symptomes of the Internal senses. THe Symptomes of the Internal senses are watchings and slee∣pings, when either of them are contrary to nature; Symptomes of the com∣mon sense. Too much watching. Too much sleep. as like∣wise dreams; the error in watchings are when men either sleep not at all for a long time, or if they do, they sleep too little. Sleep is opposite to watching, if it be too much, which comes to passe when it is natural, but not absolutely such; but lon∣ger either from the repletion of the head by vapours, and exhala∣tions, as in drunkenness, or by the consuming of the heat and spirits through too much labour. But preternatural sleep is such as doth proceed from a morbi∣fique cause, which is a Cataphora, or a Cona, that is, a dimi∣nution of the action of the common sense, which, as it were, a wreathing, neither suffers the Animal Spirits to be diffused into the external senses; nor being entertained by them, doth know, and judge aright of other objects. A Coma is two-fold, Coma two-fold. Somnolent Vigilant. somnolent and vigilant; somnolent is that which is oftentimes called an absolute Coma; with which disease those that are affe∣cted, the eyes being shut, do sleep sound and too much: but a vigil is when the sick have a propensity to sleep, yet nevertheless they cannot; but onely shutting their eyes and winking, they are possessed with too great a desire of sleep. In sleep there oftentimes happens dreams, wherein the action of the phantasie doth concur; Dreams. for dreames are nothing else but the deliriums of the brains of sleepers, although dreams happen to those which are well, yet contrary to cuome, they often remain longer, and during the whole night, or are terrible, and trouble the mind exceedingly, and bring great anxiety in sleep, and wearisomness when one is awake. To these kind of Symptomes belongs an extasie, An Exta∣sie. and that na∣tural, which is nothing else but a heavy sleep, with heavy dreams, and hence sometimes cometh a delirium therewith. As also the affects of Sleep-walkers, who whilest they sleep, Sleep-wal∣kers. arise out of their beds, walk, and perform certain works, as w∣king people do, at that time when they ought to rest; yet if the imagination be together offended, these Symptomes may be re∣ferred to that rank wherein many internal senses are hurt.
As for what belongs to the offending of the rest of the Inter∣nal senses, Whether the Phan∣tafie, and reasonable faculty be always hurt toge∣ther. sometimes one of them is offended, sometimes ma∣ny together; for the most part the Phantasie and Ratiocination are offended together, yet not alwayes; for although the un∣derstanding be busied about Phantasms, yet the understanding acting, illustrates the Phantasms, and frees them from their sup∣posed matter, and runs from one thing to another, and is busied about the Idea's retained by the memory, by which the errour of the Phantasie may often be known, sometimes also the memory is together offended; yet sometimes remains safe from the errors of the phantasie, and the reasonable faculty. But those actions are either abolished, The Me∣mory abo∣lished and diminish∣ed. or diminished, or depra∣ved; neverthelesse the memory whose office it is not to judge, but only to receive representations, may be so much debilitated and a∣bolished, namely when it does not receive, and retain those things which it ought, or it receives nothing, and retains nothing, and so a man forgets all things: it cannot be depraved, but if sometimes it receives and retains false objects that is not to be ascribed to it, but to that faculty which discovers absurd and false representations, the memory seems then to be depraved to some, when it doth not render things in that order which it re∣ceived them, but errs in order; but this seems to happen onely by reason of the weaknesse of the memory. The principal actions are abolished and diminished in the imbecility and dulnesse of the mind, The Phan∣tasie, and rational faculty di∣minished and abo∣lished. Folly. Foolish∣nesse. Madness. slownesse of the Wit, stupi∣dity, when a man hath a certain knowledge of the chief things, and draws some conclusions from them, but with great la∣bour. The greatest fault, and the greatest hurt of the Phantasie, and Ratiocination, yet without delirium, is fatuity. But when a man is so destitute of all ingenuity, and the phanta∣sie and Ratiocination are so hurt that they can neither know the first principles, and can beget no conceits, it is called foolishnesse, and madnesse; especially if the action depraved concurre, and a man judgeth not only a little but false. But the imagination and reasonable faculty is depraved in deliriums, A Deliri∣um. whereof there are several kinds; for a deliri um is either with a Fever, or without a Fever; with or without a Fe∣ver, Melancho∣ly. is either simple, viz. A moderate delirium, and without madnesse stirred up by hot vapours in a Fever, or by watching, or drinking too much Wine, which the Greeks call Paraphrosune, or Paraphrora. A Frenzy is with a Fever, which is a continued delirium,
arising from the inflammation of the Brain and its Mem∣branes. But a delirium without a Fever is Melancholy, and madnesse; Melancholy is a Delirium without a Fever, with sorrow and sadness, as it is commonly defined; or a failing of the Phantasie and reasonable Faculty about one certain thing: and indeed the Phantasie is principally offended, but the reasonable Faculty not alwayes nor in all, but the memory for the most part is safe. To melancholy Deliriums also is referred Mad Love, wherein concur various passions, Mad love. now they conceive joy with hope of ob∣taining the thing beloved; where they do many things, and speak beyond decency, and now sorrow and anger when they despaire of obtaining the thing beloved. Madnesse is a delirium without a Fever, with Fury, Fear, Madnesse. Au∣dacity, Anger, Quarrels, and Ferosity. To madnesse are referred Wolf-madnesse, Dog-madnesse, Bad∣ger-madnesse, fear of Water, viz. a Disease wherein if one be bitten with a Dog, a Wolfe, a Badger, or any other ravenous A∣nimal, he becomes altogether averse to all liquid and potulent drinks, although as for other things, they do not shun them; also those that are bitten by a Tarantula, leap and dance, and a Corea or company of S. Viti, which is a kind of delirium and madness, with which those that are affected strive to dance night and day. CHAP. VIII. Of the Symptomes of the motive Faculty. ANimal motion is either abolished, diminished, Symptomes about mo∣tion. Palsie. or depra∣ved; motion is abolished, not onely in the Palsey, which is impotency of motion, wherein the next instruments of motion are relaxed, and ceased from their action, and are not contracted, but cannot be moved by reason of putting out of joynt, fractures of bones, wounds of the muscles, Lassitude. drynesse and induration of the parts serving for motion. It is diminished in the green sickness, or in lazinesse when the motion is become weak. It is depraved in trembling, which the Greeks cal Tremos, Trembling wher∣in the part cannot move freely, but is now elevated, and anon depressed: for although in respect of the motive faculty, trembling is onely imbecility of the motive faculty; yet because the mo∣tive
faculty doth not wholly faile, but the member which contra∣ry to the dictate of the will is depressed by its own weight, it en∣deavours in some measure to elevate it selfe; here is made a de∣praved motion, where in the smallest intervals of time the mem∣ber is lifted up, and depressed in a continual course. As also in the Convulsion, Kinds of Convulsion fits. which is a preter-natural contra∣ction of a Muscle, towards its beginning, contrary to the will; and a violent stretching out of the part, into which a Tendon is inserted. A Convulsion is either Universal or Particular, U∣niversal is three-fold, Emprosthotonos, i. e. when the Neck and the rest of the Body is bowed forward, so that the diseased can∣not set himselfe upright. Opisthotonos, when the body is bent backward. Tetanos, when the body is so stiff that it cannot bend any way. A particular Convulsion in regard of several particular parts, hath divers names, Aspasmos Cynicus, a Con∣vulsion of the Muscles of the Mouth. Trismos, a Convulsion of the Muscles of the Jaws, with grating and grinding of the Teeth. Strabismes, a Convulsion of the Muscles of the Eye. To these belong Convulsive Motions, Convulsive motions. wherein is made a Contraction of the Muscle towards his beginning, but conti∣nues not in one difference of Location; but it happens with va∣rious concussions and agitations of the Member, as in an Epe∣lepsie. Sometimes also a Palsie and a Spasme are complicate, A Palsie. Cramp. Complicate Voice hurt. so that by changes and turnes they afflict, and so the part is sometimes con∣tracted, and sometimes dilated. Hitherto is to be referred the error of the voice, which either is abolished, as in Aphonia, or dumbnesse, or diminished, as in an inward and obscure, or small and low voice, or it is depraved, being broken in a shrill, sharp, hoarse, or trembling voice. The speech also is hurt, Hurt of speech. which is either taken away, as in those which are called mute, or else it is difficult, as in those who pronounce certain Letters, especially R, with great difficul∣ty; or it is depraved, as in those who in speaking now stop, and anon precipitate their speech, which evil, the Greeks call Trau∣lates and Psellotes, the English, Stammering. Amongst these errors of Motion, those Symptomes are to be reckoned wherein the natural expulsive Motion, being stimula∣ted by a preternatural cause, ariseth up to expel; it cannot per∣form motion without the help of the animal vertue, and Organ, such as are a cough, sneezing, yawning, quaking, stretching. A Cough is a depraved motion, A Cough. and vehement efflation occa∣sioned
from the sudden constriction of the Lungs, and Brest, whereby that may be expelled, which was troublesome, and be sent forth by the instruments of breathing. Sneezing is a motion of the Muscles, primarily of the Brain, Sneezing. secondarily of the Brest, and inferiour Muscles, whereby that may be expelled, which is troublesome to the Brain. Yawning, or Gaping, Yawning. is that motion whereby nature endea∣vours to expel the flatuous vapours by breathing them out of the mouth. Stretching is a distention of the members in the whole Body, Stretching discussing the vapours in them. Shaking fits, that is a concussion of the skin of the whole body, Horror. to shake off some troublesome thing. Cold fits, that is a shaking of the whole body, Cold fits. to put off that which offends it. CHAP. IX. Of the Symptomes wherein all, or most part of the animal actions are hurt. BUt sometimes it happens that either all, or most of the ani∣mal functions are offended together: amongst these Symp∣tomes, a Vertigo is the first, the Greek Dinos and Iliggos, A Vertigo. 'tis such a mischief, and depravation of the imagination, some∣times of the common sense, that all things seem to run round in a circle, and for the most part, the motion is so hurt, that a man falls down. Sometimes the external senses are affected likewise, which if it happen at the same time, the eyes are ob∣scured by a fuliginous mist; the Greeks call it Scotoma, and Scotodinos, i. e. a shady disease. Sometimes the hearing is somewhat depraved, or some certain swimming ariseth, or some other senses are affected. Moreover an Incubus, or a riding of the Mare, An Incu∣bus. or an hindrance of breathing, and interruption of speech, and hindrance of mo∣tion, as it were, an oppression of the body, with a false dream of a weight lying upon the brest. A Lethargy, which is a perpetual desire of sleeping, A Lethar∣gy. with a giddinesse of the head, with forgetfulnesse of all things, or it is a continual Delirium, with a weak Fever, heavinesse to sleep, and destruction of memory. A Carus, which is a profound, or dead sleep, A Carus. wherein the sick hear not, and being pricked, scarce perceive it, or a deep sleep
with diminution, or taking away of sense, motion, and imagi∣nation, the breathing being gone. A Catoch, A Catoch. or Catolepsis is a Diminution of the principal functions, or external senses, especially of feeling, and volun∣tary motion by abolition; or 'tis a sudden apprehending, where∣by those which are affected being stiff, remain in the same place and gesture of body as they were in when they were taken, and opening, and not moving their eyes, they neither see nor hear, nor perceive; the breath and pulse onely remaining safe. An Epelepsie is an ablation of the principal actions, An Epe∣lepsie. An imper∣fect Epe∣lepsie. and of sense and voluntary motion, with a preternatural Convulsion, or Convulsive motion of the whole body. To the Epelepsie also are referred certain Diseases, as it were, smal Epelepsies, wherein the sick are not velified in the whol body, neither do they fall down, but some parts onely are twitched, as either the head is shaken, or the eyes are drawn, or the hands and feet are snatched this way and that way, or the hands are held shut, or the diseased is turned round, or runs up and down, and in the mean time speaks nothing, hears nothing, perceives nothing. Lastly, An Apo∣plexie. an Apoplexy, which is an abolition of all animal actions, to wit, of motion and sense, in which the whole body, with the hurt of the principal faculty of the mind, respiration after a sort being safe. CHAP. X. Of the Symptome of the changeable qualities of the Body. THe second kind of Symptomes are those which consist in a simple affect of the body, The diffe∣rence of qualities changed. or the qualities of the body changed; namely, when some natural quality of the bo∣dy is changed, by reason of which change, there follows no hurt of the actions; their differences are to be sought out of the number of the external senses. The visible qualities changed are colours contrary to na∣ture, Colours changed. either in the whole body, as in the yellow Jaundice, or in a Cachochimy, or ill habit of the body, or in some part, as in the Face, Tongue, an inflammation, black Teeth, yellow Nailes, and such like. Smells contrary to nature are changed, Smells changed. when a man breaths
forth an ill smell, either out of the whole body, or from some part, as the Mouth, Nose, hollow of the Arm-pits, or soals of the Feet. Tasts or Savours are changed when the spittle, Taste changed. or any thing else which swims in the Mouth is spit out, and gives a sharp, salt, bitter, or other taste; but since these qualities are not the parts of the Body, but Excrements; they may be more fitly referred to the third kind of Symptomes. To the fourth belong Tactil qualities onely, Change of Tactil qu∣lities. as they are con∣trary to nature, and troublesome, but do not hinder actions, as Heat, Cold, Softnesse, Hardnesse. Hoarsenesse. To Hearing may be referred, sounds, warbling, crackling, grinding of Teeth, and such like, which are perceived by hea∣ring. Lastly, hitherto are to be referred common sensible things, as Figure, Magnitude; if they are preternatural, and all those things which are spoken of in the Hypocratical Face, and are described in his First Booke of Progno∣sticks. CHAP. XI. Of the Symptomes of Excretions and Retentions. THe third sort of Symptomes comprehend the errors of those things which we ought to be cast out of the body, Errors of Emission and Reten∣tion. or use to be retained in it, contrary to nature; in which kind of Symptomes regard is not to be had to the excression it selfe, or action of casting forth, whose faults are the Symp∣tomes of actions hurt, but onely to the matter which is cast out, which as it recedes from the natural state, constitutes this or that sort of Symptomes. Retentions and Excretions offend either in the whole sub∣stance, or in quality, or in quantity. First, Excression and Reten∣tion offend in sub∣stance. in the whole sub∣stance they offend, which ought never to be found in the whole body, in the stead of an Excrement; such are Stones, and di∣vers sorts of Wormes, little Hairs, and such like. Secondly, those which in their whole substance are not contrary to nature, but are cast forth in this or that manner, or place, contrary to nature; such are the Courses out of the Nose, Eys, or Teats, the Ordure by the Mouth. Thirdly, those things which are plainly na∣tural, yet ought rather to be retained then evacuated, as too much profusion of blood by the Mouth, Panch, Nose, Bladder,
Pores of the Skin, which happens in a bloody swear. To these belongs particular ejections out of the Lungs, and other parts. In quality they offend many wayes, in heat and cold, moisture and drinesse; In colour, smell, and taste, in quantity, excreti∣ons offend, when either more or lesse then ought to be are cast forth, which often happen in the dregs of the Panch, Urine, and Courses. The end of the third Part and first Section; of the second Book.
Book. II. PART. III. SECT. II. OF THE CAUSES OF SYMPTOMES. CHAP. I. Of the causes of the Symptomes of the natural faculty. SIthence we have reckoned all the differences of Symp∣tomes, The cause of want of nourish∣ment. order now requires that we may shew their Causes in the same order we have set down them; and as for the Symptomes of the Natural Faculty, amongst them the first is Atrophy, or want of nourishment; and that is either in the whole, or in some part. In the whole. Atrophy in the whole is occasioned through the debility of the faculty, or default of the nourishment; the vertne is weakned through a
dry distemper, and sometimes hot, which principally proceeds from the Heart, labouring with the like distemper, as in Hek∣ticks, and other Fevers; yet sometimes from the defect of other parts which may communicate their affects also with the Heart, diseases may perform the same. Atrophy is occasioned through defect of Aliment, when either it is not communicated in suf∣ficient quantity, or when it is affected with some ill quality: 'Tis wanting when too small a quantity is received, or although sufficient quantity be taken, yet 'tis not concocted through the weaknesse of the bowels; or being concocted, 'tis not distributed by reason of the narrownesse of the Veines about the Liver; or it is disperst, or not conglutinated, by reason of distempers of the parts, especially hot and dry. Atrophy is made through the pravity of nutriment, when ill blood by reason of the distemper of the bowels is generated, especially hot and dry, and not so profitable. In part. Atrophy is in some part whilest its force is weak, through cold distemper and defect of native heat, or through want of nourishment, by reason of the straitnesse of the passages, by which it should be communicated to the part, or occasioned by what cause soever. The immediate cause of depravation of nutrition, The cause of ill habit of Body. and of ill habit, is vitious and raw nourishment in the bowels, appointed for publike concoctions, arising from the vitious disposition there; to which sometimes a cold and moist dsstemper, and ha∣bit of the body is added. The Scabs, Of the scab, lea∣prosie. &c. the Leprosie and other known cutanious diseases have their original from ill nourishment, but not crude, but sharp, salt nitrous, or having some other pravity which since it is various, various diseases from thence do arise. But amonst the Symptomes which happen to the concoction which is made in the stomach. The cause of the ap∣petite ta∣ken away and dimi∣nished. The first is when the appetite is hurt, and the reason of abolishing or diminishing of the appe∣tite is, because either little or no juice is made, or else is not perceived; juice is not made, or very little is made, when ma∣ny crude and watery humours compess the mouth of the sto∣mach, or the chyle hither to sticks in the stomach, or because aliment abounds in the body, which may be when it is not e∣vacuated, by reason of the thicknesse of the skin, or idlenesse, or weak heat, or because it is not attracted, through some distem∣per of the Veins, or straitnesse of the Meseraick veins, and of the hollow Vein of the Liver, or because concoction and distributi∣is hindred in the stomach. The sucking is not perceived either through the error of the sensitive faculty, when the animal spirits
which should flow are desicient, or when the action is conver∣ted another way, as in such as are out of their wits, or when the nerves of the conjugation are defective, or when the mouth of the stomach is ill with some distemper, as swelling, or ulcer, or by the dulnesse of the stomach occasioned by some stupefactive Medicines, The cause of daily abstinence. Hitherto belongs the daily abstinence of those men who ab∣stained not onely some dayes and months, but years also from all meats; of which wonderful Symptome, although it be not easie to render a reason, yet it is probable that all such had not need of restoring, and that because nothing is taken away, or not in a long time wasted, because of the humours which pre∣serves our bodies, is so disposed, and proportioned to the heat of the same, that it could not be destroyed by it. On the contrary, The cause of the ap∣pet ite en∣creased. the cause of the encrease of the appetite is too much sucking, which comes to passe either from some hu∣mour sticking in the stomach; such is Melancholly, which by its sharpnesse and austereness binds the stomach, or through want of nourishment, which happens by reason of Wormes, which consumes the Chyle, or by too much labour and exercise, watch∣ings, long fastings, evacuations of blood, vomiting, or from some old distemper, binding the stomach. But the appetite is depraved by a vitious humour peculiarly corrupted and fixed to the Tunicles of the stomach, which is either generated in the stomach by ill food, or else flowes from some other part, especially the Womb, into the stomach. Thirst is abolished, or diminished, either from cold, sweat, The cause of dimini∣shing of thirst. unsavory, petuitous, aqueous, many humours generated in the stomach, want of meat and drink, or flowing from some other parts, continually moistening the stomach, or because the sto∣mach doth not perceive its want of drink, as it often comes to passe in Frensies and burning Fevers. Again the Thirst is encreased through want, Of encrea∣sed. and drinesse of humours, which proceed from those things which have drying faculties, and such as consume the primogenial humidity of the stomach; such are all drying and heating things, as hot hu∣mours, sharp and salt, a hot and dry distemper in the mouth of the stomach, proceeding either from the whole, which is in Fe∣vers, or in some part neer to the stomack, which either sends hot and dry vapours and humours to the stomach; or by reason of the communion of the Tunicles and Membranes which cover the stomach, the orifice of the stomach, the Wind-pipe, and the neighbouring parts, communicating a hot and dy distemper
to the Ofice of the stomach: external causes which are evident perform the same as those which have a power of heating, drying, and consuming the humidity in the Oifice of the Ventricle. Vitious thirst is caused by some vitious humour in its whole kinde contrary to nature, Vitious thirst. sticking in the mouth of the sto∣mach, The swal owing is hurt either when the faculty is offended, Of swal∣lowing hurt. or through some external error; and indeed the faculty either natural, or animal may be hurt: the natural is hurt whilest ei∣ther the attractive faculty cannot draw meat through the strait fibres of the internal Pannicle into the parts; or the expulsive through the Transuerse fibers inserted into the external Tunicle, cannot thrust food which is drawn into the mouth of the sto∣mach, farther down into the stomach; which is caused through the relaxation of the fibers of the Orifice of the stomach, by rea∣son of a cold and moist distemper, when the matter flows from the head to the chops; or by reason of their driness occasioned by some Tumour, Ulcer, or Excoriation. The animal faculty is hindered when the Muscle which is be∣fore the gullet, either is inflamed, which use to be in the Quin∣sie; or 'tis contracted either by Convulsion, or Palsie; it is hindered also by reason of the straitness of the entrance into the stomach, which proceeds from divers causes, as Tumours in the Throat, Relaxation of the Vertebraes of the Neck, and Back: external things being swallowed, as when Fish-bones, Pins, and other things stick in the mouth of the stomach, as also Wormes. The swallowing is hindered by some external error when any thing, hard, dry, sharp, rough, viscid, or ungrateful is swallow∣ed. The retention of meat swallowed is hindered, when it is abo∣lished, The causes of Reten∣tion of meat hurt. diminished, or depraved. Retention taken away and di∣minished proceed from the same causes, the one from the greater, the other from the lesser: and this comes to pass if the Reten∣trix be weak. The Oblique fibres loosned by a cold and moist distempers, or if any Tumour, as an Inflammation or Ulcer be present. The cause of windiness in the stomach, is windy meats, and a stomach not cold enough, but the cause of floating with a noise, is when the stomach is freed from that which might be turned into wind, yet still remaining full of drink, or extreamly cooled. But the retentive faculty is depraved when the stomach doth not ightly infold the meat, Of Palpi∣tation. and indeed a Palpitation with
floating and noise happens through the weakness of retention and thick winds pen'd into the stomach, Of Con∣vulsion. which arise either from the causes or crudity, or from flatulent meat, or yellow, or black choller spread over the stomach; But a constriction, and a cer∣tain sighing, or Hiccock happens, when after emptinesse and de∣fect of aliment, the stomach too violently contracts it self, having newly received meat. Tembling is caused by the imbecility of the retentive facul∣ty from a cold distemper, and the wait of the meat oppressing: Of trem∣bling. Of Shak∣ing. The cause of abolish∣ing and diminish∣of con∣coction in the sto∣mah. Faculty hurt. External error. and a certain Quavering when the Ventricle is molested by any biting thing, especially choller. For as much, as what belongs to the concoction hurt, is ei∣ther abolished or diminished in the stomach, they both proceed from the same causes, they onely differ according to Major and Minor, and the concoction is hindered, either primarily and by it selfe, when it cannot do its office withour the hurt of the rest of the faculties. Or secondarily, and by accident, when it is vitiated by the retentive or expulsive faculty. For unlesse meat can be retained so long as it ought. The concoction cannot be rightly performed. The concoction is hurt by its self, either when the faculty is hindered, or by some external error, the fa∣culty being hurt is hindered through some distemper of the sto∣mach, from what cause soever ariseth, or other diseases of the stomach, tumours, ulcers, and such like which hinder concocti∣on; the concoction is hindered through external errors; first, by reason of Excrements, which if they abound in the stomach and offend with cold, they are the cause of abolition, and di∣minition thereof. Secondly, by meats which offend either in quantity, or else divers and various kinds are taken, or in qua∣lity, if the meats are cold, or hard, and clammy, and hard to be concocted. Thirdly, by reason of the time of taking food; namely, if meat raw betaken before it is boyled. Fourthly, after the taking of meat, if a man watch the whole night, or sleep very little, or exercise himselfe violently, or suffer the pas∣sions of the mind. The corruption of meat is two-fold, the one nitrous, Depraved. the other acide; the nitrous hath its beginning from a hot distem∣per of the stomach, the chollerick excrements being collected in the ventricle by hot aliments which are obnoxious to corrupti∣ons; such as are sharp, oyly, pinguious things, Milk, Mush∣rooms, garden Fruit, and such like; but crudity produceth aci∣dity, through the cold distempers abounding with cold aliments; cold, pituitous, and melancholy humours in the stomach.
We have said the Symptomes of the expulsive faculty of the stomach, are Hiccock, Loathing, Vomiting, Choller, Bel∣ching. The immediate cause of Hiccock is something trouble∣some to the superiour part of the stomach, Hiccock. especially to the Ori∣fice thereof, which it endeavours by that motion to put away and expell, but the causes which trouble the stomack on this manner, are either in the Stomach it selfe, or in the parts which can draw the Ventricle by consent. The cause of Hiccock in the Stomach it selfe, is matter either oppessing by its plenty, or of∣fending in quality, as sharp meats, and biting, and such like hu∣mours, sharp medicines, malignant and foul vapours, either generated in the stomach, or sent thither from elsewhere, Worms, an immoderate cold distemper, and those things which outward∣ly press the stomach, which may happen by the pressing and ben∣ding the extremities of the ribs to the stomach. But Hiccock by consent happens when the nerves of the sixth conjugation suf∣fer together, in an inflammation and percussion of the braine; as also inflammations of the Midriff, the Eungs, the Liver, the Gutflion. Loathing and Vomiting have their rise from the same causes differing according to Major and Minor, Causes of loathing and vomi∣ting. either in the stomach it selfe ill affected and weak, or from something contrary to na∣ture, tearing the stomach. The stomach is ill affected by a cold and moist distemper; or by conformation thereof, or by a cer∣tain native straitnesse thereof, by reason of drynesse and lean∣nesse, swelling an Ulcer, whereunto belongs frequent vomiting, which indeed it selfe disposeth the stomach to more frequent vo∣miting: as also the shutting of the inferiour Orifice of the Ven∣tricle by some tumour, as an obstruction also of the Guts and mesentary, and inverted motion of the fibres of the Guts. The diseases called the Chollick and Stone, by the communion of the Membranes; and lastly, wounds and hurts of the Braine and its Membranes. But the matter which Irrirates the stomach to ex∣pel, either loading it with its plenty, or twitching it with its sharpnesse, or moilifying the superior Orifice, or by stimulating it with a malignant quality it doth it; whether it be meat and drink, or medicines, poysons, worms, blood, quitture; choller effused into the stomach, which happens to those which have a vitious implantation of the Pores or the Vessel that carries the Choller into the bottom of the stomach. The evident external causes are too much exercise of the body, and the sight of loath∣some things.
The cause of Choller is offensive, Moist Choller. and sharp matter irritating the expulsive faculty of the stomach by its plenty, and its quali∣ty to expulsion, and stimulating it to evacuate, upwards and downwards. Such is Choller collected about the Liver, Pan∣creas, and parts adjacent, also sharp adust humours, salt, ni∣trous, and other peccant humours bred of corrupt food, as Mush∣rooms, Garden-fruits, and such like strong purging Medi∣cines and Poysons do the same, and stir up this matter. As for the difference betwixt the other Choller and this, Dry Chol∣ler. which we have newly explained, that is dry, this is moist, the cause is a flatuous and sharp spirit stirred up by yellow, black, and adust Choller spread over the stomach. Belching is occasioned by thick and fuming vapours breaking out upward, and stimulating the stomach to expulsion. Belching. Concerning a loosenesse, Alientary and Celi∣ack affects. the causes of a Lyentary and Coeli∣ack affects are for the most part the same, differing onely in mag∣nitude; And in this also that a Coeliack is rather a Disease of the Guts, then of the Stomach, although its name seems to signifie otherwise; For in a Lyentary, as hath been said, the meat is cast forth crude. In a Coeliack the Chyle is ejected contrary to nature; and therefore the cause of a Lyentary is the hurting of the retentive faculty of the Ventricle and Intestines, by reason whereof the meat before it be perfectly concocted, descends into the Guts and is cast out, And indeed in a Lyentary the retentive faculty of the stomach is principally hurt. Nor can it be that meat un∣concocted can be cast forth out of the Panch, unless it be sent too soon into the Guts, by reason of some fault of the retentive faculty of the stomach; but the Coeliack is occasioned rather by some hurt of the retentive faculty of the Intestines, because Chyle generated in the stomach, ought to remain some time in the Guts; that it might there be in some manner elaborated, and be conveniently drawn by the meseraik veines, and the or∣dure should be throughly elaborated: If the retentive faculty of the Intestines be hurt, all these things cannot be performed, but the Chyle untimely, and in some, as measure crude is cast out of the Panch, but the retentive faculty of the Stomach and Guts is hurt either of its selfe, or by accident: of it selfe through a cold and moist distemper, and that either alone, or joyned with a phlegmatick humour, as also by cicatrising after a disentary, and the immoderate use of fat things, and such as cause Lubri∣city. By accident it is hurt when the expultrix being stirr'd up exceedingly, drives the meat presently downward, by reason of
the ulcerous disposition of the Stomach and Guts caused by bi∣ting and sharp humours, sometimes also by a hidden quality, or from hurtful and poisonous meats, or ill disposition of air. A Diarhaea proceeds from the expultrix of the Guts stirr'd up by plenty of humours, A Diar∣haea. crudity, or pravity, whether they pro∣ceed from corruption in the stomach, and guts, or flow from the wholebody, or any part to the guts, from what cause soever they are generated and collected, The more remote causs of Diar∣hae a are imbecility of concoction, and distribution, through the distemper of the stomach, and parts adjacent; ill diet, untem∣perate air, omitting exercises of the body, or taking a strong purge. The cause of a Dysentery improperly so called, or of voiding of blood without exulceration of the Guts are the opening of the mouths of the Mesentary Veines, A Dysen∣tary. either by too great plenty of this blood, or by crudity, by reason of the concoction of the Liver, or being retained too long in the Liver Veines, and by a burning with a preternatural heat. But as for Dysentery pro∣perly called, the causes are sharp and biting humours, whether they flow from the whole, or from some part to the Guts, or are generated in them, and are peculiarly troublesome to them, of which kind also are sharp gnawing drugs, speciplly violent purges, sharp quitture and poysons, A Tenesmus, or desire to go to stoole and cannot void any thing but blood, A Tenesm. comes for the most part from the same cause, yet principally, salt phlegm, and a sharp humour, clammy, thick, closely sticking to the skin of the Gut, called Rectum. The Belly on the contrary is suppressed either because the ex∣pulsive faculty of the Intestines is hurt, Suppressi∣on of the helly. or because the Muscles of the belly do not help to expel, or because the ordure doth not stimulate, or because the Guts are not alwayes sensible of prick∣ing and stirring up: the expulsive faculty doth not expel, either because it is hurt or frustrated by some external error, or fault in the object. 'Tis hurt either because it is weakened by a cold and dry distemper, or it is hindered by the strength and driness of the retentive faculty, or by the narrownesse of the Guts which proceed, first from astringent and drying things. Se∣condly from their inflammation, or a Tumor bred in them. Thirdly, from growing together, especially of the Fundament. Fourthly, from the going out and turning of them which hap∣pens in a Rupture. Fifthly, from obstruction, by reason of the hardnesse of the siedge, Worms, Stones, viscous Phlegm. Sixthly,
from the Muscles refrigerated and straitned, shutting the Gut Rectum. The belly is supprest through default of the object when the Ordure is too thick, viscid and hard, the Muscles of the Panch do not help to expel, either because they are weak, or be∣cause they, or the parts under them endure pain; the Ordure doth not stimulate when either there is but little, or when there is no mordication, or it hath no sharpnesse, or by reason of eat∣ing of cold meats, or because yellow Choller is not mingled therewith. The Guts are not sensible of stimulation, either because their preception is dull, or becavse through long retention they are accustomed to, and become familiar with the Ordure, or because they are stopt with phlegm. The Illiack passion hath its original from the inverted moti∣on of the fibres of the Intestines, Illiack. which proceed from some in∣flammation, or obstruction, from hard dung, or from a Rup∣ture, or from Exulceration, or a Canker, or from a high flowing of humours. Moreover for what belongs to elaboration of blood, Sanguifi∣cation hurt. that is hindered either primarily, and by its selfe, or secondarily, and by accident; Primarily it is offended either when the faculty is hindered, or by some external accident; when the faculty is offended, 'tis done by reason of some diseases of the Liver, di∣stemper (by reason of which alone, without any other manifest disease of the Liver; those which are troubled with its imbecili∣ty are called Hepaticks) obstructions, tumors, ulcers. But it is hurt by some external error, when either the Chyle is not right∣ly elaborated in the stomach, or when it is throughly elabora∣ted, some peccant matter is mingled therewith. Secondarily, or by accident it is hurt, either when the attractive faculty is hindered, by reason of diseases of the Liver, or obstuction of the Mesentary, or because the retentive faculty in like man∣ner is hindered through some disease of the Liver, and especially through its moist distemper, opening and gnawing of the ressels, and thinnesse of Chyle, or by the expulsive faculty; principal∣ly by cold distemper, and obstructions of the gibbous parts of the Liver, by reason whereof the blood cannot be distribu∣ted. But as for the Symptomes which happen in making of Urine, The cause of an Is∣cury, and of little Uria the first is an Iscury, or suppression of Urine, and making of lesse Urine: 'tis properly to called when the Urine is in the Bladder, and is not ejected, or very little is cast ou; which
Symptomes arise from the same causes, differing only according to Major and Minor; but the Urine is suppressed, or little is made, because the xepulsive faculty is either hurt and weakened, or hindered. It is hurt whilest either the sensitive faculty o the Bladder being hurt, doth not perceive the pricking of the Urine; namely, when the proper Nerves of the Bladder are affected ei∣ther by some stroak, sliding, loosening of the Vertebraes in that part, wounds of the spinal Marrow and Tumors, as also stupe∣factive Medicines being applied thereto, or it may happen when the expulsive faculty is hurt, and the transverse fibres of the Bladder appointed for expulsion, or affected with some cold moist distemper: or are extended over much, that they lose their tune or note; so that afterwards they cannot be contracted, which comes to passe when the Urine is too long retained, or the Muscles which help and assist the Bladder to expel Urine, are af∣fected so that they cannot be contracted. But the expulsive fa∣culty is hindered whilest the Neck of the Bladder and Urinary Passages are not open, and is either stopt by a little Flesh or Callous Substance in the passages, or is obstructed by Gravel, clotted Blood, Quitture, or thick humours; or it is comprest by a Tumour in compassing the Neck of the Muscle of the Bladder, or of the neighbouring parts, or it is shut by contra∣cting of the Muscle of the Neck, or it is pressed and wreathed by the falling of the Bladder out of its place. Urine also is not made when too great plenty thereof is long retained, too much dilating the fibres of the Bladder, so that afterwards they cannot contract themselves, nor cannot squeeze out, nor expel Urine, which comes to passe either when the Urine (mens businesse be∣ing urgent) of its own accord is retained long; or when the pricking of the Urine, as is said before, is not perceived. Lastly, Urine is not cast out through its accustomed passage, if by some Wound, Ulcer, Fistula of the Bladder and Urinary passages, the Urine which ought to passe through them, goes out by a way o∣pened elsewhere. There is another Iscury lesse properly so called, or suppression of Urine, when little or no Urine is sent, and comes into the Bladder, which happens when the attractive faculty of the Reins is hurt through distemper, especially cold, or is hindered by obstruction and straitnesse of the emulgent vessels, or when the Urine is carried to another place, and is cast out of the Panch, or by Sweats, or is collected in the Panch, and stayes in the first passages, as in a Dropsie,
But a Dusury properly so called, Difficulty of making Urine. or difficulty of making U∣rine, is when the time of making water, and the quantity, is a little altered, yet in the very making water, the Urine doth not passe out freely, but is made with great striving, pain, and burning, which comes to passe by some fault of the Urinary pas∣sage; namely, whilest it is affected with some Ulcer, and is ero∣ded, or the Vrine it self being sharp doth it, or the passage was formerly ulcerated. The cause of a Strangury is either some sharp thing which stimulates nature continually to expel, Of a Strangury. but because nature is sensible of pain, it hinders free emission, the Urine is made drop by drop, and dribling, which is caused by crude Urine unconcocted, or having a sharp humour mixt with it, by Gra∣vel sticking in the neck of the Bladder, or some fault of the Uri∣nary passage: whereunto belongs Intemperature of the Bladder, and inflammations of the same, and of the parts neer thereunto: hot humours, also exulceration of the neck of the Bladder and Urinary passage. Involuntary pissing, Of Invo∣luntary pissing. which happens both to those that are slee∣ping and waking, is caused for the most part when the contra∣ctive power of the Muscle Sphincter of the bladder is taken away, which is occasioned by a Palsie, proceeding either from a cold and moist distemper of the same, or by hurting of the Nerves which come to this Muscle, by compression in loosening the turning joynts of the back neer the Hucklebone by a stroak, a fall, or some tumor, or obstruction, or by hurting of the same Muscle, or certain fibres, in cutting the stone of the bladder; yet sometimes Urine is made against our wills, when the Muscles of the Panch are exceedingly drawn together, so that the Urine by reason of their constriction and compression of the belly is, as it were forced out of the bladder, as also sometimes it happens to those that are great with Child in their last months. For the same reason they cannot contain their Urine. But if a man contain his Urine waking, Of pissing in ones sleep. and in his sleep let it go from him. That happens by a certain imbecility of the Sphincter of the Bladder: Yet there concurs a more deep sleep, and a certain negligence of the superiour faculty, as also cu∣stome. It is not easie to explain from what cause a Diabetes doth proceed; To this obscure matter I say, Diabetes. It seems probable that the immediate cause is the hurting of the retentive faculty of the Reines, by too great plenty of Urine; which when the Reines cannot endure, they suffer it to flow into the bladder, This
plenty of Urine seems to be occasioned by the heat of the bowels, liver, and spleen, and the veins, drawing drink very powerfully, and melting of the humours in the veins, to which for the most part there happens imbecility and relaxation of those parts which carry the watry humour from the Stomack to the Liver, and Spleen; by reason whereof the drink is suddenly carried to the Reins. The causes of those Symptomes which are deservedly joyned to these, The cause of defect of milk. and belong to the generation of milk, seed, and courses of women; milk either is wanting, or corrupt, it is wanting either when it is generated in too small quantity, or through some distemper of the Paps, or some disease or straitnesse of pas∣sages, by reason whereof they cannot draw and elaborate suffiti∣ent quantity of blood. Vitious and corrupt milk is generated either through the pra∣vity of the matter, Vitious. and fault of the blood, or by some distem∣per of the bests. Lastly, Coagula∣ted. Milk grows thick, and coagulates whilest either it is burnt by too much heat, or if it abound in quantity, and is re∣tained 100 long in the brests, or if any vitious humour be min∣gled the ewith, which hath a power to coagulate. A Gonorliaea, Gonorhaea or emission of Sperm against ones will, happens without erection of the Yad; and desire of Venery; 'tis occa∣sioned either by the hurting of the retentive faculty, or some ex∣rernal error; the faculty is weakned through distemper, princi∣pally moist, rendring the spermatick vessels more loose: whe∣ther it proceed from too great a flux of flegmatick humours, or too much coition, or other causes. But from external hurt, or fault of the seed, whether it be too cold, watry, thin, or crude, sometimes also a Gonorhaea happens by convulsion, as in such as have the falling sicknesse. The cause of Nocturnal pollution is too great plenty of seed, Of noctur∣nal polu∣tion. heat and sharpnesse, stimulating the expulsiye faculty; and therefore this infirmity principally happens to those whose Reins and parts adjacent are very hot, and to those who have sharp humour flowing to the spermatick vessels, and then especi∣aliy, when nature in venereal dreams is irritated to ejaculate seed, or their loyns are become hot, by lying on their backs. But the cause of a Venereal Gonorhaea is poysonous seed, A Venc∣real Go∣uorhae. cor∣rupt, sharp and foul stirring up, and stimalating the expulsive faculty:
The cause of suppression of Courses, The cause of suppres∣sions of Courses. is the narrownesse of the veines belonging to the Womb, and the foulnesse of the Blood, as for the straitnefle of the veins, they are most frequently the cause of suppression of Menstrues, by reason of thick blood, and dull humours; sometimes they grow together with the vessels after abortion, or compression of the same, by some Tumours of the parts neer the cunto, or from condensation, contraction, and driness of the tance of the Womb, but by default of the blond, the Courses are supprest whilest that is thick, viscid and unapt to move. The same cause, Causes of diminish∣ing of Courses. The drop∣ling of Courses. but more gently occasoneth small evacuati∣on of Couses, viz. They eith flow in lesse quantity, or else more slowly. The comming down of Courses when they come out drep by drop, and with pain is occasioned through default of the blood when there is too much, and is thick, viscid, biting, and sharp, and flowing down to the Womb with too great violence, some way obstructs the passages, and extends them, and stirs up pain, or else through default of the passages, or veins about the Womb, and in the Womb when they are become narrower then they ought. Too much slowing of the monthly Terms, Of too much flow∣ing. aiseth when the vessels are opened, either by an Anastomasis, when the mouths of the veins are opened, or a Diairsis, when they are divided, or when the blood being hotter, thinner, more moveable, sharp, and troublesome to narure, stimulates the expulsive faculty to expel. Now for the Causes of encreasing vitiated Terms; Causes of encreasing vittated. 'tis mani∣fest what things shew the causes of diminution thereof, from what is spoken of want of nourishment. But the cause of too much encrease is too great plenty of blood, from too plentiful use of meat and drink, full of nourishment, an idle life, much sleep, too frequent use of baths, of fair water, and manly strength, which converts the blood into the substance of the parts. And these are the causes of the Symptomes of the natural fa∣culty so far, The causes of genera∣tion hurt. as they belong to the preservation of individuals. Now follows the causes of Generation hurt, and that either t∣ken away, or depraved, there is no generation made; and bar∣tennesle happens either in respect of the Man, or of the Wo∣man. In regard of the Man, In respect of the man. it is hurt either through default of the seed, or by vitious ejaculation of the same: unfruitful seed, or not sufficient, is generated, or the faculty is hurt through some
distemper of the Stones, especially cold and moist; whence un∣ripened, thin, and lesse spirituous is generated, or else some hot, whence too sharp seed proceeds; or through default of matter, whilest the blood and spirits necessary for the generation of seed, or by old age, or some disease drying the body, or its principal parts, or by fasting are defective, or when the vessels which are necessary for generating, and carrying of the seed be wanting, or when the nutriment turns into fat, or when the blood is vitious. The emission of the seed into the Womans Womb is vitiated by the Yard, either shorter, whether by nature or by a disease, or crowded through the shortnesse of the ligament. The action is hurt by default of the Woman, In respect of the Wo∣man. either when no seed, or unfruitful seed, is generated and emitted for the reasons lately mentioned, Secondly, if she do not draw and receive the mans seed, by reason of her cold and moist distemper of the Womb; or by reason of a Tumor, Ulcer, or Straitnesse of the neck of the Womb. Thirdly, if she cannot retain the seed received, because of the moist distemper of the Womb; an Ul∣cer, opening of the mouth of the Womb, a flux of Courses, and other humours. Fourthly, if the Seed be not well tempered by the womb, or being some other way affected, is not rightly che∣rished. Fifthly, if the blood necessary for the forming of the young be deficient, or very little. Generation is depraved when the young are very weak, or when monsters are generated, which comes to passe through the foul Seed of the Father, or the imagination of the Mo∣ther. Lastly, Abortion. the causes of abortion, are either too great bignesse of fruit, or defect of necessary nourishment; or humours which are contained in the Membranes; which when they are broken, are poured into the Womb, putrifie, and become sharp, and sti∣mulate the expultrix, or by a breaking and loosening of the vessels by which the Child adheres to the Womb.
CHAP. II. Of the Causes of the Symptomes of the vital faculty, and of the hindrance of respiration. THe Symptomes which happen about the vital faculty, Causes of the Palpi∣tation of the heart. or as hath been said Palpitation of heart, swooning and sud∣den deprivation of the senses; the causes of the Palpitati∣on of the heart are, first, things troublesome to the heart, meet∣ing with it which it desires to remove from it; namely, vapours, either in plenty, or quality, either manifest, or occult, or both; troubling the heart: putrid humours, sharp, hot, abundantly rushing into the heart, or pressing it, also tumours, and fleshy excrescencies and callous flesh bred about the heart, or Worms molesting it in the Chest thereof; moreover some moderate de∣fect of the vital Spirits, through want, too great evacuations, passions of the mind, vehement griefe, too much exercise, which the heart strives by more vehement pulsation, to restore and strengthen. Thirdly, preternatural heat encreased, not onely consumes and scatters the Spirits, but also enflames them, which that nature may restore temperate and coole; it appointeth this motion of the heart. The causes of Sypothymy, are defect and want of vital Spirits, Of Sypo∣thymy. which either are not generated, whether by defect of matter, namely, of air and blood, or the debility of the generative facul∣ty, and from disease of the heart, or being generated, or taken away and destroyed, whilest either they are suffocated, or dis∣persed, or corrupted by some occult, or malignant qualities. These causes if they are very grievous, produce swooning. The changes of Pulses shall be spoken of in their due place. Respiration is hurt, first when the moving faculty is hurt, The cause of Respi∣ration hurt. Faculty of Lugs hurt. Of the Brest. and that either of the Lungs, or Brests; the faculty of the Lungs is hurt either by its selfe, when its temperament is destroyed, and the innate heat is deficient, as in such as are dying, or it is hin∣dered, and hurt by accident, when the brest by what means soe∣ver becomes straiter, and the Lungs have not space wherein to di∣late themselves. The faculty of the Brest is said to be hindered by its self, or by accident; by its selfe when the animal spirits necessary to motion is wanting, or because it decayes, as in such as are dying, or its influx is not made, as in an Apoplexy; or it is not received through default of the Nerves carrying the a∣nimal Spirits to the Muscles of the Brest and Midriff; but 'tis
hurt by accident, when by reason of the pain of the side, or parts adjacent, or matter and blood contained in the Brest, or Wind, or Tumours, or something in the Panch, the Brests, and Mid∣riff cannot freely be moved; or when the Bowels in the Panch hanging about the Midriffe are obstructed exceedingly, and swell so that by their weight between breathing, the Midriff suffers not them to move freely. Secondly, Of Instru∣ments. Respiration is hindered by reason of the Organs, when there is any Organick Disease, or solution of continuity in the Lungs, Midriff, Muscles of the Brest and Panch, the Wind-pipe. Thirdly, In regard of use. when the custome of breathing is changed; namely, when it is too violent through the fiety heat kindled in the Lungs and Heart. Lastly, Of Air. Respiration is hindered, by reason of the sharpness which we draw in in breathing, if it be not fit for cooling, and fanning of the heat. The difference of an Astma and an Orthopnae, The causes of an Ast∣ma, and shortnesse of breath. which are pe∣culiar diseases of shortness of breath, is this, when a man con∣stantly breaths with great difficulty, without a Fever, such as do, those who after a violent ace and exercise stop, The im∣mediate cause is straitness of the mouths of the Lungs, or the use encreased, by reason of the narrowness of the Pipe of the Lungs; but that straitness is caused by stoppages, or pressure of the Lungs, or of the Wind-pipe of the Lungs; and both obstruction and compression are caused fist by thick and viscid humours; but sometimes by thin and serous humours, but in great plenty: Moreover a Crude Tumour, or by some swelling, or gravel stick∣ing in the ungs, which cause obstructions when they stick in the Pipe of the Lungs, but compression when they are in the substance of the Lungs, or its Veins, and Arteries. This mat∣ter sometimes is gathered by little and little through its weak∣nesse, sometimes it flows from elsewhere, and most commonly it is thought to flow from the head by the vulgar; but to me it seems more probable to flow through the Arterious Veins, from the Liver into the Lungs, whilest crude humours are generated therein, or abound in a venemous kind, which even that shews that in an Astma the cough is not alwayes present, which ne∣verthelesse perpetually accompanies a Catarrh, and because these that are troubled with an Astma, have always an ill habit of body, and the signs of debility of the Liver. A Crude Tumor may consist not onely in the Wind-pipes, but without it; which when it happens, and consisteth about
the smooth Arteries, yet it presses the rough Arteries, and respiration is thereby hurt, and the Heart is drawn into consent, and an uneven pulse is produced. CHAP. III. Of the causes of the Symptomes of the external senses. SInce order requires that we speak of the causes of the Symptomes of the Animal faculty; first of all the the sight is hurt divers ways by reason of diseases of parts constituting the eyes, and the default of the optique and spirits. The Tunicle called Cornea, which comes in the fist place, since it is transparent, and void of colour, that it may permit the passing through of visible species, if it lose its transparency, Faults of the Cor∣nea. or be affectd with a stange colour it hinders the sight: it loseth its diaphanity if it be thick∣er, and become more dense, or be moistned, or pustu∣les, or little skins cover it. It grows thicker, and more dense by drying, and that either the whole, which disease is called Caligo, or else some part, is be∣come white, which is called an Albugo, Caligo. Albugo. which spot if it be perfectly white, and darkning, so that it permit no passage for visible species, and cover the whole Pupil; it causeth blindness; but if it be not perfectly white, nor hinders all the passage for visible species; it cavseth onely debility of sight, or brings forth some depravation, and deception: If it doth not cover the whole Pupil, so that things seem as if they were divided; the same comes to pass by reason of cicatrizing left after wounds, and ul∣cers. By its moisture it loseth its transparency in an inflammation of the eye: Moreover by pustules bred therein; and the naile of the eye which the Greeks call Pterugion, or a Tunicle. But if the Cornea be affected with any strange colour which very seldome happens, the sight is depraved, and represents visible species in other colours, not their own. Secondly the Aqueous humour offendeth either in quantity, or manner of substance, or colour. Defects of the Aque∣ous hu∣mour. It offends in quantity if it be wanting, or lessoned by a wound or ulcer, when the Cornea being cut, or eroded by a sharp humour it flies out, or by quotidian diseases, or extream old age, and as it is waming more, or less: it causeth blindness, or diminution, or depravation of ght. Sometimes it offends in substance, when it is
become thick or impure, or any thing is mingled with it of a different substance; if it onely become thick, the sight is made duller, and those things which are obvi∣ous to the sight are seen, as it were, through a cloud; and if they are remote, they could not be discerned; but if they are neer, they are not exactly seen. But if the mucous and thick matter be mingled there∣with, A perfect Cataract. and be so thickened, that it loseth all transparency, and fills up the hollowness of the Pupil, it causeth blind∣ness, and that disease is called vulgarly a Suffusion, or a Cataract; but if the whole aqueous humor be not ob∣scure and dark, but onely some part thereof obscure and dark, if through that part which is dark, visi∣ble species are not received, but onely through that which is perspicuous at once not more, but fewer things are discerned; but if in the center and middle of the Pu∣pil onely a particle of such a thick and dark humour be present, and all the parts round about of the aqueous humour be transparent, whatsoever is beheld seems not to be whole, but perforated and hollow in the middle; but if the little dark bodies are not continuous, but divided and many of them stick in the aqueous humor, Gnats, Flies, Cobwebs, and such like, seem to appear in the air; but i the extremities are obscured with such a humour, the object is not discerned whole: when you look fore∣right. The same also may happen in a disease which is called Hypopuon, Hypopuon. when there is purulent matter collected under the Cornea There is also another Suffufion, A spurious Cataract. which is called No∣tha, or a bastard Cataract, which is when vapours are carried to the eyes from the rest of the body, through the A teries and Veins, the aqueous humor being safe, which happens to those which are drunk, and in burning Fevers. Lastly, if the aqueous humour be affected with some strange colour, there ariseth the same depravation of sight, as when the Cornea is discoloured, and all those things which are brought before the eyes, represent that colour, wherewith that humour is died. The Pupil which is as it were the window of the eye, Diseases of the Pu∣pil. four ways recedes from its natural state. 1. Whilest ei∣ther it is dilated, or contracted, or closed, or is removed into another part, or broken, or obstructed. The Pu∣pil is dilated by the extending of the Unca, when it is
stretched, or through dry distempers, or by a Tumor, or by wind included, or some spirit or humor, for those which have a broad Pupil; in the night time, Contracted and in an obscure place see best; but in the day time, and a light place see worst; but it is become narrower, when by its moisture it is loosned, and falls as it were into its selfe: moreover when the aqueous humor is wanting. 3. When some thick matter sticks in the aqueous humor, for those who have a narrow Pupil discern more clearly in the day, not so well in the night: Dislocated and broken the Pupil is dislocated and bro∣ken, which when it happens, and changes its place, those things are seen better, which are set on the sides of the eye; then those that are set opposite to it, and those which are opposite seem not to be so, until the sight shall be moved thither where it may be opposed to the visible things, A strabis∣mos. which affect is called a Strabismos, in English squint∣eyed. The Christal humor recedes from its natural state, Diseases of the Christal humor. ei∣ther according to the manner of its substance, and quali∣ty, or according to its situation. As for the manner and quality of the substance; If it be somewhat more solid, thicker, more obscure, so that it wants greater il∣lumination night-blindness ariseth; but if in some part, Nyctalo∣nia. or altogether, it loseth its clearness, there follows debili∣ty of sight, or blindness. If it contracts a grey colour, it is called Glaucoma, Glaucoma. with which disease those that are affected seem to see through a cloud, as it were, and through smoak, but if the same humour change its place and decline downward, or ascend upward, all things seem double, if towards the sides, things seem more to the right hand, or the left, then they are; It is recedes to∣wards the middle, or center, things nigh are ightly, sar off are not distinctly seen: if it should go back beyond the middle and center towards the Nerve Optique, things remote would seem lesser, and those which would discern them truely, must needs put them close to their eyes, which disease is called Mouse-sight and Pu-blind; Myopia. Lusciositas but if the contrary happen towards the fore part of the Pupil those who have the Christaline so placed, things nigh seem less, and things a far off bigger, which happens to old men, and especially to those who were employed all their life times in reading, and other businesses where their eyes were continually busied.
If the vitreous humour either change its place by some contusion, Diseases of the vitre∣ous humor. and some part of it is carried before the Chri∣stal humour, and puts the Christal besides its place, o∣changes its clearness and perspicuity, or is become thick∣er, divers diseases of the eye do happen. But if the whole eye, Diseases of the whole eye. or most of its parts are not right∣ly placed, the sight is diversly hurt, and is either plainly abolished, and blindness follows, or it is weakned, or depraved; namely, when the whole eye wants nourish∣ment, or changes its situation in coming out too forward, by what means soever occasioned, as also in a Strabis∣mos, or Convulsion of the Muscles of the Eye, or it is not moved as in a Palsie, or more humors are fallen out of the eye, by reason of its wide wounds, inflammations, and ulcers. The sight is hurt by default of the Optique Spirits (where we also conclude the errors of the Optique Neves) if they are deficient in the brain, Diseases of the vi∣sive spirits and of the Optique Nerve. being hurt through cold distemper, compression, obstruction, and then for the most part, the other senses both internal and external are affected, or at least that part of the braine is affected from whence the Optique Nerves have their oiginal, and then the sight onely is taken away, or by default of the Nerve Optique it self, which is its narrow∣ness, or by rupture which proceeds from obstruction of the Optique Nerves, compression, percussion, a stroak by chance, contorsion, or by any violent motion what∣soever. Lastly the cause of Splendor and Glittering of the Eyes is reflection of the Rayes of the internal light, Causes of glittering eyes. by reason of the Object, a more thick body or vapours, or thick humours, if they are mingled with the Christaline, or vi∣trious, humours, or cover them. The hearing is hindered through default of the Or∣gan of hearing, Causes of deafness. or of the spirits; and first of all if the external eares are wanting, sounds, and articulate voi∣ces seem like the warbling, or purling of Waters, or sing∣ing of Grashoppers. Secondly, if the auditory passage either wholly, or in part br hindered, either from an ex∣ternal cause, as a little Stone, a Kernel, Water; or an internal cause, as a Tubercle, an Ulcer, and such like; and so either deafnesse is occasioned, or hearing diminish∣ed, or depraved. Thirdly, if the Membrane which they
call the Drum is too thick, or moistened too much, or is loosened, whether it be from the first birth, or after∣wards from internal, or external causes the hearing is hurt. Also if it be too much dryed by any grievous diseases, or old age, deafness doth arise; But if it be broken either by internal force, as by the violent putting in of an ear∣picker, or by an extream shrill sound, or is eroded by an Ulcer, deafness is occasioned. Fourthly, if the other parts of the ear be not rightly constituted, and the air implanted be impure, or deficient, or the Nerve being di∣lated is cooled, or is made thicker, or affected with a Tumor, or those three little bones either are not well framed by nature, or are moved by some violence out of their places, or the internal passages are filled with vapors and humors flowing contrary to Nature, or the Arteries passing under the ears are filled with too much spirit, and heat, and too much agitated; or lastly, the auditory Nerue either is not rightly framed from our first begin∣ning, or is obstructed and compressed by a humor, ac∣cording to the diversity of the disease, the hearing is sometimes abolished, sometimes diminished, or depraved. Lastly, the hearing is hurt through default of the Spirits either through the straitness of the passages of the braine, as in an Apoplexy, or through its perturbation, as in an Epilepsie. or through cold distemper, by reason whereof difficulty of hearing is occasioned. The smelling is hurt through default of the Organs, Causes of smelling hurt. or Spirits, or some external error; the faults of the Or∣gans are the narrowness of the Adaequate senses, and ex∣ternal Nostrils, whether from compression, or constipa∣tion, or obstruction of the Scive-like bone, and its Mem∣brane, as happens in such as are great, or by the distem∣per of the chief Organ of smelling, the mammillary pre∣cess; but especially moist distemper, or obstruction of the same, from matter flowing, which happens in Ca∣tarrhs, and according to the variety of these diseases, the smelling is sometimes abolished, sometimes diminished; the smelling is offended by reason of the animal spirits, if either they are deficient, which are in those which are ready to dye, or are hindered from flowing, as in an A∣poplexy, an Epilepsie, and such like diseases of the brain. Lastly, the smelling is depraved through some external errors, whilest a vapour, or some filthy and stinking
matter sticks in the wayes through which the smell pas∣ses, for here it is infected by the foul smell thereof, to that things having no ill smell, seem to the sense of smelling to stink. The taste also is hurt through default of spirits, Cause of taste hurt. or by some disease of the Organs, or some external error: The taste is hurt by reason of spirits when they are defi∣cient, which useth to happen to such as are dying; or the taste cannot flow to the Organ, either through strait∣ness of that part of the brain, from whence the Nerves appointed for the taste arise, or from obstruction, com∣pression, or wounds of the said Nerves. The taste is hurt through default of the tongue, as of an instrument, whilest it is troubled with cold and moist distemper, or cold and moist matter is poured on it, or whilest it is dryed, or is troubled with Pustuls, or an Ulcer, and ac∣cording to the magnitude of diseases, the taste is either wholly abolished, or diminished. Lastly, the taste is depraved by external error, or from external causes; as from something taken into the mouth, whose savour is not easily taken away, or from an internal cause, as a humour, or a vapour wherewith the tongue is imbued, being communicated from the stomach, the Lungs, the Brain, and other parts to the tongue. Lastly, Cause of fieling hurt. for what belongs to the causes of hindering the touch, insensibility and dulness happens through de∣fect and diminition of the animal spirits of the Ogan touching; this come to pass either because the animal spirits are not generated through imbecility of the native heat, which happen to them in years, or defect of mat∣ter, by reason of great evacuation, or whilest they are re∣solved, or scattered, or cooled, or stupified by a Narcot∣tique Medicine, or when they cannot flow to it, through the narrowness of the Nerves, obstruction, constipulation, compression, solution of continuity of the same. The proximate cause of pain is solution of Unity in a membranous part, Cause of pain. whether it be occasioned by some primary quality, or secondary, whereof this stirreth up solution of continuity not so manifest, but rather con∣templable, by reason; but that is manifest, which there∣fore is properly called solution of Unity. Lastly, Itching. itching is stirred up from thi, salt, and sharp Exerements, collected in the skin, moving man to scratch.
CHAP. IV. Of the causes of the Symptomes of the internal senses. OVer much watching is occasioned by too much ef∣fusion of the animal spirits, Causes of too much watching. to the Organs of the senses: through defect of restraint of the first sense, and too much irritation of the common sense, the bond of the first sense, or sweet exhalations are defective, either because they are not generated in the body, which comes to pass by long fasting, or the use of meats, which do not produce such exhalations, or because they are consumed, scattered, and called away from the brain, which comes to pass in a hot and dry distemper, either of the whole body, or of the brain, and when hot humors and vapors are elevated in the brain, which often happens in Fevers and Delitiums. The same causes also, for the most part have a power of stirring up the common sense, and besides those, princi∣pally grief, which in what part of the body soever it is, when it violently affects the sense of touching; it also stirs up the common sense, which once moved irritates also the rest of the senses, and so it is necessary that over much watchfulness must ensue. Cause of too much sleep. The causes of too much sleep, and first the caues of non-natural, are all those things that hinder the spirits from being sent forth to the external parts, Non-na∣tural. in due man∣ner and season; such are those which dissipate and con∣sune the heat of the spirits beyond measure, or they are called back too much into the internal parts, or hinder the spirits that they cannot go out to the remote parts, as too much exercise, paines taking, too much watching, baths, and such like, which fill the braine with halituous vapours. Moreover the causes of a preter-natural and diseased sleep so called, are also against nature; namely, Preter∣natural. those things which detaine the spirits against nature, so that they cannot freely passe to the Organs of the senses. The cause of a Coma, Coma and Cataphora. or a dead sleep is a plentiful vapor, whether cold and moist, or hot and moist, either
generated in the brain, or sent thither out of the whole body, or part of it; but principally stupifactive, ren∣dring the animal spirits heavy and drowsie. When there is too greedy desire of sleep, Coma vigil. the same stu∣pifactive vapor is the cause, but because hot and sharp vapours are mingled with it, and many various and ab∣surd imaginations are brought to the fancy, the sleep is troubled and interrupted. The causes of immoderate dreams are impure vapours, Of immo∣derate dreams. black and melancholy, arising from food and humors, causing exhalations of the same nature, and stirring up the animal spirits, or a distemper of the brain, stirring the vapors ascending from the inferiour parts and spirits in the brain. A natural extasie hath for the most part the same cau∣ses, Of an ex∣tasic. for those which are troubled therewith, have in their deep sleep various shapes and images represented to their fantafie, about which, the imagination being too much busied and fixed, the rest of the senses ceasing: when they awake they account those dreams by reason of the too much intentiveness of the fantasie for truths; and think and say to themselves that those things did really hap∣pen. The cause of such as walk in their sleep, Sleep walkers. is a stronger imagination from an internal object, represented by a dream, the fantasie being violently affected, stimulates the desire, and thence the motive faculty, to perform something; the senses for the most part being bound, and the rational faculty obscured, but the imagination doth depend either on some vehement diurnal disease, which hath gone before, or on the disposition of the spi∣rits, which the vapours thicken, which are not onely mingled with the spirits, but also have force of binding all the spirits, and set before you many cleare dreames. The memory, Abolish∣ing and diminish∣ing of the mentory & fantasie. as the imagination, is either abolished, or diminished, principally through the fault of the in∣strument, which is the brain: through its too cool a di∣stemper thereof, whereunto belongs, not onely innate heat, but default of spirits: the default of innate heat is either native, and contracted from our birth, or happen∣ing afterwards from our birth. Heat is deficient to those who have too great heads, or a brain weak, and cold by
nature, and mixt with too much moisture, or a head too little, and therefore little brains, or a figure, too concise, the figure also it self of the head, may hinder these acti∣ons. After a mans birth the native heat is deficient through old age, and what other causes soever, which may destroy and debilitate the innate heat, and may cause foul spirits, whether they be internal, and diseases and vitious humors, or external, as cold meat, moist, thick, corrupt and impure air, over-much watching, stroaks and wounds of the head. Besides the defect and cold distemper of the native heat, the memory also is weakned, yea and taken away, sometimes by too much moisture of the brain; the same also is hurt sometimes by external error, namely through the fault of objects, whilest in certain diseases it is confounded, and distra∣cted, by almost innumerable objects, which may likewise happen to such as are well; who whilest they are busied in telling any story, by reason of some object happening by chance, they are so called aside, that they cannot make an end of their story. But the reasonable faculty is not diminished nor abo∣lished of its self, nor by reason of its instrument, but because the fantasie is hurt, and sometimes the memory, and sometimes both. The depravation of the imagination and ratiocinati∣nation happens in divers kinds of Deliriums, and all have their rise from some default of the animal spirits, which being ill disposed, represent objects so disposed to the fantasie, and whereas for the most part, the imagina∣tion, and ratiocination are both affected in a Delirium; and the imagination useth a corporeal Organ with its Spirits, but the ratiination useth none, but onely be∣holdeth fantasms. In every Delirium, the next cause of the hurt of the imagination, is the vitiousnesse of the a∣nimal spirits, but the depravation of the rational fa∣culty is caused by the fantasms. The imagination and understanding hurt, called Para∣phrosune hath its beginning from hot vapours, which in burning Fve s and inflammations of the interiour parts are elevated to the brain, and disturb the animal spirits, yet moderately, which thing also may happen if any one should take in his meat or drink that which may trou∣ble the spirits. On this manner commeth sottishness, and
such as is caused by Wine, the weed Darnel, Hops, and such like. A Frensie is caused by a hot Tumor of the Brain and its Membranes from whence the hot vapours being ad∣vanced continually trouble and stir the spirits in the brain. A Frenzy. The cause of offending the imagination in Melancho∣ly, Of Melan∣choly. is dark animal spirits, but the causes of depraving of the rational faculty, are dusky fantasms, but the ani∣mal spirits are become dark and black two ways; first when the spirits themselves are pure in their own nature; but some strange foul and blackish matter is mingled with them. Secondly, when the spirits themselves are darkish in their own nature, and geneate such; the for∣mer is caused three wayes; the first is when the matter dark and impure clouding the spirits is contained in the vessels in the head. Secondly, when the matter is com∣municated to the brain from the whole body, and princi∣pally from the greater veins. Thirdly, when it is trans∣mitted principally from the Hypocondries, which is thence named Hypocondriacal Melancholy: the latter is occasioned two wayes, either when the vital spirits are generated vitious and impure in the heart, which when the matter of the animal spirit is such in the braine, 'tis necessary that there be generated in such black animal spirits in the braine, or because although the vital spirit be good and pure; neverthelesle the constitution of the brain is vitious, which changeth the pure vital spirit in∣to a black animal spirit. The cause of mad Love is sorrow and conti nual soli∣tation, Of mad Love. to which anger is often joined, arising through the desire of a fair thing whether it be really so, or seem so to be; for although the amorous herb Philtra may stir up desire to lust, yet that desire is not terminated in any definite person, nor can the mind of a man be com∣pelled to love that which he is unwilling to love, and that Philtra doth not cause love, but madnesse also, as ex∣perience often teacheth. The cause of madness is a hot and fiery disposition of the animal spirits; Madnsse. such hot and fiery spirits proceed from a hot distemper of the braine, or hot vapours mingled therewith, which black Choller will set foreward, some∣times in the veins of the head only, other times in the
whole body, especially in those that are great with child, and when it resides about the womb, whether they are ge∣nerated of fervent blood, or adust colour, or dryed Melan∣choly. The disease which causeth men to think that they are turned into Wolves, is called Lycanthropie, Lycan∣thropie. if it proceed from a natural cause; and not from the Devil; It ari∣seth from the depravation of the imagination and ratio∣cination, and the blood of living creatures being drunk, may be very powerful to cause the same, yet for the most part it becomes from poyson communicated to us by the biting of any mad living creature, or by the froth of their mouths thrown upon us, by spittle, by receiving their breath with our mouths, by eating the flesh of rave∣nous animals, whence Wolf-madness, also Dog∣madness, and Badger-madness do arise, as Hydrophobie, which is when one is distractedly timerous of waters, which neverthelesse may be occasioned without the biting of any mad animal by poyson in mans body, but prin∣cipally is occasioned by terror of the observations of Phy∣sitians do witness, and then the disease is not to be re∣ferred to madness, because those Symptomes which are proper to those that are bitten with mad creatures, do not appear in these, but onely the dieased are adverse to all liquid things, and neither can swallow liquid things, but also at the sight and noise of them, they fall in dan∣ger of swooning and death, which nature is peculiar to this poyson, nor can any other cause be rendered from manifest qualities. But the disease of Tarantators, Of Taran∣tulas and a company of S. Viti. occasioned by the ve∣nemous biting of a Tarantula, and the Chorea of S. Viti. so called, hath its rise from a venemous and malignant humour somewhat like to the venom of a Taantula, be∣gotten in mans body, and indeed is the cause of the Symp∣tomes of the rest of the poysons in general, but because they dance in this manner, that is proper to this poyson onely, neither can there be rendered any manifest cause thereof, but here it is necessary to fly to that sanctuary of ignorance; and to say that this poyson is destroyed in an occu manner by the force of musick, and this little crea∣ture is harmoneous, and delights in musick.
CHAP. V. Of the causes of the Symptomes of the mooving faculty. IN the first place the cause of a Palsie, Cause of the Palsie. or deprivation of motion in one part, or more, is the defect of ani∣mal spirits in the Organs appointed for motion; the spirits are deficient when they are not sent out by the Nerves from the braine, as happens in an Apoplexy, sometimes also this disease is called a Palsie; for although they are emitted yet through the ill disposition of the part they cannot exercise motion, and sense therein; they are not admitted through default of the Nerves, and spi∣nal Marrow; namely, when they endure some cold di∣stemper and moist, especially; yet sometimes hot and dry, or are dull, or are cut, or knockt, or beaten, or are made narrower, or by obstruction, or compression, by reason of some humor, or tumor, or tubercle, whether they are in the Nerves themselves, as after wounds of the Nerves, and contusions of the same, scars do arise, or in the parts neer thereunto by some contusion, by a stroak or a fall, by a sudden relaxation made of the Vertabres, or being bound. Besides a Palsie there are other impotencies of motion, Cause of taking a∣way moti∣on. the cause whereof, besides that of the Nerves, even now explained in a Palsie is the fault of the part instituted for motion, a vitious disposition and disease, namely, if the bones in the joynts which are framed for them cannot move, o cannot rightly be removed out of their place, through ill conformation, fracture, relaxation, if the li∣gaments which come about the joints, and continue in motion in a natural state are broken, cut asunder, eroded, attenuated, or become softer, or on the contrary are dryed, hardned, and filled witk a hard and knoty substance, if the Muscles and their Tendones are cooled too much, and their native heat be, as it were, dulled, or moistned by some humour contrary to nature; or on the other side if they are dryed and hardned, if any tumor, knot, bunch, hard flesh ariseth in them, if they are wounded, if the Tendones are so stretched out by violent motion, that they become longer then they were, or wont to be, or as
it were broken with bonds, or if a painful tumor be in a Muscle. The cause of Lazinesse is the reception of trouble in the Muscles, and parts appointed for animal motion, Of Lazi∣ness. but since this slownesse is two-fold, voluntary, and against our wills, the one comes without much exercise, and la∣bour from vitious humours, burning the parts appoin∣ted for motion; the other which is also called Excicra∣tive, comes after too much labour and motion, the parts serving for motion, being dried and the spirits con∣sumed. The cause of trembling is the imbecility of the motive faculty, Of Trem∣bling. which cannot keep the member in that part wherein it is placed. The faculty is become weak through the faintnesse of the strength, and some defect of animal spirits, whether they are not generated, by reason of some distemper of the brain, or defect of the vital spirits, either scattered, or consumed, both which may be occasioned by too large evacuations, long fasting, watchings, long and tedious sicknesse, too much Venery, or through di∣seases of the Nerves, as distemper, especially cold contra∣cted by what meanes soever, or want, or losse of sense is occasioned by stupifactives, or by straitnesse, but lesse then in a Palsie. The cause of Convulsion is the irritation of the ex∣pulsive faculty, Of Con∣vulsion. of the Fibres and nervous parts in the Muscles, by reason of something troublesome, which draws the part joined to it into consent, and stirs it up to this motion, whereby the Fibres being contracted, the Muscle is drawn back to its original. Emprosthotonos, Empro∣sthotons. Opisthoto∣nos. is made in the Muscles, which bends the body of such as are affected, forwards. Opisthotonos by the Muscles affected, bends the body backward. Tetanos is from an equal contraction of the Muscles. Ttanos Spasmus Cynious. The Spasmus Cyni∣chus, or troublesome Cramp ariseth from a convulsion of the Muscles of the Mouth; Trismos from contraction of the Muscles of the Jaws. Also the cause of convulsive motions is a humor, Of grind∣ing Teeth. Of convul∣sive moti∣ons. or a vapor, an enemy to the whole generation of Nerves, ir∣ritating the expulsive faculty in them, and stimulating them to expulsion, yet is not fixed, but hath various mo∣tions through all nervous parts, and so the member is a∣gitated in various motions, and for the most part it hap∣pens
that the braine is affected, and matter is se from thence into all the Nerves. When the Cramp and Palsie are complicate, Of the complica∣tion of the Crump and Palsie. Privation of speech. the ∣mour is of a mixt nature, which hath force partly o loosening Nerves, partly of vellicating and twitchi them. Privation of speech happens through default either  the Spirits and Nerves which carry them, or of the par which are necessary for the bringing forth of a word. The spirits are deficient in an Apoplexy, Epilepsie, an Dumnesse, properly so called. Men are become du through the fault of the Nerves when either the Nerve of third pair are affected, from whence the tongue also re∣ceives its Nerve; which defect if it be native, for the most part the hearing is abolished, by reason of the com∣munion of the Nerves of the tongue and the ear, that fe∣lowship is hurt, or when the Nerves of the sixth and se∣venth conjugations, and those going back, and voc Nerves are either cut, or stretched, or cooled, or inter∣cepted, or hurt by what means soever. The voice is hurt through organick diseases thereof, if either the Mem∣branes of the Larinx, or top of the Wind-pipe are filled with some humour, and grow soft, or some chink there∣of be shut, by what means soever, or if the tongue be cut about, or maimed, or the Muscles which move the La∣rinx, Tongue, or Throat are hurt, or relaxed, or knock, or wounded, or any other way affected contrary to nature or lastly through desault of the wind-pipe, if that be cut, exulcerated, or closed. The same causes are if they are lesse, Of the voice and speech di∣minished. diminution of voice and speech is occasioned, yet more frequently the cause remains in the tongue, namely, if the ligament be too long from one birth, so that it extends to the ex∣tremity of the tongue, or if after a childs birth it be wounded, exulcerated, swoolen, or be affected with a Pal∣sie on the other side. The cause of depravation of voice and speech, Of stam∣mering. and first of stuttering, and stammering is principally a moist di∣stemper of the instruments of voice and speaking, and sometimes a dry; also an ill framing of the Tongue and its Muscles, a Tumor borne under it, as also the fault of a swelling at the entrance into the Throat, and want of the fore teeth.
Hoarsenesse ariseth from over much humidity of the outsides or the instruments for speech, Of hoarse∣nesse. whether that mat∣ter flow from the head, or be cast out of the brest, from loosenesse and inflammation of the Columella, or a fleshy substance in the entrance into the throat, as also from external and evident causes, first from air violently straining the voice daily, which causeth inequality of the Wind-pipe. All the causes of the Cough are those which hinder the instruments of breathing, whether they be internal, Of a cough. or external causes, either by Idiopathy, or by Symptothy stir up the Cough by Idiopathy, an unequal distemper, principally cold causeth the Cough, which is the greatest enemy to the brest, sometimes also distempers hot and dry; moreover the roughnesse of the Wind-pipe which happens either through distemper, or through biting hu∣mors flowing from the head, or by Medicines, or sharp drinks, or obstruction by a humour, thick, or thin, a pimple, gravel, worms, a little hard swelling, clod of blood. By Sympathy the Cough is raised, if the other parts which can draw the Organs of respiration into con∣sent be affected, namely the Midriff, Liver, Spleen, Sto∣mach, which by reason of the common Tunicle, they have vellicate the instruments of breathing, or send va∣pors to them, or presse the Midriffe, by reason of some Tumor, ot obstruction. But the external causes are cold air, dry, cold water, too much desire of drink, cold medicines applied to the brest, dust, smoak, sharp vapors, soure aliment, sharp things, and whatsoever contrary to the order of nature slide into the wind-pipe, straying, or wandring in the gullet, if it intercept the way, or stop it, or exasperate the Artery, or any way molest the Wind∣pipe. Those things cause sneezing whatsoever doth stimu∣late the Nostils, Of sneez∣ing. and the fore part of the Brain to excre∣tion, whether generated in the body, as humours flow∣ing from the Brain, or those things which affect the No∣strils by communion with the interior skins by Sympa∣thy, which comes to passe when worms stick in the Guts, or whether they happen from without, as whatsoever sharp things are dawn by the nose, smells also and sharp vapours, the splendor of the Sun, and over much light.
Gaping, Of yawn∣ing. or Yawning is when alitious vapours stick in the Muscles appointed for chewing, and moving the lower chop, which nature endeavours by this motion to cast off, but some times imagination is the cause there∣of. Stretching ariseth from such vapors as may be emitted through the Pores, Of stretch∣ing. which neverthelesse are not sharp, but being store of them they cause trouble, in the spaces of the Muscles of the whole body stirring up the expultive fa∣culty to expel, which the nature may discusse, it useth such a motion of the Muscles by constriction of them. Lastly, Shaking fits and trembling. Horror and Trembling, which are Symptomes neer alike, as also are vehemency, and greatnesse of mo∣tion; and so is the difference of the cause, they are stirred up by something that offend in the circumference of the body suddenly vellicates the sensitive parts, and stimu∣lates them to expulsion, which it strives to perform by a natural concussion. But the causes which bring forth that twitching, are either external and evident, as what∣soever befalls the body, or vellicates the sensitive parts, or cause the sharp humours contained in the circumfe∣rence of the body to be stirred and moved as a spark of sire cast on, scalding water thrown upon, a biting medi∣cine applyed to an Ulcer; piercing cold, and such like for internal, as humors, or sharp vapors, either generated in the parts themselves, or drawn, or sent from else∣where.
CHAP. VI. Of the causes of Symptomes wherein all or most animal actions are hurt. THe cause of a Vertigo is inordinate and circular motion of the animal spirits in the brain; Of a ver∣tigo. but the causes which perform this circular motion in the brain are internal, or external; internal is an inordinate motion of a flatulent spirit, moving the animal spirits cir∣cularly, and exhibiting a false representation of the mo∣ving of external things, and of its own body; but this flatulent spirit takes the occasion of its motion, either from its selfe, seeing that every spirit by nature is move∣able and fluid, especially if it be hotter, and more fervent then ordinary, or moved by somewhat else, whereas here∣after shall be shewen, which the straitness of the vessels, or of the Pores of the brain occasioneth; for if both the flatulent spirits, and animal spirits are moved in passages that are obstructed, they return back and move circularly, they are generated either in the brain, whence a Vertigo by Idiopathy ariseth, or are sent from elsewhere upward, either from the whole body, as in some Fevers, or from some part, as the Stomach, Spleen, Womb, whence it is called a Vertigo by Sympathy, the external and manifest causes are whatsoever humors can suddenly turn into and dissolve into vapours, or stir up an inordinate and circu∣lar motion, with winds, and spirits; such as when the constitution of the air is suddenly altered, immoderate and untimely exercise, emptinesse, baths, anger, turning round of the body, the beholding of bodies swiftly tur∣ning round, or otherwise moving with violence, looking down from a high place, shaking of the head, a fall and such like. The cause of an Incubus, or riding of the Mare, Of an In∣cubus. is a thick vapour ascending from the lower parts of the body and obstructing the hinder parts neer the Spinal marrow, and hindering the passages of the spirits to the muscles of the brest, whence respiration is hindered, which when a man perceives in his sleep, considering various causes, he faineth and adviseth with himselfe, and even from this
or that, he imagineth himselfe to be oppressed and suffo∣cated in his dream. This vapor is, elevated from thick flegm, or a Melancholy humor residing in the Hypocon∣dries, or proceeds from surfetting, or swelling by lying supine, or flat on the back: in children also a vapour of the same nature is occasioned by worms. A Lethargy commonly proceeds from a flegmatick humor thickning in the brain; Of a Le∣thargy. and so the matter of its selfe is cold, yet by accident it happens to be hot, but it is impossible that out or flegm only putrified, both a fever and a deep sleep should arise; for this humor is neither apt of its selfe to admit of putrefaction, especially in the head, neither if it should admit of it, can it utter so much as will diffuse the heat over the whole body, and kindle a Fever, and heart the Heart especially if it putrifie without the substance of the Brain, or its vessels in its bo∣somes and turnings; but it is more agreeable to reason that this drousinesse either is not a primary disease of the brain, but occasioned from stupifactive and pituitous va∣pors rendring the animal spirits dull, and are the Symp∣tomes of a Fever, which are called companions; namely, of a continued Quotidian of a bastard Tertian, and Semi∣tertian, or if it be a primary disease of the Brain, it doth not seem to have its beginning only from putrified flegm, but rather from a petuitous inflammation of the Brain, or from an inflammation arising from the blood mixt with flegm. In both these Lethargies there is present great heavinesse, and hurt of memory, by reason of stupi∣factive, and pituitous vapors, but a delirium, by reason of vapors risen out of the putrid humors troubling the animal spirits. The cause of a Carus is either the straitnesse of the Brain by compression, Of a Carus. or obstruction neer the bottom thereof from cold humors, or a moistning, cooling, and repletion of the Brain from a cld and pituitous humor, and an alteration of the spirits by the same, or a stupefa∣ctive power, rendring the animal spirits unfit for the acti∣ons of the senses and motions; wherewith not nly stupe∣factive medicines are endued, but also some poysons, hu∣mors in certain Fevers, Smoaks, and Vapors of Coals, new Wine, and new strong Beer, &c. A Catoche hath its beginning from a cold and dry va∣pour, A Caroche. endued with a peculiar force of fixing the animal
spirits rushing into the brain, and in some sort stopping the spirits, rendring them immovable, and, as it were, con∣gealing them, which for the most part is stirr'd up by a Melancholy humor; such also is the force in a Thunder∣bolt, and it is sometimes taken from the vapors ascending out of the earth in an Earthquake, and breaking out of their cells, but the spirits serving for imagination, and ratiocination are rather fixed and stopt then those which lately were disperst into the members of the body, which is apparent from hence, that although those that are Ca∣taleptick move no member, yet if they are moved by an∣other the power of moving exerciseth its selfe, and being struck they fall down, and moreover spreading their eye∣lids they keep their eyes open. The immediate cause of an Apoplexy is a flowing of the animal spirits into the organs of the body, Of an A∣poplexy. hindering sense and motion; but the influx of the animal spirits is hindered either by the passages through which they should flow into the organs of sense and motion, or the narrownesse of the beginning of the Nerves, or through the unaptnesse of the animal spirits themselves, or by too great a quantity, or perturbation of the same. The straitnesse of the passages of the animal spirits is made when the beginning of the Nerves in the bottom of the brain is so shut, that the passage and way for the animal spirits and motion into the organs of all the external sen∣ses are intercepted; a few onely resisting, which flow from the Cerebellum, which scarce suffice for the motion of the brest which striveth exceedingly for respiration. The beginning of the Nerves cause this straitnesse, first the flegmatick humor poured into these places performs it by obstruction, or compression, which the Antients took for the principal, nay some for the only cause of an Apo∣plexy. Secondly, blood poured out of its vessels by a stroak, or any other cause whatsoever into the basis of the Brain, and pressing the beginning of the Nerves. Third∣ly, placing of flegm when the vessels of the Braine, their being plenty of blood, are filled and stretched that the substance of the Brain is compressed, and the Pores and passages being made narrower, a free ingress for the animal spirits into the Nerve is hindered. Fourthly, a blow, or fall violently pressing the Brain it self, and so the begin∣ning of the Nerves, rendring the animal spirits slow,
as it were degenerated from their nature, and are made altogether unfit to perform animal actions, bring forth vapors which contain in them a stupefactive power; more∣over the effusion of animal spirits by deep wounds, and troubling of them by a stroak, and by a great fal and com∣motion of the Brain may take away all sense and motion from a man, but that Apoplexy which ariseth from a pi∣tuitous and stupefactive power is the chief, and is under∣stood for the most part when mention is made of a per∣fect Apoplexy, to wit, which is occasioned by its sefe, when the other Apoplexies by reason of the differences of causes, either are occasioned by some external and vio∣lent cause, as by a stroak, by a fall, or they follow other diseases. An Epilepsie is occasioned from a vaporous and thin matter, Of an Epi∣lepsie. whether by its acrimony, or venomous and malig∣nant quality vellicating and molesting the Brain and all the Nerves, and together afflicting the animal spirits, darkning and troubling of them: and there are to help this matter forward not onely certain humours corrup∣ted in a peculiar manner, and fit for an Epileptical dis∣position, but also parts of the body corrupted in like man∣ner, as Worms, After-birth, and such like. An imperfect Epilepsie hath the same cause with the perfect Epilesie, but mote gentle and less store of hu∣mours, which otherwise could not vellicate all the Nerves, yet may trouble them all, but cannot trouble and darken the animal spirits in the Brain. CHAP. VII. Of the causes of Symptomes which happen to qualities changed. ANd these are the causes of the actions hurt, Causes of colour changed. or of the first kind of Symptomes which conist in the actions hurt: the second kind, or colour of the whole body, or of its parts changed, contrary to nature are humors of the body, such are the colours of the whole body, or its parts, as are the humors in them, so in the yellow Jaundice, by reason of yellow choller effused in∣to the body, the whole body is coloured with the yellow choller in a Dropsie by stegm it waxeth pale.
The teeth grow black either through default of ali∣ment, Causes of change of the colour of teeth. or when any slimy matter flowing from the Sto∣mach, Brain, or elsewhere, or also from meat left behind sticks to the teeth; and putrifying corrupts and make them black. The Nailes change their colour through peccant mat∣ter nourishing them. Of Nails. Fifthly, Of stink∣ing smells. smells and exhalations are breathed out of the whole body, when hot and moist bodies produce plenty of crude humours, which when they cannot be overcome by heat, become putrid, and send forth a stinck from the whole body. A stink is sent out of the mouth, Of stink∣ing breath. when either many crudities are heaped together in the Stomack, which are corrupted, and send forth putrid and stinking exhalati∣ons by the Pallate, or when filthy vapours exhale, from the putrifaction in the Lungs, or when such matter cleaves to the Teeth, Gums, or Pallate, and infects the air which is breathed out with its stink. The smell of the Arm-pits which they call Goats smel, Stink of the Arm∣pits. proceeds from excrementitious humors, which are sent from the heart, and internal parts in such aboundance to these places and emunctories, that all of them cannot easily be discussed, but corrupt, and send forth filthy smells. The faetid smell of the Groin comes from the same cause, namely, Of the Groin. too great plenty of excrements which are sent out from the Liver and Veins to those emunctories. The foul smell of the Nostrils is caused by excremen∣titious humours there collected and putrifying by a Poli∣pus, a Canker, or an Ulcer in the Nostrils. Of the No∣strils. The ears stink by an Imposthume and Ulcer in the in∣ternal Ear, or by vitious humours sent out of the Brain. Of the Ears. Lastly, Of the Feet. the Feet send forth an ill smell, when the moist excrements in them, which are of a hot and moist con∣stitution, and given to surfeit, are collected and putrifie in the Feet, being drawn thither by their motion, espe∣cially when they are covered with such garments, that they cannot freely expire vapours. The cuses of tactil qualities changed, Of tactil qualities changed. appears by those things which are spoken of the Causes of Diseases when sometimes they are referred to the rank of Diseases, some∣times to the number of Symptomes; namely, as some∣times
the actions are hindered by them, sometimes they hinder not the actions, but onely cause trouble to the touch. CHAP. VIII. Of the causes of Symptomes in those things that are sent forth and retained. AS for what belongs to excretion, and those things which in their whole kind are contrary to nature, Causes of excrements contrary to nature. and may be generated in the body, as stones, worms, since the same belongs to the causes of Diseases they are spoken of before in the second Part, and the ninth Chapter; but artificial things, as instruments of Iron, Knives, and such like cannot be generated in mans body, but by the inchantments of the Devil are insinuated into the body, or are fitted to parts without, through which they cannot come back, and are there shewen, as it were, going back. If those things which are wont to be cast forth naturally are cast out another way, eressions through un∣accustomed passages. which comes to passe because the accustomed ways either are grown together, or ob∣structed, or some way or other shut, for then nature by reason of plenty of matter, which it was wont to evacu∣ate through the usual ways, they being shut, it wearied seeks new ways, either more open, or otherwise, to which some pricking humor leads it, or which it chuseth of its own accord. Thirdly, the effusion of blood contrary to nature through what place soever happens because the Veins and Arteries are opened contrary to nature, Of bleed∣ing con∣trary to na∣ture. for those reasons which before in the Second part and thirteenth Chapter are explained; and particularly sweating of Blood hap∣pens through the thinnesse of the Blood, rarity and laxi∣ty of the skin, and debility of the retentive faculty. Small pacels are cast out of the body, when from any internal part which was wont to be evacuated that way, or in that way by an Ulcer, Putrifaction, and eroded by a sharp humour, and separated from the body. As for the causes of excretions offending in quality hot ordure is cast out, if choller and hot humours are min∣gled.
If the Liver and Guts are too hot, if hot meats are used. The siege is cold by the extinguishing of the na∣tive heat, the use of cold meats and the mixture of cold humours. Moist Excrements are cast out either through crudity, when the meat is not concocted, or by obstruction of the Meseraik Veins, Causes of excretions peccant in quality. Hot. Cold. Moist. Hard. by reason whereof the Chyle cannot passe to the Liver, and therefore being mingled with the or∣dure sends it out moist, or by taking of meats that loosen the belly, or by defluctions from the Head to the Guts, or by the effusion of Choller, and other thin humours to the Guts. But the ordure is become hard by too much heat which consumes almost all the humidity, whether it be that internal heat of the Liver, or of other parts neer there∣unto, or of the whole body, either natural, or preter-na∣tural; moreover from the drinesse of the Guts, or of the whole body. Thirdly, if there be too much Urine, or if there be a continued sweat. Fourthly, by thickning and astringent meats. Fifthly, by long stay in the Guts, by reason whereof the moisture is sucked out. Sixthly, through want of aliment in the parts, Of sharp. Faetid. and too much at∣traction of the members. The dung is sharp through the mixture of sharp homours, & use of sower meats; 'Tis be∣come faetid through the use of stinking meats, and ill con∣coction, especially by the mixture of divers sorts of meats, as also by the humidity and heat of the body, which dis∣poseth it to putrifaction. Ordure is cast forth with a noise through the mixture of much wind violently break∣ing forth. It becomes white, White. when choller is not min∣gled therewith, as in the yellow Jaundice, through the use of meats that are whitening, being mixt with plenty of flegm also. Yellow. It becomes yellow through much much mixture of yellow Choller. It becomes green through aeruginous choller. It grows black by reason of a black humor, by the use of Cassia, and such like. Red. Black. Frothy. It becomes red by the mixture of blood, or adust yellow choller. It becomes frothy by reason of slimy flegm and a defluxion of windy matter from the head, and mixture of wind. The causes of the the changed qualities of Urine shall be explained in the following bok. Hot sweats proceed from hot humors either whilest the humors wax hot, Causes of sweat pre∣ter  or especially when the matter is
overcome, is attenuated and concocted, cold are caused through plenty of cold matter, which cannot be so easily overcome as heat, or by the resolution of spirits and ex∣tinction of the native heat, or through the malignancy of the matter he sweat smels by reason of too great plenty of stinking filth, they are yellow in the yellow Jaundice by the mixture of yellow choller. Green by mixture of leek-colou∣red choller, red and bloody by the watrishness and thinness of the blood, loosenesse of the skin, and weaknesse of the retentive faculty, yet there are administred Wines, which being drunk in some discolour their sweat. They are salt for the most part, which consist of a salt and serous excrement. Bitter by the mixture of Choller, sharp by the mixture of sharp humours. The menstruous blood offendeth in quality whilest it is white, Of viti∣ous Courses yellow, black, or has any ill colour; moreover whilest it smells foul, and is too watry, which comes to passe whilest the like humors are gathered together in the body, or about the womb, and goes out through it with the menstruous blood. The spittle is too thick if it be contained too long in the Mouth, Of the spittle changed. and its thinner parts consumed; or if thick matter distil from the head, or be mingled with it, or if it be thickned by heat, which happens in Fevers. It be∣comes frothy through the mixture of spirit, and much air. Spittle borrows its tastes from salt, bitter, sower, hu∣mours, especially cleaving to the Stomach. It receives its colour from humours in the bowels, and the vapours going out of them. 'Tis become white from flegm; Yellow from Choller; Red from Blood; Black from Melancholy, or thick dryed Blood; Green from aerugi∣nous Choller; it acquires a foul smell from inward putrifaction, especially from an Ulcer of the Lungs, At length the excressions erre in quantity, Causes of excrements changed the excre∣ments of the belly are cast forth in greater quantity then is convenient; First by reason of moist food, especially if after the use thereof store of drink be taken. Secondly, by reason of meats containing little alimentary juice, but much excrementitious. Thirdly, through the ill distribu∣tion of Chyle. Fourthly, by conflux of Excrements from the other parts to the Guts. But fewer then is con∣venient are ejected for contrary reasons; namely, if the meat be hard, and principally if little drink be taken after
it, if the meat be of good juice and nourishment, and be taken in small quantity; if the Chyle be greedily snatch∣ed from the Meseraik Veines; and if Choller, (which is, as it were, the Goad to stimulate and expel dregs) come not much into the Guts. The quantity of Urine ought to answer likewise to the quantity of drink, but that also is sometimes made in greater or lesse quantity, the causes whereof shall be shew∣ed in the following Book. The causes of plenty of sweat are rarity of body, Cause of store of sweat. strength of the expulsive faculty, aboundancy, and tenui∣ty of Excrements; and therefore in the Crysis of a dis∣ease great sweats arise, whilest all the excrementitious matter together, and at once is put forth. Little sweat is occasioned by contrary causes; namely, by the smal∣nesse, or thicknesse of Excrements, straitnesse of passages, weaknesse of expulsion, by the vehemency of the matter which destroyes heat. Lastly why Courses sometimes flow more plentifully, Of Courses sometimes more sparingly then is convenient; above in the Third Part, Second Section, and First Chapter, where we have spoken of suppression, diminution, and flowing of Months. The end of all the Second Book.
Book. III. PART. I. SECT. I. OF SIGNES In General. Of the Difference and Heads of Signs. CHAP. I. Of the necessity and benefit of the Method of Signs. SInce we have hitherto explained what health is, Necessity of the Se∣miotick Method. and wherein it consists, and what is the diffe∣rence of things contrary to nature; we now rightly come to the Method of healing and pre∣serving health, and are to teach by what means health may
be preserved, and diseases taken away, The benefit of it. but neverthelesse since arts are conversant about individuals, and a Physi∣tian doth not cure in general man, but Peter and Paul, &c. The Method and way is first to be explained whereby the present constitution of every man, both sick and well may be known, which now lies hid in indivi∣duals, they may be found out by the signs of a disease, and what may be known and hoped for, of the event and end of diseases, and the Method of signs are to go before. Moreover there is that benefit of this Method, that whilest the sick, see those things that may happen to them, being known to the Physitian, they may trust the more to him, and obey him; for the Physitian when he foresees those things which shall happen to the sick may have time to prevent them, and avoid the reproaches of the vulgar, whilest he foretells those things which shall come to passs, and that they may not rail against the best Medicines, being given to those that are desperately sick By the name of Signs we do understand all those things which signifie any thing, A Sign what 'tis. or all evident things which lay open a hidden matter, or as the Author of Physical de∣finitions speaks, A sign is a manifestation of somewhat hidden, or every thing that shews any of those things which are in the Method of healing, and can demonstrate them, and make them manifest. CHAP. II. Of the differences of Signs. OF Signs of this kind there are certain differences; Differen∣ces of signs wholesome and un∣wholesome. first according to varieties of Bodies, some Signes are counted wholesome, which shew soundnesse and health; others unwholesome, which shew unsound∣nesse, others are neutral, which shew a disposition to neither. Secondly, certain Signs are called Diagnosticks and Deloticks demonstrating, and demonstrative, Diagno∣stick. which demonstrate those things which shew the present constitu∣tion of the body, whether it be according to nature, or contrary to nature; certain are Prognosticks, Progno∣stick. which
foreshew what shall come to passe; Anamne∣stick. certain are Anamne∣sticks which call to memory the state of the body which is newly past. Thirdly, Proper. Common. some signs are proper, others common, pro∣per are such as agree to one disease onely, Common are such as are found in many diseases. Galen, in the first of the differences of Fevers appoints three kinds of proper Signs, and the one he calls unfeparable, another proper in its kind, a third proper and inseparable; also he calls those unseparable, which cannot be separated from the effect which they shew, and agrees to every such effect, but not onely proper, are such as agree to those alone, but not to all, Proper and inseparable are such as agree to such an effect alone, and to all. Out of this division there ariseth other differences of Signs, they are called by the Greeks Pathognomonick, Synedruors, Epiginomens, Epephanomens; in English separable, sociable, concomitant, subservient, and such as appear afterwards. Pathognomonicks are such as follow the disease also and necessary inhere in it, Pathogno∣monicks. and therefore prefently in the beginning of a disease is present and cannot be sepa∣rated from it, and agrees to every such disease, and al∣wayes where they are, they shew the disease that must ne∣cessarily be there present, yet it seldom happens that there is one Pathognomonick sign, but for the most part the Pathognomonick signs are constituted of more joyned together, which if they are taken severally are not Pa∣thognomonicks. Synedruons, Synedru∣ons. that is sociable ones, are such as are not inseparable from a disease, nor do they necessarily cohere to the essence of a disease, nor are alwayes present, but besides the Pathognomonicks, sometimes they appear presently at the beginning, sometimes they follow afterwards, and sometimes they are not present at any time of the disease; and therefore they do not shew the disease it selfe, or its kind, but signifie some condition thereof. Epiphanomenaes and Epiginomenaes are such as neither shew the kind of a disease, Epiphano∣menaes and Epigino∣menaes. nor the condition thereof, but shew onely its mutation, and they are threefold; some signs are of concoction, and crudity, o∣thers signifie health and death, others are Critick,
or decretory which foretell the termination of a dis∣ease. CHAP III. Of the heads of Signs. OF the heads of Signes, although there are many, Fountains of signs. 1 Essentially inhering. yet they seem to be reduced to theee; the first are taken from the nature and essence its selfe of the thing, or as Galen speaks from things essentially enhering in the substance; whether it be a disease, or a cause of a disease, or a Symptome; namely, when a thing in its own nature is so manifest to the sen∣ses that there needs no other signes. Secondly, signs are sought from diseases, that is, From the effects. from all things which follow health; a disease and the causes of diseases, accidents and Symptomes, whether they be actions, or excrements, and reten∣tions, or qualities of the body. Thirdly, from causes whether they be external, From the cause. or internal, by themselves, or by accident, or what other soever. Whereunto belongs ability and disposition of bo∣dy, and from hence tis easie, or difficult to fall into this, or that disease, for this shewes alike temper, that a contrary, such as helpe also, and such as hinder; as those which encrease a disease are an argument that the disease hath an agree∣ment with the thing, which increases it, but that which delights, and profits is a token that there is in nature something contrary to the dis∣ease. To these heads of signes some adde such as are alike and disalike, understanding by those things, Things a∣like and unlike either a body which is compared to another body, or a part, which is compared with another part, or with it selfe, yet others think that similitude and dissimilitude is not a peculiar head of signes, but rather a reason of fitly cmparing other signes a∣mong themselves, but the comparison may be right
the manners properly, and nature of the sick should be known, wandring diseases commonly belong to these; when if many happen to be sick of one common infirmity, and he which is sick begins to be so as the rest were, it is to be suspected that he hath the same disease.
Sect. 2. Of knowing the Tempera∣ture of Mans Body, and of his Principal Parts. CHAP. I. Of the Signs of a wholesome Body. AFter we have spoken of the Signs in general, we come now to handle the several kinds; and be∣cause bodies are two-fold, Sound, and Sick, and there is a certain difference and latitude of a sound body, which embraces neither of these; first we are to speak in what manner the various constitutions of a sound Body, and of its parts are to be known; and go∣ing back from thence, even from a natural state may be understood how a diseased, and 'tis not difficult to discern a sound from a sick: and all those that are to be accounted for sound, who can perform all those actions
which belong to a man. Yet how such counterfeit diseases are to be found out. Galen teaches in a peculiar Book; but since there is a great latitude of health, first of all the signs are to be proposed of the best constitution of body, which is, as it were, a rule for the rest, and to which, as to the statue of Polycletus, the natures of men of all of Ages, Sexes, Countries, and Conditions are to be com∣pared. The signs of such a Constitution, as also of o∣thers differing from it, Galen in his art of Healing, and fifth Chapter draws from two heads; first from those which essentially inhere, and which according to the na∣ture of the essence are in them. Secondly, from those which necessarily follow those in their operations and ac∣cidents. First, Signs of a sound body. therefore it is necessary that a sound body may obtain the most convenient temperature and constitution of the simular parts, fittest for all actions. Secondly, a convenient number it ought to have of organick parts, and likewise magnitude, figure, scituation, connexion with others, and all things in all respects, which are re∣quired to the constitution of a part, as it is organick. Thirdly, all the parts in order ought to be united and joined, but in respect of actions, a man that is very sound doth very well perform all the actions convenient for a man, natural, vital, and animal; So that there is no defect in them, and observes moderation in them all, and is very little subject to diseases, and withstands all the causes of diseases, violent excepted: the excrements observe their natural substance, quality, quantity, time, and convenient part on't; which to be ejected, the qua∣lities which follow the best constitution of a Body, are a rosie colour of the face, nay and of the whole body, ca∣lidity, frigidity, softnesse and hardnesse, smoothnesss and roughnesse; a sound body well constituted observes medi∣ocrity, the body is neither bald, nor too rough, but the hairs themselves keep mediocrity, and in youthfull age tend to yellownesse, in manly to blacknesse; the habit of the body is the middle betwixt too corpulent, and too slender, good flesh, and good stature, out of all which the handsomenesse of the body proceeds; yet all these most e∣vidently appear in the middle and flourishing age.
CHAP. II. Of the Signs of Bodies differing from the best con∣stitution. BUt Bodies which differ from the best constitutions, either are sick, which are dscerned from sound Bo∣dies, by the hurting of the actions; and the sign which distinguishes betwixt a sound and sick body, is sensible hurt of the actions; Or they are hitherto sound, which have not their actions hitherto sensibly hurt, whereof there is a great latitude, and some in the tempe∣rature of the simular parts, some in the composition of the organick parts,, some of them both deviating from the best constitution. And first those bodies which are too hot, Signs of a hot body. yet mode∣rate in drinesse and humidity, such discover themselves to the touch, hair abounds in the whole body, and is yellow and thick. They are thinner, as to matter of fat: they are swift and strong for motion, prone to an∣ger, the colour of the face is redder then of a temperate body, they are easily hurt by hot causes. If drynesse be joined to the heat, Of a ho and dry. which they call chol∣leick, the body shall be hot, hard, thin, and lean, hairy, and the hairs are black, culed, the Puise of the Arteries are great, and the Veins great, they are angry persons, which are endued with such a temperature, obstinate le∣vers of brawlings, they desire few things, they are fit for the generation of Males. If moisture be joyned to the heat, Of hot and moist. which temperament they call Sanguine, the bodies shall be hot, and soft, a∣bounding with much blood, fleshy, endued with large Veins, and those which are so in their youth, often have the Hemorrhoides of the Nose; and if the humidity somewhat abound, they are apt from their youth to dis∣cases of putrifaction. If the body be too cold, Of a cold. such a body is perceived by the touch, 'tis white, at, slow, soft and baid, 'tis easily hurt by cold things, it hath a narrow brest, and without hair, and narrow veins scarcely appearing, the hairs are thin
and of small increase for the most part, they are fearfull that are of that temperament. If moisture be joined to the cold, Of a cold and moist. not much, nor that coldnesse great, the body shall be white in colour, fat, thick, soft, red hair, inclining to palenesse; but if the fri∣gidity with the humidity be more intense, the body shall be thick, coloured yellow, exceeding bald, the hair smooth, the veins lying hid, such temperaments are dull and slow of apprehension, and for the most part altogether idle, no wayes ready, simple, and not prone to anger. If frigidity is joined to drinesse, Of a cold dry. such a body is discer∣ned by the touch, those shall be lean, bald, pale, which are of such a constitution they are slow in going on, de∣jected in countenance with their eyes fixed. And for what belongs to Melancholians in particular, Of Melan∣cholians. not onely whom the vulgar, but whom Aristotle in the thirtieth Section, and first Probleme accounts ingenious; wherein the said Aristotle writes that much and cold choller is black; these are foolish, and idle, wherein there is much and hot choller, those are quick-sighted, and ingenious, apt to love, propense to anger and lust, and some greater bablers: but those whose heat is more remiss, more temperate, and as it were reduced to mediocrity, those are much more prudent, and although they less exceed in some matters; yet in others they are far better then the others, some in the study of Literature, others in Arts, others in Common-wealths; namely, those Melancholians are ingenious, who by nature abound with good and plenty of blood, wherewith some part thicker and dryer is mingled, which adds, as it were, strength to the blood, and when attenuated, and, as it were, poured, it is spiritual. And whereas the differences of bodies are constituted according to Astrologers, Saturnines and according to the num∣ber of Planets. Those that are born under Saturn have a dry skin, black hair, and are delighted with those black things; they have little eyes, small pulse, a slow and dull gate, they are fearful, sad, love solitude, they are busie∣bodies, covetous, slow of endeavouring, silent, laborious, they have terrible and obscure dreams. Those under Jupiter are fair, Jovials. and have rosie counte∣nances, with a pleasant and venerable aspect, they have
black eyes, are of a fit stature, and handsome composure of all the parts, their habit of body is good, flesh, blood and spirits, pure and in great plenty; hence they are milde, joyful, ingenious, bountiful, moderate lovers of friends, just, and all their manners composed with come∣liness, and their gate is moderate. Those under Mars abound with choller, Martial. have a lean body, rather then a fat, have red faces and shadowed, bur∣ning and threatning eyes, a broad brest, an upright neck, they are propense to anger, contentious, bold, and often precipitate, contemners of danger, seditious, Those under Sol are of a yellowish, Solares. or a Saffron colour tending to red, they have yellow hair, golden, and cur∣led, black eyes, swelling, full faces, moderate garbs, and have hotter blood and spirits; hence they are courteous, wise, open hearted, honest, strong, magnificent, and aspi∣ring to high things, and sometimes proud. Those under Venus are faire, Venereus. coming nigh to the fe∣minine beauty, and softness, delicate colour is red, or of white, inclining to red, their eyes shining, sparkling, and casting lacivious looks, the brows and lips thin, they are quiet, joyful, pleasant in conversation, delighted with jests, company, singing, delighted with Musick, lacivious and principally love neatness, and ornaments of the body, Those under Mercury are rather little in body then great, in face somewhat pale, they have little eyes, Mercuri∣ans. and those buried within their orbs, thin lips and nose, and youthful face in manly years, very thin beard, quick voice, light spirits, whence they are wise, subtile, studi∣ous of sects, and subtile things; prevalent in memory, eloquent, but unconstant, and sometimes also crafty, de∣ceitful, witty lyars. Those under the Moon are great in body, fat, thick, Lunar. white, unstable, and sometimes delighted with one thing, and sometimes with another.
CHAP. III. Of the signs of the constitution of the brain. NOw follows that which belongs to the constitu∣tion or parts, and first of the Brain; although a just constitution of the Brain be necessary to per∣form animal actions proper to the Brain, yet to perform them, a right composition and conformation of the head, and of the brain depending thereon, do much avail; wherefore following Galen in the art of Physick, we will propound in the first place certain signs of the constituti∣on of the brain, drawn from the figure and magnitude of the head. A little head if the body be great is an ill sign, A little head. for the brain also in such a head is little, because it will generate but few animal spirits, or if it doth generate animal spirits enough, yet they cannot be moved well enough in so narrow a oom, but either being pen'd in they stick, or being stir'd up they move too violent, whence the animal actions are the weaker; and those that have such a body are unstable, and do many things inconsiderately; the brain also in a little head for the most part is intemperate and dry, and it argues unaptness, and debility of hear, and of matter in their formation, and especially a little head is naught, if it also have an ill shape. A great head if it be well shaped, A great head. and have the joining parts, as, to wit, the neck, the spine of the back, and all the Nerves correspondent, it signifies the brain is well constituted, and is a token that the formative ver∣tue is powerful, which can rightly inform and elaborate plentiful matter; but if that be wanting, it signifies only plenty of matter: but weak power, which is unfit for such matter, and therefore is no token of a good consti∣tution of the head, and such for the most part are dull and unapt. The natural and best figure of the head is most like to a sphear, The best figure of the hea. gently prest on each side, so that that com∣pression may be lengthned from the ears towards the fore∣part, and those which have that excell in wit, judgment,
and memory, are strong in body, but those which differ from that best figure are generally accounted Phoxa, that is, vitious; figure, namely, to wit, wherein the anteri∣or part, or posterior, or both of them are deficient in their excellency, so that either behind, or before, or up∣ward, such heads seem ugly; but if some excellency be deficient, and the rest well raised up, or grows narrow at top, Galen calls it aitious formation of growing sharp. and those which have this figure of the head, are the most unwise, impudent, fraudulent, and most basely cor∣rupted with other vices, that there be a rising up of the hinder part of the head, and the other bones answer to it, is a good sign, for much good matter is present, if it have a handsome figure also, not else: but if in a thin, too long, and a weak neck, the hinder part onely riseth up in greatnesse, or is deformed; 'tis an ill sign, and sig∣nifies onely plenty of unprofitable matter, and weaknesse of the formative faculty. The former part of the head, the hinder part not being altogether deficient in rising up, if it be more lifted up is a good figure, and all the senses are well; and therefore 'tis no ill sign, but on the contrary, if that magnitude be joyned with a deformed figure, and the senses are weak, it signifies imbecility of the formative faculty; those whose fore-heads are low, have weak senses, and are stupid, yet they often have good memories, and strength of body; on the other side, those whose hinder parts of the head are not raised enough up, have all their senses whole, but are destitute of me∣mory and strength of body; but those that lack raising up before and behind, and the head riseth much in the middle, are called Oxucephaloi, sharp pointed, those are unfit for all animal actions, and weak through the nar∣rownesse of the brain; if the head grow great neer the ears on each side, it is a token of unfit matter, and of a weak motive faculty. But for what belongs to the constitution of the brain, Signs of  temperate brain. they manifestly shew themselves by their animal actions, and those things that follow them; namely, a temperate brain, doth perform all animal actions well; unlesse there be any fault in the organs of the external senses, it easily resists external hurts, and injuries. Its excrements are moderate in all, and are cast out at convenient places,
especially the Palate, their sleep is moderate, their hair in Infants are yellowish, in Boyes more yellow, in young Men yellow; in figure indifferent betwixt curled and strait, nor doth it soon fall off, nor they become bald. Those which have a hot brain are changeable in their opinions, Of a hot. swift in motion, ripe in their wits, they use lit∣tle sleep, and not very sound, the excrements of their heads are few and concocted, so that no error be com∣mitted in their dyet, they are easily offended by hot things, their face is redder, and veins apparent in their eyes, their hair soone grows, and soon falls away, 'tis strong, thick, and curled, and for the most part tends to blacknesse. These which have a cold brain, Of a cold. their senses are slower and weaker, and their apprehension, memory, and wit dull, and the motion of their body, not so lively and quick; They are moderately inclined to sleep, they a∣bound with excrements of the brain, although they are not full of braines; from without they are easily offend∣ed by cold things, which easily occur, especially by the north wind: those parts which are neer their heads are neither so warm to those that touch them, nor so red to those that behold them, and the veins which are in their eyes are not so discernable, their hair is strait and reddish at middle age, bred more slowly, yet they are lasting; first they are thin, but age coming on they are more burley. Those which have a dry brain have sharp senses, Of a dry. pier∣cing and subtile, they are very watchful, and have very few excrements, strong hair, and often curled, which do so soon grow, and soon fall away, and are hurt by dry∣ing things. Those which have moist braines their senses are duller and more turbulent, Of a moist. they are accustomed to much and profound sleep, they have store of excrements, thin hair, soft, whitish, and durable; and they are seldome or never bald, they are comforted by dry things, and offended by moit. Those who have a hot and dry braine, Of a hot and dry. are ingenious, and industrious in taking in hand, and performing of business, the force of apprehension is most exquisite in
them, and they are fit for motion, yet more active for the most part, then behooves them to be, they are also most vigilant and sleep very little, and have few excre∣ments of the brain; to those that touch them, their head appears hot, their face until they come to full ripeness of years is red, afterwards the heat decaying more pale, they are offended with air, and other hot and dry things. Those which have a hot and moist brain, Of a hot moist. if either qua∣lity a little exceed, the excrements of their heads are ma∣ny, the colour of the head is white, mingled with red, the veins in the eyes great, the hair strait and yellowish, and do not easily fall away; they are easily hurt by heating things, and are pained in the head, and many excrements are collected to the other especially, if they are moist, but if both qualities abound, the senses are not so sharp, they cannot watch long, yet their sleep is not pleasing and continued, they have divers dreams, and strange ones, their heads are obnoxious to many diseases; since it col∣lects more excrements then it can discusse, they are easily hurt by heating, and moistning things, and principally by the South Wind; but if one quality overcome the other, there shall be more evident signs of the one, and more obscure of the other, which is to be taken notice of in the other temperaments also. Those which have a cold and dry brain are too ripe witted, but in process of time, Of a cold and dry. sharpness of the wit and senses abateth, and they grow old and dye before their time; especially if a distemper of the Heart and Liver concur with that of the Brain; the same are unhealthy, and are easily offended by external causes, by cold aire, and error in their dyet; the head to the touch is cold, nor have they good complexions, unless they have the better colour, from the hot distemper of the Heart and Liver, the Veins of the Eyes do not appear, their hair grows slow, and is thin and reddish, and if the dryness overcome the cold they are well, Lastly, whosoever have cold and moist brains, Of a cold and moist. are slow and dull of apprehension, and their senses not so sharp; they collect many excrements, they sleep much and sound, they are easily offended with the coldness and moi∣sture of the air, and are apt to cold distillations; they have long and soft hair, and whitish from their child∣hood, they are never bald.
CHAP. IV. Of the signs of the constitution of the heart. IF the heatt be temperate, Signs of a temperate heart. mediocrity is observed in its motion, the Pulse of the Arteries and respiration, and those who have such a heart, they are endued with good manners, not effeminate, nor mad headed, or an∣gry, but humane, not covetous, nor prodigal, but liberal, not dissemblers, nor proud, but candid, without haugh∣tiness of mind, benigne, temperate, not precipitate, nor medlers; nor busie-bodies, but mature in counsels, not envious, but desirous of others good. Those who have a hot heart, Of a hot. their whole body is hot, the motion of the heart, the pulse, respiration, through urgent use, exceeds all mediocrity in magnitude, celeri∣ty, and frequency, they are couragious, and swift, and unweary of undertaking enterprises, and bold in under∣going dangers: they are rough, and full of brisilely hairs in their brest, and the brest in comparison of the head is great. The signs of a cold heart, Of a cold. are contrary to those which are of a hot, the whole body is less hot, unless the liver be hotter, the motion of the heart, puise, and respiration when custome doth not so require it, is not so great, and sometimes small and slow, if there be a greater recesse to frigidity; and such a heart argues slowness to anger, fear, distrust, slothfulness, and lingering; whence such are ef∣feminare, contemners of glory and honour, their brests are without hairs, and in comparison of their heads little. Whose heart soever is dry, Of a dry. their pulse is hard, they are not prompt to anger, but being stin'd up to anger are implacable and mad, and they can dissemble their anger, they are obstinate, and covetous, the whole body for the most part is too dry, unlesse the moisture of the liver cor∣rect it. Moreover be whose heart is too moist, Of a moist. his pulse is soft, they are apt to ane, but easily pleased, the habit of the body is dryer, except the dryness of the liver resist it.
The signs of a hot and dry heart are a hard pulse, Of a hot and dry. great swift, frequent, great respiration, swift and frequent, those who have such a heart are fit to take in hand and perform actions, couragious and bold, apt to anger, and unplacable, envious, proud, and if there be excess of heat, and drouth, are mad, cruel, unmerciful, and sparing none; the same are hairy, especially in the Brests and Hypocon∣dries, the whole body is hot and dry, unlesse the consti∣tution of the Liver hinder it, the Brest broad and wide. The signs of a hot and moist heart, are soft pulses, Of a hot and moist. great, swift, and frequent, and the respiration answers to the pulse, so that the brest answers to the heat of the heart, and those who have such a constitution of the heart, are industrious, and prompt to actions, and not wild, they are apt to be angry, yet it is not sharp and durable, but placable, and this temperature, so that humidity do not too much exceed, most fit to prolong life, but if the hu∣midity doth much overcome the heat, putrifaction is ea∣sily caused, and putted fevers are generated. Those who are cold and moist in the heart, Of a cold and moist. bring forth a soft pulse, little, slow, thin, those which have such a temperament, are not bold, but fearfull, and distrustfull, effeminate, slow, and not apt to anger, and if they are stirred up to anger, it is not violent, but easily appeased, they are also gentle, shame-faced, desperate in adversity, and altogether endued with a soft and effeminate mind, their brests are bare, and the whole body, and the brest answers to simple constitutions in amplitude. Moreover in those who have a cold and dry heart, there is found in the pulse hardness, smallness, thinness, Of a cold and dry. and slowness, and such is their breathing, if their breasts be ample, they are no ways propense to anger, but being stirr'd up, and as it were forced to anger, retaine it very long, they are also covetous, and of all others most naked in the brest. Yet here you are to be admonished, Whether mens man∣ners are ac∣cording to their tem∣perature. that those things which are spoken of signes, of the moral actions by Phy∣sitians, are not of acquired manners, and such as are com∣pleated by education, discipline, and custome, but are to be understood of the native and congenite manners, which Galen calls Hormas,; and when Physitians tell us that manners follow the constitution of the body, that
is to be taken of the native and ingenite manners, not such as are acquired. CHAP. V. Of the signs of the constitution of the Liver. IF the Liver be temperate, Signs of a temperate Liver. the habit of the whole body is in the middle, betwixt being too fat, and too lean, the colour of the body is rosie, and for the most part, the rest of the signs appear, which are found in a tempe∣rate body, the Urine is excellent. If the Liver be too hot, Of a hot. yellow Choller abounds, and in middle age black, or chollerick, and adust blood, the Veins are broad, and ample, the whole body more hot, the Belly and Hypocondries rough and hairy; and those which have such a constitution of Liver, are carried away by pleasures, especially by meat and drink, they are of∣fended with hot meats and drinks, and hot air; but cold air and cold meat and drink help them; their Panch is dry, they are thirsty, unless the coldness and moisture of the stomach hinder it, and they are very obnoxious to het diseases. In a cold Liver all things are contrary, the veins are strait, Of a cold. the blood colder; and hence the whole body col∣der, except the heat of the Heart hinder it, the belly smooth. The signs of a dry Liver, Of a dry. are little blood, and thick hard veins, and the habit of the whole body thin or lean. The signs of a moist Liver, Of a moist. are abundance of blood, and that thin and watrish, and the whole body more moist. The signs of a hot and dry are amplitude and hard∣ness of veins, Of a hot and dry. and hotter blood, thicker, and dryer; the Hypocondris are exceeding rough, and the whole body hotter and dryer. But if the Liver be hot and moist, Hot and moist. more store of blood is generated, and that of an indifferent consistence, the veins are great and broad, and soft, and the habit of the whole body moister and softer, the Hypocondries hairy
enough, and if either quality do much exceed, those who have such a constitution fall into many diseases, which proceed from putrefaction. If the Liver be more cold and moist, Cold and moist. crude and pitui∣tous blood is generated, the veins are narrow, and the whole body, if the heart hinder it not, is colder and moi∣ster, and the Hypocondries are void of hair. Moreover the signs of a cold and dry Liver are little blood, and so the nutrition not so happy, Cold and dry. less store of hair, and the whole body is colder and dryer, unless per∣chance the heart do correct the frigidity of the Liver. CHAP. VI. Of the signs of the temperature of the Testicles. THose whose Testicles are in good temper are fruit∣ful; those whose Stones are too hot, are lecherous, Signs of temperate Testicles. Hot. and apt for Venus betimes, and fruitful also, and beget boyes, and they also have hair in their privy parts betimes, and have beards also very young. Those who have cold Stones are not apt for Venus, Cold. nor fruitful; and if they do generate, they rather procreate Females then Males, and their genital parts are more bald, and have lesse hair, and they slowly, or never put forth a beard. Those who have moist abound with much seed, Moist. but watry, and have broad beards. Those who have dry ones, generate little seed, Dry. and that indifferent thick, and are apt to have little beards. Those who have hot and dry Testicles generate thick seed, and are fruitful, and are timely stirr'd up to Venus, Hot and dry. and yet are easily hurt by Venue, they beget Males, unless the sluggish nature of the woman hinder it; hair comes betimes in the genitalls, and plentifully, and in all the parts neer, upwards in the parts nigh the Navel, down∣wards to the middle of the Thighs. Those who have heat and moisture, Hot and moist. do more abound with seed, they affect Venus moderately, and can easily brook it, if the constitution of the rest of the body agree, nay sometimes they are offended by retaining of the seed, they generate as well Males as Females, and are no so rough about the Genitals.
Those whose Testicles are cold and moist begin to use Venus late, Cold and moist. neither are they prone to Venus, and they are also unfruitful, or if they generate fruitful seed, 'tis more fit to procreate Females then Males, and the seed is thin and watry. Lastly, Cold and dry. those that have cold and dry Stones, Generate thick seed, and but little, and are more hurt after Coition then cold and moist ones. CHAP. VII. Of the signs of the constitution of the stomach. A Temperate Stomach shews it selfe moderate in all things, Signs of a temperate Stomach. it desires so much as it can concoct, and concoct it well, and neither corrupts soft meats, which are easie to be digested, no leaves hard meats unconcocted, and crude, nor is it easily hurt by meat that overwhelms it. But a hot Stomach concocts better then it desires, Of a hot. it digesteth meat hard and difficult to be concocted, happi∣ly, bur on the other side, it corrupts soft meats, and such as are easie to be digested, and brings forth a nitrous cru∣dity; 'tis delighted with hot meats and drink, and that so powerfully, that it is not hurt by the moderate use of cold things, but is preserved from the farthest decay, which will be preserved by heat; Thirst is greater then the de∣sire of meat. A colder Stomach more greedily desires then it can concoct, Cold. and principally cold meats, and such as are hard to be digested, are not easily well concocted by it, but ea∣sily grow sower in it, and a little after eating pleantifully, a sense of heaviness is perceived about the Stomach, and floating, and loathing, and sometimes vomit. A moist Stomach doth not easily thirst, Scoist. it is not easily hurt by much drinking, 'tis-delighted with moist food, and easily brooks hunger. A dryer Stomach is more thirsty, Dry yet unless the thirst arise from some part neer thereunto; it is hurt by too much drink, it desires dry meat. From these signs of the simple constitutions of the Sto∣mach,
may easily be collected, the signs of the mixt con∣strutions. CHAP. VIII. Of the signs of the constitution of the Lungs. THose who have hot Lungs do much dilate their brests in breathing, they are thirsty, Signs of hot Lungs. and the thirst is not allayed unless it be in long time, and with cold things. Cold Lungs are much hurt by breathing in of cold air, Of cold. the respiration in those who have cold Lungs is little hot, that is less cold, and is a friend to breathing; also in cold Lungs many excrements are gathered together, which are sometimes cast out by coughing, sometimes by spitting only. Dry Lungs-collect not many excrements, Dry. and there∣fore hath no need to cast up any by cough or spittle. Moist Lungs on the contrary gather many excrements and therefore between whiles in speaking, Moist. 'tis necessary to spit often. The woice also is shewen by the constitution of the Lungs and Wind-pipe, Signs by the voice. a great voice and vehemency of efflation shews a wide Wind-pipe, and heat of the Lungs; a small voice shews the contrary; the Wind-pipe rightly constituted, causeth a smooth even voice; a sharp voice but joined with clearnesse, signifies driness of the Wind∣pipe, a sharp voice with hoarsness, and obscurity proceeds from a plentiful humor moistning the Arteries, and ra∣ther belongs to a preter-natural constitution then a na∣tural; a sharp voice shewes narrowness of the throat, and consequently coldness of the Wind pipe; on the contra∣ry a great voice shewes wideness of the top of the Wind∣pipe, and therefore signifies heat strong from their infancy.
Book. III. PART. I. SECT. I. OF URINES. CHAP. I. Of the abuse of inspection of Ʋrines. AFter we have spoken of those things which are to be known about the constitution of a sound body, The vulgar opinion of Inspection of Urine. now we are to speak of the knowledge of things contrary to nature; but because amongst signes Urine, and Pulse do arise from the fountain, we will speak of them in the first place: and first for what belongs to Urine, although a false opinion is deeply seated in the minds of many, that by the inspection of Urine alone, and wholly, the state and condition of the sick, and what ill he suffers, either within or without, from what cause soever may be known, and whether the sick be a man, or woman, whether a woman be great with child or not: yet such like are beyond the power of the Art of Phy∣sick, by the Urine to divine. In the mean time the In∣spection of Urine is profitable, but as Hypocrates also 1. Aphor. 12. teacheth that Urine may teach many
things of the condition of a disease; but that there may be a right judgment of Urine, the differences and cau∣ses of the differences are to be known. CHAP. II. Of the differences of Urine, and first of the substance of Urine. FIrst in Urine too things are to be considered, The sub∣stance af Vrine. in re∣gard of the substance thereof, the liquor, and that which is contained in the liquor. In the liquor a∣gain two things, the Consistence and the Choller. First for the Consistence, some are thick, Consistence of Vrine. Thin Vrine. some are thin, others indifferent. That Urine is thin, which for the most part consists of watry and potulent matter, but of serous and salt matter, that which is separated in the Veins and Liver; or of another humor, which hath little or no mixture with it. On the contrary, Thick. a thick Urine is that which contains much mixture of serous and salt humidity, or also of other humors. Indiffe∣rent. The middle is that which hath so much of that serous excrement, and aqueous humidity mixt with it, as for the most part is wont to be in a natural consti∣tution of the body. Moreover some Urines are clear, others troubled, Troubled and thick Vrine no the same. Troubled. or foul; those are troubled, through which the sight cannot passe; but 'tis not the same thing for Urine to be thick and troubled, when as other liquors; so Urines also are accounted thick, which neverthelesle are cleare, and per∣spicuous; but a clear Urine is either made clear and so remains, or else 'tis made clear, and afterwards is trou∣bled, which is properly called troubled Urine; but trou∣bled Urine, properly so called, is that which is made so, and either remains such, which Urine commonly is cal∣led subjugal, which is like the contents of the U∣rine, or is made foul, or troubled, and afterwards become cleare, and becomes so afterwards, as is spoken. Moreover in respect of the colour, there are accounted several differences, but the principal colours, according to which the Urines differ are six.
First white; secondly, pale; thirdly, flame colour; fourthly, yellow; fifthly red; sixthly, black. First to the white Urines belong the aqueous, White U∣rine. which bare the colour of pure water, then those which represent thin wine, or fair water, into which is cast a little Oker, or Choller, as also snowy Urine, which represents the whiteness of snow, as also milkey and light gray, or such as represents the colour of clear horn. The second is pale like the colour of Oker, Pale. or sub∣pallid, which is seen in water tinckted with Oker, but some call these Urines spicious, or the colour of ears of corn, Straw colour. Flame co∣lour. and subspicious, and compare this colour to the colour which is seen in chaff that is old, or in straw. The third colour is flame colour, such as is that of a Citron, and in fire burning clear, which if it be more remiss, 'tis called subfulgent; Actuarius calls these golden Urines, and subaureous, because they are like gold. Fourthly, Yellow. the next and neerest to this fulgent is yel∣low, yet so differing from it, that this inclines more to white, Brighter yellow. that is more shining and splendid, or neer to the colour and splendor of the Stars; that which is not so deep but clearer, then yellow is called subflavous; Actua∣rius calls these colours croceous, or saffron colours, or subcroceous, such as are in waters wherein saffron, or whilde saffron flowers are mixed. The fifth colour, or red, whereof Galen makes three sorts, Red. and places red in the middle, extream red, the highest, and reddish the lowest, and those he places in Bole-Almonack, and Vermilion, and red, in Cherries and Apples; others make four differences, and first they place the colour that is a mixt red, such as is the hair of those who are said to be red hair'd, which again is distingui∣shed into red, and reddish; the second is Rosie; the third purpurious; the forth sanguineous. To these Actuarius joines a vine coloured Urine, Vine co∣lour. which represents the colour of a red Urine inclinable to black, to this be addes the colour of dry grapes, like new Wine (out of doubt of red Wine) boiled to the third part, Blakish. or which is prest out of dried Grapes, or of Cher∣ries, inclining to a black colour. Moreover there is a black Urine, Black Urine. under which some-Physitians
comprehend more colours, green, yellow, black, and such like; although there be innumerable dif∣ferences of green plants, yet two here are the chiefe, Leek-colour, which is seen in the blades of Leeks; Eruginous and Eru∣ginous which is like Verdy-grease, and yellow, which represents the colour of red Lead, and therefore called plumbeous. To these differences they refer Oleagenous Urine, Oyly Vrine which represents the colour and consistence of Oyl. Now these differences which are taken from the sub∣stance and colour are complicate, and constitute, The smell of Vrines. com∣pound differences, amongst which the chief are seaven, Urine thin and white, thin, pale, thin flame colour, or fulgent, thick white, thick red, thick black Moreover besides these there are other differences less principal, which are taken from other qualities and cir∣cumstances; first from the smell, for some Urines smell little, others very little, and have that odour which is natural to Urine, others stink exceedingly, and others smell pleasant. From the sound, for some Urines whilest they are poured out make no noise, others make a noise. From the quantity, for some Urines are made in an indifferent quantity, others more sparingly, others more plentifully. From the manner, for some are made without difficul∣ty and pain, others with pain, some drop by drop, and others altogether. CHAP. III. Of the Contents in Urine. A Content in a Urine is every corpulent and visible thing which is mingled with the liquor of the U∣rine; some Contents are essential, Contents what, how many fold. others acciden∣tal; the essential are those which appear for the most part in all the Urines of sound persons, and most of sick, but the accidental are those which neither alwayes nor most frequently are discerned in Urines. Essential in respect of scite or place, in which they a∣bide there are three; the sediment, the suspension, and
the clouds, the altitude of the whole Urine is to be divi∣ded, as it were, into three parts, into the bottome of the Urinal, and the highest region of the Urine, and the medium betwixt these two extreams. The subsidence or sediment of Urine, The sedi∣ment of Vrine. The suspen∣sion of Vrine. The nube∣cula. is that in Urine which descends towards the bottome, and settles in the bottome. Suspension, or subliment is that which is contained in the middle, and is, as it were, suspended. The clouds and little clouds is that which hangs in the higher part of the Urine like a cloud, yet suspension in Urine is sometimes taken by Hypocrates by the names of a cloud, as in the second of his Prognosticks, in the 29. Title is manifest. Yet these Contents do not alwayes exactly keep their natural place, for the sediment sometimes plainly sticks in the bottom, and sometimes ascends higher, and tends to suspension, and sometimes suspension also ascends a little higher from the middle sometimes descends lower; so also Clouds plainly overspread the extremi∣ties, sometimes incline towards the middle. In these three Contents, The diffe∣rence of Contents. other differences moreover are to be considered from the substance; a Content is said to be thick, or thin, equal, or unequal, plain and smooth, or rugged; equal is when all the parts of the Content are of the same thinness or thickness; unequal is when one part is thick and another thin; plain and smooth is that which observes continuity of parts divulsed, or rugged, is when there is no continuity for the colour, A Content is either white, red, or black, or tinctured with a colour neer to one of these. In respect of quantity 'tis either little, much, or indifferent, out of which com∣plicated divers other differences again do arise. Concerning the accidental differences which are con∣tained in the Urine contrary to nature, Acciden∣tal diffe∣rences. some settle in the bottome, others in the middle, others in the superficies, some stick to the fides of the Vrinal, others are confused∣ly mixt with the Vrine. Of the first kind are farenacious sediments, Farenaci∣ous sedi∣ment like leaves, like Pulse. which re∣present thick bran, little flakes which are like leaves, grainem, which represent a kind of pulse, or corn, besides these sometimes in a Vrine, there are clots of blood, small sands, stones, little rags of flesh, quitture, worms.
In the middle of the Vrine there sometimes swims little bodies like Attomes, threds, or rags, and haires, Hairs in Vrine. and sometimes small sands, cleave to the sides of the Vrinal, representing the substance of Tartar. But in the superficies there appears principally four things preter-natural, bubbles and those various, froth, Bubbles. Froth. A crown. a crown accor∣ding to the common opinion; when notwithstanding 'tis no∣thing else then a shadow, or light, passing through the circum∣ference of the Vrinal, received within the compass of the Vrine, and so is not properly called a Content, and Fat, yet besides these sometimes fine Sand swimming in the superficies of the Vrine CHAP. IV. Of the causes of the various consistence of Vrines. AFter we have mentioned the differences of Vrine, Causes of Vrine of an indif∣ferent con∣sistence. Thin. next we must find the causes of all those differences; and first the cause of a Vrine of an indifferent consistence is a se∣rous excrement of blood, mingled with an indifferent quanti∣ty of water which happens when the faculty concocting is well. The cause of a thin Vrine which hath little of that serous ex∣crement mixt with it, is debility of concoction, especially in the Liver and Veins, which coldness of the Stomach may oc∣casion, but principally store of drink, also a cold distemper of the Reins. Thirdly, obstruction, and straitness of the ves∣sels through which thick humors cannot flow with the Vrine. Fourthly, the changing and converting of the matter in ano∣ther part. Thick Vrine is made by the mixture of any thick matter which happens when crude humors, Thick. which are cumulated in the Veins, are expelled by nature this way, or when any obstructi∣on is opened out of the Spleen, Liver, Reins, and other parts, or an imposthumation is broken, or ulcer, the thick matter is mingled with the Vrine, or if there be store of serous and salt humors. If the Vrine be made clear and remain so, Clear. and be of good consistence, it is a token that such clearness proceeds from the natural heat rightly elaborating the matter, for nature elabo∣rates not only aliment, but excrements also, as much as it can, Thin and clear. and impresses convenient qualities in them; but if Veine be thin and clear, also 'tis a token of crudity; neither hath na∣ture then begun concoction of humors, and if Vrines have any other colour, then such waterish, they obtain it from collerick humors mixt therewith.
But if the Vrine be made clear, Troubled. and afterwards be troubled, and that be in a sound body, it is a sign that he declines from his best health, and is prone to some disease, especially a Fever, and it signifies the humors in the Veins to be indigested, which nature now hath endeavoured, yet hitherto hath not perfectly concocted: but if the same happen to those that are sick, it sig∣nifies that some concoction is now to be made, and something of the peccant matter to be mingled with the watty substance; but that mixture not to be so exact; and happening by some oc∣casion from the external air, or the heat vanishing of its own accord; the vitious matter is separated from the other humors. But if Vrine be made thick, Troubled, which grows clear. and afterwards become thin, that happens because the natural heat begins to perform and concoct the matter, and to stir it, and mingle it, which notwithstan∣ding since it is not exactly mingled, the heat afterwards cea∣sing, the Heterogeneal parts are separated of their own accord, and the thicker reside in the bottome. The same comes to pass if the Vrine be thin, but some matter may be mingled therewith in its passage; but since it is not exactly mingled with it, but on∣ly confused afterward of its own accord, it settles in the bottom. Lastly, Troubled which re∣mains so. if the Vrine be made thick and remain so, it signi∣fies great confusion of humors is made in the Veins by the heat stirring the humors, but not rightly concocting them, nor is there good concoction made, which the excrements elaborate to make after their manner, and indeed if such a Vrine appear in the beginning of such a disease, wherein no concoction seems hitherto to be made by the natural heat; it is a token that 'tis caused by the fiery heat contrary to nature agitating and troubling the humors in the veins; but if the Vrine in the beginning is not made thick, but clear, and afterwards becomes turbulent, it is a sign that the disease grows worse, and that the heat acting upon the matter contrary to nature is encreased, yet always this and also other signs must have regard to the rest of the conditions of the Vrine, and hence it is to be collected, whether such signs be made by the strength of nature working upon the vitious humors, or by the encrease of the preter-natu∣ral heat, and putrifaction, or debility of strength. CHAP. V. Of the causes of colours in Vrines. COncerning the causes of colours in Vrine, The causes of a golden colour in Vrine. a golden colour, which agrees to the Vrines of sound men proceeds according to the vulgar opinion from some portion of yellow choller, or
rather from a serous and salt excrement, yet that also something tinctured with choller, which is mixt with the Vrine. A white Water is made, Of a whit. either because nothing is mingled with it which may colour it, which is properly called aqueous, or because some white body is mixed therewith. The first cause of aqueous Vrine is Crudity and weakness of the native heat, by reason whereof this excrement is left, Of an a∣queous. as it were imperfect. Secondly, obstructions of the passages through which the matter useth to flow to the Vrine. Thirdly, if chol∣ler, and therewith that salt humor be carried to another place, as happens for the most part in acute Fevers, and Phren∣sies with them. Fourthly, much drink. Fifthly, heat of the Reins and Liver, which plentifully draw drink to them, but do not concoct it. Sixthly, Gravel in the Reins, or Bladder, too much of that which is salt, and thick adheres, but the aqueous flows out. Vrines of another kind are made by the mixture of some white substance, whether it be flegm, or quitture, or seed, Of milky and these Vrines we call milky, yet for the most part they are made thick, and afterwards become clear, and the matter setling in the bottome of what kind it is, may be easily discerned. A Vrine is somewhat pale, Of palish. Of pale. when pale choller in a sufficient quantity, or a little of yellow is mingled with the Urine, but if much pale choller, or yellow in an indifferent quantity be mingled with the Vrine a pale colour ariseth. If yellow be mixed in greater quantity, Of yellow. the Vrine becomes yellow, yet some times other causes besides internal, external may give a tincture to the Vrine, as Rhubarb, Saffron, the leaves of Senna, and such like. A ruddy colour in Vrine is caused by choller and blood, Of blood red. and indeed if the Vrine be coloured with blood it doth not look clear, and is properly called Vrine dyed with blood, and has a colour like water, wherein the flesh of animals newly slain have been washed, and is made either in some open vessel for what cause soever, or by the weakness of the Liver and Reins, by reason whereof they cannot contain blood and assimulate it to themselves, or because nature at set times evacuates the blood a∣bounding in the whole body with Vrine; but the blood which is mingled with the Vrine, is either thin, and the Vrine is made red or reddish, or thick, which if much be mingled, the Vrine is made exceeding red, but if little either simply red, or of a pale red, but that Vrine which is coloured by store of choller, the choller colouring it and and making it redder, it
shineth, and is as it were like flame, sometimes also it is made red and thick by plentiful mixture of adust choller, like wine of a blackish, or deep red. Wine like Vrine is made by the mixture of ceruleous choller, Of Vine colour. Of grape colour. or representing the colour of Woad, as also by the mixture of plenty of red choller: Grapy by the mixture of yellow choller exceedingly dryed, and as it were changed into a Violet colour and degenerating towards black. A green Vrine is caused by plenty of Aeruginous, Of green. and Leck-like colour. Yellow and black Vrine are sometimes caused by the mixture of external things; Of yellow and black. as for what belongs to the internal causes, the Vrine is made black when either the melancholy humour is evacuated with it, which happens in those which cumulate melancholy humours in the Spleen, or black choller is mixed with the Urine, or when the heat and spirits are extinguished in the veins, the blood is corrupted and becomes black. CHAP. VI. Of the causes of an oyly Vrine, and of other differences. O Leaginous Urines either have only fat swimming in the superficies, Of oyly Vrines. or represent Oyl in substance and colour: the first difference proceeds from a melting of the fat, and is rather to be referred to the differences in the Contents; but that Vrine which seems like Oyl in substance and colour, and yet is nor truly fat, hath its beginning from the mixture of ex∣crementitious humours, especially of pale and black Choller, as also of Flegm, from whence proceeds a crudity with a certain greenness like Oyl; Black V∣rine al∣ways thick. but when the difference in substance and colour are joined, a black Urine cannot be thin, but if the black humor makes it black, it is necessary that there is so great plenty thereof mixt with the Vrine, that the Vrine must be∣come thick. A light red Vrine is thin from the small portion of blood mingled therewith, A light, red, thin. but if it be made of a pale red, 'tis by choller which cannot happen unless there be so great plenty thereof, as may render the Vrine thick. A pale and thin Vrine is made when a small portion of chol∣ler is mingled with an aqueous Urine, A pale and thin. A pale, red, thick. but a pale red and thick, when choller is mixt in greater plenty, but if any choller be mingled with a thick white Vrine, the Vrine is dyed pale.
CHAP. VII. Of the causes of smell, quantity, and such like accidents. THe Urine which obtains the natural and usual smell, Cause of the smell of Vrine. sig∣nifies that the natural heat is right, and concoction is well performed; but if the Vrine smell not, or lesse then the Vrines of those that are well use to do, it is a token that the native heat is weak, and almost no concoction performed, Of no smel. nor is the serous and excrementitious humour mingled therewith. Sweet Vrine, Of smel∣ling well. or that which smells well doth not proceed from any internal natural causes, but if any such be found it hath acquired that smell from meats, or medicines taken in∣wardly. Stinking Vrines are caused first from meat and drink, Of Faetid. and certain medicines taken, also from crudity and corruption of meats, erosion, and especially from putrifaction, Fourthly, from daily retention of Vrine in the Bladder. Vrine naturally ought to answer to the drink, Of store of Vrine. but it is made more plentiful then is fit: First, if meats are administred which are full of aqueous humidity. Secondly, if the aqueous and serous excrements, which use to be discussed by motion, or e∣vacuated other wayes be retained in the body. Thirdly, if na∣ture from the other parts, or the whole body expels the vitious humours through the passages of Vrine, which useth to hap∣pen in Critick, and Symptomatick evacuations, as in a Dia∣betes, or incontinence of Vrine, Fourthly, if Dyuretick me∣dicine be taken. On the contrary, little Vrine is caused by contrary causes, Of little Vrine. namely, not only by reason of small quantity of drink taken, but of dry meats, moreover if the aqueous matter be consu∣med which useth to be in burning fevers, as also by motion and too much exercise. Thirdly, if the Vrine be converted to o∣ther parts. Fourthly, by reason of the straitness of the passages, by which the Vrine ought to be expelled. CHAP. VIII. Of the causes of Contents in Vrines of those that are sound. THe matter of a Content, The matter of a sedi∣ment in sound men. or Sediment in the Vrines of such as are sound (for in Vrines of those that are exactly well, there is scarce any Content save onely a sediment) is some part of aliment which escaped concoction; for since it neither
can be changed into perfect blood, nor into the nutriment of any part, after the third concoction it is sent to the Reins and cast cut through the Bladder, and there is scarce found a Vrine of a sound man, The causes of diversity of Contents wherein the natural sediment doth not appear; because scarce any body is so exactly sound which doth not ge∣nerate some such excrement; and no nourishment is to be found which cannot afford matter for such an excrement. Whence according to the diversity of meats, and natures there∣of there ariseth diversity of Contents: For although the Con∣tents settle in the bottome, and in those that are exactly sound; yet in those which do not enjoy most perfect health, The cause of the qua∣lity of the sediment. or do not eat the best meats, it doth not enjoy its natural place; but in some, and those which eat grosser food more then is convenient, it doth settle in the bottome; in others it ascends higher then is fit, by reason of the heat which cannot subdue it. A Sediment is naturally white and takes this colour from the veins and parts which are wont to impress a white colour on those things which they change: Equal and continued is not divided by reason of heat rightly concocting and rendring this excrement equal, and obtains the figure of a Pyramid, which although all parts seem to the senses to be equally thick; yet in truth some are thicker, which settle underneath, others thinner which consist in the superiour part. A great sediment is through plenty of crude juice which af∣fords matter for a sediment; Quantity. whence boyes through much ea∣ting, and those that live in idleness, and those whose accu∣stomed evacuations are suppressed, and females also have a more plentiful sediment; but men because they are hotter, and have not so many crude humors, have less sediment: the same hap∣pens in Summer through fasting, too great evacuations, and o∣ther causes consuming the humors, also obstructions, and much and thin drinks, which are distributed and cast forth before it can receive any mixture, or digestion with meat. CHAP. IX. Of the causes of Contents in Vrines of those that are sick. AGain in sick people the sediment consists of the more crude part of the aliment which cannot turn into nourishment f the parts; The cause of a sedi∣ment in the Urines of the sick. with which notwithstanding other vitious humors also are mingled, nay sometimes vitious humors onely may afford matter for a sediment, but by how much the more the Contents of those that are sick are like to those that are
well, by so much they are the better, and shew great concoction, but by how much the more they recede from those either in co∣lour, or other qualities, by so much they are the worse, and indeed the differences of colours of Contents are borrowed from the humour whereof they consist; but as for what belongs to the diversity of substance, that proceeds from the variety os burning heat and various disposition of matter: a farenacious sediment, as Galen teacheth, is made from thick dried blood, Causes of a fernacious sediment. Frothy. Bran-lik. Pulse-like or flesh unequally consumed by a fiery heat, but rough or sca∣ly, when the solid parts are unequally consumed, and scaly par∣ticles are cast forth with the Vrine, and bran-like sediment pro∣ceeds from a flamy and consuming heat of a Fever, and a sore in the bladder or veins: a sediment that represents pulse pro∣ceeds from melting, as Actuarius teacheth, when a Fever comes to the flesh and melts it, but it is not thought credible by the late Physitians, that by the melting or flesh any thing so thick can be mixed with the Vrine; and moreover those sedi∣ments they account do proceed from a scabby, and exulcerated bladder, or from a crude and melancholy humor. Small Sand and Gravel proceed from thick and feculent mat∣ter which sometimes contains in it selfe a principle of coagula∣tion, and a light occasion being offered, Of sand and gravel. it concreates of its own accord. Clods of blood are discerned when either from an ulcer, Of Clods of blood. or otherwise from a hurt, broken or open vessel in a part through which the Veine passeth, blood is cast out. Quitture appears in the Vrine when an imposthume, Of quit∣ture in Urine. or ul∣cer lyeth hid in the Reins, Bladder, or otherwise through which the Vrine passeth; or when from the superiour parts, as the Brests, or Lungs, nature evacutates matter through the Vrinary passages. Small pustles of flesh called Caruncles in the Vrine of exul∣cerated Reins, are aprts of the substance. Of Carun∣cles. Of slimy Ecrements. Slimy, thick, and tough flegm like the snot of the nose, if it be made with the Urine, and be voided with pain, for the most part it is a token of the Stone in the Bladder, but that which is made without pain Fernelius saith doth proceed from a crude ulcer of the Reins, or parts thereabout, or from an imposthume; and truely for the most part, such matter being present in the bladder as it is the beginning, so it is a sign of the Stone of the Bladder; and moreover being sent out it coagulates into a lapidious hardness; but sometimes flegm which is cast forth in great plenty, is the off-spring of crude matter, and ill digestion in the parts beyond the Reins.
Worms if they appear in the Urine proceed from corrupt and sordid matter, Of worms. as in other parts. Small strings and little bodies like hairs, Of fibres and hairs. and cobwebs, if they are put forth with the Urine have their original from a thick humour, either in the veins, or in the reins, or dryed in the ureters, and reduced into this form by the longitude of the ves∣sel. Bubbles and froth are generated from wind included in vis∣cous matter, Of bubbles and froth. which when it cannot exhale extends the matter into a tumor, and those bubbles may be of divers colours ac∣cording to the nature of the humour in which the inclosed wind stirs them up. A Crown shews what kind of humors are contained in the greater vessels, Of a crown and according to the diversity of humors hath divers colours, and is seated in the upper part of the Urine, and in that circle many things are obvious to our eyes, which cannot be discerned in the rest of the humors, because the light in the superficies of the liquor is otherwise divided and received then in the middle. Lastly, Of fat. if fat swim upon the top of the Vrine it proceeds from melting of the grease, but this proceeds from heat, therefore if the fat continually swim in Urine like cobwebs, it shews con∣sumption and melting of the body; yet Fernelius writes that he would advise you of Oyl taken inwardly, least any small bo∣dies of Oyl swim in the Urine by that means. CHAP. X. Of the causes of changes in Vrines. BUt Urines vary also in those that are sound, Causes of changing of Vrines. in regard of temperaments, sex, age, time of the year, sleep, watching, exercises, passions of the mind, and such like, which are called the causes of variations of Urines. As for the temperaments, Vrine of those that are hot and cold. hot temperaments have higher co∣loured Urines, and thinner and less sediment, or in stead of a sediment a cloud, or Nubecula; but colder have Urines paler coloured, and few Contents also, unless raw juice, which pro∣ceeds from weaker concoction be mingled with the Urine. In respect of age, Of Boyes. Youths. Old men. Of middle age. Boyes have white Urines, thicker, with a plentiful sediment; youths thinner with few Contents, but higher coloured; old men have white Urines, but thin and without Contents, unless many excrements meet together, which if they are mingled with the Urines, it happens that the Urine is made thick, and full of Contents; those that are of a middle age have indifferet Urines,
In regard of the Sex, the Urines of men are far higher, Of men. or deeper coloured then the Urines of women, thinner, and have fewer Contents, but the Urines of women are paler, and by reason of crude humors, thicker with more plentiful sediment; yet nevertheless the Urines of men and women do not so vary, that they can be known by certain signs, whether it be a mans or womans water, Of women great. for reasons may be given also in men which produce such Urines, as otherwise are familiar to women; although as in such as are great with child there may be some change of Urine, when the Menstruous blood is retained in them, and from thence no small change is made in the body; yet that change doth not afford a certain sign whether a woman be great, when the same causes of change may be shewen in o∣ther women which are not great, but in some which are more lively, there is little change of Urine. As for the time of the year, Change of Vrine ac∣cording to the time of the year. the Urines of every kind in the middle of the spring are moderate, as also in the middle of au∣tumn, but by how much the more the year goes on towards Summer, by so much the more the colour of Vrine is encreased, and the thickness, and Contents are diminuished: in the Sum∣mer also the Vrines are higher coloured, thinner, and have less sediments; in autumn the colour of Vrines and tenuity are lessened: the Urines in the Winter come neerest the best state. In hot Regions, According to the Re∣gion, and degrees of Heaven. To exercise and rest. and under the hotter degrees of Heaven Urines are made deeper coloured; thinner, and of little sediment. In colder Climates they are neerer to the best state. Those which exercise and labour moderately make well con∣cocted Urines, and in colour, substance, and contents mode∣rate, but those that exercise and labour immoderately, in those first the colour is encreased, and the thickness and contents di∣minuished; but if the exercise continue long, the colour and tenuity is lessened, when the streng this weakned, but those that live idly make Vrines not much coloured, and moreover thick and with many sediments. In immoderate watchings, first the colour is encreased, According to sleeping and wak∣ing. but if they continue long 'tis abated: sleep if it be moderate cau∣seth Vrine to be good in all, but if it be immoderate, it encrea∣seth the colour of the Vrine, but abateth the contents and sub∣stance, but if it be protracted longer, it becomes crude. The passions of the mind, since some encrease the heat, Passions of the mind. some diminish it, according to the calidity and frigidity which they bring upon the body, they alter the Vrines.
Lastly, Meat, Drink, and Medicines. Meats, Drinks, and Medicines change the Vrine, and Meat taken moderately causeth a moderate sediment; more plen∣tifully, a more plentiful; thin causeth none; Meats, also Drinks and Medicines have a power of changing colour and smel lof V∣rines. CHAP. XI. VVhat is to be observed in the Inspection of Vrines. SInce all these things are spoken of Vrines for that end that from thence diseases & the causes of diseases maybe known, and the events foretold, that this may be rightly done, we are to admonish you what things are to be observed in the In∣spection of Vrine. First the time in making water is to be observed, those V∣rines which are made presently after eating and drinking, When V∣rine is to be received. sig∣nifie nothing certainly, especially if much drink be taken, since the decoction is not performed, Vrine is rather to be lookt up∣on after a perfect concoction, and about the morning. In Fevers regard is to be had of the fits, because in time of the Paroxism the morbifique matter is expelled another way. Secondly, it is to be weighed whether any meat, drink, or medicine, be taken which may change the Vrine. Thirdly, The whole Vrine to be taken. It should first settle. In what place should be kept. Inspection of troubled Vrines. the whole Urine made at once is to be be taken, not to be mingled with waters made at several times. Fourthly, judgment is not to be given of Urine before it hath setled, and the Contents enjoy their proper place. Fifthly, you must beware least the Urine by cold air, or winds especially in an open vessel, being exposed thereunto, should be changed, or corrupted, yet it may be changed no less by too much heat then by too much cold. Sixthly if the Urines are troubled they are to be setled by the heat of fire, or rather warm water, that they may return to their former state; yet it is convenient to look upon troubled Urines before they become clear again, since often times in troubled Vrines the substance of the Vrine is more manifest then in clear, and often times Vrines which be not troubled seem to be alike, when troubled they differ exceedingly; and in troubled Vrines oftentimes that matter of the Vrine shews it self, which scarce any one could believe had been contained in it when 'twas clear. Seventhly the Vrinal in Inspection ought to be quiet, and not to be stirred, only after Inspection it may be lawful to stir the contents. Eighthly, the Glass wherein the Vrine is to be viewed ought to be clear, perspicuous and void of all colour.
Ninthly, the Urine is to be cast neither in a place too shady nor too light, yet the colours in a small shade, so not too dark, may be discerned best, but the Contents in a lighter place. CHAP. XII. What may be discerned and foretold by a Vrine. ALL diseases and affects cannot be discerned by Vrine only, since there are diseases of many parts which alter not the Vrine, What can be known by Urine. but without dispute the Vrine may shew that disposition which is in the Liver and Vrines; since the Vrine is an Ex∣crement of the Veins, of the Reins also and passages through which the Vrine flows, and the diseases of the Bladder and Yard without controversie the Vrine may shew; for if any thing be contained in the ways through which the Vrine passeth contrary to nature; 'tis easily mingled with the Vrine: more∣over the diseases of those parts which send matter to the Veins, may be dscerned by the Vrine. Whence if any peculiar part be affected, and the Vrine changed also; if in the part affected there be also made any peculiar change, it is a token that such matter is transmitted from that part to the Reins and Bladder. On the contrary, also when the matter which is contained in the Veins is carried sometimes to other part s, and causeth vari∣ous Symptomes; the diseases of those parts may also be known by the Vrines, especially if other Symptomes agree with those of the Vrine. Lastly, when Fevers and venemous diseases may be joined with the diseases of many parts, although the Vrines then do not first indicate that very disease of the private part; yet 'tis not unprofitable then to consider the Vrines, and to ob∣serve the signs from thence of life and death. And thus what may be known, and foretold of every Vrine is manifest, from those things which are spoken of the causes of all the differences which happen unto Vrine.
Book. III. PART. I. SECT. IV. OF PULSES. CHAP. I. What a Pulse is. A Pulse which the Greeks call Sphugmos and Sphuxis, A Pulse what. is a motion of the Heart and Arteries proceeding from the vital faculty, consisting of dilatation and contraction, and is appointed for the preservation of the Harmony of the native heat. Instru∣ments of a Pulse. Instruments of the Pulse are the Heart and Arteries, and the Heart is the Fountain, Chimny, and E∣laboratory of heat and vital Spirits; but the Arteires are the Channels through which this vivifying heat is derived from the heart, as from a Fountain, and disperst through the whole body, which work that they may rightly perform, power is given to them by nature whereby they can dilate and contract them selves by perpetual motion, Efficient cause. by which means Arteries Blood with the vital Spirits, is diffused through the whole body, the va∣pors are expelled, and cold air is drawn in; neither is the mo∣tion of the Heart and Arteries made only by the fervent heat of the Blood and Spirits; nor is this motion to be accounted ac∣cidental, Vital fa∣culty. and, as it were, violent, but the heart by a peculiar faculty which it hath in its self, which they call Vital and Pul∣sisique is moved; neither are the Heart and Arteries dilated, because they are filled, but they are filled because dilated. Nei∣ther is this faculty denied to the Arteries, although in its own manner, it depends on the heart, The vse of the Heart and Arteries, The use of the motion of the heart and arte∣ries. and the end of their mo∣tion is the preservation of the native heat, the generation of vital spirits, and the distribution of them through the whole bo∣by; but the native heat is preserved (as being hotter) whilest 'tis cooled and fanned, and the matter fit for the generating of spirits is drawn, but the fuligenous vapors are expelled. The motion of the Heart and Pulse performs these duties by that double motion, out of the which as of parts it is composed, namely by Sistole and Dyastole, or dilatation and contraction.
But because these two motions are opposite, and a thing cannot be moved against its opposite unless first it be quiet. It is ne∣cessary that these two motions admit of two cessations between; the one is that which follows the Systole, the other the Dyastole. And indeed attraction is made by dilatation; for the cooling and fanning of the heat, and the generation of spirits. But con∣traction is made for expulsion; for the heart when it is dilated attracts blood, the matter of vital spirits and arterious blood, and air from the Lungs through the arterious veins; But the Arteries draw some of the thinner blood from the Veins, especi∣ally they draw aire through their small orifices, opening to the Pores of the Skin: by contraction the Heart expels fuliginous vapors, and together emits arterious Blood and Spirits into the Arteries, but the Arteries expel fuligenous excrements, and to∣gether communicate some Spirits and arterial blood to all the parts. CHAP. 2. Of the simple differences of Pulses. THe differences of Pulses are either absolute, or relative; The diffe∣rences of Pulses. Absolute. Respective. absolute differences are when a Pulse hath any difference absolute, and in its own nature, when we consider it with∣out comparing it with any other. Respective are those which a∣rise from comparing of the Pulses amongst themselves. Absolute again are twofold, simple and compound. But seeing to the Pulse, as also to every local motion, Simple. five things are required. 1. The thing moving. 2. The space through which the motion is made. 3. Time. 4. The rest between the two opposite motions. 5. The instrument: according to these also the simple differences of Pulses are constituted, and every simple dif∣ference regards one of these, and so there are ten simple Pulses, a great and smal in respect of space, swift and slow in respect of time, thick and thin in respect of rest between, vehement and weak in respect of moving, hard and soft in respect of the instru∣ment. And if amongst the opposit motions we account a medio∣crity, or moderate in every kind, there will arise 15. simple Pulses And if there may be added to these other differences, either they are not comprehensible by the touch, or they are unprofitable. A great Pulse is that which exceeds the space, A great and a small Pulse. which by na∣ture is granted for the motion of the Artery. A little Pulse is that which doth not wholly keep that space. A moderate Pulse is that which doth observe its definite space for its motion; but where∣as in space, longitude, latitude, profunditude may be consider∣ed, some divide a great and small Pulse into other differences, to
wit, long and short, high and deep, narrow and broad, to which if a moderate Pulse be added, then there will be made five kinds, all which kinds if they are joined together, amongst themselves make twenty seven differences, which comprehend eighty one Pulses; of which Galen in the first of the differences of Pulses, Cap. 5. A swift Pulse is when an Artery runs through his space in a short time, A swift and slow. a slow when in a long time moderate, when in an indifferent time. A thick, Frequent and thin. or frequent Pulse is performed, little rest interpo∣sing between. A thin when long; an indifferent is performed in the middle of those extreams; but that a frequent and thin Pulse may be rightly perceived, The Pulses are to be divided into the stroak, and the intervall; the stroak is the motion of the Artery resisting the touch; but the interval is the time in∣terposed betwixt two stroaks, whereby the Artery is contracted and dilated, which by how much the shorter or longer it is by so much the Pulse is said to be more frequent or thin. A vehement pulse is that which strikes the hand of him that feels it, Vehement weak. and resists it: and as it were reverberates. Weak is that which gently strikes the hand. Moderate is the middle betwixt these two. A hard Pulse is when the Artery is hard, Hard. Soft. and resisteth the touch. A soft is when the Artery is soft and fainty, and gives way to the touch. CHAP. III. Of the compound differences of Pulses. OUt of these differences of simple Pulses, compound differen∣ces are easily to be found, which although they are very ma∣ny, yet these are the chief. Great. Swift. Frequent. Vehement. Soft. Great. Swift. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Great. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Swift. Frequent. Vehement. Hard. Moderate. Swift. Thin. Weak. Soft. Moderate. Moderate. Frequent. Vehement. Soft. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Vehement. Hard. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Weak. Soft. Moderate. Moderate. Thin. Weak. Soft. Moderate. Slow. Thin. Weak. Soft. Little. Swift. Frequent. Vehement. Hard. Little. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Little. Slow. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Little. Slow. Thin. Weak. Hard.
CHAP. IV. Of an equall and unequall Pulse. REspectively or Relatively, Respective differences of pulses, e∣quality and inequali∣ty. for either respect is had to the equality and inequality, or to order, or to proportion or number; equal∣lity and inequality of the Pulse is nothing else but a con∣gruity or difference of one thing in pulses when compared with another. Equality and inequality is either simply and absolutely such; or Secundum quid, How ma∣nifold e∣quall. Absolutely equall. Absolutely unequall. and which is at least in a certaine kinde such. Absolutely and simply, a Pulse is said to be equall which neither changed in magnitude nor in swiftness, nor in fre∣quency nor in vehemency, nor in swiftness, and if equali∣ty be observed in neither of these, it is called a Pulse abso∣lutely and simply unequall; but if a Pulse keeps not equal∣lity in all these, neither is made unequall in all these; it is said according to something, and in some respect to be un∣equall, the denomination is to be taken from that wherein it observes not equality. Moreover these unequalities againe are divided into sy∣stematicall or collective, Systemati∣que ine∣quality. An une∣quall pulse equally. unequall. which is observed in more stroaks, and singular, which is in one stroake; collective, againe is double, unequality equally, and unequality un∣equally; unequall Pulses are equally when the first is so to the second, as the second is to the third, the third to the fourth, and so forward, unequall; unequall unequally are those which are not alike in their change, neither is the first so to the second as the second is to the third. We call an unequal Pulse equally Myouron, Myoures. from the simi∣litude of the tayle of a Mouse, which as the taile of a Mouse from some thickness by little and little and equally tends to sharpness, so these Pulses in magnitude are lessened by de∣grees and equally, and the following stroake is alwayes less then the former, which some call maimed Pulses. These againe are either deficient Myourn which perpetu∣ally are lessoned till at length they plainly cease to strike a∣ny more; or such as at length cease to be lesned, Deficient Myouroi. and do not plainly give off and rest; and both of them againe are vari∣ous, for some keepe that pravity to which they are come
others do not persevere therein; but returne againe to mag∣nitude, Maimed reciprocall. which the Greekes call maimed Pulses running a∣gain, reciprocall shortned, or running Pulses, and these again either return to their former magnitude, or to lesser, or to a greater. Unequally, unequall Pulses also are various according to all the simple differences of Pulses, but the chief, and those which the Ancients gave names unto, are the intermittent, deficient, the intercedent, or intercurrent. The name of intermittent is attributed to that in∣equality which is in pravity and rarity, Intermit∣ting. or only rarity, namely when the arterie is so hindered in cessation, that one pulsation seems to have two or three, between two which seeme to be deficient, and after one or more stroakes, Intercur∣rent. the intermittent begins to beat againe. Intercurrent, or such as go between, are opposite to inter∣mittent, and amongst them after certain stroakes, one or more stroakes intervene, which causeth inequality of fre∣quency. A deficient Pulse is when an artery after it hath made un∣equall stroakes, Deficient. plainly seemes to be defective in motion and to cease; which if it returne to its former motion, it is called a reciprocall deficiency, Reciprocall defictent. and this is the difference between an intermitting and deficient Pulse, that a deficient reci∣procall after a long space between, whereby the man seemes to be destitute of a Pulse, returnes, but an intermit∣ting at the highest returns after intermission of five Pulses. A singular inequality is either in one part of an artery, A singular nequallity. or under one finger, or more, or all; inequality under one finger is, when in dilatation and contraction a certaine diversity in celerity is observed, so that one part of one motion is swif∣ter, another part is found slower, and this inequallity Authors divide into three parts, namely an intermitting Pulse, an uneven Pulse, and a hasty Pulse, or striking double. Intermitting in one Pulse is when the dilatation of the artery before it can come to its terme and externall rest, Intermit∣ting in one Pulse. is interrupted in the middle of its motion, and is refreshed in its rest, yet so that it cannot remaine in rest but performes motion, and comes to its accustomed terme and Externall rest.
Of this kind some Authors make many differences, Caprisons. a∣mongst which the cheife is an uneven Pulse, when in the Diostile as it were in the middle of its rest tis interrupted, yet so that after rest the faculty ariseth higher and perfects motion, whence in an uneven Pulse in one dilatation there is as were a double stroke, and indeed the latter swister then the former. Ʋneven. An even hasty Pulse is when the motion is continuall and interrupted by no rest, stirred up. but the part of the distending one is slower, another swifter, as if the motion of distention begins slowly and afterwards ends swiftly, or the contrary. Dicrotus. Dicrotus or a double striking Pulse is when the Artery be∣gins to be moved, but before it perfects its motion it goes back and a small contraction being made it riseth againe to perfect its motion, and strikes the second time, so that a double Pulsation seemes to be made, which neverthelesse consists of one distention or dilatation. In equality in one Pulse, but under more parts of the Ar∣tery happens, when in one dilatation the Pulse strikes two, three, or foure fingers, but those unequally, so that in one finger the Pulse is otherwise perceived then in another, and that in a twofold manner, for either the motion is interrup∣ted, so that some fingers perceive motion, others not, or it is a continued motion, when the Artery is otherwise moved un∣der other fingers; Myourus on Pulse. and indeed those which are made unequall in magnitude in one Pulse are called Myourus, namely when the Pulse under the fore finger is greater, lesse under the second, lesse then that under the third, but if the Pulse under the middle fingers be greater, under both extreame fingers lesse, they are called prominent Pulses or Myouroy, changing about unto every part. Out of these simple differences of inequality other com∣pound do arise, Prominent. for either a Systematicall inequality is com∣plicat with a simple, or a Systematicall with a Systematicall, or a singular with a singular; out of which compound differ∣ences the cheife are first, a rugged or uneven, second full of surges, third when it bears as if a worme did creep under ones finger, foure that feeles as if it were a Pismire, five a serrate Pulse, six a hectick, seaven a trembling. In an uneven Pulse whereof we have spoken before in e∣quality is twofold in swiftnesse and violence, Caprisons. for one part of the motion is swifter the other, more vehement then the for∣mer.
In a Pulse full of waves there are two inequalities, A surging pulse. in magnitude and frequeney, namely when the Artery is moved, the motion not interrupted, but unequall, so that magnitude may appeare first under the fore finger, afterunder the second, then under the third, hence under the fourth; according to the manner of the waves. The Pulses like the moving of a Worme or Pismire, Virmicall. differ from a surging Pulse only in magnitude, for there is the same inequality in that Vermicular as in the waving, but the Ar∣tery is lesse and slower lifted up, and it renders the Artery as it were into the forme of a creeping worme. This Vermicular Pulse being lesse and slower, Formicant. but very fre∣quent is a Formicant motion, so called from the creeping of a Pismire, which indeed makes quick steps, but goes lesse way in longer time. A Serrat Pulse is when one part of the Artery is more lif∣ted up and strikes the fingers more, A serrate. the other is lesse lifted up, and strikes the fingers lesse. A Hectick Pulse is so called from the similitude of a Hectick-Feaver, A hectick it alwayes persists in the same in equality what ever the inequality be. Lastly a trembling or fainting Pulse hath inequality in many Pulses, A trem∣bling. in magnitude, frequency, and vehemency, in the same manner, as you may observe in the panting of the heart, CHAP V. Of the order and Harmony amongst Pulses. THe second difference of relative Pulses is constituted in respect of order, nordi∣nate pulse. and it agrees at least to unequall Pulses, for equall Pulses are alwayes ordinate, but that is an ordi∣nate Pulse, which although it be unequall, yet it keeps some order in striking, but an Inordinate is that, which is unequall and keeps no order in striking; Inordinate. as if it should happen that an Artery should make foure equall Pulses, and the fift dif∣fers from equality; and againe an Artery makes foure equall Pulses, but the sift differs againe from equality, it is called an Ordinate Pulse, but if the first and second be equall, but the third lesse, the fourth fifth and sixth againe equall, the seaventh unequall, it is an Inordinate Pulse.
Inordinate Pulses againe either are absolutely so or not, absolute inordinate are, if whilst more circuits are conside∣red, those that follow no way answer to the first; not absolute Inordinate are, if the latter circuits, although amongst them∣selves they are not alike, answer to the first. The last differences of relative Pulses is constituted in re∣spect of proportion or harmony now concord is nothing else but a proportion of the time of dilatation to the time of con∣traction. Harmony is either equall or unequall; Rythmus. in pulses. equall ac∣cording to the opinion of Ancient Physitiansis when the time of contraction is equall to the time of distention; unequall is when the time of Diastole is greater or lesse then the time of Sistole, and a Pulse according to the opinion of the Anci∣ents is harmonious, which observes a proper meeter, Good or∣der. no order. to the age, temperament, and sex: Incongruous is that which dif∣fers from the proper Harmony of age, temperament and sex; but since a dilatation can scarcely be fully known, Galen doth not constitute a Harmony by comparing of the time of contraction with the time of dilatation, but rather by com∣paring of the quality of motion, as of swiftnessc and slow∣nesse, so that to him a meeter or Harmony is nothing else but proportion of dilations amongst themselves, and a congruous Pulse is that, wherein the Sistole and Diastole are equally swift; but an irregular is that, wherein the celerity of dilata∣tion and contraction is unequall, the inequality of which irregularities or discords may againe be divided into nine differences, according to the variety of dilatation and con∣traction in celerity and tardity. CHAP VI. Of certaine things necessarily requisite to dis∣tinguish Pulses by. BUt that a Pulse may be rightly perceived certaine things are required in the Physitian, certaine in the sich; Those things that are requi∣site in a Physiian that he may know pul∣ses. in the Physitian first there is required that he have an exquisite sence of feeling, and a soft hand, especially in the Pulse of the outmost joynt of the fingers, not very hot, nor too cold, but temperate; secondly that presently after his commig in he may not touch the Artery, least perhaps the sick being troubled by the comming of the Physitian, the Pulse be changed, but let him wait a little while, untill he understands
that the sick is quiet, thirdly let him touch the Artery of the wrist of either Arme. For the fingers rightly are to be applyed to the Artery, namely the first foure or three fingers, are to be put to the Ar∣tery that the more differences of Pulses may be apprehended; moreover since there is a threefold application of the hand to the Artery, compression, when the fingers do as it were presse the Artery, softly when the hand is gently applyed to the Artery, the medium when in an indifferent manner or with some small pressure it is put to the Artery; pressing is most convenient for the knowledge of contraction, if it may be, and for vehement pulses, but in languishing pulses it takes away the greatest part of the Pulseby handling fearfully and softly, the vehement Pulses are not enough perceived; thirdly the medium is betwixt these two, and neither lightnesse of feeling is observed in vehement, nor compression in languish∣ing. In the sick is required first what time the Physitian touch the Pulse, In the sick that he be free from all passions and preturbations of the mind, lest those mutations, which happen through the passion of the mind to the Pulses should hinder the Physiti∣an. Also neither is the Pulse to be tryed presently after mo∣tion of the body; lastly the hand of the sick ought to be placed right and free from all voluntary motion, and the sick may not bend his fingers much or distend them, but keep them in their middle and naturall forme, and the sick also may not lift up his hand with his strength, least he trem∣ble and causeth the Pulse to vary. CHAP. VII How to know the differences of simple Pulses. FOrasmuch as what belongs to the knowledge of Pulses, The know∣ledge of a great and small Pulse. if we observe the Artery to be dilated and extended more then naturally it ought, and by reason of its great extending doth as it were resist the fingers or make them pit in, we account it a great Pulse, but if they resist but a little we ac∣count it but a small Pulse. If it be considered that the Artery is moved by violence from terme to terme, Of a swift and flow. nimbler and swifter then in a tempe∣rate or sound man, that is called a swift pulse, but if the space
is compleated by the Artery by a slower stroake, tis called a slow Pulse. If the intervall between each stroake be longer then in a temperate or sound man, that is a thin Pulse, if shorter, Of a fre∣quent thin. a fre∣quent Pulse. If the Pulse strive against, Of a vehe∣ment and weak. and as it were opposes it selfe to the application of the hand that presses it, tis a vehement Pulse, and if not, tis a weake Pulse. A hard Pulse, if the Artery be gently touched, Of a hard and soft. doth not resist the finger, as a vehement one; but if it be pressed harder, it doth not so strongly resist as a vehement Pulse, hardnesse also is never joyned with magnitude, nor vehemency with smallnesse. CHAP. VIII. How to know the Respective differences of Pulses. WHen we know the simple differences of Pulses, by that means we may know the compound, therefore the Physitian should first of all diligently exercise himselfe about the knowledge of simple differences: it is very difficult and almost impossible to find out the inequality of Pulses in one Pulsation and under one finger, but yet if it may be known, it is known onely in the greatest and most vehe∣ment Pulses, which resist compression; afterwards slack∣ing, and sometimes the middle betwixt both is to be used, sometimes one, sometimes two, now three, then foure fingers are to be applyed, so that if happily that inequality be not perceived under one or more fingers, yet it may be found under some or other. But if the inequality of one stroke be to be tryed under severall fingers, you ought to apply foure fingers to the Arteries, To know the order and preturbation of order, Order how it may be known. tis neces∣sary dayly to apply the hand; but if in a long Series of Pulses there be some diversity observed but keeping order it, is called an orderly Pulse; but if no order be observed amongst divers Pulses, it is an Inordinate Pulse. The knowledge of Harmony, Rhythmus. since the whole depends upon the knowledge of contraction and dilatation, and the comparing of these motions amongst themselves:
but to know the Systole in all pulses, if it be not impossible, yet it is very difficult; hence it appeares that the know∣ledge of meeter is not easie; and for the knowledge thereof nothing is more necessary then those things which are re∣quired of, or the knowledge of swift pulses. CHAP. IX. Of the causes of Pulses in generall. THe causes of pulses are divided by Physitians, Causes of pulses of generation. into cau∣ses of generation, or immediate and proximate; and causes of mutation or remote; or into primary or secundary; those they call primary which make the pulse, and which being put there is a pulse, and being taken away there is none; Of commu∣tation. those which do not make a pulse but alter and change it are three, the faculty, or use or end; these are many, whereof some belong tonaturall things, as tempera∣ments, sex, age, habite of body; others to things not natu∣rall, as aire, meate and drinke, exercise, rest, sleeping, weaking, excretions, retentions, passions of the minde; others to preter-naturall namely, diseases, causes of diseases, and symptomes. The causes of pulses containing, each of them have two differences, Proper and unsepera∣rable pul∣ses. for the faculty is either strong or weake, the use is increased or diminished, the instruments are soft or hard, hence some pulses do perpetually arise of one cause onely, which Gallen calls the necessary consequent, others call proper, and unseparable; and such like pulses only follow the faculty and iustruments, but not the use, and of necessitie a strong pulse necessary followes a strong faculty, a weake pulse, a weak faculty; hard arteries, make a hard pulse, soft arteries make a soft pulse, some although they are made more from one cause containing then another, yet they do not arise from that only, Familiar. but tis necessary that others concur also, which they call familiar; the familiar pulses of a strong facultie, are great, swift, thin, weake small, slow, frequent; the use increased, great, swift, frequent; diminished, little, slow, thin; a soft arte∣ry, great, swift, thin; hard artery, little, slow, thick. Compound causes make compound differences, and some∣times
two, sometimes three causes, are complicate; first, The sacul∣ty with the use chan∣ged; what pulses it makes. a strong faculty, and the use increased; the instruments obtaining a naturall constitution make pulses, great, swift, frequent, and moreover vrhement, a strong faculty and the use lessened brings forth pulses, moderate in mag∣nitude, slower, thinness, yet vohement; from an infirme faculty and the use moderately increased comes a pulse moderate in magnitude and celerity, frequent, languishing; but if the force be very weake, the pulse is little, slow, very frequent, weake; from a faculty weakned and use dimi∣shed ariseth small pulses, flow, thick, fainty; and if there be very great debility, the very least intermittent and defi∣rent pulses arise. Secondly, if the use and instrument be joyned together, The use changed and instru∣ment. the use increased with a soft instrument, makes great pulses, swift, moderate in frequency; or if there shall be great excess, frequent, and soft; the use increased, and in∣struments hard, bring forth lesser pulses, swifter, more fre∣quent; if hardness abound; but if use, greater; if indiffe∣rent, there is excess of them both; if moderate in magni∣tude, they are swift, frequent; the use diminished with a soft instrument, causeth moderate pulses, in magnitude, slow, thin, soft; the use diminished with a hard instru∣ment renders the pulses less, slow, hard: and the instru∣ment exceeding in hardness inclines the pulse to smalness, rather then to slowness, contrariwise it happens when re∣frigeration exceeds. Thirdly, if the faculty and instrument be complicate, Faculty and influ∣ment. and the faculty be strong, the instrument soft, the pulses are manifestly made greater, somewhat duller, thinner, and softer; a strong faculty, and hatd instruments bring forth small pulses, frequent, and for the most part swif∣ter, namely if hardness abound, but in an equall recess of them both, the pulses are moderate in all, yet harder; a weake faculty with soft instruments makes for the most part pulses in magnitude, and swiftness moderate and soft, but in an immoderate recess, they shall be little, slow, frequent. And if the faculty be very infirme, the pulses be come small, dull, and frequent; Lastly, if the faculty be infirme with the instrument hard, pulses that are little, slow, thicke, and hard do arise.
But sometimes all these three are complicate, Faculties, instruments and use. and indeed, first the faculty strong, the use increased, the instruments soft make great Pulses; swift, moderate, in frequency, ve∣hement, soft. Secondly, if these should be complicate, a strong fa∣culty, the use increased, and the instruments hard; and that hardness be little, but the use very much increased, the pulses are made greater then is fit, swifter, and more frequent; but if the hardness be not great nor the use much increa∣sed, the pulses are moderate in magnitude, and become more swift and frequent. Thirdly, if the faculty be more strong, the use diminished and the instrument soft, the pulses are moderate in magni∣tude, slower, thinner, vehement and soft, and if the use be much diminished, are plainly less, slow and thin. Fourthly, If the faculty be strong, the use diminished, and instruments hard, the pulses are lesser, In celerity and frequency moderate, or also if the use be great, and that there be a recess of the instrument from mediocrity, the pulses are slower and thinner, but the hardness of the instrument abounding, there is a great recess of the use from Nature, and the pulses are small, slow, and more frequent. Fifthly, If the faculty be weake, the use increased, and in∣struments soft, the pulses are become moderate in magni∣tude and celerity, yet more frequent, but if the power be ex∣ceedingly weakned, it makes a small pulse, slow and most frequent. Sixthly, If the faculty be weake, the use increased, and the instruments hard, the pulses are made little, slow, and frequent. Seventhly, If the faculty be weake, the use diminished, and the instrument soft, the pulses are lesser, moderate in frequency, or rather thin. Lastly, if the faculty be weake, the use diminished, and the instruments hard, pulses are made small, slow, frequent, but yet not alwayes of the same smallness, slowness and fre∣quency, but according to the excess of the causes are, lesser, slower, or more frequent. But here it is to be noted, first, that the force and power of causes are more to be valued then nuthe mber, fince one more potent cause can do more in changing pulses then many weaker; secondly, the hardness of the Artery alwayes
doth resist the magnitude of the pulse, but not the celerity and frequency; thirdly, there is no more efficacious cause of small pnlses then weakness of strength and vertue. CHAP. X. Of the causes of the simple differences of Pulses. ALthough it may be easily collected from these things what the causes are of every pulse, Concomi∣tant causes of pulses. yet because cer∣taine familiar causes concurre, which may afford some be∣nefit to the generation of pulses, namely grosness of body, leanness, an empty place about the artery, weight of the bo∣dy lying next above the artery, and propriety of formation of parts, let us joyne those to the rest, and let us here adde some to these. The causes of a great pulse containing, are strong force, The causes of a great pulse, of a little. Of a high. the use increased, the artery soft; a little pulse is made espe∣cially by the weakness of power, as also diminution of use as also diminution of use and hardness of the artery. The causes of a high pulse are, strong force, the use increa∣sed, and when an indifferent grosness of body happens, and the place is straight and narrow about the artery; Of a low. a low pulse proceeds from a languishing faculty, to which happens groseness of body, as being the concomitant cause; somtimes also, the arterie is buried deeper by the naturall framing of the body, whence the pulse is lower. A broad Pulse is made from a power not altogether so weake, Of a broad. Accidents as being complicate causes are joyned therewith, the place wide, and the bodyes next over it are heavy; Of a thin. the cause of a thin pulse is a weake faculty and a hard artery, the concomitant causes are leanness of body, and thinness and driness of the skin. The cause of a swift pulse is the use increased, Of a swist. the vertue indifferently strong, and the instrument soft; the cause of a slow pulse is weake power, or the use diminished, Of a slow. or the joyning of both these together. The cause of a frequent pulse is the use increased with de∣bility of vertue, or hardness of the arterie; Of a fre∣quent. Thin. of a thin pulse, strength of vertue with use diminished, is the cause.
Of a vehement pulse, Of a vehe∣ment, weak. strength of vertue is the cause, of a weake pulse languishing strength, proceeding from what cause soever. A soft pulse proceeds from the softnesse of the Artery, Soft, hard. a hard from the hardnesse of the same, from what cause soever it come. CHAP, XI. Of the causes of the respective differences of Pulses. NOw followes what belongs to the respective differences of pulses, The causes of inequal∣lity of pulses. Of a sin∣gular ine∣quality and of an intermit∣ting pulse. and first for inequality, the cause thereof is a weake faculty, and an Artery either obtruded, or pressed or too hard, or too soft. The reason of an intermitting pulse is because the use re∣quires dilatation, and the faculty is ready and prepared that it may satisfie the use, but either tis loaden with plenty of humours, or it is hindred by obstructions or compressure of in∣struments; the same causes of inequality in motion, of swiftnesse and slownesse are rendred, but they are lighter. The cause of Dicrotus or double striking pulse is an une∣quall distemper of the heart and Arteries, Of a Dicro∣tus. or the facul∣ty varied by reason of an unequall distemper which stri∣ving by a contrary cause in the middle of its Journy, is compelled as it were to begin a contrary mo∣tion. Unequall pulses under many fingers do proceed either from weaknesse of the faculty, or plenty of humours, or soft∣nesse of Arteries. Declining pulses which are called Myouroi, Of Myou∣rey. proceed from weaknesse of the faculty, whose action by how much the more remore it is from the heart, by so much it is the weaker, or from the placing of the artery, part whereof is more remote from the heart, and is placed more in the out∣side. The cause of a congregation of many in equalities together are weaknesse of the faculty whither is oppressed, A Sistema∣ticall ine∣quality. or dis∣tracted, or irritated, and the fault of the instrument, when the artery is either compressed or obstructed, or filled; pulses are made unequallyunequall, from the faculty not weake by its
selfe, but rather burthened, and oppressed, Myourei Reciproci. Of a defi∣cient. and moreover from the ill disposition of the artery, and tis either pressed by some body that lyeth on it, or some humour, or tumour, but une∣qual equally are made by an infirme faculty; and indeed reci∣procall Myouroi do proceed from a faculty not so weake as those which are deficient. Intermitting and intercurrent pulses proceed from the same weakness of the faculty, Of the in∣termittent intercur∣rent. and the instruments compressed and obstructed, yet the faculty; labours more in an in∣termitting, then an intercurrent, and in it doth almost lye still. Concerning the causes of unequall compound pulses, Caprizan∣tes. the cause of an uneven pulses is when the faculty, otherwise strong enough, but now is oppressed by too great plenty of humours, or is hindered by obstruction. The causes of surging pulses are weaknesse of the faculty or plenty of humours, or exceeding softnesse of instruments, Like waves. and the faculty is so burthened, and oppressed with its load that it staggers and becomes unconstant. From the same causes proceeds a vermicular pulse, Vermicu∣lar, formi∣cant. only that in a vermicular the faculty is not oppressed, but is weak of its selfe but in a formicant, tis very faint, and the use striving, and softnesse of the instrument being joyned therewith. The causes of a serrine or serrate pulse is a strong faculty and the use increased, Serrate. together with hardnesse of the arte∣rie; and this pulse is familiar in inflamations of the inter∣nall membrances. Trembling. A trembling pulse is made, whilst either the pulse is not perceived by reason of the trembling of the part, or it goeth out trembling, or when the heart trembles, and communicates that affect to the artery. The cause of a hectick pulse is somewhat that is fixed and stable, and sticks to the solid parts, also weaknesse of strength. Hectick. Rhythmo∣rum. The harmony is not changed, unlesse the magnitude and celerity of the dilatation and contraction, be altered, but these are not changed except the use be changed, so all the causes of Harmony depend upon the use, for if the Diastole be swifter then the systole, there is a great heate present then, and a great necessity of refrigeration or expulsion of fuligi∣nous excrements, but if the systole be swifter and greater then the Diastole, there is more necessity of protrusion of fuligi∣nous vapours then of cooling.
CHAP. XIII Of the causes of varying of Pulses. ANd in like manner divers differences of Pulses pro∣ceed from causes containing, Of the Tempe∣rants of a Pulse. which are secundary causes, and first naturall things, those which are hot by nature have a hotter Pulse, and that comes from the use increased; those which are cold, the contrary; the Pulses of such as are dry and leane are greater and thinner by much, and some∣what more vehement, but in grosser bodyes when the Arte∣ry is covered with much flesh, and cannot be freely dis∣tended, the Pulse is made somewhat smaller and more fre∣quent. Men have a greater Pulse for the most part then women, Sex. a little duller, and thinner; women on the contrary have lesse Pulses, swifter and more frequent, but if a woman be hotter then a man, she will have a greater and more vehe∣ment Pulse. The Pulses of boyes are great, Of age. very swift, frequent, in ve∣hemency moderate; of youth they are very great, and vehe∣ment, in celerity and frequency moderate; Pulses of old men are the least, slowest, thinest, and weakest. As for the times of the yeare, Time of the yeare. in the Spring Pulses are greater, more vehement in celerity and frequency, mode∣rate; in the Summer they are fainter, small, swift, frequent; in Autumne weake, in magnitude unequall in celerity and frequency; in Winter, small and moderate, slow, thin, and weake. Meate and drink immoderatly taken cause great, Meat and drink how to change the pulse. swift, frequent, too vehement, unequall, and Inordinate Pulses; moderate lesser and weaker, and in the beginnings swifter and more frequent, afterwards slow and thin, the use of wine especially makes great Pulses, swift, frequent, and vehement, and mutations which proceed from wines suddenly comes, and suddenly goes. Naturall rest in the beginning make the pulses lesser, Sleep. weaker, slower, and thinner, afterwards greater, and more vehement, and the slownesse and thinnesse, by little and little is increased; moreover if the sleep be too long, they re∣turne againe to pravity and debility, and retaine their sloath and thinnesse; when a man is stirred, up or awakned, the
Pulses begin to be greater, more vehement, swifter, more fre∣quent; equally indeed if a man be awakned by degrees, but unequally and troubled if he be suddenly awakned, yet a little afterwards the pulse againe becomes moderate: long watchings cause little and weake pulses, yet swift, and fre∣quent, at length the faculty being weakned, they become dull and thin. Exercise and motion moderate, cause great pulses, Exercise. vche∣ment, swift, frequent, but overmuch exercise cause little, faint, swift, frequent, when the use may be increased, and the faculty debilitated, at length they are little, slow and thin. Moderate use of baths make great pulses, swift, frequent, Baths. and vehement, but if they exceed measure, little, faint, swift∣er, and more frequent. Passions of the mind. As for the passions of the mind, anger causeth great pulses, swift, frequent, vehement; joy makes great pulses, thin, and slow, moderately vehement, but if it be overmuch it renders them unequall and inordinate; In sadnesse they are little, languishing, slow, thin; feare soone makes the swift, pulse vehement, Inordinate, unequall, but they are of as long con∣tinuance as those are in sadnesse. Immoderate evacuations, Evacua∣tions. because they debilltate the fa∣culty bring forth pulses like to those caused by a weake faculty. But as for those things which happen contrary to nature, Preterna∣turall things how they alter the pulse. although they are various, yet they change the pulse, because either they change the use, or affect the instruments, or faculty; in the first place when the faculty is affected, many changes are made of the pulses, for whether the faculty be diffolved, and weakned by those things which dissolve the Spirits and sollid parts, such as are soule diseases, great dis∣tempers, vehement and diurnall greifs, fastings, too great Evacuations, or whether they are burthened, or oppressed by plenty of humours, or by diseases of instruments, inflamations, or other tumours, the pulses are made lesse in the first place, and swift, frequent, feeble, afterwards the least, most slow, most frequent, most faint, and at length the faculty being almost prostrated, intermittent, deficient, declining, vermi∣culant, formicant, all which running through the various kind of affects contrary to nature, and principally out of the doctrine of feavers are made more manifest.
CHAP. XIII. What the simple differences of Pulses signifie and presage. ALthough from the causes of pulses, Great pulses what they signify. it easily appeares what every pulse signifies, and portends: yet that we may add something of each in particular, a great pulse although principally its familiar use be in increasing, a strong faculty, and a soft instrument; in those which are sick it signifies a hot disease, and a great pulse, unlesse it be hindered, followes all feavers, and it cannot be much dilated with the Artery, unlesse the power be strong, or at least not weake; a great pulse in all feavers is good signe. A small pulse argues either debility of the faculty, or remis∣nesse of the use, or hardnesse of the instruments; and indeed if a small pulse shall be also faint tis a token that its weakness proceeds from a weake faculty, if small and hard, from the Artery; if neither debility; nor hardnesse be perceived in the pulse; it is an argument that it comes from the diminution of the use: whence little pulses with a weake faculty foretell death; the rest of pulses that are small for the most part presage long and difficult diseases. A swift pulse signifies that the use is increased and the vigour stronge, A swift. or certainly not very weake, whence in those that are sound, a swife pulse signifies heate, stirred up by motion, exercises, baths and such like causes, which if it be also great, the strength is not yet debilitated, but in those which are sick, a swift pulse signi∣fies a hot disease, and is proper to those which are fea∣verish, and if magnitude be joyned therewith itshewes that the use is increased, with strength of nature, but if frequen∣cy be adjoyned without magnitude, it shews that the pow∣ers are weakned; if hardnesse of the instrument, the use being increased, hinders dilatation, that hardnesse is to be percei∣ved by the touch. A slow pulse shews, Slow. the contrary, to wit, little heate and the use diminished, and then it is onely thin, and the vigour not firme enough, and withall it is feeble.
A frequent pulse signifies the use to be increased, Frequent. or the faculty weakned, or the instrument hard; if it proceed only from the use increased, it is not faint, nor hard, and magni∣tude, frequently goes before, and then extraordinary great heat is discovered in those that are sick; if it proceed from debility, or hardness of the artery, that is discerned by the pulse. Thin pulses are made, either through a strong faculty, Thin. and a soft instrument, or from the use diminished; in sound bo∣dies it signifies a cold constitution, but in sidk a cold dis∣ease, and coldness of the heart, and that which is contained therein, and therefore 'tis accounted an ill signe. A strong and vehement pulse, shews a strong faculty, Vehement. and if its vehemency exceed the bounds of nature, it signifies also great irritation. A faint pulse on the contrary, Faint. signifies powers to be de∣jected, and that either by dissipation of spirits and resoluti∣on, and then it is also smal, and if use hinder not, slow, or by oppression, occasioned by plenty of humours, and then the pulse also is inordinate, and unequal. A soft pulse shews softness of the arterie, Soft. and moreover in a sound body, signifies immoderate drinking, or dyet over moistning, or a bath, or idleness, but in a sick a moist habit of the body. On the contrary hard pulses, Hard. shew the hardness of the ar∣terie, and indeed either by extending in convulsions, Tu∣mours, or by repletion of vessels, with humours and wind, or by drying as in burning Feavers, Hecticks, consuming Fea∣vers, Quartans, and other drying causes. CHAP. IV. What the other differences of Pulses signifie & presage. NOw for the other differences of pulses; and first, Equality, and inequa∣lity, of that of equality, and inequality, equality although it shew a fixed disposition of matter, yet it signifies firmness of na∣ture, and therefore affords the better hope, but all inequali∣ties are worse, and either signifie obstructions of vessels or compressions, or aboundance of humours, hindring the force, and indeed a single inequality, is more dan∣gerous then systematick, or mixed: whence intermitting
pulses in one pulse, are more dangerous, then intermitting in many, if both of them proceed from debility of the faculty. Uneven pulses, Ʋnalike stirred up Myouri Di∣croti. therefore being stirred up, and Myouri, and such, as striking double, are very evil, yet in an uneven pulse, that is quickned is less evil, then an intermitting; be∣cause although it signifie the faculty declining, yet it shews not it to be extreamly weak. A Sistematick inequality, Systemati∣cal inequa∣lity. or complication of inequali∣ties unequally made is less dangerous then an equality equally made, because that for the most part is caused by, default of the instrument, but this happens by the imbe∣cility of the faculty. Intermitting pulses with imbecility, Intermit∣ting. fince they proceed from the debility of the faculty, are altogether dangerous, and indeed the longer they are quiet, and the more stroaks they intermit, by so much they are the more dangerous, yet old men and boyes are in lesse danger in this pulse, then young men in whom the faculty is weak, and offended by a smal occasion, but where the faculty is strong, not without a great cause. A deficient Pulse is yet more dangerous, Deficient. because it shews great imbecility. An intercurrent pulse is the most secure of all unequal pulses, Intercur∣rent. which indeed signifies the strength to be loaden, yet hitherto strong and whole, and promiseth victory. Deficient reciprocal pulses shew great imbecillity of the saculty, Reciprocal, deficient. yet with striving against the preter-natural causes. Adescending or a declining pulse, Miourus verni∣ouar for∣micant. & a vermicular, shew the faculty to be much weakned, but the formicant pulse is a token that the faculty is yet more dejected, and if it be perceived in Feavers, and quotidian diseases, it is a certain token of death. A surging pulse signifies that the faculty is burthened, Surging. and weakned, and tis an ill signe if it be changed into a vermi∣cular, yet sometimes it signifies, that the strength is great, and the arteries moistned with the humour, and moreover with decretory sweat A serrate pulse is ill token, Serrate. and signifies an internal great, and dangerous inflamation. But as for Order since it signifies a fixed, Order of pulse what it shews. a perpetual cause, the perturbation of order being troubled; if the
pulse be otherwise profitable, order signifies firmness of power, but inordinate shew that the faculty is oppressed by fuliginous excrements, but if the order of the pulse be together unprofitable with the inequality, it signifies the highest weakness, and is a very ill signe. Lastly, change of harmony signifies variation of the use. Rhythmes CHAP. XV. What Pulses presage health, or death. ALthough it easily appears from hence what pulses signifie safety, or death, yet that we may handle them singly; What pul∣ses shew a strong fa∣culty. great pulses, swift, vehement, double striking, surging, sig∣nifie that the faculty is strong, and indeed amongst those the vehement is in the first place, afterwards the great; hence the swift, and surging. Lastly the double striking. But smal pulses, languishing, intermitting, declining, Languish∣ing. ver∣micular, formicant, and all pulses which descend from me∣diocrity, to the extrcame (in defect) except the most ve∣hement; signifie that the strength is failing, and weak: and these pulses of themselves do shew that the faculty is weak, if they are equal, but if they proceed from the faculty bur∣thened they are unequal; hence the vermicular, formicant, intermitting, and declining, are deficient evils, by how much the pulse is fainter and lesser, by so much it argues the greater debility of strength. Hence it plainly appears that the pulses which promise health, Health, are those which little decline from the pulses of sound men, and are equal, ordinate, great, vehement; but amongst the fainting ones, little, eunqual, & inordinate, those which are least, these (so that malignity be absent) are least dangerous. On the contrary seeble pulses, little, slow, and such like, Death, indicating the faculty weak, portend danger or death; if to∣gether other ill signes also do appear; also all those pulses are evil, which come to extremity, except the most vehe∣ment, and amongst those, the least, most faint, most slow, and most thin, are the worst of all, but of the unequal, those are less dangerous, wherein are many great, and vehement
stroakes, the dangerous are the declining, intermitting, in∣tercurrent, vermicular, and formicant as is said before. Lastly, Manner of event. pulses conduce to the knowledg of the manner of the event, for pulses which are weaker; duller, and thinner to the Judgement, signifie, that the disease will not give off, but rather by solution wear away by little and little; but unequal pulses, vehement, great, swift, and frequent in∣forme the Judgement, that the disease will soon be at an end, and in a critical day (or day when there is a conflict of nature, and a disease, and a change expected) the pulses are inordinate, and unequal, and if they become strong from weak, and become great from little, it shews the next Crisis, or judgement, and they presage good; if in unequal pulses there are more great then little, swift, then slow, mode∣rate, then frequent, vehement, then faint. CHAP. XVI. Of signes to be observed from the Tongue. BVt besides the urines, The tongue a figne of diseases. and pulses, the Physitian also shal consider sweats, excrements of the paunch, spittle, the Tongue other things, but since we have spoken before of the former, and hereafter I shall speak again, here we will only add something of the tongue, which shew certain signes, es∣pecially in Feavers, and as often as any change happens of its own accord, either of colour or taste in the tongue, it is certain that so often there is some change made in the body. But why the tongue should change its natural constitu∣tion, Causes of the change∣ing the tongue, there are two principal causes, humors, exhaling out of the veins and arteries of the tongue, and principally affe∣cting the coat of the tongue; moreover, vapours and humors ascending from the inferior parts, to which notwithstanding sometimes humours flowing from the head are added. The colour of the tongue is changed, and is become white with the spittle wherewith it is moistned, The colour of the tongue changed. and it is dried by heat, which often comes to pass in Feavers, a white colour is often changed into a yellow, mud colour, or black, whilst other humors are communicated to the tongue, and that external skin is changed by the fùliginous feaverish vapours. Whence the colour of the tongue may shew both
the nature, and the time of the Feaver, for as Hiprocrate; saith, in the beginning the tongue is white or yellow (in his Third Book of diseases) in progress of time it grows black, and if it grow black in the beginning of a disease, the disease wil the sooner be over; but if in the latter end, 'twil endure the longer nay oftentimes the tunicle of the tongue, is so polluted with fuliginous vapours ascending, that some∣times it rots away; but when the Feaver declines the co∣lour of the tongue returns to its natural condition; and the humour which is spread about the Tongue, is taken away, and that which was corrupted is separated, and that change first appears in the top of the tongue: hence that other pat towards the chops also by little and little becomes pure. Lastly, the root, and if any one daily do diligently observe the tongue of the sick, the declination of these may be known no less from thence then by the urine. The taste of the Tonge being changed, Savour. signifies abundance of humours; from choler the taste is bitter; from sweet flegme sweete; from a salt, salt; from an acid humor, sour or sharp. The tongue is made rough and dry by defect of the humi∣dity, which was consumed by the feaverish heat, yet in roughness there is a greater defect of humidity then in driness only.
THE THIRD BOOK. THE SECOND PART. Of the Diagnostick Signes. CHAP. I. Of the Signes of Causes in generall. BUt now that we may come to the Kinds, Antecedent Signes. and that we may explaine the Anamnestick, Dia∣gnostick, and Prognostick signes: concerning the Anamnestick signes we only admonish you of this; that the causes which have gone before are known either by the effects which are left, or they are known by some profitable, or hurtful thing, which they occasioned. As for the Diagnosticks, Diagnostick signes of a disease at hand. they are either of a disease neer at hand, or present: Of the signes of diseases neer at hand this is a general rule, that every mutation in actions, accidents, and excrements, after what manner soever hapning contrary to custome, and without any externall cause, Of a present. threatens a disease; for when all these things are right according to the natural constitution, they are signes of health; as soon as any thing in them begins to change from its natural state, it signifies a falling from health into a dis∣ease, and the same signes, if they are gathered together, and increased, indicate a disease to be now present. But since it doth not satissie a man to know that a dis∣ease is imminent, or that it is present, but it is necessary to know what the disease is, the signes are to be propounded severally, both of Morbifique causes, and places affected of diseases, as also of symptomes: and that we may begin from the signes of causes, which lead us unto the knowledg of
diseases; concerning the necessary signes of causes, and by which any thing may be known certainly; some are pro∣per, others common, but collected together by a race or current, and are limited within their proper subject. Proper signes of humours from the tast The proper signes are savour, colour, and motion of humors, as to tast, blood is sweet, flegme, watrish and unsavory, chol∣ler, bitter, salt flegme, causeth a salt taste, flegme and me∣lancholy an acid, a sharp adust melancholy causeth a brack∣ish taste. The blood is red, as also choler is red; From the co∣lour: flegme that is white hath a white colour, pale choler, a pale; yellow a yellow; Leek colour a greene, an Aeruginous, is like Verde∣grease; melancholy hath a black hew, troubled; black chol∣er black, splendid, and when one savour, or colour agrees with two humors, we may know the humour from the taste and collour joyned together, so that when acid flegme and melancholy are joyned, 'tis acid by the white colour, acid flegme is known, by the black melancholy. Moreover the humors have their determinate motions se∣veral daies; the flegme is moved, the day between each, From the motion chol∣er; Melancholy is moved the fourth day, if such a motion be wanting the blood offends, choler also for the most part is moved about noon-day, melancholy in the evening, flegme in the night, the swiftnesse also, and slowness of motion, indicate the humours of a disease, for a swift disease depends on a thin humor, hot and cholerick; a slow, on a dull and thick. But because those signes lie hid in the innermost parts of the body, so that the humours cannot be known, Of the com∣mon signes. Current. a current of common signes then ought to suffice: the causes and af∣fects, or the antecedents and consequences supply us with such signes; antecedents are supplied by two fountains, namely external, and evident causes, or things not natural, and the disposition of the body; but the consequences are all symptomes, and whatsoever help, or hurt. Non-natural things dispose the body and bowels to the generation of this or that humour, Antecedents. according as they either heat the body, or cool it, or make other changes in it, of which is spoken before, Lib: 1, Part 2. Chap: 2. Moreover, the dispositions of the body have great power in generating humors, without which those evident causes can do little in producing them. Now these dispositions may be reduced to four heads. First, there is an hereditary
disposition of the body. 2ly. age: 3ly. Constitution of the body. 4ly. Intermission of some accustomed evacuations fit to generate this or that humour. The consequences are symptomes, Conse∣quence. namely actions hurt, excretions, and retentions, and the qualities of the body changed; also diseases arising from humours. Lastly, all things helping, and hurting. CHAP. II. Of the Signes of Causes, and of Humours in par∣ticular. AS for what belongs to the signes of every humour in particular gone before, Signes of Plethory. signifies that blood doth a∣bound, and a plethory as to the vessels is present, as is ex∣pressed before in the Lib: 2. Part 2. chap: 3. The habit of the body is fleshly and firm, overspread with an habituous vapour, the veins are fuller, and especially after exercise and heat swel; the muscles are extended, the strength of Na∣ture is increased, with a certain proportion of blood, and if the blood fil the veins so ful that they cannot be cooled, or fanned enough, it grows thick, and seeks to weigh down the inferior parts, hence the muscles of the leggs being filled with blood are moved with paine, and wearisomness ariseth. Re∣spiration is more difficult after labour, in their behaviour they are merry and pleasant, and their discourse and memo∣ry duller, their sleep is profound, and more durable and pleasing, with flattering dreams, and of red things, and blood; the pulse is great and strong, all natural actions are excel∣lently performed; the urine is more plentiful, and moderate in substance, and colour, and the contents therein are plen∣tiful, the colour of the whole body, and especially of the face is red, and rosie, the reins of the cies are red, the skin being touched is hot, yet that heat is gentle, they easily to∣lerate evacuations of blood, by what means soever made, sparing diet takes away the wearisomness, and quencheth thirst, but they are offended by hot and moist things, and all things which increase heat; idleness and food, increasing blood hurts them, but a plethorick constitution is known as to its strength, by gravity of body, an unequal pulse, signes of crudity, and oftentimes by signes of putrifaction; begin
Sweet flegme abounding is known from the causes which conduce to the generation of flegme, if they have preceded, Flegme. of which above Lib: 2. part 2. ch: 4. Moreover, those which abound with flegme are dul, flow, lazy, and unapt for moti∣on, more stupid in their senses, dullet of apprehension, pro∣pense to sleep, and sleep more soundly, they dream of wa∣ters, and raine, snow, haile, ice, and of drowning, their manners are unbeseeming, they are not easily angry, the pulse is little, dul, thin, and soft; they are not troubled with thirst, their desire is weaker, they are affected with cold diseases, moist, and durable; they send forth many flegmatick excrements, and abound with spittle, their urine is white, pale, sometimes thin, sometimes thick and troubled; their dejected ordure is crude, & pituitous; the whole body is thick, white, soft, and more cold to the touch; heating and drying things, cutting and atenuating, and eva∣cuating flegme advantage them, they easily indure fasting. On the other side all cooling, and moistning things, and thickning, and those which retaine and increase Flegme, of∣fend them; if the Flegme be sour, all those signes are the more vehement, but salt Flegme is known from the prece∣ding causes, of which is spoken before, thirst is present, a salt taste, those things which are cast out are crude, but withall biting. Moderate salt things delight them; too much drying and heating things hurt them. Choler is known to abound if the causes, Of Choller. and dispositions of the body have gone before, which conduce to the gene∣ration of Choler, proposed before, lib: 2. part 2. chap: 9 as if a man be not drowsie, but watchful; if he dreame of fire, thunder, and lightning, and contentions, and is ful of activi∣ty in motion, and rash or precipitate in consultation, is easi∣ly angry, the pulse vehement, swift, frequent, hard; if his concoction be depraved, and turned into a nitrous crudity, if the appetite of meat be less then the appetite of drink, hot and dry diseases afflict him, and those which have a swift motion, and symptomes arising from choler; if the u∣rine be yellow, and splendid; the excrements coloured with cholour, the habit of the body is dry and leane, and carries with it lively heat, the colour of the body is yellow; cold and moist things, and such as purge choller, as also acid things delight them; hot and dry things, as also fasting hurts them.
Melancholy is known to abound from the causes and dispositions going before, Melancho∣ly. propounded aboue lib: 2. part 2. chap: 6. For what belongs to the consequences, those which abound with a melancholy humour are silent, full of thoughts, stable, and pertinacious, and slow to anger, who nevertheless are not easily pacified; their sleep is turbulent, perplext with horrid and terrible dreams, they are sad and fearful without any manifest cause, they have a little pulse, dul, thin, and indifferent hard, their colour is yel∣low, dun or duskie, almost black, they desire meat and Venery moderately, they are void of thirst, and abound with spittle, they make much Urine, and if none of the me∣lancholy be evacuated therewith, it is thin and white, or if some of it flow with it, it is thick and black, and they sweat plentifully in their sleep, the Hemorhoids either flow, or are suppressed, much wind is in the body, and they are apt to four belchings, the habit of the body is lean, sharp, and hard, the colour yellow, the spleen sometimes swels, and grows hard within them; tubercles appear in the veins, and they are affected with other melancholy diseases. Black choler is a signe of yellow choler and melancho∣ly mixed together, Black Choler. and the indications of melancholy ap∣pear, but joyned with manifest signes of heat, whence mad∣ness, a canker, a Leaprosie, and such like diseases arise. Aboundance of serous Humours are collected, Of the se∣rous humor not only from the antecedent causes, whereof we have spoken be∣fore, but also from a somewhat moist and pale body, and the Urine is crude and aqueous. Moreover, Winde. winds discover themselves by those signes which are reckned above in the lib: 2, part 2, chap: 7, more∣over fluctuations, & rumblings & tumblings in the guts, and Hypochondrias are perceived, and switching pains without gravity, & wandring, & such as suddenly arise, & suddenly va∣nish; also a humming and buzzing in the ears, pantings of some parts of the body, belching, breaking wind backward, or in the paunch are discovered, and the Urines are frothy. Malignant and pestilent humors, Poysons. how they may be known is spoken amongst fevers, but the signes that poison is drank are, if any biting happen in the stomack, or guts, to any sound man, after eating and drinking, and if the belly or stomack be moved to expel, and their colour within six hours turn yellow, and spottie; if the extream parts of the body grow cold, and swounding, palpitation of the heart, and
swelling happens, but if one be hurt by the biting of any living creature, or with a prick, or sting, or froth, and the offended part should mortifie, become putred, should be inflamed and swel, and the paine be great, and those symp∣tomes before mentioned appear, it is a token that the li∣ving creature was venemous. CHAP. III. Of the Signes of Diseases. SOme signes of diseases indicate the kind of diseases; Causes, what disea∣ses they shew. o∣thers the magnitude, others the manner, and they are taken from those three fountains, the causes, those things which necessarily inhere, and the effects of the causes, and what force each hath is spoken of in lib: 2. part 2, Disposition of the body. and there∣fore if any causes are present, or hath gone before, it is a signe of a disease which that cause is apt to produce, but a∣mongst the causes, the dispositions, or inclinations of the body are to be weighed, which are apt to produce this, or that kinde of disease; for every body either fals into a disease like its own constitution, sooner then contrary to it; and that disposition depends on the age, sex, course of life, and manner of dyet. Neither are those things to be past over, which help and hinder, for if hot things are advantagious, cold things are mischeivous, and a cold disease is understood; the contra∣ry comes to pass if the disease be hot: the same reason is of other tempers also. Out of those things essentially inhering, Essentially inhering. or in the pro∣per essence, diseases are easily known in the external parts, and are obvious to the senses, but diseases of the internal parts, although they may be known by those things which essentially inhere, yet not immediatly; but others coming between; so a tumour of the bowels is known by the skin mediating, which is lifted up, by the subjacent parts, and it self is become swolne. As for what belongs to the effects and symptomes, Effects and symptomes. an action that is hurt, if it be not by some external error, it signifies that a disease is present in that part whence the action is hindred, and indeed an action abolished, and di∣minished, signifies a cold distemper, that a greater, this a
lesser; but depraved actions signifie for the most part a hot distemper, and since an alteration cannot be made sudden∣ly, nor doth the distemper suddenly cease when the altera∣tion is introduced, if the action be suddenly taken away, and suddenly restored, it doth not indicate a disease of in∣temperature, Excretion and retenti∣ons. but an organnick: but if the actions are pre∣sently taken away, and remain absent long, either obstru∣ctions occasioned by thick matter, or a cold intemperature is signified; the excrements too much coloured, signifies a hot disease, as also doth dry ordure, but clammy, thick and white dreggs shew a cold distemper, Qualities changed. qualities also changed indicate diseases; softness signifies a moist distemper, a pale colour of the body signifies a cold distemper; but a red co∣lour a hot. As for the magnitude of a disease, Signes of a great dis∣ease. if a great cause, and that which hath great force of acting hath gone before in what kind of disease soever, without doubt 'twil generate a great disease, the proper nature of a disease wil easily be∣tray it self, for by how much the more the pathognomick signes (or the signes that discover a disease) shal be grea∣ter, or lesser, by so much it shews a greater or lesser disease; hither to belongs also the worthiness of the part affected, for by how much the part affected is more noble, or can draw more noble parts into consent, by so much the disease is counted the greater moreover the symptomes by how much the more and greater they shal be, to which this hap∣pens, that if the disease do not give way to exquisite, and great remedies, by so much the greater the disease shal be, it is deservedly accounted great. A malignant disease is likewise known by malignant ve∣nemous causes preceding. Of a Malig∣nant, Moreover, 'tis the nature of cer∣tain diseases, that in the same manner is they are known, they indicate malignity, such are the Morbus Gallicus, Leaprosie, and such like. Thirdly, malignity discovers it self by the effects, for when no dangerous, or vehement symptome is present which might trouble, the sick nevertheless is un∣quiet and weak, and the disease after smal remisness is swiftly, and vehemently exasperated by sweats, and other excrements, and the sick perceives no manner of ease, es∣pecially if frigidity of the extream parts, or watchings should happen, if in the beginning of sleep, sleep seeme∣troublesome; if the sick without a cause be afraid, waxeth exceeding hot, drops blood, and the other ill signes be pre∣sent, which are spoken of amongst malignant feavers, it argues amalignant disease.
Acute diseases are known from hence, Of Acute diseases. that they are sud∣denly moved, and immediatly after the beginning afford grievous symptomes. CHAP. IIII. How to know the parts affected. The fountains of the signes whereby the parts affected are known, Signes of places affect∣ed. Galen in his first Book of the places affe∣cted, Chap: the 5th: accounts five, the actions hurt, excre∣rions, scituation, proper accidents, and propriety of paine; which notwithstnding are comprehended under those foundations before proposed. Amongst the causes the first are those things which are ta∣ken in, whereof some have power of hurting this, Causes. others of offending that part; moreover to those things which are carried about us, belong arts, and course of life, from whence it happens, that sometimes this, sometimes that part is more hurt, as sleeping, and watchings, which princi∣pally offend the braine; anger which principally hurts the heart; as also other passions of the mind. Thirdly, those things which are retained, they more of∣fend that part wherein they are detained. 4ly. Those things which happen and befal us externally, they also shew the part affected: if any one use mercuriall vunctions, it is probable that the nervous parts are hurt, that evil which commonly overspreads signifies that part to be hurt, which is manifest, doth labour in other sick persons. By things essentially inhearing, here are understood both the propri∣eties of the parts, and the diseases themselves inhearing, for although diseases are not of the essence, of a part as it is a part; yet as it is an effect centrary to nature: diseases them∣selves seem to be in a part essentially; inherent diseases therefore indicate parts affected, a tumour appearing any where signfies either that part is affected, or the part which is placed above it; and the scituation and figure of the Tumour, and the motions hurt will shew it in its kinde; a falling of the guts into the codds
signifies a rupture of the peritoneum, or rim of the belly; gibbosity signifies hurt of the spine, or marrow; the propri∣ety of parts shews places affected as they are proper to those parts, so if we see stones come forth with Urine, with∣out doubt we conjecture the veines or bladder to be affe∣cted. As for the effect, Effects. actions hurt. first an action hurt shews that member by which it is offended, unless it be hurt by some external error; so ratiocination being hurt, imagination, memory, they signifie the brain to be affected; as likewise by sleep, watchfulness, exercise of the whole body; The visive fa∣culty is hurt by an affect of the eye; the hearing, of the ear; the smelling of the nose; the taste spoiled is a token of a disease of the tongue; if the urine be suppressed, the cause is to be sought in the reines, uriters, bladder, or urina∣ry passages, if yellow choller be not purged from the blood, blood, it is a token that the bladder of the gall is di∣stempered. Paine, Hitherto belongs paines, which shews that some sensible part is affected, yet a differing paine may be a signe of di∣vers parts; a pricking paine is proper to inflamations of membranes; a striking paine, is caused by parts sensible which are inflamed, containing arteries; a burthensome paine agrees to the whole substance of the bowels, lungs, liver, spleen, reines; inward, deep and profound paines, as it were breaking the part, signifies the membrances of the bones to be affected; a broad paine, & spreading it self eve∣ry way about, is a token that the membrances are affected; streightness shews somewhat belonging to the extending of the nerves. The vital actions being hurt shews that the heart la∣bours. Lastly, natural actions hurt in what part soe∣ver, shew a signe of that part which is affected, but more manifestly in publick parts, more obscurely in private parts. Excretions Secondly, in excrements which also afford signes, more things are to be considered, namely the kinds, qualities, manner of casting them out, quantity, order; the kinds of excrements are two-fold, for either something is cast out of the substance of some part, & signifies that part to be affect∣ed, as if a little skin orflake, or little peece of flesh should be cast out of the mouth, it shews the lungs, the wind-pipe,
the Epiglotis, the gullet or ventricle, to be corroded; and if it be cast out by a cough, it is a signe that it comes from the brest, but if it be cast out by vomit, it is a signe it comes from the stomack; or that it is not the substance it self, but that which it contained in it, and is familiar to it, that is so ejected, so meat, drink, or chile cast out by reason of a wound, shews that the stomack is proforated, or that the guts are too thin, and if the stomack be hurt, the sick wil belch much; if the guts, the wind goes out by the seat; u∣rine flowing out through an Ulcer or wound, shews that the bladder, uriters, or reins are hurt; but which of these parts are affected, the scituation of the wound discovers. The dreggs of the belly ejected through a wound, or the smel of the dung perceived in the wound, shews that the guts, especially the thick, are hurt. So also of other parts. But seeing that the same things may often come forth from many parts; the quality of the excrement, and man∣ner of its coming out, shews which is the part affected: if the blood be thinner, hotter, more florid, and comes out leaping, it shews that the arterie is cut; but if it be thick∣er, and comes out without leaping, or dauncing, it shews that the veins are hurt; blood that comes from the paunch, shewing like that wherein meat hath been washed, shews that the liver is affected; if any come forth only by spit∣ting it shews that the mouth, or parts next to it are affe∣cted, unless perhaps it flow from the head into the mouth; if by spittle, the chaps or larynx are affected; if by cough the wind-pipe, or lungs, so that it doth not raise a cough by defluxion from the head; if by vomit, the throat and stomack, so that it come not into the stomack from the liver, or spleene, or other parts adjacent. The quantity also of excrements afford signes; if much blood is cast out, it is a Token of an affect of the lungs; if little, of the wind pipe. That blood which flows from the reins is more; from the bladder less. Moreover, order in excrements is a token of the place affected; if first blood, and afterwards dreggs are cast out, it signifies that the fundament, or some gut is affected within; if first dreggs come forth, afterwards blood, it shews the guts are thin, or the parts above them are affected; so if quitture which is brought forth in the Urine come before, it shews
there is an ulcer in the gut colon, if it follow it shews that the superior parts are ulcerated. Thirdly, Qualities changed. qualities changed also affords signes of places affected, red colour of the cheeks signifies inflamation of the lungs, the colour of the body, but principally of the face, pale or yellow shews that the bladder of the gall is not right, the flesh and skin being yellow, in dicate the bones that are under them to be corrupted, a filthy smel exha∣ling from the nostrils, shews that the parts within the no∣strils are affected; if from the mouth, it shews that the teeth, chops, lungs, or stomack are affected; if from a wound of the paunch, it signifies that the guts are wounded; hardness of the right Hypocondrie is a signe that the liver is affected, of the left that the spleen is affected. Lastly, certain diseases pertain to effects following, other diseases of the place affected, which are therefore called symptomatick, or familiar, and are discoverers of the prima∣ry disease. Signes of parts affe∣cted by con∣sent. But least that we should erre in knowing the place affe∣cted, by the actions hurt, and should take the part which is hurt by consent, for the primary affects; First the anatomy and functions of mans body, and the use and consent of all the parts ought to be known whence a part receives its nerves, arteries, and veins, and from what parts it can send any thing to them, and receive any thing through them, therefore if in a member sense, or motion be hindred, and the part suffer no ill, we must observe what nerves are in∣serted therein, what muscles move it, and whence those muscles take the nerves, and tis to be enquired, whether those parts have suffered any evil; so a nerve being hurt, tis easily communicated to the braine, the evils of the arte∣ries to the heart, the hurts of the veins to the liver, and a∣gain, the braine being affected, sence and motion is hurt; the heart, the vital actions are hurt, nutrition is weakned through default of the liver, Moreover it is to be enquired whether a part be primarily hurt, or by consent of other parts; that is known first from he precedent causes. Namely if a part which is affected be hurt by no evident cause, but a part with which it hath consent, hath suffered some evil, tis probable that that part is affected by consent. Secondly, if any hurt coheres with the hurt of another member, that by increasing of the one the other increased, and by the decrease thereof it be
diminished, and that ceasing, it caseth; it is a token that such an affect is stird up by consent: but from that part where the disease first declined, it shews that to be the part affected by consent; but by essence that wherein the disease remained longest; thirdly an affect by consent doth not presently infect, but for the most part by in∣tervals; fourthly if two parts are together affected, and by applying things that are helpfull to the one, or hurtfull, the other be helpt or hurt; tis an argument that tis an af∣fect by consent. Signe that the head is affected. But although any one from these Fountaines of signes may come to the knowledge of all parts affected, yet that for ex∣ample sake we may add some in particular, first Animall actions hurt, afford signes of diseases of the head and braine, whither they are diminished or depraved, yet this is to be noted of the externall senses, and motion hurt; since that the braine is not the immediate Organ of those actions, but only supplyes animall Spirits, tis to be inquired whether the cause of these actions hindred be in the brain, or in the proper Or∣gan; the excrements also of the braine sent forth through the Emunctories indicate the braine to be affected. The signes of diseases of the heart, Of the heart. for the most part are taken from vitall actions, and the qualities changed of the body: Actions hurt are respiration which the preternaturall heat of the heart changeth, palpitation of the heart, the pulses much changed; for according as the heart is, so is the heate and colour in the whole body. The signes of the liver affected, Of the li∣ver. are first when its action is hurt, which is Sanguification, a token whereof the urine and dregs of the paunch afford; moreover when the habit of the body is changed, and their is an ill colour of the the whole body, and penury of blood is in the veins; some∣times also by default of the spleen, or by reason of excre∣ments regurgitating from elsewhere into the veins, the co∣lour of the whole body is changed; thirdly distribution of blood is hindred, which is known by the leannesse of the bo∣dy and flux of the belly; fourthly a perception of gravity in the right Hypocondrie, as also a tumour encompassing the liver. When the stomach is ill disposed tis known by its Of the Stomach.
actions hindred, such are the appetite hurt, the concoction vitiated, which is perceived, because those that are sick either are sensible of paine after meate, or the stomach is blown up with wind, or are troubled with belching, loathing, vomiting; also if the dejection be slower or swifter, without any fault of the liver, then is fit, the stomach is to be suspected. Of the brest The first signe that the brest is affected, is difficulty of breathing; the second, a cough; the third, paine; lastly those things which come out by coughing, as blood, quitture. Lastly, Of the windpipe. the signes of the affects of the Windpipe are the same, but principally they are taken from the change of the voice, somtimes also a cough is joyned, more may be read of these things in the practicall part. CHAP V. How to know Symptomes. ALthough Symptomes for the most part are obvious to the senses, Signes of Symptomes. Of the na∣turall fa∣culty lying hid. yet somtimes they lye hid, and had need have signes, which are taken from causes, and effects: nutri∣tion, if it be not rightly performed, the body is extenuated and growes leane: if augmentation be not rightly per∣fected, the body is lesse nourished; if the generative fa∣culty be hurt, either none, or weake Children are generated; attraction and retention being hurt, are known from their effects, especially digestion is known by the excrements of its concoction; so that which is in the stomach, by the dregs of the belly; that which is in the liver and veines, by the urine; those excrements which are in the brest, by the spittle; lastly the expulsive faculty is known to be hurt, if those things are retained which ought to be ex∣pelled. The vitall faculty is known to be hurt by the changed pulse of the heart and Arteries. Of the vi∣tall. Of the ani∣mall. As for the animall faculty, the Physitian knows the de∣pravation of the principall faculties from the words and deeds which are different from comlinesse and congruity. In the same manner also other animall actions may be known to be hurt from their effects.
THE THIRD BOOK, PART THE THIRD: Of the Prognostick SIGNS. CHAP. I. Of the severall kinds of Prognostick Signes. YEt there remains the Prognostick Signs by which we may know those things which are to come, Of what things are to be fore∣known in the sick. which may happen to thesick: For the Physitian ought especially to know before hand three things concerning the Patient. First, what the event or the end of the disease will be. Secondly, at, or about what time the disease will have an end. Thirdly, how, or by what means. Of Prog∣nostick signs. Of each of these before we speak in particular, we must speak in generall of the Prog∣nostick Signs: and we will premise some things of knowing the times of diseases; Namely, some signs are of crudity and concoction, others of life and death, others criticall, or judi∣catory. The signs of concoction and crudity, are Urines, Of conce∣ction of crudity, of life and death. Criticall. Excre∣ments of the Paunch, spirtings, and spaulings, and cathar∣rous matter; The signs of life and death are those which are sent forth with Urine and Excrements of the Paunch; also swears, easie and difficult respiration, easie or difficult induring of the disease, the pulse, the face, and comly lying down, like unto what they were wont, and the contrary to these: Moreover, criticall signs are such as shew sudden mu∣tation and perturbation, and some of these are both signs
and causes as Vomit, Excrements of the Paunch, much Urinc, blood flowing from the Nose, the Parotides, or swel∣ling of the Gumms, or about the Chops, setling of hu∣mours in one place, and then in another, which are called dissolving by Hippocrates, because they put away the dis∣ease; some are only signes of a Delirium, watching, stupidity, paine of the head, difficulty of perception, out of quiet, dif∣ficulty of breathing, and darkness arising, and appearing before the eyes, a noise of the eares, shinings before the eyes, unvoluntary teares, a troublesome night, without any reason, agitation of the lower lip, great stifness, the face and eyes looking red, a retraction of the Hypocondries, a loa∣thing, but there is not the same force and reason of all these signes; the signes of concoction are never ill at what time soever they appeare, nay the sooner they appear the betterr: but judicatory Signes are not accounted good, unless in the height or state of a Disease; so neither are those good which are wont to indicate those in the beginning of a Dis∣ease. Signes of concoction, some are proper to one sort of disea∣ses, as spittle to the diseases of the breast, others are common to many kind of diseases, such as Hyppocrates, 1. Aphor. 12. reckons, the Urine, excrements of the Paunch, sweats. The excrements of the belly are signes of that concoction which is perfected in the belly, but the Urine of the concoction which is made in the Liver and arterious vein. For when the Urines afford proper signes of the parts through which they pass, as of the Reines, Arteries, Blad∣der, Yard, we must have a care least we are deceived in u∣niverfall and acute diseases, by those particular and proper signes of those parts; and what is spoken of Urines may al∣so be said of excrements of the Paunch. CHAP. II. Of those kinds of Signes by which the times of Dis∣eases may be known. IT is exceeding profitable to know the times of diseases, Signs of the times of diseases. but especially the state, but the signes of times are taken first from the form, and Idea, secondly from the time of the year, and other such like things: Thirdly from the comings (or
fits) and circuits, increasing and decreasing. Fourthly, from the Symptomes of diseases, or from the Essence, and Idea, the causes, and those things that precede the disease, and by the Symptomes, and those things that accompany a Dis∣ease. As to the form of a Disease, From the Idea of a disease. by how much the motion of a Disease is swifter, by so much it is nigher to its height, and is a token that the Disease will be shorter, but by how much the flower the Disease is moved, by so much the more remote it is from the state. Secondly, Time of the year. Region. Temperant of bodies. In respect of dyet. that Disease which happens in the Summer is neerer to its height, that which happens in the Winter is more remote: In hot Regions, Diseases are more acute and short, but in cold, longer; those that are hotter by na∣ture, are subject to hotter Diseases, and so shorter; those that are colder, to more cold, and consequently more la∣sting; hotter, and dryer Victuals, generate hot humours, and thereby shorter Diseases; colder, and moister dyet generates pituitous humours, and so more lasting Diseases; great strength of nature in a Disease that is not mortall, Strength of nature. shewes that the Disease is short, but weaknesse shewes it will conti∣nue longer; but strength in a disease that is mortall, shewes that it will continue longer, but weakness signifies that it will be shorter. Thirdly, From the course of fits. in the fits the houre is to be considered in which the Paroxysme returnes, the time of duration, and the vehemency of Symptomes, for if the fits returne soo∣ner, and the latter be longer then the former, and more vehement, it is a token the disease is increased: on the contrary, if the latter fits return slower, and endure a shorter time, and are not so violent, it is a signe the disease abates; but sometimes Paroxysmes, enveigh equally and all of them return at the same houre, which most commonly is a sign of a long disease, but sometimes they come not e∣qually, but at severall houres, which shewes that the disease will be shorter, and is neerer to the state. Moreover, if the fits come sooner, and that equally, the signs of concoction not appearing, it is the beginning, but if they anticipate more hours then before, it is in the in∣crease; when they observe equality again a good while, it is the state; when lastly the omitting or abating of the fits happens to be various, it is the declination: If the order of
the fits, so that sometimes they come too soon, sometimes too late, and sometimes equally, and at certain times. When the fits do equally invade without the signes of concoction, tis the beginning, but when they anticipate not, tis the aug∣mentation; when they observe equality, it is the estate: And lastly when the coming late happens again, tis the de∣clination; but if the order of fits be various, so that some∣times the Paroxysmes invade equally, sometimes anticipate, and sometimes come later; when the fits equally invade without signes of concoction, the beginning is; when they come too soon no more, the state is; but when they come too late, the declination is. As for the longitude and magnitude of fits, In longi∣tude. if the time of intermission or declination be short, and they are neither plainly intollerable, nor altogether free from Symptomes, it is a signe of the increase. On the other side, if the abating or the intermission be long, easie to be indured, and free from all Symptomes absent, declination is shewn. But the most certain signes of the times of diseases, are di∣gestion and crudity, for whensoever a sign of concoction ap∣pears suddenly, it shews the disease will be short and termi∣nate in health, but a signe of crudity shews the disease will continue long, or even prove deadly; and if grievous Symptomes grow upon the sick, so that they come with signes of concoction, they need to trouble no man, but if they happen without signes of concoction and with crudi∣ty, they portend danger. CHAP. III Of the signes of times of Diseases in particular. ANd that we may speak something peculiarly of knowing of the times of Diseases, the beginning of a disease is as long as the disease is crude; Signes of the begin∣ning of a disease, of augmenta∣tion, of the height. An evident and manifest con∣coction is a most certain signe that the beginning is finished: And in the beginning the Symptomes are hitherto more mild, but in the augmentation all of them increase, and in the state, when the greatest contention is betwixt the matter and the disease, all of them are most vehement: but this comes to passe sometimes soon, sometimes late; for in very acute diseases immediatly they have extream pains, 1. Apho. 7 but in Chronick the times are extended longer.
CHAP IV. Of the signes by which we may foretell the event of a disease. ANd these things are spoken of Prognosticks in gene∣rall, now we are to speak of those three, The event of a dis∣ease foure∣fold. which use to be presaged, namely the event of a disease, the time of the end, and the manner: but the event of a disease is fourfold, for some diseases kill the diseased, others plainly leave them off, so that the sick returne to their perfect health; others neither kill the sick, nor leave them off, but accompany them even to deaths doore; others are changed into other diseases, and somtimes into worse, somtimes into milder. The event of a disease is known by comparing the strength of nature with the disease, and by the longitude of a disease, When it may be known. or the state with the time to come; for if the sick passe over the state, there is no need, that he should any more feare the danger of death by that disease; because after the state no man dyeth in the declination by the power of that disease. The signes of strength and weaknesse of nature are sought principally from causes, and effects: Signes of strength and debi∣lity of na∣ture. the proximate cause of the strength of nature is a natural constitution of the parts. And this, by how much the neerer it is to the naturall tempe∣rature, constitution and naturalll unity, by so much it signifies the firmerstrength; by how much the more remote, by so much the weaker. For strength of nature principally depends upon a naturall temperament, whereunto belongs age also and sex; for in men and youths the strength is firmer; in women, old men and boyes, weaker. Remote causes are all those things, which by whose intervening the strength of a naturall con∣stitution is increased, or preserved, or diminished; such are those things, that are taken in, which are carried about, which happen externally, and that are evacuated, and retain∣ed; for if all these things have been moderate heretofore, and are moderate, it shewes strength of nature; if immode∣rate, imbecility. Amongst the effects are first, actions, which, by how much the more they are observed according to nature, by so much the more they signifie health: on the contrary, by how much the more or more noble they are, or by how much the more they are hurt, by so much the more
they shew the strength to be weakned: Secondly, Excre∣ments signifie nature to be powerfull, when in their substance, quantity, and quality they are most like to na∣turall, but they signifie the contrary, if they are contrary. Lastly, qualities changed, by how much the neerer they shall be to the qualities of sound men, by so much they shew the greater strength in the diseased; by how much they differ from them, by so much the more imbecillity. The strength of a Disease is known from things essen∣tiall, Signs of a strong dis∣case. inhering causes, and effects, or consequent Symp∣tomes. As for what belongs to a constitution contrary to nature, the difference which follows the form of a Disease, or the causes, or the subject, afford signes of the event; if the Dif∣ease be great it indicates danger and death, if little health, and by how much the fewer and more gentle those Symp∣tomes are that shew what the disease is, by so much the lesse the strength of the disease is shewn; but by how much the more or greater they are, by so much the more vehement is the Disease: but principally malignity ought to be suspe∣cted alwaies; a disease also, by how much the more it resides in a noble part, or may draw in a noble part by consent, by so much the more dangerous; but that which is in an igno∣ble part is out of danger. The causes are such, as either bring forth a disease, or dis∣positions which have gone before it. or such as are helpers and supporters of a Disease. The efficients are either Internall or Externall, internall are either solid bodies, or fluid; Diseases therefore which proceed from solid matter, as from stones, gravell, especially such as is great, for the most part are incurable; Diseases which arise from humours are dangerous, if they offend in the whole substance, and are malignant, if they are very purred, if plentifull, endued with mischievous qualities, and inhere in a noble part, and are crude; those which are contrary indicate the Disease to be less dangerous: Dis∣eases which arise from blood for the most part are whol∣some, from yellow and pale choller not very dangerous, from leek coloured choller, and the colour of the Yolk of an Egge, for the most part deadly.
The Aeruginous for the most part all are mortall, as those from black. A Disease also from an humour perversly thin, is more dangerous then if it be mingled with some o∣ther more mild. Diseases also which proceed from many vitious humours mixed together, are more dangerous then those that arise from a single humour, regard neverthelesse being had to the nature of the peccant humour. Diseases also are more dangerous which proceed from a humour causing a tumour, then from a quiet, so that it doth not adhere quietly to a noble part. As for the exter∣nall and evident causes, this is to be noted of them in gene∣rall, if they trouble the body long and violently, and are withall malignant, and continue long in the body, they sig∣nifie a dangerous Disease; those which are contrary tend more to health, and are lesse dangerous. Of the dispositions of bodies, Hippocrates 2. Apho. 34. writes thus. Those are lesse dangerously sick, whose disease is sutable to nature, or age, or custome, or time of the year, then they whose diseases are agreeable to none of these. Moreover, if Adjuvants, Effects and Symptomes. whether they are externall or internall, or from nature, or from art, help, they signifie a healthy Disease, and not a dangerous; but hurtfull things, if they hurt not, shew that nature is well: On the contrary, if those things which ought to help, do not help, they shew that the Disease is dangerous and deadly. Thirdly, for what belongs to effects and Symptomes, by how much the Symptomes are lighter, by so much the Dis∣ease is more gentle, by how much they are greater, by so much the Disease is more violent. The plurality of Signes are not only to be handled here, Dignity of signes. but the gravity and dignity of good and evill signes are to be considered and compared amongst themselves, and with the strength of the Sick; for the dignity of signes is principally to be valued in respect of life, and alwaies those are counted most worthy which indicate the force or imbecility of the vitall faculty.
CHAP. V. How to presage of life and death from the error and faults of actions. AFter that we have spoken those things in generall of knowing the event, we will speak something in particu∣lar of what may be foretold by Symptomes, whereof this is the summe: Those things which are most like or agreeable to nature are healthy, those which are most unlike, or diffe∣rent, The third Book, and part of the fourth. Animall a∣ctions hurt what they presage. are deadly, And first for actions hurt, and what belongs to the ani∣mall faculty, in what disease whatsoever, to have the right use of ones reason, and to be well in respect of those things which are taken in, is a good signe, but the contrary is an ill signe, Hypocrates 2. Apho. 33. and to do any thing contrary to custome, and to will something formerly not accustomed, or the contrary, that is, either to speak little or much, or mad∣ly, or absurdly, or obsceencly, to move the hands untoward∣ly, to read wanton things, to uncover the body, and denu∣date the privy parts, not to be sensible of pain, untoward, and next to being frantick, Delirium. 2. Coac. Sect. 1. Apho. 10. But prin∣cipally to continue well in understanding, is good in those diseases wherein the brain is affected, or is drawn into con∣sent: But although to be well in mind, in diseases of other parts, be a good signe, yet it is not sufficient to signifie health, for many dye that are perfect in their understand∣ings. Although no ravening be safe, yet that which is with laughter, and good signes, and is light, and not continuall, is more safe, but that which is with violence, continuall and vehement, is more dangerous, but that which is with bold∣ness and rashness, is the worst of all; yet other things which are joyned therewith are to be considered; first, the Pulse, respiration, and appetite, which if they remain safe, it is a good signe, as also if sleep follow; but on the contrary, if ill signes are joyned with ravening or madness, they threaten death, for deadly signes denote certaine destru∣ction.
Ignorance with shaking fit is evill, The me∣ry hurt. tis hurtfull also with oblivion, 1. Prorrh. Com. 2. Apho. 30. yet that oblivion which comes with a Delirium is less dangerous, so that the Delirium wherwith it appears be not dangerous. Sleeping and waking if they are customary, Sleeping and wa∣king. and from a na∣turall course, tis good, but sleep and watchings if they are eccessive evill, 2, Apho. 3. but yet if watching happen before a Crisis, the matter being concocted, it denotes no hurt; a Coma or Disease that causes long sleep, in the beginning of a Disease, signifies the Disease to be dangerous, as also that which happens in the height of a Disease, and by so much the more dangerous is the Coma, by how much the more grievous Symptomes are joyned with it. As for the mischiefs of the externall Senses, if the sight, Hurt in of the exter∣nall senses. Of sight. the time of judicature being instant, be hurt with the signes of concoction, it indicates no evill, but that sight which is hurt without the signes of concoction, and after an ill Crisis, wants no danger, Cal. 4. Aphorisme 49. The hinderance of hearing also, if it happen during a good Crisis, is not evill, but if without a Crisis, it is evill; and in acute Diseases for the most part it denotes the braine to be affected: And in the first place, that is mortall which is made by reason of decaying of the strength and extingui∣shing the faculty; those evils also which proceed from evill evacuations, 3 Prorrh. 37. The sound also and continuall humming of the eares, if it happen with signes of crudity, and in a day that is not judicatory, and the strength langui∣shed, it signifies a mortall or deadly Phrensie; when it happens otherwise in the vigour of a disease, and decretory daies, it indicates the Hemerodes of the Nose. The mell and tast being offended, Of Hearing is a certain signe rather of the peccant humour, then of the event of a disease, but yet if the sick, the faculty being extinct, should be deprived of tast, it is a deadly signe. The sudden want of the sence of feeling, Of Touch∣ing. which happers in diseases, is an ill signe, since it is a token, either of the dilating of the vitious humors so sar as to the brain, or of the extinguishing of the native heat.
If inflaming paines which presently appeare in the be∣ginning, Paine. and are not too vehement, nor continuall, and are taken away in a short time, or are abated, especially, after a plentifull evacuation, occasioned by nature, or art, and no dangerous signe be joyned, tis good; but those which continue long, presage an impostumation, but those which happen, the disease increaseing, are not evill, because they denounce a Crisis. It is good also if when a concoct∣ion appears, the paines invade the remote parts from the bowels, and that principally on the criticall day, but all those diseases are evill which afflict the principall parts, es∣pecially if they are joyned with a continued feaver, and other ill Symptomes; but diseases of the noble parts are good, if they happen after concoction, and doe not vanish in a short time, and the sick are other wayes the better by that means; but if they happen in the beginning, the mat∣ter being hither to crude, and the disease not abated thereby, or if shortly they vanish without any manifest cause, or be∣ginning from a more ignoble part, and ascend to a more noble tis an ill token: also it is evill not to be sensible of paine in any part. The same reason for the most part is from wearisomnesse, Lasinesse. for that lassitude which is promoted by the humours, flowing from the noble parts to the externall, with signes of concoction, is a good signe, and especially if it vanish after some evacuation, but if it happen without the signes of concoction, and with other perverse Symptomes, and is not abated by evacuation, it pretends evill. As to the Symptomes of motion; Motion. if bodies are moved aright and easily, tis good, but not afight, or with difficulty, tis ill 2. prog. text. 6.7. Hitherto we may refert the decubiture, Lying downe. for it is good for the sick to lye on either side with his hands neck, and legs, a little bent, his body streight, not bending towards his feet 1. prog. text. 13. for it is evill to lye supine, with the hands, and feet stretched and dejected, but it is worst of all to slide downe the body to the feet, to observe no order of lying in one's bed, nor to be quiet in one place, raving and striving to fly out of the bed, to uncover his hands, fecte, and nakednesse, ib. textu. 14. and seq. but if a
criticall anxiety or trouble, tis not so hurtfull, all the rest are evill 2. prog. 27. That convulsion is most dangerous wherein it appeares that the motion is most depraved, Convulsion. and the contraction more vehement, and lasting, and which occupyeth more parts, and neerer to the braine, which renders respiration diffi∣cult, interrupted, and sighing, or from a flux of blood, or which happens from much purging, which happens in acute feavers, which succeeds a Phrenfie, as also in the iliack, passion and watchings, but the convulsion which happens to Children is lesse dangerous, Galen 1. Epid. comm. 4.24. and that which is caused by too much motion of matter to the head or stock of nerves, or that which is occasioned through the mordication of the ventrilcle by the sharpnesse of the humour, or a medi∣cine, or by straining in vomiting, and doth not last long. A Hiccock is like to a convulsion which if it come with∣our a feaver or any disease; Hiccock and be occasioned by meate or drinke it portends nothing of eminent danger, but after too much purging, and with inflamations and feavers, hiccocks are allwayes dangerous, especially if they happen to old men; unlesse a Crisis of vomiting afterwards be present, especially if other dangers and deadly signes joyn∣ed therewith. Trembling is evill if it happen in the beginning of diseases without an evident cause, Trembling. and indicates the diseases to be dangerous, especially if it shall be longer and more grevious, and other weighty Symptomes are joyned therewith, as those which happen in an Apoplexy and Lethargie, but that trembling which happens after∣wards, and is occasioned by the critick expulsion of hu∣mours, from the interior to the externall parts, is a token of no evill, nor is that trembling evill which succeeds a palsie, since it is a token that nature overcomes the disease. A shaking fit which incontinued feavers happens in that houre wherein the paine useth to gripe, A partx∣isme. when the signes of concoction go before, tis a token of a future Crsis, and ther∣fore accounted good, if some good evacuation follow; otherwise if it happen in the beginning of a disease, or with an ill and difficult crisis tis adjudged evill.
Cold fits which happen at certain times in intermitting feavers, Cold fit. signifies no evill; nor are they ill signes in con∣tinued feavers, which happen after signes of concoction, and are tokens of criticall evacuations; and after which the body growes hot again, and some criticall evacuation follow∣eth. But those which are occasioned whilst the matter is crude, by reason whereof the body cannot grow hot with e∣vill evacuations, or when no evacuation followeth, and which happens with ill signes, are all evill. Sloath of apprehension, Torpor. specially of the body caused by cold, is perpetually evill, and without a feaver or Apoplexy, it pretends manifest danger in feavers, by reason of the ex∣tinguishing of the native heat. Moreover the signes of defaults of speech are to be obser∣ved; Hurt in the voice. a shrill voice threatens danger, since it denotes excee∣ding drinesse of the instruments of the voice; dumbnesse, al∣though it be never good, nor without danger, yet it is not al∣wayes deadly, namely when the judicatory evacuation fol∣lows, and when it doth not continue long; the rest that are dumbe, are all for the most part mortall; and so much the worse, how many the more perilous signes are ioyned. Secondly, The strength of the vitall faculty. the strength and weaknesse of the vitall faculty, which are of greatest force in foreshewing safty, or death, we observed principally from the pulse and respiration. Of the pulse tis spoken already, onely we repeate this, that the most languishing, most dull, and most thin, are the worst of all; after these the least and softest, and hardest; next the most frequent, but not swift, nor great; only amongst extreames the most vehement is the best, yet we must diligently observe alwayes, whither the change of the pulse arise from the dis∣ease, or come from externall causes. Hereunto belongs the Palpitation of the heart, swounding and falling downe, as it were dead, which indicate dejection of the vitall faculty, and great danger, if they happen through some disease of the heart it selfe. Respiration, Respira∣tion. of it be naturall, signifies neither the brest, nor heart, not midriffe to be any way affected with paine, nor any adjacent parts Galen 1. prog. Apho. 25. and moreover it hath great force in signifying tokens of health, when one is sick in a feaver, especially if other good signes are present Hip. ib. on the contrary preternaturally respiration, although it be not allwayes mortall, yet tis alwayes evill, but worst of all if it be joyned with other ill signes; great and swift brea∣things
signifie great store of fuliginous vapours, yet the organs apt, and the faculty hitherto strong, a great and slow pulse happens only to those that are disturbed in mind; a great and frequent pulse snew pain or inflamation of the part serving for breathing; little and swift respiration shews plenty of fuligi∣nous excrements, but with paine, or inflamation of some of the organs appointed for breathing; a little, and slow pulse shews not many vapours, with paine or inflamation of some instrument of respiration, and with other ill signes portends not a little danger; little and obscure respiration is perpetu∣ally evill, and signifies dissolution of strength; but little and thin is the worst of all, because it indicates the greatest debility of the faculty, and if a cold breath proceed from the mouth and nostrills, it is very destructive; but the worst of all, and the nearest to death, is when it extends & is obscure, and sublime, wherein the brest is much dilated, and some∣times the Shoulders, and grisly part of the nostrills, but that which is inspired is very thick, and most frequent; but the worst respiration of all, is that which is made with ordure. Moreover for what belongs to the Symptomes of the natu∣rall faculty, Symptomes of the na∣turall fa∣culty what they pre∣sage. their perfection is known by their operations, of which it shall be spoken hereafter, but that we may speak here something of the desire of meate and drink; to have a good appetite to meat, and that proceding from a naturall cause, and as Hippo. 2. Apho. 33. writes, in every disease to take easily whatsoever is offered, is a good signe; on the con∣trary an ill appetite of meate is bad 7. Apho 6. not to thirst also in hot and burning feavers, wherein the tongue is filthy and black, perpetually signifies mischeif, and a delirium, or dissolution of the desiring faculty, or of them both; but as it is an ill signe not to thirst, so tis a good signe to thirst in hot diseases, also to thirst immoderatly and over much, is notgood, CHAP. VI. Of the signes of life and death which are taken from excretions and retentions. AMongst exerements, urines principaly use to be observed, Prognost∣ick from vrine. but although it is spoken of already, what they shew, above, part the first See. 2. cap. 21. yet here we may breifly comprehend those things which portend to death or life, namely, that urine is best which is most like that of a sound
person from this the rest differ in substance, colour, quantity, and contents. As to the substance, the goodnesse of the sub∣stance with a good colour, promiseth health; thin urines with a good colour promise health, yet they shew a disease which re∣quires longer time for concoction. Thin and red urins signi∣fy a crude disease 2. prog. 30. but thick, which are made so after the beginning of a disease are also good, if they were thin before, much urine if it be made on a criticall day is good, which somtimes is profitably made with sharpnesse, and paine. Troubled urine, not setling in the bottome, because the strength of the diseased persists, argues for the most part the disease to continue long; if imbecility of the fick be present, it denotes their death, but those which grow cleare are bet∣ter. As for the colours of waters, a pale red, a light safron co∣lour, and a kind of cleer clay colour are good, neither is a red∣dish colour with a reddish and light sediment to be found fault with, but on the other side bright shinning urines, and white are evill; and especially if they appeare such, in Phrensies, 4. Agho. 72. principally, if they are so in the be∣ginning of a disease, and continue so long; thin, and red, signify the disease is crude, and moreover tis dangerous if they continue so long; black urine in acute diseases, unlesse they are emitted on a criticall day, allwayes denote great danger; after black, the oyly are the worst, yellow, and green also are nought, and green urines if they appeare so suddenly in men that are in other respects sound, with biting of the heart, tis a signe they have drank poison, and they are in dan∣ger of death, but in feavers they are mortall signes; es∣pecially if they appeare in the beginning of the dis∣case. As for the quanity Hippo. 3. Epid. com. 3. tom 4. condemnes thin urins made in great quantity; as also much urine, thick, not residing and no way helping; and all urines are made in great quantity in the beginning, are disliked; small quantities of urines in acute feavers are also nought. As to the contents, those urins are evill which have no se∣diment, and nothing that swimmeth in the urinall in the mid∣dest of the urine, nor a little cloud; unlesse the sick hath fasted long, or watched, or laboured: or because the body is exceeding full of choler; thick waters also without a sediment are dan∣gerous, and a sediment representing, the forme of thick brain, is evill, but worst of all, if it reside in a manner like scales of
Fish, but if it be thin and white tis vitious; but that which is furfuraceous or like Bran is worst of all, Hippo. 2. prog. 28. a nubecula, or little cloud, which is carried in the Urine, if it be white tis good, if black tis nonght; tis evill also for the sick to make water and not know of it. Secondly, Of dejecti∣on of the helly. the dejections of the belly afford us signes two manner of waies; first, as they shew the concoction of the stomack and guts, also as they manifest the humours flowing from other parts to the guts; As for the first kind, that ejection is best if it be gentle and constant; and sent forth at that time when it is wont to be in the best health, if quantity be according to what hath been eaten, 2. Apho. 13. The latter is good if it be criticall, and with signes of concoction in the state of a disease, and happen on a cri∣ticall day, and ease the sick, 1. Apho. 2. On the other side ill dejections, and those which portend destruction, derogate from the good in substance, colour, smell, time wherein they appear, nor are they voided with ease. As to their substance and quantity, dry excrement and rolled up in clods are signes of fiery heat, and if be∣sides they shall be black, they declare a burning disease to be in the middle of the body, and for that reason are evill: On the contrary liquid excretion is not evill, if it have other good notes; but the watry ordure is worse, and proceeds from greater crudity; and moreover in chole∣rick diseases, with ill Urines tis deadly, but in more milde it signifies the disease will continue long. A glutinous, white, light, fat, and foetid ordure, and little, are condemned, 2. Prog. 21, 22. Cleare dejections also in acute diseases are condemned, 2. Prorrh. 15. and froathy, and cholerick ejections in acute cholerick diseases are accounted evill, ibid. Apho. 18. As to the colour, excrements which differ from the naturall colour, are white; red, bloody, watry, green, yellow, black, full of mixt colours, unlesse they are emitted cri∣tically they portend danger: Yet in all these ejections in judging of them, regard is to be had of the meat, and to take heed you observe whether that quality hath its rise from dyet that hath been taken; for they become white either by the obstructing of the passages through which choler descends to the guts, or through the motion of the choler to some superiour and more noble part,
Red are also of themselves dangerous, yet if they are extru∣ded after the victory of nature, they rather shew hope of pre∣sent health, then portend any thing of evill. Black Excrements since they proceed either from blood or melancholy humours, or from black choler, that blacknesse which comes from concrete blood, or a melancholy humour, is not alwaies evill: but pure black choler can never be sent out of the body without destruction of the sick. Green and aeruginous ordure which proceeds from aerugi∣nous choler tending to black, is an argument of a pernicious disease, if it be cast out from any principall part, and the bowels be affected with an Erysipelous; if the Excrements are yellow, they signifie vehement cold in the internall parts, and as it were a certain mortification: Ejections also of di∣vers colours are evill, 2. Prog. 23. Faetid Excrements are evill also, and the worst of all, and few are preserved whose excrements in acute feavers are foetid, yellow, fat, black, and blew, or lead colour. Those vomitings are good which truly purge the causes of diseases, Of vomi∣tings. or which are made critically, and when concocted matter appears on the criticall daies, and are suitable to the nature of the disease, and take away or abate the same; but on the contrary, all those are evill which happen in the be∣ginning, when the matter is not yet concocted, and which take not away the morbifique matter, and the disease; and they are so much the worse if other pernitious signes be pre∣sent, such as are sincere Vomits, leek coloured, lead coloured, black, stinking, and foetid, from the guts, Ileon, and very lit∣tle. Sweats are good which happen after decoction is made, Os sweats. and on a criticall day, and coldnesse, and stifnesse, proceeding & flowes out hot and plentifully from the whole body, and lessen and abate the disease: on the other side, those are evill which happen whilest the matter is crude, which are too much, or too little, and those which are cold, or flow not from the whole body, and neither diminish nor take away the disease. The Hemorodes of the nose are good which happen in the state of a disease, From the Hemerodes of the nose. with signes of concoction, nor is that al∣waies to be condemned which happens in the augmentation, and also in the beginning, seeing the blood wants no other preparation, neither do the other humours. Good Hemerodes ought to be large, but yet not over much, but to be made with
ease, and the symptomes of the Feaver to be abated, and to happen in a criticall day, and in those diseases, wherin blee∣ding is proper to their nature and condition; and moreover the blood ought to flow from a part opposite to the part affe∣cted: on the contrary, those are ill Hemerodes which hap∣pen in the beginning, unlesse other good signes are present, and if they appear with dangerous signes, and those which are too large, or too little. Dropping of blood from the Nose is evill, if it be caused by pervernesse of matter, multitude, imbecility of force, or all these, especially in the beginning, or on the fourth day, if the blood be black, sincere, and without mixture: But it be a token of a future Crisis, tis no ill signe, which happens when the signes of concoction have been before, and the disease is not dangerous. Spittle is of great use in shewing of diseases of the breast, From spit∣tle. and that is good which is concocted, white and equall, and is spit out conveniently, and easily in a short space of time, without great pain, and a great cough: on the contrary, tis evill if it be crude, yellow; worse, if it be green, worst of all if black, especially if it be without mixture, if it appears more dull, and is spit out with great difficulty, tis also evill; when the spittle is bloody, for it proceedeth from erosion, or from breaking of Vessels. Lastly, decretory Imposthumations are good, Ʋlcers. if they happen with signes of concoction, and other good signes, and break on a judicatory day; they are good by nature which are re∣moved from the bowels and more noble parts, which perse∣vere, are suppurated, and help the sick: On the contrary, those are evill which break forth without signes of conco∣ction, the matter as yet being crude, and on a day that is not criticall, if they are too great, or too little, or happen to be in the fingers, or toes, if they are lead colour, or too red, inclining to black, and those which decrease and vanish, without any reason, and without any precedent evacuation, those which are not well suppurated, which are corrupted, and they bring either that part where they are, or the whole body into danger.
CHAP. II. Of the signes of health and of death which are taken from the mutations of the qualities of the body. MOreover to the mutation of the qualities of the body, What may be fore-told by the habit of the body. and first concerning the whole body, tis a good signe if it be rendred not much unlike to a sound body in habit and colour. Tis no good signe for the most part in a great Disease, when nothing is changed, 2. Apho. 28. Tis also an ill signe when bodies are extenuated in the declination of a Disease, and although they take food are not thereby refreshed. For in acute Diseases, tis an ill signe when the body is puft up and swelled, unlesse criticall humours are then remitted. The colour of the body when changed contrary to na∣ture, From the colour. and especially in the yellow Jaundice, is a good signe. In Feavers if it come to passe by natures driving the cholerick humours critically to the out side of the body, and the skin; but that which is contrary is to be adjudged evill. Those signes which are in the face are of great force, From the face. but that face is best which is like to theirs which are in health, but if it be contrary tis vitious, Hip. 1. Prog. 5. but a face may be unlike to their faces that are well many waies, and by how much the more it recedeth from the face of sound people, by so much the greater evill it denotes. All which signes Hippocrates in his description of a face, Hippo. face. which differs from a face of a sound person produceth, which therefore is called an Hippocraticall face, 2. Prog. 6, & 7. sharp Nose, hollow Eyes, the Temples streightned, or nar∣row, the Eares cold and contracted, and their fibres in∣verted, the skin also about the Forehead hard, fixed, and dry, and the colour of the whole countenance green, or black, which change of the countenance is very deadly, especially in the beginning of a disease, unlesse it so hap∣pen to be from some evident cause, and mends night and
day, but that face which is of a purple colour, mixt with blew, unlesse the Hemerodes of the Nose, or an Imposthu∣mation behind the Eares be to follow after, is an ill figne, and denotes a very hot disease of the brain. As the eyes are affected, so the body, By the eyes and principally the head, 6. Edip. Comm. 4. tom. 28. for if the eyes are like to theirs that are well, have a naturall colour, are full, splen∣did, and indure the light without trouble, if they open their eye lids well, and shut them without teares, and without excrements, they are good signes. But there are divers mutations in the eyes, and as Hippo. 1. Prog 10. writes, if the eyes avoid the light, or shed tears against the will of the sick, or are perverted, or one shall be lesse then the other, and the white become reddish, or of the colour of lead, or black Veines, or phlegme appears a∣bout the sight, or look divinely upward, or are hollow, or the colour of the whole countenance varies, all these are to be accounted evill and destructive, but worst of all if the sick see not, hear not, and if this happen in a weak body, death is nigh at hand. A sharp Nose, and a Nose that is turned, or wreathed, By the No∣strill. after what manner soever, is an ill signe; if the Nose itch contrary to custome, unlesse it indicate a flux of blood imminent, it shewes that a Delirium will fol∣low. The Eares if they are of a wan colour, By the ears. black contracted and cold, tis a signe of death. The grinding of the teeth is an ill signe, By the teeth tis an ill signe also when any glutinous humours sticks to the teeth. When the Tongue is like theirs who are in health, By the Tongue. tis a very good signe, but tis very evill if it be green, black and exceeding dry, cleaved, or chopped, rough, and as it were burnt: But principally dry, hard, and black Tongues indi∣cate danger, if they appeare with other ill signs, & most of all if when the Tongue is rough and dry, the sick be not thirsty. The Chops ulcerated with a Feaver is hard to be cured, By the Cheps. 3. Prog 15. and if in acute diseases of the Chops, if paines, and abjectnesse, and stoppings, without a tumour happen, they are pernitious, 1. Prorrh. 11. and if the Feaver being de∣tained, he suddenly turn his neck awry, and can scarce swal∣low, no tumour being present, tis mortiferous, 4. A∣pho. 35.
Tis a good signe if the Hypocondries are without paine, By the Hy∣pocondries if they are soft and equall, on either part if they are not exte∣nuated; yet somtimes when the Hypocondries are stretched it shewes a crisis to come, but then also other criticall signes are present; on the contrary tis an ill signe, if the Hypocon∣dries are troubled with inflamation, or paine, or are stretched, or unequally affected, on the right, or left part; also when extenuated, By the ex∣tremities of the body. and beating, unlesse a Crisis be present. Lastly as to the extremities of the body, if in intermitting feavers, the extreame parts grow cold, and the internall burne, and they thirst, tis mortall 7. Apho. 1. but tis very good if all the body be equally hot, and soft; it is evill also, and for the most part deadly if all the body be heavy, and es∣pecially if the nailes and fingers are black and blue, or black, if the genitalls, and stones are drawn up together, also filthy smells indicate great putrifaction and danger. CHAP. VIII. Of knowing the time, longitude, brevity and event of a disease. THe length, Which dis∣eases are ended in the fi st quartar∣nary. brevity, time, and event, of a disease are known principally by the signes of concoction and crudi∣ty, and the vehemency of a disease, by the celerity, and tar∣dity; for if in the first day in an acute feaver, the signes of concoction are present in the urine, and no danger be per∣ceived, it argues the disease will end about the first quartarna∣ry, third, fourth, or fifth day, if the disease be contrary to this, and presently after the beginning have the worst Symptomes, Which are exten∣ded to the second. the fifth day, or before, he will dye. But if signes of concoction appeare the first and second dayes, and the disease be neither benigne nor vehement, the disease may be extended, to the second quarternary, but as long as such seavers can continue the first day, it can scarce be known, but afterwards each quartarnary are to be conside∣red, and the signes of concoction in them are to be wieghed & compared with the vehemency of the disease, towit, if in the fourth day signes of concoction appear in the urine, tis a signe that the matter is apt to be concocted, and that the disease will terminate on the seventh day; on the contrary, if in such a feaver, on the fourth day there appeare no signes of con∣coction but ill signes are also increased, tis an argument that
the sick growes worse, and may dye about the seventh day; unlesse some error be committed, or some other cause of change be present. But if the signes of crudity, remaine till the fourth or: Which to the third. se∣venth day, the disease shall indure beyond the third quartarnary, but if on the fourteenth day, it shall have an end, the eleventh, which is the index of the fourteenth will shew it, for if then signes of concoction appeare, either be∣fore the fourteenth day judgment may be given, or on the seventeenth day; but if on the eleventh day there appeare not as yet sufficient signes of concoction, there is no hopes that the disease will be judicatory on the fourteenth, and therefore the signes of concoction are to be sought in the following quartarnaries, for if the signes of concoction appear about the twentieth day, there is hopes on the first quartina∣ry, after the twentieth day, that the disease may be judged of, but if no mutation hitherto appeares it may be extended to the fourth week, and those diseases which retaine all the signes of crudity to the foure and twentieth day, cannot be decreed, before the fourtieth day, and those which are exten∣ded beyond the fourtieth are not ended with a Crisis, but with slow concoctions. Sometimes not only the day but also the houre of the end of a disease may be foretold, The houre of the event of a disease how to be known. namely if we consider particu∣lar fits, for if we think any one will dye on any day, tis pro∣bable he will dye in the worst time of his fit, or in a particu∣lar declination, when the strength, in the height of a dis∣case is dejected, by the cruelty and vehemency of Symp∣tomes. CHAP. IX. How many mutations there are of diseases, and the manners, and what a crisis is. THe third thing which ought to before known by Phy∣sitians is the manner of event, and end of diseases: Changes of diseases how many. they are terminated six severall wayes, as well to health, as to death, for either the disease is suddenly fully dissolved, and the sick recovers immediatly his firme health, or there is a sudden change to better, and the sick is transferred from a worse state into a better, after which, at length also he re∣covers to be well, or there is a conversion of the disease by
little and little to health, or contrary the sick suddenly dies, or the disease is suddenly become more dangerous, which change at length ends him. That mutation which is made by degrees, tending to death, is called a Marasme, or Wasting; that mutation of a disease which is made by little and little, and tends to health, is called a loosing, but that sudden and hasty change which is made in Feavers, especially acute and tend to health, Crisis. or death, is called a Crisis; but that change can∣not be made unlesse vitious humours which oppresse nature are moved, which indeed cannot happen without great perturbations of the body, and vehement symptomes, a Ca∣talogue whereof Galen recites in his 1. of criticall daies, Cap. 1. CHAP. X. Of the causes, differences, manner, and time of Judg∣ment. SInce that in Judgments many things happen, The cause of a crisis. Conturbat∣on. contur∣bation, evacuation, and sudden mutation, tending to safety or death, that conturbation which is a heap of those judicatory symptomes, which proceed from agitation and molestation of humours which the body affords, and this comes to passe either from an externall cause, as influence of Stars, or an internall, irritating and provoking as well nature as the matter. The cause of evacuation is the expulsive faculty, Evacuati∣on. which ei∣ther is stird up by the plenty or the quality of matter, yet critically expels that which doth molest. There are four differences of Crises, Differences of Crisis. according as nature is sometimes stronger, sometimes weaker, and sometimes op∣pressed more by vtious matter, sometimes lesse, for either the sick forthwith recover their former health, or sud∣denly dye, or undergo some change, tending to safety or death, Good Evill. yet immediatly they neither recover, nor dye: From whence afterwards other differences will arise, for some Cri∣ses are good, some evill; those are good which tend to the recovery of the sick, those are evill which discover the death of the sick. Again some are perfect and very good, Persect. Impersect. which free the sick perfectly and wholly from the disease, and leave none of the morbifique matter, but the imperfect leave some of the morbifique matter behind.
Again, some are faithfull and secure, Secure. Not secure. which so take away the disease, that there is no feare of a relapse; unfaithfull is that which leaves a doubt of falling into it again. Moreover tis called a safe Crisis which happens without danger of Symptomes; A safe. Dangerous. but a dangerous which is joyned with perilous Symptomes. Some Crises are with good signes, Eusemes. and have their indi∣cations from the daies going before them, and are called good signes; but that which happens without signes, and is, Asemos. as it were, unseperated, is said to be an ill signe. But all these differences depend on three things, The diffe∣rences of Crisis whereon they depend the strength of nature, the nature of a disease, and the conditi∣on of the matter which ought to be expelled; and that a good and perfect Crisis be made, tis requisite that nature be strong, and Heaven favourable, the disease not dangerous, and the matter benigne and facill; in all other Crises one, or more of these are wanting. All Crises are made two waies, either by excretion, Crisis, how many waies made. By excreti∣on, by tran∣slation. or e∣mitting, or else by removing the matter: By excretion a Crisis is made when peccant humours are expelled by vo∣mit, Seidgs, sweat, plenty of Urine, Hemerodes of the Nose, flowing of the months, and Hemerodes: A Crisis is made by translation, when the matter is not expelled out of the body, but is removed into another place, and that either into internall parts, or externall, the for∣mer Crisis is the better, because the matter for the most part is throughly cast out from the center of the body; by so much also a Crisis is the better, that is made by translation, by how much the matter is transferred to a more ignoble and remote place; so much the worse, by how much the place is more noble and nigher to the seat of the former disease: An Im∣posthumation also, or Ulcer ought to be out of the region of the part affected, and to have the other notes of a good Impo∣sthumation; an abscesse also ought not to vanish suddenly, but to remain untill either it be turned into quitture, or till it be dissipated by degrees. But the best Crisis never happens unlesse it be towards the end of the height, when the concoction is perfected, A good cri∣sis, when it happens. for that which happens in the augmentation before the state, is im∣perfect, and is so much the worse, by how much tis longer di∣stant from the end of the state; sometimes also evacuation which is made in the beginning of diseases, and is sympto∣maticall, is not to be accounted evill, especially if those hu∣mours
are evacuated, from whence the disease had its origi∣nall, and the strength of nature can endure it. CHAP. XI. Of Criticall daies. WHereas the Crises are made more frequently and bet∣ter on certain determinate daies then other daies, Criticall daies. those dales therefore are called criticall; but other daies wherein a Crisis seldome happens, or such a one as is not good does happen, are called not criticall. Criticall daies are of three kinds, some are those which are simply, and according to preheminency called criticall, wherein Judgments are made better and more frequently, all which are bounded within the circuit of a septinary number, and are these, the 7.14.20.27.34.40. for daies are not taken whole, but shorter. Moreover, there are some which are called indicant and contemplable, from whence the Crisis to come is shewn, and they are the middles, or quarternaries of every seventh morn∣ing, as 4.11.17.24. Others are such as come between, Interve∣ning. which the Greeks call Parempiptontes, others call them provocatory, wherein from some accident contrary to nature, or by the violence of a fit, or by reason of some externall cause, nature is provoked to hasten to untimely expulsion, such are the 3.5.9.13.19. and according to some 15.18. Vacant or not criticall daies are those wherein no crisis happens, Vacant. or very seldome, and unperfect, and evill, such are the 6.8.10.12.16.18. to which some add 22, 23.25.29, 30.32, 33.35.38.39. which daies are also called medicinall, because the Physitian on those daies may safely administer purging Medicines. After the 40. day diseases languish, and by a slow conco∣ction, and by Imposthumations, rather then Crisis are termi∣nated; after these some diseases are judged by months, o∣thers by years, and especially in climactericall years, when changes are made even of diseases which have been contra∣cted from their Mothers Womb. From this doctrine neverthelesse of Hippocrates, and Ga∣len, which Galen reduceth, as it were, in brief, in the 1. of decretory diseases, cap. 5. the ancients now long since have de∣parted; Asclepiades, Archigenes, Celsus, and others, which accounted the third criticall year not the twentieth, but
the one and twentieth, the fourth, not the twenty seventh, but the twenty eighth. The Astrologers also do not simply observe daies and num∣bers, The opini∣on of Astro∣logers. but referring all the reason of criticall daies to the mo∣tion of the Moon, note those daies wherein the Moon comes to every quadrangle, or fourth corner, and comes to the dia∣meter in respect of place wherein she was found when the disease began, as now in the causes of criticall daies shall be shewn. CHAP. XII. Of the causes of Criticall daies. THat we may omit the opinions of others, The cause of criticall daies. of the causes of criticall daies, no offence to any other judgments, we appoint criticall daies to depend on the Moon, and the con∣dition and disposition of peccant humours, and the expul∣sive faculty, for what mutations soever the Moon in her con∣junctions, oppositions, and quadrangles makes in these inferi∣or bodies is very well known, and therefore that power which is attributed to quaternaries, and septinaries do all depend on the motion of the Moon, yet neverthelesse that this, or that Crisis may be made betwixt those, the motion of the Moon alone is not sufficient, since not alwaies the seventh or fourteenth day is not alwaies criticall, and somtimes a good and an ill Crisis is made on the same day, and therfore the condition and disposition of peccant humours are to be joyned; and lastly, the expulsive faculty is to be added, which being stimulated by the motion of the Moon and disposition of humours, is the next and immediate cause of a Crisis. First seeing the order of criticall daies cannot proceed on∣ly from the faculty of the body, nor from morbifique matter, The Mon. but a coelestiall cause is to be joyned therwith, and the Moon in every quarternary, and septinary, and according as it takes up one and another place of the Zodiack in its motions, and by reason of the light from the Sun varying, shews to us vari∣ous lights or representations, it may make great alterations in sublunary things, tis not therfore without a cause deter∣mined, that great mutations arise in diseases in those places which have regard to the place wherin the Moon was in the beginning of the disease, with a quadrate or opposite ray; and when she is come so far as that she hath a new shape, and manifest mutation of light; for the motion of the Moon and her progresse to the quadrate, and opposite signes, and the
changings of the shape of the Moon are to be joyned what∣soever they are; yet the crises are stronger when the Septina∣ries exactly fall into the quadrates of the Moone. But in the computing of the criticall dayes, A periodi∣call month in criticall dayes to be observed. the month of wandring or travelling is to be observed as being naturall and according to which many changes are made in this in∣ferior orbe, which for the most part is made in twenty seven dayes and eight hours, which if they are divided into foure weekes, the first will be ended, in six dayes and twenty hours, the second in thrirteen dayes, and sixteen hours, the third in twenty dayes and twelve hours. Therefore on what day soever any one fall sick at the first onset of the disease, a conjunction as it were is made of the Moone and the disease, hence when the Moone hath measu∣red three fignes, or past over ninty degrees, and comes to the first quadrate, the first criticall day is made; when she hath past through six signes, or an 180. degrees she comes to the opposite signe, and the second criticall day begins; when from the opposite signeshe passeth to the second quadrate, the third crisis begins, if the disease be prolonged till then, lastly when she returns again to the place where she was at the beginning of the disease the fourth crisis begins, and she shews as she did at first. Prognosti∣call diseas∣es. The same reason is of indicatory dayes, for when the Moone hath passed over two signes or 60. degrees from the signe wherein she was when any one began to fall sick, and is said to come to a sextile, the first indicatory is begun; when she hath past over foure signes, or a 120 degrees, and becomes triangular, the second indicatory is made; and when from the opposite signe againe she comes to be triangular, then is the third indicatory; lastly when she hath gone from the second quadrate to the second sextile, the fourth indicatory is. But here the dayes are not to be numbered according to the diurnall indifferent motion of the Moone, Which motion of the Moone is to be ob∣served in critiball dayes. which is thir∣teen degrees, ten minutes, 35 sec. but according to the true motion of the Moone, for the Moone is sometimes swift, some∣times slow in motion, nor doth she passe through alike num∣ber of degrees each day, whence it comes to passe that she arrives sometimes sooner, sometimes later, to the quadrate and opposite signe, and hence without all doubt it comes to passe, that most admirable Physitians vary in defining of criti∣call dayes, and Hippocrates as also Galen account the twenti∣eth, and seven and twentieth: Archgenes, as also Diacles count
the one and twentieth and eight and twentieth for criticall dayes; neither are allwayes distinct aspects to be observed, but often times, plarick are sufficient. Secondly besides the motion of the Moon, The dispo∣sition and motion of humours. The nature of a body. the disposition and motion of humours are to be considered and which is the cause that the crisis happens sometimes sooner, sometimes later. Lastly the nature of the body is to be adjoyned, which being assisted by the motion of the Moone, and stirred up by the humours, begins a combate with the morbifique matter, and expels the same, and makes a crisis. CHAP XIII. Of the signes of crisis in generall. BUt crises are made as it is also said before, only in acute, In what diseases crists are made. and violent diseases, arising from hot, thin, and acrid mat∣ter which may tire out nature; but if sometimes in durable or chronick diseases also, criticall evacuations as it were, are made, it is necessary, that ther be certain periods of time be∣fore the disease become vehement and become of the same nature with acutes: Moreover that the crisis may be made, tis requisite that there be strength of nature, according as ought to be: thirdly, to the foreknowledge of a crisis certain pertur∣bations in the body conduce, which use to arise before a crisis, Signes of crisis. and signes which Galen in the third of crisis Cep. second at large describes, and, he breifly comprehends in the same book Cap. the tenth when he writes, that when a crisis is to come there is some new alteration, either about respiration, or concerning the mind, or the sight, or hearing, or about some of those which we call breifly, by one name, criticall ac∣cidents or signes.
CHAP. XIIII. Of the signes of differences in Crisis. A Good crisis is thus known. The best signe of cri∣sis. First because critick signes have precedes. Second, because the signes of concoction have gon before especially in urins and other excrements. Third, be∣cause it is shewn on the judicatory day. Fourth, because it hap∣pens on the judicatory day. Fifth, because convenient excre∣tion is made according to the nature of the disease. Sixth, be∣cause the sick after the Crisis is almost freed from the feaver, the Symptomes abate, and the face is of a better colour. But these Crises that differ from the best are known thus; Of the de∣clining from the best. because the signes of exquisite concoction have not gone be∣fore, nor have they happened in the state, nor a little before, but in the augmentation, they are not made on a criticall day, the evacuation doth not plainly answer to the nature of the disease, the sick doth not well endure that evacuation, the Pulses are not better, the sick is not eased of his disease, and in the night which followeth the crisis he is not more lightsome, yet amongst the other evacuations which are went to happen before an absolute concoction, the best of them is the Hemerhodes. An evill crisis is known by the signes which are contrary to the best crisis, Evill. namely because such a crisis first doth not expect the time of concoction; secondly in the judicatory day it was judicated by il signes, or it suddenly grew upon him without preceding signes; thirdly it is not made on a decre∣torie day, but for the most part on the sixth or eigth day; fourthly the evacuation doth not answer to the nature of the disease and the excretion of it selfe is evill, fifthly the sick is not eased, the pulse is become worse, the strength decayes, and the sick doth totally fall into a worse condition. CHAP. XV. The signes of a crisis to come by excretion and Impos∣thumation. BUt whether a crisis be to be made by emission of morbi∣fique matter, Sgnes of a crisis to come by excretion. or by transposition of it into another place, or by imposthumation, the kindes of diseases, and the motion,
time of the yeare, nature and age of the sick do shew; for if the disease be very acute ariseing from thin and acrid matter, and the crisis be to come after, the first periods, if nature be strong, the pulse high, the passages open, and nature accusto∣med to sweate or some other evacuation, if it be Summer time, tis a signe that there will be a crisis by excrements. By an vlcer or impost∣humation. But on the contrary if the disease be not so acute and the matter be thick, nature weaker, especially if the urines come forth thin and crude for a long space, if their be debility of the externall parts, and propensity of nature to thrust out hu∣mours, to these places; if the time of the year be cold, tis a token that there will be a crisis occasioned by imposthuma∣tion. And indeed excretions are good when they are evacuated as they ought, and such as ought, Signes of good or evill ex. cretions. and in such manner as they ought, and when, and as much as is expedient; namely when the humour which offendeth is evacuated, and concocted in due quantiry, in a criticall day, in a right manner, together, and through places sending them out together; evill evacua∣tions are contrary. Good imposthumations are those which are made when the matter is concocted, have laudable substance, Imposthu∣mations good or evill. namely a figure swelling externally, and sharpned, do equally ripen, and are not hard round about, and are of a good colour, red, yel∣low, or white, indifferent bignesse, when they continue and go not away untill they are suppurated, and are soon ripened; on the contrary, ill imposthumations swell not enough with∣out, and are not pointed, they suppurate not all alike, they are hard about, and cloven into two, their colour inclining to red, yellow, or black, they are greater then is convenient, and they vanish before they are suppurated, or are ripened very slowly. CHAP XVI. Through what places there will be excretion and where there will be impostumation. THrough what place there will be excretion the inclina∣tion of the humour teacheth, and about those parts to which the humour to be expelled is moved, or through which it is moved, a certain change is perceived.
When a Crifis is to come by the Hemerodes of the Nose, Signes of Hemerodes of the nose. the Hypocondries are wont first to be extended without pain, then when the blood finds the way to the superior parts, it causeth difficulty of respiration, but not long continuing; afterwards followes the paine of the head and neck, and the pulse becomes more vehement, and at times the Arteries are discerned to beat and pant, and the face and eyes become redder, and the eyes shed involuntary teares, and shinings, or glistrings are observed in them, or dimnesse ariseth, the imagination is also hurt, and a Delirium happens, and cer∣tain red apparitions seem to be before the eyes; and moreo∣ver the Hemerodes being now nigh, the sick begin to scratch their Nose with their fingers: and these signes are the more certain, if the age of the sick, and nature, and the time of the year, and the present constitution of the aire consent. If by reason of sweat which happens very often, Of a critick sweat. a Crisis be to come, there happens suppression of Urine for the most part, and a cold fit hinders it: but the signes of Hemerods are absent, as also the signes of Vomits, and monthly courses, and when the sweat comes forth the pulse is soft, waving and flowing, the exterior parts grow hot, and red, the skin is soft, and a certain hot vapour breaks out through the skin. That there will be a Crisis by vomit, the motion of the hu∣mours to the stomack shew, Vomit. from whence ariseth biting of the stomack with paine of the head, a giddinesse and dark cloudy shadowes or mists before the eyes, agitation of the lower lip, much and thin spittle flowing out of the mouth, loathing and disdaining, a cold chill fit, or trembling, and frigidity of the Hypocondries, a hard and unequal pulse, and difficulty of breathing. If a Crisis be to follow by reason of excrements from the Paunch, Excretion of the el∣ly. there is no proper and exact rule to know it, but only thus, because signes of a Crisis are present, but signes of a Vomit, or slux of blood, or sweat, or of courses are wanting, therefore we may conjecture there will be a Cri∣sis of the belly, and especially if belching wind, rumbling, or breaking wind in the elly be present; also paine of the loynes, heavinesse of the knees use to happen, and the Vrine is sometimes suppressed, or made more sparingly. That there will be a Crisis in the same manner, By Ʋrine. is knowne by the absence of signes, which use to shew the manners of other Crises, and the sick are not much tossed up and down, nor are they much out of quiet, but there is present a cer∣taine
gravity of the Hypocondries, and a perception of windi∣nesse about the bladder, and afterwards the Urines begin to be increased, the dregs of the belly to be retained, and the sick when he makes water is sensible of certain paine. Tis a signe that there will be a Crisis by the courses if signes of other evacuations be absent, By courses. but when the time when the tearmes are wont to flow, is present; and moreo∣ver the heat and gravity of the loynes concur, when there is paine and stretching out of the Hypocondries, and other Symptomes which familiarly happen when the courses are present. By the Hemerodes that there will be a Crisis is collected, By Heme∣rodes. If this flux be not otherwise familiar to the sick, and the signes of other criticall evacuations be absent, and the sick perceive some heat about the marrow of the back, or paine or extending of the loynes, or some paine in the belly. If criticall excretions are to come through more places, By more parts. In What place an Impostume will hap∣pen. the signes of more excretions wil give you notice thereof. Lastly, if it be conjectured that nature will remove the morbifique matter into another place, that place where the Impostumation will be, is known by the inclination of the matter to those parts whether inferior or superior, although the matter be thin, it shall rather be moved to the superior then the inferior parts, and if nature be strong, it rather drives the matter towards the inferior, then the superior parts. CHAP XVII. Of the time of the Crisis. LAstly, it is to be known at what time the Crisis will be, Signes of the time of Crisis. but that fore-knowledge depends upon the fore-know∣ledge of the State, of which we have spoken before, but the chief signes are those of concoction and crudity. If therefore on the first day a manifest signe of concoction appear, and all the rest portend nothing of evill, the Crisis of the disease is to be hoped for on the fourth day; but if on the first day there doth not appeare a manifest figne of concoction, other daies are to be consulted on; and if a signe appeare, in any of the decretory daies, or the next quarternary the Crisis is to be expected. Moreover those things are to be joyned with the signes of
concoction; which the Ideas, magnitude, motion, and man∣ner of a disease affordeth; for of acute diseases, some at the most are judged in foure daies, some are extended to the seventh, some to the fourteenth, others longer: The altera∣tion of a disease also shewes the Crisis, since it shewes whe∣ther the Crisis will be on an even day, or an odd: Also the times of diseases are to be considered, for in noisome diseases the crisis appeareth not perfectly before the state, only an im∣perfect crisis in the augmentation; but destructive are made either in the beginning, especially if the disease be vehement and the strength weak: To these signes also is to be adjoined the consideration of the time of the yeare, region, age, tem∣parature of the sick, and such like, of which Galen speaketh in the third of Crisis, cap. 4. But that a Crisis is now present, Signe that of a present Crisis. the criticall signes spoken of and enumerated before, do shew, namely, the night wher∣in the Crisis is to come, which precedes the fit, useth to be more grievous, 3. Aphor. 13. but various perturbations pre∣cede in the body, according as nature is to expell matter through this or that part: Of which before cap. 13. and Galen 3. of Crises, c. 2. But oftentimes not only the day but houre of Crises may be fore-told, for if we know the day of the Crisis which is to come, we ought to consider in what houre of the day the fit useth to come, and what time of the Paroxysme the sick is most grieved, and that is principally to be observed. Instead of a conclusion also, it is to be observed what cer∣tain, perfect, and best crises may be known, and the rest to know no otherwise then by the most probable conjectures, wherefore unlesse we can presage somewhat certainly before hand, it is more safe to hold our peace, then rashly pronoun∣cing to be deceived. Lastly, Signes of sttable and unstable change of diseass. concerning the Crisis, the stability and instability of the event is to be weighed, but stability of the event and certain health is to be hoped for, if nature be strong, and no Symptome remaine over and above; if all the rules of a good Crisis be present, if the humours are thin and hot, which are easily evacuated, but if nature be weak, and some Symp∣tomes abound, as loathing, and such like: all the good rules of a Crisis are not present, and the humour be colder and thicker, tis lawfull to presage unconstant health, and such may fall into relapse.
THE FOURTH BOOK, PART the I. Of things necessary for the pre∣servation of Health. CHAP. I. What things appertaine to the Doctrine of the pre∣servation of Health, and how many kinds there are of necessary causes for the preservation and defence thereof. HItherto we have explained three parts of Physick, which, as it were, prepare the way to those things which are proper to Medicine: Now the next is, that we explaine those principall parts of Physick, the Hygeeinall and Therapeuticall, or the preser∣vative and restorative; yet first of all we will place before hand certaine common Axioms and Maximes to be observed in the method of them both. 1. Nature doth nothing rashly. 2. Too much of any thing is an enemy to Nature, Common Maximes. 2. A∣pho. 51. 3. Nature is the Physitian of Diseases, but the Physitian the Servant of Nature, and ought to imitate her, she acting aright: 4. Custome is a second Nature, and those things which
are accustomed along time, although they are worse, they are wont to be lesse troublesome, then those things which are not accustomed, or which men are not used unto. Now concerning the Doctrineof the preservation of Health, The Do∣ctrine of the desence of health. it may conveniently be comprehended in two parts; the first is the knowledge of those things which are, as it were, the materialls of health, or the knowledge which is re∣quired of wholsome causes, and of things called Non-natu∣rall. Secondly, a method necessary for preservation of health, which teacheth how, or in what manner those non-naturall things are to be used to preserve health. First, for the causes which are necessary for the maintain∣ing of health, they are comprehended under the notion of things called non-naturall, and are conveniently reduced in∣to foure ranks, into those things which are taken, those things which are carried, those which befall the body with∣out, and those things which are emitted and retained: First therefore we are to speak here of Aire, Meat and Drink, Pas∣sions of the Mind, motion, and exercise of body, and rest, sleep, and watchings, Venery, Bathes, Excretions, and reten∣tions. CHAP. II. Of Aire. THe Aire affects our bodies two waies; Aire. either as it incom∣passeth us extrinsically, and insinuates it self through the pores of the skin, or as it is attracted by inspiration, both waies it alters our bodies, and impresseth its force on them, but that Aire is the best which is temperate, The best Aire. as to the primary qualities, and is pure, and infected with no pollutions, but is serene, moved or stird with the winds, breathing sweatly with pleasant gales, and which is sometimes moistned with whol∣some showres: Corrupt. On the contrary, that Aire is vitious which is infected with exhalations and vitious vapours, breaking forth on every side, or is incompassed with Marish grounds, where are standing waters, or after what manner soever it be impure, and such as cannot be purified by the blowing of winds; Situation of places. change the constituti∣on of aire. that which is troubled, or too hot, too cold, too dry, or too moist. But the constitution of the Aire may be polluted through divers causes; first, the constitution of the Aire depends on
the scituation and nature of places; for some Regions are hotter then others, others colder, for by how much the more any Regions receives the direct beames of the Sun, and by how much the longer the Sun remains above their Horizon, by so much the Country is the more hot; for the contrary reasons tis so much the colder. Yet this cause only doth not suffice, The earth and nature of the place. neither is the same constitution of aire in all the inhabitants under the same paralell; secondly, the mould and proper nature of the earth conduceth to the constitution of the temperature of the aire, where in is to be observed what the nature of the ground is, fat, dirty, filthy, gravelly, stony, sandy, whither the place be high or low, what scituation there is of mountains, and val∣lies, what winds it often admits, and from what climates, whether the the sea, or any lakes be neere it, whether it brings forth mettalls from whence malignant aire may be exha∣led. The mountains also change the constitution of aire, Scituation of Moun∣taines. ac∣cording as the blowings of certain windes drive away, and admit it, and if the mountains drive away the North-wind, but admit the South, it comes to passe that the places are hotter and moister, but on the contrary if by scituation of the Mountains, the blowing of the South be hindred, and the North admitted the place is colder and dryer. The winds bring forth great mutations, Winds. also the Orientall winds are more temperate, as also the Occidentall, but these are moister, the Notherne are cold and dry, and have power to bind and dry our bodyes, the Southerne are hot and moist, therefore as the Region or scituation is more or lesse disposed to this or that wind, so it obtains this or that constitution of Aire: Regions, and Countryes exposed to the Orientall Sun, are more wholesome then those which are exposed to the Septentrionall, and hot winds; as also then those which are exposed to the West. The vicinity of the Sea also and lakes conduce much to the peculiar nature of Aire, The vicini∣ty of the Sea and of lakes. unlesse interjected Mountains pro∣hibit, for from moist places of this nature many exhalations are drawn up, which mingles themselves with Aire and moisten it, and indeed the humidity will be increased if the Sea or a lake be scituated on the South, but if towards North, the frigidity increase; if a lake of the Sea be Orientall, and the rising Sun not far off, it drawes aboundance of moist ex∣halations to those places, but if the Sun be more remote, the
Vapours with the beams of the Sun wax hot and bring dry∣nesse to that place, but lesse moisture comes from lakes, and waters scituated to the West. Metallick pits for the most part sends forth filthy malig∣nant Vapours, Metallick Mines. and communicates them to the neighbouring places; Dens do the same and Caves, exhaling venemous Aire; Woods that are too thick, take away the light of the Sun and Moone, and hinder the motion and agitation of the Aire. Thirdly the seasons of the yeare change the Aire which in∣deed Astronomers constitute equall according to the motion of the Sun, Times of the year. and Zodiack being divided into foure parts, but Physitians principally regard these times, according to the temper of the Aire, and call that the Spring when the consti∣tution of the Aire is more temperate, when we neither grow stiffe with cold, nor sweat with heat; but the Summer when the same is hot and dry; Winter when it is cold and moist, neither do they appoint these seasons to be equall in all Re∣gions. Hence the Spring as being the most temperate, The spring. or as Hippocrates calls it, hot and moist, that is, when calidity moderatly overcomes frigidity, and humidity moderatly ex∣ceeds drynesse, it is the most wholesome time of the yeare, and although diseases are generated in the Spring time, yet the Spring of its selfe doth not produce them, but the vitious humours which are gathered together in the Winter time are driven out by the heat of the Spring. The Summer, Summer. because tis hot and dry makes bodies hotter and dryer, rarifies, dissolves, and renders them weaker, it at∣tenuates humours, and kindles them, from whence choler∣ick and sharpe humours are collected. Autumne, Autumne. because that in the same, Morning and Evening, the cold prevailes, about mid day heate, its constitution is mixed with cold and heat, and by reason of this inequality of Aire, it is very obnoxious to diseases, and the blood at this time of the year is diminished, and mellancholly abounds, bodyes are thickned, and pores shut. In Winter as being cold and moist, Winter. phlegme is cheifly increased, and bodyes are rendred obnoxious to distillations. All which neverthelesse are so to be received if you com∣pare one houre with another, or the times of the yeare ob∣serve their naturall constitution 3. Apho. 8. but if the sea∣sons of the year are unstable, divers diseases according to the
various constitutions of the year, arise, of which in the selfe same Apho. 6.11.12.13. Out of all which it is manifest that those scituations of pla∣ces are more wholesome wherein the constitution of the Aire is temperate, the Spring temperate, The most wholesome scituation of places: the heat of Summer sufficient to ripen fruits, and graines, Autumne colder, Win∣ter cold, yet not offending our bodies with two much frigidity, where ther is also a fruitfull soile, men indued with a comely habit of body, well coloured in the face, laudable in their manners, ingenious, and rejoycing in their prosperous health. CHAP. III. Of meate. AS for what belongs to meate and drink, Aliment what tis. wherewith the substance of our bodyes is renewed and increased, it is aliment, which can increase the substance of our body, and it is either properly so called, because it nourisheth our bodyes only, or Medicinall, because it also doth alter our bodyes. But aliments are taken from two kinds of things, Food whence to be taken. either from plants growing out of the earth, or from living creatures; and those things which are taken from living creatures, are either the parts of animalls, or those things which proceed from them, as eggs, milke, and those which are made from these, as butter, cheese, hony, and such like. Differen∣ces of ali∣ments. The difference of food is great, for some meats are of a good, others of an ill nourishment and juice; some are easily, others with difficulty concocted, some are easily corrupted in the stomach, others not. The best meate. That is the best food which is easily concocted, nourish∣eth much, affords much aliment, is not easily corrupted, nor indued with any ill quality, and leaves few excrements, Ʋnwhole∣some. but that food is unwholesome, out of which an ill juice is ge∣nerated, and which easily putrifies. That food is accounted firme which brings forth much nou∣rishment, but wants great strength of heate for concoction, Firme. but that is infirm which is easily concocted; and nourisheth, but affords but little nourishment, and such as is soone dis∣persed.
Meates from plants. THe most ancient, Fruits or Graines. and most familiar kind of aliment are plants, and those things which grow out of the earth, a∣mongst which in the first place are all sorts of Corne and grain, which the Greeks call by the name of fitou, and in the first place truly Corne is hot and moist, and beyond all the rest affords much nourishment and that firme and most wholesome, out of which although divers kinds of food are made, yet the best amongst them is bread, but that leavened, which agrees to every age, and is conveniently taken with all meats. A sort of Barly which they commonly call spelt, Spelt. is the next in nature to Corne, and is the middle as it were betwixt wheate and Barly, and it nourisheth more then Barly, but tis weaker then Wheate, out of this spelt is made a kind of frumenty, or Barly broath, Frument. Bye. of which Pliny 18. Booke 11. Chap. Rye, of which bread is made for the most part in Germa∣ny, and other parts, is hotter then Barly, yet not so hot as Wheate, and the bread which is made of it hath more aliment then Barly bread, and that stronger, yet it is something more hard of concoction, then Wheaten bread. The bread which is made of Barly is colder, and yeelds not so firme nourishment, Barley. Partisan of Barley. of Barly also is made ptisan, which being taken after what manner soever, affords good nourish∣ment both to those that are sick, and those that are well, and is no way or clammy, or viscide, but easily passeth through and cleanseth the passages, yet the aliment which it affords is a little thinner, Rice is hot and dry, Rice. or rather temperate, it nourisheth much, especially being boiled with milke it increaseth seed, it doth not easily putrify, stops the Loosenesse, it is hardly concocted, and yeelds nourishment somewhat thicker, and the frequent use of it may easily occasion obstruct∣ions. Millet. Millet and the graine like it, called in Latine Panicum i. e. Indian Oates, are almost of the same nature, and are cold, and dry, and stop fluxes of the belly, neither do they afford much nourishment, nor very profitable, yet millet is the better: Oates are hot and afford nourishment of a better
account; Pottages and Broathes are made of them, which may be given to those that are sick or well, which stops Loosenesse of the belly. The Corne called Saracenicum, Saraceni∣cum. of which Pottages are wont to be made, yeelds nourishment profitable for men that are given to dayly labour, and it is hard of concoction, it begets wind, and offends the eyes. Beanes are cold and dry, and flatulent, Beanes. hard of concoction and crude, and yeeld excrementicious nourishment, yet not visced, but have some cleansing power, they make the senses dul, and noises seeme troublesome. Pease are cold, and dry, and flatulent, Pease. especially the greene, yet they yeeld better nourishment then Beanes, but not so plentifull. Parsenips are hot, and dry, Parsnips. and have greater force of clean∣sing then Beanes, and therfore more usefull in Physick then dyer. Lastly Lentils are the worst food, cold, and dry, thick, Lentills of evill and vitious juice, and hard of concoction, they fill the head with thick Vapours, they hurt the eyes, they ingen∣der thick blood, and are cheifly hurtfull to melancholy per∣sons. After graines, instead of food, Pot-herbes are given, Pot-herbs. and the leaves of the Herbes, Branches, Roots, and the fruits of them, as also of Trees, which neverthelesse, yeeld not so good and profitable aliment as Corne, but many or them are too Medicinall; yet all of them are better boyled then raw. Lettice that is sowen is esteemed the best of all Pot-herbs, Lettice and affords more nourishment then other Pot-herbs, yet tis cold, and moist, and Medicinall, and moreover, in a hot con∣stitution of Aire, tis conveniently given to young men, and those which abound with choler, and those which have hot stomaches, it provokes sleep, allayes the heat of the reines, yet too much use thereof diminisheth the naturall heate. Cabbage is accounted by most to be cold, and dry, Cabbage yet in the juice thereof a certain bitternesse and acrimony is perceived, which hath a force to stir the paunch, tis hard of concoction, affords little nourishment, and that thick and Melencholy; from whence fuliginous Vapours fly into the head, and produce turbulent sleep, and weaken the sight, its malignity is corrected if it be boyled with sat meates, the
staulks are worse then the broad leaves, and are to be eaten only by those which are used to much labour. Spinnage cools and moistens, Spinage. affords little nourishment, yet not so evill as Orach, or Blitum, which is a kind of Beet, it generates cold and serous humours in the stomach, unlesse it be corrected with pepper and, oyle, or butter, it is not laudable, and it begets wind. Beets, Beets. Blitum, Orach, and Mallowes can scareely be used with profit, or benefit for aliment only, but are more benefi∣cially taken, when there is need to loosen, refrigerate, and moisten the belly; and Beet indeed is hot, and dry, and takes away obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and hath a different substance, the juice is detergent, wherefore it loos∣neth the belly, but the substance stops the same. Blitum, Blitum, O∣rach, Mal∣lows. Orach, and Mallowes loosen the belly only by hu∣mectation, they nourish little, they yeeld a watry juice, and have of themselves no pleasing savour unlesse they are dres∣sed, with Butter or Oyle, and other Sawces. Asparagus, Asparagus. Young Hops. to which the young branches or tender sprigs of Hops are next like unto, neither heat, nor manifestly cool, they are gratefull to the tast, and cause appetite, yet afford little nourishment, and therefore do afford not so good nou∣rishment; they have a detergent faculty, and provoke U∣rine, they cleanse the Reines, and open obstructions of the Liver, and of the other Intralls. Garden, Cresses. Mustard∣seed. or Water Cresses, and Mustard-seed may be used instead of Sawces, but not as nourishment, they are hot and dry, and of a biting tast, they attenuate crude meats, as also crude and thick humours. Onions afford little nourishment, Onions. they are acrid and have a heating, cutting, and extenuating faculty, and inflame the blood, and together with the discussed thinner parts they leave behind them a thick juice, they irritate Venus, they are all hurtfull to the head, eyes, teeth, and gumms, they cause turbulent Dreams. In raw Garlick there is almost no nourishment, Garlick. in boyled very little, and that bad, but there is manifest heat and dri∣nesse in it, and a power of extenuating thick and viscide hu∣mours, and of cutting them, and taking away cold, and tis the best remedy to convert the pravity of waters, as also a∣gainst the Plague, Leeks. and venemous aire: Leeks have almost the same power. Raddish. The Roots called Raddishes which we use being dipped in
Salt affords little nourishment, but are rather instead of me∣dicinall knacks, they heat beyond the second degree, and have a tart tast, they cut phlegme, attenuate, provoke Urine, and expell sand from the Veines. Wild Raddishes have the same force, Wild Ra∣dish. but are more power∣full, which are fit for sawce, but not of aliment. Turnips, Rape-roots round are slowly concocted, Rape. and fill the belly with wind, especially when they are raw, but boyled they are easier digested, and afford aliment enough, and ther∣fore not so hurtfull, but are hot and moist. Long Turnips are almost of the same nature, Tunips. but of a bet∣ter tast, and yeeld lesse thick and flatulent juice, and afford strong nourishment, they stimulate Venus. Parsley is hot and dry, provokes Urine and courses, Parsley. opens obstructions, purges the Reines, and bowels, yet it afford lit∣tle nourishment. Garden Parsnips yeild little, hot and dry, Parsnips. and not very good nourishment, they cause lust, provoke Urine, and bring down courses. Red Beets which are pickled with Vinegar, Red Beets. the seed of Carawayes, and the roots of wild Raddishes are used rather instead of Sawces, then as food, since they nourish very little. The fruit of Plants are various; Melons. Melons are pleasant to the tast, and send forth an Aromatick smell, but they are of a watry moist substance, not without coldnesse, whereby they quench thirst, and causes Urine, they cleanse the Reines, but they are easily corrupted, and being corrupted, become as it were of a venemous nature, and stir up choler, or gene∣rate Feavers, whereby many great men are killed, and ther∣fore they ought to be eaten at the first course, that they may the easier descend through the Paunch, and after the eating of them, some food of good juice is to be taken, and good Wine is to be drank, that the corruption of them may be hin∣dred. Cucumbers, are also cold, but not so moist, Cucumbers and the juice not so hurtfull, nor are they so easily corrupted in the sto∣mach, they are most conveniently taken, before they are ripe being pickled in Vinegar, or Brine, and Pepper, and they are least offensive to those which have hot stomachs. Artechocks Artechocks heat and dry, to the second degree, they are hard of concoction, and afford not very good nourishment, they are windy, and stimulate Venus, unlesse this be rather to be attributed to the seasoning, or dressing of them.
Strawberies, Strawbe∣ries. are cold, and moist, they are profitable to those that are troubled with choler in the stomach, they coole the liver, they restraine the heate of the blood and cholerick humours, they allay thirst, and therefore are be∣neficiall in hot constitutions of bodyes, they have thin juice, purge the reines, cause urine, but are easily corrupted in the stomach, and therefore ought to be eate, the first. Now followes the fruits of Trees, Peares. and frutices, first of peares there are divers kinds, nor are they all of the same faculty, the austere, and sharpe are astringent, and cooling, and hurtfull to the stomach, and Guts; sweete are more tempe∣rate, yet almost all are of a cold, and moist nature, only some are hot and moist. and moreover, more apt to cor∣ruption, they are not unpleasing to the stomach, in the first place being taken they stop a loosenesse, but being taken af∣ter other meate, they loosen the belly, and shut the mouth of the stomach, they are better boyled, then raw. There are divers sorts of Apples which discover themselves by their taste, Apples. the sower are colder then the sweete, and of a thinner, and lesse flatulent substance; the austere and sharpe are yet colder, and of a thick substance, and descend more slowly through the paunch, and stay it, yet their vio∣lence is corrected by boyling; and sower, austere, and sharpe Apples are to be used rather instead of medicines then aliment, they all afford ill juice, but those are most hurtfull which are watry, and for the most part have no taste; the best are sweete ones, with an aromatick taste and smell, and such as afford an indifferent quantity of aliment, and that not evill, they strengthen the heart, exhilerate the minde, and are very beneficiall to those which are troubled with Melancholy. Quinces are cold and dry, Quinees. and have an astringent fa∣culty, they are harder of concoction, afford little nourish∣ment, and that thick, they strengthen the stomach, and stop vomiting, and if they are taken after meate, they hinder Vapours so that they cannot easily ascend to the head, and they loosen the belly, but being taken before meales, they stop a loosenesse; being taken raw they hurt the nerves, and often cause fits of the cholick
Peaches are cold, and moist, and are easily corrupted, Peaches. and afford little nourishment, and therefore are to be eaten spa∣ringly, and warily, and indeed before meales, not after other meates, neither is water, nor any cold drink, to be drunke after them, but wine; being dryed they are lesse hurtfull, and especially being boyled in Wine, their pravity, if they had any, it is taken away. Apricoks which are well known to the Persians, Apricocks. in goodness are beyond Peaches, and more pleasing to the stomach, and are not so easily corrupted. Medlers are cold and dry, Medlers. and are not eaten till they are rotten, they afford little nourishment and are slowly con∣cocted, they stop the belly and all fluxes, they stay vomit∣ting, and agrece well with a cholerick stomach. Sowre Sherryes have a chooling faculty, Cherryes. are easily con∣cocted, and descend through the belly, they coole the sto∣mack, and liver, they quench thirst, and raise an appetite, and are not so easily corrupted, nor are they of so hurtfull a juice, but the sweet ones are far inferior to the sharpe ones in goodnesse, by reason of the moisture abounding, and are easly corrupted, and generated urred humours, and Wormes, in putred feavers. There are divers kinds of Plumbs, all of them cold, Plumbs. and moist, the sweet ones are not so cold by nature, yet they mitigate the acrimony of choler, and therefore agree most with colerick persons, they are easily concocted, and passe through the belly, those that are fresh, alter most powerfully, they mollify the paunch, being taken before meate, but with their moisture they scatter abroad many excrements, and that crude, neither do they generate so good juice, yet some are softerthen others, those which abound most with a crude and moist iuce, they are the worst, the white, and waxen colour, or yellow, are the worst, and afford ill juice, but the best are Damask Prunes, and those which are neerest to these are green, but the dry are more fit for nou∣rishment, and afford better aliment for those which are weaker in stomach, Plumbs are not convenient; for they loosen itstone. Mulburies moisten, coole, quench thirst, Mulburies. mitigare the heate of choler, they nourish little, they easily passe through the belly, but if they are retained, they easily are corrupted, and become putred, and acquire an ill nature, wherefore they are to be eaten when the stomach is empty only, and not
overspred with peccant humours; that they may on a sud∣den descend and passe through the paunch. Figs are hot and moist, Figs. by nature they nourish more then other fruits, they easily descend and go through the belly, they have a penetrating, and abstergent faculty, yet too much use of them begets wind; dry Figs are hotter, and dryer, yet acquire a power of cleanseing, opening, and attenuating, yet they also loosen the belly, drive humours to the externall parts, being often taken and plentifully, they cause sweates, and generate blood, not very good, but such as is apt to putrify. Sweete grapes are hotter, Grapes. and for that reason cause thirst; sharpe, and austere are colder; those that are fit to make Wine, are betwixt these extreames; those that are fresh ga∣thered, afford little nourishment, and are flatulent, and if they are detained long in the stomach they are corrupted and dilate the belly, and stir up cholick fits, they cause the spleen to swell, and fill the stomach and liver with crude humours, and allwayes the fresh gathered serve rather for pleasure, then for health; the austere and sower Grapes, are colder, and strengthen and bind the belly, the sweete ones are hotter and afford more nou∣rishment; those which have a mixed taste, obtaine mixt faculties, but the sweet, which participate something of sharp∣nesse, are commended before the rest, they are pleasing to the stomach, gratefull to the liver, as also they are said, by a certain propriety, to be advantagious to the whole sub∣stance, they are helpfull to the brests, and strengthen all the naturall members; those which are without stones are called Corinthian, they loosen the belly more, but those which have seed strengthen the stomach. Amongst Nuts, Almonds. the best are sweet Almonds, they are tem∣perately hot and moist, and yeelds store of nourishment, and of good juice and moderate, they attenuate and cleanse, for which reason they are the best food for immaciated bodies, and they replenish the intrails, and the whole body with convenient nourishment, and such as is not apt to corruption, they purge the brest, open the passages of urin, and cause sleep, but they are not so convenient for a cholerick stomach, nor to be given in cholerick Feavers.
Walnuts are hot and dry, especially dryed, Walnuts: for your green ones are moister, and are not so hot, and therefore are eaten safer, but the dry generate choler, and offend the Orifice of the stomach, and hurt the Gullet and Wind-pipe, and cause a cough, and generate pain in the head, commonly the use of them is commended after Fish, because with their heat and drinesse they prevent the corruption of Fish. Hasle-nuts afford more nourishment, then Walnuts, Haslenuts. but they are colder, yet they are hot and dry, they are hardly di∣gested, and afford a thick juice, more earthly then Wal∣nuts. Chestnuts are hot and dry, Chestnuts. and Galen conceives they have no ill juice, as all the rest of the fruits of Trees, if they are well concocted in the stomach, yet they are harder of digesti∣on, and are distributed more slowly, yet they afford more du∣rable nourishment, they bind the belly, and if they are eaten in too great plenty, they cause wind. Toadstools and Muskeroms for the most part are cold, Musheroms they yeild a watry and thick nourishment; Toadstools are pre∣ferred before Musheroms: yet all of these are not to be taken without danger, because they do not only generate ill juice, but oftentimes there is poyson in them. Lastly, Oyle. Oyle drawn out of ripe Olives affords nourishment temperate, and for the most part agreeable to our nature, and can correct the pravity of other aliments, and amend the crudity of Herbes, it also mollifies and loosens the belly, is takes away all sharpnesse; it helps Ruptures, and such as are bursten, and mitigates pain. Meates from living Creatures. IN the second place many living Creatures supplies us with convenient nourishment agreeable to our nature, Aliments of living Crea∣tures. as being neerer and more familiar to our nature, and lesse exceed in the qualities, and afford better juice. Either the parts of living Creatures are taken as food, or those things which are taken from them, yet are not the parts of living Creatures, and amongst the latter the first is Milk, which is of a cold and moist, or rather of a temperate and moist nature, and yeilds nourishment, the best by much if it be rightly concocted in the stomach, and be good in its self.
There are three parts of milk, Parts of milk. the butirous, the serous, and the caseous; the butirous is of an oylely and hot substance, the serous is watry, yet having some mixture with saltnesse; but the caseous is cold and try, and indeed Cowes milk is the fattest and thickest, and contains more butter then the milk of other Animals, and therefore nourisheth more, and is most agreeable to us, and hath more of the caseous part then Ewes milk. Gotes milk is in the middest betwixt these. Sound A∣nimals only generates good milk, but sick generate vitious: Dry Herbs also cause the milk to be thick, but green, and such as are full of juice makes better, wherefore the milk at the latter end of the Spring is best, for by how much the thinner it be, and more serous, by so much it is the easier concocted, and sooner passeth through the belly, Best milk. Antter. and obstructs lesse, but it nourisheth least; the best milk therefore is that which is of a good smell, and sweet to the tast, of a middle consistence, neither too thick, nor to thin, nor serous, nor caseous over∣much, of a white colour, which yeilds good aliment, and that plentifully and constantly enough, especially for lean bodies, as being that which is elaboured by so many concoctions, and is become familiar to our nature, that tis easily, truly concocted, as in unwholsome bodies tis casily corrupted, in a cold stomach it easily growes sowre, in a hot, it is turned in∣to an adust smell, and choler, and causeth pain in the head, wherefore it is hurtfull to those that are sick of putred Fea∣vers, and to such as have paines in the head, as also to those which are troubled with diseases of the eyes, or are obnoxi∣ous to breed gravell, those that are obstructed in the Liver, and inflamed in the Hypocondries, 5. Apho. 64. but the worst corruption thereof is, when it is coagulated, which may be prevented, if any Salt, Sugar, ot Honey be added to it: It is most conveniently taken on an empty stomach, nor are o∣ther meats to be eaten presently after, especially the use of Wine after milk is unwholsome. As for the parts of milk, Butter is used in our Countries instead of food, and sawce, tis hot and moist, and almost of the same nature with Oyle, yet it nourisheth more, and is a sawce for many things, tis used more advantageously then Oyle, tis pleasant to the tast, tis easily concocted, and nou∣risheth much, yet it agreeth not with those that have a moist and slippery stomach, yet tis far better to be taken before o∣ther meats, then after; nor is it so agreeable to hot natures, tis most conveniently eaten with bread.
Sowre milk is colder, and agreeth not with colder stomachs, Sowre Milk. but with hotter, especially in the Summer, and in very hot weather. Cheese is hardly concocted, and yeilds thick nourishment, Cheese. and therefore stops the belly, opens the Pores, and affords matter fit for the generation of stones; but that which is old affords ill nourishment, the new yeilds better: the new and salt is as yet cold and moist, and of a flatulent nature, the worst is the oldest, that which is of a middle age, which is neither hard nor soft, and is moderatly sweat and fat, is the best, but whatsoever it be, tis alwaies to be eaten after other meats, and sparingly; but since there is great diffe∣rences of Cheeses, according to the nature of living Crea∣tures, and of place, and pasture: That of the Ewe is the best, tis easier concocted then others, and affords better nourishment: Cowes milk is next to this in goodnesse, the Goates is worst of all; yet that Cheese is better, when the buterous and caseous parts are not separated, but are made altogether into Cheese, but those Cheeses are worse which are made of the caseous part only of the milk. The serous part of the milk nourisheth least, Whey. and is instead of Medicine rather then aliment, yet tis most fitly used for the evacuation of serous and adust humours; it consisteth of two parts, the one salt and participating of acrimony, and is altogether hot, which is the lesser part, the other is watry, and is the greater part, for which it is called cold and moist whey Eggs, but especially of Hens, are food with us; Eggs. an Egg consists of two parts, the Yolk, and the White, those are mo∣deratly hot, and moist, and of the best nourishment; these cold and dry which afford also much nourishment, and that lasting enough, but hard of concoction: The newest Eggs are the best, and nourish most, and soonest, and yeild good aliment; but the stalest are the worst, and the corruption of Eggs the worst: And they do not so well agree with those whose Liver or stomachs are filled with vitious humours, and in Cholerick and hot stomachs they are easily corrupted, and turned into choler; As for the dressing of them, they are best when they are soft, and to be supt, beeing boyled in seething water, but those which are roasted in ashes are not so good; those that are boyled till they are hard, although they afford more solid nourishment, yet they are worse, but the worst of all are those which are fryed in a Frying-pan, especially in Oyle.
Honey is of a hot and dry nature, Honey. in the second degree yet that which is whitest is not so hot, and is more commo∣dious for those that are sound, but all honey is medicinall aliment, convenient for old men and those of cold natures, but because it easily turnes into choler, tis not fit for hot na∣tures, nor for the Liver, but tis good for the Lungs, other∣wise it hath a cleansing faculty, Sugar. and resists putrifaction. Sugar, although it be not taken from living Creatures, but is made out of Reeds, hath a great agreement with ho∣ney, yet tis lesse hot and dry then honey, and therefore tis profitably mingled both with hot and cold things, yet in those that are very hot, it easily turnes into choler, otherwise it hath an abstersive faculty without sharpnesse. Aliments which are taken from the parts of Animals are many, Food from the parts of Animals. Feet. which both according to the kinds of living Crea∣tures, and according to their parts do vary. The feet of A∣nimals, of what kind soever, are cold and dry, they have little flesh, and scarce any blood, they yeild a cold juice, dull and glutinous, by reason whereof the broath of boyled feet is congealed. The Heart is of a hard and dry nature, Heart. and fibrous, neither is it easily concocted, but if it be well concocted it yeilds neither ill juice, nor a little, and that stable and firme. The Liver it self is hard to be concocted, Liver. and yeilds thick nourishment, which is slowly distributed, it is of good juice and firm, but there is great variety in this part, not only according to the kinds and ages of living Creatures, but also by reason of their food and full nourishment; for Animals which are not grown to their full state, and which use better and fuller feeding, have also a greater Liver, more delicate and fuller of juice. The Spleen affords little nourishment, Spleen. and that melan∣choly, tis hardly concocted, and slowly distributed. The substance of the Lungs is light and thin, Lungs. and nourish∣eth lesse, yet it is easier concocted, nor doth it afford ill nutri∣ment. The Reines afford not very good but thick aliment, Reines. and the Reines of younger Quadrupeds, or Calves are of better juice, and are easier concocted. The Tongue excels the other parts in pleasantnesse of tast and goodnesse of aliment, Tongue. it is also easily concocted. The brain yeilds pitutious and thick juice, Brain. and is not ea∣sily concocted, nor distributed, and causeth loathing.
The Stomach and Guts of Animals are of a harder sub∣stance, and of a colder and dryer nature, Stomach. they are harder of concoction, and not to be concocted except it be by a strong stomach, and that they be well boyled, they yeild little blood, and that cold, and not very good. Flesh that is full of Muscles, Musculous flesh. which is frequently taken instead of food, differs principally according to the kinds of living Creatures. Swines flesh nourisheth very plentifully, Swines flesh. and yeilds firme nutriment, and therefore is most profitable, for those that are in their flourishing age, sound, strong, and which are exercised with much labour, yet because too much humidi∣ty abounds in it, it yeilds a thick and slow juice, and many excrements, it agrees not with all men, especially with those that are sick, wherefore many other sorts of meat are prefer∣red before it. Brawn, or the flesh of tame Bores, Brawn. so that it be of youn∣ger Bores, is the best, because it hath not so much excre∣mentitious moisture. A Lamb before tis a year old hath moist flesh, Lamb. slimy and viscid, but when tis a yeare old, tis very good nourishment, consisting of good and plentifull juice, and indifferent lasting, and easie of concoction, but in those which are exercised with hard working, tis easie discussed, and aliment that is not solid is made thereof. But because Lambs that are of a longer growth, Weather Mutton. become Sheep, and the flesh is then become ungratefull, and not of so good juice, their stones are cut out, and they are made Weathers, the younger whereof are the best meat, and tis easily concocted, and generates good blood, and therefore agrees both with those that are well, and those that are sick. But Mutton of Ewes is evill, Ewe Mut∣ton. both by default of the tempera∣and by frequenting of copulation, and of bringing forth young, tis hardly concocted, evill, and dull, and viscid juice is bred thereof. Veale is temperate, render, and affords good juice, Veale. of a pleasant tast, yet it yeilds somewhat a thicker juice then Lamb or Mutton. Beef is thick flesh, hard of concoction, Bese. and doth not ea∣sily passe through the Veines, it doth not participate of vi∣scidity and sliminesse, the frequent use thereof causeth dry and melancholly humours in the body, especially Cow-beef, or that of an Oxe, which with age and much working hath
contracted drinesse and hardnesse of flesh, or is hardned with salt and smoak. Goates flesh affords good nourishment, Gotes-flesh and may easily be preferred before the rest of Sylvestrous Animalls, in good∣nesse of aliment, facility of concoction, pleasantnesse of tast, and paucity of excrements, yet they are something drier. Venison is hard of concoction; Venison. and generates melancholy juice, especially if the Venison be grown to ripenesse of years, and doth obstruct the bowels. Hares flesh is accounted a great dainty, Hares∣flesh. yet by Physiti∣ans tis numbred amongst those aliments which yeild a me∣lancholy juice, and therefore are not so good for those who have dry bodies, yet if they are well concocted, they are thought to occasion a good colour in the face, if they are well boyled, the juice is not evill. There are many kinds of Birds, amongst the which never∣thelesse, nay, amongst flesh, the Hens are accounted the chief, Hens. for they are temperate, easie of concoction, of good juice, and contain few excrements, and thence they pro∣create good blood, and yeild most profitable food for those which are not much exercised with labour, yet there is a certain difference amongst this kind of Fowl, the best is the flesh of a Capon; the next is that of Chickins, yet their flesh is moister, Hens are dryer, the flesh of Cocks is harder and dryer, the Hens flesh affords nourishment not firme e∣nough for those who are day-labourers. A Turky-cock also yeilds much and laudable nourish∣ment, Turkie∣cocks. nor is it inferiour to Capons, neither in tast, or good∣nesse of juice, it is profitable food for those which are in health. The flesh of Patridge is temperate, Patridges something inclining to drinesse, tis easie of concoction, it affords excellent juice and much nourishment, and few excrements, and is very good food for those that are in health, and those that are troubled with the French Pox. A Phesant and a Quail, Phesants. Quails. Pigeons. which are the best nourishment and most excellent food for such as are in health. There is no small variety of Doves, the better sort are those that are of the Mountains and Woods, yet the flesh of all of them affords a thick Melancholy and excrementious juice, and is not easily concocted; and tis hurtfull in putred Fea∣vers.
The flesh of tame Geese doth abound more with excre∣ments, then that of wild, Geese. yet the flesh of them both is hard of concoction, and yeild no good juice, but vitious, and ex∣crementitious, and such as is easily putrifyed, but if one have a strong stomach, and it be well concocted, it af∣fords plenty of nourishment, but the liver of Geese that are well fatted, are temperate meate, most plea∣sant, easey of concoction, of good juice, and much nourish∣ment. A Thrush is easily concocted, A Thrush. yeelds good juice not ex∣crementitious, and affords nourishment firme enough. A Lark also, generates excellent juice, A Lark. and is easily con∣cocted, and by a peculiar faculty, it is reported not only to preserve one from the cholick, but also to cure it. The flesh of Black-birds both for pleasantnesse and faci∣lity of concoction, Black∣birds. and goodnesse of juice is somewhat inferi∣or to that of the Thrush. A Quaile is hot and moist, hard of concoction, A Quaile. of ill nou∣rishment and full of excrements, and affords matter fit for the generation of feavers. Fishes are colder and moister food, Fish. then the flesh of ter∣restiall Animalls, and scarce afford so good juice as Corne, and fruits, and other vegetables, they easily putrify also, and if they are corrupted, they acquire a quality most averse to our natures. But there is a great variety of fishes, Salmon. a Salmon in the first place, hath tender flesh, gratefull to the palate, tis easily concocted, affords good juice, and is the best amongst fishes; when they are pickled with salt, and hardned with smoake, they are much worse. Troutes amongst fishes which are bred in fresh waters are the best, and are next in goodnesse to a Salmon, Trout. easy of con∣coction, full of much good, and thin juice, but the greater of them, have flesh not a little excrementitious, fat, and full of viscidity; those are commended before others, which have red flesh, and many red spots, and that have hard flesh and participate not of viscidity, and fat, those are easier concoct∣ed, descend sooner, Soles. and have lesse excrementitious juice. Amongst Sea fishes, the sole is highly commended, which hath delicate flesh, and is easy of concoction. Gudgeons. Gudgeons properly so called are the best of taste amongst the
fishes, and very wholesome aliment, easie to be concocted, and such, as remaine not long in the stomach, and are profitable, both for pleasure, and health, and may safely be given to those that are sick, to which other little fish are alike, as dace and minners, and such like. A pick, A Pike. especially of the smaller growth, hath hard flesh, it is concocted easily, and easily distributed; and hath not many excrements, and may also be given to those that are sick. A Perch also hath tender flesh, A Perch. and such as will easily part asunder, and no fat, and glutinosity, tis easy to be di∣gested, the juice is not evill, yet it affords weaker aliment, and such as is easily discussed. A Breame hath soft and moist flesh, A Breame. and yeelds a juice very excrementicious, and is to be eaten as for the most part, all other fish are, not; tis not to be mixed with divers kinds of meates. A Barbell, A Barbell. whose egs perchance gave an occasion to some to suppose, that he hears very bad, it causeth not onely paines of the belly, but also vomiting, and disturbes the paunch, and stirs up choler, from the use whereof we ought to abstaine, but the flesh thereof is very white, easy of concoction, and distri∣bution; and affords aliment of good juice. The flesh of Eeles is sweete but glutinous with fat, and abounding with much moisture, Ecles. it generates ill juice, and the use thereof is not safely granted to those that are sick, nor to those that are well, especially if they be taken plentifully. A Lampry is meate of a gratefull and delicate taste, A Lampry. if it be rightly prepared, and sauced, yet it puts not away quite its slimynesse, and glutinosity by this meanes, and for that reason they are not numbred by Physitians, amongst fishes of the best sort. A Tench is neither of a pleaseing taste, A Tench. nor easy to be con∣cocted, nor good aliment; but yeelds a filthy slimy juice, and such as is easily corrupted, neither is it easily distributed, and it brings forth obstructions. A Herring hath white flesh, A Herring. apt to cleave into small peices, and hath a good taste, not hard of concoction, it affords good juice not thick, and glutinous, tis pickled with salt, and hard∣ned with the smoake, but then tis harder of digestion, and yeelds not so good juice. Amia a fish which hath no English name, but is like a Thunny, Amia. hath soft flesh, yeelds good juice, but not much aliment.
A Sturgeon hath hard fat, and glutinous flesh, A Sturgon. which yeelds thick juice, yet not hurtfull, and tis not easily concocted, yet the younger are more plesant to the taste, and easier concoct∣ed, and yeeld much nourishment. A Sole, Plaice, and Turbet, are white fish, A Sole Plaice. Turbet. yeeld good juice, and plentifull nourishment, and such as is not easily corrupted, but being dryed, they become harder, and are harder of concoction. Cod-fish, Stock-fish. (or rather stock fish) although whilst it is fresh tis said to have friable flesh, and tender, of good juice, and easy of concoction, yet being dryed, it becomes so hard, that it is to be knocked with Hammers, and Clubs, and to be pul∣led into peeces in water before it be boyled, whence it af∣fords thick nourishment, and hard of concoction, and is to be eaten without dammage only by those who have very healthy stomachs, and are given to dayly labour. Oysters have a soft juice, Oysters. and therefore irritare the bel∣ly to dejection, and stimulate Venus, they nourish lesse, and are hard of concoction, and easily generate obstructions. Terrestiall Cockels, or Snailes, Snailes. are accounted for dain∣ties by many, yet the flesh of them is hard of concoction, and requires a healthy stomach and the addition of many sawces, yet they remaine hard, and generate thick, and black blood, but that part which is said to be given in broath for Hecticks is only in the hinder part of the snaile, which Aristotle in the fourth of the History of Animals Cap. the fourth, calls Mico∣na, that is poppey, as he pleased to call it, which hath in it a certaine glutinous, and caseous substance, easily dissolved, yeelding to the teeth, tender, the which is not hard of con∣coction, and nourisheth much. Crab fish, which have no tailes, and Lobsters, Lobsters. and craw∣fish which have tailes, and are frequent in our Countries, seeme to have no great difference in their nature, all of them are hard of concoction, and are not well concocted, unlesse by a strong stomach, yet if they are well concocted they nourish much and beget good juice. CHAP. IV. Of drinke. DRinke whereby the moist substance is restored which is dayly consumed, and the naturall thirst allayed, The benefi of drink. the
fat, and thick moisture, carried through the narrow passages, and the meat in the stomach is mingled, concocted, and pow∣red forth, and an inflamation of that fat, which is destina∣ted by nature to nourish our bodies, is prohibited; there are divers kinds, The kinds. Water, Wine, strong Beere, and water mingled with Hony, and certaine liquors made with Apples, Peares, and such like. There is great variety of Waters, Waters. all which are cold, and moist, but the best is that which is found to be pure and fin∣cere, by the sight, taste, and smell, and offers the savour of nothing to the taste, Differences of Waters. neither odour to the smell, which soone growes hot, and suddenly grows cold, which is light, and wherein flesh, and fruit are soon boyled: some is Fountaine water other is River, some is Raine water, other lake, or Pond water, some Marish, other Snow water. The Fountaine is the best which hath these notes of good water, Fountain. that which spreds towards the East, and runs towards the rising of the Sun, and thrickles through sand, and gra∣vell, that carries no mud with it, that is hotter in Winter, and colder in Summer. River water for the most part is Fountaine water, River. and a∣riseth from many Fountains flowing together, and therefore is of a mixt nature, and receives also a mixt nature from the earth through which it flowes, and somtimes also, they are mingled with Snow melted in the Mountaines, and great Showres of water collected together, yet its crudi∣ty is corrected by the beames of the Sun, whilst it runs through many parts of the Earth; before the use of it, it should stand, and setle, in water-tubs, that whatsoever it carries with it that is impure may settle in the bottome. Rain water which falls in the Summer time with thunder is the thinnest, Raine. and lightest, but since many Vapours are lift up by the heate, and mingled with the Showres, these waters are not very pure, whence they are obnoxious to putrifact∣ion. Well waters, Well wa∣ters. since they are not raised above the Earth, and are lifted up on high, only by the benefit of Art, they are thick and heavy, whence they continue long in the bowels and offend them. Lakes and marish waters are the worst, Lake wa∣ters. they easily become purred, they are thick, and crude, and often times, malig∣nant, and Pestilent, from whence the stomack is offended by them, the bowels obstructed, and humours corrupted and
often times putred, and malignant feavers and Pestilen∣tiall do thence arise, Waters of Snow, and Ice, are condemned, Of Snow and Ice. for they are thick and hurt the stomach, and stirr up greivous diseases of the joynts, nerves, and bowels. But the malignancy of waters are corrected, by boyling, Boyling of waters. whereby not only the crudity, and frigidity is amended, but also, the terrene, and vitious parts are separated, which af∣terwards when the heate vanisheth, settles in the bot∣tome. Wine hath a heating, Wine. and drying power which even the Spirit which is drawn out of it teacheth, yet because it easi∣ly nourisheth, and increaseth moisture, and blood, fit to nourish the body, tis said to be moist, namely Wine is a me∣dicinall aliment, hot, and dry, some in the first, some in the second, and some in the third degree; for this reason, the use of it is forbidden boyes, and by reason of this drying faculty many use to mixe water therewith, yet there is not a little difference in heating, and drying, not only according to age, but also according to the nature of the Wine it selfe, for some is very little suffering, because in mixture it will indure but little water, but other Wine is called winy Wine, because it may indure more water to be mixt with it. But Wines differ according to taste, smell, colour, Differences of Wines Savour. and manner of subsistance: as for what belongs to the taste, sweet Wines properly so called, nourish best, and are not only most gratefull to the palate, but to the bowells, but because they are thicker, they easily produce obstructions in the Liver, and Spleen, inflame the Hipocondries, and are easily turned into choler, they are profitable for the Lungs, Chops, and Throate, nor do they so hurt the head, nor offend the nerves. Austere or harsh wines have the weaker heat, tarry longer in the belly, nor doe they easily passe through the veines, and pe∣netrate through the passages of the urine, whence they are good for a loosenesse of the belly, but hurtfull in diseases of the brest and Lungs, for they detaine spittle; the best wines are the middle sort which are neither very sweet, nor sowre. A fragrant smell is a token of the best Wine, Smell. because it can increase Spirits, restore decayed strength, and recreate, and suddenly refresh those that are languishing, even by its smell, and can exhilerate the mind, and strengthen the
whole body and all its faculties, and principally tis good for old men, only that it fills the head, and hurts the nerves, but Wines that have no smell are base, and neither received so greedily by the stomach, nor are they so easily concocted, nor do they afford matter, nor so fit aliment to engender Spirits, nor do they add so much strength to the heart, nor do they so much refresh the body, but those which have a strange smell, whencesoever contracted, are all nought. White or pale Wines heate lesse, Colour. then full and yellow Wines, and are weaker, especially if besides their whitenesse they are of a thin substance, all black wines are of thicker sub∣stance, and for the most part sweete and nourish very much, yet they beget thick blood, and not so laudable, they cause obstructions, and continue long in the bowels, and fill the head with many Vapours; between the white, and red, there are middle colours, yellow, reddish yellow, a pale red, and perfect red; a pale red are necrest to the white, and if the substance be thin, are the best, such as are Rhenish Wines, the most apt to strengthen the heart, and to renew strength; Greek Wines also strengthen the heart, and are beneficiall to to those that are troubled with cholick paines, and with the flatus of the stomach; red Wines for the most part have not so great a force of heating, they generate good blood, and do not load the head, but if they are of a thicker substance, they are not so good for the Liver, and Spleen, by reason of the ob∣structions, which they occasion; between the white, and red, is a Wine of a mixt colour, which also doth not heat so much, nor offend the head. As for the manner of subsistence, The man∣ner of sub∣sistance. tenuity is in the first place in that which is watry, hence that which is of a pale red, and yellow; crassitude is in that which is black, red, sweet and sowre, and thin wines easily penetrate, and soon refresh the strength, they open passages, move sweates and urine, yet they nourish more sparingly, but the thick nourish more, and are longer detained in the parts, and heat and dry them more, and often times bring forth obstructions. Wines also differ according to age, Differences of Wines according to age. new Wine is thick and flatuous, begets the cholick, impeads excretion of urine, yet it loosens the belly, and unlesse it doth so, tis the more hurtfull, new Wine, and that which it as sweet, as Wine new prest, is not easily distributed into the body, but old Wine does work too much upon the nerves, and offend the head.
That which is middle aged is more commodious for all uses, in which thing neverthelesse there is a great difference according to the nature of the Wine, for some will indure age, others sooner loose their strength, and consume away, and loose all their Spirits. In places towards the Septrentrionall, Strong drinke. wherein there is not so great store of Wine, strong Beere, or Ale, is the familiar drinke, and indeed profitable enough, as experience shewes. But the strong drinke is prepared, some of Wheate, Its differ∣ences. some of Barly, others of them both, in Polonia it is made of Oates, and preserved with Hops, the manner of preparing is very different every where, the waters also differ, wherewith they are boyled, they are kept also in some places in pitched Vessels, in others not pitched. Strong drinke made of Wheate nourisheth more then that of Barley, and also heats and moistens more, Drinkes made with Wheate. especially see∣ing the strong drink made of Wheate hath lesse Hops, then that which is made of Barly, but it generates more viscous juice, it causeth obstructions, it provokes urine, With Barly but it loosens the belly. Barly Beere, because of the Barly, heateth lesse, but be∣cause more Hops for the most part are put into it, acquires no small force of heating, it nourisheth lesse, Mixt. and yeelds a thinner juice, but is more diuretick, that which is mixt of Wheate and Barly is of a middle nature. That drink which is made of Corne, no way dried but by the heate of the Sun, hath more excrementicious humours, and often times brings forth obstructions. All new drink is more unwholesome, especially, if it be troubled, for it obstructs the passages, and breeds the stone, but that which is more cleansed is wholesomer, but princi∣pally, strong drinkes have their faculties, from various wa∣ters of severall natures. Hony and water mingled, Hydromell. for the most part heate and dry more then Wine, especially if Aromatick things are ad∣ded, but it easily turnes into choler, by reason of the Hony and therefore is not so good a drink for cholerick per∣sons.
CHAP. V. Of the passions of the mind, and of the exercise and rest of the body. THE perturbations of the mind, Tranquili∣ty of mind. have great power in the preservation of health, for an Euthumie, or well setled mind, and such as is at quiet doth much conduce to the pre∣servation of health. Joy. Next to that moderate joy is fitrest to preserve the health of body, and a naturall constitution, because it recreates the heart, spirits, and the whole body, but if it be overmuch, it dissipates, Exercise of body. and diffuseth the Spirits. Motion of the body, and exercise, first brings a certain solidity, and hardnesse to the parts, then it increaseth health, thirdly it moves and agitates the spirits from whence the heart is made strong, and can easily resist externall inju∣ries, and is fit to undergoe all actions, happy nourishment is made, and the excrementicious Vapours are discussed; on the contrary, those bodies which live idly, are soft and ten∣der, Kinds of motion. and unfit to performe labours; under the name of motion, are comprehended labours of every kind, dancing running, playing at ball, gesture, carrying, ryding, swim∣ming, walking, a stirrer up of the people, rubbing and such like, but divers exercises have different force, and some ex∣ercise some parts more then others; in running and walking, the legs are most exercised in handling of weapons; and lay∣ing them down, the armes; in singing, speaking with a loud voice and cleare reading, the face and brest; the whole body in playing with a little ball, which exercise therefore is most convenient, whereof a peculiar book of Galen is extant; there is also a certain diversity according to vio∣lence, and magnitude in motion, swift attenuates, and thickens; slow, rarifies and increaseth flesh; vehement extenu∣ates the body, and makes it leane, yet together hard, flou∣rishing, and firme; too much motion exhausteth and dissi∣pates the substance of the spirits, and solid parts, and cooles the whole body, it dissolves the strength of the nerves, and ligaments, it sometimes looseneth, and distendeth the mem∣brances, and breaks the lesser veines.
CHAP. VI. Of Sleeping, and waking. MOderate watchings stirs up the Spirits, and senses, Watchings. and render them more flowrishing, distribute the Spirits, and heate into all the parts of the body, they helpe distribu∣tion of aliment, and promote the protrusion of excrements, yet if watchings are immoderate, first they consume and dissipate the Animall Spirits, and dry the whole body, espe∣cially the braine, they increase choler, they whet and in∣flame, and lastly the heate being dissipated, they stir up cold diseases. The strength being decayed is againe kindled a fresh with moderate sleep, the spirits, Sleep. that are dissipated with diurnall labours, are restored, the heate is called back into the in∣ner parts, from whence a concoction of Aliments, and crude humours is happily performed in the whole body, the whole body and especially the bowells are sweetly moistned, the heate increased, and the whole body becomes stronger, cares are taken away, anger is allayed, and the mind en∣joyes more tranquility, immoderate evacuations besides sweate, are hindred, and sleep is especially beneficiall to old men; on the contrary immoderate sleep obscures the spirits, and renders them dull, and causeth an amazednesse in the understanding, and memory, it sends out the heate, being hindred with crude, and superfluous humours accumu∣lated, sleep also, which seizeth on our bodyes after what manner soever, when they are empty, drys and extenuates the body. CHAP VII. Of Bathes. EVery Bath of fresh water, moistneth, A Tempe∣rate Bath. but in heating and cooling, there is not the same faculty every where, a temperate Bath of sweet water opens the pores of the skin, and softens, and rarifies the part, and discusseth the excre∣ments into the extreame parts, and corrects the drynesse of parts, and so takes away lassitude, but if it should continue long 'twould discusse that which is dissolved, and weaken the strength.
Luke-warme Bathes, Luke Warme. if they incline to cold, something re∣frigerate the body, nor have they power of rarifying the parts and discussing excrements. Cold water of it selfe cooles, Cold. yet by accident the pores being shut, and the heate penned in heateth, whence if through dissipation the native heat should be in danger, cold rhings being timely applyed, have power to recollect and pre∣serve it. Bathes oftentimes do hurt, and especially to those that are not accustomed to them, and to Plethorick persons, and such as are filled with crude humours, as also to those which are obnoxious to Catarrhes, and inflamations, or an Erysipe∣las. The Romans often frequented Bathes, and they often bathed twice a day, the preparation whereof you may see Galen 10. of the method of healing Chap. the tenth; they used unctions also before and after bathing, whereof Galen the second of simple faculties of healing Chap. the twenty fourth; and the seventh. CHAP. VIII. Of Excretions and Retentions, and of Venery. THe body may be easily kept in its naturall State, Excre∣ments of the paunch. if those things which are profitable for its nourishment, be re∣tained, and those things which are unprofitable, and ought to be cast out, are omitted, but if those things which ought to be retained, in the body, are cast out, and those things which ought to be protruded, are retained, the health is in danger. The severall concoctions have their severall excrements; the excrements of the paunch, if they are not evacuated in due season, hinder concoction whilst putred Vapours exhale from thence to the stomach, and neighbouring parts, for the same reason they offend the head, stir up cholick paines, and other evills, but too sudden cleansing of the paunch oftentimes hurt nothing, whilst those things which are of∣fensive nature doth expell from the paunch of its owne ac∣cord, yet if any such thing happen too often or too lasting, it necessarily defrauds the body of nourishment, and the strength is weakned, and the guts are debilitated, and of∣fended. Urine if it be made in due season, Ʋrine. is commodious and pro∣fitable
for the body, but if it be made sooner then it ought, and especially, if it have bin retained longer then it ought, it brings no small dammage, for it oppresseth the bladder, and often times so fills it, that afterwards urine cannot be ex∣pelled, and sometimes an inflamation of the bladder, nay sudden death, followes; but if the reyns have not drawn whey as it were, it remains mixt with blood, and stirs up greivous Symptomes in the whole body. Seed untimely retained causeth heavinesse, and dulnesse, Venus. of the body, and if it be corrupted stirs up greivous accidents, all which may be avoided by Venery, but let it be timely, and lawfull, neither is there any need to try any thing for the preservation of health, which is contrary to divine lawes, and the Creator of man is so much indulgent to him in this thing, as tis necessary for him to shun all things which may hinder his health; but too much Venery dissipates the naturall heate, cooles and debilitates the whole body, accumulates crudities, hurts the nerves, generates the running Gout, and brings the Palsie, and debility of the senses and understan∣ding.
THE FOURTH BOOK, PART II. Of the Method of the preservation of Health. CHAP. I. Of those things which are to be observed by all for the preservation of health. AFter we have explayned those things which are ne∣cessary for the Preservation of health, now we must shew a Method how all those things are to be used for the safty thereof; but their are some certain common precepts which are to be observed by all; some peculiar precepts to be observed according to ages, sex, and other Circumstances. The most common Precept here is this, that what ever is according to nature is to be kept, but since that in some health exactly such, in others difference from hence, which is called a newtrall constitution; the former is to be exactly preserved with its likes, and nothing contrary to be admitted, whereby the body may be put out of that naturall state; but a Newtrall constitution requires some change, yet that ought to be small, and by degrees, if the course of life will admit thereof. Yet that most generall rule is to be observed by all, The most generall rule to de∣send health. namely that mediocrity is to be ever accompted safest according to that of Hippo. 2. Apho. 52. to much of every thing is good for nothing, or all excesse is hurtfull to nature. As also that 2. Apho. 50, those things that we are long accustomed unto al∣though they are worse, yet are they less troublesome to us, then those things that we are not accustomed to.
Moreover, we are to endeavour, that the naturall consti∣tution of our bodies, consisting in a good moderation of cold and heate, occult qualities, due conformation of the Orga∣nick parts, and unity may be preserved by those things which are fitly borne to preserve it, namely by their likes, in case the body bee throughly well constituted, or somwhat with contraries, if the body decline from the best state. But all things are to be avoided which may destroy it. Likewise causes of health sometimes require things plainly alike, sometimes a little contrary, Most health full aire. and therefore the Physitian shall appoint the right use of those things which necessarily happen to the body, namely aire that is temperate is the best for those that are temperate, and hurtfull to no constitution of body. Moreover let the purest bee chosen, cold aire when the fire is kindled is changed, hot aire is tempered by water that is cold, being poured out of one vessell into another, or sprinkled on the floare, or by cloaths moistened in water and hung in the bed-chamber, or Roses strowed in the house, or the leaves of Vines, Willowes, Wa∣ter Lillies and other cooling Herbes; moysture in excesse may be corrected by the kindling of fires, and burning of suf∣fumigations of t things; drinesse is corrected with the moystnings of waters & sprinklings or strowings of moistning Herbes. As for Meat, meats of little juice are offensive to all, Meate and drinke. and profitable to none, nay even the dayly use of thick, viscide, tenacious, cold, hard, flat, and acrid meats are to bee avoy∣ded by all, since they cannot bee well concocted, nor afford good nourishment: yet some regard is here to bee had of the appetite according to that of Hippocrates, 2. Apho. 38. a litter worse meate and drinke that is more pleasant, is to be preferd before that which is better and ungratefull, as also of custome according to that 2. Aphor. 50 those things that we are long accustomed unto, although they are evill, are wont to trouble us lesse then those things which we are not used unto. Moreover meates are to be taken onely in that quantity whereby our strength may bee refreshed not oppressed, that which hath beene spoken of meat is also to be understood of drinke.
Of the passions of the mind, Passions of the mind. this in generall may be spo∣ken, that overmuch of all them are to be avoyded, and quiet∣nesse of mind and moderate joy is to be cherished. The excrements of the belly twice a day or at least once ought to be ejected, Excre∣ments. urine likewise ought to be expelled as often as their is need. We are to take heed likewise of that of Celsus, least in our best health we take things adverse thereunto, and there∣fore we ought not rashly to trouble or molest our bodies with purges or other medicines, but tis better to exercise our bo∣dyes moderately every day, least excrements should be ga∣thered together, and if any disease seeme to be comming up∣pon us, to follow this counsell, that is by quietnesse and ab∣stinence many great diseases are cured. CHAP II. Of the cure of little ones not yet borne, and of the dyet of women with child, THese things being premised in generall, what course of dyet may best agree to every degree of health (of which before, in the first Book and third Chap.) we will now ex∣plaine distinctly, and therefore we will handle good habit or the preserver of the best State, called under the generall name of the Hygeinall, which governs sufficent health in all our actions. The Prophylactick is that part which guides the neutrality of those that are falling away. The Analyptick is that which brings neuters to be healthy; And first a me∣thod of preserving of the health of such as are very well is to be explained; wherein notwithstanding some things may be delivered, which may be accommodated to the other degrees of health. But in the first place it is to be noted that the foundation of our future health fully depends on the conception and seed of our parents, Seed the cause of future health. and therefore as Fernelius in his first Book of Pathology Chap. 1. writeth, If Husbandmen being to sow Corne choose the small and young seed, having found by experience, that ill fruite comes from that which is rot∣ten, how much more diligently ought we to observe the seed in the procreation of our Children. Moreover when the Mother hath conceived a Child in the wombe, Dye of such as are great. she ought to beware of all things which might bring
any detriment to the young; or rather, she ought to be care∣full, that she may strengthen, and preserve it safe; namely that she avoid foggy Aire, that she beware of the smell of candles newly put out, of brimstone, castor and such like, and of the smell of herbs that are too fragrant, she should shun meates of ill juice, and sharpe, and such as cause urine, or cause loathing, or provoake sneezing, she should not use many Aromatick things; if those that are great desire, any ill meates, they are not altogether to be denyed them, but if the food, which the woman desires cannot be obtained by her; least any inconveniencies should happen to the young, they use to give her some hony with nutmeg; or water dis∣tilled from the tender leaves of a Vine in the month of May; or of the barks of Citron, or the pills of Oranges, or of the Roote of Piony, being bruised and prepared in Spanish Wine, or Malmesy. For the strengthening are exhibited, the precious Stones, Strength∣ning the young. called Pearles, Coralls, the shavings of Ivory, the barkes of Citron, Cinamon, Saffron, the wood of Aloes, Cloves, Quinces, Sugar of Roses, sweete Almonds, corrected with high Country Wine, Water, called the Balsome of Chil∣dren, the confection of Gems, Diamargariti calidi, Malmsy Wine applyed with Bread to the belly. The same things may hinder an abortion which is night at hand, and moreover Ʋnguentum Comitissae, externally applyed, Hindring abortion. also those that are great should principally avoid hard labours and passions of the mind, yet to be altogether idle is not so convenient. The opening of a vein eafter the fifth month for the most part is prohibited, Whether a veine be to be opened of the wo∣man with∣child. but before the fifth moneth you may open a veine, in Plethorick bodies, nay some unlesse they are let blood, before the fifth month miscarry, of purgation Hippo∣crates writeth in the fifth Apho. 39. thou shalt purge those that are with child, any time within foure months, and some∣times untill the seventh month, but sparingly, and you are to use only lenitive medicines.
CHAP III. Of the Diet of Infants, and thence forward untill 21. yeares of Age. WHen a Child is brought forth into the World, before the teats are given him, we ought to give him some pure honey, or Corall with Sugar, or the Sugar of pennidice, with: Oile of sweet Almonds, whereby the Dregs may be drawne through the Paunch, and an Epilepsie be prevented. Afterwards let the Infant be nourished with Milke, The Infant is nouri∣shed with the mo∣thers Milk. and that from his Mothers Breast, as having most agreement with the Infant, and it is generated of the same blood, by which before the little one was formed, and nourished in the Wombe, unlesse perhaps the Mother be sick or ill disposed; the Infant is to bee nourished with Milke, untill it be two years old, or certainly till the eighteenth Month, & tis to be ac∣customed in the meane time to other meats by little & little; yet such as may be easily concocted, commonly their is prepared for them Papp made of Bread, and water or Milke, yet by rea∣son of its clamminesse, it seemes not to so good to many, and therefore more wholesome may bee made with crums of Bread, or certainly with bread first dried in an Oven. Afterwards the Infant by degrees is to be accustomed to more solid meats, Diet the first three yeares. but the first three years, his food is to bee moister, and the Infant is to be nourished with good meats, and should use Bathes often, but not presently after eating and drinking; neare the end of seven years Age, the use of Bathes ought to be more seldome, Infants and Boyes should not drink Wine. By how much the more a boy growes in yeares, by so much the more both the mind and body are to be imployed, yet the exercises ought not to bee immoderate, least that any member should be turned awry, or least the body should bee dryed too soone with two much motion, and the growth of the body should be hindred; of sleep, by how much the more Age increaseth, so by little and little we ought to abate it. In the second and third Septinaries more solid meats are to be afforded, Dietin 7. and 3. Sptinary. yet not over much drying: Exercise also ought to be somewhat lesse then the strength might tolerate, and in the third Septinary order of Diet convenient for every course of life is to be begun, for those which are given to a labori∣ous kind of life ought to seed more plentifully in the third
Septinary, and with those meates, which being taken in no great quantity, nourish much, and strengthen them for grea∣ter labours. But those wich apply their mindes to learning at this age ought to be carefull of the animall spirits, Diet of. Schollers. and diligently to endeavour that they may be plentifully generated being pu∣re, and cleare, which may be if they live in a subtile Aire, pure thin, by dyet and meats that are not thick, but which may afford matter for pure and lauadble blood, and endea∣vour to evacuate all excrements in due time, not to accumu∣late crudities, nor weaken their bodies with untimely stu∣dies, nor is the use of Venery to be granted till the end of this Age. CHAP. IV. Of the Diet of middle Age, That Age which followes the third feaventh Yeare or from the twenty first to the fiftieth, Diet for middle age. is accounted the mid∣dle Age, and for the most part there is the same reason of Di∣et, unlesse that the former halfe part or the fourth septinary, and the latter halfe or the seaventh doth more agree with the diet of the Age, which he hath attained, then of that Age which is truly the middle. The rule of diet. variety. First for what belongs to meate, in meate is to be obser∣ved quality, quantity, time of taking, manner, and such like circumstances; as to the quality of meats, those are to be chosen, which are most temperate, quantity. and most familiar to our nature, amongst which, Bread well baked obtaines the first place, hence the flesh of Animals, and those things which are taken from Animals, and alwaies they are to be chosen which are of good juice, and to be avoided, which have ill juice, yet somthing is here to be graunted to custome, 2. Apho. 56. and to the various constitutions of bodies, and Celsus admonieth a sound man, and one which is in health to avoide no kind of meate which the people use, which is principally to be obser∣ved by those, which necessarily must live a different course of life; variety of meats please, and divers sorts of meat are ea∣ten with greater pleasure, yet we are to beware lest meates are eatentogether of different substances, and various facul∣ties, whereof some are thick, others thin, some easie, others hard of concoction, since from such variety corruption of
meats, may easily follow, but those which have a certaine si∣militude are rather to be chosen, that the same heate may be required, for the concoction of the same. Secondly that quantity of food is to be taken which may increase the strength, Quantity. and not hinder it, but you cannot mea∣sure that, neither by weight, nor number, but tis to be found in this, in that you have regard to three things; first, to the nature of aliment, secondly, to the nature of the body, and the course of life and labours, and thirdly, to the time of the yeare, and constitution of the aire. For first, meats hard to be concocted being taken in grea∣ter plenty, hurt more, then those of easier concoction next meate brings lesse inconveniency if it offend onely in quanti∣ty, then if it also hath an ill quality joyned therewith, re∣gard is also to be had of pleasantnesse as is said before. Moreover, one stomack desires more, another concocts more, in which matter the counsell of Hippocrates is more safe, the 6 Epid. Comm. 4. Text 22. The study of health is not to be glutted with meate, nor to be slow to labour: and Avicenne admonisheth us to rise from the Table, with those that are hungry; lastly those which live idely, and live a life not so labourious concoct less, those which are exercised in labour digest more. Of the time of the yeare, Hippocrates writeth, 1. Apho. 15. Their Bellies which are born in the Winter or Spring are very hot, and their sleep tedious; therefore at those seasons of the yeare they ought to eate more, forasmuch as they have more heat, whence it comes to passe, that they want more plentifull nourishment. And in the third of Diet he teach∣eth, that wee ought to eate more in Winter, but drink more sparingly, but in Summer, the contrary. But neverthelesse if any one either through ill custome, or the allurements of meats hath any way offended herein, that afterwards is to be be corrected by fasting, or more sparing diet, sleep, quiet, or vomiting, and therefore tis good to omit supping once a week, or else to eate very little supper. As to the time, Time. to eate often and much is neither commo∣dious for the body nor mind, yet tis better to eate a little often, then much at once, but it is most wholesome that a man of middle age, well tempered, and that hath government of him selfe, doe eate twice aday; so that he takes onely so much meate, as may not oppresse the stomake; in other things some thing is to bee granted to Age tempera∣temperament,
kind of life, custome and such, like but the time betwixt dinner and supper ought to bee shorter then that which is betwixt supper and dinner againe. But whether supper or dinner ought to be larger, Whether supper or dinner ought t be largest. is seve∣rally understood amongst Physitians: that we may briefly con∣clude the matter, if any dine more sparingly, and frugally, which the Ancients for the most part did, the supper ought to be the larger, but if we observe our custome and manners, since men about noon day dine more plentifully, and can∣not sufficiently concoct their meat in that short time, which is betwixr dinner and supper; tis altogether necessary that they should sup more sparingly, since tis not convenient to be twice filled with meat the same day, for then they shall have a troublesome night, and in the morning perceive crudities, and principally this to be observed by old men, because expe∣rience testifieth, that all old men are offended with large suppers. As for the order of meats, tis of some concernment, Order. whe∣ther wee take this or that meat in the first or second place; namely, those are to be taken in the first place, which molli∣fie the Paunch, and make it slippery, and those which are not of so good juice, are easily concocted, and descend out of the Stomack, and are easily corrupted; to these are to bee added those things which may stop the belly, they are not so casily concocted, and which descend slower, and are of better juice. As for drink, quantity of drink. of the qualities and differences thereof wee have spoken before; as to the quantity, as a little of Wine, strong Beere, and if their be any other kinds of drinkes like to these, the use of them moistens the body, cherisheth the spirits, corroborates the strength, helps concoction and distri∣bution of meats, provokes Urine, heates the habit of the bo∣dy, and is a remedy against the coldnesse, and drynesse of old age, it causeth sleep, corrects the acrimony of choler, exhi∣lerates the mind, and makes mens manners pleasing; so the im∣moderate use thereof, and drunkennesse is the Plague it selfe of health, and of a man, for by immoderate drinking, the native heat is consumed, crude and perverse humors are accumulated, the mind is troubled, and a kind of madnesse is begotten The most convenient time of drinking is betwixt meales Time fit to drink.
for so it conduceth much to the concoction of meate, and the right distribution of the same, but if you drink upon an emp∣ty stomack, the head and the Nerves are extended; if after meat, the concoction is thereby hindred; if the meat doe not casily descend, the concoction being perfected, tis profitable to drinke something; drink also is to be avoided going to rest, but especially after exercises and Bathes; sudden drin∣king of cold drink is unwholesome; tis more commodious al∣so to divide the drinke then to drinke it together, least it cause a floating in the stomack. The passions of the mind, Passions of the mind. all of them that are vehement are to be avoided, and on the contrary, moderate joy is to be cherished. Motions of the body all of them, Exercise of body. doe not agree with all, yet for all sound men, deambulation may suffice, and frication and such like exercises; otherwise to thinner bodies more moderate, to stronger greater exercises are more convenient, yet regard is here to be had of custome, according to that of Hippocrates, 2. Apho. 49. those which were accustomed to dayly labours, although they are weake and old, easier endure exercises then those that are unaccustomed thereunto, al∣though they are strong and yong; regard also is to be had of the time of the yeare, for in summer, lesser and shorter exer∣cises, in Winter greater and stronger are to be appointed; so long also onely the body is to be exercised, untill a fresh colour appeare in the body, and the body begin in some mea∣sure to swell, and sweat to flow out: exercise and motion is to be used when the concoction is performed in the stomack and liver, and as Hippocrates, 6. Epid. Sect. 4. Apho. the last labour ought to goe before meate, wherefore the most convenient time for exercise is the morning, when the Stomack is empty, and the excrements of the Paunch and Bladder are first sent out, the same time is most fit for study; regard is also to bee had of the place where exercises are, for exercise under the Sun heates the body very much, powers out humors, and are very obnoxious to those whose heads are weake or full of humors, but all exercises that are in the shade are sa∣fer.
Rest is no lesse necessary then motion, for this is the reme∣dy of wearinesse, and repaires decayed strength, and there∣fore exercise and rest take their interchangeable turnes. Sleeping and wa∣king. The time also is to be appointed for sleeping and waking, the most fit time for sleep is the night, appointed for man by God himselfe, but we ought not to sleep presently after meat, but an houre or two after supper, otherwise the head will be filled with many vapours; diurnall sleep likewise fils the head with vapours, but if any one hath contracted a sence of wearisomenesse, or hath past an unquiet night without sleep, tis lawfull to cherish sleep so long in the day time, and especially for old men, who seldome sleep the whole night, but wee are to sleep so long untill the meate be con∣cocted in the Stomack and Liver, and the spirits that are ta∣ken away are restored, which space is not equally in all, lesse then six houres scarce sufficeth, but beyond 9. houres sleepe is scarce to be extended, for the most part the space of seven houres is sufficient. But those which are studious principally offend in their sleep, if they wake long after supper, Sleep for those that are studi∣ous. and sleep after the ri∣sing of the Sun, for they do not onely pervert the order of na∣ture, but also much hinder the concoction, whilst they im∣peade the instauration of spirits, which were wasted with di∣urnall labours, and watchings, and call them from the Sto∣mack, and fill the head with vapours. But we ought to lie downe with our legs and armes a lit∣tle bent, our head something elevated, on either side, Manner of lying. since lying supine hurts much, and first to lie on the right side, that the concoction of the Stomack may bee helped by the Liver, not under the canopy of Heaven, nor the Beames of the Moone, and the windowes are to bee shut, and the noctur∣nall aire to be kept out, the bed-chamber ought to be with∣out any smell, the bed should bee soft, and fitted to drive away the frigidity of the Aire, when you please, the Head also is not to be wrapt with too many cloathes. Watchings after sleep should bee moderate, Watchings. for too much consumes the native heate, and dissipates Spirits, dries the body, brings forth crudities, dulls the senses, and of∣nds all the actions.
There is no small profit also of Bathes, Bathes. for the preservation of health, as is said before, part the first chap. the seventh, yet the right use of them is to be appointed, neither are we to go into a Bath before the meate be concocted in the sto∣mach, least crud humours should be carried into all the parts of the body. In a Bath we must abstaine from all meat and drink, and we are to go out before we are weary, and to de∣fend the whole body from cold, nor must we eate nor drink before the heate of the bath be expired. Lotions of the head open the pores of the skin and discusse Vapours, Lotions of the head. yet they are not to be used when either a Catarrh, or paine of the head offendeth, but are to be used in the mor∣ning, or an houre before Supper, and after the washing of the head it should be throughly dryed with warme linnen cloathes. Lastly the washing of the feet is not profitable, to hinder their sweating, but to avert humours which would flow from the head thither. Lastly we must endeavour that presently after sleep, Exre∣ments. the dregs of the paunch may be cast out, if the paunch answers not to desire, tis to be moistned with Raisins of the Sun, the broath of a Cock, a decoction of the staulkes of Burrage, Mal∣lowes, Beares breech, or six or seven Pruins, boyled in the broath where Senna hath been infused, to be taken for the first course, or a little before meate, the excrements of the third concoction are to be expelled by dayly exercise, the head is to be combed in the morning, the mouth to be wash∣ed with water, the eares, nose, and palate to be cleansed, the eyes and the whole face, are to be washed in cold water, and the body, especially the Armes, and the Legs are to be rubbed. And if so any error be committed in the use of these things, which may easily happen, afterwards it is to be mended the next day by its contrary, and an inequality being introdu∣ced the contrary cause is taken away. CHAP. V. Of the dyet of old men. THat part of Physick which rules, Diet for old men. or governs the age of old men is called, Geronomick, but because in old age the body every day is more and more dryed, and the native heate is consumed, we are to endeavour that drynesse may be
prevented, and the native heate so much as may be pre∣served. Hotter and moister Aire therefore is agreeable to this age, Aire. and unlesse it be such of it selfe, tis to be corrected by art, especially in Autumne and Winter, which Aire is cheifly of∣fensive to old men. The Aliment it selfe also ought to be hot and moist, Aliment. of good juice, and easie of concoction, but thick meates, hard, glutinous, and which fill the head, grow sowre in the sto∣mach, and are easily corrupted, are to be avoided, and if hurt be contracted by the use of such things, tis to be cor∣rected, by the use of Diatrion, Pipereon, Diacalaminth, and such like. Of the usuall quantity also every day something is to be abated, for as Hippocrates writes, 1. Apho. 10. there is little heate in old men, and therefore they need little nourishment, sith thence their heat is extinguished with much; and therefore meate is to be given sparingly, but often, and in∣deed very conveniently thrice aday, viz. break-fast, dinner, and supper. The best drink for old men is Wine, Drink. from whence Wine is called old mens milk, yet tis not to be taken in too great plenty, and it ought to be of a hotter nature, and other things good and generous, middle aged, but thick Wines which cause obstructions, and have an astringent faculty or hinder urines, are not convenient for old men, wine mingled with hony is good for old men also. Old men should use moderate exercises before meate, Exercise. yet so that no lassitude may thence ensue, but principally mode∣rate frication is commodious for them, especially in the mor∣ning. Old men should sleepe longer, Sleepe. and if they are troubled with waking, that remedied with the use of sweet Almonds, Lettice boyled with Sugar, and dill being taken the last course, and with Somniferous lotions of the feet and hands. First of all let them avoid vehement perturbations of the mind, Perturba∣tions of the mind. Excre. ments. and let them rather refresh their minds and bodyes with honest pleasures. Lastly let old men be carefull that they void their ex∣crements well, and therefore, if the body be costive, the belly is to be moistned with convenient meates or with hony of Roses solutive, but stronger, and more Phyficall things are not to be given to old men.
CHAP. VI. Of the Dyet of such as are out of temper and of neu∣ters. AS for what belongs to the Dyet of bodyes, Bodies that are neuters how many∣fold. that are neu∣trals, there art two kinds of bodies deviating from per∣fect health, for some are more remote from a sickly constitu∣tion, others are neerer to it, and these are twofold as before is spoken lib. the first Chap. the third, neuters falling away, which governing part of the Method of the defence of health is called Prophylactick; in neuters tending to health and waxing strong, the governing part of the Method of restora∣tion of health is called Analyptick. But those former neuters which are as yet far from difeased, yet decline from the best health, whether from their birth, or whether they have contracted such a habit from custome and dyet, it is hard to change, neither can it be done sudden∣ly, but by degrees, and with long diligence; but if lea∣sure doth not permit, tis neither commodious, nor possible, for as Galen 2. of the defence of health Chap. the third those who are busied in civill affaires, and distracted with many businesses tis safer for such a one not to indeavour to change his temperament. Such bodyes therefore, Dyet of un∣temperate men. if either leasure will not permit, and their minds are not bent to reduce them into a better state, they ought to be preserved so by their likes, but if you in∣tend to reduce them to a better condition, you must use con∣traries by degrees; yet a hot and moist distemper, since that tis more agreeable to our nature, is by no meanes to be changed, because it introduceth no disease, but bodyes which are become too dry, are alwayes to be moistned as much as may be, during the whole terme of life. Hot bodyes therefore should avoid hot Aire, Of such as are hot. hot and sharpe meates, their drink ought to be more plentifull, but smaler, and strong drink rather then wine, their exercise ought to be moderate, the use of bathes, of fresh waters warme, frequent; they must shun anger, too tedious meditations, and their sleepe ought to be longer. If drynesse be joyned to the heate, let them avoid the use of hot and drying things, and therefore let them beware
of a hot and dry constitution of Aire, and vehement exer∣cises, if humidity be joyned and that be moderate, fince that temperament is most agreeable to man, and conduceth to the prolongation of life, tis to be preserved as much as may be, and only to be fore-warned that no more of the heat and humours may be added, and cause diseases, and stir up putri∣faction, wherefore let these avoid Aire that is too hot and moist, let meat be given which hath attenuating force, and let them endeavour that it may be well concocted, let their exercises be such, as may discusse excrements, yet not dry the solid parts; let all other things be moderate, and prin∣cipally let them endeavour, that the excrements of the belly and the urine may freely passe from them. Those which are cold are to be nourished with hot meates, let them use exercises, which may stir up heate, Oscold. let them evacuate timely the pituitous excrements. Dry constitutions should use moist meates, Of dry. and moistning drink, and bathes of fresh water, but the most unhappy con∣stitution is cold and dry, which represents old age from the beginning, and hastens to it and therefore such are to use heating and moistning things, and to be nourished with hot and moist food, their exercises should be moderate, such as only stir up the naturall heate, their sleepe longer and the use of bathes of fresh water frequent; Venery is very hurtfull: cold and moist, if the constitution of the body be so, Moist. the frigi∣dity is to be corrected, and the humidity preserved, to which purpose moderate exercise conduceth, and excrements if they are timely and duly evacuated. Neuters declining; which now incline to sicknesse, Dyet of neuters de∣clining. dis∣eases are imminent to them, especially for two reasons, Ple∣thory, and Cacochymie, both of them therefore are to be taken away; if the falling away from health be but little, it may be done with rest and abstinence; but if it be grea∣ter, opening of a veine, and purging is to be used, which is spoken of in the following book, for this Prophylactick part is placed in the end of a cure. Only we here admonish two things, first that the Spring-time is best for preservation; as Hippocrates 6. Apho. 47. teacheth, he sayes, to those that the brea∣thing of a veine or purging are profitable, to them the opening of a veine, and a purgation is to be com∣manded,
in the Spring; it is also profitable, to purge black and Melancholy humours, before Autumne. Moreover the use of aloes doth much conduce to the pre∣servation of health, Ʋse of the aloes. since it gently purgeth the excrements which stick in the first passages, which are oftentimes the causes of many diseases, it resists putrifaction and corruption, and seldome reacheth the Liver, but because aloes, if it comes to the Liver offends it, it is not to be used too often, and in too great plenty, least it should penetrate to the Liver, but it purgeth onely the first passages, which is performed pro∣fitably, if it be taken in a small quantity, a little before Sup∣per. Lastly, Dyet of neuters growing better. for what belongs to the dyet of those newters that are inclinable to health, two things in the first place are to be obserued in their dyet, first that they fall not againe into the disease; secondly that they may suddenly recover their former health: first when, as it is 2. Apho. 12. those things which are left in diseases after a crisis are wont to cause re∣lapses, if ought of the peccant matter be yet remaining, that is to be taken away by degrees, and by helping, and the prin∣cipall parts are to be strengthned, but if nothing of the vitious matter be present, the body is carefully to be refresh∣ed with moist aliment, and that which is easie to be con∣cocted, namely the yolkes of eggs, broathes with Bread, Chickens, Hens, Capons, Fish; lastly Goates flesh, Mutton, Veale; sleepe helps concoction, unctions strengthen the stomach, before meate are appointed frications also, mode∣rate walking, Baths of fresh warme war, lastly strengthen∣ing things are to be used, and such as may resist the reliques of the causes of imbecility, and of sickly disposition, but those things which may call back the distemper, which trouble sick, these are to be avoided.
THE FIFTH BOOK, PART 1. Of the Materialls for Cure. SECT. I. Of Medicines. CHAP. I. What a Medicine is. THere remains the last part of Physick which is the Therapeuticall, which restores men that are fallen into diseases to their former health, and expells those diseases from mens bodyes which torment them, but that the Physitian may obtaine this end, it is necessary that he be in∣structed in two things, first a Method whereby he may find those things that are helpfull by Indications, secondly In∣struments or Materialls for cure, whereby he may performe that which he found out by Indications. The matter fit for cure is properly reduced to three heads, Instru∣ments of Physick. dyet, manuall operation, and making up of Medicines. First you are to be admonished that you are to distin∣guish cures, from the materialls used in curing, for cure is that whereby instruction is given from the Indicant to performe or act something, and is alwayes one, as to heate or make hot, but the Matter of helpe is that whereby that is per∣formed by the Physitian which the Indicant commands,
which may be manifold, as whilst you are to heat, it may be done with Pepper, Ginger, Wormewood. &c. But since that of Dieteticall matter is spoken suffici∣ently in the former book, it remaines that wee speake of Me∣dicines, Medicine what is it. and Manual operation, and first as for Medicines, by amedicine wee understand every thing that is a different thing from nature, which may alter our bodies and reduce them to a naturall state from a preternaturall. In which re∣spect it differs from aliment and Poyson, for Aliment, as it is aliment, is onely that which increaseth the substance, or it re∣newes and increaseth our bodies; a Medicince alters, but doth not repaire, but if any thing can together nourish and alter our bodies, tis alimentall Medicine, or medicinall aliment; but poysons neither nourish, nor alter our bodies, but are de∣stroyers of our bodies, and have power to corrupt them. CHAP. II. Of the faculties of Medicines in generall. MEdicines are two-fold, Medicines how many∣fold. Simple Compound some are simple, other com∣pound; a simple is that which is such by nature onely, and hath nothing mixt with it by art; compound are when more naturall things are mingled by art into the forme of one medicine. Simple Medicines are taken from Plants, Simple how many fold. Plants. Animalls, Mine∣ralls; and Plants are either taken whole or their parts, Roots, Woods, Piths, Barkes, Leaves, and Branches, Flowers, Seeds, Fruits, Juices, Gumms, Rosins, Oiles, and Liquors, as Wine. Animals also are used whole, Living Creatures. or their parts, as Harts-Horn, Marrow, Flesh, or those things that are generated in them, as Milke, Eggs, or their workes, as Hony, Wax, or their excrements as Gall, Urine. Under Mineralls are comprehended not onely those things which are properly called Mineralls, Mineralls. Vitriall, Antimo∣ny, Sulphure, and Mettalls, and the excrements, but also di∣vers kinds of earths, as Uermillion, Irish Slat, Bole-Armi∣nack, as also all Stones and Gemms, also divers kinds of Salts, and concreted juices in the earth, of which Naptha is one, also bathing-waters, in which ranke Manna may be put, if there be no other place fit for it.
The faculties are various, of so many different things, The diffe∣rence of Medicines Actuall. and from hence the divisions of Medicines are various, for first, some Medicines are said to bee such in action, others in power to be such; things as are said to be such in action, which in them containe that which they are said to be, the act being as it were present, and absolved, and so the operation is in a readinesse, and can affect our bodies at the first touch, with that quality wherewith they are en∣dued: so Water, and Ice, are cold in action, because after what manner soever they are applyed to a body, they can pre∣sently coole the same; but those things are such in potentia, Potentiall. whose force is not perceived at the first touch, but lyeth hid and as it were asleep, nor doth it discover it selfe by action, untill it be some way changed by our heat and be burnt, and reduced into action, so Pepper, and Wine, although to the touch they are cold, yet neverthelesse they heate. But although the force of Medicines are various, Facultiei of Medi∣cines mani∣fest. yet they may conveniently be divided into manifest and occult; those are called manifest which affect our senses, or which excite qualities in the patient which are discerned by our senses, and whereof a manifest cause may be rendred. But occult are such which doe not produce qualities in a Patient, obvious to sence, Occult but performe something by a hid∣den propriety, to wit, they purge a certaine humor, they strengthen a certaine member, they resist poyson, or being hung or carried externally worke upon the body, the mani∣fest causes whereof cannot be explained, and no other reason can be given, then that such a power or force is in them, by a peculiar propriety of nature, although there are some who re∣ject hidden qualities, yet I. C. Scaliger rightly thinks that tis a high peice of impudence to reduce all things to manifest qualities, in the 218. of his exercises Sect. 8. and those which endeavour this, bring foolish and ridiculous reasons, or deny those things which are confirmed by experience; and these fa∣culties and actions are different from those in their whole kinde as also from others, which are spoken of before in the 2. Booke 2. Part. Cap. 12. both from hence in the first place, because the strength of these qualities, are far greater then theirs of the primary qualities, and their efficacy is great oftentimes in the smallest body. But both of them, The first the second. the manifest and occult fa∣culties and actions of Medicines are various, of ma∣nifest qualities some are primary, others secondary,
others of a third kind; The third kind of qualities. the first have power of heating, coo∣ling, moistning and drying; the second to soften, to harden, condense, rarify, resolve, attenuate, thicken, to draw, to re∣pel; the third, to provoke Urine, to cause and stay courses, to move vomit, generate flesh, and to breake stones, although the power of breaking stones may more fittly be attributed to the propriety of the whole substance, as beneath Cap. 17. shall be shewne. Occult are of three kindes, for either they evacuate a cer∣taine humour by a peculiar faculty, or they have a sympathie with a cortaine part, whence they are called cephalicks, or cardiacks, or they resist poyson. But the faculties of all Medicines according to the chan∣ges which they make in our bodies, The kinds of faculties in Medi∣cines. may be referred to four ranks or formes, first some belong to an inducing of a new quality, such as are those which are said to have the effica∣cies of the primary qualities, to wit heating, drying, cooling, and moistning, but because every thing that alters, cannot be safely applyed to every part, appropriated Medicines are con∣veniently joyned to every member which do alter. Moreo∣ver hitherto is to be referred those which are accounted a∣mongst the number of secondary qualities, such as soften and harden, loosening, rarify and condense, stiptick, and ob∣structing, astringent and opening, attenuating and incrassa∣ting, filling, and deterging or cleansing: lastly hereunto be∣longs, Anodunes, Stupefactives, and Hypnoticks or such as cause rest. In the second forme are those which prevaile in causing motion, attracting and repelling; to the third forme those things are referred, which consist in the generation of a∣ny thing, ripening, generating quitture, breeding flesh, Glu∣tinating, cicatrizing, and procuring milke and sperme. To the fourth forme are referred those things which cor∣rupt, corrode, putrify, such as cause dry crust, burning, and such as doe corrupt seed and milke. The fift forme comprehends those things which belong to the taking away of any thing, such things as make lesse, such as purge, such as cause Vomiting, Urine, or sweats, or pro∣voke courses, expel the secondine, or send forth a dead child, such things as break and expell the Stone, Errhines, Sternuta∣tories, and Apophlegmatismes, such things as purge the breasts, and such as kill and expell Wormes.
They may be placed in the last forme which resist poyson and are the drugs against poyson. CHAP. III. Of the first faculties of Medicines. AS for what belongs to the first forme, Altering temperate. and first for alte∣ring Medicines, some of them being compared with mans body are called temperate, which cause or bring forth no mutation in man either in coldnesie, drynesse, heat, or moisture; and these are either such simply and in all the quallities, or els in two of them only; Intempe∣rate. but the intemperate are such as have power to change the heate or moysture of our bodies. Moreover these qualities are divided by Physitians into certaine degrees, Degrees of qualities. which are left to bee esteemed by their ef∣fects; the first degree is when a Medicine alters our bodies obscurely and scarce senfibly; the second is, when it mani∣festly changeth our bodies, yet without hurting, inconveni∣ency or trouble: the third degree is, when it doth not onely manifestly alter the body, but vehemently, and not without trouble, and paine, yet without corruption: the fourth degree is that which altereth the body not without paine, and that most grieviously. To either of these degrees there are appointed certaine Latitudes, which are commonly called mansions, Mansions of degrees. as they al∣ter more intensely or remisly, or betwixt both, which they call in the beginning, middle, and end. The temperate are, Venus haire, Sparagus, Temperate Medi∣cines. Licorish Sweet Oyle, Pine-nuts, Jujubes, Figgs, Sebestens, Raysins, Dates, Gum Elemie, and Tragacanth, Calves and Goates Suet, and Hoggs Grease. The hot in the first degree are, Marsh-mallowes, Burrage, Hot in the first. Buglosse, Beets, Cabbage, Camommil, Bindweed, Agrimony, and Fumitory, Flex, Melilot, A lease that swims in Ditches without any Root, Spikenard, Wall-wort, and Coltsfoot, the flowers of Borrage, Buglosse, Bettony, Oxe-eie, or Wild Ca∣momil, Melilot Camomil, black Poplar, Arabian Staechodos, an herbe with grey downe like an old mans haire called Sene∣cio in Latin: Fruits; sweet Almonds, Chestnuts, Jujubes, Ciprus∣nuts, green Walnuts, Grapes, ripe Mulberies, sweet Apples, Fra∣grant Seeds, Coriander, Fenegreeke, Flax, Grumwell, Lu∣pines,
Sesanix rice, Rootes, Marsh-mallowes, Bares Breech, Beets, Buglosse, Licorish, Satirion, Barkes, Guaicum, Tama∣risk, Liquors, Juices, and Gummes, Sugar, Bdellium, Lada∣num, Al. 2. i. e. Others in the second degree, Gumme of ivy, the tallow of Goates, Does, Harts, fresh Butter. Hot in the second degree, Hot in the second. Worme-wood, Pimpernell, greene Dill, Angelica, Parsly, Mugwort, Bettony, Calamus Aromaticus, ground Pine, Faenugreek, St. Johns-woort, Ivy, Hopps, Bawme, Horehound, Motherwort, Sweete-ferne, Ba∣fill, common-Burnet, Maiden-weed, Poley, Rosemary, Sum∣mer or Winter Savory, Sage, Scabious, Scordium, Staecha∣dos, Feaverfew, Flowers of Night-shade, Saffron, Gilli∣flowers, or Carnations, Schaenanth, Lavender, Lupines, Bawme, Ros-mary; Fruits, as Capers, Nutmeggs, Pistack∣nutts, dried Figs, dryed Nuts; Seeds, as Dill, Parsley, Bitter∣vetch, Water Rocket, Pulse, or Vetches, Nettle seed. Roots, as Parsley, Caper-roots, Mayden-weed, common Burnet, Turneps, Zedoarie, Rosewort; Barkes, as the Barkes or Wood of Cassia, Cynamon: others in the third degree. Frankinsence, Roots of Capers, Liquors, Gums and Ro∣sins, Wine that is new, Ladanum, Aloes, and Galbanum, Myrrh, Mastick, Frankinsence, dryed pitch, Rosin, storax; Fats, as Lions fat; Libards, Beares, Foxes. Hot in the third degree are Mettalls, Hot in the third. Flos aeris, which is that which comes from the Brasse in melting, burnt Brasse, Squama aeris or the Scaling of Brasse, Verdegrease, Dreggs of Brasse, Allum, Salt, Nitre, Brimstone, Red-vitriall; Herbes or leaves, as Sowthernewood, Asarabecca, or the chast Plant, Wake Robin, the Herbe called Hierusalem, or Ladies Rose, the herbe Ammios, dried Dill, Bayes, Dittany, Carnations, Germander, blew flower, Bastard Saffron, Century the grea∣ter and lesse, Celandine, (or Pile-wort) Calamint, Fleabane, Horsemints, Fennel, Epithymum, so called, because it growes upon Time, Juniper, Elecampane, Hyssop, Laurell, Marje∣rom, Marum an herbe cald Marjerom, Mints, Fennel flower, flowers of the wild Vine, wild Marjerom, wild Woodbine, Parsley, Sneeze-wort, Penny-royall, Oxe-stay, Rue, Savine, Wild Time, wild Mints. Al. 2. Time, trifoile, Vervaine, Net∣tles, Fl owers of Agnus-castus, Epithymum, Violets, of the wild Vine, of the wild Woodbine. Fruits, Iuniper-berries, Cloves, the fruit of Balsimum, Anacardium, that is a fruit of an Indian Tree, like a Birds heart, and the juice like blood, Pepper, Al. 4. Seeds of Ammi, and Anniseed of Hie∣rusalem,
or Ladies Rose, Carawayes, of Garden Cresses, bast∣ard Saffron, according to Galen, Fern. 2. of Fennell, Cum∣men; Carrots, Fennell Flower, Turneps, Parfly, Hartwort, Stavesager, of a Vine. Roots; of sweet Garden Flag, others in the second degree, Asarabecca, wakerobbin, Sea Onion, or Squills, Dittany, Leopards bane, Fennell, English Galin∣gale, both kinds of Hellebore, Elecampane, Orrice, Parsly, Raddish, Barkes bf Mace, Liquors, Teares and Gums; old Wine, and sweet Asa, stinking Asa, Ammoniack, Cedar, Pitch, Opoponax, Muske. Hot in the fourth degree, Hot in the fourth. are such as belong to mettalls as vitriol, Arsenick, Sandaraca, which is a Gemme, Chry∣socolla is a kind of a minerall found like fand in veines of Braffe, Silver, or Gold, which Goldsmiths use to solder Gold, and Silver with; Mysysory, is that which the Apothecaries call vitriol, Melantheria, Inke, wherewith Chyrurgions consume putrifyed flesh, Herbs, or Leaves; Pepper-wort, Garden, and water Cresses, some would have them to be hot in the third degree, great headed Leekes, the fullers herbe Thapsia, a Milke Thistle; Fruits, as Pepper &c. Seeds as of both kinds of Cresses, Mustard-seed; Rootes, as Gar∣lick, Onions, Costus, Leekes that have great heads, bastard Pelitory, or sneezing wort, Euphobium. Things cold in the first degree, Herbs, or Leaves, Cold in the first. as O∣rack, sowre Sorrell, Mallowes, Mirtles, Pelitory of the wall, Flowres, of Mallowes, Roses, Violets; Fruits, as the sub∣stance of Citrons, Quinces, Pares, Plumbs; Seeds, as Barly, Millet; Rootes, of Mallowes, Concreate Juices, Acacia, o∣thers in the second, Draggons blood; Stones as a Hyacinth, a Saphir, an Emerald. Things cold in the second degree, Leaves, and Herbs, Cold in the second. a kind of beete which some call Spinack, Spanish Succory, Lettice, Ducks-meate, Endive or Succory, Violet leaves, Sorrell, Plantine, Knot-grass, Fleawort, Night-shade; Flow∣ers, of wild Poppies, Cichory, water Lillies; Fruits, as Gourds, Cucumbers, Oake Apples, Oranges, Pomgranates, Damaske Pruins, Pippens, Peaches; Seeds, of Sorrell, Cicho∣ry, Winter Cherries, Wood of Santalls. Things cold in the third degree, Herbs, or Leaves, Cold in the third. Pur∣slan, Mandrake, life everlasting, Henbane, others think it hot in the fourth degree; Flowers, as of Pomgranets. Fruits; as Oringes, Mad-Apples of Mandrake; Seeds, as of Hemlock, Henbane, Poppy, Rootes of Mandrake, juice of the juice of Holly Rose.
Things cold in the fourth degree; Cold in the fourth. Herbs or Leaves, Hem∣lock, Poppey; Fruits, Apples of Pern; Concrete Liquours, as the juice of Poppy or Meconium, also Opium, according to the vulgar opinion, which is not true, for they are hot. Moist in the first degree; Moist in the first. Herbs, Buglosse, Pellitory of the wall, Mallowes; Flowers, of Buglosse, Mallowes, Endive; Fruits, as the substance of Citron, In jubes, sweet Almonds, Seeds, of Mallowes, Sesami, which is a white graine grow∣ing in India; Rootes, of Satyrion, Buglosse, Lycorish, Mal∣lowes, Rape Rootes. Moist in the second degree; In the se∣cond. Herbs, as Violet Leaves, Water Lillies, Milk Thistles, a kind of Beet which hath no savour, which some call Spinach, Lettice, Ducks-meate, Pur∣slan; Flowers, of Water-lillies, Violets; Fruits, Gourd, Melons, Pompions, the juice whereof some place in the third degree, Peaches, Damask Pruins, ripe Grapes, Su∣gar. Dry in the first; Dry in the first. Herbs and Leaves, Beetes, Cabbage, Camomill, Fennill, Violets, or Purple coloured Lillies, Malabathrum i. e. a certaine Herb, she swims in Ditches in India without any Roote appearing, Mirtles, Petty Mullein, or Longwort, Flowers of Oxe eye, Camomill, Saffron, Violets, Melelot, Roses; other in the second degree, Fruits; as Iuniper berries, Chesnuts; Seed, as Beanes, Fenegreek, Barly, Roots; of Briony, of the wild-Vine, of madder, Tamarisk, Marshmallowes, Wake-robbin; Gums; Frankinsence, others in the second degree. Dry in the second degree, In the se∣cond. Herbs as, Pimpernell, Mugwort, others say in the first degree, Green Dill, Bettony, Bindweed, Calamus Odoratus, Endive, Sea Cabbage, Shepheards∣powch, Horstaile, Chervills, Mints, wild Mints, Plantine, Rosemary, Spikenard, Walwort, Fumetory, Burnet, Sorrell, Vervine, Shephards rod; Flowers, of Piony, Scarlet, Anemone or wind Flowre, ground Pine, Wood-bines, Staechados; Fruits, the Oily acorne, Capers, Quinces, Ciprus-nuts, Nutmegs, Pares, Pistach-nuts; Seeds, Fennell, wild Saffron, Lentills Ervum, Millet, Rice, Poppy, Night-shade; Roots, of Caper, Cichory, Raddish, Wood of a Santall Tree, Teares, Gums and Rossins, as Galbanum, oppopanax, dry Pitch, Myrrh, Storax, Mastick, Hony. Dry in the third degree, in the third. belonging to mettals, as flowre of Brasse, burnt Brasse, the dregs of Brasse, Draggon-wort Salt, Solder of Gold, or Saltpeter, Brimstone, red vitriol; Herbs,
and Leaves, Fearne, Yarrow, Cinqfoile, Poley Mountain, Trifoile, Worme-wood, Southernwood burnt, Dill burnt, Parsely, Asarabecca, Ammi, Calamints, Germander, Ground pine, Epithimum, Hyssop, Juniper, Marjerom, Horehound, Origanum, Maiden beets, Wildstone, Parsly, Seezing-wort, Rue, Savine, Willow, Water-mints, Time wild Bettony; Flowres, of Pomgranates, Epithimum, Ground pine, Wild∣wood-bine; Fruits, of Cloves, the Fruit of Balsamum, Oake-Apples, Pepper, Juniper-berries; Seeds, as Graines which Dyers use, I think he means Cutcheneale. Dill, Parfley, Ammi, of the herbe Jerusalem, or Ladies Rofe, Anniseed, Carraway, Cumming, Coriander, Gith, bastard-stone Par∣fley, Millet of the Vine; Rootes and Barkes, of sweet Garden Flag, the hollow Roote of Galingale, Squills, com∣mon Cinqfoile, Trifoile, Mountaine Osier, Asarabecca, Smallage, Leopards-bane, Hellebore, Cinnamon; juices, and Gums, Aloes, the juice of Sorrell, Acacia, Camphir, Muske. Dry in the fourth degree, Metalicks, Coppras, Arsenick, In the fourth. Sandaracha, Borax, or green Earth found in the Mines of Brasse, Silver, or Gold, Misysory, that which the Apotheca∣ries calls Vitroil, Milantheria or a Metallick juice; Herbs and Leaves; Wild-rue, Garlick, Cresses, Mustard-seed CHAP IV. Of Medicines proper to every part, or of corroba∣rating Medicines. BUt whereas occult qualities are often adjoyned to the primary qualities, Medicines proper to every part. the same things altering are not con∣venient allwayes, nor accommodated to all parts, but those things are to be chosen which have regard to every or any part in respect of the whole substance, and by reason of some occult proprieties have some singular Sympathy therewith, which Medicines therefore are called Appropriated or Cor∣roborating Medicines, for so occult qualities concur with manifest, and conspire in acting, or performing toge∣ther. Cephalicks Heating and drying: Bettony, Marjerom, For the head heat∣ing and drying. Sage, Hyssop, Bawme, Rosemary, Bay-leaves, Bay-berries, Savory, Rue, Calamint, wild Time, Spike, Lavender, Ori∣ganum, Herba Paralysis, I take it to be true love or one berry
Flax, Asarabecca, Liver-wort, Squinanth, Spikes Maudelin, Fennell, Parsley, Smallage, Sparagus, bitter Almonds, Ele∣campane, the flower of Bettony, Raysins of the Sun, Pistack∣nuts, the hot Seeds, Sweet-Garden-Flagg, &c. Wood of Cas∣sia, Cinnamon, and the rest of the Aromaticks. Things cooling the Liver, Cooling it. Endive, Cichory, Garden En∣dive, Lyons Tooth, and those which belong to these, Pur∣slan, Lettice, Roses, Violets, Water-lillies, Sorrel, Straw-berries, the greater cold Seeds, namely of Mellons, Gourds, Cucumbers, and Citrons, and the lesser namely of Lettice, Endive, Garden Endive, Purslan, Barley, Santalls, Camphire, Pomegranates, Currants, Barberies, Strawberries, Melons, Cherries, Sorrell, whey of Goates Milke. Things heating the Spleen, Heating the Spleen. Ceterach, Spleen-wort, Epi∣thimum, Wormewood, Fumetory, Hops, Rue, Calamint, Parsley, Speedwell, or Fluellin, wild Germander, Ground-pine, Bawme, Garden or Water-cresses, Scurvy-grasse, Hore-hound, Broome, Elder, Asarabbecca, the Rootes of Polipo∣dy, Elecampane, Ferne, Fennel, Smallage, Vine-roots, Ta∣mariske, Capers, Birth-wort, Madder, Bitter-almonds, Squils, Sweet-garden-flag, Ammoniack, Bdellium. Things cooling the Milt, Cooling the Spleen. Mallowes, Endive, Cichory, Purslan, and for the most part the rest of the cooling He∣paticks. Things heating the Reines, Heating. the Reins. and Blad∣der. and Bladder, Venus haire, Rue, Saxifrage, Betony, Lovage, Fennell, Rocket, Mug∣wort, Calamints, Eringo, Sparagus, Buttchers Broome, Bur∣net, Liquorish, Parsley, Smallage, Nettles, Carrots, Drop∣wort, red Madder, red Parsnips, Grumwell, Iuniper-ber∣ries, flowers of Camomill. Cardomoms, Turpentine Chervill, Almonds, Pistack Nuts, the Kernels of Peaches, Cherries, Rootes of Capers. Things cooling the Kidnies, Cooling the Reines. Mallowes, Lettice, Pur∣slan, Pellitory, Barley, the foure great cold Seeds, Poppy, Lettice, Fleawort, Quinces, Pepons, Stone-ber∣ries, Violets, Flowers of Water-lillies, Camphire, Santalls, Sorrell, Iuice of Lymons, Melons, Currants. Things Heating the Womb, Heating the Womb. Mug-wort, Mother-wort, Bet∣tony, Dittany and Origanum, Penny-royall, alamints, Marjerom, Sage, Time, Bawme, Summer or Winter Savory, Rue, Rosemary, Bay-leaves, Flowers of Camomil, Cum∣minseed, Anni-seed, Fennel-seed, Carrot seed, Parsley, Smallage, Roots of Birthwort, Red Madder, of Eringo, Fen∣nel,
Parsley, Sparagus Burnet, Angelica, Valerian, Master-wort, the meate and liquor of the Indian Nut, Bay-beerries, Iuniper-Berries, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Sweet garden flag, Cinamon, Worm-seed, Saffron, Galingale, Mirrh, Castor. Things cooling the Wombe, Water-lillies, Violets, Roses, Cooling the Womb. Quinces, and the Sirrup thereof, Purslane, Lettice, Garden-Endine. Hot simples belonging to the joynts, the Gout, and disea∣ses of the sinews, Marjerom, one Berry Herbe, Lovage, Bet∣tony, Groundpine, Rosemary, Sage, Bay-leaves, Lavender, Staechados, Mugwort, and most of the chephalicks, Castor, earth Wormes. CHAP. V. Of extenuating, and preparing of humours. OVt of this forme of humours are sought digerent, Of clean∣sing and preparing. di∣gestive, or preparing things; so called, all which, since they hinder nature in acting, take away and change the qua∣lities, which resist the action of native heat, namely they coole too much those things that are hot, and heate too much those things that are two cold; they moisten dry things, and dry up moist things, they attenuate what is thick, and in∣crassate what is thin. Namely yellow choler is to bee corrected with cooling, Cholers. moistning and thickning things, Phleagme is to be prepa∣red with heating, drying and attenuating things; melan∣choly humors are to bee corrected with things moderately heating, moistning and attenuating; black Choler is to be prepared with things that are very moistning & attenuating. And those things are to be used which are fitted to every part, according as the humour resides in this or that part, cold cephalicks prepare and digest choler in the head; cold Thoracicks, in the Breast; cold Cardiaacks in the heart, things cooling the Ventricle, in the stomack; cold Hepaticks in the Liver. Hot Cephalicks prepare Flegme in the head; Phlegme. hot Tho∣racicks in the Breast, hot things appropriated to the Ventri∣cle prepare flegme in the stomack; hot Hepaticks in the Li∣ver; things heating the Reines in the Reines; hot things appropriated to the Womb in the Womb.
These things prepare Melancholy, Melanchol∣ly and black chol∣ler. and black Choler, Fu∣mitory, Buglosse, Burrage, Spleen-wort Bawme, a kind of bind weed growing about flax, Venus haire, common Ger∣mander, ground-pine, Hops, Barkes of Citrons, Fennell Rose∣mary, juice of Apples, Ceterach, Capers, Epithymum, Vio∣lets, Butchers Broome, the flowres, and seed of Tamariske of Basil, Ashen Keyes. CHAP. VI. Of Emollients, Relaxing, Rarfying. &c. EMollients are those things which power our that which is concreate, Emolli∣ents. such are those things which neither are very hot nor exceeding dry; many hot in the second degree, and something moist, and moreover having a clammy or em∣plastick force, such as are the Leaves and Roots of Mallowes, and Marsh Mallowes, the Roots of white Lillies, Orach, English Mercury, the Seed of Mallowes Sesami, (a white graine growing in India) Flax, Fenugreeke, Marsh mal∣lowes, Fat Figs, Simple Oiles, the Fat of Hens, Sowes Fat, Calves, Kidds, Sheeps Fat, and such like, almost all Mar∣rowes, fresh Butter, Wax, Pitch, Rosin, Bdellium, Amoni∣ack, Storax melted, Ladanum, Galbanum. To these are opposed hardning and binding things, Things hardning. Loosening. which are cold and moist, Sengreen or life everlasting, purslan, Fleawort, Ducks-meat Night-shade. Things loosening are compared to those things which bind, which joyning together humors contrary to nature, become hard, and are especially those which when certaine matter, or a vapour or Wind fills the space of the parts, and extends them, rarifies them, and attenuates and discusses an unsavory spirit and matter, such are those things that are mo∣derately hot, moisten more largely, and are of a thinner substance, that they easily penetrate and are not hindred by thicknesse, as Lillies, Oile of Camomil, Flaxseed, Fenu∣greek, Fats, Butter, Greazy wool and such like. Condensing things, Condense∣ing. are of a more watry nature and con∣tract more weakly, and moreover they close the thin and ex∣ternall Pores, they contract and condense, but they cannot contract the whole part on every side, and powerfully, such are cold water, Purslan, Sengreen, Fleawort, Mouse-eare,
Ducks meate, Thistles, green Houseleek, the greater and the lesser. Stiptick things are cold and astringent, Binding and Stop∣ping con∣densing. and of a thick sub∣stance, for being applyed externally, by their thicknesse they stop the pores, and by their frigidity and siccity they contract the part and close them into one another, of that kind are those which are otherwise called binding (or astringent) the Barks of Pomegranates, Frankinsence, Mirobolanes, the Roots of Tormentill, Rhubarbe Torrified, Plantine, Horse∣taile, little double Dazies Blood-wort, or Wall-wort, the Floures of Pomegranates, Flowers of Roses, Sorrell; seeds; as of Plantine, Roses, Purslan, Ciprus-nuts, Mirtles, Quin∣ces, Pares, Medlars, Mulberries not ripe, Ceruises, or (swal∣low Pares,) the fruit of a Cornell or Dogg Tree, Oake Ap∣ples, Kernels of Grapes, Cups of Acorns, the red juice of Wax or Hony in the Hony-Combs; also such juice of Wild Hony, Acacia, Mastick, Vermillion, Spode, which is soot arising in the rising of Brasse, Pearles, Coral, Bolearmenack, Irish flat, Allum, Lapis Haematites or Bloodstone, Iron. To condensing things are opposed rarifying things, Rarifying. and to astringent things, opening things; rarifying things are those which open the Pores of the Skin, and render the pas∣sages wider, that Vapours may be blowne or breathed out the better; such medicines are hot, but moderately, of thin parts and not drying, as Marsh-mallowes, English Mercury, Dill, Flowers of Camomill, of Melilot, of Elders, seed of Fe∣nugreek, Flax, dry Figs, old Oile, Butter. Opening things are those as dilate the Orifices of the Vessels, whence they may be called in generall aperient, Opening the mouths of Vessels. yet those are principally called aperient, which penetrate deeper and attenuate the thick humors, and are hot in the second degree, endued with somewhat a thicker substance, and are not easily dissipated untill they have performed their operation, A hema∣ting and to this purpose bitter things are very usefull next to these are attenuating and cutting, which divide, dissolve, and make lesse, those attenuate the thick, these the viscide, and glutinous humours, and are moreover of a thinner substance, and hot for the most part in the third degree; also sharpe, and such as appeare biting and
hot, to the smell, or taste, or to them both, and have a ni∣trous and salt savour, or they are sharpe and bitter, such are the five opening Rootes, Opening. so called, that is, of smallage, Fennell, Sparagus, Parsley, and Butchers broome, Grasse, Cichory, Eringo Rootes, Gentian, Ferne, wild or Garden madder, Century the greater, Asarabecca, Capers, of Tama∣risk, of Ashes, Fumetary Wormewood, Agrimony, Venus haire, Liver-wort Ceterash, Ground-pine, common Ger∣mander, Bind-weed, Hore-hound, Calamints, Penny-royall, Scurvygrasse, Brooklime, Water-Cresses, Anniseed, Fennell, seed, seed of Ammi, of Agnus Castus, red Parsnibs, Lupines, bitter Almonds, Capers, Kernells of Peaches and Apricocks, Cinnamon, Cubebs, Sorrell, Ammoniack, the juice of Ly∣mons. To these are opposed, Iucrassa∣ting. Incrassating things, which make the thinner, and more liquid juices thicker, such are cold or temperate, without sharpnesse, of a thick and terrene substance, whereby, whilst they mingle themselves with thinner humours, they make them become of a thicker consistence, as Bolearmenack, Poppy, Sorrell, Rice, Len∣tills, Quinces, wild Pares, Amylums, tis a food made of Corne without grinding, Chalybeate milke, the juice of Pom∣granets. Emplasticks, Playster-like things. and those which have a clammy and Plaister-like force, are such as adhere close to the passages of the body, and Plaister up the pores, as it were, fills them, and stops them, and they are certaine dry, and earthy things, yet without mordication, and acrimony, and if they are be∣daubed over the passages of the body, they are hardly taken away, but some are also mixt with an aqueous, and acrious humour, yet are tenacious, as sweet oyle, such are Amylum, Pompholix, which is the soile that runs off Brasse, Cerusse, Chalke, Bole armenack, Irish slat, Parget Litharge; burnt lead, the Rootes of Marsh Mallowes, Lillies, seed of Fene∣greek, all mucilages, and bran of wheate, Kernells of Pine nuts bruised in water, Gume Arabeck, Sarcocolla, Traga∣canth, fresh Grease, and Marrowes, fresh butter, new cheese, whites of an egg, wax. To these are opposed detergent things, Detergent things and such as o∣pen ob∣structions. and such as open obstructions, whereof these cleanse filth in the superficies of the body, or skin, but those are of a more subtil substance, & penetrate into the pores also, and open obstructions, and moreover have a drying faculty, with
tenuity of substance whether they be hot, or cold, for there are both hot and cold abstergent things, such as are all salt things, bitter things, nitrous things, as Hore-hound, Centu∣ry the lesse, smallage, Wormewood, Southernwood, Hyssop, Cresses, the bread of Lupines, and of a kind of Pulse called Orabus, Agrimony, Beets, Germander, Tansey, Bitter Al∣monds, Roots of Birthwort, Orice, Gentian, Solomons Seale, Barley, Bran, Iuice of Lymons, Nettle-seed, Rootes of Ta∣mariske, Bark of Capers, Spleen-wort, Squils, Nitre, Hony, Sugar, all Lixuviums, or Lee, Whey, the Galls of living Creatures, Verdy-grease. CHAP II. Of Medicines easing paine and causing rest. Lastly, in this forme are Anodunes, Narcotticks, Anodunes. and Hyp∣noticks, those are properly Anodunes which doe not take away the cause of a disease or dull sence of paine, but such as mitigate the paine, the cause stil remaining, and they are temperate and gentle, and endued with mild heat, and are soft to the touch, and bring forth a pleasant and sweet plea∣santnesse and those performe that, which are endued with a luke-warme and gentle heate, and are most like to our bodies in temperature, and for the most part are soft and fat, and loosen, and mollifie the part that it may be the lesse apt to be sensible of paine, such are Camomil, Melilot, Dil, Elder, Mallowes, Marsh-mallowes, Seeds of Fenegreek, Flax, wheat, Barley, sweet Oyle of middle age, Oyle of sweet Almonds, and other things prepared, with those above, fresh Butter, Hens grease, Goose-grease, Whites of Eggs, the pulpe of White-bread, warme Milke, and Hoggs grease. Narcoticks or stupefactives, and Hypnoticks, Stupe∣factives. which also cause sleep, but neither take away the cause of paine, but stupifie the part and benumes it, least it should perceive that which is painefull; but this power depends on a hidden quality, such like are Lettice, Water-lillies, Poppey, Night∣shade, Henbane, Mandrake and Opium.
CHAP. VIII. Of drawing and Repelling Medicines. IN the second forme, Things drawing. are drawing Medicines which attract the humours, and Spirits out of the body into the superfi∣cies, but that attraction is made by heate, concurring with tenuity of substance, and some are hot and dry in the se∣cond degree; which draw moderatly; others in the third degree, which draw more; others in the fourth, which draw most of all, and with their heate raise a tumour in the skin, with rednesse, and lastly raise blisters, from whence medicines to take away haire, Synapismes, Rubifying medi∣cines are prepared, such are the Rootes of both kinds of birth∣wort, selandine, sow-Breed little Dragon, Gentian, wild Pellitory, or sneezing-wort, Crowfoot, mustard-seed, Cresses, Garlick, Onions, Leaven, an Indian fruit like a Birds heart, and the juice like blood, Gum Amoniack, Galbanum, saga∣penum, Opoponax, dry Pitch, Propolis or that in a Hony∣combe like wax, Goose dung, Pidgeons dung, Hen dunge, and Cantharides. Repelling Medicines, Repelling. are opposed to attracting, and pro∣hibit the Flux of humours, or represseth and casteth back that humour which hath newly flown in, and moves there∣in, and is not as yet settled; they performe this, either be∣cause they are cold or astringent, or because they have both a cold and astringent faculty; astringents are two-fold, some are cold, others not, and indeed they doe most powerfully bind, which are both cold, and astringent; those things which repell only by frigidity and are aqueous, or humid, are cold water, life for ever, Purslan, Ducks-meate, Endive, Let∣tice, Night-shade, Coltrops of water, Venus Nauell, Flea∣wort, the white of an egg; cold things astringent are, Plan∣tine, narrow leaved Solomons seale, Mouseare, Daizes, Horsetaile, the leaves of service, or sherve Tree, Oake, Mirtle, Medler Tree, the Flowers of Rosemary, Pomgranates, Mirtle-berries, Oake Apples, swallow Peares, Barberries, Mirtles, the Barks of Pomgranates, the Rootes of wild Dam∣sons, the Rootes of Barberries, the Rootes of Cinqfoile, Snake-weed, (or small Bistort) Tormentill, the juice of Pomgranates, Acacia, Hypocistis, or sap of the Rootes of Cystus, of Mulberries not ripe, sorrell, Irish slat, Bolearme∣nack,
sanguis Draconis, Tutty, hot astringents are, spike, Aloes, Frankencense, Mirrh, Cypresse, Wormewood Cyprus Nuts, the Barks of Frankencense, sweet Garden Flag, Al∣lom. CHAP. IX. Of Ripening things, and such as generate quitture; also of such as generate flesh and Brawny flesh, of such as dry and cleanse green wounds and cause Cicatrizing, and of such as generate seed and milke. IN the third forme are ripening and concocting things, Ripening and con∣cocting of quitture. and moving purulent matter, so called, because without them the generation of matter cannot be easily performed by na∣ture, to wit, such which by the similitude they have with our bodyes, defend and increase the substance of the native heat, for they are temperately hot, and together moist and em∣plastick, which shutting the pores or passages, keep in and retaine the spirits and heat, such are sweet Oyles Oyle, mixed with water, Butter, Hogs grease, Calves grease, the seed, and Bran of Wheate, Wheaten Bread, the seed of Fenugreek, Flax, Leaves and Rootes of Marsh Mallowes, Mallowes, Beares breech, the Rootes of white Lillies, boyled Onions, dry Figs, Fats, liquid Pitch, (or Tarr) liquid storax, Turpen∣tine, whereof some if they seem, either too dry or too moist, you must observe, that scarce ever one of these is used alone but are mingled with others, so that the drynesse with the one may be corrected with the humidity of the other, and the humidity of the one with the drinesse of the other., Sarcotticks or such as generate flesh, are such as conduce, Generat∣ting flesh. to the restauration of flesh, in a wound or ulcer, indeed na∣ture, in the generating of flesh is the cheif workeman, yet certain Medicines doe as it were helpe nature, whilst they remove excrements, which hinder nature in the generation of flesh, and preserve the native heate of the part, of which kind are those which moderatly heat and dry, and cleanse filth, without biting according to the plenty of quirture, and according to the humidity or ficcity of the body, some∣times they ought to be gentler, sometimes stronger, such are Barly Bread, a kind of pulse, called Ervum, Fenugreek, Tra∣gacanth,
Orice, Teares of jeat, Mastick, Frankencense, Sca∣mony, Aloes, Mirrh, Hony, Walwort, Saint Johns-wort, Birth-wort, Brasse Oare, Cerusse, Tutty, Pompholix, Li∣tharge, (or white lead.) Next to these, are Glutinating Medicines, which are no way detergent, but rather astringent, and by some are called Enaima, and Traumatica, because they are used, in joyning of bleeding wounds, although they are used in cleanseing Ulcers, from which neverthelesse, according to more or lesse, Epuloticks differ from such as cicatrize, as being such dry more to the second degree; in the number of Glutina∣tives, and Epuloticks are, Allum, Litharge, Circocolla, Aloes, Bolearmenack, Lead, Brasse-oare, Birth-wort, the Flowers of Pomgranates, Corall, Horse-taile, Plantine, Wal-wort, Tor∣mentill, Cinqfoile, common Thurrow-wax, the Barkes of Pomgranates, Frankencense, Burnt-brasse washed, Sanguis Draconis, Lapis calaminaris, Antimony. Hereunto belongs Traumatick Medicines, or vulnerary which by a peculiar force, so dispose the blood, that fit and laudable flesh by it may be restored, or any other substance, which is lost, and afford matter, for potions, called vulnera∣ry, such are, great and little Cumfery, Sannicle, Cumfery, the middle Sarracenous, Agrimony, Winter-green, Fluellin, Mug-wort, Plantine, Savine, Horse-taile, Rootes of Tormen∣till, of Gilli-flowers. Carduus Benedictus, common, or water Burnet, Ladies-mantle, Periwinkle, Pimpernell, Golden∣rod, Mouse-eare, century the lesse, Adders-tongue, Bittony Saint Johns-wort, Flowers of Roses, Tansey, Veruine, Dra∣gon, Rupture-wort, Cinqfoiles, Scordium Crabs-eyes, Mace, Bolearmenack. To Epuloticks Poroticks all such as generate brawny flesh are nere alike unto, For wounds. Genera∣ting hard flesh. namely, such as dry, thicken, har∣den, moderatly heate, and bind, some of those are given in∣wardly as juice of Primeroses, or Cowslips, powder of the Roots of Agrimony, of the juice thereof, but especially the stone called Osteocolla, some are externally applyed, as Bolear∣menack, meale, Osteocolla, Aloes, Cypres Nuts, Franken∣cense, Tragacanth, Acacia. Lastly to this forme belongs those things which generate and increase milke and seed, Genera∣ting milke. they helpe to generate milke which conduce to the generation of good blood, and draw blood to the pappes, and have a peculiar consent with the breasts, such are Fennell, and Dill green, Louage, Smallage,
Poley Mountaine, Rocket, Milke-wort, yet some are said to conduce to the generation of milke, by a propriety of sub∣stance, as powder of Chrystall, Fennell, and Dill. In like manner those things for the generation of seed, Generating seed. which generate the best blood, which is the matter of seed, and what things soever, draws the blood to the vessels, ap∣pointed for generation of seed, or which fill the seed with wind, namely moderately moist, and temperatly hot, such are, Leekes, Parsnips, a kind of a land Scinks, Satyrion, Rocket, Ashen Keyes, Flax, Garlick, Onions, Eringo-rootes, Turneps, Sparagus, Green-ginger, Galingale, sweet Al∣monds, Pine-nuts, Pistack-nuts, Chestnuts, Dates, Beanes, Carrots, Rapes, Rice, Artechoakes, obstreae. CHAP. X. Of such things as make the skin red, of such as cause Blisters, and of such as cause scabs, or pustules, of burning things, of Corrosives, Putrifactives and of such things as take away haire, and ex∣tinguish milke and seed. TO the fourth ranke, belong those things which breake forth, Rube-factives, Escaroticks, and Causticks, which are all comprehended under the name of fiery Medicines, which with their exceeding heate, as the heate of water, or fire, burne our bodyes, the most gentle amongst them, are Rube-factives which onely by heating make the skin red, and those things which lye deeper, they draw out to the skin, Making red the skin. such are Mustard-seed, Cresses-seed, Nettle-seed, the Rootes of Thapsiae. The stronger are called vesicatories, Vescicato∣vies. because they raise Pustules, or Blisters, which for reason of the tenuity of sub∣stance, burne only the Cuticle, or the outmost skin, and draw out a humour, like scalding water, and pull the cuticle from the cutis, or thick skin, and raise it into a bladder, such are, Cantharides, Mustard-seed, Leaven, strange Clema∣tis, Crow-foot, seed of Cresses, Thapsia, roote of Sow-bread, bastard Pelitory, sea Onions, Garlick, Doves-foot, Euphor∣bium, Pidgeons-dung, Soape. The more vehement are Escaroticks, or such as cause, Burning the skin.
Pustules, or scabs, so called because they burne, not only the cuticle, but also the cutis, and they are hot in the fourth de∣gree, and of a thick substance. Amongst these the most vehement are Causticks, Causticks. and they are endued with extraordinary heate, and thick substance, which burne not only the skin, but sometimes the flesh also, as burnt brasse, Flowre of Brasse, quicklime, vitriol, Ashes, or dust of the dregs of Wine, little Figs, Ashes, of Ash, Savine, Pidgeons dung, Ashes of a Pine Tree, white Helle∣bore, Salt prepared of the lee, whereof soape is made, Arse∣nick, Oaker, Mercury sublimate. Besides these there are yet other Medicines which draw away flesh, Of corro∣ding Medi∣cines. and they are two-fold, some of them are more mild and are called Cathereticks, others are stronger which are called Stypticks; Cathereticks, or Corrafives, are those which take away the soft flesh that is growing, and only the outmost which they touch, they take away the superficies not suddenly, but by degrees, but cannot be indured to pene∣trate deeper, and they are hot in the third and fourth degree, the milder whereof are, Aloes, Allum, Ashes of Oystershells, Ashes of an Oake and Fig-tree, the Rootes of a white Vine, of black Hellebore, burnt Lead, Antimony calcined, the stronger are quick-lime, Flowre of Brasse, burnt Brasse, vitri∣ol calcined, Quick-silver precipitated, sublimate vitriol, Mysy∣sory (a stinking mettall) burnt lead, Things putrifying. oyle of vitriol, sulphure. Stypticks, or Putrifactives, soften the harder flesh, and they are the hottest, dryest, sharpest, pernicious to the na∣tive heate, which seeing they destroy, and take away the ra∣dicall moisture there followeth corruption of the substance of the part, and a deadly putrifyed disease, such are Arsenick, Orpiment male, or Female stone-Ferne; Pityocampes, they are wormes in a Pine Tree, Monks-hood, sandaracha. Hereunto belongs those things that take away haire, Taking a∣way of haire. and extirpate them, and make the part bald, and if they continue long in the skin, they exulcerate and burne it, such are strong Lee, quick-lime, Ants, or Pismires eggs, sandaracha, Orpiment and Arsenick. Moreover concerning the extinguishing and diminshing, Consuming of milke. of milke and seed, the generation of milke is hindered, if the store of blood be abated, which medicines do not performe, but spare dyet, or exercise, hinders the comming of it to the brest, such are Hemlock, Lettice, Ducks-meat, Water Lillies, Gourds, Night-shade, Purslan, Poppy but milke that is
generated, is consumed, by the seed of Agnus Castus, Cala∣mints, Cummin, Rue, sage, saffron, Bean-meale, Lupines, Basil, some whereof are thought to doe it by a hidden pro∣priety. Certaine things consume the seed by a hidden propriety, Etingui∣shing the of seed. Rag weed, the lesser, as the greater, increaseth seed; seed of Agnus Castus, some by a manifest quality, cold things as Hemlock, Gourds, Henbane, Lettice Water Lillies, Wood∣sorrell, Ducks meate, sorrell, and sower things; hot, Cala∣mints, mints, Dill, Rue, Hemp seed, hereunto also belongs Saccharum Saturni, Camphir, which J. C. Scalliger de∣nyes. CHAP XI. Of Medicines purging through the Paunch. IN the first ranck of Medicines, Purging. namly of those things which consist in the ablation of any thing, and are first called Purgers, but although all Medicines in generall which free any parts of the body from excrements may be called, purg∣ing medicines, yet use hath brought it to passe that they are only called purging medicines in particular which lead or drive out excrements through the paunch or by Vomit; those which move by the belly and are wont to be known by the common name of Evacuators, are twofold; some of them are such as only purge the belly and the first passages, others there are which reach beyond the first Region of the body and emit peccant humours from the more remote parts, which are more properly called purging medicines. The former sort the Greeks call, Lenitives. Enteropticks and Hy∣pacticks that is Lenitives, because they evacuate ordure out of the guts, and whatsoever is detained in the stomach, guts, and Orifices of the Meseraick veines, whether they doe it by mollifying and humecting, or by lubrifying and making the passages slippery, which they imbue, and melt the feces with their abundant humidity, and provoake to expulsion, or whe∣ther they have a power of cleanseing and moderatly stimu∣lating, such are, Mallowes, March mallowes, the herbe Mer∣cury, Beets, Cabbage, Blites, Orach, Sparagus, Raysins, sweete Pruins, Sebestens, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Oyle of sweet Almonds, new fat Figs, sweete Apples, fat Broaths, especially of a Cock or Capon, whey, especially of Goats milke, fresh new Butter.
But the purging medicines are most properly so called which send forth some particular humour out of the body, Things purging. from some particular part, but by what power they performe, that is much controverted by Physitians, but it seemes pro∣bable, that purging medicines, whither taken in at the mouth, or by Clister, or externally applyed to the Navell or belly, or held in the hands or applyed to the Buttocks are resolved and deduced into action by the heate of our bodyes, and that the most subtill spirits, or vapours of them so resol∣ved are dispersed through vessels into the whole body, and by a hidden force and propriety, move the humours which have affinity with them, and trouble, stir up, and as it were ferment them, and do so bring it to passe, that those hu∣mors, which before were mixed with the blood, and caused no disturbance of nature, being now stirred up and seperated from them, and being by themselves, stimulate nature and irritate it to expulsion, which being irritated by the helpe of the expulsive faculty, expells both the purging medicine, and the vitious humor so seperated by the power thereof, to∣gether from the body. But some of them are more mild which mollify the belley, More mild. yet besides this, by a propriety of substance, regard a peculiar humour, and exercise their strength beyond the first wayes, to the Liver and Spleen, yet cannot evacuate from the whole, and the most remote parts, some are stronger, which eva∣cuate beyond the liver and spleen, also greater vessells, but the strongest purges are those which evacuate humours out of the whole body, Stronger. and from the most remote parts, and from the smallest veines; there are divers purging medicines, yet the difference of them is drawn, from the number of hu∣mours, which they attract by a specifique force. Cholagogues, or the milder purgers of choler. MAnna, Manna. which in the broath of Beef, or of a Hen, or in a decoction of Pruins, or Tamarinds being dis∣solved, and strained, is given, from an Ounce to three Oun∣ces. Cassia Fistula, Cassia. is a benigne, and safe medicine at all times and all ages, unlesse that it be too moist and windy, and therefore, not so convenient for a moist stomack and guts,
and those that are flatulent, and therefore is corrected with Cinamon, Mastick, Anni-seed, Fennell-seed, Carrot-seed, halfe a drachm, or a whole drachm being added to it, it is exhibited conveniently in the forme of a Bolus, or Electuary not long before meate, it is given from halfe an Ounce, to two Ounces. Tamarinds are cold and dry in the second degree, Tama∣rinds. and for that reason, represse the Acrimony, and heate of humours, the pulpe is given from an Ounce to two Ounces, or three Ounces, and in decoction to foure Ounces. The juice of Roses, syrups, Juice of Roses. and Hony prepared of it gives strength to the Liver, and bowels, but it opens the Orifices, and therefore is not to be given to such as are with child, the juice is given to two Ounces, the Syrup and Hony to three or five Ounces. The juice of Violets, Violets. and Syrup and Hony prepared thereof, mitigates heate, the juice is given to two Ounces, the syrup and Hony to foure Ounces. Flowers of the Peach-Tree cause not only purging, Peach Tree flow∣ers. but vomiting, and purge chollerick and serous humours, the Syrup prepare of them is given to two Ounces, the conserve to an Ounce, a handfull of them infused in Wine doth per∣forme the same. Myrobalans, of citron colour, are cold and dry, Citron Mi∣robolanes. and also bind, and strengthen the bowells, but are not so safe in ob∣structions thereof. Their astriction is corrected, opening things being added, and sweet smelling seeds, or if they are rouled in Oyle of sweet Almonds, they are given in powder to two drachms, in infusion to five drachms, or to an ounce and halfe. Rupbarbe besides yellow choler, purges phlegme also, Rhubarb. but not unlesse it stick in the nighest passages, tis principal∣ly good for the liver, it hath divers parts, by the more sub∣tile it purgeth and opens, by the thicker it binds, whence it is profitable, in a Lientary, and in spitting of blood, and in ruptures, it is given in the substance, in infusion, and de∣coction, it ought to be very light, and the third part of Ci∣namon is added, or of Camells hay or Indian spike, when you are willing only to purge, or open, tis best given, in in∣fusion or decoction, but when you would bind and corroba∣rate tis best in the substance; there is also an extract prepared hereof, but such a one, which scarce purgeth stronger, then when it is taken in the substance, tis given in the substance
tis given in the substance, to two drachms, in infusion to halfe an ounce. Turpentine moves not only the belly, Turpen∣tine. but the bowells, and especially cleanseth the reines, tis given with the powder of Rhubarbe, or Licorish, and Sugar, made into a Bolus, or with the yolke of an egg, and some convenient water therewith, wrought in a Morter, and reduced into a milky liquor, tis given from halfe an Ounce to six drachms. Aloes is hot in the second degree, Aloes. and dry in the third, exceeding bitter, it opens the mouths of the veines, and therefore is hurtfull to such as are apt to a Flux of blood, or such as are with child, and Hecticks, and no way safe for those that are hot and dry, extenuated; tis most conveniently ta∣ken prepared, and extracted, and Rosated, as they call it, by reason of the bitternesse of it; it is not easily given in drinke, but in pills, most pro∣perly it is given from halfe a drachm, to three drachms. Fleabane, Fleawort. or Flea-wort, the seed of it, is cold and dry, in the second degree, tis given in infusion, rather then in the substance, from a drachm to three drachms, Stronger Purgers of Choler. SCammony is hot and dry in the third degree, Scamony. it primarily drawes choler, next Phlegmaticks humours, and unlesse it be well corrected, it frets the guts by its Acrimony, causeth gripings, opens the Orifices of the vessells, and causeth a Flux of blood, it hurts the stomack, Liver, and Heart, in∣flames the Spirits, and stirs up feavers, and therefore we sel∣dome use it alone; and least that it should offend, fat things are to be added, Tragacanth, Bdellium, Oyle of sweet Almonds, seed of Fleabane, Cinamon, Spike, Galangale, Fen∣nell seed, Quinces, Mastick, the juice of Violets, and Roses, tis commonly corrected, by boyling it in the substance of a Quince, and so prepared tis called Diagrydium, there is also prepared of it an extract, or Rosin, it is scarcely fit to be gi∣ven to those that are weake although it be corrected, the dose of Dyagridium is given from five to fifteen graines, some give a scruple.
Asarabecca purges choller by the Paunch, Asarabec∣ca. yet it rather stirs up vomit, it attenuates, opens obstructions, and provokes sweats, and therefore is profitable for Hydropick and Icterick persons, and such as are troubled with the Spleen, and Quar∣tan Agues, tis given in the substance from halfe a Drachme, to two Scruples or a Drachme, in infusion from two Drach∣mes to halfe an ounce. The milder purgers of Phlegme. MYrobolans, Mirobo∣lanes Che∣bula. Emblica. Bellirick. Chebulae which principally are good for the Braine and Liver, according to some evacuate also black choller, emblick which are appointed for the heart, Spleen, and Liver, as also Bellirick are cold, in the first, and dry in the second degree, and bind, and therfore are not safely given in obstructions, nor when Phleagme tenaci∣ously cleaves to the guts, but in fluctuations and in a loose∣nesse, and when there is need of astriction and corrobora∣ting, they are prepared according as we have shewed before, of the Citron Myrobalams there is also the same Dose to be given. Agarick purges onely thin, and aqueous Phlegme, Agarick. but not viscide, and principally evacuates the excrements of the Braine, and Lungs, opens obstructions of the bowells, yet is not so commodious for the stomack, and therefore the third part of Cloves, Nutmegs, Galingale, Sal gemmae, Ginger, are to be added, tis given in the substance to two Drachmes, in in infusion from two Drachmes to halfe an ounce. Mechoacan also purges Phlegme, Mecoacan. but principally se∣rous and aqueous humors, and therefore is excellent in Drop∣sies; tis corrected with the third part of Cinamon, Anniseed, Mastick, tis given from a drachme to two drachmes in the substance, in infusion to halfe an ounce. The stronger Purger of Phlegme. TVrbith is hot in the third, Turbith. and dry in the second de∣gree, and drawes out thick and viscide Phlegme, even from the remotest parts, tis hurtfull to the stomack, and cau∣seth
loathing, and Vomit, and is not to be given to children, old men, nor Women with child, and when tis exhibited, it is to be corrected with Ginger, Mastick, Pepper, Cina∣mon, Fennel, Galingale, nor must you eat fish after you have used it, the Dose is from 2. scruples, to 4. scruples, in the substance, in infusion or decoction from 2. Drachmes to 3. Drachms to 6. Drachms. The seed of wild Saffron, Seeed of Cartha∣mus. purgeth Fleagme, and Water, by Vomit and Stoole, and is very good for the breast, and such as have Asthmaes, but it is an enemy to the stomack, and therefore it is used with the third part of Cinamon, Galingale, Mastick, or Anniseed, tis given in decoction from three Drachmes to six Drachmes. Coloquintida, Coloquin∣tida. which is hot and dry in the third degree drawes out Flegme, from the most profound and more re∣mote parts; Turbith cannot evacuate but is a most vehement medicine, and offends the stomack and Guts, when there is a Feaver; and moreover it useth to be sod, being bound up in a skin, tis seldome used alone, but instead thereof Tro∣ches made thereof, which they call Alhandals, are wont to be used, tis corrected with Cinamon, Tragacanth Mastick, Bdellium, and other Cordiacks, Hepaticks, and Stomaticks, tis given to 15. graines or a Scruple. Hermodactiles purge thick Phlegme especially from the joynts, Hermo∣dactiles. and therefore is good for the Gout; tis corrected with Cinamon, Ginger, Mints; tis given in the substance from 2. scruples to a Drachme and halfe, in infusion, or de∣coction to 3. Drachmes. Euphorbium is hot and drying the fourth degree, Euphorbi∣um. it drawes away thick and tough Phlegme, but more powerfully aque∣ous humours, it is a violent medicine, and tis reckoned by some, rather among poysons, then purgers, tis corrected by cordials and stomaticks, Oyle of sweet Almonds, Saffron, Mastick, by the sowernesse of a Lynion or Cytron, the high∣est Dose of it is 10. Graines. Opopanax heates in the third, Opopanax. and dries in the se∣cond, it drawes away thick and viscide Phlegme from the more remote parts and joynts, tis corrected with the third part of Ginger, Spike, Cinamon, or Mastick, tis given from halfe a Drachme to a Drachme. Sagapenum is hot in the third, Sagape∣num. and dry in the second de∣gree, and purges clammy and thick humours from the Bow∣els, Braine, and more remote parts especially of old men
hurts the stomack and Liver, it is corrected as opopanax, the Dose is from halfe a Drachme to a Drachme. The milder Purgers of Melancholy and black humours. INdian myrobolans are of the same nature with the rest of them, onely that these purge melancholy. Indian. Mirobo∣lanes. Polipodie evacuates adust choler, as also Phlegme; tis profitable in diseases of the splcene, and Hypocondries, Polipodie. the Dose is from a Drachme to three Drachmes, in infusion to an Ounce and above, Epithymum purges a dust choller, Epithy∣mum. and Melancholy with∣out trouble, and is profitable in Diseases proceeding from hence; yet because tis hot and dry in the third degree, tis sa∣fer to be used in Winter, then in Summer, tis given in the substance from two Drachmes, to three Drachmes in infusi∣on from halfe an ounce to an ounce. Sena is as it were the middle betwixt the stronger and weaker, hot in the second, dry in the first, Sena. tis a very usefull medicine, which not onely evacuates adust humours, but also choler and Phlegme; cleanseth all the bowels, and is con∣venient for all ages, when tis more dry tis not inconveniently corrected with the flowers of Violets and Burrage, Ginger, or Cinamon, or the fourth part of Galingale is added to it, the powder is given from a Drachme to two Drachmes, in in∣fusion from halfe an ounce to an ounce. The stronger purgers of Melancholy and adust humors. LApis Armenius purges dull, thick, melancholy humours, Lapis Ar∣menius yet more gently then Hellebore, it is corrected by washing in Cordiall waters, tis given from halfe a Drachme to a Drachme, or sometimes to a Drachme and halfe. Lapis Lazuli hath the same vertue but is something wea∣ker, tis corrected with Cordialls, the Dose is the same. Lapis La∣suli. Black Hellebore is not usually to be given to children; Black Hel∣lebore. women that are great, nor to weake bodies, and indeed it is more safely given in decoction, then in the substance, tis corrected with Cordialls, and stomaticks; tis given in the
substance from a scruple to two, nay to a Drachme, in infu∣sion or decoction from a Drachme to halfe an ounce. Hydragogues and such as evacuate aqueous humours. THe juice of the root of Flowerdeluce is hot and dry in the third, Root of O∣rice. opens drawes, out thin Choller and water; but for women with Child tis not so safe, because it provokes the months, tis corrected with a little Wine and Cinamon, and Manna, or honey of Roses is added; or decoction of reysins of the Sun, tis given from halfe an Ounce to an Ounce and halfe, or two Ounces. Gratiola or hedge Hyssop purges by stoole and vomit, Hedge Hy∣sop. but troubles not a little the body, tis corrected with Cina∣mon, Anniseed, Liquorish, tis given in the substance to a Drachme, in decoction from halfe an Ounce to an Ounce. Elaterium or the juice of wild Cucumbers drawes water and choller out of the Bowels, Elaterium. and happily drawes forth the water of hydropick persons, but it provokes vomit also, gripes the bowels, opens the mouthes of the Veines, and unlesse it be cautiously exhibited doth mischiefe; tis corrected with Tra∣gacanth, Fleawort, Bdellium and Cinamon; in the Dose you must not easily exceed six Graines. The rine and juice of the root spurge, Spurge. purgeth and gnaw∣eth powerfully, and therefore is corrected with Bdellium, Tragacanth, Mucilage of Fleawort, Cinamon, Spike, the Dose of the Barke of the Root is from six graines to fifteene graines, but of the milke (or juice) from three graines to eight graines. Mezereon whose force is fiery, Mezere∣um. exceeding sharpe, exulcera∣ting, biting, kindling Feavers, dissolving the strength of the heart, and noble parts, and purging choller violently; and Bilous serosities, tis corrected with Sorrel, with the juice of Pomegranates or of Quinces, of Purslan, Mucelage of the seed of Fleabane, the Dose in the substance is from six grains to ten graines, in the decoction from halfe a Drachme to a Drachme. Dwarfe elder, Elder. Dwarfe. or Dane wort and elder, the seed and mid∣dle barke, and juice of the root and leaves, draw out water, they are corrected with Cinamon, the Dose of the berries is given to a Drachme, of the barks to two drachms, of the juice
from halfe an ounce to six drachmes. Soldanella or sea Colewort are the best remedy to draw out water, but tis an enemy to the stomack, Soldanel∣la. tis corrected with Ci∣namon, and Ginger, the Dose is from a drachme to 2. drach∣mes, of the juice to halfe an ounce. Gummigote purgeth choller and water, Gummi∣gote. and oftentimes cau∣seth vomit, which is prohibited by the addition of the spirit of salt or Mace, the Dose is from five graines to eight graines. The root of Ialap powerfully and with violence purgeth se∣rous and black humors, tis given from a scruple to 2. scruples. Ialap. Although each of these do purge single humors, yet some of them do purge other humors also secondarily, Rhubarbe, A∣loes, Cassia, Agarick, Scammony, evacuate choller with Phleagme; Myrobolanes, Chebulae, Lapis Armenius, Lapis La∣zuli, Phlegme and black choller. Sena, Epithymum, Polipodie, black Hellebore, purge choler, Phleame, and Melancholy, the latter Physitians have drawne other medicines into use un∣known to the Ancients, prepared of Venus Mercury and Mars. CHAP. XII. Of Medicines that cause vomits. SEcondly amongst evacuating medicines are such as cause vomitings, Things causing vomits. which indeed evacuate the stomack immediat∣ly, yet if they are too strong they draw the neighbouring Bow∣els and the greater veines, they performe that for the most part by a peculiar propriety, by reason of which they have an inclination upwards, yet some of them for a manifest cause, namely because they swim in the stomack and oppresse it, and loosen the Orifice of the superior ventricle, such are all fat and oily substances. But some are gentle, others indiffe∣rent strong, others very strong. The gentle are simple water, or Barley water luke warme, The most gentle. especially with a little honey, and salt, dranke by little and little at one draught, common oyle luke warme, foure ounces or six ounces, Hydromell largely taken, Hydreles to ten oun∣ces, Figgs newly eaten, and cold water dranked after. The middle sort are the Flowers of Dill, The mid∣dle sort. as also the Seed of Orach, and of Raddish, they are given from two drachmes to halfe an ounce, the root of Asarabecca, and Orach are given in the substance to foure scruples; Bittony, the middle barke of a Walnut, to a drachme, in infusion to halfe an ounce, the greene pill that co∣ver the walnut shell dryed in an Oven, from halfe a
a drachm to a drachm, the juice of Raddish to two ounces, the tops of green Elder, (or the berries.) The strongest are the Rootes, The strong∣est. of Spurge, of Sow-bread, to a drachm; in infusion, from a drachm to two drachms; the Rootes of white Hellebore, in infusion from halfe a drachm to a drachm, adding cardiacks, Flowers of Danewort, Barkes, or Roote; Flowers of broome, seed of broome, from two drachms, to halfe an ounce, the seed of spurge, the husks be∣ing taken of, ten in number, a water to provoke vomit made of green Walnuts and Raddish Rootes, Ana, parts 2. of Vinegar part 3 d, being distilled, is given to two ounces or three ounces, white vitriol, Salt of vitriol, glasse of Mars, and Flowers, crocus Metallorum, and from thence a water to cause vomiting prepared by Rulandus, Mercurius vitae &c. are in use with the chymists. CHAP XIII. Of Medicines causing Ʋrine. OF Diuretick medicines, or such as cause Urine, some are properly so called, Diureticks. namely such as easily penetrate into the veines, and poure humors into them, they cut, and sepe∣rate the thick from the thin; that they may so doe, tis ne∣cessary that they be hot in the third degree, and of a most thin substance, of this kind are, the Rootes of smallage, Fen∣nell, Parsly, Butchers-broome, Sparagus, Valerian, Burnet, Spikenard, Asarabecca, Wormewood, Agrimony, Nettles, Ground-pine, Cheruil, Rue, Scordium, Anniseed, Fennell-seed, Hart-wort, cheruil, Gromwell, Saxifrage, Juniper-berries, sweet Almonds, Peach-stones, and water distilled out of them with Malmesey Wine, Cubebs, Garden-cresses, the wood cassia, Medicines of spirit of Salt, and of Tartar, others lesse properly so called, whereof some are hot but doe not at∣taine to the third degree, as Turpentine, Parsnips, Dill, Venus haire, fresh gathered Rootes of Smallage, others are moist also which supple, or loosen the passages of Urine, as Licorish, march Mallowes, the seed of Mallowes, others are cold, which have an abstersive faculty moderate, attenuating, and refrigerating force, such are Pippens, Gourds, Cucumbers, the substance and seed therof, Barley, Strawberries, whey, juice of citrons, and Lymons, others besides that they are of thin parts, they afford much aqueous humidity, as thin
white Wine, the seed of Melons, Gourds, cucumbers, waters of baths. CHAP XIV. Of Medicines provoking sweats. I Droticks, Provoking sweat. or Sudoriphicks are endued with a greater te∣nuity of parts, then Diureticks, they are hot also and be∣sides they penetrate into the farthest parts of the body and cut humours, they attenuate, rarify, and turne into exhala∣tion, and what ever is in their way, they carry with them, and drive into the extremities of the body, or if some amongst them are cold, or astringent also, by a hidden quality, where∣by they resist poyson, they drive malignant humours to the superficies of the body. Such are Carduus Benedictus, Venus haire, Rootes of Fen∣nell, Smallage, Parsley, Burdocke, Burnet, Angelica, Tor∣mentill, Worm-seed, China, Flowers of chamomill, the wood guaicum, Sassafras, Irish slat, Harts-horne, juice of Elder, Bezoarticum, Minerald without; and with Gold, fixed steele, or Diaphoretick, and copper, and steele fixed, Diaphore∣tick, Mercury precipitate, also to provoke sweates, Laconick bathes, of sweet water are profitable, also fomentations, as warme Bottles, and hot Tiles, Frications, Vnctions and such like. CHAP. XV. Of Diaphoreticks and Medicines, discussing wind. DIaphoreticks, with the Greekes are the same, Dissolving. with dis∣cutient and dissolving medicines with the Latines, and they drive out through the insensible passages, and secret pores, all such things are hot and dry, and have power of converting humours into Vapours, and of opening, and dila∣ting the pores of the skin, such are camomill, Melilot, Dill, Fenugreek, Rue, seed of Flax, Lupines, Galbanum, dryed Pitch, Storax, Brimstone, Sagapenum, and such like which are lately named. Next to these are they which are called, Discussing of wind. discussers of wind, which as well can discusse, and consume wind within the body as when it is moving to the extremities, such are,
besides those already named, century the lesse, which won∣derfully conduceth to the discussion of wind, upon the Hy∣pocondries, Anniseed, Bay-leaves, Pennyroyall, Fennel-seed caraway-seed, cummin, Ammi, carrot seed, Parsley, Agnus Castus, Dill, Juniper-berries, Bay-berries, Galingale, cloves, Mace, the Pills of Oranges, the genitalls of a Beaver. CHAP. XVI. Of provoking courses, expelling the secundine, and a dead child. SUch as bring downe menstrous, Eringing downe courses. are either improperly so called, to wit, such as corroborate the expulsive faculty, or further the generation of blood, or else attenuate its thicknesse, and viscidity; or properly so called, which open obstructions of the wombe, and draw down blood to the wombe, which opening and cleanseing things most power∣fully performe, and such as are not of a very thin substance, least through their tenuity of substance, they should present∣ly be scattered, and therefore there is most conveniently provided for this purpose, things which have some bitter∣nesse, mixt with Acrimony; such like are Sage, Penny-royall, Dittany, or Garden-ginger, Marjerom, Rue, Cala∣mint, Wild-Marjerom, Bittony, Spike, Asarabecca, Mug∣wort, Germander, Worme-wood, Ground-pine, Rootes of red Madder, Birth-wort, Fennell, Parsley, Flowerdeluce, Eringo, Lovage, Burnet, Saffron, Flowers of white Violets, Parsnips, Juniper-berries, of Bays, Flowers of Camomill, Cinamon, Mirrh, native Borax. The stronger of these drive out the secundine, Expelling Secondines and a dead child. and expell a dead child, which therefore are called casters out, and drivers out, or Ejaculators, because they drive out the young; such like are, Asa faetida, castor, Myrrh, and those things which are variously applyed externally, as Opopanax, Galba∣num, Amoniacum, Sulphure, the smell of the burnt hoofes of an Ass, Coloquintida, Rue, wild Cucumbers, the gall of a Cow, or Calfe.
CHAP. XVII. Of Medicines that breake the stone. SInce the common Doctrine of the generation of stones is suspected, as is said before in the second Booke, page 2. Breaking the stone. C. 9. also the common opinion which strives to support it concerning the power of dissolving stones is suspected, and therefore here we deservedly fly to the propriety of the whole substance, which nevertheless is not inconveniently drawne, from a Saline or salt force, the medicines breaking the stone are Ground Ivy, Bitony, Pelitory, the Rootes of Rest-harrow, the five Diureticks, the Rootes of Raddish, Saxafrage, Burs, bitter Almonds, cherry-stones, the stones of Apricocks, the Kernells of Medlars, Grumwell, Parsnips, cinamon, Gourds, crabs stones, Goates blood, Lapis Judaicus, the Rootes of Sparrage, Snales, Lignum Nephriticum. CHAP. XVIII. Of Errhines, Sternutatories, and Apophlegma∣tismes. ERrhines draw out phlegme into the Nostrills, Errhines. not from the ventricles of the braine but such as is about the mem∣branes covering the braine; they performe that by their heate and vitrosity wherewith they are endued by their extergent and sharpe faculty; such are made of Marjerom, Rue, Pimpernell, cabbage, Beetes, Rootes of Flowerdeluce, Fen∣nell flowre, Penneroyall, Wild Marjerom, Hore-hound, Sow-bread, Wild Cucumbers, celendine, Fell-wort, the juice of double or single Pasque flowre. Ptarnicks, or Sternutatories, or such as cause sneezing, Sternuta∣rories. are those which by their Acrimony irritate the expulsive fa∣culty of the braine, which being wearied desiring to expel the medicine, sends out together with it the excrements, which remaine about its membranes, and in it selfe, such like are certaine Errhines most curiously powdered, and likewise white Pepper, Ginger, white Hellebore, bastard Pellitory, Caster, Cloves, sneezing-wort, Euphorbium. Lastly, Apophlegmatismes, Masticatories, Apophleg∣matismes. or Gargarismes are those which being put into the mouth and touching the
Palate, draw excrements from the braine into the Palate and mouth, and that by their whole substance, or by their heate and Acrimony, which poure out and melt excrements, and stimulate the expulsive faculty of the braine to expell, such are made of Mastick, Raisins, Hyssop, wild Marjerom, sweet Marjerom, Penneroyall, Caster, Cubebs, the barkes of the Rootes of Capers, Ginger, Fennell flowre, white and black Pepper, Mustard-seed, Turbith, Staves-acre. CHAP. XIX Of things causing spittle. THose things which helpe to evacuate humors in the breast and lunges when they are therein contained, Expectora∣ting things. ought to be cutting and attenuating and somewhat sharpe, that they may render what is thick thin, and what adheres by reason of viscidity, may be cleansed, least the thinner parts be∣ing resolved, the thick should be left behind and become un∣fit for expulsion, nor should they be too sharpe least they should stir up the cough, such are made of Hyssop, Venus haire, Scabious, Raisins, Horse-hoofes, the Roote of Elecam∣pane, Birth-wort, Angelico, Flowerdeluce, Wake-robbin, Squills, Licorish, Raisins of the Sun, Injubes, Sebestens, Almonds, Figs, Pistack-nuts, the feed of a silke worme, Gar∣den Cresses, Water-cresses, Hartwort, Nettle-seed, Sper∣ma ceti. CHAP. XX. Of Medicines killing and expelling wormes. LAstly those things may conveniently be referred to this ranke which kill wormes, Killing wormes. whither they doe it by bitter∣nesse, or by a peculiar or occult force, such are century the lesser, Wormewood, the Herbe Lung-wort, Mints, the leaves of Peach-Trees, Rue, Purslan, Sorrell, Lyons-Tooth, Cynae or Santonici an Herbe like Southernwood, the stalkes of Leekes, Orach, Plantaine, Lupines, Rootes of Grapes, Ferne, Gentian; Elecampane, bitter Almonds, Peach-stones, Aloes, Syrup of Pomgranates, Citrons, Hearts-horne prepared, Bole armenick, Myrrh, whither they are ta∣ken inwardly or externally applyed to the Navill.
CHAP. XXI. Of drugs good against Poyson. IN the last ranck of Medicines, Drugs good against Poyson. we will place those things which resist Poyson which are called Alexiteria or Alexi∣pharmaca, all of these if we rightly weigh the matter, per∣forme that which they doe either with their whole substance, as they say, or else by some occult propriety: Medicines against Poyson are two-fold, some are generall, and common, which resist all manner of Poysons, and strengthen and comfort the heart and vitall Spirits, so that they cannot easily take in∣fection, others are particular which oppose some peculiar sort of Poyson. Common Antidotes against Poyson are Angelica; Common Antidotes. Carduus Benedictus, Valerian, Dittany, Scabius, Divells-bit, Swal∣low-wort, Burnet, Tormentill, Rue, Germander, Sorrell, Worme-wood, Plantine, Marigolds, Speed-well, or Fluelin, Vipers-grass, Zedoary, Gentian, Juniper-berries, Citrons, Bezoar stone, Unicornes-horne, Harts-horne, Bole armenick, Irish-slat. Of those Alexipharmicks which resist particular Poysons, Proper. many are delivered by Dioscordies in his sixth booke. CHAP XXII. Of the manner of finding out the vertue of Medi∣cines. WE come to the knowledge of the faculties of these Medicines two wayes, by reason, and Experience; How the vertues of Medicines may be found out: and indeed especially by experience; for the force of some Medicines, as acting in their whole substan, is found out only by experience and although reason may seeme to per∣swade some things, yet unlesse it be confirmed by experience it is to be rejected; truly those indications are not plainly to be rejected which are taken from externall passions of things, from the place, and Aire, from colours, and smells, and remarkeable signes, yet in many things they faile, unless experience be joyned: nay experience alone often sufficeth, for those things which are cleerly manifest to our senses, leave nothing of doubt, yet if that which is found by experience,
can be confirmed by reason, Manner of experi∣ments. that is, by much the most cer∣taine knowledge, but when reason seemes to be adverse to experience, tis better to cleave to experience, yet experi∣ence ought not to be taken rashly, nor to be taken from one example but many observations, and those are choicely to be collected, which may be done if the medicine acting, and the body or subject suffering, be diligently considered. In medicines, especially such as are taken from Plants, the substance, quantity, quality, age, time of gathering, na∣tive place, and such like, are to be considered, and especially to be regarded, whether it have got any strange, and acqui∣red quality, but it ought to have its owne vertue whole and entire. The subject is mans body, and all medicines are said to be such, not absolutly, nor in respect of other things, but in re∣gard of mans body, whence it comes to passe, that experience ought to be made, of the primary qualities in a temperate man; in others for the most part, especially those that are sick, and those that are affected with me simple discase, and not a compound, least experience should be put out of its course, nor is it enough, that experience be made once, or in one body, but observation ought to be made in many that are alike in Temperament, age, sex, structure of body; it is also to be considered whether any Medicine, performes any thing primarily, and by its selfe, or by accident.
THE FIFTH BOOK, PART. I. SECT. II. OF CHYRƲRGERY. CHAP I. Of Chyrurgery in generall. AFter we have spoken of the faculties of the medi∣cines, it remains that now we speake of Chyrurgery, and that we propound all the operations, which are made by the hand, and Chyrurgicall instruments, in mans body, for the recovering of healths sake, we will pro∣pound the operations which often are the matter of helpe. Chyrurge∣rys what. But although the word Chyrurgery, which signifies manuell operation, may be taken of all actions, which are done by the hand, yet according to Preheminency, tis taken for that part of Physick, in particular, which by the artificiall use of the hand, cures diseases of mans body, which are con∣trary to nature, and so Chyrurgery is imployed only in the externall parts of the body, and exercised in those internall parts also to which the hand, and Chyrurgicall instruments can reach. Sith hence three things are required to performe an action, the Agent, the Subject patient, and those things by which
the action is made, in Chyrurgery also, these three are to be considered, Discription of a Chy∣rurgeon. the Agent, is the Chyurgeon, which Celsus in his seventh Book, and the beginning of that Book thus des∣cribes, a Chyrurgeon ought to be a young man, or a middle aged man, with a strong hand, stable and never shaking, and as ready with his left hand as with his right, sharpe, quick and cleere sighted, not daunted in courage, not pittifull, as he is willing to cure, whom he takes in hand, one that may not by the clamour hasten his motion more then the matter re∣quires, nor losse then is necessary, let him cut, but let him performe all things, as if no others paine could trouble him by their crying. The subject is mans body, The sub∣ject. the knowledge exactly wher of, and the figure of every part, and their scituation, and con∣coction is required in a Chyrurgeon, which often defection of bodyes will bring forth. Those things by which an action is performed, are instru∣ments; and some other things are necessary for perfor∣mance of operations, as the place, light, garments, Servants, standers by. The Instruments are various, Instru∣ments. yet the cheife are, an in∣cission knife, a Pen-knife, a paire of Tongs, an instrument to pluck haire from the body by the Rootes, called vossella, a Probe, a broad Probe, a Seaton needle, a Needle, Threed, a Hooke, a little hollow Instrument of Chyrurgeons, boared, a Phillet, Swathing-bands, Clouts, and little rags, Lint, Sponge. The place is to be chosen, Place. which is most commodious for Chyrurgicall operations, and wherein the sick may not be hurt, by wind, cold, heate, or any externall accident. The light whether it be that of the Sun, Light. or some other, ought to be such, that the Chyrurgeon may accurately dis∣cerne that part, which he dresseth, least he should offend himselfe or the patient. The Servants, Servants and stan∣ders by. and standers by ought not to be displeasing and troublesome to the sick, but ought to be attentive to the commands of the Chyrurgeon, silent, and which is their duty, faithfull to performe his dictates. The garments of the Chyrurgeon ought to be so made, Garments. that they may no way hinder him in his operation. The Chyrurgeon himselfe ought to endeavour as much as in him lyeth, to performe his operation presentsy, safely, and with delight, and as much as possible without paine.
All the Chyrurgicall operations are five, Chyrurgi∣call opera∣tions how many. a putting toge∣ther or conjunction of seperated parts, a correcting and set∣ting right of those things which are out of joynt, or out of their place, a Solution of continuity, an Extirpation, or cut∣ting off of Superfluities, and a Restitution of deficiencies, of which now in their order. CHAP II. Of putting together, and binding in generall. POsition is that operation of Chyrurgery whereby the parts, are joyned together, Setting or putting to¦gether. Finding. which were seperated contra∣ry to nature. Deligation or binding is necessary to this as also for the most part to other Chyrurgicall operations, to which belongs fascia∣tion, or Swathing-bands, and the putting in of Tents, fitting of Splints to bind about wounds, and the action it selfe or putting in of a round string to cleanse the wound, aright or true placing of the part bound. Of Swadling. A Swath is a long and broad band (or list:) Swathing. fasciation is a convenient circumduction and convolution of the swa∣thing-band about the member to be cured, the most conve∣nient bands are linnen, which are cleane, light, soft, which have neither seames, nor knots. The differences of Swathing-bands are various, Differences of it. which are taken from their figure, length, and breadth, they differ in respect of figure, because some are rolled up thick, long and equally broad, and rolled up into a round circle, others are rent, or broken, which consists only of one linnen cloath, but that cut or parted, either in the middle or outsides, others are sowed together, which are Swathing-bands and Ligatures ending in divers heads, and representing severall figures; Swadlings differ in longitude, because some are longer, others shorter, and so it is of latitude. There are two kinds of deligation, the one simple, Differences of deliga∣tion. the other compound or manifold, the simple is either equall or une∣quall, the simple that is equall, is only round, which incom∣passeth
the affected member, in a round circle, alike every way, without declination, unto either part, but is simple e∣quall, binding is divided into Asciam, and Simam, which only differ in respect of more and lesse, because Asciadeclines a little from a round, but Sima, much of severall wayes of swathing are many differences, taken from the similitude of the parts which are bound, or from the similitude of cer∣taine Animalls or other things, of which Galen in his Book of swathing. As for what belongs to the manner, The man∣ner. sometimes the bind∣ing, is to be begun from the part affected, other times from a sound part, neerest to the part affected, sometimes from the opposite part, moreover sometimes swathing is to begin, at the end of the swathing-band, sometimes at the middle, thirdly swathing-bands should neither presse the part too hard, nor suffer it to be loose, for when tis too loose, it doth not sufficiently containe the part, and when it is too hard it causeth paine and inflamation. The use of swathing is twofold, one by its selfe, which is to draw together the disjoyned parts, to contract thedilated, to direct the distorted, to containe the member framed and the adjunct parts, to resist a humour flowing; or to represse a humour which is already flowne, or to force blood to extenua∣ted parts; but that which begins in a place affected re∣presseth from the part, that which begins from a sound or opposite, forces towards the part, the other is by accident, which is to keep on medicines applyed to any part. Of Cerots or Bolsters. SPlenia, Splents made up with Lin∣nen. are Plaisters so called, from the figure of the Spleen, the Ancients calls them, Plumaccoli, but now they are called Pulvilli, Plagulae, they are linnen rags folded up together, which are put to the part, some according to longi∣tude right, others oblique, others transverse, and some doub∣led, fome threefold, others fourefold, sometimes single, and sometimes more, according to the use which they are put for to strengthen, the binding members, unequall in thicknesse, or thin and hollow parts are to be equalled, and filled up; that the whole dilagation may be equall, the parts also
are to be defended from the paine of the swathings and bands, and the Sanies, and thin matter, is to be expressed and imbibed. Of Splents. SPlentors, or splents, Splents. which are wont to be fitted to broken bones, and such as are out of joynt, after they are set, which were prepared by the Ancients, of wooden-slips of a cane, but now they are prepared of the wood, of Firre, or splentors of some other wood, or of the Barks of Trees, or Paistboard, and hard Leather, which may answer to the parts greivously wounded, or broken, or put out of joynt, especially to the hands, sometimes to the chest of the body, so made up, of light wood, that they may answer to the figure of the member, or of white thin plates of Iron, or tough skin, or shell, Paper glued together, and fitted, so that they may containe, the parts drawn and joyned together, least that they shake or totter, and slip out againe, and slide out of their places. Of Binders. LAqueus, Swathing∣bands. is a band or binder so knit together that being drawn in or prest by weight, is shut, or closed, the use there∣of is to extend broken limbs, or such as are out of joynt, to continue such as are put right in their places, to bind the parts and draw them in straight, also to bind the heads of vessells out of which blood flowes, the differences of them may be seene, in Oribasius de Laqueis. Of fit placing of a member that is bound. THe convenient placing of a part that is bound consists in this, that it may have that position, which may pre∣serve its naturall figure, and may be without paine, and may be convenient for the cure of a disease. A member shall be so
placed if all its parts, bones, muscles, nerves, veines, and arteries, may enjoy that position whereby they neither are distended, nor pressed; if the member be set or placed softly, and equally; if the orifice in a hallow ulcer, or wound, tend downeward as much as may be, that the quitture may be purged out; lastly if moderation be observed in ordering of the binding so that it be neither too straight nor too loose. But collocation is made either by putting in, or by sus∣pending; a member is fitly restored, when tis underpropt with certaine stayes, with feathers, wooll, or soft rags, that it may be quiet and leaning or resting on somewhat, it should lye allwayes even, and soft, least it either should be shaken by motion, or extended by reason of flux, or least the sanies and thin matter should be retained in it: the member is suspended, either when the sick keepes his bed, or newly be∣gins to walke, and especially the hand, and the arme are to be kept in a Swath, which Celsus calls, Mitellam. CHAP III. Of Coaptation of broken bones. Synthesis, which joynes together seperated parts, is either of bones, Setting how many∣fold. or of fleshy and soft parts, setting together bones is either a fitting those that are broken, or a restoring those which were out of joynt. The putting together of broken bones, is performed by two operations, Of broken bones. whereof the one is called Catastasis, Antitasis, or extension; the other is called Diorthosis conformation, or tis called reposition of the bones, into their owne places; extension is either equall, or unequall, equall is that wherein the member is equally extended from either side of the broken bone, but that is said to be une∣quall, when the member is more extended on one side; that side ought to be more extended, wherein the broken bone is contained but no man can rightly performe those operations, Extension. unlesse he knoweth the nature, and differences of bones and fractures, for when a muscle is drawn back to its head, and so carries with it that part of the member which is joyned to it, first there is need of extending, which the Greekes call Antitasis, which ought to be done, as neere as may be, with little or no paine, and that is performed by one worke, or more, and that either with the hands only, or raynes as it
were swathings, or instruments, according as the bone is more or lesse broken. Diorthosis, or conformation, Strength∣ning. is a restitution of a broken bone into its place, and a right fitting of the extremities of the broken bone, which is performed if after the member be so much extended, that in putting it back the bones cannot touch one another, the Chyrurgeon is to take hold of the member on both sides, with both his hands, and that which is slid into the right part he should thrust into the left, and the contrary, and what ever hangs out of the bones, he should put back into their owne cavities, untill the extremities of the bone are rightly united, and thrust back, into their places, and the member hath recovered its naturall figure. The cure of a fracture with a wound. But if the extremities of the broken bones, breake through the skin, that they hang out, some convenient instrument of Iron, like a barr, is to be used, to force the broken bones into their place, but if any particle of a bone so hang out, that it cannot easily be put into its place, it is to be cut off with a sharp paire of cissars, or to be filed off with a file, that it may be shorter, neither let it any more hinder the reposition: in such a fracture which is joyned with a wound, if any thing stick betwixt the broken bones, which may impede their glutina∣tion, whither particles of a bone, or any thing whatsoever, it is to be taken away without violence; when the bones are rightly placed, the extension is to be remitted by degrees, and with convenient binding and placing of the member, and so to be performed, that the bones united and rightly framed may remaine so. Yet before swathing-bands are put about a broken mem∣ber some medicines used to be applyed, to hinder the Flux of humours and inflamation, and to farther the generation of brawny flesh, of which, read the Institutions. The deligation is to be performed, Manner of swathing or deliga¦tion. neither too straight nor too loose, with two swathing-bands, whereof the first is to begin above the fracture, and to be bound about it, twice or thrice upwards; the other, being longer by halfe, is to be rolled about the contrary way, and is to be put on first upon the fracture, and beginning from thence to be rolled about something downeward and againe is to be carried above the fracture, and lastly towards
the superior sound part, but in fractures of great bones, that the deligation may be the more stable, and the bones firme∣ly put into their places, may remaine so, Bolsters or crosse folded cloathes, and splentors, and Plates, are also to be used, moreover the member is rightly to be placed, gently, equal∣ly, and inclining upwards, so that the part may obtaine its naturall position, to which purpose, both a hollow Pipe, and Cane, or Plate, or such like, are sometimes to be applyed, the deligation being well performed, is to be loosned the third day, the fracture to be cleansed, and bound up againe, and this is to be continued untill hard flesh be grown, and the fracture healed, but if a fracture be joyned with a wound, after the extension is abated, and there is convenient con∣formation of the broken bones, the lips of the wound are to be drawne together, and being drawn, to be kept together, yet so that the swath-bands be not too straight bound, which ought to be flacker, and to be extended on both sides, be∣yond the lips of the wound, least paine should be stirred up, but in the following deligations, a hole, or vent, may be cut above the wound, both through the Plaisters, and swa∣thing bands, that it may be perfectly cured. CHAP IV. Of restoring of bones that are out of joynt. Synthesis which puts bones slid out of their places into them again, calle this Arthrembla, this is performed three wayes, either with the hands of the Chyrurgeon which is convenient in tender bodyes, and when the hurt is newly done, or with certaine common instruments, as by the helpe of raynes, swa∣thing-bands, Laqueorum, scalarum, sedilium, forium bifidar∣um, and it is convenient for children, Women, and those whose muscles are grown stronger, and luxations have been longer, or by instruments, certaine Engines, peculiar for that purpose, is performed, and are used for strong bodyes, and old luxations, and altogether on those, which cannot be re∣stored by the two former wayes, of such Engines, you may see Hippocrates, of joynts and fractures, and Oribasius of Engines intititled, de machinis. But after what manner soever, restitution of a boneout of joynt is performed, foure operations are necessary to doe, it
first Extension, Reposition, Deligation, and Confirmation, What things are required for the set∣ting of bones. and Collocation, of the members so replaced. Extension, is made, either by the hands of the Chyrurge∣on, or his Servants, or by raynes, bindings and swathings, or Instruments, and Engines, as is said. Extension being made, the bone which is slid out of its place is to be put into it againe, which worke the Greekes call, Moclia, and Mocleuses, Reposition. namely a compulsion of a bone that is out of joynt and extended into its owne place, which being slid from or out of the end, in the same way which the joynt slid, it ought to be put back to that place out of which it slid, whereof there are so many wayes as there are joynts. The joynt being restored, the intention is to be remitted and the member afterwards, so to be strengthned that the joynt cannot againe goe out of its place, Deligation. which for the most part is performed in the same manner as in fractures. Lastly the member is to be placed gently, and equally, and to be kept unmoved till the fourth or seventh day. Colloca∣tion. CHAP. V. Of the putting together of the soft and fleshy parts. THe fleshy and soft parts, disjoyned, Setting of soft parts. preternaturally are joyned together, either without any division of them, or by solution of their continuity, that putting together, which is performed without any division of parts is various, and of different parts, and first of all sometimes certaine parts being slid out of their places, come to be put into their naturall place againe, such are the guts, and paunch, which sometimes by the wounds of the paunch come out, sometimes the Rim of the belly being loosned, or broken, falls into the groine, and cods, or breake out at the navell, hitherto belongs the wombe, and gut Rectum, which sometimes also fall out of their places, and therefore all these are to be put into their places againe, but how the restoring of each singular part ought to be performed, is spoken in our Institutions, and 3 d. Book of praxis. Moreover, Wounds, how set. for what belongs to the manner of joyning together, wounded parts, without division, the lips of the wounds, since they are disjoyned, are to be brought and joyned together, and when they are brought, being joyned are to be kept together, which may be done too wayes without solution of continuity, either
by swathing, or gluing, or a suture with the Glue, and in∣deed as for swathing that is convenient being made for Wounds according to the length of the member, Swathing. and not very deep, and when we hope by fasciation only, the lips may be joyned. A future is not rashly to be appointed, and indeed if the wound be long, narrow, and straight, swathing is better, that is, deligation of three fingers breadth is enough. The manner of fasciation may be seen in the Institutions. But when in transverse and long wounds, A suture by glue. sasciation a∣lone is not sufficient to draw and continue the lips of the wound together, there is need of a suture; but when in wounds of the face prickings cause deformities, and in o∣ther long and great wounds before the glutination of the wound the sutures are broke; render bodies also cannot in∣dure a seam which is made with a needle, a certain lutina∣tion or suture is invented by glue, by which without any division of the wounded part, or stitching with a needle, the lips of the wound are drawn together. Provision to perform this may be seen in the Institutions. But that conjunction of wounded parts which is made by solution of continuity is performed with a suture and pipes to the suture, A suture by a needle. three Instruments are to be used, the Nee∣dle must be triangular and thred strong, least it should be broken, not too hard, but softned with Wax, equall, or e∣ven, the Pipe ought to be Gold mixt with Copper, or Sil∣ver, with a hole in the end that the Needle may passe through the hole, and the Pipe holding it, and being put to i, it may stay the lips of the wound, least whilst the needle is put to it it should be stirred, neither should it be lengthned to the protraction of the thred and needle: the manner of the suture is two-fold, the one is that which is performed in the same manner as Skinners or Furriers use to sow their skins, being fitted for wounded guts; the other is thus, in the middle of the wound, with a Needle drawing a double thred, the lips of the wound are tied, and a knot being made, the thred a little above the knot, is to be cut off: Moreover in the middle space on both sides another hole is to be pricked with a double thred, and a knot being made in the like manner, tis to be cut off, and that is to be con∣tinued till the lips of the wound be rightly sowne together, and brought to mutuall contract. Fibulae. There is mention also amongst the ancients of a Pipe,
but what it was for the most part is unknown at this day, since it is incredible that those iron hooks should be fixed to the skin, since that would have caused intollerable pain, the opinion of Gabriel Fallopius is more probable, who teach∣eth that pipe to be that suture newly described, which is cal∣led Intercisa, and at this day is most frequent, which is drawn with a needle drawing a double thred through both the lips of the wound, and above the wound, with three involutions, both the ends of the thred are tied together and knit into a knot. But the word Fibula signifies every Instrument that joyneth things together. And thus much of the Chyrurgicall operation which is of putting or joyn∣ing together. CHAP. VI. Of correcting of Bones that are represt or set a∣wry. THe other Chyrurgicall operation is Diorthosis, or the putting right, a correcting of bones put awry, or wri∣then; The Skull if it be deprest, which often happens in Children, is to be reduced into its naturall condition and place, either with Cupping-glasses, the haire being shaved with a great flame put to them, and the mouth and nostrils being shut, the Patient by expiration, together with a violent striving, by putting Cucurbita Cornea, out of which the mouth and nostrills of the sick being shut, a strong man may suck up aire, or with some Plaister sticking very fast to the skin, which is to be applied, and when it cleaves very fast then to twich it up, or with an elevating Augur, or trepan, or by performation and elevation of the Skull. The bones of the nose being broken or bruised, Of the nose are to be drawn back by the finger, or a Specillum put into the no∣strill, and without are to be directed and put into frame by the hand, and afterwards a tent is to be put into the hol∣low of the nose or nostrill. A member being contracted first it is to be softned, Directing of contra∣cted mem∣bers. after∣wards either gently to be bowed, or with an Instrument fit for that purpose it is tenderly and by degrees to be drawn in, or stretched out.
The Legs or Armes in Infants being awry, Direction of crooked Legs or Armes. the best way of directing them is, that they may be reduced by handling and directing them gently with the hands and by degrees, and with swathings drawing them the contrary way to that which they are in, and by rolling the swath-band by little and little they may be reduced into their naturall and due figure, but if the swathing be not strong enough, and that the child desire to goe, little bootes like bagging shooes in that manner as Paraeus hath described them in his twentyeth book of Chyrurgery, Chap. the eleventh, are to be fitted to his Legs; and thus much of the second operation of Chyrurge∣ry. CHAP. VII. Of disjunction in generall, and of dissection of soft parts. THe third operation of Chyrurgery is disjunction, The kindes of division. which devides those parts of the body which are joyned and continued together, of the first of these there are two kindes, Section, and Ustion; Section, some is of soft some of hard parts; and of soft parts according as it is made by cutting or pricking, in particular it is called, Tome, or cutting, or Pa∣racentesis, pricking; of the bones and hard parts there is per∣foration or boaring with a wimble, shaving, filing, sawing; lastly Ustion is common both to hard and soft parts, all which operations are now to be explayned in their severall kindes. In cutting soft parts, Opening of a veine. first comes the opening of a veine, which is appointed for emission of blood out of the body, in divers parts of the body, the provision and convenient prepa∣rations for that purpose may be seen in the institutions. Moreover since that sometimes the matter in tumours should be changed into quitture, Opening of impost∣humes. nor doth an imposthuma∣tion, allwayes breake of its owne accord, and it is to be doubted least the purulent matter retained should offend the neighbouring parts, and bring rottennesse to the bones, some∣times also there is venemous matter, and affects the way to the internall parts, or an imposthumation or Ulcer neere a principle part, or joynts, may stop the fundament, oftentimes an Ulcer or imposthume full of matteris to be opened with an Instrument, or by which opening ought to be so performed
as that the adjacent veines, arteries and nerves may not be offended; the Sanies either is included in a bladder, or else hath no bladder; if the quitture be not included in a blad∣der, let that part be wounded that the tumour may come to its height, and the skin is very thin, yet as neere as may be doe it in a declining part; the Instruments fit for cutting are, variety of Incision knifes, according to the variety of figures, and necessity of their use, the bignesse of the cut is to answer to the quantity and the quality of the matter to be emitted, an incision being made, and the matter in some part evacuated, least the wound before the whole matter be let out should close up againe, tents are to be put in, nay if neede be, the wound must be dilated, and the part so bound up and placed, that the quitture may conveniently flow forth, but if the purulent matter be inclosed in a bag, the tumour according to its longitude if it be lesse or cut athwart like, the letter X; if it be greater and the whole bagg with the matter in it, tis to be taken out and nothing of it to be left be∣hind. Thirdly Fistulaes also are often to be cut, The cutting of a fistula. which is done with a fit Instrument, which therefore the Greeks call Syrin∣gotomon that is a Pipe cutter, the manner of cutting may be seen in the Institutions. Fourthly parts also are sometimes to be separated which are joyned together from ones birth, after ones birth, Seperation of parts that are joyned to∣gether pre∣ternatural∣ly. where∣unto belongs the cutting of the tongue when it is tyed, of eares when they are shut, of the fundament when it is closed, the opening of the private part of a female, the free∣ing of the prepucium when tis straightned, a seperation of it from the glans, the opening of the top of the yard, or glans when tis closed, separation of fingers growing together, the opening of the eye lids when they grow together, all which may be performed by cutting by a skilfull Chyrurgeon, and how it shall be performed, shall be explained in the Institu∣tions. Fifthly hitherto belongs scarrification, Scarifica∣tion. which is performed with an incision knife, or launce, and so that the skin may be opened only with gentle cuttings, or to wound it deeper, and that the more ready evacuation of blood may follow, cupping glasses for the most part with a burning flame are to be applyed, which may attract the humours more potently, yet sometimes scarrification is appointed without cupping glasses, such as that of Mallets which was in use amongst
the Ancients, and the scarrification, in use with the Aegyptians this day. Sixtly, Cutting of vessells. Angeiologia so called in particular, which is a cutting of the vessells in the forehead, in the Megrim, and an invete∣rate Opthalmy, and when there is a perpetuall weeping of the eyes, whereby a vessell, freed from the neighboring parts, is tyed with a threed on both sides, and afterwards in the middle betwixt the two threeds it is to be cut transverse according as the manner of operations is delivered in the In∣stitutions. To the cutting of vessells belong the cutting of the varices, Cutting of the vari∣ces. which was done by the Ancients, almost in the same man∣ner as the cutting of the other vessells lastly propounded, as you may see out of Celsus the 18. Book Chap. the 13. Paulus Aegineta the 6. Book the 82. Chap. Hier. Fabricius hath another manner of Chyrurgicall operation, Tit. of Chyrurge∣ry of the vessells called varices, namely such a one, the In∣strument Volcella (which is to pluck up haire by the Roote) bowed or lifted up first with a hooke, he prick; the varices in many places, afterwards he puts to it a binding medicine re∣presenting the figure of a candle, according to length of it, and upon this he puts the barke of a hollow reed or Cane, To Angeiologie also may be referred that cutting of an Aneurisme, Cutting of an Ancu∣risme. out of Paulus Aegineta, 6. Book, 37. Chap. and 64. Chap. which may there be seen, which neverthelesse is scarce to be attempted unlesse the Aneurisme be very small, and in an ignoble part, not having any great vessells, since without great danger it cannot be performed. Seaventhly, Paracen∣tesis. to Seperation or Section, belongs Paracentesis by which word every pricking in generall was denoted by the Ancients, and tis performed in divers parts, and that either with a needle or with the point of a knife, this opera∣tion is famous and Ancient, in the paunch, to evacuate wa∣ter of those that have dropsies, which retaines the name of the generall name, the manner and reason of performing whereof in the Institutions and in the 3. Booke of Practise part the 6 th. sec. the 2 d. Chap. 3. is delivered; in water of the head the same pricking is sometimes used in the skin of the head, and in the cods filled with water. Hereunto belongs the cure of a Cataract by pricking which is so to be performed as Celsus also describes in his 7. Couching of a Cata∣ract. Book and 7. Chap.
As also the cutting of the wind-pipe, Laryngo∣tome. which is called Laryn∣gotome, which when it is necessary is to be performed with a launce, (the other parts being removed, under the Larynx betwixt the third and fourth ring of the Wind-pipe, the manner of operation is propounded in the Institutions. As also the cutting of the brest, in an Empyema, An incisi∣on of the brest. or an Ulcer or imposthume, in the cavity of the brest, which is performed on one side of the brest, betwixt the fift, and sixt rib, and how it also is to be performed is explained in the Institutions. Moreover a Seton, Applying of a Seton. or using of a Seton Needle by which operation the neck is prickt, and the wound kept open, that peccant humours may be evacuated by it, of which operation you may also read in the Institutions. To prickings, we have annexed leaches, Leaches. or the applica∣tion of leaches, which being chosen, prepared, and cleansed, are applyed with a rag, or a reed; by their biting they open the veines and draw out blood, and indeed from the sub∣cutaneous parts only, and capillary veines, if they are apply∣ed only to the skin, but if they are applyed to any great ves∣sell, they draw blood from the innermost parts of the whole body, and therefore they are applyed according as there is need of this or that evacuation, and are applyed to children when we dare not use the launce to open veines. To the veines of their armes when they are affected with any grei∣vous disease that requires evacuacion of blood. CHAP VIII. Of Section of Bones. BUt that cutting which is performed in hard parts or bones is fourefold, according to the various manner of seperation, and variety of instruments, namely shaving, filing perforation, and sawing. First shaving is a plaining and a making smooth of the inequality of bones with an incision knife shaving them, Shaving. or a detraction and taking away of the filth clinging fast to the bones, and it is performed with files, in magnitude and figure, according to the severall natures of diseases and of bones; either straight, such as are hammers which they use in driving, or bent in the end such as they use in drawing, sometimes they use both a file, and a Hammer wrapt in a clout.
Secondly filing, Filing. or wearing away of bones with a file, it usefull in the teeth when they hang out contrary to nature. The third is perforation whereby we cut the part out of the middle of a bone, Perfora∣ting. either with a Trepan or with a file, or together with a Trepan and a file; the perforation which is made by a Trepan, the Greekes call, Trupesis, a wimble they call Trupanon, Kinds of Trepans or Wim∣bles. and Trupane; but a Trepan is either straight and sharpe, and in a hollowed circle, which is called a wimble in particular, or it is hollow which is called, Modic∣lus; Trepan is like to common wimbles which Carpenters use, and tis twofold, the one is that which answers plainly to the wimbles of Carpenters; the other, which neere the point at such a distance as the thicknesse of the skull is of, hath a knot without, or a circle fitted, which whilst the Trepan is within the skull, hinders it that it cannot goe deeper then is fit, which kind of Trepan, because it cannot goe deeper, the Greekes call Trupanon, or Abaptiston; Modiolus the Greeks call, Cointhion, and Coinichis, and Prion Caractos, tis a hollow Instrument of Iron, round and long like a Pillar, at the bottome of the mouth like a saw, or full of teeth, and straight Trepans, which are called Periteria, are opposed to it, which are turned about with a handle, which if it have a naile (or pin) in the middle tis called male, and if it have not is called female, but the perforation or boaring is per∣formed principally when the skull is broke, or when some matter, or blood is contained within the skull, the manner of which operation may be seen in the Institutions, sometimes also in rotten bones when the rottennesse goes deep. Lastly by sawing, Sawing, or cutting with a saw, bones are divided, when any dead part, the flesh being first cut away with a knife to the bone, and the bone is laid open, or when some broken bone hangs our, and cannot be put back into it place, or when any chinke is to be filled up, or when the table of the skull is to be taken away.
CHAP. IX. Of Burning. THe last kind of seperation remaines, Burning. which is burning, which is to be used when diseases cannot be taken away by medicines, nor cutting; burning is performed two wayes, Burning twofold. either by those things which actually have in them fire, and a fiery quality as Iron, or other fiery Instruments made of Gold, Silver, Brasse, which are called actuall Cauteries, or with burning medicines, which are called potentiall Caute∣ries. There are some differences of actuall Cauteries, especially, An actuall Cautery. in respect of matter and figure, and differing also some other wayes; as for matter, Metallick Instruments prepared of Iron, Brasse, Silver, Gold, are in use this day, Iron burnes potently, Brasse and Gold not so violently, the figures of Cauteries are various, which are described every where, sometimes they are fiered more, sometimes lesse, sometimes impressed deeper, sometimes superficially only, the manner of burning is to be seen in the Institutions, Another manner of burning is that which is performed by potentiall Cauteries, Potentiall. what Caustick medicines are, and Es∣caroticks, is spoken above, part the 1. sect the 1. Chap the 10 th. and in what manner Cauteries are to be prepared shall be shewne in the end of this Book. Fontanells, Issues. and Issues are made by actuall and potentiall Cauteries, namely little Ulcers, prepared to evacuate, draw back, and drive humours through them, but in what parts, and how these Fontanells are to be made shall be shewn in the Institutions. To this third operation may be referred that, Cupping glasses. whereby something is drawn in the body, or out of the body, by cup∣ping glasses, but a cupping glass is a vessell with a belly which is fastned to the body to draw, all whose strength of acting comes by reason of vacuity, but what the differences of them are, the manner of applying of them, and their use, shall be shewn in the Institutions: and thus much of the third Chy∣rurgicall operation.
CHAP. X. Of drawing of things out of the body which were sent into the body from without THe fourth Chyrurgicall operation is, How ma∣ny wayes things may be drawn out of the body. Drawing out of things thrust into the body. A Dart how many wayes it may be drawne out. Exairesis, or extract∣ion of hurtfull and unprofitable things out of the body; but things which are to be taken away, are either sent from without into the body, or begotten in the body. First for what belongs to the extraction of things sent from without into the body, they are twofold; first all those things which are sent to wound the body, as darts of all sorts, and Bullets shot out of Guns; Moreover certaine ex∣ternall things which come into the Chops and Throate, Eares, Nostrills, and Eyes, and stick in them, But Darts are taken out two wayes, either by extraction, or impulsion, that is, either that way which they came in, or that way which it aimed to goe out at; tis drawne out by the part which it came in at, either without any launcing, or with launcing; for if the dart pierced not deep, if it hath not passed through great vessells, or nervous parts, and and meetes with a bone, veines, arteries, or nerves, out of the region whither it tended, and if there be no feare of any great tearing, it may be drawn back that way, which it enter∣ed into the body, and that without cutting; but if there be danger, and that it be to be feared least that the body should be lacerated, if the dart should be drawn out the same way that it went in at, the wound is to be dilated either by cutting, or without launcing, namely with that Instrument, which Cesus in his 7. Booke and 15. Chap. calls Hypsiloei∣des, or Swans, or torkes beake, or other dilating Instruments whereby the Dart may the casier be drawn back. Tis drawn out by the hand, if it may be, when it is apparent, and is fastned only in flesh, or with a Volcella, when it sticks so deep that it cannot be taken hold of by the hands, or other Instruments which the Greekes, Boloulca, that is certaine Instruments to pull out Darts, of which kind are long Tongs, Tongs with teeth, straight, a little bent inward, but the out∣most part broad and round, to which the latter Chyrurgeons have given severall names from their figure, and call them Crowes, Storkes, Ducks, Geese bill, the figures whereof are extant, in Amb. Parey in the 10 th. Booke 18 th. Chap. but
if the point of the Dart, hath pierced into the member more then halfe through, and the place by which the dart is to be drawn through, be more, then it hath hitherto passed, and neither bone, Nerve, Veines, nor Arteries hinder it, tis more convenient, to drive the Dart thither whither it tended; dissection being made in that part, and to draw it out by making of a new wound; but yet if the Dart be too broad tis not expedient to draw it out through another part; least that we add to that great wound, another greate one. The reason of drawing out Musket bullets in many things is agreeable to the extraction of Darts, The way of taking out of Musket bullets. for three things are required to extraction, the first that the way may be dilated with an Instrument; secondly that the bullet be taken hold of; the Instrument takes the bullet, either as a paire of Tongs, or the point of the Instrument enters into the bullet, incom∣passeth it with its cavity, or it takes hold with the end that is toothed like a faw; thirdly a bullet being taken hold of with an Instrument, is drawne out by the hand of a Chy∣rurgeon with the Instrument, of which more in the Institu∣tions. Moreover sometimes thing shappen externally to the Chops, Things that stick in the Chops. Throate, Eares, and happen into the Nostrills, and Eyes, and use to stick in them, each of which require severall wayes of drawing forth; if a little fish bone, or the back bone of a fish stick in the Throate, and that it be in sight when the mouth is opened, tis to be taken out with a Volcella, and that either straight, or a little bowed towards the end, and convenient to take out the bones from the Threate, but if it should descend deeper into the Throate, or having used a Speculum of the mouth to open it wide, if it doth not ap∣peare, a vomit is to be stirred up with oyle of sweet Al∣monds, or of Olives, or with a quill, or putting downe ones finger. A Worme sticking in the Eares, A worme in the eares how to be taken out. first of all it is to be drawn out a live, and that it may be the better performed, and the worme may the easier be taken, it is to be enticed outward, by injecting sweete things into the Eares, and applying of them outwardly, but if it cannot be enticed, or drawn out a∣live, it is to be killed with those things that are bitter, and by a peculiar propriety and force, are destructive to wormes, but being killed, tis drawn out by powring in water or wine and Oyle luke warme, and putting in of tents made of Cot∣ton, wet with Hony, Turpentine, or some glutinous gum,
wherewith twisting it up and down in the Eare, the worme is drawn forth, the sick leaning on that side the Eare is af∣fected Other things which may be put, or slid into the eare are either hard, or liquid; if the things are hard, warme Oyle is to be powred in that they may be dissolved, if it be possible, or certainly the passages of the Eare may become slippery; but if the thing which falls in be of that nature, that it will swell with moistning, as Pease, Beanes, &c. all moist things are to be avoided, afterwards sneezing is to be provoaked, the Nostrills, and the mouth being shut, that the spirits may be forced to goe out through the Eares, and so that together to be thrust out which was slid into the Eares, but if the thing cannot be extruded in this manner, tis to be drawn out with a convenient Instrument, yet very warily, least either that which is to be taken forth should be thrust deeper, or the membrane called the drumme of the Eare should be broken. If that which is to be taken out be liquid, the affected should hop upon his foote on the contrary side, bending his head downeward on the afflicted side, that the moisture may come forth, which if it doth not come to passe, sneezing is to be occasioned, or a little dry sponge is to be put into the Eare, so that the extremity of the Channell which goes into the Eare be first stopt and fortifyed with Cotton, that whilst the spirit is drawn, there be no roome granted for the letting in of Aire in any wayes. If any thing come into the Nostrills sticks in them, there is another way of drawing of it out, then that of drawing out those things that stick in the Eares. If sand or dust stick in the Eyes, the stone found in the maw of a Swallow, Crabs Eyes, Pearles, if they are cast into the Eyes, cleanse them, but if any greater thing be fixed in the Eye, tis to be drawn out with a fine linnen cloath, wet in pure fountaine water, or with a sponge tyed to a soft quill, but if it be greater, tis to be taken out with a little Volcel∣la, or unlesse extraction in this manner doth succeed, Ano∣dunes, or medicines taking away paine, being applyed and other convenient medicines, the businesse is to be commit∣ted to nature.
CHAP. XI. Of drawing out of things generated in the body ac∣cording to nature, but retained in the body beyond the limits of nature. AFter these, amongst those things which are to be drawn out of the body, somethings are found which in∣deed are generated in the body according to nature, yet are detayned there contrary to nature, and hitherto belongs first of all, extraction, or excision of a living or dead child out of the body, moreover the drawing out of Urine de∣tained preternaturally. First of all, Of taking out a lived child. if the young can neither be brought out by the helpe of the mother, nor by any other, there is no other helpe remaines then cutting, whereby the living child is taken out, and those which are brought forth on this manner, are called Caesares, the young is cut out when the mother is living or dead, Of a dead. but of this Cesarean bringing forth, you may see a peculiar Book of Francis Rousset, but as for the extraction of a dead child by what meanes that may be rightly performed Celsus teacheth in his 7. Booke. 29. Chap. 23. Aetius Tetrach Book 4. Ser. 4. Chap. and Hieron Fabricius ab Aqua P. of Chyrurgicall operations, Amb. Parey describes fit Instruments for this operation in his 23 d. Book Chap. 26. Job. Andr. a Cruce. Next to these is the drawing out of a Mole and the same reason for the most part is in drawing out them as in the extraction of a dead child. Extraction of a Mola Lastly hitherto belongs the drawing out of Urine by Chyrurgicall operation, Drawing out urine with a Cathera. but that operation is performed by Silver, or brazen Pipes, which they call Catheters, which that they may be fitted for every body greater or lesse, three of them are to be prepared for men, and too for wo∣men in a readinesse, the manner of operation is in the In∣stitutions.
CHAP. XII. Of taking away the corrupt parts of the body. SOmetimes the parts of the body are so corrupted that there is no hope of curing of them, Cutting of dead flesh. which as being un∣profitable and hurtfull, and such as may infect the parts next to them, and pollute them, are to be taken away; whatever therefore is corrupted, is to be cut off, but the manner of cutting offis various according to the variety of the parts that are hurt, and the place where they are, and nature of the disease it selfe, and therefore the rightest manner of taking away such from the body is known by particular operations, yet oftentimes in fistula's and other malignant Ulcers, cutting alone is not sufficient as being that which cannot take away the smallest fibrillaes and particles, but after cutting there is need of an actuall or potentiall Caute∣rie that the remainders may be taken away, nay some∣times without cutting, by Cauteries only things so corrup∣ted are taken away. Hereunto belongs the Amputation of parts corrupted with a Cancer, Amputa∣tion of a cancer. Of a Vvula, yard, wombe. Of bones. also a cutting off of the Uvula, corrupted either by inflamation or by Morbus Gallicus, the cutting off also of the putred, or corrupted yard, as also of the cor∣rupted wombe. Corrupted bones are taken away by filing, shaving with an incision knife, or with a wimble, of which it is spoken before, as also with divers kinds of Tongs, whereby the corrupted bones of the fingers, and broken bones hanging out may be taken away. Hitherto belongs the plucking out of teeth, Teeth. which is performed, the Teeth being first loosned from the gums, and is done with severall Instruments, whose names are taken from the figure, and similitude for the most part, which they have with the beakes of living Creatures, which Hie∣ron Fabricius, reckons up, the figures of them are extant in Amb. Parey. the 16 th. Book Chap. the 17 th. and Joh. Andr. a Cruce. Lastly it sometimes happens that in mans body certaine parts are corrupted with mortification & they so dy that ther is no hope of recovery of life, Amputa∣tion of Limbs. when there is one indication
that which is corrupted is to be cut off, least the sound also should be affected, which operation the Greekes call Acro∣teriasmos, or a tearing off the dead lesh, but in what place and when that Amputation is to be made cannot be deliver∣ed in a compendium, see the Institutions. CHAP. XIII. Of freeing and taking away things generated in the body contrary to nature. THe last kind remains of taking away things out of the body, Things preternatu∣rall begot∣ten in the body how many-fold. namely those which are generated in the body con∣trary to nature, but there is no little difference amongst those things, for some of them are borne together with the parts of our body and are adhere tenaciously, as Warts, Warts great above and small below, swellings and inflammations in the fundament, the top of the yard, the way to the wombe, cal∣lous flesh, Cornes, Knots, the Kings Evill, excrescencies of flesh in the Nostrills, and Polypus, swelling in the Chops, small tumours in the Urinary passage, Excrescencies on the eye lids, fleshy ruptures, or else they are contained in some part of the body, as water in an aqueous rupture in the paunch, stones or gravell in the reines, bladder or yard. The cutting of warts is performed either by binding, Warts. cuttings, or burning; Warts hanging downe are taken away either with a silken threed, or Horse haire, or they are to be tyed with some other strong threed every day harder and harder untill they come off; cutting is performed with an in∣cision knife, like a Mirtle leave, or with a launce; burning is performed with an hot Iron, or with green wood that is burnt; but how severally the tumour called Thymus in the fundament, glans or prepuce, are to be taken away is shewn in the Institutions, and in the 3 d. Book of practice. Sometimes a little tumour ariseth in the Urinary passage from an Ulcer, Caruncles extirpated out the Ʋrinary passages. and is so increased sometimes that it stops the urine, this is to be taken away by the helpe of a Chyrur∣geon, and fit medicines, but least that other parts should be eroded, medicines are to be ejected through a silver Pipe, to the tumour, or else it is to be incorporated and mixt with the top and head of a wax Candle, and thrust into the place af∣fected, or a little Cane with Lint and white wax put into it, and bedaubed with a fit medicine, being hollow that the
urine may passe through it. This is to be put into the urina∣ry passages. Polypus if it admits of cure, Taking a∣way a Po∣lypus. it is to be cut off with a sharpe Iron Instrument made after the manner of a Spatula, being put into the Nostrills, of which operation see the Institu∣tions, and the first Book of Practice. Fleshy excrescencies in the Chops called, Epuli a naile in the eye. Epuli, as also Encanthis, or excrescencies in the greater corner of the Eye, and the naile of the Eye, unlesse they can be taken away with medicines, are to be cut off, as also peices of flesh here and there growing in the skin of the body, Excrescen∣cies of flesh. Fungi. Nodi &c. and excrescencies which represent a kind of soft flesh, which are like the rootes of Mushroms, and grow like them, and therefore are called Musheroms, knots also, Kings evill, Kernells, swellings in the Throate, and swellings in the flesh, or fleshy ruptures if they cannot be eradicated by Medicines, must be taken away by cutting. A watry rupture, A watry rupture. or water collected into the cods cannot alwayes be taken away by discussing medicines, the cods are to be opened, and the water to be let out through the wound. Lastly the stone of the bladder, Stone of the bladder. since it is seldome di∣minished by medicines, the bladder being cut, tis to be taken out, and sometimes a stone sticking in the urinary passage is to be drawn out, but in what manner those cut∣tings, and operations all of them ought to be persormed, is spoken in the Institutions, and may there be seen, nor can the wayes of those operations be reduced into a compendium, but all things which are there spoken in the operations are diligently to be observed, and thus much of the fourth Chyrurgicall operation. CHAP XIIII. Of the restitution of parts that are lost, or of the Chyrurgery of imperfect parts. THere remains the last Chyrurgicall operation, Chyrurgery of such as are maim∣ed. which is required in the cure of such as are imperfect and maim∣ed, namely when the extremities of the Nose or Eares or Lips are shortned, and these parts maimed, but although parts that are lost are counterfeited by Instruments fained made and painted, out of severall matter representing the
similitude of the part lost, yet this is only a counterfeite and palliating cure, but when it cannot be restored by a new generation of the deficient part, tis to be restored by the flesh of another member being brought and united to it, yet that operation is not to be tryed on every body, but first it is to be observed what kind of body it is which is to be cured, for in old men or in a body which hath an ill habit, wherein wounds are difficult to be cured, this way of cure is not to be easily attempted. Casper Taliacotius in his Book of maim∣ed Chyrurgery, by inserting, accuratly and largely describes the manner of this operation, the sum of this operation is this; he makes his transferring, or bringing into the Nose, and Lips, from the Shoulder; but to cure unperfect Eares he takes away from the Region behind the Eares, namely he appoints a convenient cutting in those parts, and the maimed parts being first cleansed, he commits and joynes the skin of that part which is cut off with the maimed part, and that they may be kept joyned together untill they grow together, he binds them with swathing bands. And indeed he puts that part of the Nose or Lips which is maimed, into the wound made in the Shoulder, with the head tyed to the Arme, as it were to a prop, that it is, immoveable, and fixt so that it can be moved no way. And in this manner when it hath stuck so long, untill the flesh of both parts be united and growes together, he cutteth off againe from the Nose or Lip, the traduct, or that which was brought from another place and is here gown, then he makes conveniently, and frames that flesh so cut off from the Arme into a forme of a Nose or Lip.
THE FIFTH BOOK, PART. II. Of the Method of healing. SECT. I. Of shewing how to preserve health. CHAP I. Of the Method of healing and of indications in gene∣rall. BUt it is not sufficient to know the Instruments for the recovery of health, and those things which are profitable for the curing of a disease, but tis necessa∣ry to understand how and in what manner every thing is to be used, or to know the Method of healing, and restoring of lost health, the next thing therefore is that we may shew the Method of healing. Capivaccius defines the Method of healing to be an art wherein by indications remedies are found out that the lost health of man may be restored, The Me∣thod of healing. for the Method of healing (as also all Physick) is a certaine principall effective had bit using indications as Instruments to find out remedies for the cure of diseases. For the end of the Method of healing is twofold. The in∣ternall, or proximate, namely invention of fit helps and
remedies in every disease, or rather an invention of indica∣tions, that shew what will cure. The externall is a restitu∣tion of the lost health, or which is the same, an extirpation of a disease. But an indication which the Greeks call Endixis is some∣times taken in generall for every shewing or demonstration, Indication what. yet properly and in particular, and as it pertaines to the Me∣thod of healing, it signifyes the shewing of remedies, and tis a perception of what is healthfull in the Indicant, known by causes, or which is the same, tis a perception, and compre∣hension of that which is helping, or indicated, with an appre∣hension of what indicates without experience or any force∣able argument from the cause to effect. But although Indication be the first Instrument of Dog∣matick Physick whereby tis discernd from other Sects, yet that doth not plainely reject experience, and any forceable arguments, but when diseases and the morbisique causes of nature are not sufficiently known, it flyes to experience and example as to a forceable Argument. Experience is the remembrance and observation which oftentimes is seen to come to passe in the same man∣ner. Experience what. An Analogisme, Analo∣gisme. or forceable Argument to perswad is an ap∣prehension of what is helpefull from the like, but that simili∣tude is either amongst the affects or remedies, or amongst the members. As for the Indication, that is really a certaine Enthyme∣ma, by the force whereof that is found out which is done, for the consequence is so manifest that no man can deny it, and indeed by the force of those propositions which are the foun∣dations of Method, and like Axiomes, and principalls in the Method of healing, and they are these. Every thing which jndicates shews the conservation of its selfe, or the taking of it away. That which is according to nature is to be preserved, and that which is contrary to nature is to be taken away. Contraries are cured by their contraryes, likes are preser∣ved by their likes. But there are various differences of Indications, Differences of Indica∣tions. the first and most generall is taken from things about which they are conversant, which are according to nature, and preternaturall, and it is because an Indication is a perception, and insinua∣tion of the preservation of that which is according to the
nature, of the indicant to be performed by its likes, the other is an apprehension of the taking away of that which is preternaturall, to be performed by the contrary of the in∣dicant. Moreover one Indication is genericall, Genericall another subalter∣nate, another specificall and determinate; genericall which the common and genericall nature of the indicant supplyes, and which simply teacheth how to take away the disease, and the cause of a disease, and to preserve strength, but in what manner that may be performed, it doth not shew; sub∣alternate, Subalter∣nate. Specificall. which the subalternate essence of the Indicant shewes, and which indeed determinates the matter more, yet not perfectly; specificiall which is taken from the specifique nature of the Indicant, and describes the whole Indicant exactly and its remedie, and is also called the determi∣nate. Profitable. Thirdly one Indication is profitable, another unprofitable; profitable is that, to which some matter answers, or which indicates such remedy, the matter whereof may be found out, and primarily, Ʋnprofita∣ble. and by its selfe can take away the disease; but unprofitable is that, which shews such helpe, the matter whereof which can take away the disease of the first is not to be found. Fourthly of Indications some are artificiall, Inartifici∣all. others inarti∣ficiall; inartificiall is that which may be known by others and to the vulgar, as well as to the artist, who equally knowes the disease is to be taken away, and the strength to be preserved, but knowes not a reason how that may be done, Artificiall. such as is genericall, and sometimes subalternate; but artificiall Indi∣cations are those which are not known to all, but only to Ar∣tists, and require a great deale of skill that they may be known, and the Indicant, and helping things are exactly described such as are specificall and determinate. Curatory, preservato∣ry, vitall. Lastly some Indications are to restore, others to preserve, some are vitall, according as they are taken from the resto∣ring Indicant, the preserving, or vitall. CHAP II. Of Indicants. BUt an Indicant as it belongs to the Method of healing is some Agent permanent in mans body, An Indi∣cant. What. which by its
proper nature and estence shews some helpe, and shews the Indicate which it requiers to be directed to its selfe that the lost health of man may be restored. Whence it appeares what are the true notions of a true indicant, for first it is required that it doe act, What is required in a true Indi∣cant. or that it be some Agent, Secondly that it be something permanent and present, or adhering to it, Thirdly the Indicant ought to be known to the intellect, Lastly one Indicant, as it is one, indicates also one. As for the numbers and difference of Indicants, The diffe∣rences of Iudicants. tis taken from the end of the Method of healing; which is an inven∣tion of remedies, for whereas things preternaturall are to be removed and things according to nature to be kept, the Indicant should be twofold; called removing or curing in generall, or vitall, and since that things contrary to na∣ture are three, a disease, the cause, and the Symptomes, there are properly foure Indicants so called. The Indicant which is taken from a disease is called Cu∣tratory, An indi∣cant cura∣tory. Preserva∣tory. An urgent Symptome. the common name being retained of the method of healing, but that which is taken from the cause besides the containing cause, is called Preservatory; that which is ta∣ken from the Symptome, is called an urgent Symptome, nor are Symptomes to be excluded from the number of In∣dicants, since that also is preternaturall, and hath pecu∣liar indicates which of its proper nature it affords, and that different from the indicates which the diseases and causes afford, and remedies may be brought for Symptomes which regard neither the disease, nor the cause of a disease, which is manifest in paine which Anodynes shew. The Indicant which is taken from things according to nature is called vitall, A vitall Indicant. but since things according to na∣ture, are health, the causes of health, and the accidents of health, a vitall indicant may also be sub-divided. But although some reckon more Indicants, Indicants lesse pro∣perly so called. yet they are not new and peculiar Indicants, but belong either to the causes, from whence Preservatory indication is taken, or they are not true indicants, but rather manifest true indi∣cants and by accident, and the intervening of another helpe to discover remedies, such like are temperament, habit of body, age, sex, kind of life, strength, custome, the peculiar nature of every one, the condition of the part beset with the disease, aire, condition of Heaven, the time of the yeare, the Country, the place of habitation, the times of diseases, and the force of the remedies.
Namely the temperament indicates the preservation of its selfe, of which, a rule; That disease which differs most, from the naturall state, is to be cured with more vehement medicines, that which differs lesse, is to be cured with milder. Age circumscribes the vitallindicant, of this there is a rule also; By how much the more a disease recedes from the nature of the age of the sick, by so much the more violent remedies tis to be cured with; by how much the lesse, by so much the more gentle remedies. There is the same reason of Sex, as there is of age; as for custome, those things that are accustomed along time, although they are worse, doe lesse hurt, then those which are un-accustomed, whence a dis∣ease which differs much from custome, is to be opposed with stronger, that which recedes lesse, with weaker medicines. The course of life for the most part requires the same as cus∣tome. Idiosuncrasia shews that choice is to be had in Medicines. It is to be considered about the part affected, first its excellency, whence, a rule; Noble parts are not to be tampered with strong medicines, but ignoble parts will endure them more safely; moreover, its conformation and figure which determinates the Indicant and the Indi∣cate; so a thinner part being moistned over much requires not great dryers, but a thick and compact part requires great dryers, Thirdly situation, of which you must know, that parts which are deepe in the body, are to be cured with stronger medicines, but those that are in the Superficies with weaker: Fourthly, the place, of which is to be noted, that if many wayes lye open for the giving of medicines, the next are to be chosen. Aire according to a severall respect, some∣times signifies a Curatory Indicant, sometimes a vitall. Of the season of a disease Hippocrates his Axiome is, In diseases beginning, if any thing seeme proper to be removed, move it; but in diseases that are quiet, tis better to be quiet. Lastly, medicines sometimes shew a greater, sometimes a lesser regresse from the naturall state.
CHAP III. Of the concord, and discord of Indicants. BUt those Indicants, according as they sometimes agree amongst themselves, and somtimes disagree, they are allotted new names, and are called Indicaats, Consenti∣ents, contrary Indicants, Prohibents, Permittents, Repug∣nants, Correpugnants. Co-indicants or consentients are those, Co-indi∣cants. which conduce to the finding out the same remedie, and more of them indi∣cate the same thing, yet others would not have Co-indicants to be Indicants, which require the same helpe, but to be that only which in the foregoing chapter we have said to be called not so properly Indicants, namely such as indi∣cate mediately, and by the intervening of another, but the rest which are properly called Indicants, and require the same helpe, which is required by another Indicate, are called by a peculiar name Consentients. Prohibents which you may call contrary Indicants, Repug∣nants. and Re∣pugnants, they are those which differ from other Indicants and require, and indicate another thing which is adverse to that, which was indicated from another primary Indicant and indeed so that the indication thereof be to be preferred before the other, and that which was indicated from the other is to be omitted. Those are called Correpugnants, Correpug∣nants. Permit∣tents. which resist together with others, and prohibit something. Lastly, Permittents are those which although they indicate contrary to that which was indicated by another, yet, they are overcome by another, as being more powerfull, so that they are compelled to suffer that which the other per∣swades. From whence it is manifest that a Physitian ought to consider not only what one Indicant perswades, but also what another requires, for if all the Indicants agree, and conspire as it were in one, that is boldly to be performed which is commanded by them, but if there be some disagree∣ment amongst them, tis diligently to be weighed which of them perswades most powerfully, and those things which dissent amongst themselves are to be valued by their strength, dignity, and number. If they are equall according
to power and dignity, and are uneven according to num∣ber, those which exceed in number are to be preferred, and that is to be preferred which is indicated by most, but if the Indicants are uneven in strength and dignity, that is rather to be preferred which is commanded by the more noble, or even by one more noble, but if those Indicants are equall both in strength and number, in all things they are to be regarded according to each severall respect. From whence it is manifest that if the magnitude of Indicants be even, the vitall indications are allwayes to be preferred before the rest, and the greatest respect is all∣wayes to be had to the strength, but if there be not a parity amongst the Indicants, that is rather to be performed which is indicated from that which most perswades, yet the rest if it may be are not plainely to be neglected. CHAP. IV. Of Indicates. AN indicate is that which helpeth, An Indi∣cate. and is shewn that it is to be used by the Indicant, it is also named Sum∣pheron, that is, profitable, Prospheromenon, that is aid, that which is required, the scope, and tis called the second scope, to distinguish from the first (for so the Indicant is sometimes called) also a remedie in the Curatory or resto∣ring part. An indicate is divided into something to doe as they speake, Division of an Indi∣cate. or into the very essence of the remedie and nature of it, and into the use, or right Administration of that mat∣ter fit for remedie. What is to be done is known by its selfe from the nature of the true Indicant, What is to be done. whereby is known that the body is well or ill affected and confists in two things, and the Physitian propounds to himselfe two things principally to be per∣formed, namely that he may preserve the strength, and drive away those things which are contrary to nature, as a disease, the cause of a disease and Symptomes, from whence and, what is to be done, as the indicants above shew, is divi∣ded into Curatory, which is a remedie taking away the dis∣case; Preservatory, which is a remedie taking away the cause, and vitall, which is helpfull for the prefervation of life, to which as is said may be added, mitigation of urgent Symp∣tomes
In these oftentimes contrary indications doe meete, and that which is perswaded by one, is disswaded by another, for the strength requiers giving of nourishment, contrary to which a disease and the cause doe indicate, for they are increased by the exhibition of aliment, but then that is to be helped, which hath most need. But in giving contrary things, this principle is to be ob∣served, that the remedie may be given contrary to the in∣dicant, very exactly, but since that which is equally con∣trary may be given two wayes, either by applying such a thing once which is equivalent to the regression from the naturall state, or oftner by exhibiting contraries, not so di∣rectly contrary at severall times, the first kind of remedie is to be used in two sorts of diseases, namely in those which are weake, and in those diseases, which are extreame, dan∣gerous, but the latter way of remedie is to be used in those diseases, which aremoderate as it were the middle betwixt the extreame dangerous, and the weake disease. Moreover that which is to be done, as of indications, so of indicants, one is genericall, another subalternate, another specificall, another appropriated, one is profitable, another unprofitable, one is artificiall, another inartificiall. But the use and right Administrations of helpe are com∣prehended under quantity, Ʋse and right ad∣ministra∣tion. place and time which aimes Practicioners commonly name how much, when and where to act or doe, yet it is here to be observed that those circum∣stances and manners of Administrations have place both in the helpe it selfe, and in the matter fit for cure. As for what belongs to quantity, Quantity whence In∣dicated. since that it may be ta∣ken both for a de finite degree of Administring of a remedie, in which respect quantity, and what is to be performed by a specifique agent are the same, and for the dose, plenty, and bignesse of the matter of cure it selfe: quanttity or magnitude of the essence indicating denotes quantity taken in the former sense, for example sake, great heat shews that it must be much cooled. Yet heare is to be considered whether the part be scituated deep in the body, for then a stronger Medicine is to be chosen that it may come to the part affected, with its full force. When, or the time is shewne from the time or presence, of the Indicant, Time. for then helpe is to be Administred when that which requires it is present. Order also belongs to time, for that which in simple, Order of doing. is
Time, incomplicate is order, and the presence of a vehe∣ment Indicant shews the order of performing, but that is first to be done which is shewn by the Indicant, which over rules the rest in indicating, and that overcomes the rest in indicating, by which the greatest danger is threat∣ned, and without the removing of which the rest cannot be taken away, and therefore three things being observed, we may proceed in a right order of cure; if first we weigh what urgeth most, and from whence there is feare of greatest danger, for that is first to be opposed, which strives most, or from whence the greatest danger of life is threatned. Secondly, if we consider what regard it hath of the cause, and what of the effect, for the cause is to be taken away be∣fore the disease. Thirdly, if we confider what may be in the stead of an impediment, and what before what, and what with what, and what after what may be cured, for what∣soever may be a hindrance in the taking away of a dis∣case, or the cause of a disease are first to be removed, and therefore it is to be considered whether a disease be joyned with a disease, or with the cause of a disease; if a disease be joyned with a disease, it is to be considered whether those diseases agree or not, if they no way agree but are resident in divers parts, you may cure them severally, or together, each by their proper remedie, and tis no matter to which you apply the first remedie, yet regard is to be had of the parts wherein those diseases reside, for those which are in noble parts, or those parts which serve the noble parts, or have consent with them, or which performe any publike duty, they are first to be taken away, but if the diseases have some agreement, and are some way united, it is to be con∣sidered whether the cure of the one is beneficiall to the cure of the other, or at least no way hinder the cure of the other, or whether the cure of the one may bring any impedi∣ment or hindrance to the cure of the other, or whether they partly consent, and partly dissent; if the cure of the one bring no impediment, or bindrance to the cure of the other, or also if it promotes it, as if a distemper of the liver, and an obstruction thereof concurr, you may cure them severally, or together, and begin with which of them you please; also when a reason thereof may be had from that which urgeth most, if they are not of equall force, but if they are so joyned together that the one is more dange∣gerous then the other, you must begin with that which is
the other, neither of them is to be cured by its selfe, but the remedies shall so be tempered that they may both be cured, most dangerous, qut if the one be no more dangerous then both be cured, Lastly, if they partly agree, and partly disa∣gree, you are to begin with that, the cure whereof hinders not the cure of the other, and without removall whereof the other cannot be taken away; if a disease be joyned to a cause, the cause is first to be removed, but in the removing of causes it is to be observed, that they are to be taken away in that order wherein they follow one another, so that you are to be begin first with that which was first in generation and last in dissolution, from thence you are to goe on to the next, and so to goe on forward in order untill we come to our desired end, and that we may breifly comprehend all the matter, the presence of the Indicant which overcomes the other Indicants, and the absence of the prohibiting In∣dicant, shews when to act, and the order of performing; and moreover it teacheth whether the same remedie be to be repeated often, for so long and so often, it is to be repeated, as the Indicant remaines present, and no hindring Indi∣cant happens. The place, or substance of the Indicant sheweth where, and the place of applying remedies, and the place is to be found out in which, by which, and to which as they com∣monly use to distinguish. In all alterations the place in which is principally to be taken notice of, in evacuations the place from which, Manner. and by which, if the matter be carried out of one place into another, the place to which As for what belongs to the place of applycation of mat∣ter fit for remedie, since a contact or touch of the matter and Indicant cannot allwayes be immediate, that is to be chosen by or through which the matter of cure may come to it, that there may be a touch, and action and passion thereof and of the Indicant. As for Mode, if it regard the remedie it selfe without consideration of matter, How the matter me∣dicinall answering to the Indi∣cate may be found out. it seemes not to differ from quan∣tity, time, and place, but rather to be a Summetry in mea∣sure, and equity to be observed in these; but if it be taken for the forme of a medicine, that is delivered in the doctrine of the composition of medicines. The helpe or Indicate being found out, that the Phy∣sitian may be carefull of the matter of cure tis very requi¦site;
which is taken from three heads, Chyrurgery, Ingre∣dients, and Dyet, the same Indicate shews matter, circum∣scribed and determinate with its conditions, quantity, time and place, for that matter is proper and fit, which can performe that, which the determinate Indicate requires by its rules, and which may have force, but if there be more Indicates, or matter to be sought which have more faculties, or if these be wanting more shall becompounded together. But because allwayes as is said, regard is to be had of the strength also, and it is to be weighed, whether by the ap∣plication of this matter, there may come more good or not, the nature of the whole body, and of the part to which the medicine ought to be applyed is to be considered, in which businesse not only manifest, but also occult qualities ought to be weighed, and tis to be enquired by the Physitian whe∣ther the sick have any peculiar hatred to any particular thing, which therefore is in no wise to be given in the cure, but in parts affected in their kind, the excellency of a part is to be weighed, the sense, scituation, conformation, for if a part be a principall one or performes a publick Office, no Medicine is to be given which can much hurt it, and dis∣turbe its Office and Duty, for then losse would redound to the whole body, so to the mouth and chops poysons and things ungratefull to the taste and sordid are not to be exhibited, nor stinking things to the Nostrills, nor gnawing and biting things to the eyes, nor those things to be applyed to nervous parts affected, that cause paine. The same rules which we have now even propounded in the right use of remedies, Quantity of matter. ate to be observed also in choice of matter, the quantity of matter regards the measure, & waght thereof, which was indicated by the Indicant, and is prop∣per for the performing of the Indication; the quantity of the matter is found two wayes, first in what quantity any me∣dicine whatsoever is to be given, and what are those bounds betwixt which if it be given it performes that which it ought, and no way hurteth, is manifest by experience only, but in what dose, whether in the highest, lowest, or middle, the medicine be to be given, to this or that sick person, what the quantity is of the matter to be administred, that is known from the magnitude, or extent of the Indicant, and if the quantity of the Indicant be great, the quantity of the medicine ought to be great likewise, in which matter the condition is to be weighed and the strength of the
whole and of every part, for if a part to be altered is more remote in place, a greater quantity of the remedie altering is required, namely that it may come with its full force to the part affected. But the time of Administring of matter is taken not sim∣ply from the presence of the Indicant, Time. but is that when it can helpe, but this time is known, and the knowledge of the matter to be administred, and the nature of the part to which it ought to be Administered, for some things worke presently, others after some space between; the action of of some things continues long, of others it ceaseth pre∣sently. The part as it is open, or placed deepe, so it re∣gards the action of the Agent presently; the Administra∣tion of the matter is to be prohibited when it doth more hurt then good, but it may doe hurt, when it may preserve any thing contrary to nature which ought to be taken away, or when it may take away that which ought to be preser∣ved. The place of Administration of matter, is that place where the matter is to be given, may helpe and performe that which tis required to do, for since every action is perfor∣med by contact, the Physitian ought allwayes to endeavour that the matter which he seth might penetrate to the place where the Indicant is, and may touch the Indicant, but some parts are Externall, others Internall, in Exter∣nall the matter is plaine, for there the matter of the medi∣cine is to be applyed where it is to worke, or where the In∣dicant is, since the Externall parts may be immediatly touched with the medicines, but medicines cannot be so im∣mediatly applyed to the Internall parts, and therefore when we are willing to evacuate, common wayes are to be chosen, and the next through which the matter may be eva∣cuated; if we are to alter in the interior parts, either mani∣fest wayes are to be found ut or occult passages, through which the matter that is given may penetrate, and indeed as for manifest passages, the widest and nearest are allwayes to be chosen. But concerning the measure, Manner. or manner shall be shewn hereafter, part the 3 d. Sect. 3 d. where various formes of medicines, both simple and compound shall be proposed.
CHAP. V. What Morbifique causes indicate, and peculiarly of purging of a juice in the body which causeth ill digestion. FOrasmuch as hitherto we have explained the universall Method of healing, now peculiarly we will propound the Method of taking away of Morbifique causes, removing diseases, and preserving strength, and will begin from the causes. What the differences of causes are, is spoken before in the 2 d. Booke, part the 1. Chap. the 3 d. for of what kind soever they are, whether begotten in the body, or external∣ly, or admitted into the body, and become as it were in∣ternall or stirring up, cherishing, and increasing a disease without, they all require removall. But whereas causes offend either in the whole substance, or quantity, Causes what they shew. or quality, or motion, or place, first, all things which put on the nature, of a cause, as in their whole kind they are contrary to nature, they indicate, an absolute ab∣lation of them out of the body, or as latter Physitians say, an Eradication. But that here we may treate only of humours, What things shew in their whole nature pre∣ternatural. severall wayes there are of rooting out and evacuating corrupt hu∣mours out of the body, for sometimes they are purged through the paunch, sometimes they are ejected by vomit, sometimes discussed by sweates, sometimes cast out by urine, of which we will now speake in their order, and first of pur∣gation. Purgation taken in the largest sense is indicated from a Cacochymie; What shews when to purge. or juice which causeth ill digestion and bad nourishment, and a purging medicine taken in the largest signification is the matter of remedie, indicated for a Ca∣chochymie; but that this doctrine of purgation may be more evident, in the first place tis to be observed, that Physitians in respect of purging medicines, divide the body into three common Regions, into the first, which is without the liver, and is extended from the stomach, through the middle part, home to the liver; the second which is dilated from the middle of the liver, through the greater veines, to the
outside of the body; the third, which comprehends the ha∣bit of the body with the lesser veines: private parts also have their excrements and peculiat wayes to void them, and hence one evacuation is called universall, Ʋniversall evacua∣tion. another particular, universall is that which evacuates humours from the common Regions of the body, such is evacuation of blood after what manner soever, purging by the paunch, vomitting, voiding of uine, sweate, Particular. insensible transpira∣tion; particular is that which evacuates some private part, as the braines, lungs, wombe. As for universall purgation which evacuates the com∣mon Regions of the body, Cacochymie consists of what Indi∣cates it, either on this side, or beyond the liver; Cacochymie which consists in the first Region of the body, by its selfe, and properly indicates those medicines which have power without any manifest agitation of evacuating superfluous humours through the paunch, which stick in the first Region of the body, although sometimes if the matter have an in∣clination upwards, and the sick can easily endure a vomit, by vomit also humours may be purged out of the first Regi∣on of the body, so that those things which cause vomitting are not purging, and vehement, but gentle, such like are as bovesaid part the first, Sect the first Chap the second: Lenitives. others are called Encoproticks, only such as loosen, and mollify the belly; which evacuate only by softning, and washing away, and drawing away, others by a singular pro∣priety, purge peculiar humours, whose force notwithstan∣ding since it cannot be extended beyond the liver, by some are called Lenitives, by others, gentle purges; both of them and first the former, since they evacuate without much troubling the body, the strength easily endures them, and therefore they may be secrely given in what age soever, sex, or time of the yeare, so that the use thereof be lawfull, namely that they are given in their due quantity, and before meate a little, and in feavers not neere the fit. But excrementicious humours, Purges properly so called. which consist beyond the liver are to be evacuated by Cathartick medicines, so cal∣led peculiarly, or purgers, stronger, and strongest, and Ca∣tharsis or purgation in particular so called is an evacuation of excrementitious humours abiding beyond the liver by Cathartick medicines through the paunch, and by vomit, and is indicated from excrementicious humours, and such
as are unprofitable for the nourishment of the body, and some of those are naturall, others contrary to nature, the naturall are those which are generated by the purpose of nature, as sweet phlegme, Melancholy, choler, for these if they abound, and are generated in the body in greater plenty then they ought, constitute a Cacochimy, but pre∣ternaturall are those which are generated contrary to na∣ture, and unto which naturall humours degenerate, both of them, if they so offend that they can neither be taken away by dyet, nor any other milder kind of evacuation, as by sweates or insensible transpiration Indicate purgation. But as Cacochimy subsisting beyond the first passages, and that being greater, Indicates purgation, so such require such kinds, as purge a definite humour; namely phlegme requires Phlegmagogues; Choler, Chologogues; Melan∣choly, Melanagogues; watry humours, Hydragogues; mixt humours require mixt. Yet it is to be weighed what the strength permits, Permission of purga∣tion. and prohibits in purgation appointed, by a Noble medicine, and whether the strength can endure purging, and the sick be apt, or unapt to purge, and whether more profit or hurt will ensue by purging. All the rest of the signes which are said to forerun purga∣tion, belong to the strength, whether they are strong or weak, of which kind are Temperament, habit of body, age, sex, of which Hippo. 4. Apho. 1. speaking of purging women with child saies: Those that are pregnant are to be purged if the humour be unbridled after foure months, and un∣till the seventh month, although these lesse, for those that have lesser or greater young are more warily and religiously to be medled with, the kind of life, custome, property of nature, constitution of Aire and such like. As for the Tem∣perament, hotter and dryer bodyes endure with more dif∣ficulty cold and moist indifferently, hot and moist easil: strength of body admits of purgation, imbecility very little, a leane habit of body warily, a full body easily, a fat body hardly, of age it is principally to be noted that sucking children are most conveniently purged by medicines given to the Nurse: as to custome, those that are wont to be purg∣ed, more boldly; those which are not accustomed are more ringly to be purged: of Aire you must know that neither the hotter, nor the colder; but purging is principally in
the spring time to be appointed: concerning the nature of a disease it is first to be noted that in hot dileases, if the dis∣ease will beare it, cooling things are to be administred be∣fore purging, moreover because in them the store of ill humours is rather to be taken away by loosning things then by true purgation. Thirdly because those which are apt to a Diarrhaea, Crampe, &c. are not casy to be purged. But principally you must observe whether the sick be prepared and fitted for purging, namely whether the wayes through which the matter ought to be conveyed, are open, and the humours themselves fit to be evacuated, of which it shall be spoken. CHAP. VI. Of the time fit for purging of a disease. BUt although peccant, Time of purging. corrupt and putred humours all∣wayes Indicate their own taking away, and evacuation out of the body, yet because they are not allwayes apt for purgation, you may not evacuate them at any time, but are to enquire of the time and occasion of giving purges The convenient time of purging is, when the humour Indica∣ting purgation is present, and other Indicants permit it, and nothing hinders it. But in the beginning you are to be admonished here, that those things which are to be purged either may stir up a feaver, or other diseases without a feaver; if the feaver be absent, the wayes open and the humours themselfes prepa∣red for motion, you may purge them at any time, so in the Scab, Cachexie, paine of the head, Palsie, Trembling, paine of the Teeth, you may purge during any time of the disease, when nothing prohibits, it and that a concoction is not expected, when those humouts are not properly crud, the are ill drawn hither by some Aho. Hippo. 22. Sect. 1. things concocted, are to be purged not crude, but the whole disputation of the fit time for purging of a disease is of Feavers, and that acute, especially wherein the hu∣mours are properly crude, although the time of a dis∣ease shew not, yet there is a signe which shews either the prohibiting, or permitting vertue; for since that in the aug∣mentation of a disease, nature begins a combate therewith, in the state there is a great conflict between them, let him endeavour this one thing with all his industry
that he may overcome the morbifique caue, and having overcome it may drive it out of the body, and all the Symp∣tomes if they are greater, nature is neither to be opposed any more with purging medicines then, nor to be called away from its good purpose, nor being debilitated enough by the Morbifique matter, and most greivous Symptomes, is it to be hindred; there remaines therefore two times, namely the beginning of a disease, and that after the state, neither notwithstanding is it equally profitable to purge in which you please of these in all diseases, but allwayes to consider whether more profit, or more inconveniency will ensue by purging, but what it is to be done here. Hippo, teacheth in the 22. Apho. Sect 1. which Galen, in 4, of pre∣ferving health Chap 5. calls an Oracle, he sayes, concoct∣ed, and ripened humours are to be purged and moved, not crude. Out of which it is manifest that the most convenient time of purgation is after the state, Purging is the best in the decli∣nation of a disease. and when the humours are concocted, for if we purge concocted humours, that is such as are overcome and tamed by nature, and separted from the profitable blood, we have nature our helper, and the hu∣mour more aptly followes the leading of the purging me∣dicine, but if we endeavour by purges to evacutate crude, humours, that is such as are not as yet Elaborated, and be∣come benigne, nor as yet seperated from the profitable, the sick will receive more dammage then benefit from thence: neither have we nature to a fist us, nor are the humours apt for purgation, wherefore either the purge performes not its purpose and brings out nothing, or very little, or if the me∣dicine be very strong, it draws out not only the unprofitable, but profitable humours, (since they are hitherto mixt,) it melts, and consumes the body, disturbes the humours more, and confounds them, brings forth obstructions in the first passages, the matter being stird and not sufficiently evacua∣ted, whence greivous Symptomes doe arise, but if any vo∣luntary purge shall happen, and that sufficient, or that any future loosness be expected, there will be no need of any pur∣ging; according to Hippo. 1. Apho. 20. those things which are perfectly judged, and exquisitely confirmed are in no ways to be removed, Sometimes you may purge in the begin∣ning. neither moved, neither with purging, me∣dicines, nor other endeavours, but are to be let alone. But although the best time for purging is after concoc∣tion, yet sometimes you may purge in the beginning, by the
command of Hippo. 2. Apho. 29. where hee sayth, in the be∣ginning of a disease, if any thing seeme fit to be moved, move it, but when you may, purge it in the beginning of a disease: It is variously disputed amongst Authors; Galen shews it clearely, whilst 1. Apho. 24: he saith, that then onely purging is to be used, when greater profit may follow by the evacuation of offending humours, then the detriment is, which the body receives from purging medicines; or when any present danger doth more urge, then crudity of hu∣mours; but Hippo. shews the cause, and that danger, 1. A∣pho. 22. whilst he writes. That purging is not to be used in the beginning of a disease, unlesse the matter raise Tu∣mours, or be angry: for if hot humours, acrid and biting wander up and down in the body, and it be doubted least the strength should be debilitated by the agitation of the matter, or least the matter being stird up should rush into some prin∣cipall part with violence, or into some part, which may draw a principall part with violence, or into some part, which may draw a principall part into consent, or least the native heat should be extinguished, you may purge them presently in the beginning of a disease, especially when they also of their owne accord are moveable, and easy to be evacuated, and nature wearied out by them, affords its assistance towards their expulsion, and indeed that should be done in the very beginning, Apho. 10. Sect. 4. of Hippo. To purge in very acute diseases if the humour swell, the very first day, for delay in diseases of this kind is dangerous. CHAP VII. Of preparation and concoction of humours. AT another time, Concoction and prepa∣ration of humours differ. Concoction of humours the work of nature. concoction of humours is to be expect∣ed before purging be appointed, and the Physitian shall studdy to prepare those things which further concoction, and cause more commodious evacuation, for we must distinguish betwixt concoction and preparation, and concoction is attri∣buted to nature, preparation to Art, namely nature only con∣cocts humours, and Elaborates them, and draws them to that perfection, and better state by putrifying which they can re∣ceive, that they may the more conveniently and without prejudice or detriment to the sick be evacuated, but it is not in the power of Art to concoct humours, yet it may be
helpfull to the native heate, concocting both by cherish∣ing and strengthning it. Besides this true concoction which is the worke of nature only, Prepara∣tion of hu∣mourst wo∣fold. Digestion. there are yet other preparations of humours, which are appointed for the more happy concoction, and more profitable evacuation sake, which the vulgar call concoc∣tions also, and medicines effecting them, they call Conco∣quents, or as they commonly speake Digestives. These preparations are of two kinds the one is that which preceds the concoction which is performed by nature, The first prepation of humours. the other is that which followes it, the former is that which takes away all things which are impediments to nature whereby it may the lesse begin, or happily perfect concoc∣tion, and commonly useth to be called concoction; the quality of humours besides their quantity, hinder concoc∣tion; therefore what qualities soever hinder concoction are to be taken away by their contraries, and hot humours are to be cooled, cold to be heated, dry to be moistned, moist to be dryed, in like manner humours that are too thick are to be attenuated, those that are to thin and sharpe are too be thickned and allayed, and those that are tough to be wiped away or purged. Namely phlegme which is cold, Phlegme how to be prepared. Choler. moist, thick, and dull, requires heating, drying, attenuating, cutting, and deter∣gent medicines. Yellow choler since it is hot and dry, tis to be corrected with cooling and moistning things, but as it s thin, and by its too much tenuity may molest the body, it is to be thickned, the other kinds of choler which are produced by too much adustion, sichence they are now thicker, require extenuation. Moreover the melancholy humour since it is cold, Melancho∣ly. dry and thick, is prepared with things modernately heating and attenuating and moistning, but black choler, since tis a hot humour very dry and thick, requires cold things, much at∣tenuating and moistning. The other preparation is that which is appointed when putred humours allready concocted, Another preparation of hu∣mours. or others also not pu∣tred, by reason of some impediment are not evacuated without difficulty, unlesse that be taken away. But sithence humours which ought to be evacuated, ought to be moveable, and the wayes through which they ought to be moved open, hence it easily appeares that there are
two hinderances, which impead the happy purgation of hu∣mours, namely thickness of humours and obstruction of passa∣ges. And therefore the Physitian which would purge as Hippe. commands 2. Apbo. 9. must well prepare, as Galen explaines it, tis to extenuate the thick and dull humours, and open the passagesthrough which they ought to be traduced, and drawn by the force of purging medicines. CHAP VIII. Of the quantity of purgation. THat we may purge as much as is convenient, How much to purge. and no lesse, we are to use diligence, first to know the quan∣tity of the peccant humour, that from thence the quan∣tity of the purging medicine may be determined, for the quantity of the purging medicine ought to be such that it may evacuate all the peccant humours, least any part thereof remaine in the body, and corrupt the other hu∣mours, and afterwards cause a ralapse. But whether the peccant humours ought to be evacuated together, and at once, Whether the peccant humours are to be evacuated at once or severall times. or at severall times is to be known from the store of humours, and strength or weaknesse of the Patient; for if the matter be much, and if the strength be great, yet it is better to divide the purgings, nor by too large evacuation rashly to debilitate the strength, but if the matter be too little, and the strength great, you may purge all the humour at once; if the strength be weake, and many, or few humours are to be evacuated, tis more commodious to evacuate at severall times, then to debili∣tate the strength by one strong purge. Permit∣tents and Probibents. Moreover you must attentively consider how the strength will endure purging, and all those things which may disco∣ver present strength as well as that is to come, and all those things are to be weighed which are numbred amongst per∣mitting things, and such as prohibit purgation: amongst which the first is the naturall propriety of body, for some having taken stronger, and greater doses are scarce moved by purgers, others are purged very easily having taken any purging medicine, therefore if the propriety of natures be not sufficiently discerned, tis better to try with gentle things, then rashly to meddle with the strongest; custome also and habit of body is to be known, and tis to be consi∣dered
whether the sick can beare strong medicines or not. The perfect fignes of purging Hippo. Signes of perfect purgation. delivers 1. Apho. 23. he saith Excretions are not to be valued by their quanti∣ty, but if they are such as they ought, and so goe out that the sick can easily endure it; whereof the first is if such as ought are evacuated. Secondly if the sick can well beare it. Thirdly thirst happens through evacuation, according to Apho. 19. Sect. 4. whosoever are purged having taken a purge, and doe not thirst, the purge hath not reached home to the marke before they doe thirst. But if due evacuation be not made it shall be promoted sparingly by moderate exercise of the body, More sa∣ring purga∣tion how to be provok∣ed. Overmuch how to be hindred. as tis in Hippo. 4. Apho. 14.15. but if it be too much, you must use sleepe and rest. Too great evacuations are hindred by Ligatures, and rubbing of the extreame parts, by sweates, Cupping-glasses applying to the navell, astringent Topicall Medicines put to the Region of the stomach, taking of new Treakle, or old, with a graine of Opium, as also with meate, drinke, and Medicines given, that have astringent qualities. CHAP. IX Of the place by which purgation ought to  made. LAstly the place, What shew the part to be purged. by which purgation ought to be made the residence, or as I may say the inlination of the hu∣mours shew, for a humour is to be evacuated through that place, through which, both in respect of the place wherein it resides, and of its owne nature, it is fit to be evacuated so that the strength will permit it, which Hippo. also admo∣nisheth 1. Apho 21. we ought to lead out humours that way which they are most inclined to goe, thither they are to be led through convenient places. But the convenient places are those through which nature at other times rightly acting, evacuates what is offensive, and indeed there are two wayes by which purga∣tion is to be appointed, the one is that by which we vomit, the other through the paunch, By vomit. but by vomit those humours are conveniently evacuated which are apt both in regard of the place where they reside, and in respect of their own nature to be carried to the stomach, or such as tend upward,
namely such as are generated, and reside in the stomach, as those also which are contained in the Spleen, Cavities of the Liver, and Pancreas, as also thin humours, hot and cholerick; but by the paunch those which remaine in the inferior parts and tend downwards, as also thick and cold humours, By the paunch. hence Hippo. writes 4. Apho. 6. those that are leane, and easie to vomit are to be evacuated upwards, being carefull of the Winter. As for example, those which abound with choler which tends upwards; but on the contrary those which are hard to vomit, and are somewhat thicker, and of an indif∣ferent habit of body are to be purged downward being cau∣tious in the Summer, because they more abound with phlegme. Moreover the time of the yeare shews the humour, Time of the yeare. and from thence also the place of purgation, hence Hippo. 4. Apho. 4. in the Summer the superior ventricles, in the Winter the inferior are to be purged, for in the Summer yellow choler and hot humours abound, and by reason of the heate all things in our bodyes seeme to tend upwards, in Winter, phlegme rather abounds which is heavy, and by nature tends downwards. Symptomes also shew the nature of humours, Symp∣tomes. and whither they incline, as Hippo. teacheth 4. Apho. 17. the loathing of meat by one that is not in a feaver, the griping of the mouth of the stomach, a Vertigo with Apparitions of shadowes, and bitternesse of the mouth shew that there is need of purging upwards, all which Symptomes signifie that choler is willing to ascend to the mouth of the stomach, and the same Apho. 18. paines above the Middriffe, whoever wants purging, they signify they are to be purged upwards, but those which are beneath, downward, and the same Hippo. Apho. 20. if there be gripings, and frettings in the guts in feavers, and heavi∣nesse of the knees, and paine of the Loynes, they shew that you are to purge downward. Yet in provoking vomit we must consider whether the sick be easie to vomit, or not, and whether the stomach or any of those parts, which may be moved by vomit and to which the humours, or at least the vapours stird by vomit may flow, be weake, and affected, for then you must ab∣staine from giving a vomit.
CHAP. X. Of the due Administration of Purgers. AS for the houre of giving a purge, Particular time. purging medicines are to be given at the fourth, fifth or fixth houre in the morning, but if there be any thing which impeades purgation at that time, or requires a purge to be given sooner, it may al∣so be taken at another houre, for fits hinder, which if they come in the morning, the medicine is to be exhibited in the Evening, but a violent disease forceth us to purge, since it threatens present danger, in which case purging is not to be deferred, but to be given, although in the Evening, the purge being taken, you must abstaine from meare foure, five or six hours, after the medicine is taken, those which are given to drink should be given, hot, not cold, nor luke-warme. Some are wont to mingle purges amongst their meates, Whether purgers may be mixt with meate. but they did not well, for the force of the medicine is hindred by the meate; and the meate is defiled and corrupted by the medicine, and the humours which are drawn; its con∣coction is hindred, and being uncocted, the medicine stimu∣lating, it is expeld; and tis to be feared, least some excre∣ments, mixt with the meate, should be distributed into the Liver and veines, or that the meate it selse, being not e∣nough concocted, or rather corrupted, should breed some in∣conveniency in them. CHAP. XI. Whether it be lawfull to sleepe having taken a purge. WHether we may sleep having taken a purge Physiti∣ans disagree, but there is need of a distinction; for if the purging medicine be gentle and benigne, having taken it we ought not to sleep, least the medicine should be carried away and overcome by nature, and its action hindred, but if the purging medicine be stronger, and requires greater heate that it may be brought into action, sleepe may be granted to the sick, yet moderate, which may only further the activity of the medicine, but not impead evacuation, but afterwards to abstaire from sleep untill perfect and sufficient purgation
be made; moreover for the same reason, after taking strong purges tis lawfull to sleepe a little while, that the malignity of the medicine may be resisted by the more plentifull heat, occasioned by sleepe, and those troubles which the medicine occasioneth may lesse be discerned in sleepe, and so the me∣dicine retayned without trouble or molestation, may right∣ly be reduced into action. CHAP. XII. Whether it is best after purging, to use cleansing, and abstergent medicines. TIs the custome at this day, some houres after taking purging medicines, to exhibit cleansing broathes, and such as wipe away, and that is righly done, for tis profitable before food be taken, that the remainders of the medicine, and the residue of its qualities, and if any vitious humours are drawn by the medicine, and remaine in the stomach, they are to be washed away, and drove downward, and the loathing, and disdaining of meate, which is wont to be occa∣sioned by purging, may be freed and taken away. CHAP XIII. Of Evacuation by Ʋrine ALthough the watry humour is principally evacuated by Urine, which remains of the drinke, Evacua∣tion by Urine. and is mingled with the blood, and the gibbous part of the Liver, Reines, Bladder, and Vessells sub-servient to these, are principally purged by it, yet the other humours attenuated, and prin∣cipally the serous, thinner phlegme, the cholerick humour, and all the nerves and veines, may be purged by the same. But seeing those things that cause Urine cleanse the body by degrees, tis most profitable in those diseases, wherein tis convenient to evacuate matter by degrees, and sparingly; but in those where there is need of sudden excretion, and of evacuation to be made on a sudden, in such evacuation of Urine is not so helpfull. But what the difference is of medicines provoking Urine is spoken before, Diureticks properly so called are usefull only as often as thick humours residing in the Reines, blad∣der
and parts sub-servient to them are to be evacuated, or if thick humours stay, or stick in the veines but those which move Urine only by affording aqueous matter, are conve∣nient in those diseases which are bred of thick and adust humours, for by the mixture of aqueous substances, these are rendred more fluid. Permit∣tenes and Prohibients. Those things which permit, and prohibit also, are here to be considered, the strength easily endures this evacuation so that it be so administred that more profit then dammage may redound to the sick, for if either in the whole body or about the liver, many ill humours stick, there is danger, least by their plenty and thicknesse whilst they get to the straight passages, they should obstruct them; and therefore first a purge for the belly is to be appointed: Diureticks al∣so are not so convenient for hot and dry diseases, as feavers arising from hot humours, nor for such as are leane and withered, as also if the Reines, bladder, and passages and vessells appointed for this evacuation, are ulcerated, or inflamed or affected with some such like disease, Time. The time of drinking medicines causing Urine is not not convenient in the beginning of a disease, since the mat∣ter is as yet more plentifull, and thicker, but in the declina∣tion when the matter is somewhat abated and thinner, but they are most profitably given before meate, and on an empty stomach. CHAP. XIV. Of evacuation by sweate. LAstly vitious humours also may be expelled by sweate, Sweate whence it evacuates. for although sweate evacuate in the first place from the circumference, and habit of the body, yet it may evacuate humours also from the rest of the body, and indeed first out of the greater veines and Arteries, and afterwards out of all other parts, namely from whence humours may be driven to the veines, and from thence to the superficies of the body, for they are not conveniently thrust out from the cavities of the stomach, guts, wombe, and such like, to the extremities of the body, and there are other wayes by which they are far more easily evacuated, What hu∣mours are evacuated by sweate. but the watry humour is evacuated by sweate, which also may be evacuated by Urine, and so may every thin humour and cholerick, as
others also if they are attenuated, but principally sweates are profitably provoked by art in inveterate and cold dis∣cases, and diurnall distillations, in the Palsie, the Sciatica, and other paines of the joynts. Yet you must be carefull here what the strength can per∣mit, for this is a powerfull remedie, Things permitting. and requires great strength, but principally hot and cholerick persons en∣dure sweate lesse, and not long, nor doe very hot things agree with them; much matter prohibits provocation to sweate, for tis to be feared, least being dilated to the skin, it should shut its small breathing holes, or pores, and so either generate, or increase putrifaction. As for how much, How much. we must be carefull that we doe not over much provoke sweate, for sweate, if it be too much, weak∣ens the strength exceedingly, resolves the body, and makes it leane, wherefore tis more commodious to cause moderate sweates often, then to debilitate the strength with one that exceeds measure. But the fit time for provoking sweates is the beginning of a disease, but after universall purging of the body, When. and in the declination of a disease, but the particular time, when the meate is concocted, and in the declination of diseases, in those which have paroxismes. But medicines provoking sweate are especially to be ex∣hibited with profit in pestilentiall diseases and in all ma∣lignant matter, by which the malignant matter, In what diseases. the pesti∣lent and venemous matter to the great benefit to the sick is driven from the internall parts, and those that are next the heart to the extremities of the body, and is evacuated by sweate. But Sudorisiques, which are given in such dis∣eases, ought to be of the number of those that resist poyson, that they may together infringe and debilitate the venome. In Administring of which, there is no need of all those rules or observations, which are necessary to be observed in provoking sweates in other diseases, but presently in the be∣ginning of a disease those Sudorifique resisters of poyson are to be given, neither is too much debilitating of strength to be feared.
CHAP. XV. Of particular Evacuations. AS for particular Evacuations, Particular evacuation of the braine. Errhines. if any vitious humours are collected in the braine, it may be evacuated two wayes, by the Nose, and the Palate. By the Nose, first Errhines call out phlegme, which is spread about the braine, and filmes that cover it, and stirs up its faculty that it may strive to cast out super fluous hu∣mours. Moreover sternutatories, Sneezing. which are stronger, and irritate the braine, and by the force thereof humours which lye dee∣per may be cast forth, of both of these this in generall is to be noted, that such remedies are not to be used, unlesse uni∣versalls have preceded, and that the whole body be purged, but or the matter and forme of Errhines, and those things that cause sneezing, see before part the 1. Sect. 1. Chap. 18. and hereafter part the 3 d. Sect. 3. Chap 30. But those things which evacuate by the Palate, Apophleg∣matismes. are cal∣led Apophlegmatismes, and purge the more inward cavities and ventricles of the braine, they are not conveniently gi∣ven to those, the inward part of whose mouth, throate, gullet or Larynx is exulcerated, and such as are obnoxious at other times to distillations to the Chops and breast. Those which purge the Lungs are called expectorating things, Purging the breast. and because humours cannot cast out from the lungs through the Wind pipe, without a cough they are called Becchica of which kind for the most part are Arteriacks i.e. medicines for Rhemes all of them, especially those which cleanse, cut, or any way prepare the matter for expulsion, but that humours may the more easily be evacuated by cough, their consistence ought to be indifferent, neither too thin, nor too thick, but only so thick that they may be car∣ried upward by Aire; not so viscide, as to stick in the mouth of the Lungs, and therefore if the humours are vis∣cide they are to be moistned and cleansed with sowre things but if too thin, to be somewhat thickned. The stomach is evacuated by vomit or by the paunch, Things purging sty∣mach, Li∣ver, Reines, Wombe. the guts with glisters, and medicines purging the belly; the cavities of the liver, through the belly; the gibbous parts, by urine; the reines, and urinary passages, by urine, the wombe by the cources. Of which tis now spoken in univer∣sall evacuation.
CHAP. XVI. Of the abating abundance of blood with Leaches, Cupping-glasses, Scarrifications &c. THe other fault amongst morbifique causes is quantity and the common Indication which is taken from hence that that which aboundeth may be deminuished, What shews the fault con∣cerning quantity. What offends in quantity. and that which is diminuished, may be increased, but since nothing can be said to abound, unlesse that at other times it be na∣turally present; but in the body blood only and such ex∣crements are contained which proceed from nature; blood and naturall excrements in this second manner may be the causes of diseases, as also milke and seed, and moreover the spirits and solid parts of the body, all which if they are defi∣cient in quantity, ought to be increased, but if they exceed are to be deminuished; naturall excrements are seldome de∣sicient in quantity, but they often exceed; but since the same reason is of evacuating naturall excrements, which there is of the humours, in their kind preternaturall, here only we will speak of taking away of blood when it abounds. Therefore if Plethory, be present and the blood abound, Plethory what it shews. the blood is to be diminuished, and that which aboundeth to be taken away, and too great plenty of blood indicates diminution of the same. But concerning the manner how we abate the blood, The man∣ner of a∣bating blood. some performe it more strongly, others more weakly; fri∣cations, Sweates, Bathes, Exercise, Fastings performe it more weakely; Leaches, opening of the Hemethodes, pro∣vocation of courses, Cupping-glasles, and Scarrifications performe it more strongly; but the most generous, and powerfull remedie here, is opening of a veine. Frications, sweates, Bathes, and Exercises, they diminu∣ish the blood one way, because they stir up the heate in the body, which dissolves and dissipates the substance of our bodyes. But fasting doth not evacuate by its selfe, Fasting. but by reason that it takes away humours, and diminuisheth the body, be∣cause it puts nothing in the stead of that which is consum∣ed by heate, and denyes necessary aliment to the bo∣dy; but because fasting evacuates the whole body equally, tis then requisite when the humour abounding
doth abound not in one part but in the whole body; yet shorter fasting first evacuates humours out of the sto∣mach and about the stomach; but because fasting evacu∣ates by degrees it is not profitable, nor sufficient for an in∣dication, when plenitude is suddenly to be abated. But tis endured when the strength is powerfull, to which all other things, which prohibit fasting are to be referred, as tem∣perature of body, hot and dry, hot and moist, a thin habit of body, griping or biting in the Orifice of the stomach, vomiting, flux of the belly. Leaches by opening the mouths of veines, Leaches. and sucking blood, evacuate blood by themselves, and sensibly, yet by little, and little, in which respect they may diminuish the plenitude of the whole body and helpe diseases of many parts to which they are applyed, and evacuate, sometimes a greater, sometimes a lesser quantity of blood, as they are applyed to a greater, or lesser veine, in the application therefore of them, you are to observe, whether they are pla∣ced for the evacuation of the whole body, or for a disease of some private part, for if they are applyed for the evacua∣tion of the whole, they are to be put to the great and pro∣minent veines, in the Legs and Armes or Hemerhodes, yet in women that are with child, they must be applyed on∣ly to the Armes; but in regard of peculiar diseases they are to be applyed to divers parts, as this or that part is affec∣ted. The Hemerhodes if they use to flow at other times, Hemer∣hodes. the opening of them may be instead of breathing a veine, but otherwise the Physitian in opening of them shall labour with little profit, unlesse happily they are opened by leaches putting to them; but since the Hemerhodes are twofold, externall and internall, the externall are opened to abate a Plethory, as also for diseases of the Reines, Wombe, Back, Hips, and other diseases arising from the hollow veine with profit; as in diseases which proceed from the Hypocon∣dries, the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, the internall may be conveniently opened; but the externall are opened with frications, the leaves of a Fig, course rags, Leaches applyed, the juice of an Onion, the juice of Century, or Sow-bread, the Gall of a Hog, or Bullock, or with rags wet in these, but the internall with suppositers and sharpe Glisters. The courses whilst they flow exacuate also and diminish perfluour blood; Courses. but nature appointed that flux, which
if it be supprest is to be opened; in which businesse this is to be observed, that in provoking them, the Physitian should make use of that time, when at other times they use to flow, for if he should endeavour it at another time, he looses his labour. Cuppings, which Scarrification also, Cupping with scar∣risying. but by die, evacuating blood by themselves, and sensibly, but by degrees; for which reason they are something applyed for good reasons, sometimes instead of opening a veine; if they are applyed with good reason, they are indicated from no great fault of the blood. But when they are used in∣stead of Phlebotomie they are applyed for some great fault in the blood, which indeed requires the breathing of a veine, which notwithstanding weak strength will not endure; but Cupping-glasses properly evacuate cutaneous blood, yet because some of the blood which comes out of the skin is powred into the capillary veines from the great veines, in this respect also they are said to evacuate the whole body: but if that evacuation be more sparing it doth not reach the whole. And when Cupping-glasses evacuate by drawing, the use of them is most profitable if any revulsion be requi∣red at the same time: as for the place of applycation, if they are applyed in respect of the whole, they should be put to the inferior parts; if in respect of any part, then to that part which requires this remedie; yet in those that are pregnant, they are not to be exhibited to the inferior parts but rather to the Armes. Lastly simple scarification also without cupping, Scarrifica∣tion. may eva∣cuate blood; which truly is used sometimes instead of o∣pening a veine; and tis appointed in the Legs especially, by which meanes it may not only evacuate but also re-vell from the head, and superior parts, yet sometimes in the Arme and back also, but in its proper use tis exhibited, when there is a purpose to evacuate only out of some one part, but especially when we would evacuate some acrid, ma∣lignant, and venemous matter, least being retained, it should cast the sick into danger, which is used also in a Gangrene, and by the ancients in a callous Ulcer.
CHAP XVII. Of opening a veine. BUt the most efficacious remedie for evacuation of blood is the breathing of a veine, which neverthelesse hath o∣ther uses, What indi∣cates a breathing of a veine. whereof we will here speake together, for tis a que∣stion of great moment when the breathing of a veine, or eva∣cuation of blood by opening of a veine is to be appointed, where first this is to be noted, that the opening o a veine is not some one Indicate, but the matter of remedie which is profitable in many Indicates. There are two generall benefits in the opening of a veine, The use of opening a veine. to evacuate, blood, and by accident, whilst it draws away the blood, the vehicle of heate, to coole; againe in evacuating it performes two things, for it both takes blood out of the body, and allwayes the cource, and violence of humours in the veines; first the way it both takes away the ill blood, and only diminuisheth it offending in quantity, but the latter way it can revell, and draw back and derive the blood flowne into a part, and the blood which is flowne in whilst it is yet moveable, can draw it to the parts neere thereunto; so that the opening of a veine may wholy per∣forme five things, namely to evacuate corrupt blood, to diminuish blood, to revell, derive, and refrigerate. For first the vitious and putrifying blood may be eva∣cuated by opening of a veine, Putred blood eva∣cuated by the opening of a veine. as that which is contained in veines, and they being opened it flowes out, and indeed tis most profitably appointed in beginning of diseases, since nature for the most part in feavers use to drive no small portion of the peccant matter to the extreames, and those greater veines under the skin. Secondly, breathing a veine is an excellent remedie to diminish the blood. The cut∣ting of a vtine de∣vinuisheth blood and revels. Thirdly, the opening of a veine is used for revulsion, for a veine being opened, the violence of the blood is turned and drawne back to the contrary part, and therefore tis a very efficacious remedie to stop flowings of humours, con∣tained in the veines. Fourthly, the opening of a veine may derive the blood, which newly flowed into the part, It derives. and is not yet setled there, but as yet fluid; a veine being opened nigh at hand it may, I say drive the blood to a neighbouring part. Fifthly, Cooles. opening of a veine cooles by accident, but if dis∣temper
only be present, which may be corrected by other re∣medies, and no other fault of the blood be joyned with it which requires breathing of a veine also, cooling medicines are ordered to be used; but if the blood be so exceeding hot that it requires sudden refrigeration, which other medicines perchance cannot performe, or some other fault of the blood be joyned, which by the same means, opening of a veine may helpe, for this cause also you may open a veine. From whence it is manifest, For which Indicants cutting of a veine serves. that the breathing fo a veine may be profitable, whilst the blood either putrifyes, and is corrupted, or offends in quantity, or flowes to any part, with violence, or oppresseth a part, or burnes vehemently. Yet it is not allwayes necessary to open a veine when these inconveniences are present, since we can take them away by other meanes, but then only breathing a veine is conveni∣ent, when there is a great corruption of the blood, and it re∣quires sudden releasing, as being that which is the best and most efficacious remedy amongst the evacuations of blood, then presently blood may be evacuated. In short, The ade∣quate In∣dicant of cutting a veine. the Indicant to which by mediation of the Indi∣cate, as being the matter of helpe, opening of a veine a∣grees, it is a vehement fault of the flowing blood, which is corrupted either in its substance, or it offends in quantity, or rusheth into some part, or oppresseth some part, or growes exceeding hot; yet besides these principle faults, the blood also sometimes, as a cause without which it cannot, and as adjuvant, it may offend; and then also it requires opening of a veine. Yet we may not allwayes open a veine when these Indi∣cants are present, Things per∣mitting opening a veine. for since the opening of a veine evacu∣ates blood together, and also exhausteth somewhat of the spirits, and so debilitates the strength, if the strength be great, it permits opening of a veine, if it be weake it pro∣hibits it, and regard is to be had here not only of the pre∣sent, but of the future strength, for when the strength is weake, either oppressed with store of humours, or loosed, in the latter imbecility only breathing of a veine is prohibi∣ted, but in the former it is profitable. All other things which are said to permit, or prohibit the breathing of a veine, besides strength, they doe it only in this respect, namely as they are the tokens or signes of strength, or debility of nature, as Age, which flourishing admits of opening a veine, Child-hood and old Age prohibit
the same, Se. the Sex, as to women with child, especially in the last monthes, the opening of a veine is prohibited; unlesse some disease inforce it and there be store of blood, proper∣ty of nature, custome, habit of body, course of life, constitu∣tion of Aire, some Symptomes, as large evacuations, watch∣ings and such like, which dissipate the spirits, and substance of our bodyes, and loosen our strength, unlesse they are ta∣ken away by opening of a veine. How much blood to be evacuated. The quantity of letting blood is indicated from the great∣nesse of the fault depending on the blood, and according as that hath greater or lesse force, so blood is to be evacuated more largely, or sparingly, yet the strength, as also things permitting are here to be weighed, an all those things, which are the signes of strength, and weaknesse; and tis to be considered whether the strength will beare that evacua∣tion, which the magnitude of the disease requires. But whether the quantity of blood which is indicated be to be taken away at once, or severall times, the great∣nesse of the disease, and the strength doe shew; in a most violent evil, tis convenient to evacuate the blood at once, in milder at severall times; also strong bodyes will beare one large evacuation of blood, but if they are weake, tis better to doe it at severall times. The presence of those Indicants which serve for the let∣ting blood, Time. shews the time of letting blood, and the ab∣sence of the prohibiting; therefore the most convenient time of letting blood for the most part is the beginning of a disease, yet it is not to be appointed whilst crude juice, and unconcocted meates are in the first passages, and in diseases wherein there are certaine intermissions, and wherein the fits returne at certaine times, the time when the fit is, is not convenient for letting blood, but the time of intermission is more commodious, or if that be too short, the declination of the fit, or the abating of a disease. As for the houre, Houre. if a disease that is violent, provokes or urgeth, in what houre of the day soever, or even at mid∣night, no preparation being made before, and no delay being made, you may open a veine, at other times, one houre or two after sleep is most convenient. But where, What veines to be opened. or the place, and veine to be opened, al∣though what veines soever be opened it may evacuate the whole body, yet the larger performe this best, and regard is to be had, to the fountaine of blood, and the rise of the
evil, which are principally the liver and spleen, the veines therefore in the right or left cubit are to be opened, accor∣ding as the disease requires, the internall, externall, or middle, and especially the internall, but what veines are to be opened for Revulsion and Derivation sake shall be shewne in there proper place. CHAP. XVIII. Of Revulsion. AS for the third fault of humours, Default of humours according to quali∣ties. namely when hu∣mours recede from their naturall state in respect of qualities, how that is to be amended, from those things which were spoken before of the preparation of humours, and which shall be spoken hereafter of curing of diseases of intemperature, is manifest enough. But the error in motion is various, In motion. and humours decline from their naturall state, if either they are not rightly mo∣ved, that is, when they are moved thither whither they ought not, that is, when they ought to be quiet according to the Law of nature, they are moved at that time; or else are not moved, when they should be moved; or are moved in parts or thither where they ought not to be moved; the first error is called the restraining motion, the second the inciting, the third the helping, the fourth the correcting, and averting to another place. First therefore humours as they offend in motion afford one indication only, of stopping of motion, Humours offending in motion what they indicate. of staying the vio∣lence of a humour, or an averting of a humour from a place, to which it flowes contrary to nature, unlesse hap∣pily nature unburthens it selfe conveniently by that meanes, or the body puts away humours that trouble it to some ignoble part of it, but we may satisfy this indication severall wayes, namely if either we take away those things from the humour, which are necessary for motion, or whe∣ther we draw back the same by force, namely, if out of what is thin and fluid we make it thick, if we stop the passages to it, and straighten, and make narrow the wayes, through which it ought to flow, lastly if we prohibit its comming, and bind the passages which are in the part that it may not be conveniently received, but when we cannot hinder these often, or it is sufficient to stay a flux, we call back and re∣tract
those humours by force: Humours are drawn back either by reason of vacuity, or heat, or paine: By reason of vacuity, or rather evacuation humours are drawn back, which power out and evacuate them out the body through other parts, as the opening of a veine, scarrifications, lea∣ches, flowing of courses, Hemmerodes, purging by the Paunch, vomitings, urines, sweats,: By heat and paine they are drawn back, by those things which have power of inciting heat and paine, or have power of performing them both, as are frications, ligatures, lotions, fomentations, ve∣sicatories, causticks, and such like. An so, How many waies the motion of humors may be hindered although there is one Indicant, namely a fault of the humours in motion, so there is one Indicate, namely, remedy hindring motion, and averting the humour from the part to which it flowes, yet the manners of performing these are various, namely foure, Revulsion, Derivation, Interception, and repulsion. Revulsion, Revulsion, what. which the Greeks cal Antispasis, is an averting of a humour flowing into some part, into the contrary; But humours are Revelled, not those which are in the affect∣ed part (for these are properly evacuated out of the part affected, Revulsion ought not to be to the next. or nigh thereunto) but they are such as do flow to some part, or are about to flow. But since this is com∣mon to every Revulsion, that a contrary motion may be occasioned for the flowing humour, and may move it to a part, not to that whither it tends, but to a contrary; hence it followes, that Revulsion ought not to be to the next, but to the remote and opposite parts, and principally accord∣ing to length, and breadth. As for the other oppositions some observe them also, whilest they make a twofold Re∣vulsion, the one which is simple and absolutely such, or a universall Revulsion as it is called, Universall. which observes con∣trariety in respect of the whol body, & in it regards contra∣ry termes, from whencesoever the humours flow, as when we revell from the head to the leggs and feet. Particular. But there is another particular Revulsion, or locall, which in one member onely regards contrary termes and opposition of the parts of the same member, and in the same member revels from the anterior parts to the posterior, or from the hinder to the former parts: Which nevertheless scarce de∣serve, the name of a Revulsion: And this former in the be∣ginning of diseases, when the body is as yet very full, is most proper: But the latter is not convenient in the be∣ginning
of diseases; also whereas in revulsion the flowing humour ought to be drawne to the contrary part is manifest, flowings are to be drawn back together to the beginning; hence when humours flow from the whole body, or the be∣ginnings of fluxes lye hid, the revulsion is fitly made to the remote parts, but when the beginning of the flux is cer∣taine, to that the flux is to be re-called, although it be not the remotest part. In particular, as for the revulsion by opening of a veine, Revulsion by opening a veine. although that also is to be appointed in a distant, and re∣mote place, yet not simply the most remote part is to be chosen for the opening of a veine, but that part which is exactly on the contrary, or which also hath communion of veines joyned to it, or Euthyory which is a certaine di∣rection of vessells, by which the reduction of humours may conveniently be made, and may easily flow from one part into another, and therefore veines, which are open for re∣vulsion sake, rather communicate with the part sending, then receiving, as it is necessary; so we recall blood flowing to the place from whence it begins, and we cause a contra∣ry motion for it; namely we ought here to choose veines which are remote to the part affected, and have communi∣on with the part sending, which are directly opposite to the part affected, either according to longitude, or latitude, hence an inferior part being affected, a veine in the Arme of the same side, a superior part being affected a veine in the Arme of the contrary side, the liver affected the interior veine of the right cubit is to be opened. As for the Administration of a Revulsion, The right Administ∣ration of revulsion. the quantity of revulsion answers to the quantity of the flux, and strength tollerating, but that is greater which is made with the let∣ting out of a humour, then that which is without it, and there are certaine degrees and differences of magnitude in every kind, every one whereof answers to the certaine error in the motion of the peccant humour. As for the time of flowing since revulsion ought to be of humours flowing, tis principally to be administred, The time. when the flux begins, but if the flux be more lasting, it ought to be exhibited after the beginning also; but if the flux be lesse so that it may be stopt by derivation, or repulsion, there is no need of revulsion. The places, to which revulsorie remedies are applyed, Place. are various, according to the variety of the parts affected.
CHAP. XIX Of Derivation. DErivation regards that matter which newly flowes in∣to the part affected, Derivation what. but as yet is not spred abroad in∣to the space of the part without theveines; but as yet it flowes in its veines, and it is an averting or drawing away of the humour offending the part, to the adjacent parts, and an evacuaion of it through the same, and in this evacuation, namely that which is made by opening of a veine, the com∣munion of the veines with the part affected is observed, wher∣of mention is so often made by Authors; also if the matter in the body be plentifull, derivation is not to be appointed unlesse that plenitude be first abated. The quantity of Derivation of a humour which flowes into the part, Quantity. answers to the quantity which so flowes, and to the strength of the sick, but in letting of blood the mea∣sure, and limits of Derivation in inflamations Hippo, com∣mands us to learne by the changing of the colour: the second of the reason of dyet in ac. T. 10. so that the strength will beare it. The convenient time of Derivation is when the matter flowes into the part, Time. and the store of matter is taken away, and the flux is abated, yet it ought to be performed before the matter besme are the part. The scituation of the part shews the place; Place. which in generall ought to be neere the part affected, and to commu∣nicate with the passages. CHAP. XX. Of Repulsion. REpelling things drive away the humour flowing, Repelling: to an∣other place, and hinders its comming to the part affect∣ed, and that which newly hath flowne, they free the part from by pressing of it out But you may not exhibit Repelling things in all fluxes, Repellents not conve∣nient ser fluxes. for first they are not to be given in ignoble parts; Second∣ly, when the flux is nigh to a principall part, least the mat∣ter repulsed be carried to the principall parts. Thirdly, to parts placed too deep. Fourthly, if the matter be malig∣nant,
and venemous. Fifthly, when a wound is inflicted by the stroake, or biting of a venemous Creature. Sixtly, if nature rightly acting, drives any matter into a part cri∣tically. Seventhly, if the humour be much, and the body as yet full. Eightly, if the humour be fixed in the part. Ninthly, if there be vehement paine. The most convenient time for Administration of repel∣ling things, is the beginning of the flux; Time. but when the beginning proceeds towards the augmentation, Digerents are to be mixed. But since as is said before, some repelling medicines are cold and moist, others cold and dry, and astringent, those doe best agree when the humour shall be thin, and little, and is in the extremities of the body, or when fluctuations happen by reason of two great heate of the parts, or when they have great heat adjoyned, or if the paine be vehement, but these when paine doth not so provoke, and fluctuations are made through the debility of the parts. The place to which repellents are to be exhibited is the same from whence we ought to repell. Place. CHAP. XXI. Of Interceptings. SUch things as doe intercept, Intercipi∣ents. for the most part agree with those things that doe repell, and they differ only in re∣spect of place from them; for repellents are exhibited to the part affected; but intercipients to the wayes through which the humour flowes; such like are Defensitives, com∣monly so called, which being endued with a cold faculty, dry, earthly and astringent, stop the comming of the hu∣mours in their passages, and hinder them that they cannot come to the part affected, and since some are more power∣full, others more mild, the strongest are to be used in a grosser habit of body, when the vessells are wider, and the condition of the Aire hotter, which loosens, and dilates the passages, and that there is greater violence of the hu∣mour flowing; if the matter be otherwise, the milder are to be applyed. But they are most fitly applyed to places void of flesh wherein the vessells are more evident, and open. Place.
Tis contrary to the error of humours in motion, Motion of humours taken a∣way. when those things which ought to be moved, are not moved at all, as when the months, Hemerhodes, or other accustomed Evacuations are supprest, for then the humours which lye still are to be attenuated, and heated, and the passages to be relaxed, and the straightnesse to be taken away, of which in their place, which if they helpe not, we must come to those things, which can stir up humours by violence, which we have accounted before, namely which drawe humours into some part, by reason of heate, paine, and vacuity. CHAP. XXII. Of discussing. THe last fault of the humours, Humours offending in any part. is according to the place where, namely when some humours abide in some part where they ought not, the humours therefore which cleave to that part are to be taken away, which is done either in∣sensibly, by the secret pores, or by Evaporating, whilst the humour being dissolved into vapours is discussed, or the hu∣mour is plainly evacuated and under the forme of a humour is drawn our. Those which take away the humour by insensible tran∣spiration, Discutients in what diseases conveni∣ent. are called Discutients, Resolvents, and Dige∣rents; but they are most profitably administred, when the humour is thin, sticking under a soft skin, to which the force of the discussing medicines may penetrate; for you may not use Diaphoreticks if there be plenitude in the bo∣dy, but rather must evacuate the body first, The most convenient time for exhibiting Discutients is the state, Time. and the declination at hand, yet in the augmen∣tation they may be used, but not alone, but mixt with such as repell. But since some Diaphoretick medicines are stronger, and hotter, some not such, we use the gentlest when the matter is in the superficies of the body, the part affected soft and loose, the stronger are given when the matter is scituated in a deeper place, under a thick and grosse skin, and it selfe is colder and thicker.
CHAP. XXIII. Of Softning and Ripening of matter. EMollients are necessary as often as the matter is thick, Emollients. and hard; for as often as the matter is thick and hard∣ned, in vaine we exhibit Diaphoreticks, since that such mat∣ter cannot be discussed by them, but they are forced to be softned; of Emollient medicines tis spoken before. Yet if the matter cannot be dissolved, and discussed, Suppura∣tives. tis to be turned into quitture, whereof if the Physitian see that the humour cannot be discussed by Evaporation through pores, in this part he ought to helpe nature, and to exhibit ripening medicines, but if there be hope that the humours may be discussed, he must abstaine from suppuration, tis to be noted also that all humours cannot equally and aright be turned into purulent matter; blood indeed is easily turn∣ed into quitture, but in diseases arising from choler, and Melancholy suppuratives, or ripening medicines are scarce to be exhibited without danger, since by the use of these, those humours often times do so degenerate, and are cor∣rupted, that they may excite a cancer, and other ma∣lignant ulcers. Neither are they safely administred to every place; In the internall parts suppuration is not rashly to be procu∣red; amongst the externall parts, suppuratives are not safely used about the joynts.
THE FIFTH BOOK, PART II. SECT. II. Of shewing how to cure. CHAP. I. Of diseases of Intemperature. AFter we have finished the Indication Preservato∣ry, now we come to the Curatory, and are to shew the way of curing diseases, and first diseases of the simular parts, and indeed what belongs to diseases of Intemperature. Distemper what it shewes. Of Intemperature there ought to be an alteration by contraries, namely a hot di∣stemper, indicates medicines cooling, a cold heating, a moist drying, a dry, moistning, hot and moist requires a medicine cold and dry, hot and dry a medicine cold and moist; cold and moist require hot and dry, cold and dry Indicate hot and moist. But not only in alteration is contrariety to be observed in generall, How a de∣gree of con∣trariety is to be obser∣ved. but also certaine degrees of contrariety, as much as may be; and therefore a disease which receds very much from the naturall state, wants more vehement remedies, and on the contrary a disease which differs not much from the naturall state, requires gentler remedies; hence a hot disease in a body by nature colder, then those that are well, is to be resisted with cold things. And a cold disease in a
body hot by nature, requires hotter remedies: A moist disease in a dry body, and hard by nature, requires exceeding dry∣ing Medicines: A dry disease in a moist body, and soft, re∣quires things that moisten exceedingly. On the contrary, a hot disease in a body, hot by nature, requires milder cooling remedies: A cold disease in a colder body, requires weaker heating remedies. A moist disease, in a body moist by na∣ture and soft, wants dryers not so powerfull: A dry disease in a body, dry and hard by nature, hath need of remedies moistning less. Moreover in alterations, Contraries appropria∣ted. not onely a Medicine exactly an∣swering to the present distemper, as neer as may be should be opposed; but it ought to be appropriated, and have a pe∣culiar agreement to the nature of the part affected. Also we must beware least the Medicine have some other quality joyned with the quality which is necessary to correct the di∣stemper which may hurt the part. Also sith hence in the cure of simple distempers, Simple contrary Medicines do best agree, if they are not alwaies in a readiness, that quality which doth not agree, or which is hurtfull may be taken away by the mixture of others; As on the contrary compound distempers, if we cannot have a Medicine which is convenient for the compound contrary qualities, that which is wanting must be supplied by the mixture of others. From all these it is manifest, Distemper of the brain. that in curing diseases of the head, tis not easily to be altered beyond mediocrity, least the native heat should be weakned and dissipated; yet tis more safe to heat then cool. In diseases of the Breast and Lungs, The Breast. you must alwaies be∣ware that you dry not too much, least the matter should be thickned and unfit to draw out. But when there is need of cooling, first beware that cold astringents are not given, but moistning, for cold things are very hurtfull to the Breast, 5. Apho. 24. not onely applyed outwardly, but taken in∣wardly. In the cure of the heart Medicines are alwaies to be mixed which have a corroborating power, Heart. and therefore moderate astringents, and odoriferous, and Bezoa ticks as they are cal∣led, should alwaies be mixed with the Medicines which are given to the heart: But alwaies beware of vehement coolers and heaters,
The stomach is easily hurt as well by too much heate, Stomach. as by too much cold, and in a hot distemper tis to be warily cooled, by degrees, and by little and little, but in a cold you must take heed least the innate heate, be too much dissipated by hot things; and therefore somewhat astrin∣gent and strengthning is all wayes to be added, which may hinder the dissipation of the innate heate and Spirits. In curing the Liver, Liver. these medicines are to be chosen, that have some binding and strengthning faculty with te∣nuity of parts; such like are those that are astringent and are bitter; but you must abstaine from sweet things, by which the Liver, as also the spleen doe easily swell. The Spleeen requires, and endures the strongest medi∣cines, Spleen. and therefore they may safely be applyed outward, yet so that the humours contained in it may not increase by sudden cooling, or be hardned by drying; but they are scarce safely given inwardly, least the other bowells be offended by them, and therefore what is wanting in vehe∣mency, is to be be made good by dayly use of them. In a disease of the wombe, Wombe. you must abstaine from vinegar, for pleasant things are more gratefull to the wombe, yet such as are great must abstaine from them. The Eye since it is very sensibly it doth not endure sharpe medicines, The eye. or such as may bind, and exasperate it. But in the cure of distempers, not only contraries con∣venient are exhibited, but the use of likes are altogether to be avoided. Yet if the distemper be with matter, Distemper with mat∣ter. alteration alone doth not suffice, but the cause from whence it is cherished is first to be taken away; and therefore Indication in di∣stempers of this nature, is evacuation and alteration, where notwithstanding by the name of a cause are not only understood causes simply so called, but also diseases and affects, some of which excite, and cherish other diseases, for these in like manner are to be taken away in the first place. CHAP. II. Of curing diseases of the whole substance. IN curing diseases of the whole substance, the occult malignant quality is to be driven out by its contrary, and
a remedie against poyson; and the venemous cause to be taken away, and rooted out of the body; and therefore poyson which is drunke or taken in at the mouth, is to be cast out by vomit, or presently to be drawne out through the punch; but if it be drawne in with Aire, or hath pas∣sed beyond the liver, tis to be expelled by sweates; but those which are communicated by the biting, or striking of venemous animals, are brought by drawing after what manner soever to the body, first of all we must labour to draw back, and extract, and to hinder it all manner of wayes, least it penetrate and creepe within the body; but principally, every sort of poyson is to be expelled by those remedies, which experience teacheth to be most re∣pugnant to them, and with those the heart is to be strength∣ned; yet to observe the manifest qualities also in poysons, is a great part of the cure. CHAP III. Of the cure of diseases of Conformation. AS for the Errors of Conformation, Cure of figure in diseases. What they show. if the bones are set awry, and ill shaped, in those which are growing, the cure is possible; but in those that are come to ripenesse of yeares, and which grow no more, they are incurable. But tis a generall Indication which supplyes the fault of the figure, a changing of the part of the viticus figure to the contrary, until it acquires the figure which naturally it ought to have, but this is performed two wayes, by fashion∣ing, and alligation or binding; How cor∣rected. by fashioning that mending of the figure is to be taken, which by drawing and prossing with the hands, by little and little and often, is perfected; by binding, that correction is understood which is perform∣ed by swathings, and Ferrules, or Canes, namely by which part of the vitious figure by swathings is drawne contrary∣wife, and retained by splintors, least it should bend back againe towards its erroneous figure. The second sort of diseases of Conformation are in the hollow places, which two generall indications doe helpe, The cure of diseases in the chan∣nell or passages. namely to open that which contrary to nature is shut, and to shut that, which contrary to nature is opened.
But amongst diseases in defect the most common is obstru∣ction of passages, Of obstru∣ction. whose common Indication is, apertion of obstruction But sith thence the causes of obstruction may be various, particular indications are taken from them, and those being taken away, the obstructions are also opened: Therefore that obstruction which is made by thick and viscid humours, requires attenuating, cleansing, and cutting medi∣cines; amongst which, sometimes the weaker, sometimes the stronger are used, according to the nature of the humour it self, and the condition of the place wherein it resides: But if obstruction be made by many humours, and they con∣trary to nature in their whole kind, the cure thereof consists altogether in evacuation. But if the humour be not contra∣ry to nature in its whole kind, but onely offends in quantity, the Indication is Apokenosis, i. e. That which abounds is to be abated, according to its abundancy: But although all the obstructing causes should be evacuated, yet they differ as well in other things, as also especially in this, that each of them require their peculiar and convenient places: Those which obstruct the Breast and Lungs, are to be ejected by cough, nor can they easily be evacuated any other way: But those which are contained in the Liver, or in Veines, or in Arteries, or in the Reines, are cast out by Urine, the belly, or vomit. The other kinds of straightness, Coalescense when the causes are ta∣ken away, they are likewise taken away, things growing together, or Coalescents, since it comes to pass by the grow∣ing together of parts and sides of a passage Indicate a Me∣dicine breaking and taking away that Siccatrizing again. Constipation Indicates the cause to be taken away, Pressing & closing. Compressi∣on. which make that straightness. Compression since it proceeds from externall causes, rest∣ing upon the passages, the Indication is common, namely, to take away that cause of pressing together, and shutting the passage, but the speciall Indications are various, according to the variety of causes, and the whole cure consists in the abla∣tion of those causes which shall be shewn in their owne place. Lastly, Subsidence, if it be caused by too much humidity, the part is to be dryed: If the part be wrung hard, and as it were contracted, with drying things, and too many Astrin∣gents, and cold, the contraries, namely, Relaxing and moist∣ning things are to be exhibited.
On the other side, if the passages, Cure of the opening of Vessels. and vessels which ought to be shut are opened, and humours flow out from thence, the common Indication is, that the opened vessell is to be shut, which may be performed in the externall parts, with conve∣nient Medicines applyed, and bound: But if the opening be in the inward parts, the manner of performing that is vari∣ous, according to the variety of causes: If it be an Anasto∣mesis, or opening of the mouth of a vessell, the orifice of the opened vessell is to be hardned and bound. If by a Diapede∣sis, thickning and incrassating Medicines are required: If by a Rupture, the broken vessell is to be united, and shut: If from Erosion, Sarcotticks first, afterwards consolidating me∣dicines are required. Thirdly, If the part which naturally ought to be smooth, Cure of di∣seases of the superfi∣cies. should become rough, tis to be made smooth againe, which is performed in the Wind-pipe and Tongue: If that which is evacuated be filled up, or that which is extant be taken a∣way; That is performed in soft parts by Medicines which moisten, and have a clammy nature: But this with abster∣gent Medicines; But in bones whether they are eroded, Of rough∣ness. or have any superfluity annexed to them, the roughness is con∣veniently taken away by shaving. Smoothness contrary to nature, Of smooth∣ness. requires a contrary way of cure, and the naturall roughness is to be brought againe, by abstergent Medicines, and indeed such as throughly cleanse, namely, such as can free the glutinous humours, tenaciously cleaving to the out-sides of the parts, and restore the naturall roughness to the part. CHAP. IV. Of the cure of Diseases of number. DIseases in Number, since they are two-fold, in excess, and in defect, either of them require their Indication, Diseases of number what they indicate. and that which is wanting, and naturally ought to be pre∣sent is to be restored: But that which abounds is to be taken away and removed; but since that which is wanting onely can be a naturall thing, tis the part of Nature onely to make
up and regenerate that which is wanting, but the Physitian is only the servant of nature in these things whilst he de∣fends the strength of nature, Administers fit matter, and removes impediments, but this generall indication is vari∣ed according to the variety of parts, and cannot allwayes be reduced into action: for it proceeds in one manner in the generation of flesh, in another of a bone, in another of a nerve, and other parts, of which in the solution of uni∣ty. Moreover since some parts are simple, others compound, if compound are lost, neither the same in particular, nor any thing like unto them, can easily come in their stead; in which the third scope is to find out a certaine comeli∣nesse, or to make something, which may some wayes doe the office of a lost part, yet later Physitians have invented a way of curing imperfect parts, whereof above, part 2 d. Sect. 1. Chap. 16. On the contrary excesse requires its removall, but since those things are various which ought to be taken away, each of them deserves its peculiar cure, according to the substance, dignity, situation of the parts, and differing also in other respects, for we allwayes beware of this, that other parts may not be hurt, or at least to doe our endeavour that they may receive very little hurt, and that there may come no greater losse to the body by the taking away, then that was which came by the thing abounding. But the Instruments wherewith a Physitian may appoint the ablation of things which abound contrary to nature, are three, Iron, Fire, and medicines; by Iron all acute Instruments of every kind which are fit for the cutting of superfluities, are understood: by fire, actuall eauteries are understood, whilst that which abounds is burnt with Iron, Silver, or fired Gold. Medicines for this purpose most con∣venient, are those which are called potentiall cauteries, Ca∣thareticks, namely, Septicks and Escaroticks, all which are mentioned before. CHAP. V. Of curing diseases of magnitude. WHen either the whole body, Magnitude increased what it shews. or any member thereof is increased contrary to nature, so that the naturall
actions are thereby hindred, the Indication is that the mag∣nitude increased may be diminished: and indeed since the substance of the part is not sound, when tis increased in magnitude, as in wounds, and ulcers, the same medicines are to be exhibited as to those abounding in number; but if either the whole body or any part be equally increased, and it too much increaseth through the whole, you may not use Iron, or Fire, nor corrasive medicines, but there are two speciall aimes, namely, to draw away the too greate plenty of aliment from the parts, and to consume it, or take it away by Digerents, and discutients, wherefore fasting and spare dyet, are then convenient; and such use of the non-naturalls as may attenuate and discusse, and medicines of the same nature. Tumours also have their peculiar aimes which that gene∣rall Indication satisfieth, Cure of Tumours. which commands us to diminish that which is increased contrary to nature; of which in its owne place. The magnitude diminished on the other side indicates its increase, but this is performed by new nourishing, Bignesse diminished what it shewes: or restoring, and by generation, by renutrition; that which is wanting is restored by good and plentifull aliment, and the part acquires a greater, and naturall bignesse, but generation is then necessary when any thing is lost of the substance of the part: for there that is restored by the re-generation of flesh which was lost, and the cavity of the ulcer filled up. CHAP VI. Of curing diseases in scituation and connexion. MOreover Organick diseases, Diseases in position and con∣nexion without they shew. since there are diseases in position, and connexion, that which hath lost its naturall place, Indicates its reposition into its naturall place, but that, which is not joyned to those which it ought, Indicates its conjunction with them; the first indication performed, and bones out of joynt are cured by bending and forceing them from the opposite part to that from whence they were removed; which by what meanes it may be per∣formed is shewne before part 1. Sect. 2. Chap. 4. so other parts are to be reduced into their owne places.
But if the parts which according to nature ought to be se∣parated, are joyned together, and grow together contrary to nature, they are to be freed and separated: But that separation is made either by Chirurgery, and the help of an Incision Knife, and Iron, or with a silken string, or with a Horse hair, or with caustick Medicines and Septicks. But the other kind, Diseases in connexion. when the part is not joyned with those with which it ought, Indicates that, that which containes should be rendred more firme and solid: And therefore those parts ought to be strengthned and contained. CHAP. VII. Of the cure of Solution of Continuity. THe first, Ʋnity dis∣solved, what it shewes. What to be done by the Physitian. and most usuall Indication of Solution of Uni∣ty, is uniting, or unity dissolved Indicates that the parts that are separated should be united; which thing although it be the work of nature, yet the Physitian is the Servant of nature in this matter: For these are the principall duties of the Physitian here. First, he is to be carefull that nothing fall into the part affected, which may impede conglutina∣tion. Secondly, That the extreams, or lips in the dissolved uni∣ty are rightly joyned againe, and are mutually applyed to each other. Thirdly, That the extreames so joyned may be kept toge∣ther. Fourthly, That the Temperament of the part it self may be preserved, and the help of nature is necessarily required in agglutination. Fifthy, That the Symptomes which may ensue be preven∣ted and corrected. But these aimes are not alwaies performed in all parts a∣like: The cure of wounds. For in wounds, every extraneous thing is to be taken away out of the Wound, then the lips of the Wound are to be joyned together, and it is to be endeavoured that they may be kept united: As before part 1. Sect. 2. cap. 5. is spoken, the parts being joyned, the rest of the work is to be committed to nature, tis the parr of the Physitian onely to endeavour that the blood which comes out offends neither in quantity, nor quality, and to use Medicines that generate flesh, of
which Galen 3. of his Method of healing, cap. 3. And lastly, to citatrize the wound: yet if certaine Symptomes which may hinder the cure, do follow, as Hemerodes, paine, con∣vulsions, they are to be resisted, and principally care is to be taken that no inflamation ensue. In the cure of Fractures, Of Fra∣ciures. the Physitian propounds to him∣self two aimes. First, that the broken bones may be right∣ly joyned together againe, and that the naturall Position and Figure may be restored to them: The other that being joyned they may be kept together and retained, and grow in their naturall figure: But in what manner that may be per∣formed, is spoken before, p. 1. S. 2. c. 3. But the generation of hard flesh and skin, Generation of hard flesh. whereby the bones and skin may be conglutinated and grow together is the work of nature: But the Physitian ought to help nature, which he doth if he beware least any inflamation or such like accident which may hurt the substance and temperature of the member, should follow, and the aliment is to be so dis∣posed through drying Medicines, that it may the sooner be changed into callous, or hard flesh, of which tis spoken be∣fore. CHAP. VIII. Of the cure of oppressing and urging Symptomes. THe third sort of preternaturall things remaines, Symptomes urging, & how many. name∣ly, Symptomes. Symptomes as they are preternatural In∣dicate in generall the ablation of themselves: But that In∣dication for the most part is unprofitable: For since they de∣pend on diseases, and their causes, those being taken away, these also are taken away: But because it cannot alwaies be expected, or waited, untill the cause, or the disease be taken away, somethings necessary Indicate, vvhich require a pecu∣liar cure different both from the cure of a disease and of the cause, and that they require to be done speedily: Such Symptomes are those which are said to urge or ensorce: All those things provoke which threaten such danger and mis∣chief, that the ablation of the disease, or of the cause on which it depends cannot be expected, but if it should be ex∣pected, it would threaten the hazard of life, or some great hurt; But then the ablation of the disease is not to be expe∣cted
when either it is uncurable, and the Symptomes be∣longs to an action hurt, that is neceslary, not absolutely for life, but for amendment, or if it be cureable, the cure where∣of is so tedious, that before it can be perfected, danger and hazard of life will be like to happen, by reason of the Symptome; those Symptomes are commonly accounted but few, principally paine, watchings, and immoderate Evacua∣tions, yet there are some others. Paine indicates a medicine taking away or mittigating paine, Cure of paine. but since paine is either a sad sensation, or else is not made without a sad perception by sense, and two things are necessary to sensation, perception of a thing Tangeable, or sense in the part which it meetes with, and advertency of the mind, if one of these be wanting neither sense nor paine is, and therefore those things which take away, and hinder one of these, are contrary to the paine: and as for what be∣longs to the sense in the part, we may resist paine two wayes, either by opposing a contrary object to the sad sensation, or by taking away the sense; sithhence therefore a sweet and pleasant sensation is contrary to a sad, that the sad sensation may be taken away, that is to be offered to it, which is endued with a mild and gentle heate, and brings forth a pleasant, Anodines. and sweete sensation when touched, which are Anodines (or medicines mittigating paine) properly so called, as a bath of fresh water, common Oyle, the far of Animalls, Muscillages, and other things endued with a temperate and pleasing heate, of which above P. 1. S. 1. Chap. 7. Moreover Narcotticks mittigate paine, Stupefac∣tives. or Stupifactives, which stupifie the Spirits, and together provoke sleepe, and so doe it, that the Dolorifique subject is not perceived. Secondly, Intentiveness of mind is hindred if it be averted to other objects. Over much watching indicates a medicine causing sleepe, Cure of over much watching. sleepe may be occasioned foure wayes; first if all things may be removed which may excite any sense to operate. Second∣ly, if the mind be drawne away from the agitation of the externall senses, and the animall spirits are pleasantly in∣vited, from motion to rest. Thirdly, if those things are ex∣hibited, which allay hot, dry, and sharpe vapours, and send pleasant fancies into the braine, whereby it is moistned, and as it were stupifyed. Fourthly, if those things are ex∣hibited which by a peculiar faculty make the animall
Spirits drowzie, and unapt, or dull, which specially are called, Hypnoticks, and Narcoticks. Thirst since it is the desire of cold and moist, Cure of Thirst. and is made through the defect of cold and moist, it Indicates cold and moist, as its contrary. Too great a flux of the belly, as it is such, Of the flux of the belly. Flux of blood. is stopt by astringent things. Blood slowing Indicates a remedie that stenches blood; but it is stopt two wayes, either by prohibiting, that the blood cannot returne to the place, out of which it came, or if the vessells suffer it not to flow, which will be done, if they are shut, or closed, and sometimes, one of them only sufficeth, and sometimes, when there is a great flux of blood both are necessary. That the blood may not flow back to the place out of which it came, is to be brought to passe if it be not drawn back by it, if it be repelled, if it be drawn to another place, ts not drawn back if the causes, by reason of which tis drawn back be taken away, as heat, pain, trou∣blesome thirst: tis repelled by the use of the Refrigeratives, and astringents, tis drawne into another part by Revelling, or Deriving, but that the blood may not flow back, is prohi∣bited when the end is shut, which is done, when the way is obstructed, and stopped; through which it flowed. We cure a swooning by refreshing the Spirits, Fainting or swooning. although it cannot be done presently by removing the cause, for this purpose the most f things, are pure Aire, excellent and O doriferous Wine, and spirits distilled of it. But not only actions hurt, but other Symptomes also sometimes trouble, if the Arme pits stink and smell ranke, that inconveniency is remided by the use of sweet things, if the breath stinks, that imperfection is hid by the chewing of sweet smelling things.
THE FIFTH BOOK, PART II. SECT. III. Of the vitall Indication. CHAP. I. What doth Indicate Dyet in those that are sick. SIth hence, it is spoken by what means things preter∣naturall are to be taken away, now it remains that we speake, how that which remains in a sick man, ac∣cording to nature may be kept, or preserved: but those things which are according to nature commonly come un∣der the name of strength, or force, and Indication which is taken from thence, is called vitall, and Conservatory, because it preserves those things which are hitherto in the sick, according to nature, and those things which can pre∣serve the strength of our body by themselves, and are ac∣cording to nature, are called vitall and Preservatory Indi∣cates. But since as above in the 4. Booke, part 2. Chap. 1. it is said there are three vitall, or Preservatory Indicants, health, the cause of health, and sound actions, as we are to endea∣vour, that in a sound condition all these may be preserved, so it is to be aimed that as much as it is possible they may be
kept in such as are sick, and this is to preserve strength; namely to preserve the native heat, in the whole, and in all the parts, and the right use and observation of things called non-naturalls. Namely the strength shews the Aliment, The strength what it shews. in this respect because 'tis placed in spirituous, solid, and fleshy parts, having a just quantity, and doth use them as an Instru∣ment; and the vitall Indication is busied only about keep∣ing the substance of the spirituous, solld and fleshy parts. But although the strength only Indicate Aliment, Things prohibi∣ting. yet it may be prohibited from others, for oftentimes the giving of meate increaseth the morbifique constitution, and also to regard this, that 'tis not to Indicate Aliment, but to prohi∣bit it, for when meate is given nature is called away from concoction, and evacuation of morbifique matter, and there∣fore when the powers Indicate their preservation, which is performed by exhibiting nourishment in that quantity which the substance to be preserved wanteth, but the mor∣bifique cause indicates its Evacuation, and therefore com∣mands nature to be at leasure for it selfe alone, and so pro∣hibits Aliment, whereby nature would be called away, and hindred from its worke, you must be carefull, what urgeth more. In breife: strength only Indicates Aliment; the mor∣bifique cause permits, or probibits; the rest, as age, custome, Time of the year, the state of Heaven, and such like are the signes of firme strength, or of weaknesse, or such as may shew the force, and greatnesse of the morbifique cause. CHAP. II. What things belongs to Dyet. ALthough Dyet consists principally of meate and drink, Things pro∣hibiting to Dyet. yet other things also called non-naturalls, as Aire, sleep and watchings, exercise and rest, and accidents of the mind, belong thereunto: but amongst these there are some things out of which primarily, and by themselves Aliment is generated; such is Aire, meate and drink, but others, are accounted amongst the matter of food, in this respect, not because really out of those as the matter, Aliment of the bo∣dy is generated, but as they are the causes of Aliment by
accident, and helpe that those things which are the true materialls of Aliments, may be more commodiously turned into Aliment: such are sleep, and watchings, exercises, and rest, Repletion and Inanition, and passions of the mind, of which is spoken above in the 4. Book. CHAP III. How many sorts there are of Dyet, and which agrees to which diseases. BUt Dyet is threefold, Dyet three∣fold, Thick. Indifferent. Thin thick, thin, indifferent, or be∣twixt both, thick or full Dyet is that which can pre∣serve not only the strength which is present, but also can increase it, indifferent is that which preserves the strength as it finds it, the thin is that which preserves the strength yet somewhat abated. Of thick and full Dyet again some is simple, which agrees to those that are sick, and is made by a ptisan, with the Barley whole; another is fuller and thicker, which is made with fish and Eggs; another which is the fullest of all, which gives way to flesh of creatures that are gelded. Simply thin is threefold, simply such and is made by the juice of ptisan, the thick juice or creame of ptisan, or ptisan strained; the thinner is that wherein water and Honey is mixt; the thinnest Dyet was that of Hippo. wherein nothing was put; the middle sort was made with bread dipt in broath, or also with the flsh of fowles. But regard is to be had of custome, places and Countries, since in some Countries, full Dyet is more in use, in others more sparing, and according to that, the matter of thin Dyet is to be moderated. But what kind of Dyet agrees to what diseases, the com∣paring of the strength which Indicates food and the morbi∣fique causes, What food is fit for what dis∣eases. which hinder the same, do shew; for by how much the more nature is busied, in opposing the morbifique cause, by so much the more sparing Dyet is convenient; but by how much the lesse it is busied, by so much the more plen∣tifull Dyet may be given; but by so much the lesse it is op∣pressed, by so much the state of a disease is nigher, and therefore also, by how much the disease is more acute, by so much the Dyet is to be more sparing, so that the strength can endure with it, untill the state, but tis known when the strength can endure and subsist untill the height, but when
it cannot, the nature of the sick is to be considered: for if the body is made bitter with choler, hot and dry, aboun∣ding with choler, especially about the stomach, he cannot endure thin Dyet, or fasting; for such bodyes motion is easily hinderd, regard also is to be had of age, for as it is in Hippo. 1. Apho. 13. old men easily endure fasting as also those of middle age, young men lesse, boyes least of all, and a∣mongst them, especially those which have sharper, and quicker wits. But as for the nature of a difease, Dyet in long dis∣eases. in long diseases there is need of an indifferent or full Dyet, and so much the more plentifull, by how much the diseases are slower, but in acute dises, thinner is requisite, least if we should give too much meat, we should cherish the discase; but since there are de∣grees of acute diseales, so much the thinner is to be given, by how much the discase is the more acute. Yet it is allwayes safer, to give thicker Dyet then is fit, Whether more error is commit∣ted in full or spare Dyet. rather then thinner; as for the quantity you ought rather to studdy substraction according to Hippo. 1. Apho. 5. In thin food the sick doe faint; whence it comes to passe that they are hurt the more, for as much as every fault here, is greater then it useth to be in a little more plentifull Dy. CHAP. IV. Of the right Administration of the Dyet of sick per∣sons. IN the same manner as in medicines, so in vitalls, Quantity of meate. a three∣fold these may be observed; namely the highest, middle, and lowest, which may be administred in all Dyt, whe∣ther thick, indifferent, or thin. But which dose is to be given, and when, is collected, by comparing of the strength, and morbifique cause one with another; for since the morbifique matter sometimes urgeth more, sometimes lesse, and some∣times the helpe of nature is more required in resisting the cause of a disease, the same forme of Dyet may be observed, sometimes a greater, sometimes a lesser is to be given, ac∣cording as nature is sometimes busied more, sometimes lesse in the combat with a disease. Namely in the beginning of a disease, nature contends not much as yet with the morbifique cause, neither whilst it is yet imployed in concoction, and Evacuation; wherefore
you may exhibit victualls, which are convenient for the disease, then the highest dose. But in the Augmentation because nature begins to con∣tend with the disease, In the Augmenta∣tion. and is more busied about the morbi∣fique matter then in the beginning, then some of the quan∣tity is to be abated, and Dyet is to be given in a middle dose. But in the state when the combat of nature, In the state. and the dis∣ease is most violent, and nature is most busied in concoction and evacuation of matter, the victualls are to be administ∣red in the smalest quantity, and nature not to be called away from its purpose. The time, The time of giving food to the sick. and when meate is to be given, as for that in continued diseases, and such as have no differences of fits, Dyet is to be administred according to custome, principal∣ly at that time when the sick use to eat before; But in dis∣eases which have fits, when meate is to be given Hippo. shews 1. Apho. 11. It behoveth to take away meat in the sits themselves, for to give it is hurtfull, and when by circuit diseases returne, in the Paroxismes themselves you must abstaine, which neverthelesse is not simply to be taken, but if a feaver be from a sharpe and biting humour kindled by the Sun, anger, fasting, labours, and the sick be thin, and leane in body and in Temperament, and especially in Summer time if he be hot and dry, either a little before the fit, or in the fit it selfe meate is to be taken, otherwise he easily falls into a burning feaver or Hectick, swooning, or convulsion, or such like, and indangers the losse of his strength.
THE FIFTH BOOK, PART III. Of the Compositions of Medicines. SECT. 1. Of preparing and compounding of Drugs in general. CHAP. I. Of the necessity and profit of preparing and Com∣pounding simple Medicines. THere remains now the Pharmaceuticall part of Physick, which prepares and compounds simple medicines, for the word Pharmacopia compre∣hends them both, namely the alteration of simple medicines by the helpe of Art without mixture of others, and the mixture of simple medicines. But this part of Physick is necessary, Why it is necessary to compound medicnes. for many and great causes, for first the cause may be in the medicine it selfe namely if the substance of medicines be not so proper, and troablesome to the sick, by preparation and composition that which is wanting may be supplyed and that which is unprofitable, troublesome, and hurtfull may be taken a way; sometimes a medicine hath a super fluous quality which we do not then want, therefore we ought to allay that by mixture of the contrary; some simple qualities are easily
corrupted, wherefore there needs digestion, distillation, concoction, to be used, or to preserve, or pickle those things with Honey, Sugar, Vinegar, Salt. The strength of some medicines is easily taken away, whence we are to effect by the mixture of more viscid things, that so it may not be easi∣ly dissipated, moreover the causes in effect it selfe contrary to nature, for if simples are not to be found which have all those faculties, which are requisite, in one sick person of∣tentimes, and in the mixture of diseases contrary to na∣ture, then one medicine is to be compounded of severall simples, which may performe all the Indications; which kind of medicines the Greeks call, Polychreston. Thirdly since that simples are not allways supplyed by nature which may agree to the Temperament, Sex, kind of life, and va∣rious constitution of the parts of every one, there is need of preparation and composition. Lastly, for the severall formes also whereof this is more pleasing to this, that to that per∣son, nay in regard of the disease also tis necessary to pre∣pare and compound medicines. O that we may breifly contract these things, there is need of compounding medicines, for two reasons, either for the strength of the medicines sake, or for its use and ap∣plycation sake; for if the vertue of the medicine be weake tis to be strengthned by mixture with more vehement, if any faculty be deficient, tis to be mixt, if a medicine be stron∣ger then it is required, something is to be added by which i is to be abated, or corrected If a simple have any super∣fluous quality or hurtfull, that is to be mixt, by which that hurtfull quality may be taken away. But that the medicine may rightly be applyed and drawn into action, tis necessary that the medicine maybe preserved, least before administration it looseth its strength, by mix∣ture of some preservative, for example, with Suga, or some other. Moreover that it may come to the place, a vehicle is to be mixt, which leading it, it comes the easier thither, and least it should be weakened by the way, tis to be mixed with the stronger, that it may come to the part in that de∣gree which it ought. Lastly, tis necessary, that the medicine applyed to the part affected, may continue, whence are re∣quied medicines which may retaine those things which goe away, or do not adhere to the part, in the part.
CHAP. II. What things are necessary for the artificiall prepa∣ration and Composition of Medicines. ALL those things which are requisite for the compo∣sition of Medicines may be reduced to soure heads; What things are required for the compoun∣ding of me∣dicines. The basis of medi∣cines two∣fold. Simple. first a medicine which may supply the Indication whereby a dis∣ease or the causes of a disease, or the Symptome it selfe which offends, may be opposed: and such a medicine, in composition is called the basis because on that as on the foundation, the edifice is builded, the whole composition depends on it and al the rest are referred to this, & are mix∣ed together, for its sake, and that its strength be great in the compound tis necessary; But the basis is sometimes simple, sometimes compound, and indeed not in one manner, for that is called a simple basis, which satisfies one Indication, and brings forth one effect, although it doth not allwayes consist of one, and a simple medicine, but oftentimes is com∣pounded of more, but that is called a compound basis, Compound. which can performe more uses, but at other times that is cal∣led a simple basis which consists of one medicine, a com∣pound which consists of many, but a compound medicine takes its denomination, sometimes from the basis, sometimes from the medicine, set downe in the first place in the pre∣scription. But that the basis, or medicine, Correctors and Hel∣pers. which is opposed to the disease contrary to nature, should be accommodated in all respects, besides preparation, oftentimes correcting and helping things are required; for since that sometimes the basis is weaker, thicker, or flower, or stronger, and more powerfull then it ought, or hath any malignant, and hurt∣full, quality or is ungratefull to the smell or taste, or any other way troublesome, and have any strange and unprofi∣table quality; the dull and idle are corrected by the mix∣ture of whetting things, and such as increase strength: thick qualities, are to be amended by mixture of thin; sharp, vehe∣ment, too hot or too cold, or malignant are to be corrected by the addition of their contraties: in unpleasant savour, or taste, by things having pleasant savour; those things which
are indued with an ungratefull and unpleasant smell, by those things which have a fragrant and pleasant smell, and by all other pleasant things are to be corrected, and all hurtfull qualities or unprofitable, are to be amended and ta∣ken away, by the mixture of their contraries. Thirdly, Directers. If medicines of their owne accord cannot con∣veniently come to the part affected, there is need of Di∣recters, as they call them, namely such as either are familiar to the part affected, or open a way for the me∣dicine. Lastly, Preser∣vers. To the composition of a Medicine those things are required which preserve from injury and corruption, and give it a certaine forme and consistence: He ome are preserved with Honey, others with Sugar, others with Oyle, and receive from them the forme either of an Ele∣ctuary or of a Sirrup, or a Conserve: But some are ren∣dred fitter to endure, or keepe, by preparation only. CHAP. III. Of the weights of Medicines. BUt before we come to the preparation and composition of medicines, by which two Pharmacopeia is finished, something is to be premised of the weights and measures of Physick, and of the dose of medicines, for things out of which the formes of medicines are prepared, are esteemed either by number, or a heap, or weight, or measure. Fruits and Pulse, What things are accounted by number. By heape. By pugill. Little handfull. Bundle. and the greater seeds, are numbred, and when the number is equall, they are divided into paires, or couples, and tis written, Par. 2.3. But the quantity of medicines is described by heape, by little handfulls, by great handfulls, and little bundles: and Physitians use these principally in leaves, hearbs, flowers, barley, and certaine seeds, salt, and other things: A Pu∣gill is as much as can be comprehended by the extremities of the fingers joined together, and drawne together, and tis called by some a little handfull: A handfull is as much as can be held or comprehended in the hand: A little bundle is as much as we can take between our armes.
By weights, as by the balance and scales, By weight. they weigh dry things for the most part, but liquid things they mea∣sure, although they also may be described by weights. And the measures are no other then such as are described by pounds and ounces. But although there be great variety of weights, By mea∣sure. we will propound onely those which Phisitians use at this day eve∣ry where up and downe, and are most necessary for the reading of Authors. The least of all weights is a Graine, A Graine. which moreover is constant, and ought to be one and the same amongst all Nations; for although without doubt, it tooke its name from a graine of Barley, or Wheate, yet since there is not the same weight of these in all places, not these but the smallest Money, which in all Nations is the same, and is kept unchanged, and is to be accounted for the foundation and beginning of all weights: But it is noted by Physitians in this manner, Gr. g. A Chalcus with the Greeks, consists of two graines, Chalcus. which kinde of weight the Arabians named Kestuf, com∣monly called Aercolum, or two graines. Dicalcon makes foure graines, Siliqua. with which agrees Cheration: Siliqua or foure graines, which the Arabians call Chirat. Hemiobolon, or Hemiobolion, Semiobo∣lus. a Semiobilon is six graines. Obolon, Obolus. or Obulum consists of twelve graines, the sixth part of a drachme. Foure and twenty graines make a scruple, A Scruple. for a scruple consists of two Obolaes. Whence with the Greeks a Diobo∣lon, is the same with the scruple, whence it is also called by the Greeks Gramma, that is, a Letter, to wit because an ounce containes so many in it, as the Greeks have Let∣ters: and it is the four and twentieth part of an ounce. But amongst later Writers, for the most part, those which fol∣lowed Nicholaus, and Venetous, a scruple containes only twenty graines, and it is thus noted, ʒ Thirty six graines make Hemidrachmon, or Triobolon, Semidrach∣ma. that is halfe a drachme, which they call an Egyptian bean, or an Alexandrian bean, ʒ ss.
Seventy two graines make an Attique drachme, A Drachm. which is used by Physitians; but the drachm of Nicholaus and Ve∣netus, which at this day, for the most part, is used every where, containes onely sixty graines, Drachimi, and Dar∣chimie, or Darchimet, with the Arabians, the word being corrupted, is called Drachmes, in English a Drachm. By Se∣rapio, and the same Arabicks it is also called Aureus, and by the same these names, Drachme, and Aurei, are often confounded: But at other times, Nummus Aureus, or De∣narius containes foure scruples, namely a whole Drachm, and the third part of a Drachm; eight Drachms make an ounce, and it is thus marked, ℥i. Twelve ounces make a pound, lb. Deunx makes eleven ounces, ℥XI. Dextans hath ten ounces, ℥X Dodrans hath nine ounces, ℥IX. Bes hath eight ounces, ℥VIII. Septunx hath seven ounces, ℥VII. Semios or Selibra hath six ounces, ℥VI. Quincunx hath five ounces, ℥V. Quadrans hath foure ounces, ℥IV. Triens hath three ounces, ℥III. Hereunto belongs the Table * CHAP. IV. Of Physicall measures. AS dry things for the most part are weighed, A Descrip∣tion of measures. so liquid things are measured, although the manner of mea∣sures be appointed by Physitians, according to the manner of weights: But measures may be explained two wayes, either greater by lesse, or on the contrary, lesse by greater; or by weights: For if it be asked, what a Pint or a Pound is, tis answered, to be the halfe of a Sextarie, or to con∣taine fix Cyathos, or Cupps, or its answered, it contains nine ounces of Oyle: For the former way of describing measures, is certaine and stable, but the latter way of ex∣plaining them is not alwayes the same; for although the capacity of measures be not changed, yet the weight of the
things that are measured by the same measure are not the same; whence Physitians at this day, since in liquid things they rather regard the weight then measure, and they use measures onely for to save the labour of weighing. Three kinds of measures of liquid things are used; namely, some for measuring of Wine and distilled Waters, others are ap∣pointed for Honey, others for measuring of Oile; all which measures, although they are distinguished by the names of Ounces, yet the weight of liquid things varie in the di∣stinction of ounces: for since Oile is light, more of it goes to an ounce, Wine since tis heavier then Oile, lesse of it goes to an ounce; Honey since it is heavier, then both, a small quantitie, in comparison of the other, makes an ounce. The first and least of measures which are tryed, not by weight, but onely by quantitie, is a spoonfull, and the division of measures doth not go beneath it: But a Co∣chlear, or a spoonfull, is four-fold; The least, that a little bigger, a great, the greatest; the least containes halfe a drachm in weight, of a thing that is of a middle weight; that a little bigger, a whole drachm; a great, a drachm and halfe, or two drachms; the greatest containes halfe an ounce in weight. A common little Spoon is halfe a cup, Mustrum. and containes in weight of Oile, six drachms, of Wine or Water twentie scru∣ples, of Honey nine drachms. A Cyathus or a Cup, is the sixth part of a pint, Cyathus. by common observation, it holds in weight of Oile twelve drachms, of Wine or Water thirteen drachms and a scruple, of Honey eighteen drachms. Acetabulum, which by the Greeks is called Oxybaphum, Acetabu∣lum. is a Cup and halfe, the common observation it holds in weight, is eighteen drachms of Oile, twentie drachms of Wine and Water, twentie seven drachms of Honey. Quartarius, or the fourth part of a Sextarie, Qa tari∣us. containes three cups. Hemina or Cotyla, is the twelfth part of a Congie, Hemina or Cotyla. halfe a Sextarie, it contains six cups, but in weight nine ounces of Oile, ten ounces of wine and water, thirteen ounces and half of Honey, (this measure contains three quarters of a pint.) The Italian Sextarie is the sixth part of a Congie, A Sextary. it con∣taines two Heminaes (or a pint and halfe) twelve cups; but in weight it contains eighteen ounces of Oile, twenty ounces of wine and water, 27 ouncse of Honey.
A congie is the eight part of Amphore, A Congie. (which is a Tan∣kerd, or Rundlet,) containing eight gallons:) it contains six Sextaries, twelve Heminaes, but in weight, nine pound of Oyle, ten pound of Wine and Water, thirteen pound and halfe of Honey. Urna, Urna. Amphora. is half the Italian Amphora, but the third part of the Attick, for a Greek Amphora which is called, Cadus, and Merreta, is greater then an Italian, it containes 48. Sexta∣ries, but in weight it holdes seventy two pound of Oyle, ninty pound of Wine and Water, one hundred and eight pound of Honey (this Urne of our measure contains foure gallons and halfe.) Culeus is a measure containing twenty Italian Ampho∣raes, Culeus. tis the greatest of measures, but of these things tis spo∣ken more at large by others. CHAP. V. Of Doses of Medicines. ALthough in this darknesse of mans understanding, tis not so easy to define, by what Rule and proportion, Elements agree in mixture, yet by the most, the opinion of Alchindus is retained, and a Geometricall proportion is appointed in degrees, not an Arithmeticall, and that for this reason, because betwixt the neerest degrees, there is a far greater difference, and inequality, then there is between two numbers, immediatly following one another. Hence from two scruples to two ounces is accounted a temperate dose: the dose of a medicine, in the first degree from a scruple to an ounce; in the second from halfe a scru∣ple to halfe an ounce; in the third from five graines to two drachms: in the fourth from two graines, and a halfe to a drachm: yet it is here to be observed that in every degree as appeares by the dose, there is a certain latitude in the highest degrees, you may not allwayes ascend to the highest dose, nor may all those things, which are in the fourth de∣gree be given to a drachm, but according as some are in the beginning, others in the middle, and others in the end of the fourth, so the dose is to be moderated. Moreover 'tis here to be noted that regard ought to be had of occult qualities also, and therefore experience is es∣pecially to be consulted with
The Doses of Purgers. AS for the doses of purging Medicines, The Dose of purges. they may be limi∣ted according to degrees, but since that in every de∣gree there are three mansions, tis not lawfull to give what medicine you please of what degree soever from the lowest to the highest dose of that mansion. But every mansion hath its highest and lowest dose. The dose in the first mansion of the first degree is from two ounces, or three to six or seven ounces; such like are Syrup of Roses selutive, and Honey of Violets solu∣tive. Those which are in the third mansion of the second de∣gree are given from ℥2. to ℥3. or ℥4. to these belong juice of Roses and Violets, Manna, Cassia, Syrrup of the flowers of Peaches, juice of Flowredluce. Medicines in the first mansion of the second degree are exhibited, from halfe an ounce, or five drachms, Of the se∣cond de∣gree. to an ounce and halfe, or two ounces; hitherto are referred Ta∣marinds, and Cassia; in the second mansion of the second degree they are given from halfe an ounce, to an ounce and halfe, as Turpentine. In the third mansion of the second degree they are ad∣ministred from 3. Drachmes to 7. Drachmes, of this kind is Epythimum. In the first mansion of the third degree the dose is from a Drachm to halfe an ounce, Of the third de∣gree. hereunto are referred Myroba∣lans, Rhubarbe, Agrick. In the second mansion of the third degree, purging me∣dicines are exhibited from a scruple to two drachms, in this rank are Aloes, the seed of Fleabane, Polypodie, the leaves and powder of Sena, Mechoacan. In the third mansion, the dose is from halfe a drachm to a drachm, hitherto belongs Asarabacca, Carthamums, or bastard-safron, Soldinella, Hermodactiles, Turbith, Lapis Armenus, Lapis Lazuli, Opopanax, Sagapenum, black Hel∣lebore, the roots of Jalap. In the first of the fourth degree, Of the fourth de∣gree. Purgers are given from ten grains to halfe a drachm, hitherto belongs Mezereum, the seed of Thymelea, or Oneorum, or Granum Gnidium, i. e. Mountaine Widdow-waile, Coloquintida, Elaterium, Hysop.
The dose in the second mansion of the fourth degree is from five graines to fifteen graines, in the end of this man∣sion, is Scammony. In the third mansion of the fourth degree, they are given from three graines to ten graines, of this kind is Euphor∣bium, Spurge, Antimony. But of the dose of these simple purgers, is spoken parti∣cularly, above, part. 1. Sect. 1. Chap. 11. But as for the doses of compound medicines they are first found out by the qualities of the simples which are mixt together; Secondly, from the degrees of their strength; Thirdly, from their quantity, of which in the Institu∣tions. In the finding out of the dose therefore of compositions, The Doses of com∣pound me∣dicines how they are to be found out. first tis to be considered, how many doses of purgers are in any composition, afterwards the weight is to be determi∣ned, of the whole composition, and hence by the rule of proportion you must enquire how great a part of the whole compound may be given for one dose; as for example, if we examine, Pillulae Cochiae, there are in that composition of Hierapicrae ten drachms; which in its selfe containes ten high doses of Aloes, of Coloquintida three drachms, and a scruple, which containes seven doses, of Scammony two drachms and halfe, which hath ten doses, Turbith five drachms, which for the most part make foure doses, Siechados five drachms, Syrup of Stechados, for the most part ten or twelve drachms. And so since the whole composition which containes twenty foure of the highest doses, hath for the most part thirty six drachms, a drachm and halfe answers to one dose, and the highest dose of Cochiae pills shall be a drachm and halfe. The doses are 24. The composition 36. drachms. Therefore the dose is 1. drachm and halfe.
THE FIFTH BOOK, PART III. SECT. II. Of Operations necessary for the preparation, and composi∣tion of Medicines. CHAP. I. Of the parts of Pharmacopoeia. THE whole art of an Apothecary may be divided in∣to two parts, The art of an Apothe∣cary. whereof the first handles the operations by which the Apothecary obtaines his desired end, and whereof oftentimes in the preparation of one Medicine they are more, and the same are required in divers prepara∣tions; The other teacheth, to prepare certain remedies by those operations, and to reduce them into a certain form, and when it is needful, to joyn and compound many of them. To the former part belongs Chymistry in some measure. But since, that is largely spoken of in the tract of consent and dissent of Chymicks, and Aristotelians, as also in the Institutions, I am unwilling to repeat those things here in this compen∣dium.
CHAP. II. Of the kinds of heate. AS for what belongs to operations, The de∣grees of heate. and performances, since all Apothecaries whatsoever have need of heat and fire, as being the most common and usefull Instru∣ment, first let us treat of heare. But in heate in the first place, the degrees thereof are to be considered and the manners, of adding of fire; the de∣grees of heate in generall and absolutly are accounted foure; The First is that which appears pleasing and milde or gentle; the Second is that which is quicker and allmost not to be endured by the hand; the Third destroyes, the Fourth is the highest: but every of these degrees have a great latitude, and therefore not undeservedly every degree may be divided againe into its degrees, in rightly shewing wher∣of much discretion is required, but for the most part tis bet∣ter to erre in defect, then in excesse, for if any thing be once corrupted by the violence of the fire, it cannot be re∣stored to its selfe againe, and oftentimes glasses are corrup∣ted, and other dangers are accumulated, but if there be any error in defect, by continnance and increafing the degree of heate, it may be recompenced, although the time of operation be prolonged. But the degrees of heate may be made up divers wayes, How they may be va∣ried. and depend on divers causes, the cheife whereof we will propound. For first fire may be used divers wayes and manners, for sometimes the matter with a fit vessell, or without a vessell, naked and open, is put to the fire, which again is done severall wayes, for either it is circular, which in plaine incompasseth the vessells and is removed from a distant place by degrees neerer to the vessell, untill at length, 'tis heaped up over the vessell, or else the vessells are put in a fit furnace or the fire is made above the vessel Re∣verberatory, or striking back when the flame is repercussed by the cover, or doore of the furnace, it strikes as it were the matter, and so it flyes round every way. At other times the matter with its vessell is not exposed to the open fire, A dry Bath. but is setagainst another body intervening, and that divers wayes; for first, if a pot to put sand or such
like matter into, put on a vessell standing on a Trivet con∣taining the matter to be prepared, be empty, tis most conve∣niently called a dry Balneum or a dry Stupha, but if the vessell be not empty, a various heate according to the va∣riety of matter which is put in it, may be afforded, and may be called by severall names; if it be filled with water and the vessell together with the matter to be distilled, be set into the water; it is simply called Balneum Maris or Mariae; Balneum Maris. a Bath also may be prepared not only of water but of the saw-dust of sawed wood or Hay filling the vessell and then moistning it, and so cover it with a glasse, but if the vessell with the matter to be elaborated be not set in water, but be so placed, that it may receive only the vapour of the heated water, it is called Balneum Vaporosum, afterwards let the pot be filled with the dust of Bricks, with Sand, Saw∣dust, the filings of Iron and such like. Secondly, the moderation or governing of the heate, de∣pends on the store of fuell, the quantity whereof in the kindled coales, the Artist can at pleasure abate or increase, or make it how he please, and that either by the plenty or want of coales, or by the more free eventilation of Aire, and the shutting out interception of the same; for a greater quan∣tity of coales make a greater and stronger heate, if they can by the fuming of the Aire, and by opening of breathing holes, be kindled, all which may be better shewne then des∣cribed. Thirdly, for the variation of the fire, the dishes com∣monly called Cappellae do make it according to their various distance from the fier; for if they are moved neerer to the fier it is increased, but if further off, the heate is remitted. CHAP. III. Of the first rank or forme of operations of Breaking, Sleeking, or making plaine, In the in∣stitutions Chap. 3 4.5.6.7. The kindes of opera∣tions Phar∣maceuti∣call. Shaving and File∣ing. NOw for what belongs to Workemanship and opera∣tions, although all these may seeme to be referd to conjunction and separation, yet it pleaseth us in this place according to our purpose to reduce them into three formes,
and to comprehend them in the three following Chapters, In the first we may contain those operations which pertain to the dissolution and corruption of a thing; In the second we will put in those things which are separated, and the detra∣ction of any thing, In the third, we will explain those which are appointed for the alteration, immutation, perfection, and preserving of a thing. In the the first rank are breaking, or grinding, shaving, sleeking, filing, melting, or dissolving, drayning, burning, turning into ashes, or incineration, calcination, praecipita∣tions, fumigation, putrifaction and fermentation. As for breaking or grinding, Tritura. the chief end thereof is, that things may reduced into their smallest parts; that afterwards they may the easier, and more exactly be mixt with others, and their vertue may be drawn out. Sleeking, Laeviga∣tio. or levigation, is nothing else then a most exact breaking or grinding, whereby some Medicine, red marble, or some other polite stone, a convenient liquor being powred in, or else without liquor, tis so long wrought with a little kind of Mil stone, by the turning of the hand, that it is re∣duced into the form of fine flower, and wonderful smal dust, in that manner painters use to prepare their colours. Next to these are Section, Shaving, and Filing: Leaves, Staulks and rootes of plants, Cutting Shaving Filing are cut with Scizzers, or Knives, and by this means they are prepared, for boyling, infusion, or grinding, other things are shaved, or lessened by a turn, as woods, horns, hoofs, or nails, teeth of living creatures, for the same purposes. But those things which can neither be lessened by cutting or breaking, should be filed with an iron File, and reduced into the smallest parts, such like are most met∣tals, as iron, and others, and also woods, horns, and bones of Animales. Melting is a reduction of harder things, Meltings Dissolving. into a more liquid substance. Dissolving differs not from this, unlesse because that is done alwaies by the benefit of heat, and for the most part without adding of moisture; but this is alwayes done with moisture, and oftentimes without heat, so they melt fat, butter, marrow, wax, Pirchosin, certain kinds of gummes, as also mettals by a greater strength of fire, but for the most part with powder added that they may the better run; all kinds of salt, are dissolved teares, juices, many kinds of gummes, Rosins.
Drayning or dissolving is a peculiar sort of solution when a body is made fluid, by moist aier, Deliqui∣um. which insinuates it self into it, so salts, allome, nitre, and such like melt, all which turn into liquor, also lyme, or chaulke, of which the greatest part are dissolved into liquor, or some thing of them onely melt, according as they contain more or less salt. To these belong burning, and torrifying, Burning. Toasting: yet they differ in this, that these are performed with the lesse, they with the greater fire, whence, in tosting things are rather dryed, then burnt, and if any thing be burnt, tis the out-side, but in burn∣ing as well the internal parts, as those on the outside are burnt together. This drying is performed in a Platter, or Frying pan, especially of iron, wherein medicines put to the fire may often be stirred about, that either the superfluous hu∣miditie may be consumed, or the qualitie that abounds in the medicine may be taken away, but burning, when any medi∣cine, as harts horn, mans skull, ivory, oils inclosed in a pot∣ters furnace, are burnt, and being burnt, and as yet hot are ex∣tinguished in a convenient liquor, and afterward rubbed, or crumbled to dust. Cinefaction, or a reduction into ashes, Burning to askes. is so called when the moisture, which was in the combustible matter, by which the parts hung together, is consumed by the fire, which is per∣formed, two wayes; First, the fire being opened the thing it self is cast in naked, and is reduced into ashes, moreover in a Vessel that is closed, matter is burnt and turned into ashes, which combustion differs from the former in this, for in the former, whatsoever is volitile flyes into the ayer, but in this some volitiles are retained, and fastned with the fixed. Calcination is a pulverisation of a thing by fire caused by the privation of the moisture of the part joyned with it. Calcining. This principally takes place in minerals, and mettals, and other things which of themselves do not burn, and are more firmely united, and tis appointed either that a thing may be made the fitter for solution, or to lose the acrimony, which it hath, although on the contrary some things become the sharper for burning whilst the aqueous humiditie, whereby the acri∣mony is occasioned is consumed by fire. But this is perform∣ed two wayes, either by actual fire, when things are fired, and the bond of continuitie is broken by actual fire; or by poten∣tial fire, when things to be calcined, are corroded, by strong and corrasive waters, and other causticks.
That calcination, which is made by actuall fire is againe various, for some things are calcined by themselves, and without any addition, but other things, with additamen∣tents, which either prohibit the fusion, or else burne and corrode. But that calcination in particular, which is made and corrasive powders mixt therewith, Cementing. is called Cementing, and tis performed when a crucible is filled with thin plates of mettall, and corrasive powders, one ranke above ano∣ther, First Plates, then Powders, then Plates, then pow∣ders, &c. As the manner is in doing, after the crucible is exposed to a circular fire or Reverberation by degrees, yet some things are extinguished first by certaine waters, be∣fore they are calcined, some are corroded first by their own waters and afterwards are Reverberared; on the contrary some things are Reverberated first, afterwards corro∣ded. Calcination which is done by potentiall fire is finished by corroding, Corroding. precipitating, or Fumigation. Corrosion is a so∣lution of mettalls, or such like by waters and sharpe spirits Precipitation is when a mettall descends to the bottome, Precipita∣tion. Fumiga∣tion. in the likenesse of Chaulke, and is seperated from the water that dissolves it; but Fumigation is when some body is corroded and brought into a body like chaulke, by the ex∣halation, or vapour of a corroding thing. Hitherto pertaines Amalgamation, Corroding of mettalls by Quick-filuer. Putrifacti∣on. which with the Chy∣mists is an operation which is nothing else then a corrod∣ing of mettalls by Quick-silver and Mercury. Lastly putrifaction, which others call Fermentation, and digestion, is that operation whereby a mixt body is someway dissolved by a moist heate, and losing its natu∣rall juncture, or Union, is rendred the more fit for artificial seperation. CHAP. IV. In the In∣stitutions Chap. the 8.9.10.11.12.13.14. the se∣cond forme of opera∣tions. Of the second ranke or forme of operations. TO the second forme of operations we refer those things, which are imployed in seperation and detracti∣on of any thing; and in seperation of Homogenialls from
Heterogenialls, of pure from impure, of Profitable, from unprofitable, such are fifting, washing, infusing, boyle∣ing, straining, fumeing, Clarifying, Filtring, Digestion, Expression, Distillation, Sublimation, Exsiccation, Eva∣poration, Exhalation and Coagulation. Sifting is not only a seperation of things beaten, Sifting. and brought into powder, of the finer part from the thicker, by meanes of the seive, but also for the most part, a casting of moist and boyled things through a haire seive. Washing is not appointed for that end only, Washing. that medi∣cines defiled may be cleansed, but that some superfluous quality may be taken away from the medicine, or a new, may be introduced. Infusion is nothing else but a steeping of a medicine in some liquor, Infusion. whereby the medicine may be moistned within and without, that its force or strength may be drawn out, or increased, or its malignity corrected, or that which is hard may be softned. Next to infusion, is boyling, or seething, Seething. which differ only in this, that medicines in infusion are moistned with longer time and lesse heate, but by boyling tis performed sooner and with greater heate. Straining is that whereby moist things, Straining. either first heat∣ed, as the thicker and more viscid things, or lukewarme or eold, as those that are thinner, are cast through a thick, or thin strayner, the thicker parts and dregs being left be∣hind in the strainer, they become the purer. Scumming is when during the time of seething the froath swimming on the top, is often taken away with a spoon, Scumming. for the most part perforated. Clarifying, Clarifying. although it may be taken in general for any sort of separation of filthy, and thick things, which may be per∣formed many wayes, either by standing still whilst the secu∣lent matter, descends of its selfe to the bottome, and settles or by straining, or by froathing, yet principall with the Apothecaries, Clarification is that purification of things boyled by despumation, having added the white of an egg, namely whilst the white of an egg is beate with a Spatula, or spoone, untill it come into froath, and afterwards is ming∣led with the Syrup or decoction hot to clarify it, and when it hath contracted any blacknesse tis taken away, and a new is put in so often till the liquor become cleare.
By Filtration, Filtring. or straining through a brown paper, that which is thick and faeculent, mixed or confused in any li∣quour is separated, namely whilest the pure liquour descends through the strainer, whether it be a linnen ragge or brown paper, into the Vessel that is under it, but the impuritie is left in the strainer. Digestion, although sometimes it signifie putrifaction, sometimes a certain exaltation, Digestion. and circulation, since that in general, to distribute or dispose in order, is to concoct, and digestion is concoction, yet in this place, by digestion, we understand such a conction only whereby that may be se∣perated, which is as yet foule in things, whilst the substance of the liquour is attenuated, and separated from its earthy impuritie. Hereunto belongs Expression, Pressing. by the benefit whereof by a strong endeavour, either with the hand alone or with a presse, we separate the liquid and moist from that which is dry and earthy. Distillation is nothing else, Distilla∣tion. but a collection of exhalations elevated by heat, out of something exhalable, by the help of a Vessel, and receptacle, thick, and cold into a liquour. This is commonly accounted threefold, the one is that which is by ascent, the other is that which is made by the sides, the third is that which is made by descent. By ascent Distillation is said to be, Distilla∣tion by as∣cent. when the exhalations and vapours ascend upward, from the Alembick, or the head of the Furnace. And the Vessels which contain the matter to be distilled, the head being put on in it, tis condensed into a liquour, which distills drop by drop through the beak or nose into the receiver, and it is gathered together. This is performed, either by the Sun beams or by fire, sometimes ly∣ing open, sometimes not manifest, namely some other body intervening, as sand, ashes, water, &c. Hitherto also may be referred conveniently Distillation by a Glasse like a ball so called, Distilla∣tion by a glass. whereby oil of sulphure is pre∣pared, namely when the brimstone is kindled, glasse, ham∣mers receives the vapours, and condense them into oil. Distillation to the sides, Distilla∣tion to the sides. or else it is called by inclination, when the exhalation, and spirits do not ascend straight up∣wards in the Alembick, but tend towards the receiver by the sides and obliquely, This is performed either when the fire is opened to it, or when some other body comes between, as sand, ashes, &c. By a Vessel which they call a Retort, or a
Straight gourd, yet placed oblique in the furnace, that the Alembick may incline downwards. Distillation by descent is when a liquour, Distilla∣tion by descent. is not carried upwards, from the dissolved exhalations, nor to the sides; but tends downwards, and drops into the supposed Vessel. This again is performed, the Vessel lying immediatly on the fire, or sand, ashes, &c. intervening. To distillations belongs Rectification, or Cohobation, Rectifica∣tion. whereof that is no other then a repeated distillation of a thing, to purifie and exalt it the more, the dreggs being left in the bottome, or to seperate the phlegme from oil, or the spirit from phlegme, but this is said, when the humour which was distilled, is powred off, and again, and again, is drawn, and distilled in the same Vessel, where the matter was left. Sublimation, Sublima∣tion. which is performed sometimes by fire that is open, sometimes by some intervening body, as Sand, Ashes, &c. Tis the nearest to distillation by ascent and differs from it only in this, that as in distillation vapours, which are exalted, come together into a liquour, so in sublimation exhalations ascend dry, and being carried up on high, stick to the sides of the Alembick like attomes. Praecipitation seems to be contrary to this, Praecipi∣tation. which is done when bodies dissolved by waters and corroding liquours, are again separated from the liquour, that the form of chaulk or dust may remain, which commeth to passe, when any thing is cast or powred into the solution, by whose force the dis∣solving liquour, or that which was the cause of solution in the liquor, is seperated from the dissolved body. Drying. By Exsiccation the superfluous moisture is taken away, whether in the shade, or in the Sun, or whether it be done in an Oven, or in a Frying-pan over Coales, both for that the Medicines may the better be preserved, and may not contract thirst by their superfluous humidity, and putrifie, and be cor∣rupted, and also, that they may the easier be contained, and made into powder. By Evaporation the aqueous humidity expires, Evapora∣tion. Exhala∣tion. as by exha∣lation, dry exhalations are elevated by heat, as that which is superfluous in the thing being dissolved into vapours and ex∣halations may go out, and the more useful part only may be left. To these operations is added Coagulation, Coagula∣tion. which is no∣thing else but a reduction of a liquid thing to a sollid sub∣stance by the privation of moisture.
CHAP. V. Of the third manner of Operations. THe third forme comprehends those operations which are appointed them, The third forme of operations. for alteration, immutation, and per∣fection of a thing, and aime at this, that a thing may be reduced to a better state and more noble degree. But al∣though some do reckon more such operations, and perhaps there are more, yet in this place all of them are properly called by the name of Digestion, Digestion. and as it is distinguish∣ed from the two higher kinds of digestion, whereby a new quality of a thing newly elaborated, is introduced, so that if the thing containes any thing that is hurtfull, it puts a∣way that, or if any thing is wanting to it, it begets that; and if there are any others to be here repeated, they ought to be accounted for certaine wayes of Digestion; Institution Chap. 15. and 16. Circnla∣tion. For all of them for the most part, in the same manner by a gentle ex∣ternall heat, exciting the internall force of a thing are per∣formed, which here is the primary agent. But amongst the manners or kinds of digestion, the cheife is Circulation, tis called by some Pelicanation, from the vessell wherein it is performed, where by a gentle ex∣ternall heat being exhibited, the matter which is circula∣ted, is exalted continually in the forme of vapours, and is againe condensed, and so by that continuall concoction and this circular motion of refolution and condensation, it at∣taines to the highest degree of perfection in its kind. Hitherto belongs conditing, Conditing. preserving, and confecting; fruits, flowers, roots, are condited or pickled with Honey, Sugar, Vinegar, Salt, not onely that they may be preser∣ved the longer, but that they may be the more pleasant to the taste. In confecting, Confecting. fruits, roots, seeds, sweet smelling spices, are preserved and candied with Sugar, more for the taste sake then preservation, or augmentation of the strength. Nutrition of medicines is a certaine humectation, but such whereby the thing is presently wet, Nutrition. or moystned, and im∣mediately dryed againe by the Sun or fire, and is to be wet and moistened againe; which labour is to be repeated thrice, sour times, or so often until the medicine hath suffici∣ently imbibed that humour which we desire.
THE FIFTH BOOK, PART III. SECT. III. Of the Formes of Medicines. CHAP. I. The Division of Medicines. AFter we have finished the operations necessary for an Apothecary: The Divi∣sion of Me∣dicines. It remaynes that we now come to the preperations themselves of Medicines, which are per∣fected by those operations. The differences of Medicines, are taken either from the substance or from the parts to which they are applyed. Medicines being considered the for∣mer of these wayes are, some full of Vapours, others Corpu∣lent; Corpulent are either fluid, or having a consistance, Fluid are various, as distilled waters, Spirits, Liquid tinctures, Vineger, Medicinal wine, Hydromel or Hony and Water, clarifies Juyces, Oyles, Emulsions, Decoctions, Infusions, Ju∣lebs, Syrrups, Baths, Clystets, &c. Again those that have a consistance, some of them are actually moyst, others dry; Of the former sort are Conserves, Electuaries, Eclegmas, Juices, Extracts, Boles, Muscillages, Fat Lineaments, Balsomes, Un∣guents, Cataplasmes: Those that are actually dry, are either continuous, and the parts cohaere together, or else they are discontinued. Of the former kind are, Pills, Troches, Rotule, Morsels, Plaisters, Cerates, Suppositers, Glasses, Regulus, and certain things sublimed: Of the latter sort are, several Species and Powders, Meal or brann, Flowers, & things praecipitated.
But in respect of the parts to which they are applyed, some are called internal, Internal. others external. The internal are those which are taken into the body that common and usual way as we take in meat and drink, all the rest whether they are applyed to the body, or spread over the body, or any other way applyed to the bodie, or if they are cast into the bo∣dy any other way, External. as, at the fundament, ears, nostrils, wombe, we call them externals. The formes of Internal Medicines are various; The diffe∣rence of internal Medicines. for some are fluid, others not fluid, and these are either soft and liquid, or altogether dry, The fluid are, Decoctions, Infusions, Medi∣cinal VVines, Honey and VVater mixt and boiled together, wine mingled with honey, vineger, and honey, and barley∣water, Juices, distilled waters, Spirits, tinctures, and Liquid ex∣tracts, Oils, Sirups, Julips, Emulsions; Soft and not fluid are, Extracts, Conserves, Preserves, Medicinal Juices thickned, Electuaries, Eclegmaes, or Medicines to be licked or supt, Boles, Not fluid, and plainly dry are, powders, Sweet meats, Salts; Saffron-flowers, Precipitates, Comfits, little round Cakes, Mor∣sels, or little snips, march-paines, And those which belong to these, as Troches, and Pills. But externals are either sent into certain parts of the bodie, Of Exter∣ternal. or they are only applyed, or exhibited to the su∣perficies of the bodie, or they are only hung about, as Ammu∣lets, and Periapticke medicines, or medicines to hang about ones bodie; Suppositers and Clysters are injected, and cast into the body; Clysters, and pessaries, are also injected into the womb, also certain Liquours are injected into the yard and bladder; into the mouth are put gargarismes, to wash the mouth, or throat with, Apophlegmatismes to draw away Phlegme, Dentifrices to rub and cleanse the Teeth, To the nose Erhines, Sneezing-wort; Odours, Suffumigations, pecu∣liar injections into the Ears, Collyries, or medicines, applyed to the eyes. To the outside of the bodie only are exhibited, and applyed, oiles, balsomes, ointments, linements, cerots, plaisters, Cataplasmes, Dropases, or ointments to take away hair, Sinapismes, Phaenigmaes, or medicines causing the bo∣die to break out in blisters, or Pustules, Epithems, or medi∣cines some what softer then plaisters to be applied to the bo∣die, fomentations, or any thing applied plaister-waies to a∣swage pain, little baggs, powders, embrocations, washings of the extream parts, baths, washbals, searing irons or caute∣ties.
Some others do best agree with certain other parts; What Me∣dicines are are applyed to the Head. all ex∣ternal things for the most part, communicate their strength to the head, as distilled waters and spirits, oils, extracts, de∣coctions, infusions, syrups, conserves, preserves, comfits, electua∣ries, little round cakes, morsels, pills, powders. But external medicines applied to the head, in the form of powders, little baggs, round balles, oiles, balsoms, ointments, unguents, plai∣sters, cerots, cataplasmes, oxyrhods, that is medicines with vinegar and roses, epithemes, or the softest plaisters, embroca∣tions, suffumigations, perfumes of divers sorts, as al∣so washings of the Feet are profitable for the Head. To the eyes. To the Ears. Externally waters, and Collyries, ointments, fomentations, unguents, cataplasmes, are convenient for the eyes. Into the ears distilled waters, Juices, decoctions, oiles, and other liquours are infused and dropt, and other Medi∣cines in the form of evaporation, and fumes are sent into the ears, also liniments, ointments, fomentations, epi∣themes, Cataplasmes are applied. For the teeth are convenient, lotions for the mouth, To the Teeth. lini∣ments, small pills to be put into hollow Teeth, unctions for the Jawes, powders for rubbing the Teeth, and also troches, and pensills made in the form of suppositers are convenient for the Teeth, and being dryed, and hardned, the Teeth are rubbed therewith. Medicines applied to the mouth, and Chopps are lotions, For the mouth and Chopps. For the Breast. and gargarisines, ointments made of hony, of syrups and juices, lohocks. Most internal things are good for the Breast, but especi∣ally, lohocks, troches, and litle rolles, such as they use to hold under their tongues, the thicker sort of syrups, vapours, and fumes drawn in with aier, externally, the samemedicines may be applied in the form of oiles, ointments, unguents, cata∣plasmes, plaisters and cerots, little baggs, fomentations, and epithemes. Medicines are applied to the Heart, To the Heart. for the most part after the same manner, and moreover fumes, or steames, which are profitable for the recreating and refreshing of the spi∣rits. Internal Medicines may be conveyed to the Stomack in all formes, To the Stomack. but principally those which are taken in at the mouth, but externally, in the form of oils, unctions, fomenta∣tions, liniments, unguents, cataplasmes, plaisters, epithemes, baggs.
Moreover, To the Liver. all internall things may penetrate to the Li∣ver. But externall in the forme of Ointments, Fomenta∣tions, Linements, Cataplasmes, Unguents, Plaisters, little bags, Epithems, are applyed. In the same manner Unctions are exhibited to the Spleen, To the Spleen Reiues and Bladder. and Bladder; Bathes also, and Tubs of waters to fit in, are usefull for the Reins, Bladder and spermatick Vessells; and Clysters injected are good for diseases of the Reines. All the same things are convenient for the wombe, and moreover injections into the wombe, Pessaries, Errhines or medicines to put into the nose, fumes, and Evaporations, Lotions of the feet. And all these sorts of medicines shall now be explained in their order, as far forth as this compendium will admit of. CHAP. II. Of Decoctions. DEcoctions which the Greeks call Apozemes, are potu∣lent medicines prepared by the boyling of plants and of their parts, Decoctions what. How many fold. are potu∣lent medicines prepared by the boyling of plants and of their parts, seldome of Animalls; all Decoctions may conveniently be reduced into two formes; namely into De∣coctions altering, and purging; under Decoctions altering, we will comprehend all those that have any other verrue besides purging, and do alter the body, whether they are given in regard of themselves only, or for some following purge; which Decoctions are then called Preparatives, Di∣gestives, or Apperatives, that is opening things. But the matter to be decocted is taken out of the rank of Vegetables, The matter of them. wherein are variety of parts of plants or herbs, seldome of living Creatures. But as for the quantity of the materialls to be decocted, Quantity. if a weight be to be assigned generally to what ever is to be boyled, it begins from an ounce or two ounces for the most part, and ascends sometimes to halfe a pound, nay some∣times to a pound, a pound and halfe, and two pound, but as for the dose of the several kinds Decoctions are prepared. Of the Roots and Barks ℥2. ℥3. and ℥4. Of Leaves, 3.4.5. or 6. handfulls.
Of seeds 3.4.5.6. drachms Of Fruires, in number 1.2.3. couples or paires 5.6. Of flowers, pugills 4. or 5. Halfe an ounce, five drachms or six drachms answers to a little handfull, two drachms or three to a pugill, but it is not necessary to mixe all those together in every decoction, and to heape up a mixture of them all, but when a few will performe the intentions, tis in vaine to put in many, yet if the decoction be provided to be given at many severall times, such a quantity of materialls ought to be taken, as that the decoction made of them may be powerfull to per∣forme the aime of the Physitian. But in the seething, Prepara∣tion of the matter. Or of boy∣ling. the preparation of the things to be boyled, and the manner of seething, is to be observed, for first if the materialls are too thick or hard, they are first to be cut or gently bruised, or fyled or beaten in a mortar. In the manner of seething, order is to be observed in put∣ting in the things to be decocted the fire and instruments and Liquor which is decocted; and time also is to be obser∣ved. Order of boyling is to be observed, that all the things may not be put in together, but the Roots, Barkes, Woods, which are the more sollid things, and without smell, should be put in first, then the Leaves, and seeds, last of all flowers, and Aromatick things, and all those things which smell strongly, and those things which may disperse their strength by much boyling; but this cannot be obser∣ved except the vessell be opened, but if the decoction be made in a thing that is covered, it matters not much to put in all the things altogether, and if any of them are more difficult to be seethed, those should first of all be bruised by themselves. The fire should be cleare and equall, but very gentle, since the vertue is easily called forth, but stronger when there is need of much boyleing. But decoctions are made by the Apothecaries commonly when the vessell is open and the fire also, but tis more con∣venient, least the strength of the medicines should vanish in boyling, to make a decoction in a Biploma, as they call it or a double vessell, the vessell being shut, or if a decoction be made the fire being open, tis convenient to set on it a close Alembick, or if it hath a beake, o snout, to fit it with a receiver to take the liquor, and to mixe it with the strained decoction.
The Liquor in which the things are boyled ought to be such as may performe the intentions of the Physiti, Liquor for the De coction. as wa∣ter of the Fountaine, distilled water, Barly-water, Chaly-beate, Water, Whey, water mixt with Honey called Hy∣dromell, sometimes Wine is taken, seldome strong Beere is used, sometimes some Vineger is put in, that the viscid and tough humours may more powerfully be cut thereby, and the medicine may penetrate the more; sometimes Roots a∣lone, before the decoction is made, are brayed in Vineger. Distilled waters also are often used for decoctions with no great profit but with great charge, unlesse the decoction be made in a close vessell, since so long boyling takes away all their strength. The quantity of the Liquor ought to be such as may sa∣tisfie for the decoction, The quan∣tity of Li∣quor. and ought to cover the medicines three or foure fingers breadth; which for the most part is left to the discretion of the Apothecarie. But if the pro∣portion be appointed by the Physitian, the Liquor is for the most part foure-fold, six-fold, eight-fold, in proportion to the medicines, according as the Herbs are dry, or full of juice, thick, or thin, and may imbibe more or lesse of the Liquor, and they ought to seeth a little, or long. Sometimes before boyling, the medicines are some∣what cut, or bruised, and sometimes they stand a while (af∣ter decoction) before they are strained. But they are boyled to the consumption of halfe or of a third part, or of a fourth part only of Liquor, or till but a third part remaines, according as the medicines and the scope of the Physitian requires: for those whose vertue easily vanish and are in a thin, and seperable substance are to be boyled the lesse time: but those whose substances are thicker, the strength cannot be drawn forth without longer boyling, the decoction is strained with, or without squea∣zing, according as there is need of the thinner parts only, or thicker, and such as lye deeper. A decoction is prepared either for one dose or more; for one, three, four, or five ounces may suffice, if for more, the decoction should be made that the remainder may be a Pint, or a Pint and an half, and afterwards of things ma∣king it pleasant, for one Dose an Ounce, or an Ounce and an half may be added, yet more than a Pint, or a Pint and an half of a decoction, at one time, is seldom made, (except the decoction of Guiacum and such like) since that if more
should be prepared, it would easily be spoiled before it would be taken by the sick; Unto three four or five ounces of the decoction strained are added, of Sugar, which often is used or Honey, six drachms, or an ounce, or of some con∣venient Syrup in every dose an ounce, or an ounce and halfe: Sometimes the juices that are most convenient of Herbs, or Fruits, and often other Liquors, as Aqua vitae, Spirit of Vitrioyle, Copper, Salt-peter, some drops thereof are added, and indeed only one of these is added sometimes to an Apozeme, but of lenitives more, as more Syrups, or jui∣ces & Syrups, or of juice and Sugar, when juices are admini∣istred, for the most part; Sugar or Syrup is mixed with them, and sometimes pleasant things; that they may be the better mingled, a gentle ebullition is appointed at a weak fire; if it be convenient, the white of an egg may be added, that the Sugar and Honey, and decoction also may be clarifyed; or if that clarification doth not suffice, the decoction is to be put into the Balneum Mariae, till the thick dregs settle in the bot∣tome, and they by setling in the bottome, and powring off of the cleare Liquor are seperated, and that is to be re∣peated sometimes if it be needfull; sometimes the decoction is to be made pleasant either for the acquiring of a good taste, or smell, or some other vertue, namely the Aroma∣ticks a little before the end of boyling being reduced into into powder, or Aromatick species fitted for the disease, halfe a drachm, or a drachm thereof in each pint, is to be hung in a thin skin, or bladder in the decoction, and are often pressed out, or else a little after, the decoction is re∣moved from the fire, the decoction being as yet hot, they may be cut, or bruised more grossely, and so injected, and after they have stood together some time in a vessell well covered, it is strained againe. Muske also, and Amber∣greaze, if it be convenient, may be also given to the dose of a graine of each; or a drachm or two of Cinamon water may be added. If Wine or Vinegar be necessary, tis more convenient to add them after the boyling, or a little before they have done boyling. They are given for the most part in the Morning, The time of giving. or E∣vening, or two or three hours before dinner, or supper, the stomach being empty and the decoction being first warmed, three foure or five ounces thereof is given at a time, and that is often performed two, three, foute or five dayes fol∣lowing, and either once only, or twice a day; if the de∣coction;
are prepared for many doses, they are to be kept in cold places under ground, for they will scarce continue a∣bove a weeke although it be in the Winter: but in the Spring and Summer, for the most part they are renewed every way. Hereunto belong restorative Broathes as they call them, Restorative broaths. which are made of Hens, or Capons, to which Veale, or Goates flesh may be added, and there are of three sorts; the first they call a compleat, Jus Con∣sum ma∣tum. or a perfect broth, because 'tis most absolute, and fittest to nourish: it is prepared as or∣dinary broathes are, only that they boyle longer, and in∣deed so long untill the sixth, eighth, or sometimes the tenth part only remaines; Gelatina. the second is called Gelatina, which is made if these meates are boyled in a double vessell with∣out powring off the water, and the juice is pressed out from thence, from which after it is cooled, the fat swimming on the top is to be scummed off: Contu∣sum. the third is called Contusum which is prepared when the meates first sodden or rosted, afterwards are beaten in a morter, so long untill they may melt when broath is put to them, and afterwards are strain∣ed. Purging Decoctions. PUrging decoctions differ not from other decoctions, The man∣ner of pre∣puring pur∣ging of de∣coctions. un∣lesse in respect of materialls; namely that simple pur∣ging medicines are mingled in purging decoctions, the manner of preparing is the same: for purging medicines convenient for the evacuation of the humours are taken, and that for one and more doses, yet because in seething their strength will decay, or waste they ought to be taken in a greater dose, then in the substance, the strongest for the most part double, but of the milder purgers, four-fold. Of which before in the doses of medicines. Other things are added to these, which may either re∣sist and correct the malignant, and noxious qualities of the purge, or may prevent the mischeives which may befall nature by theuse of strong purgers or which may increase and stir up the dull faculty of a medicine, or extimulate them to worke more speedily, or may bridle them if they worke too strong and quick, or such as have regard to some private part, and may leade and direct the purging medi∣cine
thither; Aromatick powders or species are added to the decoction strained, for to please the palate, halse an ounce or an ounce of Syrup is appointed and prepared. 2. Oftentimes something that purges is added to the decoction as Syrup and Honey of Roses and Violets solu∣tive, also Cassia, Manna, which are dissolved in the decoc∣tion, which is againe strained. 3. Sometimes purging electuaries are mixt and dissolved in the concoction, in such quantity that they make one dose when they are mingled with many things that are boyled together. 4. But because decoction, by the mixture of electuaries become thicker; tis not inconvenient if they are strained againe, and also clarifyed, but then the Electuaries may be used in a larger quantity. 5. Sometimes, some of the purging powders are added to the Liquor or decoction. 6. Or some quantity of a purging extract is dissolved in it: 7. Lastly, decoctions are oftentimes made of purging and altering medicines together. Hereunto belongs decoctions to cause vomits, Vomiting things &c. sweates Urine, examples whereof are extant every where. CHAP III. Of Infusions and other purging Potions. INfusions are next unto decoctions, Infusions. and differ only from decoctions simply so called, in that they are wont to be prepared only by boyling without macerating them before hand: but these are when the medicines are broken, or beaten before, and put into a convenient Liquor for some certain time that they may leave their vertue in it The mn∣ner of pre∣paring. They are prepared of medicines of all sorts, but most com∣monly of Purgers, which should be given in somewhat a greater weight, then in the substance, namely halfe so much in the substance, and double in the Infusion, with their correcters and directers being cast in also in a due quantity, (sometimes in a nodule or little bagg of fine linnen, shut) in a Liquor convenient for the purpose of the Physitian: the Chymists at this day, that the extract
may be made the easier, put to the menstruum or prepared matter some drops or spirit of Salt of Vitrioll, or Oyle of Vitrioll is added, which is made by draining, which they call per deliquium. The quantity of the Liquor ought to be such as may co∣ver those things that are macerated, and may be something higer then they, being infused in this manner, fix, twelve, or twenty foure hours in a warme vessell stopt or shut, they being beaten or cut in peices should so long lye in it untill the Liquor hath extracted all their strength, which may be known by the taste and smell. But if, which often happens, there be urgent occasion, the medicines cannot be mace∣rated for want of time, that defect may be supplyed by gen∣tle boyling of them, afterwards that which is strained with or without squeazing is appointed for use, and indeed without squeazing or pressing that which is strained is more cleansing and pleasing to the taste, but weaker: but with ex∣pression tis more troubled and thicker, but more efficacious. You may add to the infusion things that sweeten it or o∣ther purging things as tis said before of decoctions. Sometimes Decoctions, and Infusions are given toge∣ther; namely a Decoction is prepared in the same manner as is said before. In a sufficient quantity of that decection are infused purgers with their correcters, and the rest of the things are afterwards mixt as in other infusions. Another way also a Potion is made of insusion and de∣coction mixt, or an infusion with a decoction, namely the decoction is prepared by its selfe, and the insusion by it selfe, both of them according to the method formerly de∣scribed, and these two Liquors are afterward mingled to∣gether. To these purging decoctions, A purging Potion. The men∣ner. and infusions, by reason of their fimilitude we add a purging Potion peculiarly so cal∣led by some, which is prepared in this manner, first a suffi∣cient quantity is taken of any sort of Liquor, decoction, distilled water, Whey, water and Honey mixt, Broath, Wine, Juleps of Violets, sufficient for a draught, namely two 3. or 4. ounces, in the Liquor a sufficient quantity of Cassia, Manna, or a sufficient quantity of any one purging electuary, or more, is to be dissolved for one dose; sometimes of some Sy∣rup half an ounce, or 6. drachms, or some of the Aromatick powders are added, and these potions are taken as the rest, which we have spoken of heretofore, hot in the morning fasting.
2. Secondly, as tis spoken of puging things, so here also straining, and Clarifying may be appointed, but then the electuaries are to be taken in a greater quantity, then if they are given without straining. 3. Thirdly, purging Potions may be prepared of purging extracts, but seeing that extracts are wont to be given in a smaller dose, they require lesse quantity of Liquor, and thr∣fore are more gratefull to the affected: sometimes two or three ounces of other Liquors are taken instead of Muska∣dine, and the extract is dissolved in them, and if there be danger of being too hot, some Sorrell, or Lemons, or some o∣ther convenient things may be added. 4. Lastly, purging Potions are prepared of powders as well simples, as of compound purging medicines, as also with purging Roles, but the dose of such powders, ought not to be much more then a drachm, otherwise the Potion will be too thick, and ungratefull: and sometimes some powder is mingled with dissolved electuaries. In the same manner also, Potions and infu∣sions for vomits. Infusions and Potions for vo∣mits, sweates, and medicines provoking of Urine may be prepared. CHAP. IV. Of Medicinal Wines, drinks of honey and Water sodden together, of Wine mingled with Honey, of Oxymel, of Medicinal Vinegar, Decoction or Barley-water, also of Clarified Juices. OUT of those things which have bin hitherto spoken of Infusions and Decoctions, Medicinall wines. it will easily appear how me∣dicinal wines are prepared, and they are either altering, r purging and altering together. They are prepared, either of Must; or of Wine that is re∣ined, those that are prepared of Must, have a more plea∣ant taste, and they are thus done; The dry Medicines are ut into little woodden Caskes; when the Must is some∣hat abated, and the Wine cleansed, and made clear, it should e drawn out into another Vessel, and kept for your use. In the same manner Physical drink may be prepared, Phsical nkes. of
Wormwood, Harts tongue, Bittony, Sage, Rosemary, and other herbs, and also of purging things: but for the most part, the herbs are first bruised in the drink, after tis brewed, being as yet warm, and afterwards in due season things to make it work, being put in, they are suffered to cool. Of Wines so cleansed, Medicinal Wines are prepared; Dry medicines are cleansed, cut, and broken, and are put into a glasse, or earthen Vessel, sometimes into a Nodule, or little Bagge of fine linnen, or thin linnen sewed up; a sufficient quantity of good white Wine is powred in, so they stand in infusion, in a Vessel that is shut, afterwards strained, unlesse they are inclosed in a little Bagge. But this proportion for the most part is observed, that to a pound of medicines, there is taken of Must, or Wine eight Pints, twelve, nay, to twenty five, nay thirty, or thirty six, so that an ounce may answer to the proportion of two or three Pints. Medicinall Wines also that alter, are prepared if distilled Oyles are added to them being first mixt with Sugar, or Spi∣rits, or tinctures, spirit of Wine drawne out of simple medi∣cines, or moist extracts. Sometimes medicinall Wines are sweetned with Sugar or Honey, Claretum. and are called Clares, and Hippocratick Wine, they are profitable in cold durable diseases, they ae made in this manner: Aromatick things or roots also and seeds grate∣full to the smell and taste, principally are grosely beaten, or cut, and such as have great efficacy, are infused in sweet Wine, so they are to stand sometime in the Infusion, in a warme place for some hours, or let them simper in Balmum Mariae, for halfe an houre, especially if you may accelerate the worke, or to prepare Wine mingled with Honey; after∣wards there is added a sufficient quantity of Sugar to make it pleasant to the taste, so that to two, three or soure parts of Wine, one part of Sugar may be taken, and oftentimes Wine is drained through Hippocrates sleeve, that it may be∣come cleare, some of the distilled waters that are conveni∣ent, may be mixt with the Wine. Some infuse the Aromaticks in spirit of wine, about eight or ten parts whereof is used to one part of the Aromaticks, and when the spirit of wine hath drawne out the tincture, they seperate it by declination, and straining or filtring, and keepe it for their use, but when tis convenient to make Hippocraticall wine, they power some drachms, and withal
an ounce or two ounces, to one measure of Wine, a suffi∣cient quantity of Sugar to sweeten it. But such Wines and Clarets, may be prepared not only to alter, but also to purge, with the same dose for the more choice sort of persons, namely with purgers, principally the Leaves of Sena, Mecoacam, Agrick, Turbith, with their  recters are put into a sufficient quantity of Rhenish Wine, and being heated in water luke-warme in a glasse after∣wards must stand in a warme place, six hours in Infusion, afterwards add of Julep of Violets, or Roses halse an ounce, or let them be sweetned with halfe an ounce of white Su∣gar and be strained, and filtred through a browne paper, let three ounces of that which is strained be perfumed with two drops of Oyle of Cinamon; Manna also may be ta∣ken instead of Sugar. If the Wine be sweerned with Honey instead of Sugar, Wine ming∣led with Honey. tis called Oinomell. Mulsum, or wine mingled with Honey, is prepared of one part of Honey, and two or three parts of Wine mixt and boyled together: and Aromaticks of eve∣ry sort may be added, and it may be prepared at the time of gathering of Grapes, namely if one part of Honey be taken and two of Must: of water if it be convenient three parts or five parts in quantity, and let them heate toge∣ther. Hydromell, and Mulsum, and Melicratum, Hydromell. Mulsum. Meliera∣tum. are names of medicinall Potions of the same nature, namely made of water, and Honey, and sometimes of other things boyled therewith, or if there be any difference amongst those, 'tis only in comelinesse, for Melicratum is made suddenly for present use of a mixture of Honey and water; but Hydro∣mell is prepared to keep longer, and is neater made; of Mulsum some is more cleanseing, others purer, so that there is a severall proportion of Honey to the water, accor∣ding to the various scope of the Physitian, and temperature of him that takes it. To prepare it eight, ten or twelve times the quantity of Fountaine water is to be taken: but this is made of one part of Honey and five or six of water, boyled till the fourth or fifth part be consumed. Amongst the kindes of Mulsum, which can keepe, Meade. the most noted at this day, is that drinke which is called Meade, and the best indeed is prepared in Liuania. But Hydromell is prepared not only of water and Ho∣ney but also of severall Aromaticks, Herbs and Rootes, as
Clary, Hysop, Bettony, and others, both kindes are made, that which is for present use, and that which is more du∣rable, and will keepe longer, it is prepared for present use, if in a pint of the water of Plates, a drachm, or at most two drachms are boyled, the 10th. or 12th. part of the best ney be added, to every pint of the decoction. Hydromell is made after the usuall manner: But sometimes Hydromell is compounded, when the simple Hydromell is sented with these only, although no other thing be boyled in it. Besides the compound Hydromell which doth alter, a purging Hydromell is also prepared, which is nothing else but a purging decoction made with simple Hydromell. The next to Mulsum, Oxymell. is Oxymell, which differs from it, only by the mixture of Vinegar, a drinke very usuall a∣mongst the Ancients; but the old Physitians did not make Oxymell alike, but severally and added Vinegar according to the nature of a disease and of the diseased and other cir∣cumstances, and they gave it not only mingled with other medicines, but alone to quench thirst, and other purposes to drinke, but that which is most cleansing, and may also be used in feavers was made of twelve parts of water two of Honey and one of Vinegar; they were gently boyled and scummed, and the fire not being fierce, and by the addition of the white of an egg were clarified, and afterwards strained through a woollen cloath, till it become cleare and pure. There are prepared by the Physitians other kindes of Oxymells compounded of more medicines; such is the Oxymell Helleborated of Gesner or rather of Iulian. To this head we referr the water, Barly wa∣ter. or decoction of Barly which is made of whole Barley boyled in the water till it comes to a Ptisan, and some is simple when nothing is boy∣led besides Barley; another is compound when certaine o∣ther things also are added to the Barley, namely Raisons, Licorish, Anni-seed, Fennell-seed, Cinamon, Sugar: of Licoris is added, from two drachms to half an ounce or six drachms, Raisons from an ounce to two ounces of such as are stoned, halfe or a whole drachm, Cinamon to one drachm, or 2. drachms, for a pint and halfe or z, pints of Liquor. Sometimes a sowre medicine is prepared, Medicinall Vinegar. as with Squills, Roses, the rindes of Scordium, the Flowres of Elder and ma∣ny others, and not only of one, but more simples by infusion and materation of them in the same manner, as in medici∣nall wines.
Moreover to this Head we may refer clarified juices, Clarified juices. which being pressed out of new gathered Plants are purifi∣ed, either by the white of an Egg, or by straining, often re∣peated, principally by filtring, or by separation. CHAP. V. Of distilled Waters and Spirits. THose things which are prepared by distillation are cal∣led distilled things, which are of divers kindes, Things distilled. yet all of them may be reduced to two formes, for either the things distilled are in the forme of waters, or Oyles; Water. those that are of the same consistence with water are again two-fold, for either they come neere the nature of water, and are plainly called waters, or else they are spirituous, Spirits. and are called Spirits, yet these names are often confounded, for oftentimes that which is spirituous is called a water. 1. First distilled waters are prepared of divers things: Manner of distilled waters. of herbs and Flowers, all for the most part are distilled by as∣cent; and principally of fragrant flowers, and other thin∣ner and colder things, whose force easily vanisheth, for the most part, waters good enough are distilled in a crooked glasse, by the Balneum Mariae. 2. Others bruise the flowers, and herbs that are to be distilled, and presse the juice out of them, and out of that juice by distillation through an Alembick they draw out wa∣ter into the Balneum Mariae. Some cut in small peices the Plants to be distilled, or bruise them, and being bruised they they fill the Gourd ha∣ving a narrow mouth all most full, and the patelli the glasses being put on with the powder of the glasse of Copper and borax Hermeticall, they shut and afterwards they put the glasse ful of water into a Cauldron, and boyle it six or seven hours, afterwards they put the glasse when tis taken out of the water, into a warme place to cleanse it, untill the drops cease to stick to the sides of the glsse, and the digestion be absolute: they distill the matter digested in Balneo Roris, they seperate the Oyle from the water they power out the water with the reliques againe and repeate the distillation.
4. But the hotter, and Aromatick Herbs, and those whose strength doe not so easily vanish and lyes deeper, are not so conveniently distilled by Balneum Mariae, but in vesica, but in this distillation by a vessell of water, some diversity also is observed, for some bruise the herbs, or cut them in∣to smal peices, and fill the fourth part of the Vesica besides for them, then they poure of the pure water that three parts of the Vesica may be filled therewith, and one quarter for the most part remaines empty, and a Refrigeratory vessell, being applyed and the worme also (if you desire meerely a spirituous water) or with an Alembick with a Refrigitory, and their conjunctions or joynts shut, and a convenient fire being kindled and placed under the Vesica they distill wa∣ter gently and by drops. 5. Others having powred in hot water into a vessell close shut, first they bruise the herbs, twenty foure hours for the most part, they think it most profitable if the herbs are not only macerated in warme water a day and night space, but being bruised, or beaten, they should stand in digestion, and putrifaction in Horse dung, or Balneo Roris, or Mariae, for ten or fourteen dayes, afterwards they should be distil∣led. That water which first drops out is the best: but that which comes out last is like water it selfe; distilled water, if it be convenient, may be poured off, with new herbs to be digested, and distilled againe. 6. But since that water and spirit ascend together, they must be seperated, which is most conveniently done by the Balneum, namely all the water is to be powred into a crook∣ed glasse or Violl, and by a gentle heat only the spirituous part is to be distilled, by which distillation if the heat be rightly governed, the separation happily may be made at once, yet if it shall not so happen the first time, the distilla∣tion is to be repeated, and that rectification which was first made by a Gourd, afterwards rectification is appointed by a Phyoll. Examples may be seene in the Institutions. CHAP. VI. Of Oyles. FOr the most part it comes to passe that with the water in distillation of hot herbs, Oyles. and Aromatick seeds, Oyle
comes forth together, which is to be seperated from the water; but this is performed first by a kind of tunnell which they call a Separater or Tritorium, afterwards through a filter or a course woollen cloath, thirdly through browne paper: the Precepts of which operations are to be sought out of the Institutions. Yet certaine Oyles are distilled also without waters; so Oyles are drawn by distillation from Amber, Mastick, Frankinsense; Of which in the Institutions. CHAP VII Of Syrups and Juleps. SYrups, and Seraps, The name of Syrups. derive their names from the Ara∣bicks, and therefore are not to be written with ay, which the Arabicks want, and 'tis drawne from the roote Schareba, which signifies to sup, and therefore it signifies a Liquor to be Supt; Syrups therefore are fluid medi∣cines prepared of a convenient Liquor, whether it be boy∣led, or infused, or a juice made up with Sugar or Honey, and boyled for the most part to the consistence of Honey: Syrups are invented both for delight to the taste, and for durability, that convenient medicines may be in a readi∣nesse at any time of the yeare. Some of them are simple, Differen∣ces. which are made of one simple medicine only, and with Sugar, or Honey; compound which are prepared of more; both kindes are appointed for severall uses, of them are some altering and strengthning, others purging, and the liquour is taken from decoctions, infusions, clarified juices and Vinegar. This is the manner of preparing, Manner of preparing Syrups. First the decoctions art taken; to the Decoctions are added Sugar or Honey, according as the use and scope of the Medicine requires; namely, two pounds of Sugar or Honey to a pound, or a pound and halfe of the decoction, as it is desired to be thicker or thinner, and ought to be kept more or lesse time: Then afterwards it is to be clarified by adding of the white of an Egge, that the decoction by a gentle Fire may seeth to the consistence of a Syrup: If Honey be added, it ought to bee boyled lesse, because being cooled it easily becomes thick. Syrups also, like an con∣coctions, may be made with Aromaticks, or Aromaticke Powders.
2. Seconldy, they are prepared of clarifyed Juices, to which is added half the quantity of Sugar, and boiled to the consistence of a Syrup. 3. These Syrups are better if fresh flowers are infused 24. hours in the expressed juice in Bal. Mariae, and are again ex∣pressed, and that repeated as often as it is fit. Then the juice is to be clarified by digestion, and half the quantity of Sugar to be mixt with it. 4. Others boil the juice till half be consumed, then they strain it, and suffer the decoction to stand and settle, that the juice may be the purer, the which when Sugar is added, they settle to the consistence of the Syrup. 5. Sometimes the juice pressed out is poured into hot cla∣rifyed Sugar, and exposed to the heat of the Sun, to con∣sume its aqueous humidity. But, if the heat of the Sun be not sufficient, it may be performed by gentle boiling. 6. Syrups are also made of Infusions, Sugar being added in the same manner as of Decoctions. 7. And sometimes other things are infused in juices, and afterwards when 'tis strained, Sugar is put to it, and the Sy∣rup is made according to art. 8. Syrups may be made of extracts also, if a little Sugar be added to the extract being thickned by abstraction of the Menstruum. 9. Syrups may also be made of soft Electuaries, if the Electuary be dissolved in six times or eight times the quanti∣ny of warm liquour, and strained, and half so much Sugar added thereto, by a gentle heat without boiling, the liquour should evaporate to the consumption of the third part. 10. Also Syrup is prepared of Sugar and Vineger onely, namely four pound of Sugar, and two of Vineger, and ac∣cording to some five Pints of water, and 'tis called Syrup of Vineger simple. 11. Moreover, Syrrups are made much more artificially, especially of hot and dry Plants, if onely so much water is poured off as that so much of the liquour may be left after straining without concoction, as otherwise useth to be left after concoction is made, and the matter infused on this manner in a Glass or other convenient vessel, such as Fire-vessels,
or earthen vessels, whose orifices may be fitted with a cover made for it, that is round and channelled, which should be put into the Balneum, three or four days to digest, and afterwards should be strained, and that which is strained should again be put alone in Balneo, or because of straightness of time, it should be clarifyed with the white of an Egg, what ever is feculent in it. Afterwards Sugar should be taken and clarifyed, and boiled to such a consistence, as is observed in the Confection of Penides, and it should be mingled with the clarifyed infusion. The nearest to this is Oxymel, Oxymel. which is to be had in the Shops, which is prepared of one part of Water, one of Vineger, and two parts of Honey, whereof divers composi∣tions may be made also. Syrups are seldom given alone in Diseases of the Breast and Stomack; The man∣ner of ad∣ministra∣tion. but oftentimes are mixt with double the quantity of distilled waters, or decoctions; and an Ounce or an Ounce and an half of Syrups may be drank with two or three Ounces of Water or Decoction at one time. To Syrups and Juleps belong Rosated water, A Potion of Roses and wa∣ter. which is a Potion compounded of Roses, and Water, and Honey or Sugar: Oribacius put into sixty Pints of warm water, ten pound of Rose-leafs, he shut the Vessel till they were perfectly boiled, afterwards the Roses being taken out, he infused of boiled and clarifyed Honey thirty pound, and put it into a Cellar. Actuarius took ten Pints of water, and five pound of Sugar and boiled them together to a conve∣nient thickness, afterwards he infused a pound of the juice of Roses. The likest to Syrups are Juleps and Zulaps, Juleps. as they are called, from the Arabick word Sialaba, which is to heal or make sound, without doubt it is derived from thence, so that indeed Physicians often times take them for the same Medicine, and Potions that are mixt of Water and Syrups called Juleps, but the name of Juleb is often extended farther now than with the Arabians, who invented this Medicine to be made; for the name of Juleb was absolutely given by them, when Sugar onely is dissolved in Rose-water, and boiled, as Julep of Roses is, otherwise called Alexander's Julep.
But a Julep, if there be any difference betwixt it and a Syrup, is a Medicine clearer than a Syrup, and therefore more delicate and gratefull, and it is made of distilled wa∣ters, clarified Juices and Sugar. They are made with, The man∣ner of pre∣paring of Juleps. and without boiling; without boil∣ing on this manner, Common or distilled water is taken, or a decoction of Barley, to the which some Juice also of Citrons, Limmons, Pomegranates, Quinces, or Vineger may be added, and white and clarified Sugar is poured in, or instead thereof common Juleps of Roses and Violets, which being boiled to the cosistence of a Syrup, are kept for use, and are diligently mixt together, and if there be need, are drained through Hippocrates's sleeve. But the proportion of Sugar, or usual Juleps, which is observed to the waters and juices is various, as the present occasion re∣quires it. For the most part the Palate of the sick is their guide, and sometimes the proportion of water and Juices to Syrups and Sugar is threefold, sometimes fourfold, six∣fold, eightfold, or twelvefold. Sometimes Juleps are made with Aromatick Powders, or convenient little Tabulets are dissolved in them. 'Tis most convenient also in some Diseases to add Spirit of Vitriol. 2. Moreover, Juleps are prepared of Conserves and me∣dicinal Juices, if distilled waters that are proper, or a Deco∣ction of Barley be poured into them in a sufficient quantity, and are stirred with a Pestle in a Morter, or are mingled to∣gether over a gentle fire, and strained. 3. But those Juleps which are said to be prepared with decoction, are nothing else but the pure and finer decocti∣ons of Syrups, and the same manner of preparing of them which is of decoctions and Syrups, onely that they are re∣moved from the fire before they receive a thicker consistence. CHAP. VIII. Of Emulsions and other Mixtures, bringing or causing milk, and of strengthning things. AN Emulsion is so called, Emulsion. because it is like Milk, and is prepared as it were by milking; for 'tis a potulent Me∣dicine prepared of the pith and strength of seeds and certain
fruits, especially of sweet Almonds (Which Emulsion in particular by some is called Amgydalatum) by the affusion of convenient waters, or of some other liquour, and by pounding and pressing of them, to which the Pulpe of a Capon or Pullet may also be added, if you have a desire to nourish. They are prepared for severall purposes or uses, The use. accor∣ding to the variety of the matter, namely, to quench thirst, to cause sleep, to provoke sweats, and other things; and sometimes externally in stead of Epythems, and may be exhibited for the heat of the braine, and to mitigate paine, and cause sleep. They are prepared in this manner, Manner of preparing. Sweet Almonds are blanched, so are the foure great cold Seeds, and other things, the Kernels also are beaten in a stone or marble Morter, pouring in by degrees some fountaine water, or of Roses and other convenient distilled waters, or clarifyed with a convenient decoction that is pleasant to the taste: The proportion of the liquour is uncertaine, sometimes more, sometimes lesse, according to the strength of the seeds and fruits, and according as the Emulsion is required to be thicker or thinner: But at the least a threefold, often∣times a six-fold, eight-fold, ten-fold, &c. quantity of the liquour is required; being beaten they are strained, and if convenient, Syrups or Julips that are proper, as of Vio∣lets or Roses are added: The Emulsion being made some∣times it is to be sweetned with Sugar, or Rowles of Dia∣marg. frig. manus Christi perlati, or the Juleps lately men∣tioned: Sometimes there may be added some Cinamon water, if the disease will suffer it; and sometimes conserves, Comfits, and liquid Electuaries may be added, from halfe a drachm to a drachm, two drachms or more. Pearles also, Corall, Harts horne burnt, and other pow∣ders and Spices, may be added to Emulsions. Sometimes potulent Medicines may be made of Pearles onely, Corall, Harts horne, and such like, with convenient waters, which also by reason of the colour of Milke, which they have, are called Emulsions, and are very frequent, with moderne Physitians. Oftentimes Juices also that are drawne out by expres∣sion, as of Pomegranates, Lemmons, or other liquours also are mixt with those waters (yet so that the distilled waters for the most part exceed the rest in quantity) sometimes,
but seldome, some convenient Syrup. But because Physitians for the most part desire a white colour in this water, for the most part they omit all those things that may discolour it. CHAP. IX. Of Tinctures, and Extracts, and liquid dissolutions. AN Extract is nothing else but the pure essence of a thing separated from its grosser body by a fit menstruum (whence they are also called Essences by many) which whilst it is as yet in a more liquid substance, An Ex∣tract. and joyned with the menstruum, it hath also the colour of the thing, and therefore is called a Tincture; alth ough sometimes they are called Tinctures also, when the essence of a thing is now separated from its menstruum which extracted it. Essences or Tinctures that are liquid, Essences. are prepared ei∣ther of green Plants, or of Juices: when they are prepa∣red of green things, the Hearbs are bruised, and a little spirit of Wine is put in for the preservation of them, and the juice is pressed out, which being cleansed is called an Essence. Those that are properly called Extracts are prepared of dryed Plants, from whence if the whole menstruum be not separated it is called a Tincture, or liquid extract: But menstruums, that is, Liquours exhibited for the drawing out of the essence of a thing are various, according to the diversity of the matter, and use; they of spirit of Wine, distilled Waters, Whey, Vinegar, and such like, are ex∣hibited. In choosing a menstruam, first you are to consider whe∣ther you desire a liquid tincture, or an extract, or a thicker or grosser body: For if a liquid tincture be desired, a men∣struum is to be taken, which is of the same kind and facul∣ty: But if the menstruum ought to be separated, it is no matter, although it be of another kinde then the Tincture is of. But since it is required in a menstruum that by the subtility of its substance it may penetrate the matter, and by its fa∣miliarity intice out the purer parts, and without spoyling and corrupting of the Extract it selfe, may againe be sepa∣rated
from it: Spirit of Wine may easily be esteemed the best amongst them, and take the first place; but May-dew, distilled Vineger, Spirit of Salt, of Turpentine, &c. are used also according as some present occasion may require. If compound Extracts are prepared, The man∣ner of pre∣paring Ex∣tracts. and the simples be of divers natures, each of them severally, or those which are nearest one to the other, are drawn off by their Menstruum, and afterwards the Extracts are mingled. The way of preparing Extracts is plain of it self, namely, the Menstruum is poured into the matter, that is beaten and poudred, which sometimes by the help of an external heat, when the essence of a thing is drawn out, and the Menstru∣um coloured enough, 'tis poured out, and another is put in, and that so often repeated, till all the strength and virtue is extracted; afterwards the Menstruum is separated by heat, which if it be not separated whole, 'tis called a Tincture or liquid Extract; but if almost whole, and of the consistence of Honey, 'tis called a simple extract; examples may be seen in the Institutions. Nor are such Extracts as well liquid as thicker prepared simply alone, but also compounded: to these belong Eixir, of propriety, purging Extracts, and universal purgers, Lau∣danum opiated. To Extracts belong those Rosins also which are prepared of Scammony, Mechoacam, Jalep, and such like, containing in them a kinde of gummy substance. Of Tinctures, of Gemms, Coralls, Metalls, as of Balsum of Venus, may be seen in the Institutions. CHAP. X. Of Conserves, Preserves, and medicinal Juices. THe name of Conserve is given principally to Flowers, The man∣ner of ma∣king Con∣serves. and sometimes to Herbs, and certain soft and tender Roots, which being made up with Sugar are kept many years: they are prepared in this manner, the Flowers or Herbs newly picked or cleansed, and (if they abound with too much humidity) first a little dried in the shade, let them be mingled and brayed in a stone-morter, with a woodden Pestle, with twice or thrice the quantity of Sugar, and after∣wards
the mixture is to be put up in a Glass or glased vessel. If the Plants are moister, 'tis profitable to heat the Con∣serves when they are made, by a gentle Fire. 2. Others take a Glass, and cover the bottom of it with Sugar, then they put in the Flowers to be condited, the depth of three Fingers breadth, and then they put in Sugar again, and in this manner heap upon a heap, and the Glass close shut they expose it to the Sun some certain weeks. 3. Sometimes the Roots are boiled untill they can be pounded, or without boiling, are washed and cleansed, and are beaten very small, to them so pounded, or to the De∣coction strained through a Hair-sieve, the Sugar is added as it use to be for Syrups. The name of Condite although it may be taken for a compound medicine also, Things condited. as well as for a simple Plant mixt onely with Honey or Sugar, so that Conserves also may be comprehended under the notion of Condites, yet in particu∣lar the name of Condite here, is given onely to medicines which are not pounded, but whole for the most part, Pre∣served with Sugar or Honey, both that they may be kept longer, and rendred more gratefull to the taste. Fruits in the first place are preserved, Manner of Prese ving Roots, Barks, Stalks, and some Flowers, as of Citrons or Lemmons, and Oranges: this is the Preparation, the softer Fruits, as Cherries, Black-berries, Barberies, Apritocks, Peaches, Pears, Moshcattellina, and the like, which are soft, being put into Sugar or Honey, that is hot, they are boiled, untill the humidity of the Fruits  consumed and the Sugar or Honey receive their former consistence; or if there be danger lest being boiled they should decay and lose their colour, the Su∣gar onely being hot, they are poured out, and when the Su∣gar hath drawn their aqueous humidity, the Sugar alone is again to be boiled, till that aqueous moisture is consumed, and afterwards to be poured out again to the Fruits, to be preserved: but those which are more solid should first be bruised in Water, or boiled, untill the bitterness and un∣gratefull taste be drawn out, and they become softer; yet you must observe that whilest we do strive to please the Pa∣lae, we must not lose the strength of the Preserve by too much maccration or boiling; afterwards we dissolve and clarifie the Sugar, either in fair water, or in the water where the Medicine is macerated, unless it hath an ill taste, we pour out the clarified Sugar upon the Fruits or Roots, and
then we seethe them again, untill the aqueous humidity which remains be consumed. Lastly, being so prepared, they are kept in a Glass or carthen Vessel covered with a round woodden Cover, and clean stones being put upon the Lid, the Lid is deprest so as that it covers the Liquour. Next to these are thickned juices, Thickned juiees. and such as are fit for medicinal uses, which the Arabicks call Rob: They are pre∣pared for the most part of the juices of Fruits, sometimes of Flowers also, that they may be usefull in the Winter, when we want fresh Herbs and Fruits; and in this manner they are prepared, the juice being drawn out is boiled over a gentle Fire to the consumption of half, or the third part, then whilest as it is yet hot, the thickest is strained: that which is strained is permitted to be clarified by settling in the bottome, or it is clarified with the white of an Egg; that which is clear is boiled again, untill it acquire its due consistence. But because the juices of themselves will not easily keep, unless they are boiled to a thicker consistence and all the watriness be taken away, for the most part less than half so much of Sugar or Honey, or a little quantity of one of them is added. Those purest, clearest, finest juices, Gelatinae. like icicles in frosty weather, as they call them, being poured out use to be kept, which commonly are called Gelatinae, or frozen juices, and they are prepared principally of juices that are made with∣out expression, the purer and more delicate juice of Quinces, Apples, Pears, Goosberries, (or Currans.) That composition called Diacydonium, Diacydoni∣um. which use to be prepared for the most part in the form of a solid Paste, unless you would rather refer it to the Electuaries. And Purgers may be mingled with those Juices, and of them pleasant Medicines are made for infants and more de∣licate Persons. CHAP. XI. Of Electuaries. THe name of an Electuary, although it be severally used by several, An Electu∣ary what. yet we think that it is to be attributed to Medicines, which are reduced with Honey, or Syrup, or plain
sugar, or some other convenient thing, being used to a thick∣er consistence then a syrrup, and not o fluid, yet somewhat moist, this word is derived, or rather corrupted from the word in Greek Elleickton, or Elleickton, by which name they call a Medicine which may be taken as it were by licking, by some they are improperly called Opiats, Whence so called Opi∣ats. not because they have Opium in them, but because they are of the like con∣sistence, with those Medecines of the Ancients which had Opium in them, such as Treakle, and from hence they are called Opiats. Electuaries may be for severall uses, according to the na∣ture of the simples whereof they are compounded, for some are to alter, and strengthen, others against poysons, which because for the most part they have opium in them, they are called Opiats, as Treakle, Mithridate, Aurea Alexandrina, o∣thers are fit to purge, which are called Catharticks. Difference of Electu∣aries. Electuaries are twofold, the preparation of the former is thus, Aromaticks, and other simples being beaten into a fine powder. In the first place clarified honey is put into it, or sugar, or some convenient waters, or syrups, or proper de∣coctions of proper simples in faire water, or a sufficient quantity of another liquor, or infusions, or juyces prest out of other Medecines strained and boyled with clarifyed sugar, or honey, to the consistence of a syrup, or of many of these together, whilest they are as yet warme by the fire. A third part is sprinkled in by little and little, which may con∣veniently be done through a Sieve, and is to be stirred a∣bout with a woodden Pestle in a Morter, and should be exact∣ly mingled and kept in a convenient Vessell. The other manner is thus, Conserves they are convenient for your present purpose, to which are added powders, and Aromatick Species, Troches, Conserves also, and medi∣cionall juyces, or Robs must be exactly mixt together in a Morter, with a sufficient quantity of dissolved sugar, or a convenient syrup, or honey: But the proportion betwixt the Conserves and Powders, and Species are not so exact, as some do determine, but severall times they may be three fold, foure fold, six fold, eight fold, twelve fold: For a sufficient quantity of a convenient syrup being poured in, whatsoever the proportion be betwixt it and the Powders, they may be all reduced easily into the consistence of an Electuary, which is also to be held of Conserves. Sometimes also spirit of
Roses, of Salt, of Vitrioll, distilled waters compounded, or of distilled Oyles, some drops are to be put in. And these kinds of Electuaries were called by some Condites, as is said before, tis so called by some from the mixture. Mixture. Purging E∣lectuaries for the most part are so made. There is another manner like to this: Fruits, seeds, or roots are put in, or are boiled in wine or water, to the frm of a Poultice. Afterwards they are strained through a haire Sieve, sugar, or clarified honey is added, or Syrups, or Man∣na, and if it be needfull are boiled to the consistence of ho∣ney, sometimes the Species, and Powders also. Spirits also of Vitrioll, and Salt, and distilled Oyles. Of Raysins and Pruants that are laxative, you may see the Institutions. CHAP. XII. Of Eclegmaes, and Lohochs. EClegmaes, or Eclectaes, from the Greek word Ecleio, Eclegma. that is to take up with ones tongue, or lick of, the Ara∣bicks called Lohoch, or Linctns, Lohoch. and things that are to be licked, as they are commonly called, are like unto Electua∣ries, nor do they differ from Electuaries, only in that they are of a moister consistence, and as it were the middle betwixt Syrups and Electuaries, and are appointed peculiarly for di∣vers diseases of the Breast and Lungs. Species and Powders, Conserves, thickned juices, Honey, Manner of preparing. Sugar, Extracts, Muscellages, Syrups, Juleps, Oxymell, di∣stilled Oyles, the manner of preparing is the same also with that of Electuaries. The Powders are taken, which are most convenient, Gums of Arabick, Tragacanth, Juice of Liquo∣rish, Rice, and all things are incorporated in a sufficient quantity of honey, or Syrups, or Juleps, or Muscellages, or Juices, or Insusions, or of some decoction for this purpose, prepared of roots, herbes, seeds, fruits, But principally of Muscellages, and visoid things being strained and expressed and boiled with honey, or sugar, to the consistence of a sy∣rup, or any one, or more of these, and all of them are to be wrought so long in a Morter with a woodden Pestle, untill they are exactly mingled, and come to be of the consistence of honey, or rather the middle betwixt Honey and Electuaries. Eclegmaes may be prepared without the addition of Pow∣ders, and Species, if a juice, or Muscellage be boiled with honey, or sugar, to the consistence of an Eclegma.
3. Eclegmaes also may be made according to that manner which is explained last of all amongst the Electuaries, so that if it ought to be licked, the consistence ought to be the moister. 4. And such things are often administred alone to be supt up by the sick, or else they are prepared of them other things being mixt, a new Eclegma is made for the present occasion; for you may take as much as you please of the usuall Eclegma; Conserves also are added, and conve∣nient Powders, Sugar, and an Eclegma may be reduced into the forme of a Syrup, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup, or Juleps or clarified Honey, or Sugar dissolved; To which sometimes some drops of distilled Oyles are ad∣ded. 5. Sometimes an Eclegma is prepared of Syrups alone, Sugar-canded, or Penedies being added. Hereunto belong medicines which by some are called Saponea, Saponea. from the similitude of white Soape not yet made hard, by others tis called Linctus, from a Liniment made of Almonds. Sweete Almonds are taken being blanched, and are pounded; to those that are pounded, clarified Su∣gar, or Penedies, or Sugar-Candy is added; being first dissolved in a convenient Liquor, they are boyled to the consistence of Honey; a little before they have done boy∣ling a pound of Rice is added, to wit, unto two ounces of Sugar, an ounce of Rice, and another of Almonds, and a sufficient quantity of Rose water, and a little before it be ended some Ginger also, or Aromatick may be added. Others draw a milke out of Almonds with Rose water, or some other convenient Liquor, with some portion of milke; Sugar is dissolved, the Rice is rast in afterwards, and the other part also of the mulsion being poured in they are stir∣red with a gentle fire. The composition which is called Leucophagum, Leucopha∣gum. is so named from its colour, and therefore may be referred to this, or the precedent head; tis prepared of swee Almonds macerated in Rose water, and the flesh of a Capon, or Pa∣tridge boyled with it, being very much wrought in a Mar∣ble Morter, and strained through a haire seive, with a lit∣tle of the beaten blanched Almonds, and Sugar, boyled to a due consistence, to which according to the severall aimes of the Physitians, Aromaticks, Corralls, and other things may be added.
CHAP XIII. Of Boles. A Bolus hath that name because it is a gobbet of Physick in a round figure, A Bole. allmost as much as ones mouth will hold, whence it is calied Buccilla; but the name of Bolus agrees not only to purging, but altering Physick. Purging Boles are thus prepared: The way to prepare purging Boles. purging Electuaries are taken, and a convenient quantity of Sugar being ad∣ded, they are made up in the forme of a Pyramid, not much unlike an Olive, lest they should be loathsome, they ought not to be made of Electuaries that are ungratefull, and for that reason Hiera is scarce ever given in Boles; the quan∣tity ought not to exceed an ounce. 2. Sometimes some of the Powders or speties are ad∣ded. 3. You may add conserves. 4 Or instead of Sugar Conserves either alone, or with a little Sugar may be used. 5. Instead of Sugar, or sometimes with Sugar, especi∣ally in diseases of the reines, Licorish-Powder; or some o∣ther may be added, so may Turpentine also. 6 Moreover in the stead of purging Electuaries, Powders of simples that purge use to be taken, wherein something also which alters, or corrects the violence of purgers, or that give a pleasant mell or taste to them; or else they may be added for some other cause, or species of purging Confections, or Extracts purging, both simple and compound, which are taken and incorporated with the pulpe of Cassia, the pulpe of Tramarines, or Pruants, or some Conserve or Rob, or some convenient Syrup, and with a sufficient quantity of Sugar are made into the forme of a Bolus. 7. Sometimes distilled Oyles are ming lediwith a Bolus to corroborate, namely of Anniseed, Mace, Cinamon, Cloves, some few drops, and sometimes the Bolus is covered with Gould.
Boles to cause vomiting, Vomiting boles. and they are prepared after th same manner, and are made of some Emettick powder, sim ple, or compound, to which sometimes is added some of the things that alter or correct, some certaine grains, or some E∣mittick extract, with a conserve or some confection of the like consistence, and with syrups. Boles also may be exhibited for other uses, Altering. to alter, stengthen, and provoke sleep; but the composition differs not from the former. CHAP. XIV. Of Powders, and Trageis, or Comfits. BUt as for the formes of dry Medecines, Powders, and Tra∣geis. Powders, are the plainest way of compounding amongst them, com∣monly called Trageas, without doubt corruptly derived from the word Tragema, which consists of one, or more Medecines compounded, if the tast be ungratefull, an equall part of su∣gar, or half so much sugar is to be added. But Powders are either thin, and subtile, which if they con∣fist of pure Aromaticks, and Sugar, they are wont to be cal∣led generally Tragemats, or Trageae, or else more thick, and not so subtile; nay sometimes Aromaticks are not pulverised, but onely cut asunder, and seeds hardned with sugar, or candied, called Comfits, are added to them, and Species that are cut, are also called grosse Trageaes. They are used for severall purposes, according to the vari∣ous nature of the simples whereof they are composed, some of them resist poyson, others purge the belly, others by vomit. To those that purge, simples which have in them a faculty of purging are taken, and correcters are added, sometimes al∣so a grain of distilled Oyles is mixt with a drachm of Pow∣der,
CHAP. XV. Of Salts. ALl things almost containe two kinds of Salts, Salt two∣sold. the one volatile, which endures not the fire and heat, but flies away and is dispersed, and vanisheth by burning, the other is fixed, which endures the fire, and is left in the ashes. Volatile Salt is collected in distillations, so of stale Urine, Volatile Salt. Salt distilled by an Alimbeck in the first place, and by a Phiola or the bottome of a Glasse-Still; in the second place Volatile salt of Urine is collected, the same may be drawne out of other things. In the juices of Plants also, salt some∣times coagulates to the thicknesse of boiled honey, Fixed. in a cold place. But fixed salt is prepared of the ashes of plants and woods, whilest a Lye is prepared out of them, and that is boi∣led till all the water exhals, for then the salt is left behind, which is purifyed first by often dissolving, and coagulating. Secondly, If it be dissolved into a liquor by drayning in a moist place, tis filtered, and afterward coagulated. Cream, &c. Of Tartar. Hereunto belongs the cream, or thick juice, and Christall of Vitrioll, and of Tartar, which are nothing else but salt of Tartar separated from the dregs that were mixt. Magisters. Also Tartar vitriolated, salt of Tartar. To these belong Magisters, or dissolvings of Pearle, Corall, Crabs clawes, precious stones, Saccharum Saturni, which takes place so far, if salt that is vo∣lantile, of the menstruum that dissolves doth as yet stick in them: For then according to the manner of salts they are dissolved in waters and other liquors; but if they are preci∣pitated by oyle of Tartar, or Vitrioll, and the salt that dis∣solves be separated from them, they rather belong to pow∣ders. CHAP. XVI. Of Croces. TO powders and salts we may well joyne those things which the Chymists call Crocos, stours, sublimates, Croci what. pre∣cipitates: The name of Crocos is given to some Medecines from the colour of Saffron, for Croci are nothing else but fine powders, or tinctures reduced into the forme of a powder of Saffron-colour: But principally they are called Crocos of Mettals, and Crocos of Mars.
Crocus mettalorum is nothing else but Antimony burnt with nitre, Crocus mettalo∣rum. and reduced into powder of Saffron colour, next to this is that of Venus of Antimony Gouden as it is called. Of which the Institutions may be seene. Crocus of Mars is prepared severall wayes, which may also be seen in the Institutions. To these we may well referr that which is called earth of vitrioll, whose preparation is taught in the Institutions. CHAP. XVII. Flowres. Of flours and Sublimates. THose are called Flours by the Chymists, fo the most part, which are the thinner, and more subtill parts of a body, seperated from the thicker by sublimation, the most common flours are of Copper and of Antimony, as also Benzoes; the reason of preparing whereof is to be had in the Institutions. Hereunto belong the other Sublimates, amongst which the cheife is Mercury Sublimate simple, and Mercury Subli∣mate sweete. CHAP. XVIII. Of Precipitates. Of precipi∣tates. ALthough those things in generall are rightly said to be precipitated, which are dissolved in some Liquor by a peculiar Art, and seperated from the Liquor, deseend to the bottome in the forme of a Powder or like Chaulk, yet the name of precipitating principally belongs to Mercury, which after it is dissolved in Aqua Forci, and is seperated from the water that dissolves it, and lettles in the bottome, 'tis called Mercury precipitated. Turbith. The name also of Tubith, or Turpeth, is in use amongst most Chymists, Mercury precipitate Gold of life. Bezoarti∣cum Mi∣nerale Mercurius Vitae. which from whence soever it had its origi∣nall, it signifies nothing but Mercury precipitated. The way of precipitating Mercury is shewne in the Insti∣stitutions: to which if any Gold be added, tis called Gold of life; of which in the Institutions. To these belong also Bezoarticum Minerale, as it is cal∣led: tis there also described, a also Mercury of life and some others.
CHAP. XIX. Of Glasses, Regalls and certain Chymicall Powders. THose chymicall Medecines which remaine, Glasses, Regulus-chaulks, and certain Powders, we will annex in this Chapter. First, Glasse is prepared from the chaulks of things; Glasse. and vi∣trification, for the most part, is the last resolution of things: for Ashes, or Chaulk is to be poured into a very strong fire, and sometimes Borax is added to ripen the fusion, or other fusill Powders, but fufill matter is poured into a Basin made hot, or upon some table. Glasse of Antimony is predared in this manner; Of Anti∣mony and Mercury. also Am∣ber of Antimony, or as others would have it, of Mercury. Purging cups may be made of these Glasses, also Rings, Mo∣ney: If glasse of Jupiter, or glasses, or Amber of Antimony, Rings pur∣ging, Regu∣lus of An∣timony. Antimony, Diaphore∣tick. Lac Veneris. if they are set into the bottome of a cup, or into a Ring, or any Coyne: Of Glasse of Antimony golden; see the institu∣tions, as also of Regulus of Antimony. Moreover, the next to these are chymicall Powders and Chaulks; as for them, the first that is referred to them, is called Antimony fixt, or Diaphoretick, which is made if An∣timony be burnt so often with Nitre, till it become white and fixt. Milk of Venus, how tis prepared, the Institutions shew. To these belong Dreggs, or Faeculae, Faeculae. as they are called by later Chymists, which are certaine Farinaceus Powders prepared of the juice of certaine roots beaten, or expressed or extracted by some liquor, namely, if a juice, or liquor be put into a cold place, the Faeces of their owne accord settle in the bottome, which when the moisture is poured off, are dryed and kept; the chiefest that are in use are the Fces of Briony, Wake Robin, Piony, and Orrice, as also of Dra∣gon. CHAP. XX. Of Comfits, little round Cakes, and Morsells, and such like. THat the palate and taste may first be pleased, certaine Medecines are found out by Physitians, preserved with suger, and are made up into a dry body: Amongst which the
first are those which are called Comfits, as we may speake in the manner of an Apothecary, with whom, Comfits are nothing else but Conserves dryed, Seeds, Kernells, skind or blanched Roots, and Pills or Rindes. Purging confections also are prepared, Of purging Comsits. and that two wayes, first if the Sugar be poured in before it be cooled, the purging things are mingled, and stird about together that they may stick to the Sugar; Secondly, which is more con∣venient, if the seeds, or Rindes, are macerated in a purging infusion, untill they swell, and then being gently dryed are hardned with Sugar. Morcover, The man∣ner of pre∣paring lit∣tle Cakes. there are little Cakes which are prepared in this manner, take of the powders or species of medicines, of Sugar, either plaine white, or of Roses or Violets, six times so much, sometimes eight-fold, to which simple or compound Manus Christi pearled, may be mingled, or ad∣ed; in purging Rolles, also double, treble, or a four-fold, quantity is dissolved, according to the taste of the purgers, which is dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Fountaine wa∣ter, or of some convenient distilled water, or juice, seldome of a decoction, or infusion; to this Sugar, Powders, and Species, are throwne in by degrees, and stirring are ex∣actly mingled together: and are powred out by drops upon marble stone, or on a Cypresse or other table of wood, that being cooled they may concreate in round Cakes and Rolles. Sometimes instead of Powders, Oyles or extracts are taken, and of altering extracts, five, six, seven, eight, nine, or ten graines are taken, for an ounce of Sugar, so of dist∣illed Oyles three, foure, five, or six dreps, for an ounce of Sugar, sometimes Powders, Extracts, and Oyles are taken together. Manus Christi purging are made two wayes, Purging Manus Christi. for either to every pound of Sugar, an ounce of Rosin of Scammony prepared is taken, and so 'its made up in the forme of a Ta∣bulet, or the faeces of Mechoacam instead of Rosin may be mingled in a three or foure-fold quantity of Sugar. There is the same way for the most part of preparing mor∣sells, Morsells. only that medicines for the most part, in morsells are nor beaten so fine, but in a grosser manner: to which others may be added which are not made easily into Rowles, or at least in a lesse quantity, as Fruits, and seeds, namely Al∣monds, Pine-nots, Pistack-nuts, seeds of Melons, Citrons,
(or Pompions) Conserves, Preserves; the proportion is to be observed betwixt them which is most agreeable to the intention of the Physitian: and all of them as tis said of Rowles in a sufficient quantity, that is for the most part six or eight-fold, sometimes also ten or twelve-fold; but in purgers a three or four-fold quantity of Sugar dissolved in a convenient Liquor is taken. 2. Sometimes Fruits themselves are not taken in their substance, but an Emulsion is made of them with conveni∣et waters wherein the Sugar is dissolved. 3. Befides these Extracts, and distilled Oyles may be mingied in the same manner as Rowles. 4. Sometimes instead of Sugar, Manne may be used in pur∣ging things. When all things have been exactly mingled over the fire before they are cooled, the whole masse is laid on a marble stone, or Cypresse Table, and is dilated, and folded, or is powred into a woodden Box made for this purpose, and are cut into Tables that are foure-square, or into what shape you please. 5. When the Tables or Morsells are prepared they may be moistned with distilled Oyles, or with muske and Am∣ber distolved in Rose-water, namely when we feare least the strength of them in boyling should flye into the aire. 6. Purging morsells may be made after another manner a due quantity of the purging extracts are taken, or some of the purging Powders are joyned with them, to these are ad∣ded Aromatick powders, or Aromatick Extracts, and with Manna or Sugar little Cakes are made, the proportion of Sugar is double, or treble to that of the Extract, and the proportion of Manna is the same, but these Cakes are not made of Fruits and seeds alone, but sometimes, the flesh of Capons or Partridges, or Cockes-stones are joyned with them, namely when we intend to nourish, and especially in those which can eate no meate, whence such morsells, are called nourishers, or nutritives. Nourishing Morsells. Pandalae∣um. To these may be added the medicine, which junior Phy∣sitians call Pandalaeum, which in matter and in the end (for which is used) agrees with an Eclegm, and is ap∣pointed for diseases of the breasts and lungs, but in forme it differs not from Rowles, Tables or morsells only in that Rowles and Tables are framed into a certaine figure either round, or square, but Pandalaeum, remaines
without being formed, and Pouders are permitted to con∣dense with Sugar in a Box in that which is called Pandalaeon, and when it is used a Lump of it is cut with a Knife, or taken up with a Spoon, and held in the mouth till it be con∣fumed. Moreover, Diamygda∣atum. to this rank pertain several Comfits which are principally prepared to restore health, and from the Basis they are commonly named, such are Diamygdulatum or Marchpane, Diatestudinatum, a composition whereof Snails is the Basis, Pineatum where Kernels of Pine-nuts are the Ba∣sis, and Sugar-bread. Marchpane is compounded of sweet Almonds wrought with Sugar and Rose-water well mingled and boiled ac∣cording to art; but for Physical use, Fruits, Seeds, and Aro∣matick Conserves are added. Testudinatum is made almost in the same manner, Snails being onely added. As Pineatum also of Kernels of Pine-nuts mixt with Sugar in the same manner. Sugar-bread is made of the whitest Flour, Sugar and Eggs being added, and sometimes mixt with other Medi∣cines, and boiled in a Pot, or Furnace; of which see the In∣stitutions. CHAP. XXI. Of Trochees. TRochees, that is, Rolls and Cycliscoi & Artiscoi in Greek, that is, Trochees. Pills or little round Balls are solid Medicines, cohering and consisting of convenient things, taken in a Li∣quour made commonly in the form of Lupine-seeds, their circumference sometimes round, sometimes with a corner, both of them smooth without-side, invented principally for that end, that Medicines reduced into Pouder may be kept the safer in this solid figure from the injuries of the air. There are a sort of Trochees amongst the universal Medi∣cines, The way of preparing them. and such as are for all uses almost, and may be exhi∣bited according to the nature of the Medicines whereof they are compounded, and afford convenient matter for
many other compositions, for some purge, some open ob∣structions of the Liver and Spleen, others provoke Courses, others open the obstructions of the Reins, some mitigate heat, some are appointed for the Breast and Lungs, some strengthen the Brain, some stop Fluxes, and stench Bloud, some are exhibited externally, or that may repress humours that are flowing, or take away proud flesh, such like are Pills or Lozenges, of Polyidae and Andronis; or to cause sumes and suffumigations. The materials whereof they are made, are Medicines of every sort, which being macerated in a convenient Liquour, or made into some mussellage are reduced into one mass, which are divided into many Lozenges and Pills, wherein for the most part some impression is made; they are made either by a gentle fire, or rather are dried in the shade, and kept for use; not onely Pouders and Species, but thickned Juices also, Conserves, Extracts, Fresh-flowers, Eclegmaes, and distilled Oyls, are made into Trochees. CHAP. XXII. Of Pills. PIlls are so called from their similitude to little Balls by the Latins, and from the solid form, Pills. the Greeks call them Ca∣taposia from Catapineine, that is, Drinking or swallowing down: Pills are Medicines made into the form of a Globe or Ball, principally for this end, that they may be swallowed whole, and the unsavoriness of the Medicine may the less be perceived by the taste. They are made of Pouders, the matter whereof they are made are Electuaries, Trochees, Flours, Salts, and whatso∣ever things are dry do afford: but Pills, since they ought to have great efficacy in a small quantity, the Medicines out of which they are compounded ought to be powerfull, and therefore those things which have but small strength in a great mass are not to be put into them, such as are Flours for the most part. They are reduced into a mass with Sy∣rups, thickned Juices, Extracts, and such like Liquours. But although all Pills for the most part do purge, and by Pills a Purging Medicine is understood, yet other Medicines may be reduced into this form.
Pills are prepared in this manner, The man∣ner of pre∣paring them. convenient Medicines are to be taken, and reduced into a Pouder, and mixt in a Morter with some Liquour somewhat viscid, as with a con∣venient Syrup or Juleb, seldome with Honey alone, by the benefit whereof both the mass may stick together; and if they are to be kept long they may be preserved, so that the faculty of Medicines cannot easily expire and vanish; but the Aloes which commonly is given in Pills serves to incopo∣rate. 1. If they are prepared for many Doses and daily use, the mass is to be kept in the form of a Pyramid, (which they commonly call Magdalias and Magdaleons) and in the begin∣ing they should be softer, that they may ferment, and the virtue of the Medicines may be the more exactly mingled; then after two or three days tis wiped over with Oyl of sweet Almonds, and covered with a Bladder or a Skin, and kept in a Box. 2. Of the usual Pills, and those which are kept in a rea∣diness for daily use, the manner of the Preparation is thus, Take of the mass of usual Pills more or less, as much as is need, to which instead of a Goad are added some Diagrydium or Trochees of Alhandale, or else some other Purgers, that all together may make one Dose, and let them be mingled with some distilled Water, or with white Wine, or some other convenient Liquour, and brought into one mass, and let it be reduced into 10, 15, 20, 25, 30. Pills more or less. 3. Pills when they are made sometimes use to be covered with Gold, or Pouder of Cynamon, Nutmeg, Fennel, Li∣coris, as is convenient. 4. You may mingle Extracts with the other usual Pills or Pouders. 5. Nay, Pills may be made of Extracts alone, if they are a little thickned, or, which is more convenient, if some of the Purging Pouders be added. 6. You may also prepare Extracts out of the masse, parti∣culars of usual Pills, and make Pills of them. 7. There may be added also for to correct, a drop or two of distilled Oyls, as also of Spirit of Copper, Common Salt, Vitriol. 8. There is another manner also of making Pills, The Simples whether Altering or Purging are macerated for two days in Wine or some other Liquour, or else they are boiled, in it, or a certain juice is taken out of convenient things
and one of these things are taken, or two or more of these Liquours severally prepared are intermingled, or being new∣done they are poured again into some of these, or they are boiled, and afterwards strained: to the Wine or Liquour strained, or expressed, purging, or altering Species, and Pou∣ders, or Compositions of the Shops which may be poudred, as Trochees and Tabulets, somewhat less than the eighth part in quantity to the Liquour, or there abouts, or cathar∣tick or not cathartick Extracts; to which distilled Oyls also, some drops, or half a scruple, according as the bigness of the mass for Pills, is more or less, may be powred. After∣wards all of them by often stirring may be dried over warm Embers, or in a Stove, till they re brought into a mass, if it be convenient, the mass being dried, it may again be im∣bibed and wrought in the same Expression or Liquour, and dried; and you may repeat that the third time: but that they may continue the longer, some Aloes is to be added to them. But lest that Pills should cause loathing in swallowing, Manner of using Pills. the whole Dose ought not to exceed a Drachme, or four Scruples; and that the same loathing may be prevented in taking them, we have said, they are to be rolled in Aroma∣tick Pouders, or Licoris Pouder; there are some who can easily swallow them alone; but others to take away the taste, and avoid the unpleasantness, and facilitate the swal∣lowing, use divers means, Wines, Syrups, Pulp of rosted Ap∣ples, and other things please others, they are conveniently taken in a little Pulp of Bread in Beer. After the altering Pills, and those whose force can penetrate from the Sto∣mack to the remote parts are taken, some liquid thing ought to be taken after them, to carry them to the Veins. There is another kinde of Pills which are called Hy∣poglottides, Hypoglot∣tides. because they are retained under the Tongue, till they melt by degrees, principally for the Cough, and Diseases of the Breast, simple Medicines are taken: to an Ounce, and half, more or less, and are beaten, and with a convenient Liquour, as with a Muscellage of Tra∣gacanth, Quince-seed, Fleawort, Wine boiled to the third part with Honey or any pectoral Syrup they are taken and made into Pills; sometimes they are prepared of a De∣coction, namely, to that which is strained, somewhat less than the eighth part of Tragacanth is added, the weight of
Sugar, and Penides equal to that of the Decoction. Sometimes these Hypoglottides are prepared for preserva∣tion from pestilent air, and to corroborate the Brain, and cherish the animal spirits, as also for delight and pleasant∣ness of smell, to correct the stink of the external air, or of the mouth within, the filth offending the nostrils, let them be made of sweet-sented things, with Muscellage of Tra∣gacanth. CHAP. XXIII. Of Suppositers. EXternal Medicines are twofold, External Medicines. some are injected and put into certain parts, others are applied onely to the Superficies of the body; of the former kinde are Suppositers, and Clysters, both those which are injected into the Paunch, as those which are injected into the Womb; and Pessaries, Injections, which are made into the Yard and Bladder, Gargarisms which are in Mouth and Chops, Apho∣phlegmatisms, Dentifrices, Errhines, Sternutatories, Odo∣raments, and Fumes; Injections into the Ears, Collyries, which we shall speak of in the first place. In the strst place, Glandes or Suppositers Glandes, with the Greeks, Ballanoi, commonly Suppositers, are solid Medicines, which are put into the Fundament, in figure somewhat long and round, like to an Akorn or Wax-candle, four or five fingers breadth in length. But Suppositers are not always prepared for the same-use, Ʋse. for they are often exhibited, that they may loosen the Bel∣ly, and stimulate the expulsive faculty; sometimes for other affects also, namely, when an Ulcer is in the Gut rectum, that it may cleanse, consolidate and dry; when pain is pre∣sent, it may allay it, and draw it away; when the humours flow towards the upper par, that it may draw them back, and cause revulsion; when there are little Worms called Ascarides, to kill them. Suppositers irritating the expulsive faculty are exhibited, first, when the sick is so weak that he cannot take Clysters; moreover when the Seige clings in the Paunch, there is need of a Suppositer to be used before a Clyster, that it may make way for the Clyster. Thirdly, if Clysters injected do
not work, or operate slowly, 'tis needfull to stimulate nature to expulsion. Fourthly, when by reason of straightness of time we cannot prepare a Clyster. There are three sorts of these Suppositers, The kindes of Suppo∣siters caus∣ing stool. Gentle ones which are sufficient for infants, and are made of Lard, a Fig the in-side being turned outward, Bullocks fat, the stalks and roots of Beets, Cabbage, Spinach, the Herb Mer∣cury, indifferent strong, are prepared of Honey, boiled till it be thick, a Mouses turd being sometimes added, the White of an Egg, Salt, and a little Saffron and Honey, with white Soap; the stronger are composed of Honey, Salt, and the Pouder of purging Species, as with a sufficient quan∣tity of Hiera, with Agrick, Hiera, Logadii, Aloes; the strongest of all are prepared with Species, convenient for Suppositers, the Pouder of white Hellebore, Euphorbium, Scammony, Turbith, Colloquintida, Indian Salt, Amoni∣ack, Salt-Peter, a Bulls Gall, which we use onely when the faculty is stupified, and we endeavour to draw back from re∣mote parts. They are prepared in this manner, Manner of preparing them. Honey is boiled to spissitude, that is, so long till you can take it up with your fingers; into which other things are sprinkled which are needfull, namely, half a Drachm or a Drachm of common Salt, Salt-Gemmae a Scruple, of the gentler purging Species a Drachm, of the stronger half a Scruple, of Juices half a Scruple, (or a Drachm,) of sharp Salts six Grains, or half a Scruple to an Ounce of Honey. Hence they are made out of the mass in form of a Pyramid, as big as ones little finger, and dipt in or anointed with fresh Butter or Oyl; some∣times a Thread is tied to it, that it may be drawn out at pleasure. These Suppositers are properly applied to those who have Ulcers, Clefts, Inflammations, and other Tumours in the Fundament. But when they are troubled with pain of the Hemerhoids they are not convenient to be used, for they exasperate pain.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Clysters. CLysters which the Greeks call Clyster, Clyster. Clysmos, Clysma, and Enclysma, is so called from purging or cleansing, al∣though it signifies every sort of Medicine in general, which pours in that which is liquid into any part, yet in particular, as also Enema from injecting, for the most part is taken one∣ly for a Medicine which is injected by the Fundament into the Guts. A Clyster is injected for several ends, Differences of Clysters. whence there a∣riseth various differences of Clysters; for some loosen the belly, and of these some do it by Emolliating, which are made of Emollients, proposed before, p. 1. S. 1. c. 6. Others purge, to which purging Medicines are added. Some cleanse, namely, those which are compounded of Bar∣ley, the herb Mercury, Pellitory, Wormwood, Agrimony, Century the less, Pease, Parsnibs, Lupines, Flour, Honey with Roses, Hiera. Some are composed for the discussing and breaking of winde, and are made of those Medicines that expell winde, above mentioned, pag. 1. sect. 1. cap. 15. Some binde and are prepared of Astringents, proposed in the same, cap. 6. Some glutinate, and are prepared of gluti∣nating things, spoken of in the same part and sect. cap 9. Sometimes Clysters are made of Anodyns, or Medicines that mitigate pain, for pains of the Guts and Reins. But Clysters are compounded in this manner, there are taken of Roots and Rindes an ounce or two, of Leafs three, four or five handfuls, of Seeds three, four or five Drachms: of Flowers some Pugils, of Fruits, Pears ten, that is, twenty; to which if a purging Clyster ought to be made, Purgers are ad∣ded, Agrick, Colloquintida, Seeds of Carthamons, (all which least they should stickto the Guts, and offend them, are tied in a Linnen-cloath) the Leafs of Senna; but there is no need of such variety always, but oftentimes a few simples suffice. All the simple Medicines are boiled in a sufficient quantity of water; of the Decoction take three, four to fifteen Ounces, according to the age, for infants three Oun∣ces, hence those that are a little riper four, five or six may suffice; for one that is come to ripeness of years, for the
most part they take a Pint, sometimes also fifteen Ounces; yet sometimes, namely, when we would retain the Clyster long, and lest the too great quantity should oppress the other parts, onely eight or ten Ounces is taken in the Stone. In the Decoction strained those things which agree to our present purpose, we dissolve, as Oyls from an Ounce to two or three. When we onely are to emolliate, we put in Oyls onely or Butter, but indeed in greater quantity: those which have a purging faculty are then wholly to be omitted, lest by reason of the hard ordure sticking in the Guts, nature should be stimulated in vain, and humours be∣ing drawn greater evils do ensue. On the contrary, when you are to purge, to repell, and a sharp Clyster is required, the Oyls whereby the force of sharp and purging things is resist∣ed, are to be omitted, and purging Electuaries are to be added for the most part double the weight, which at other times they use to be taken in at the mouth, or Pills are to be dis∣solved, Salt also is to be added from a Scruple to a Drachm; also Abstergents, as Honey of Roses, or Sugar, in weight an Ounce or an Ounce and half; all of them being mixt, and moderately heated by a convenient and known instrument, they are to be injected into the Paunch an hour or two be∣fore meat. Those who are unwilling to have it done by others may give a Clyster, as they call it, to themselves by instruments described in many places, the most convenient whereof Guil. Fabricius propounds in his Chyrurgical Operations, Cent. 1. Obs. 78.
CHAP. XXV. Of Injections into the Wombe, and of Pes∣saries TO Clysters which are inje&ed into the Guts, Injections into the Wombe. we may well joyne those which are cast into the Womb, and are therefore called Uterine Clysters; The Instrument, or Squirt, by which the liquor is cast into the Womb, is called by the Greeks, Metrencytes, but the Medecines which are in∣jected they call Metrencyta. A due quantity is taken of simples agreeable to every ones disease, Way of preparing. tis boiled, and three or foure ounces of the deco∣ction, or instead thereof distilled water is taken, and two or three ounces of Oyle are added, and powders, to the quan∣tity of three drachms; and of those mixt together, three ounces are injected into the Womb. For the same causes, Pssaries. for the most part, for which Clysters as they call them, are injected into the Womb, Pesses, and Pessaries, barbarously called Nascalia, are put in. 1. The man∣ner of pre¦paring. There are many waies of preparing Pessaries, the first is cotten, or wooll that is shore and well carded, and are mixt with a juice, or some liquor, either alone, or with some con∣venient powders mixt, twisted, or wreathed, about the big∣nisse and length of a finger, tis wet in it, and applied to the generative parts of women, the quantity of Medecines that are pounded for the most part is an ounce. 2. Moreover Medecines that are pounded are taken in con∣venient liquors, as with oyl, fat, wax, Galbanum, Storax, ho∣ney, and are made up and mingled into a masse, and fashio∣ned in the figure of a Pessary, to which a thred is tied, which also may be covered with fine linnen, or a thin peece of silk. 3. Sometimes green herbs, and such as are full of juice, are a little bruised, and tied about with a thred, and bound in the form of a Pessary. 4. There is a time also when Powders onely being taken in fine wooll, or cotten, being made round, are put into a thin bagg made of a fine ragg. Nascalies, Nascasia. as they are barbarously called, are compound∣ed of the same Medecines, which are taken with cotton,
or soft wooll, and applied to the externall orifice of the womb, especially in Virgins, to whom you may not give Pes∣saries. CHAP. XVI. Of those things which are injected into the Yard, and Bladder. INjections into the Bladder, Injection into the Bladder. are liquid Medecines which are injected into it through the urinary passage; in the use whereof, the whole art consists in injecting, for sometimes tis sufficient to cast in this Clyster by a Squirt, sometimes a Catheter which opens the way, as it were, and tis necessa∣ry to precede. It happens also sometimes that there is need of injection into the Yard, namely, when it is either hurt by the stone, Into the Yard. or troubled with paine, or the passage within is ulcerated; tis prepared of those things which are agreeable to the scope of the Physitian. But not onely fluid Medecines are injected, but Unguents are cast in in this manner: Take a wax Candle, to which some Turpentine may be added, of that thicknesse and length which may answer to this passage and chanell, this Candle is bedaubed with an Oyntment, and is thrust in, but you must be carefull that the candle may be so prepared, and stick so long, that it may not melt with the heat of the yard; you may boyle also some convenient Plaister, and put the wax candle, or a little Instrument made of lead, into it. CHAP. XXVII. Of washings of the mouth, and Gargarismes COllutions of the mouth with the Greeks, Diaclysmata, Mouth-waters. they are fluid Medecines, which are contained in the mouth, and without swallowing, by the help of the tongue are agitated up and down, being principally appointed for paines of the teeth, and diseases of the Gumms.
Next unto these are Gargarismes, to wit liquid Me∣dicines, Garga∣rismes. by which the Chaps are washed without swal∣lowing, namely, whilest the humour contained in the mouth, flowes towards the top of the Wind-pipe by its gravity, the head leaning backward, the breath break∣king out is repelled, and is agitated by a reciprocall mo∣tion. Gargarismes are administred for divers purposes, Use of gar∣garismes. some to repell, others to resolve, and discusse, others to ripen, others to absterge, or wipe oft, others to consoli∣date: But of all medicines for what purpose soever they are intended, those are to be chosen which are not ungratefull to the smell or taste, nor have any venemous and malig∣nant qualitie, since it may easily come to passe, that any thing may be swallowed contrary to the will. Some are prepared with distilled waters, Manner of preparing. others with de∣coctions, wherein Juices, or Syrups are dissolved, under a three-fold, foure-fold, or six-fold quantitie, so that to a pinte of distilled waters, or of a decoction, two, three, or foure ounces are taken, to which sometimes some of the Aromaclck Species are added, and being mixt all are exhibi∣ted together luke-warme. CHAP. XXVIII. Of Medicines that draw away Phlegme. APophlegmatismes, Apophleg∣matismes. are Medicines also, which are held in the mouth, and draw out Phlegme from the head, and neighbouring-parts, from whence they have their name, for the most part they are called Diamasse∣mataes or Masticatories. But they are not all made alike, Manner of prepa∣ring. for first Apophlegmatisms are used in the forme of Gargarisms, which how they are made is newly shewn. Moreover, Medicines may be made by bearing, and with a convenient liquor, reduced into the forme of an Electuarie, wherewith the Palate should be an∣nointed. Masticato∣ries. The third are called Masticatories, which are retai∣ned and masticated longer in the mouth, partly by their heat, they dissolve Phlegme, draw it out, and intice it
forth, partly by the strength wherewith they are endu∣ed, of stimulating the expulsive facultie of the braine, they irritate it, to eject what ever troubles it, which againe may be done three waies. For first simple Medicines, either whole, The way of making. or a little cut one∣ly are detained and chewed in the mouth. Secondly, The same medicines pounded, and with a sufficient quantitie of Honey, or Wax, which is taken, are made into Troches, like Lupine seeds, or Hazel-nuts, being in weight a scruple. Thirdly, The same medcines stamped, being put in a lin∣nen cloath, which may be bruised and chewed with the Teeth. CHAP. XXIX. Of Medicines to rub, and cleanse the Teeth. DEntifrices, which the Greeks call Odontrimmata, Dentifrices and Smegmata Odonton, are principally prepared to whiten, cleanse, and strengthen the teeth, The way of making. and fasten the Gumms when they are loose; But there is not one sort of them onely, for first they may be washed with convenient liquors, or rubbed with cotton, or a linnen ragg, wet in a convenient liquor. 2. Moreover the forme of an Oyntment may be used, if the powders are taken in honey, simple Oxymell, with Squills, honey of Roses, or syrup of Roses. 3. The Teeth may be rubbed with powders. 4. Troches, or Penfills may be made in the forme of sup∣positers, which being dried and hardned, the Teeth may be rubbed. 5. After Dentifrices, tis convenient that the mouth he washed, principally with Wine wherein Orice roots, or some other convenient thing is first macerated.
CHAP. XXX. Of Medicines put into the Nose, and to provoke snee∣zing. ERrhines, Errhines. as the name shews, are medicines which are put into the nostrills, which is done for severall ends; either for calling out Excrements from the braine, and to provoke sneezing, those that performe which in particular, are called Ptarmica, Ptarmica. or such as cause sneezing; or to open the obstructions of the passages, or to heale an Ulcer, or stench blood; whence the matter of Errhines, is not all∣wayes the same but various according to the various inten∣tions, which is shewne before in the faculties of medicines. They are prepared also in severall formes; Way to make them. for some are moist, and Liquid, others hard and dry; againe, the Liquid are twofold, either they are powred into the nost∣rills, or the nostrills are anointed with them only expressed juices are powred into the nostrills, and are drawne in by and clarified them. 2. Or distilled waters are added to the clarified juices, Wine, Oyle, Honey, somewhat lesse then double, or some∣what lesse then foure times the weight, according as thicker, or more fluid Errhines are required, or conveni∣ent powders may be added, about a drachm in weight. 3. Or decoctions are prepared which are mixt with some∣what lesse then double, or somewhat lesse then foure times so much Honey, and are put into the nostrills. But those things wherewith the nostrills are anointed, are most conveniently made of Oyles and Powders, to which belongs Balsoms, which the Nostrills are anointed with. Besides these, to the moist there seemes to belong, those things which are put into the Nostrills in the forme of a tent. But dry Errhines are made first of convenient Rootes, Dry Er∣rhiaes. or Staulkes, as of Beetes, Flowre-deluce, Sow-bread, which are fashioned in the forme of a Pyramid, and afterwards macerated in the water of sweet Marjerom, or some other
a fit water, or Oyle, a thred being first tyed about them, they re put in. 2. Moreover dry Errhines are made when simple medi∣cines are reduced into a thin powder, and a graine or two or two of them is blowne into the Nostrils, and so they use to call Errhines in particular Ptarmaca, or Sternutatories. 3. Thirdly, Errhines and Sneezings may be made of the same powders, if with a linnen or woollen cloath, or a Linnen bagg, that is round, they are wrapt up in it, and either with juice, or convenient distilled waters; for exam∣ple of Marjerom, the Sternutatorie powder be dipt in it or sprinkled with it, and put into the Nostrills. 4. Fourthly, medicines for the nose being reduced into a powder, are taken in a Muscellage, or Gumm, or Turpen∣tine, or Oyle and wax, and diligently mixt, are made up into Pessaries, in the forme of a Pyramid, as it were in that big∣nesse that they may be put into the Nose, to the end whereof a thred is tyed, that it may be drawne out at pleasure. CHAP. XXXI. Of sweet Smells, Perfumes, and Odoriferous, Bal∣somes. SWeet Smells also are taken in at the Nostrills, Things causing sweete O∣dours. Simples Odorise∣rous. but prin∣cipally they are exhibited for altering of the braine, and recreation of the Spirits and are exhibited for the resisting of filthy and Pestilentiall smells. The materialls of these things are all such as breath a sweete Odour out of themselves, as Muske, Amber, Civit, Benzoin, liquid Storax and Ladanum, wood of Aloes, Rose-mary, Lavender, Marjerom, Spike, wild Basill, Ste∣chados of Arabia, Mace, Cloves, Cinamon, Frankinsense, Myrrb, graines of Juniper, Gallia Moschata, Camphir, and those things which are given cold, as Roses, Violets, Flowers, Kindes of Odor fe∣rous things. of Nimphea, santalls. But they are exhibited severall wayes, and severall kinde of sweet smells, are made of those simples, for first they use to be reduced into powders, and are kept either in a Box, or woodden vessell, and as often as necessary, are put to the Nostrills, or else are included in a little bagg, or nodule of silke.
2. Secondly, the same reduced into powder are taken with Ladanum, Wax, Liquid Storax, to which some Tur∣pentine may be added also, and made into one masse in a hot Morter, by powring in of Rose-watar, of which little balls are made commonly called Pomander: 3. Thirdly Unguents and Linements, use to be made of sweete things, Balsomes. which they call Balsomes at this day, they are prepared of distilled Oyles, to which is added Amber, Muske, Civit, Indian Balsom, whereof the whole force of them depends, which are mixed with a certaine body which affords a convenient consistence, instead whereof although some take other things, yet extract of Plantine is conveni∣ently taken, or Oyle drawne out of Nutmegs, by which all the smell for the most part, colour, and taste is extracted by the Spirit of Wine, or which is most convenient, an extract and Oyle of Nutmegs, together to this mixture a colour a∣greeable to the Balsom, shall be made of a juice or tincture of the medicines. 4. Fourthly, perfumed waters use to be prepared, where∣with the Garments use to be sprinkled, or the nose, hands, and other perts of the body use to be wet, the same waters being put in a convenient vessell upon the coales, are dissol∣ved into an Odoriferous Vapour. 5. Fifthly, wash-balls are also prepared, or sweet balls to wash the hands, and feete, of which hereafter Chap. 42. 6. Fumes. Moreover, sweet Vapours, or fumes, belong to Odori∣ferous smells the Greeks Thymiamata, which although they are taken for the sweetnesse and pleasantnesse of smell, or for strengthning the braine, yet they may be appointed for other ends also, namely to stop distillations, for drying ulcers of the lungs, when they are stuffed with thick matter, peculiar suffumigations, also are prepared for the wombe, and to provoke and stop courses, the falling down, and suffo∣cation of the mother, & the coming out of the Fundament. 1. How pre∣pared. But suffumigations are prepared, first of sweet medi∣cines, that are cut, or powred, being throwne upon live coales, or hot ashes. 2. Moreover, the same powders are made into Cakes or Trochees, with a convenient Liquor, and with a Gumme or Rosin. 3 Thirdly, the coales of Lime or Teile-tree or of Willow being mixt, Pyramids and Candles as it were are made of the same matter, which is kindled, when there is use for, them.
CHAP. XXXII. Of those things which are put into the Eares. THose things which are put into the Eares to asswage their pains, for inflammations, Ulcers, Singings, Things to be inject∣ed into the Eares. Hum∣mings, and other infirmities, are exhibited, either in a Liquid forme, and first dropt into the Eares. 1. Secondly, a hot Vapour of Decoctions, or conveni∣ent Liquors are injected into the Eares, (which they com∣monly call Embotum) or simples that are convenient are included in a bagg, and boyled, and put into the Eares. 3. Thirdly, they are exhibited in the forme of a Line∣ment. 4. Fourthly, simple medicines may be reduced into pow∣der, and blowne into the Eares, or sent in, in the manner of a fume, or Vapour. CHAP. XXXIII. Of Liquid medicines for the eyes. COllytion, and Collurion, as much as to say Collurion, Collyrium. that is Colobon ten Ouran, or Colobee Oara, it is so called because it is like mutisarae caudae, in which forme although various medicines appointed for various uses, were hereto∣fore prepared: yet at this day by the name Collyries, are understood only externall medicines proper for the Eyes. But medicines which are exhibited to the Eyes, and in generall have borrowed their name from those dry ones, Way of pre∣paring. are named Collyries, and are commonly divided into dry and moist, dry ones are made when medicines pounded very small, are made fine in a Morter, and with a sufficient quantity of Whites of Eggs, or of some Muscellage, are made into the forme of a Py∣ramid, or Trochees, and are dryed in the shade
when there is need of them, they are beaten againe, in a marble, or Stone Morter, some convenient Liquor being powred in, and the Liquor, afterwards, which is then pre∣pared, is dropt into the eyes. 2. Moist Collyries are twofold, for either they are dropt into the Eyes, in the forme of a Liquor, which is made of juices, distilled waters, Decoctions, or many of these mixt, powders being added, and espcially of those medicines which will dissolve in a moist body. 3. Or they are made in the forme of an unguent. 4. Lastly, convenient medicines also, are boyled in water, and the warme Vapour exhaling out of the pot, which is covered with a linnen cloath, is received into the eyes. CHAP. XXXIV. Of Oyles and Balsomes. BUt as for what belongs to Medicines which are exhi∣bited to the superficies of the body, Oyles. the first amongst them are Oyles; whereof some are naturall, as Petroleum and common Oyle, which is made of ripe Olives, and Om∣phacine, which is drawne of unripe Olives; others are arti∣ficiall, which are made three manner of wayes. 1. How to prepare them. For first; Unctuous juice is expressed, after which man∣ner Oyle of sweet Almonds, Pistack-nuts, Nuts, seed of Flax, Gourds, Cucumbers, Henbane, Hempe, and Oyle of Poppy is prepared; by expression also, Oyle of Yolkes of Eggs is made, 2. Secondly, Oyles are prepared by Infusion many wayes, for sometimes simple medicines are boyled with Fountaine or distilled water, and Wine, or other conveni∣ent Liquor, in common Oyle, to the consumption of the moisture, or juice; sometimes the same simples by a gentle heate are macerated in the Sun, yet it seemes more con∣venient if dryed Plants are steeped in Oyle, in Balneo Ma∣riae, twenty foure hours, afterwards the Oyle is expressed, and clarified by residence.
Thirdly, Oyles are prepared by distillation also, as is said before, amongst which some at this day are called Bal∣somes; examples whereof are to be had in the Institu∣tions. CHAP. XXXV. Of Linements and Oyntments. A Linement, or Litus, with the Greeks Crisma, A Line∣ment. and Syn∣crysma, and that which takes away wearisomnesse, is called Acopon, that is, freed from labour, tis a liquid Mede∣cine, externally applied, thicker in consistence then oyle, but more liquid then an unguent, or of a middle consistence betwixt an oyle, and an unguent. It consists of oyles, butter, wax, fat, tallow, marrow, gums, juices, muscellages; for the most part they have no wax, or if any be used, they take onely a drachm of wax to an ounce of oyle, to these sometimes, flowers, powders, and rosins are mixt. They are prepared in this manner, The oyles, fats, How pre∣pared. or other things here named, are taken: to these powders are added, Juices, and such like, of that proportion for the most part, that to an ounce of oyl, three drachms of fat, or two drachms, and one drachm of powders is taken, or that proportion is observed, as may make the consistence onely a little thick∣er then oyle; and all are mingled either without fire and boi∣ling, or are dissolved at the fire as Gums, and Fats, or also by some ebullition, namely, to the consumption of the Jui∣ces, or Vinegar, if any such thing be mingled with it. Unguents which the Greeks call Myra, and Alleimata, Ʋnguents. from whence Miropolae and Alyptae were the names that the Anci∣ents first called them by, which for pleasantnesse were made of odoriferous things, and were distinguished from oyles not in thicknesse, but in pleasantnesse of smell. But those things which are at this day called Unguents, are Emmota, so called by the Greeks, and are made of the same things whereof Linements are; But are somewhat thicker then Linements, and those things which thicken, are taken in a greater quntity in an Unguent, then in a Linement, but as for the liquid and oyly things a lesse quantity is observed in compounding them, this is the proportion for the most part; that to an ounce of oyles a drachm of powder, two
drachms of wax may be taken, or a sufficient quantity, namely in those things where Unguents are made of oyles, powders, or mettals, or plants, and wax. But they are prepared either with fire, How pre∣pard. or without fire, without fire they are prepared in this manner; 1. The powders being beaten, and sifted, are taken, which are sprinkled in the oyle, and a sufficient quanti∣ty of wax being added, are reduced into the forme of an Unguent. 2. Or usual Unguents are taken, and for the most part foure fold, or eight fold, the quantity of powders, and species are mixt with some convenient oyle. 3. Or fat, or marrow are taken alone, or with oyle in equall weight, double, or halfe so much again, a few pow∣ders being added with a sufficient quantity of wax, an Un∣guent is made, 4. With fire also, they are made many waies, for ei∣ther the grease, oyles, or gumms are melted, that the pow∣ders may the easier be mingled. 5. Or herbes, roots, seeds, are macerated, sometime in wa∣ter, wine, juices, oyle, afterwards they are boiled almost to the consumption of the liquor: to the decoction when tis strained, the other things are added, and with some grease and a sufficient quantity of wax, or a gumm, an Unguent is made. 6. Or they are prepared without oyle, with grease, namely, herbes, flowers, or fresh roots, are bruised with grease, and wrought in a Morter, untill the herbes have imbibed the grease, and then they are melted by the fire, and pressed out. CHAP. XXXVI. Of Cerots, and Emplaisters. THe name of a Cerat, or Cerot, the Ancients used for a soft medicine, namely for that which consisting of oyle and wax is anointed. But at this day tis taken for a medicine, like unto a plai∣ster, yet is not so hard as a plaister in consistence, and tis so called from Cera, that is wax, because the greater part of it is wax: And tis compounded at this day of powders, oyles,
Gums, Pitch, Turpentine and Wax, and sometimes Lard, Marrow, and Muscellages are added. But the proportion of the things that are mixt is various, neither can it easily be defined and comprehended by Rules, and the quantity of Wax to be mixed is left for the most part to the discretion of the Apothecary, who ascends by de∣grees, according to progress from a lesser quantity to a greater; yet for the most part the analogy of mixture useth to be desired, so that when they consist of Oyl, Wax, and Rosin, one part of Oyl is taken, half so much of Rosin, of Wax the third part: But when Pouders are added, the proportion of Oyles to Pouders is eight-fold, to Wax, two three, four or six-fold; and to Rosin, that it may stick the faster, they use to add twelvefold; a Cerot becomes the harder three ways, namely, by defect of Oyl and Grease, by boiling, and store of Pitch, Wax, or Pouders. 1. They are made in this manner, How made. If the Cerot ought to be made of Pouders only, Oyl and Wax; the Oyl and Wax should be dissolved together at the fire, and the Pouders put in by degrees, and exactly mingled. 2. If Lard, Gums, or other things to be melted by the fire are taken, they should be melted with the wax. 3. If Gums are to be dissolved in Vineger or Wine; first they must be dissolved in Oyl, and mingled with Wax, that the Vineger or Wine may be consumed with boiling, afterwards the Pouders may sprinkled in. 4. If you are to add Roots, Fruits, or Seeds, these are first to be boiled, and the Decoction to be boiled again with Oyl to the consumption of the moisture. Lastly, the things melted and pounded are to be added, and all to be mixt together, and to be kept for use. But when you may prescribe fresh things for present use, three Ounces and an a half may suffice for a great Cerot, for an indifferent one two Ounces, for a little one, one Ounce, & three or four Drachms of Pouders are sufficient for an in∣different Plaister: and such Cerots use to be put with an Aromatick Pouder sprinkled on them into a piece of Lea∣ther, or to be covered with fine Linnen; the quantity and figure, if it may be, should answer and be conformable to the parts to which they ought to be applied.
Plaisters, Plaisters. from Emplattein, that is, from fashioning, and soft anointing is derived, because they may be extended, and spred on a Linnen cloath, or peice of Leather; they are medicines somewhat harder and more sollid then Cerots, and are compounded of the same things whereof Cerots are, only that metalls, and mineralls, and for the most part, Li∣tharge are added, which makes them of a more sollid con∣sistence. For the most part this is the manner of compounding them; How com∣pounded. the wax for the most part is melted in Oyle, if the Litharge be in readinesse, that also should be boyled in Oyle. If Juices of herbs, or decoctions, Musceilages, Vinegar, Wine or any other Liquor be to be mixt, then that also is to be mixed with the rest, and being mixt, are to be boyled so long, untill the aqueous humidity be consumed; afterwards the Rosins, fat, thickned and concreate juices, and Gumms, are to be put in sometimes, dissolved first, and strained, with Wine, Vinegar, and Oyle; lastly Turpentine is to be mixt, and all to be boyled to a due consistence, which when tis done, and taken from the fire, the powders must be put in by little and little, and continually stird about, that they may be brought into one masse, with the rest, of which being cooled, but before it growes hard, are to be fashioned, in the similitude of a Pyramid, or a long Rolle, or Rollers, and be kept for use, of the which when tis necessary, a part may be cut off, and if need be softned somewhat with convenient Oyle, spred on Linnen, and applyed to the skin. The proportion of mixture, can scarce be defined ex∣actly, and strictly, and if any error be committed, it may easily be corrected by boyling or mingling of more dry, or liquid things; but this proportion for the most part is observed, that to an ounce of dry things, there is taken of Oyle, Fat, or Honey, three Ounces, of Wax a pound, of Rosin eight Ounces: But if boyled, and pounded Herbs are added, a little handfull, requires an Ounce, or an Ounce and halfe of Oyle, or Grease, so that the proportion of Wax to Rosin is six-sold, to Oyle foure-fold, to Powders double: but if the quantity of Rosin be greater, there needs the lesse Wax. Sometimes before the Emplaistick masse be cooled a Lin∣nen Emplastick Web.
cloath that is worne out by age is dipt in, and when tis bedaubed with the substance of the Plaister, tis taken out, extended, cooled, and kept for use; which kind of Plaisters, they called Emplastick Webbs of cloath, and Spa∣radrapum, and applyed them for cleansing of Ulcers, Glutina∣ting, Cicatrizing, and other uses. And these are properly called Plaisters, yet some things are referred to Plaisters also, which are prepared without Wax, Pitch, and those Glutinous things, and without fire, and are compounded with Honey, Muscellages, and a cer∣tain thick juice, or Barme, or only with a little Wax, mel∣ted with Oyle; of which kind is the Plaister of Bay-berries and de Grusta panis, and such like, which are as it were in the middle, betwixt Plaisters, and Cataplasmes. CHAP. XXXVII. Of Cataplasmes. CAtaplasmes, which the Ancients called Pultases, A Cata∣plasme. are To∣picall medicines soft, and having the consistence of Pul∣tases, and are prepared to asswage paine, repell, mollify, discusse, to ripen, and other ends. 1. They are either prepared without fire and boyling, How made. or with fire and boyling, from whence the one is called crude, the other boyled. Without fire, greene Plants are pounded, and reduced into a Poultice, or dry, reduced into Powder, are mingled with a sufficient quantity, namely double, or trebble, of Oyle, or a convenient Liquor. 2. They are made with fire, and boyling, if the plants be∣ing beaten, and pounded, are boyled in a sufficient quantity of water, till they are soft; afterwards strained through a seive, which neverthelesse, if they are well boyled, and bruis∣ed is not allwayes necessary, to these are added Muscellages, Flowre, and a sufficient quantity of Fat, and Oyle, and are all boyled againe to the consistence of a Poultice, sometimes plants also are immediatly boyled in Oyle.
The Cataplasmes being prepared, and put on a piece of linnen are applied hot to the part. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Medicines to take away Haire, Salves made of Mustard, Medicines causing Wheales, or Pusties in the body, and Vesicatories, or Medi∣cines that cause Blisters. A Dropax, or any thing to take away haire, a Syna∣pisme, or a Salve made of Mustard, a Phaenigne, a Medicine to cause Wheales, or Pustles, differ not from the forme of a Cataplasme, yet for some certaine peculiar effects which they produce, Authors have been pleased to separate them from other Cerots, Plaisters, and Cata∣plasmes. Dropax in Greek, A Dropax. with the Latines Picatio, is a Medi∣cine composed in the forme of a Plaister, or Cataplasme, powerfully sticking to the skin, which heretofore was ex∣hibited to extenuate and relax the Member, to heat and draw more store of blood, as is spoken before, part 2. Sect. 2. Cap. 5. or to dry moister bodies; It is two-fold, the one simple, Its diffe∣rences. which consists of Pitch and Oyle melted together, the other compound, which besides Pitch and Oyle, hath in it, Pepper, Castor, Pellitory, Bittony, Gal∣banum, Brimstone, Nitre, or the ashes of Vine-twiggs, and other things which are needfull; out of all which a Plaister is made with Oyle and Pitch, which is put in a peice of Leather, or linnen cloath, and applied to the member, being hot, the haire shaved before hand, and the part well rubbed, and before tis quite cold, is twitched off againe, and put to the fire againe, and applied to the part againe, and that is so often repeated, untill the part growes red, and is somewhat swelled. Synapismes are Cataplasmes, A Syna∣pisme. or Plaisters, principally consisting of Mustard-seed, from whence they have their names, or other things are compounded, which are of the same nature with mustard-seed, and they are two-fold, the
one more mild and gentle, which the Greeks call Phoinig∣mon, because it makes the skin look red, and is to draw out the matter which lies so deep hid in the body, to its superfi∣cies. A Vesica∣tory. The other is stronger which also raiseth blisters in the part to which it is applied, which they properly call Vesi catories. The Ancients made Synapismes of Mustard seed, How to prepare Sy∣napismes. or sheere-grasse, dry Figgs were macerated in warme water, the next day after Mustard-seed pounded was mixt with that pulpe, and if a stronger Synapisme were required, they would mingle two parts of Mustard with one of Figgs, but if weaker, one part of Mustard-seed, and two parts of Figgs,: If indifferent equall parts, being mixed they were applied to the part affected,, and left there so long, till the skin run down with moisture, and looked red. Other Medicines also, both making red, How to make Ve∣sicatories. and causing Blisters, are mentioned before, part the first, Sect. the first, Cap. 10. and are mingled with honey, Oxymell with Squills, Vinegar with Squills, Melle Anarcardino, Spirit of Wine, Turpentine, Soap, the crum of bread, and Gmme, with sharp things and Plaisters, and Catapla∣smes are made of them, whether to cause the part to look red, and burn onely, or to raise blisters. The principall thing to raise blisters is a medicine compounded of Cantharides, and Leaven. When a blister is raised by a medicine, and is broken, tis not forthwith to be dried, but to be permitted to run, that the humour which we desire to evacuate, revell, or derive, may flow out, and therefore some fat unguent, or a Figg, or the leaves of Coleworts, are to e put to it. CHAP XXXIX. Of Epithems (which are somewhat moister then Plaisters) Medicines made of Vinegar and Roses, and of Medicines applied to the Temples, to stop fluxes of Rehume from falling to the eyes. ALlthough all medicines which are externally adplied to the body may be called Epithems, Epithems yet by custome those onely are called so at this day which consist of distilled wa∣ters, decoctions, or juices mingled with species and powders, and are externally applied, principally to the region of the
Liver, Spleen, Heart, Stomach, fore-head, and joynts. As for the matter whereof they are made, tis various ac∣cording to their severall intentions: of distilled waters, Juices, Decoctions, Oyles, either alone, or mixt, Epithemes are applyed for the mittigation of heate, resisting of hu∣mours, that flow, strengthning the parts, and Liquors, or Powders that are appropriated to any part whatsoever, are to be applyed. Epithemes are prepared two wayes, How pre∣pared. first of liquid things only, distilled waters or juices are taken convenient for the disease and proper for the part, to which sometimes, some Vinegar, or Wine for penetration sake is added: afterwards Species or Powders, beaten very fine a drachm and a halfe or two drachms, to a Pint, and sometimes more Powder is taken: the matter of the Epitheme is prescribed according to the magnitude of the part, from three Ounces to a pint, the mixture in the first place hath a linnen or wollen cloath Cotten, or Spunge dipt in it, and stird about, when tis to be used least the Powder should settle in the bottome, and for the most part tis applyed warme, and as often as tis taken off, tis dipt into it againe, and applyed. Sometimes certaine Powders are put in, but they are first macerated in fountaine water. To Epithemes belong Oxyrhodes, Epithemes for the fore-head. as they are called, which are Epithemes peculiar to the fore-head, prepared of Oyle of Roses, and Vinegar, to coole, and repell; The Ancients, tooke of Oyle of Roses three parts, and of Vinegar one part, and stird them well together, wherein they dipt a peice of leather, or skin and applyed it to the forehead; At this day also other Oyles, as of Violets, Myrtles, Nimphaea, or wa∣ter Lillies, and sometimes distilled waters, and Powders are added Santalls, and other things. To these are referred anacollemata, Anacolle∣mata. which are wont to be applyed for diseases of the Eyes, and Hemorhodes of the nose, principally to the fore-head, so called for this reason, whether they consist of medicines that fill up, glutinate, and have an astringent quality, because they stop the violence of humours that flow into them, or because by their clam∣minesse, they adhere, and as it were stick like glue to the part to which they are applyed.
And they are prepared of Volatile or fine Flowre, How pre∣pared. Bole∣armoniack, Dragons-blood, Acacia, mastick, Manna, Fran∣kincense, and such like, mixt with the white of an Egg. 2. Yet they are often prepared without the white of an Egge, to mittigate the paine of the head, or cause sleepe which are applyed, either with a Leather, or a skin dipt therein, or inclosed in a little bagg, and they are more pro∣perly called Epithemes, or Frontells. CHAP. XL. Of Medicines applyed Plaister-wayes to mittigate paine, and of little Bags. LIke unto Epithemes, are Fomentaes, so called, Fomenta∣tions. because they doe by their heate, as it were cherish the parts of the body to which they are applyed, and they are exhibited either to heate the parts, or to cleanse, and discusse, or to mittigate paine, or soften that which is hard. Differen∣ces of Fo∣menta∣tions. Moist. 1. And they are two-sold, moist, and dry; the moist are made either of hot water, Oyle, Milke, or wine, or decoct∣ions of Plants, made with warer, wine, Vinegar, Milke, whither a spunge, or linnen cloath, answerable, to the mag∣nitude of the part affected, is dipt whilst it is hot, and ap∣plyed to the part, and when they begin to be luke-warme, or to coole, they are changed for hot, or the same are heat againe in the Liquor. 2. Sometimes, simples, included in Linnen baggs, are boyled in water, wine, or Milke, and are applyed hot to the part affected, for which purpose, tis convenient to prepare two Baggs, that when the one is cooled, the other may be applyed. 3. Sometimes, a Hoggs Bladder, or an Oxe his Bladder, is halfe filled with the Liquor of the decoction and applyed hot to the part affected. 4. Fomentations, are made also, of living Creatures dissected, and as yet warme, especially Pidgeons, as also of the parts of living Creatures newly slaine, whilst they are hot, as the Lungs, Paunch, o Oyles made of the same.
5. Sometimes the steam onely of Waters, of Wine or Vineger boiled, is stirred up by the fire onely, or by casting in of stones or Irons burning into the Liquour, or some of the Liquour poured on them is applied to the part; the va∣pour is taken by a Pipe or Tunnel with a wide orifice, or it is put about the part with some covering, whereby the steam being detained and included, it may act the stronger on the part affected. But dry Fomentations are made with Bags, Dry. the Bags are compounded of Herbs, Flowers, Barks, Roots, Seeds, Aro∣maticks, Gums, which are agreeable to the present intenti∣on, being cut and pounded proportionable to the figure and magnitude of the part affected, are put into a Bag, and ap∣plied to the part, for a cordial Bag an Ounce, or an Ounce and half may suffice, for the stomack a greater quantity is required. The Bag is prepared either of Linnen or Silk, and being pricked through with a Needle is applied dry to the part, and sometimes it is wet in Wine or Vineger, and put on a hot stone or brick heated by the fire, it is applied to the part affected and makes it warm. CHAP. XLI. Of Embrocations, Lotions, and Bathes. THe likest to Fomentations are Embrocations, or Water∣ings, Lotions, and Bathes, all which signifie rather a certain manner of using, than any Composition and Forme of Medicine, and they contain for the most part the same matter with moist Fomentations. Embrochee, Embroca∣tions. is a certain distillation or dropping down of a moist humour from above like Rain: the dropping which is made on any part is performed, either by pouring water out of a vessel, with a long snout, or by dropping out of a Laver. Tis applied principally to three parts; First, upon the Co∣ronall Suture, in distempers of the braine, and the moisture runs no further, then the Sagittall suture. Secondly, from the beginning of the spinall marrow, in diseases of the Nerves and the moisture is terminated at the end of the spine. Third∣ly,
to heat or dry the stomach, and the matter is suffered to run over all the belly: if the guts also are weak, a Cerat with Santals is to be applied to the liver, if there be feare of in∣flaming it, the matter to be so distilled is common water, water of Bathes, decoctions, milk, oyle, according as the part affected requires it. Some Lotions are exhibited to certain parts which are called particular Lotions, Lotions. others to the inferiour parts of the body onely, which are commonly calted Incessus, and Se∣micuoium, i. e. a Vessell that you may sit upright in, others are fit for the whole body, which are called Bathes. Peculiar Lotions principally use to be administred to the head, hands, and feet, and are prepared as Fomentations of hearbs, or faire water, or boiled in a lee, Wine, or Oyle. Incessus, which the Greeks call Encathisma, Incessus. is a bath for the belly, and inferiour parts wherein the diseased must sit up to the Navell, and such bathing Vessels serve for severall uses, sometimes to mittigate paine, sometimes to soften and dis∣cusse wind, sometimes they are used to provoke courses. A Bath is a washing of the whole body, A Bath. and is administred either for cleansing and taking away the faults of the skin, or to relax the parts; or for some distemper of the whole. Some bathes are naturall, others are made by Art. The Diffe∣rences. A∣mongst the naturall bathes the plainest is that of Fountaine∣water, which hath a power of heating and moistning, and therefore is convenient for such as are Hectick. Nature also affords bathes, for the imitation of bathes artificiall, and of naturall Bathes, the Physitian may prepare many things to supply the want of them. CHAP. XLII. Of Soapes. SOap also, Sapones. or Wash-balls are used to certaine parts of the body, which are prepared in this manner; There is taken of Venice Soap made smooth, How mad or of some other good and white Soap as much as is sufficient, to which is added six or eight times so much Powder, and all of them are mingled in a sufficient quantity of a water that is proper,
and reduced into one masse, from whence round Balls are made in the forme of an Apple. They are exhibited principally to cleanse the body, or some parts thereof, and to give a pleasant sent to it. CHAP. XLIII. Of Cauteries. LAstly, Cauteries. That we may speak something also of Potentiall Cauteries, their preparation is manifold, and there is no man, but here will somewhat boast: But the most profitable which will make an Escarre soonest without paine, and other Symptomes, is that which is thus prepared; Take the Lee, whereof black Soap is made and put it into a Frying-pan, till it become almost as hard as a stone, and when it growes cold cut it into the forme of great Dice, and let it be kept in a glasse close shut, least it should melt, and it is commonly called the Corrasive stone; the use whereof is very frequent at this day; to quicken Ulcers, by the which humours may be diverted from the more noble parts, to the ignoble, and therefore they are called Issues, or Fon∣tanells. HONOƲR, GLORY, and THANKS∣GIVING be to GOD alone. FINIS.
Bookes Printed for LODO LLOYD, and sold at his Shop next the Castle-Tavern in CORNHILL. BƲrtons Anatomy of Melancholy, Folio. A Historical description of the Fast-Indies, by Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, Folio. Mr. John Goodwins, Redemption redeemed, Fol. Divine authority of the Scriptures, 4o. Antapoligies in answer to Edwards, 4o. Theomatica, or the danger of fighting against God, 4o. Anticavilearisme, 4o. Hagiomastix, or a Scourge for the Saints, 4o. Vindication of the Sentence past upon the late King, 4o. Reply to A.S. in vindication of the Congregationall way. 4o. Answers. 4o. Fresh discovery of a high Presbyterian spirit, 4o. Quaeries concerning the Government, 4o. Vindication of the change of Government, intituled Peace protected, 4o. Apologist condemned, 4o. Three several Disputations concerning the extent and death of Christ, with Mr. Powell and Mr. Simpson. 4o. Exposition of the ninth to the Romans. 4o. Catabaptisme, in vindication of Infants Baptisme, proving not onely its lawfulnesse, but divine In∣stitution, 4o.
Pagans Debt, and Dowry, 4o, Agreement and distance of Brethren, being a brief survey of the Judgment of Mr. J.G. on Justifica∣tion, 4o. Defence of the true meaning of Rom. 4.3.5.9. in answer to Mr. Walker, 4o. Water-dipping, no firm footing for Church-com∣munion, 4o. Return of mercies, 12o. Saints interest, 12o. Behm's Mysterium magnum, or an Exposition of Genesis, fol. The principles of the Divine Essence, 4o. Three-fold life, 4o. Foure questions of the Souls originall and nature, 4o. On the two Testaments, Baptisme and the Supper, 4o. Mercurius Teutonicus, 4o. Way to Christ discovered, to which is added a Trea∣tise of the Complexions, 12o. Tree of Christian faith. 4o. A true relation of the Authors life and death, fol. Considerations of Infants Baptisme, by Mr. Horne, 4o. Antipoedobaptisme, or a Treatise against Infants Baptisme, by John Tombes, 4o. Exposition of the eleven first Chapters of Job, by Mr. Joseph Carill, 4o. Some baptismall abuses discovered, 4o. A doubt resolved, or satisfaction for the Seekers, wherein the case touching an Administrator of Gospell Ordinances in these times, is handled by Mr. Wil. Allen, 4o. Doctrine of Justification asserted and vindicated in
answer to Mr. Wil. Eyre, of Sarum, and Mr. Rich. Baxter of Kederminster, by Mr. John Eedes Minister of the Gospell, 4o. Monarchy or no Monarchy in England by Mr. Wil. Lilly, 4o. Divine Opticks, or a Treatise of the eye, by Mr. Re∣bert Dingly, M. A and Minister of Brixton in the Isle of Wight, 8o. Astrea, or true loves Mirror, by Leonard Willan, Gent, 8o. The exceeding riches of Grace, advanced in Mrs. Sa∣rah Wight, by H. Jessey, 8o. Gospel-liberty, by Mr. Cradock, 4o. The Prophesie of Daniell explained by Ephr. Huit, Pastor to the Church at Windsor in New-England, 4o. The Anatomy of Conscience, by Mr. Ephraim Huit, 4o. Supplication of Saints, by Thomas Sorocould, 12o. Saints daily exercise by John Preston, D D. 4o. The Christians daily walk in holy security and peace by H. Scudder, 12o. The pouring out of the seven Vials, by Mr. John Cotton, of Boston in New-england. 4o. The power of the Keys, by Mr. Cotton, 4o. Silex Scintillans, the second Edition enlarged, with a second part added thereunto, by Henry Vaughan Satyrist 8o. A Tteatise of faith, by Fzekiel Culverwell, 12o. The Doctrine of faith, by John Rogers, 12o. Graces and Prayers for Children, 8o. Fire of the Sanctuary, by Mr. Bruges, 12o. Martyrs Flowers, by Clement Cotton, 12o. Balm from Gilead, by Mr. Robrough, 8o. Signes of a godly man, by Mr. Byfeild, 12o.
The right use of Promises, by Jer. Lewis, 12o. A definition of faith, by Timothy Bat, 12o. Three questions of free justification, Christian liber∣ty, and the use of the Law, by Samuel Torshell of Banbury. 12o. The Saints humiliation by Sam: Torshell, 4o. Tree of life, or the blood of the Grape, by Tobias Whitaker, Dr. of Physick, 8o. Job Paraphrased, by George Abbot, 4o. The Works of Dr. Stoughton, 4o. Questions and answers on the Common Catechism, by John Ball Minister of Langton, 8o. Right receiving of Christ, by Daniel Dyke, being a Treatise of the Lords Supper, 12o. A Treatise of the morality of the Sabbath, by George Abbot, 4o. Reformation sure & steadfast, by Sam. Farecloth, 4o. Marrow of Sacred Divinity, by Dr. Ames. Saints Nosegay, by Sam. Clark. An Exposition of the Canticles, by Thomas Bright∣man, 4o. A Treatise called the two Covenants from Sinai, and Sion, drawn up Catechistically, by Sam. Slater, 8o. Godly mans choice, by Mr. Scudder, 12o. The Anchor of hope for Gods tossed ones, by John Wells, 12o. The Spirit convincing of sin, by Peter Sterry, 4o. Christ alone exalted in the perfection and encou∣ragements of his Saints (notwithstanding sins and tryals) by Dr. Crispe. 8o. A small Catechisme, called Milk for Babes, by John Cotton of New-England, 8o. Golden Sands, with a few short hints about the ri∣ches of grace, by John Bachilcr, 12o. Spaniards cruelty and treachery in peace & war, 4o.
Quakers quaking principles, by Ellis Bradshaw, 4o. Quakers Idol, by Josuah Millar, 4o. Magia Mdamica, or the antiquity of Magick, and the descent thereof from Adam. Lumen de lumine, or new magicall light discovered and communicated to the world. Anthroposophia Theomagica, or a discourse of the na∣ture of man, and his estate after death. (All three) by Engenius Philalethes, 8o. Expositions with observations on several Scriptures, by Isaac Pennington; Junior, Esq 4o. Postilion, or Prophetical Prognosticks of the wars of Christendome, written in high Dutch, by Paulus Felgenhowre, translated in the year 1655 4o. Garden inclosed, Christs Church, Christs Garden, by Paul Hobson, 8o. The Protestants practise, or the Compleat Christian, containing the summ of Christian Divinity, by a Reverend Father of the Church of England, 12o. The whole grounds of Physick and Chyrurgery, by that great and famous Physitian Dan. Synertus, Dr. and Professor of Physick, made English for the benefit of the unlearned, by I. O. late of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge. 8o. Severall Sermons and Discourses of Mr. Wil. Dell, Mr. of Gonvill and Cajus Colledge in Cambr, 4o. The Orthodox Evangelist, by Mr. John Norton of Boston in New-England, 4o. The Chymists Key to shut or to open, or the true Doctrine of Corruption and Generation, by that juditious and industrious Artist Henry Nollins, published by 'Eugenius Philalethes. Short Arithmetick, or the old and tedious way of numbring reduced to a new and brief method, by Edward Howes, Rector of Gouldenham in Essex, 12o.
DOCTOR D. SENNERTVS OF AGUES AND FEVERS. Their Differences, Signes, and Cures. Divided into four Books: Made English by N. D. B. M. late of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Lodowick Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhil, 1658.
To the Reader, HEALTH and SAFETY. WOnder not Reader, that you see these Rarities in the English Tongue, written by the learned Professor of Physick, D. Sennertus; neither be an∣gry that the Mysteries of this Noble Art are laid open for the unlearned to peruse, for such I design them. The antient Greeks as Hippocrates, Galen, &c. and the Arabi∣ans, as Avicen, Averoes, Mesue, Serapio, &c. wrote all in their own genuine lan∣guage, as Celsus, Serenus, and other La∣tines also in their vernacular and mother Tongue. The Author teacheth the knowledge of those diseases that reigne amongst us, and the cure of all sorts of Fevers, continued and intermittent (which are called Agues) he shews the way to cure the Small Pox, nay the Pestilence or Plague it self, when it is never so contagious.
Kind Reader, I wish thee no greater happiness in time of sickness, then this Book to advise thee, where an able Phy∣sitian is wanting; I hope it will find acce∣ptance by thee, and be both welcom and profitable to thee. For my part, as I ex∣pect no thanks, nor desire no commenda∣tion, so I fear no ignominy or calumnia∣tion. May it prove as beneficial to all that read it in this Tongue, as he desires it may that writes it; for seriously, he assures the world, that all true Christians Lives are as dear to him as his own; and their health desired most candidly by him, that esteemeth and valueth nothing so much as the publique good of his Brethren. Not long since, this Authors five Books of Institutions of Physick and Chyrurgerie, were published in the English Tongue; which incomparable Piece I recommend to thy serious perusal, as the best founda∣tion for Practise) that any man hitherto hath laid; Without any further troubling of thee with these Epistolary lines, I refer thee to the Book it self; and so Farewel.
The Table. BOOK I. Of Fevers in general, and of an Ephemera, and of a Synocha with putrifaction. OF the Nature of a Fver, Chap. 1. p. 1. Of the causes of Fevers in general, ch. 2. p. 3. Of the Symptomes of a Fever in general, ch. 3. p. 4. Of the differences of Fevers in general, ch. 4. p. 5. Of the Cure of Fevers in general ch. 5. p. 6. Of the Fever Ephemera, ch. 6 p. 6. Of an Ephera of more days, and of a Synocha with∣out putrifaction, ch. 7. p. 10. BOOK II. Of Putred Fevers. OF putred Fevers in general, ch. p. 12. Of the differences of putred Fevers, ch. 2. p. 15 Of the sign of putred Fevers in general, ch. 3. p. 16 Of the Cure of putred Fevers in general, ch. 4 p. 17. Of breathing of a Vein, ch. 5. p 18 Of Purging, ch. 6. p. 19 Of co-coction and separation of Humors, ch. 7. p 22 Of Sudoificks and Diureticks, ch. 8. p. 23 Of Diet in putred Fevers, ch 9. p. 24 Of the differences of putred Fevers, ch. 10. p. 27 Of a continued putred primary Fever, and first of a Synocha in particular, ch. 11. p. 28 Of a Causus or Burning Fever, ch. 12. p. 31 Of continued periodick Fevers in general, and of a continued Tertian, ch. 13. p. 33 Of a continued Quotidian, ch. 14. p. 36 Of the Fever Epiala, p. 38 Of the yncopal Fever p. 39 Of a continued Quartan, ch. 15. p 40 Of Symptomatical Fevers, ch. 16. p. 41
Of Intermitting Fevers in general, ch. 17. p. 46 Of Intermitting Fevers in particular, and first of an Intermitting Tertian, ch. 18. p. 55 Of a Quotidian Intermittent, ch 19 p. 61 Of an intermitting Quartan, ch. 20. p. 62. Of compound Fevers, and Semi-tertians, ch. 21. p. 67 BOOK III. Of a Hectick Fever. OF the nature of a Hectick Fever, ch. 1. p. 71 Of the signs of a Hectick Fever, ch. 2. p. 72 Of the Cure of a Hectick Fever ch. 3. p. 73 BOOK IV. Of the Plague, and of Pesti∣lential and malignant Fevers. OF the Nature of the Pestilence, ch. 1. p. 75 Of the causes of the Pestilence; ch. 2. p. 77 Of Contagion ch. 3. p. 79 Of the signs of the Plague, ch. 4. p. 81 Of preservation from the Pestilence. ch. 5. p. 82 Of the Cure of the Pestilence, ch 6. p. 85 Of the nature of a pestilent and malignant Fever, and the difference of them from the Plague, ch. 7. p 89 To what kind of Fevers pestilent and malignant ones prtain, ch. 8. p 90. Causes of a pestilent & malignant Fever, ch. 9. p 91 Signs of malignant and pestilent Fevers, ch. 10 p. 92 Of the cure of malignant and pestilential Fevers in general, ch. 11. p 93 Of a malignant Fever, with the Measles and Small Pox, ch. 12. p. 97. Of the Spotted Fever, ch. 13. p. 105 Of the English Sweat, ch. 14. p. 108 Of the Ʋngarick Disease ch. 15. p. 110 Of a malignant Fever with the Cramp, ch. 16. p. 114 Of a malignant Fever with a Catarrh, and a Cough and the Squincy, ch. 17. p. 116 Of the Cure of Symptomatical Fevers, ch. 18. p 118
Book I. Of Fevers in General, and of an Ephemera, and of a Sy∣nocha with Putrefaction. CHAP. I. Of the Nature of a Fever. THat which is called by the Latines a Fever, The name. of a Fever by the Greeks (from fire) is called the fiery di∣stemper; Hippocrates plainly calls it fire, if it be very vehement, as being by the consent of all men a hot distemper; For although some Ger∣mans call it Daskalte, yet that appellation belongs not to e∣very Fever, neither doth it express the nature of a Fever, but only signifieth Cold, An intermitting Fever may be so called. A Fever is a hot distemper of the whole body, atising from heat, kindled contrary to nature in the heart, Its defini∣tion and nature. and by the me∣diation of the Blood and Spirits, conveyed through the veins and arteries to all the parts, and hindring natural actions, un∣less it be prevented. For a Fever is generated, when (as Galen 1. Aphor. 14. hath it) The native heat is become fiery; Generati∣on of it. For seeing that all the parts of the body have a certain temperature, and all of them are actually hot, every one according to its own degree, and thereby are rendered fit to perform natural actions; If
in the heart, from whence the vital heat is diffused over all the parts of the body, each part receiving its due temper from thence, a certain preter-natural heat be kindled and spread o∣ver the whole body, so that to the natural temperature of the parts some degrees of preter-natural heat are added, and that actual heat shall be increased; a certain excess of heat and a hot distemper is kindled in the whole body, which is called a Fever. Which distemper indeed formaliter, as some say, is contrary to nature, and is called a Fever; but materialiter 'tis not altogether contrary to nature, for unless there had been before some degrees of natural heat extant, the superveni∣ent heat could not constitute this degree of heat. And indeed a hot distemper only constitutes a Fever; Driness is no part of the Essence of a Fever. for although all fevourish heat tend to driness, yet that driness is not sickness in all Fevers, neither is the body by fevourish heat rendred unfit to perform its natural actions, it is so by dri∣ness in every Fever that the natural actions are hindred; but although the fevourish heat always tend to driness, yet often∣times the disposition of the body wherein that heat acteth, and moisture therewithal, hinders the production of a disease by driness. The adequate Subject of a Fever is the whole body, The Sub∣ject. or cer∣tainly most of its parts, but the principal is the heart, as being that wherein that heat is first kindled, and from thence communicated to all the other parts of the body, unless it be hindred; nor can a Fever be generated, unless the heart first become hot. Indeed the whole body is the Subject of a Fever in regard of the similiar parts, and as it is indued with actual heat, which is as it were kindled by the innate and influent heat; For this heat when it is changed and converted into a fiery heat from a temperate and moderate, a Fever is stirred up. The immediate cause of a Fever is heat kindled in the heart contrary to nature, The proxi∣mate cause. and diffused over all the body; For as the heart whilest it is well and according to nature, is the foun∣tain of natural heat, and disperseth the same over all the bo∣dy, so if it grow hot contrary to nature, it distributes that unnatural heat over all the parts. For although a Fever may be kindled by the inflamation of other parts likewise, yet that happens not unless that heat be first sent to the heart, and af∣terwards from thence to all the parts of the body, whence it comes to pass that in every Fever the Pulse is changed. Ne∣vertheless every kind of heat in the heart is not sufficient to
cause a Fever, but such a kind of heat it ought to be, as can cause such a hot disease as can hinder the performance of natu∣ral actions. Whence 'tis manifest that a Fever is one thing, A Fever and feve∣rish heat differ. and a fea∣vourish heat another thing. A Fever properly is that hot di∣stemper which happens in the living parts of a body, and ren∣ders them unable to act; but the fevourish heat is also in the humors and spirits, and stirrs up that hot distemper of the bo∣dy, which constitutes the essence of a Fever. CHAP: II. Of the causes of Fevers in general. ALthough there is but one only cause of a hot distemper of the whole body, which constitutes the essence of a Fever, namely, preter-natural heat kindled in the heart, and thence distributed over all the body, yet the causes from whence that heat in the heart ariseth, are several, as Galen of the causes of diseases, cap. 2. and in the first book of differences of diseases, cap. 3. recites five, Motion, Putrefaction, Con∣tact of some hot thing, Cloasure of the pores of the skin, or a Retention of a hot stream; and lastly Mixture with some hot thing: And of these causes, some by themselves, and some by accident stir up heat. First from Motion, Motion. sithence the Spirits and humours of our bodies are hot, from the confluence of them into any part, according to the various motion of the body and mind, heat is increased, which if it be greater, and be either kindled in the heart, or communicated to the heart, a Fever ensueth. Secondly, Putrefaction excites heat. Putrefa∣ction. For since all things that do putrifie become hotter, and out of putred bodies are exalted many hot vapours, thence heat is conveyed to the heart by the veins and arteries, and from thence a Fever raised. Thirdly, contact of a hot thing exciteth a Fever: Contact of a hot thing. As if the body wax hot by the Sun, Fire, Bath, or Medicine, and that heat be sent to the heart a Fever followeth. Fourthly, if the pores of the skin are closed, and a hot stream and hallituous excrements, Retention of a hot steam. which in concoction are genera∣ted in the body, and use to be sent out through the pores of the skin, be penn'd in, heat is thereby kindled, and a Fever bred. Lastly, when hot things are mingled with humours and spi∣rits, as meat, drink, hot Medicines, all those communicate
that heat which they contained in themselves to the Spirits and humours, which if they penetrate the heart, and from thence be distributed to the other parts of the body, a Fever is there∣by kindled. And indeed the fourth of these causes, or the retention of the hot effluvium, is sufficient alone without the rest to cause a Fever: But the other causes without this can hardly do it. For although from Motion, Putrefaction, Contact, and Mixture with a hot thing, hot vapours are stirred up in the body; yet if the body freely ventilate, and that so much be daily evaporated and emitted of those vapours as are generated, a Fever is not easily occasioned, but when those vapours are detained, a Fever is soon kindled. But although these causes if they be powerful, Disposition of a body to a Fever. may raise a Fever in any body whatsoever, yet in bodies inclinable an or∣dinary power in the causes may suffice to beget a Fever. Now they are most inclinable to Fevers which abound with much heat, salt and sharp humours: For which reason Youths are more apt to Fevers, of which you may read, Galen 8 Of the Method of healing, cap. 8. where the whole order of Inclinati∣ons to Fevers are set down. 1. Hot and dry. 2 hot and moist. 3. hot only. 4. dry only. 5. temperate. 6. cold and dry. 7. cold only. 8. moist only. 9. cold and moist. Yet to another kind of Fevers other bodies are more inclinable. CHAP. III. Of the Symptomes of a Fever in general. WHereas in a Fever the temper of a body is changed, Symptomes of Fevers. and rendred hotter, hence certain Symptomes of Fevers must necessarily ensue: And first of all it is hence manifest, that those actions are especially hindred, which should be performed by the similar parts as they are such, and by the benefit of the temper of each such part, no organick part concurring. Such action since it is Nutrition, and those that are subservient thereunto, they are especially hurt in Fevers. Yet because the Instruments by which other actions are performed, consists of similar parts, that imperfection is derived to the hinderance of them, as of vital and animal acti∣ons. Indeed the vital actions are principally hurt in a Fever, because the fevourish heat is first kindled in the heart. Whence in all Fevers the Pulse becomes more frequent and swifter; for since the motion of Pulses in all Fevers may be increased,
first, a thick Pulse, as being most facile of all; but if that fre∣quency satisfies not the necessity, celerity happens, which if that be not sufficient, then magnitude follows: So that the strength be not debilitated: The animal actions also are often hurt. As for other Symptomes, preter-natural heat is obser∣ved to offend internally or externally. Also the excrements and qualities of a body are variously changed by reason of the hinderances of concoctions. CHAP. IV. Of the differences of Fevers in general. THe differences of Fevers are taken from their essence, Differen∣ces. or from their accidents. Hippocrat 6. Epid. comment. text. 29. propounds the differences taken from the heat it self of the Fever, that some Fevers are biring, namely, such as strike the hand of them that touch them, and by reason of that sharp vapour, which is stirr'd up by putted matter, it doth as it were prick the hand; but a mild one is such as hath troublesome heat, but not so violent. Moreover the heat o some Fevers at the first touch is not sharp, and nipping, but if the hand be continued longer, afterwards it betrayes itself. On the contrary others are quick at first to the touch, but if the hand continue longer, it is overcome by the hand, and a little abated. But those are the most proper differences which are taken from inherence in the Subject, and the cause of inhering, which Fevers are divided into Ephemeraes, putred and hectick, the truest foundation of which division is, that one Fever is in habitude, the other in habit, for although the fevourish heat in every Fever possess the similar parts of the body; yet some are so inherent in the body, that they require no cause to che∣rish them, and although they are not fed by the kindling of hu∣mours and Spirits, nevertheless they will continue, which sort are called Hecticks. Another hot distemper is so inherent in the similar parts of the body, that unless it be cherished by the kindling of humours and Spirits it can no more subsist, which Fever is called a Fever in habitude, which in respect of the cause is twofold, an Ephemera, to which also a Synocha without putrefaction is referred; and a putrid. There is another thing worth the noting, that one Fever is Primary, another Symptomatical, Primary is that which fol∣lows no former disease, but depends on its proper cause: Se∣condary
or Symptomatical is that which ariseth from the in∣flamation of any member. See Galen. 4. Aphor. 7. But of Symptomatical this is to be noted, that those which by the ancients were accounted Symptomatical, were indeed primary many of them, and inflamations of the parts, of the Membrane that covers the ribbs, of the lungs or chopps, ra∣ther happened to those parts, then the Fever to take it's rise from them: Feavers accompa∣nied. Which Fevers may be called Comitatae, or such as accompany the Fever. CHAP. V. Of the cure of Fevers in general. NOw to the cure. Cure. A Fever as it is a Fever being a hot distemper, indicates cooling things are to be used. Ga∣len. 8. Meth. Med. Cap. 1. But because there is no small difference amongst Fevers, and that a Fever is often joyned with it's cause, regard is to be had of the cause of the same. Nay indeed because the cause often offends more then the Fever it self, the Fever is so to be cool∣ed, as that the cause may not be cherished, and those things be detained in the body which ought to be evacuated. And oftentimes error is committed in this; whilest regard is had only of the heat, cold things are administred, by which the cause of the Fever being detained, the Fever is prolonged: Whereas on the other side, heating things, as likewise either opening or sudocifick things, without cooling medicines, of∣ten with happy success cure the Fever; For the cause being ta∣ken away, the Fever it self ceaseth of it's own accord; Where∣of more particularly hereafter. CHAP. VI. Of the Fever Ephemera. THere are two sorts of Fevers whose heat are inherent in our bodies in habitude. Feavers in habi∣tude. For that the hot distemper of the parts is cherished either by the heat of the Spirits or humors; and the humors are inflamed either with or without putrefaction. Those Fevers which are sustained by the heat of the Spirits and humours without putrefaction, The name Epheme∣ros. are called Ephemerae and Humorales without putrefaction: Those which are kindled by putrifying humours are called putred Fevers. That Fever which is cherished by the kindling of Spirits,
is called by the Greeks, Puretos Ephemeros, by the Lattines, Diaria and Ephemera, by a name not taken from the nature of the disease, but from it's duration. In respect of the Es∣sence thereof, it may be defined thus: Definition It is a Fever arising from and depending on the heating and inflaming of the vital Spirits. The proximate cause of this Fever is the heat of the vital Spirits kindled contrary to nature, The next cause. which being spread over the whole body through the arteries, heats the whole against nature. That heat is stirr'd up from all those causes before mention∣ed in the second Chapter, only except from putrefaction; Remote cause. which sometimes immediately, sometimes remotely, by means of the natural and animal Spirits heat the vital; to wit, perturbations of the mind, sadness, fear, sollitude, anger, over much watching, too much intentiveness of the mind; too much exercise of body, grief, hunger, thirst, hot meats and drinks, drunkenness, crudities in bodies cholerick, heat of air, fire, hot Baths, retention of the hot Effluvium, infla∣mations of Kernels and Buboes, from the which heat alone without putred vapours is conveyed to the heart according to the vulgar opinion. Yet it seemeth not impossible but that those putred vapours by the veins and arteries next to the part affected, may be communicated to the heart. And so these Fevers should rather be Symptomatical then absolute, putred then Ephemeral. Those that are hot and dry easily fall into this Fever, Dispositi∣on of body. in whom many hot dry vapours are coliected, which are easily inflamed by causes heating them more. Amongst the Signs by which this Fever is known and dis∣cerned from others, in the first place, Galen. 1 de differ. Diagno∣stick signs. Fe∣brium c. 7. saith, it beginneth from some procatartick or evi∣dent cause; which indeed is an inseperable sign, but not a proper sign; for although a Fever that doth not arise from a manifest cause is not an Ephemera, yet every Fever which ari∣seth from a manifest cause is not therefore an Ephemera. 2. Moreover the Urine in substance, colour, and contents, is most like unto the Urine of healthy men, or at least recedes not much from them, which in an Ephemera, which pro∣ceeds from crudity, it useth to do, in which the Urine useth to appear more crude and whiter. 3. The Pulse is neerer to a natural one, then in any other Fever; only that it useth to be extended in magnitude, celerity, and frequency. Yet in re∣gard of the cause which occasioned the Fever, some change
may be made in the Pulse. 4. The heat of this Fever is gen∣tle and weak in respect of other Fevers. 5. Nay in the very state and height thereof it is somewhat more gentle and mode∣rate. 6. This Fever invades without shakings, or tremb∣lings; it's increase and augmentation in heat and pulse is free and equal. 7. The declination is performed by moisture, or moist evaporation, by sweat like theirs who are sound in health, which by a little exercise more then ordinary comes forth, and a perfect apurexsie follows that moisture, so that after the decli∣nation no footing is left for the Fever, either discernable by Pulse or any other circumstances: And in case any footing be left, it is a sign that it will turn into another sort of Fever. The causes are most perfectly to be known by the relation of the sick, which may instruct the Physician whether from passi∣on of the mind, exercise of the body, or any other evident cause this disease hath been occasioned. These causes also affords some signs of themselves, which the Physician cannot be ig∣norant of. These Fevers are the shortest of all others, Progno∣sticks. and continue not above twenty four hours: There is no danger in them, unless some error be committed, and for the most part they are con∣quered by nature, wherefore Physicians are seldom called to their cures. Yet according to the diversity of their causes some are cured more easily, others with more difficulty. For those causes which are hardly taken away, and the humours are ap to corrupt, a Fever introduced from such, easily degenerates in∣to a putred; which happeneth when it is extended above four and twenty hours, or no sweat appears, and pain in the head be present and persevere: And it degenerates either into a Sy∣nocha without putrefaction, if the body be youthful and ple∣thorick; or into a putred, if the body be cacochymick, or into a Hectick, if the body be hot, dry, and lean. And the pro∣per signs of those Fevers shew into what sort of them the trans∣mutation will be made. Moreover sithence this Fever is a hot distemper of the whole depending on the heat of the Spirits inflamed: Indicati∣on. And seeing the heat of the Spirits, and the distemper thence introduced indi∣cate cooling, yet if the cause exciting the same be still present, that also ought to be taken away. These Fevers are cured by good dyet, The Cure. so that there is seldome any need of strong medicines; the food therefore ought to be cooling and moistning, the meat of good juyce, and easie of concoction, principally cream of Baey, the rest may be mixed
with lettice, sorrel, juice of Citron or Lemmon, Vinegar. The drink should be barley-water, small beer or small white∣wine: Yet if pain in the head be present, or that the Fever be occasioned by anger, or from a bubo, then wine is to be refrai∣ned. The Ancients most frequently used Baths of warm wa∣ter, but at present, neither the same industry is used in prepa∣ration of them, neither are men in our age so accustomed and disposed to bathe. In the first place diligent care is to be had of that Fever E∣phemeral, which ariset hfrom the clovure of the skin, Cure of an Ephemer a from clo∣sure of the skin. or it's thickness, or crudity of the stomack, since they easily turn in∣to putred Fevers. And an Ephemera which is caused by stop∣page of the pores of the skin, since it comes to pass rather from plenty of blood, then ill habit of body, in that a vein is forth∣with to be opened, that the blood may be diminished and cool∣ed; but the thickness of the skin if occasioned by cold or a∣stringent things is cured by those things that rarifie and open the same, by a bath of fair water luke-warm, soft rubbings, tem∣perate and luke-warm oils, wherewith the body should be an∣nointed. But if the thickness of the skin be occasioned by dry∣ing things, use moistening dyet, and the body should be an∣nointed with temperate and moistening oils. Lastly, if the Ephemera proceed from crudity, From cru∣dity of the stomack. since that is twofold, the one called Acid, which proceeds from diminution of heat, the other Nitrous, which is caused by preter-natural heat: If from Acid crudity, which seldom happens, the E∣phemera proceed, and that crudity be less, so that meat may be reduced into a better state, rest and sleep are to be occasion∣ed, and before sleep meat of easie concoction in a small quan∣tity is to be taken, and the stomack to be comforted with hot oyls; But if the crudity be great, then the meat is to be ejec∣ted by vomit, or if the sick be not apt to vomit, with a lenitive, he should provoke a stool; before it be distributed into the veins he must then abstain from meat, and the stomack both with internal and external medicines is to be comforted. But if the crudity be unsavoury or nitrous, 'tis to be conected with cold things, wherewith if the concoction be not helped, the corrupt meat is either to be emitted by vomit, or to be purged by gentle medicines opening the first passages only, such as are good against cholar, and as corroborate the stomack.
CHAP. VII. Of an Ephemera of more dayes, and of a Synocha without pu∣trefaction. THere remains another kind of Fever, An Ephe∣mera of many days. called Ephemera, to which that appellation doth not belong, because it is ex∣tended more dayes: Yet it can be referr'd to no other sort of Fever then this more conveniently; therefore although Ephe∣mera should signifie the essence of the Fever, Ephemera is so called though with the addition of more dayes. Such Fevers are those which no wayes differ from Ephemeral Fevers newly described, unless in durability, the cause of which is obstruction of cutanious vessels, which when they do continue stopped, Synocha without putrefacti∣on. an inflamation of the Spirits so long endu∣reth until that cause cease. Moreover to these belong a Syno∣cha without putrefaction, commonly called a Fever inflative, which is generated from the fervency of Spirits, and thinner blood without putrefaction. The cause of this Fever is the prohibition of the hot Efflu∣vium, Cause. arising from obstructions or striction of the pores of the skin in a plethorick body. This continues several dayes, namely, to the third or fourth day, neither can the plenty of vapours kindled, and exhaleing, which proceed from the blood, be discussed in one day, nor can the obstruction or astriction of the pores of the skin be ope∣ned in one day. The Signs of a Synocha without putrefaction are the same with those of other Ephemeraes, Diagno∣stick signs. only more evident: For the heat is somewhat greater then in the others; the skin is not dry but moist as it were, the Urine somewhat thicker and redder, the Pulse vehement, swift, frequent, full, great and equal; the face and whole body red and fresh, and as it were blown up; the veins swell and strut with blood, the head is heavy and respiration more difficult. This Fever as the other Ephemerals is void of danger, Progno∣sticks. and is dissolved by sweat or Hemeroids of the nose, within the fourth day, or if it be protracted longer, within the seventh day, so it be rightly handled. For unless it be rightly order'd 'twill degenerate into a Synocha with putrefaction, or into a Phrensie, Squincy, Plurisie, or some other perillous inflama∣tion. But when this Fever ariseth by the inflaming of the thinner
blood and Spirits in a plethorick body, occasioned by the pro∣hibition of transpiration, Cure. the blood offending in quantity is to be abated, the heat to be cooled, and the closed pores to be opened. Therefore presently a Clyster being first given, or a lenitive medicine, a vein is to be opened, that the blood may be abated, fanned, and cooled, and better governed by nature: And in that more plentifully then in any other Fever you may bleed, yet so, as that the strength may bear it. As for things altering, Galen to cool the blood drinks cold water, and commands the sick to drink as much of it as they please, which may be permitted in those which are accustomed to small drinks, and in whom no danger is to be feared by drink∣ing the same, whether by reason of thick juices which the drink∣ing of cold water may hinder the dividing of, or by reason of some weakenness in the bowels, by which they may be offended at the drinking of water: which unless seeing in our bodies we seldom need, we may rather use other coolers, such as are Oxy∣mel with water, water of Chicory, Endive, decoct of barley, juice of Lemmon or Citron, Oxysauharum, Spirit of Vitriol, and Salt, and the like cooling and opening things. And that the appertion may the more happily be performed, you must abstain from syrrups and conserves with much sugar in them, un∣less they are much watered. If obstruction of the pores of the skin be present, 'tis to be opened as I said before. Their diet ought to be thin and little, Dyet. such as hath force to cool and moisten, principally a Ptisan, the meat should be savoured with juyce of Lemmon, Pomegranates, Goose-ber∣ries: Their drink should be barley-water or small beer. Fernelius 5. cap. of Fevers, Synoch. Bilios. Fernal. makes mention of another sort of Synocha, which is made by the kindling of the Spirits and cholerick humours without putrefaction, and which ariseth from the same causes as an Ephemera, if it happen in a chole∣rick body, which opinion indeed may take place if it be meant of the thinner and subtiler part of the hotter blood, which som∣times useth to be called choler, but not if it be spoken of excre∣mentitious cholar. The end of the first Book.
BOOK II. Of Putred Fevers. CHAP. I. Of Putred Fevers in General. WHereas there is a two-fold sort of Fevers, whose heat is inherent in the parts according to habi∣tude, whereof the one hath it's rise, and is con∣tinued by the kindling of the Spirits, and thin∣nest parts of the blood, without putred humours, the other hath it's original from vapours and putred humours; of the former kind 'tis already spoken; The next business is that we handle the putred Fevers. That there are putred Fevers many things shew; Putred Fevers. For neither is it dissonant from the nature of humours, but that they may putrifie, since that may happen to every mixt body; and we see humours putrifie otherwise in mans body, as it happens in inflamations, wherein quitture is generated, as Galen in the 1 of the differences of Fevers, cap. 6. he compares the putrid∣ness whereby the humours putrifie in the brain, with that, by which Sanies is generated in the humours. And that they do actually putrify, sufficient reasons are given, which hereafter we shall propound, and the matter it self shews that humours do putrifie in the veins. For both blood which cometh forth from breathed veins, and those things which are evacuated by stoo, Urine, sweat, sufficiently by their smell and otherwise, argue pu∣tridity of humours. And the way of cure proves the same, for 'tis not performed by things that alter, but evacuate humours, which is partly instituted by nature, partly by the Physician. For if humoral Fevers could be made without putrefaction, they might also be cured by altering things only. And indeed such Fevers are not only malignant as some think, but the same signs appear, and the same way of cure is exhibited to intermittent and continued, What Pu∣trefaction is. which are void of all malignity and pestilency. Aristotlc. 4. Met. c. 1. defineth putrefaction to be the corrup∣tion of the proper and natural heat in every moist body, by rea∣son
of external ambient heat, but by Galen 11 Meth. med. c. 8. without doubt not so much regarding the common and adequate subject of putrefaction, as to mans body, subject to medicinal consideration. It is (says he) a change of the whole substance of the body putrifying to corruption, by reason of extrane∣ous heat; the ultimate end of putrefaction is the dissolution of the parts whereof the mixt body consists, and the corruption of the whole mixture. That we may here pass by the tedious disputations which are extant amongst Philosophers and Physicians concerning putre∣faction, this is to be taken notice of, How ma∣nifold it is, that putrefaction in re∣spect of the mixt body putrifying, the one, is according to the whole and perfect, according to the who whereby mixt bodies are plainly dissolved in∣to Elements, out of which they are bred: The other is in some part, and imperfect, whereby these which are full of moisture, in some part. putrify. For seeing the moisture wherewith it aboundeth can∣not wholly be drawn out, only some parts thereof, especially the thinner are. And such putrefaction, namely, according to parts, agrees to humors also; namely, when some particles of theirs are really corrupted, and they loose their form: Yet the whole hu∣mour must not necessarily loose it's form; thence it continues it's name, and those corrupted parts being evacuated, it returns to its former nature; unless the corruption have so far gone, that mutation is made into another kind. Which putrefaction, is pu∣trefaction indeed, and not alteration only. For although the whole be not corrupted, yet some parts thereof are really cor∣rupted. Putrefaction in a body is caused by extraneous heat, The cause of putrefac∣tion. and when the humours are no longer governed by the natural heat, but are destitute thereof, they are corrupted. Therefore all things whatsoever which may be an occasion to hinder the innate heat, so that it cannot in its due manner govern the humours, may be said to be the cause of putrefaction of the humours. Putrefaction of humours though oftentimes it be caused by obstruction, and bowels, and prohibiting of free transpiration, since that, as Galen. 11. Meth. med. c. . writeth, things hot and moist, in a hot and moist place not being fanned and cooled by wine easily putrifie: Yet putrefaction may be occasioned with∣out this, by the meeting with putred things, and other causes, which debilitate the native heat, and bring in an extraneous heat. First, certain humours by reason of some internal defect, Default of humours. of heir own accord tend to putrefaction, or at least are casily over∣come
come by small causes of putrefaction, and having gotten the least occasion fall into putrefaction: Such vice humours contract first from bad meats, of the which they are generated, whether they are such by nature, or any other wayes corrupted: More∣over by meats which are easily corrupted, such are fruits rare∣ripe. Thirdly, from the ill dressing of meats, or ill concoction, or when they are taken in excess, or at unseasonable hours, or after a preposterous manner. Fourthly, by the default of the parts appointed for concoction, by reason whereof even the best aliment may be corrupted. Lastly by reason of other causes which either impede concoction, or retain execrements, as also the preposterous use of the six Non-naturals. Therefore by how much the more of such humours are cumulated in the body, by so much the more easily they putrify. For nature doth not defend excrementitious humours so carefully as those which are fit to nourish the body; whence they are easily corrupted and putrify. Blood also out of the veins, being out of it's natural place, and of a hot and moist nature easily is corrupted. But al∣though such humours turn to putrefaction of their own accord, and being in a hot and moist place; yet it happens sooner if any other cause be added. Nay good humours also in a sound body if they are the cause in psse of putrefaction may become putted. Amongst all these causes the first and chiefest is the hinderance of transpiration and ventilation, Transpi∣ration hindred. whether it happen by straitnes of the pores of the skin, or by obstruction of vessels & passages in the more inward parts of the body. For hot and moist things in a hot place unless they are ventilated, easily putrify. Narrowness of pores is occasioned either by constriction from cold, or astrin∣gent things, or driness, as staying under the Sun-beams; or by Obstructions, which either plenty or vicosity, or thickness of humours brings forth. Moreover the internal passages are stopped, either through store of blood over-flowing in the body, or plenty of it contracted up and down in many parts, or by the thickness and viscousness of humours. Secondly, Causae cali∣facientes. those things cause putrefaction, which can kindle preter-natural heat in humours, and call out the native heat; in which number is the Fever Ephemera, which for this cause is often changed into a putred in hot and moist bodies: Moreover the other causes heating, as hot air, a hot bath, too much ex∣ercise of body and mind Meetings with pu∣tre things. Lastly, the meeting with putred things, seeing that which is touched by what is putred, is defiled and putrifieth From all which it is manifest, that a putred Fever is short,
having it's rise from hot vapours stirr'd up by putred humours, and heating the heart, and thence the whole body against nature. CHAP. II. Of the differences of putred Fevers. ALthough there are many differences of Fevers, neverthe∣less those which are necessary to be known for the perfor∣mance of their cure, The diffe∣rence of putred hu∣mors. are taken either from the matter pu∣trifying, or the place putrified. For first either solid parts putrify, or humours, or even the Spirits themselves; concerning which it is controverted as in it's own place shall be shewn. Humours that putrify are as well na∣tural as preter-natural: And those of every kind, blood, Phlegm, choller, melancholy; which both the variety of those things which are evacuated by stool, vomit and sweats, and the diffe∣rence of Symptomes which happen in Fevers doth shew, moreo∣ver the diversity of causes which went before it, whereof some generate this, some that humour, and moreover some afford matter for this, other for that humour. And the humours ei∣ther simply putrify, or a malignant venemous quality and conta∣gion is joyned with it. Furthermore the place wherein the hu∣mours putrefie is not alwayes the same; For sometimes the hu∣mours putrefie within the veins and arteries, sometimes without them. And that putrefaction which is within the vessels, is either equally in all the vessels, or in the greatest, or in certain parts of a vein. Whence these differences of Fevers do arise. First, some Fe∣vers are simply putred, without any malignity or contagion, o∣thers malignant, postilent, contagious. Moreover some Fevers are continual, others intermittent, according as the putred va∣pour which is the cause containing of putred Fevers, or heat stir∣red up by putred humours either continually heats the heart, and from thence is diffused over all the body, or by certain inter∣valls. Of either of which kinds of Fevers there are again many diffe∣rences; For either the putrefaction is kindled in the common vessels, and not in private passages, whence arise continued Fo∣vers, called Primary: Or the putredity comes by the inflam∣mation of some peculiar part, and from thence putred vapours are continually communicated to the heart, which Fevers are called Symptomatical. Primary continued again are two-fold, for some have no aug∣mentation,
nor remission, which they call Fevers containing, or fiery Synochaes. Others are continued, yet there is some increase of heat, and sometimes remisness, which are called Synochaes, and by the ge∣neral name of continual Fevers. The continual for the time of their increase and decrease of heat, some are called tertian, others quotidian, others quartan, according as the heat is exasperated, dayly, each other day, or the fourth day likewise. Intermitting also according to the time of their invading, some are called, tertian, others quotidian, others quartan. Nay it is observed that there are Fevers that have a longer distance between the Paroxismes. CHAP. III. Of the signes of putred Fovers in general. APutred Fever is known. The Diag∣nosticks. 1. From it's heat, which is more gnawing and acrid, then of any other Fever, and that in the increase and state. For in the beginning of fits, the heat doth not at the first touch of the Pulse discover it's acrimony, but if the hand be continued longer it may be percei∣ved, which proceeds from fuliginous vapours which exhale out of putred humours. 2. Because it begins without any manifest cause. Which indeed is a proper sign, but not an inseparable one, for as often as any Fever is kindled without any manifest cause, you may well determine it to be a putred Fever: Yet sometimes humours are so disposed to putrefaction, that upon any light occasion they'l become putred. 3. Urines in putred Fevers ei∣ther are crude or else at least afford but obscure notes of concocti∣on, unless an Ephemeral be degenerated into a putred Fever, o∣therwise there is no putred Fever wherein the Urine in the begin∣ning doth not appear crude or obscurely concocted. 4. The pulse is more changed then in other Fevers. 5. Putred Fevers begin with a cold shaking. Which is a proper, but not an inse∣parable sign. 'Tis a proper sign because neither Diaries nor Hecticks do ever begin with cold shaking; yet it is not insepera∣ble, because all putred Fevers do not begin with a cold fit, as a putred Synocha. 6. It is the property of putred Fevers to return by fits and Paroxismes; and no other Fever hath fits. Yet this is not an inseperable sign, because it doth not agree with all pu∣tred Fevers. 7. Lastly, if any sign be present which is proper to any sort of putred Fevers, 'tis a sign it may admit of the ge∣neral appellation of a putred Fever.
Concerning the event of putred Fevers in general not much can be spoken, The Pro∣gnostick. since there is great variety and difference of pu∣tred Fevers, and the event various: Only this, that the event is best to be known by comparing the magnitude of the disease with the strength of the Patient; For if the patient be very strong, there is much hope of a good end of it, if the party be weak, there is great danger. CHAP. IV. Of the cure of putred Fevers in general. NOw seeing a putred Fever is cherished by the cause con∣taining, Indicati∣ons in pu∣tred Fe∣vers. Indications in putred Fevers are taken some from the Fever it self, others from the cause thereof. Nor indeed ought vital indications to be neglected. First, a Fever as it is a Fever, indicates cooling things; Moreover as that heat of the whole depends on a hot putred vapour, as on the cause containing, the removal of that is also indicated; but because putred vapours depend on putred matter, they cannot be removed, unless the matter putrified be taken away; putrefaction cannot be taken away except its cause be removed, as we said before. First, all evident causes which are present are to be removed; the antecedent causes and whatsoever is in the body, either of su∣perfluous blood or peccant humours, they are to be prepared. and if occasion require, to be evacuated, streightness of passages if it be external or interal in the bowels, they are to be opened and free ventilation and respiration for the humours is to be pro∣cured, Putrefaction is to be resisted, and the putred humours are to be cooled and dryed; the generation of peccant humours, by ablation of their cause is to be prevented. Yet nevertheless seeing that these indications are often contrary, and that those medicines which are administred for the cause, may make the Fever worse, and the contrary. We must be careful how to perform these intentions. And for the most part, since the Fever comes last, the cause is to be taken away first, since the cause hath more power then the disease, and the cause of a putred Fever be∣ing taken away, the Fever of necessity ceaseth. Yet if the greatness of the Fever inforce, 'tis necessary to have regard of the Fever first; and afterwards to the taking away of the cause; or certainly if we may first go to the taking away of the cause, we should be very careful that by those things by which we take away the cause, we increase not the Fever. But those
things are never to be used for the cure of the Fever, which in∣creaseth its cause, fince that for the most pare that is of greatest force. CHAP. V. Of breathing of a vein. NOw for the cure to be performed by these intentions, Letting blood. and first concerning Phlebotomy. Galen 11. meth. medendi. cap. 15. gives this rule. It is most wholesome he sayes in all Fevers to open a vein, not only in continued, but also in all others which the putrifying humour stirreth up, Whether, when, and why to be done in a putred Fe∣ver. especially when neither age nor want of strength prohibites it. And he addeth this reason; For nature which rules our bodies being enlighthed, and unburthened of that by which as with a pack it was oppressed, what remains, it will overcome without difficulty, and therefore not being forgetful of its proper office, will both concoct what can be concocted, and cast out what may be emitted. Yet this precept of Galen is to be rightly understood and explained. For although there are many occasions for opening a vein, and Au∣thors cannot agree about the reason why Galen commands Phle∣botomy in putred Fevers: Yet 'tis clear he did it, that by evacu∣ation of the blood, nature might be enlightened and freed from the greatest part of her burthen, for when blood abounds, the opening of a vein, and purging of Cacochymy are the best reme∣dies; furthermore when it is a plethorick body, without doubt we should open a vein. In some measure the breathing of a vein, doth take away the cacochymy contained in the veins, and mixed with the blood, since the vein being opened, the vitious humours go out with the blood, especially because purgation which can take away foul humours out of the veins, is not so safe as the breathing of a vein to be appointed at the beginning of a Fever. For although Phlebotomy cannot take away all the ill humours out of the veins, yet nature is lessned some part of her burthen, and therefore can concoct and master the remain∣der the more easily, for it may be that the plenty of blood, which before the sickness was no trouble to the party, now being sick and weakened with a Fever, may become burthensom unto him. And although some good blood be emitted therewith, yet that hurts not the sick, but rather helps, as is said: As we also see by critical Hemorrhodes, that nature sends out no small quantity of good blood together. Yet nature for the most part useth to
drive no small part of peccant humours to the extream and sub∣cutaneous parts; thence and in the first place most commonly the worst blood comes first out. Whence it is manifest especially in continual Fevers, in those who abound with blood, or have peccant humours mixt with their blood, that bleeding is pro∣per, and that at the beginning, that nature may be unladed of part of her burthen, but if vitious humours are not intermingled with the blood in the greater veins, the breathing of a vein for e∣vacuation thereof is not to be used. Cooling and fanning the blood is performed by lerting blood: but they are only to be done when bleeding will not cool it alone. Rules al∣lowing Phleboto∣my. We are not only to observe whether bleeding be needful, but also whether the party be strong enough to suffer it, when the strength of the vital faculty is principally to be required, so that the strength do not languish by too great store of blood suf∣focating the Spirits, Age, Habit of body, and condition of the ambient air shew the strength. But how much blood is to be taken away, The quan∣tity that may be ta∣ken. first by the plenty of blood, then by comparing the strength of the Patient with the greatness of the disease, will be manifest; for greater quantity requires larger emission, lesser, less; robustious bodies require larger breathings of veins, weaker require less. The strength varies according to temperament, habit of body, age, sex, sea∣son of the year, the condition of the Heavens, and the Region, as also in regard of certain Symptomes, which use to be accom∣panied with Fevers, as of watchings, pain, and such like. As for the time for letting blood, The time. 'tis to be done when 'tis indicated, and no way prohibited; which is in the beginning, and by how much the more the disease hastens to increase, so much the sooner blood is to be taken away, The place. but if the concocti∣ons are more dull and slow, Pulebotomy may be deferr'd longer. Veins that are opened for evacuation are best in the middle of the arm; yet if the sick be weak, and that also revulsion is to be made from the head, the veins in the foot are to be opened to the greatest benefit of the sick. CHAP. VI. Of Purging. BUt because all putred Fevers have their original from foul humours: Purgation Now we are to consider by what means they may
be evacuated, but seeing those things which evacuate them are twofold, Lenitives and Purges, properly so called: Lenitives are safely to be administred in the beginning of all putred Fevers, because there are scarce any bodies wherein the stomack, guts, and Mesaraick veins contain not some of the peccant humours. These evacuations are to be caused by Clysters, Clysters. called loose∣ning medicines, and by vomit. The Clysters are made of Mallows, Marsh-mallows, Violets, Pellitory, Beares-breech, Mercury, common Oil, or mixt with Violets, brown Sugar, Cassia, Lenitives. Elect Lenitive, Diacatholicon Hiera, and such like. Or those lenitive medicines may be given which are at this day in use: Syrrup of Roses solutive, of Violets solutive, Honey of Roses solutive, Tamarinds, Cassia, Manna, the lenitive Electuary simple, Cream of Tartar. You must use such medicines at the times of remisness and in∣termittings, when the Fever least offendeth, whether it be car∣ly in the morning or in the evening. Sometimes also in the beginning of Fevers you may admini∣ster a vomit; when great store of matter is contained in the sto∣mack and adjacent parts, whereof no concoction can be expect∣ed, the which useth to corrupt and putrifie in the body, and of∣tentimes that is easily vomited out, which with great difficulty is purged out. Vomits. The Vomits are set down in the fifth Book of the Institutions part. 1. Sect. 1. cap. 12. Some give at this day the roots of A∣sarabecca, from half a drachm to a drachm. The Chymists use white Vitriol, Salt of Vitriol, Medicines prepared of Anti∣mony; which do not open only the first passages, but stir the whole body: These are to be used with much caution, and as Hippoc. Purging medicines. 1 Aphor. 24. Not without skilful advice. Concerning Purgers at what time they are to be used, there is great controversie; for although vitious humours at any time during the desease, shew that they ought to be taken away; Yet they ought not to be evacuated at any time, but instead of an Oracle, Galen admonisheth four of preservation of health, c. 5. the Aphorisme of Hippocrates is to be had in esteem, 22. Sect. 1. Such as are concocted and ripe, ought to be purged and removed, not crude; neither in the beginnings, unless the matter trouble much, which seldom cometh to pass. But although some inter∣pret this Aphorism otherwise, yet if it be diligently considered, 'twill be manifest, that Hippocrates meant to speak only of pu∣tred Fevers, and of no other disease, and by crude humours in∣tends those that by reason of their putresection in putred Fevers
ought not to be purged, being unfit; by concocted he intends such as are fitting to be purged: The words crudity and concoction, being transsated from their proper signification of crudity and concoction to excrementitious humours. Although there are certain other preparations of humours for purgation both in Fevers and out of Fevers: Concoction of humors. Yet the name of concoction belongs not to them, and we must distinguish be∣twixt concoction and preparation of humours. Concoction, whereof Hippocrates speaketh, is a reducing of the putred hu∣mours into a better condition, and less obnoxious to the body, and a separation of them from good blood, that they may the more profitably be evacuated out of the body; hence concoction belongs only to humours, which are contained in the Veins, and mixed with the blood, but those that are in other places, and not mixed with the blood, may be purged at any time. For these humours unless they are reduced to a certain mediocrity as they are capable of, and are seperated from laudable blood, the Physician in vain, and with much detriment to the sick, endea∣vours to expell them by purging. For neither will the humours follow the foregoing medicine, neither hath the Physician na∣ture for his assistant, since the matter is only stirr'd and trou∣bled, and various Symptomes arise; either the strength is weak∣ned by the vioence of a strong medicine, or the native heat is consumed and weakened. Yet flatulent humours may be purged without concoction; Flatulent humours. For although these are not as yet concocted, yet because there is not only danger lest they should fall upon some principal part, but also because being thin, and already in motion, they easily follow their leading medicine; and the Physician hath nature to assist him, which alone sometimes expells such humours at the be∣ginning, to the great advantage of the sick. But by flatulent hu∣mours here, we are not to understand only those which hitherto are moved to no determinate part, but also those which although they rush into some part yet they are still moveable, and so dis∣posed, that they'l easily remove into another part, and according to their manner, are hitherto wandring, but have not any fixed seat any where. Concoction, whereof we here speak, is the work of nature on∣ly, which when 'tis strong, gives what perfection they are ca∣pable of receiving, even to the vitious humours, as may be seen in the generation of quitture; and this concoction is made only in putred Fevers▪ For whilest the humours ferment in the veins, like new wine, and the good and bad are mixt together,
and cannot easily be seperated: They are called crude, but when the humours are appeased and cooled, and the good may easily be seperated from the evil, they are said to be concocted. CHAP. VII. Of Concoction and Seperation of humours. ALthough the concoction of humours be the work of na∣ture only. Yet a Physician may help her by his medi∣cines, which may either cherish and strengthen the na∣tive heat, or take away impediments which may hinder nature in concocting, Digestive medicines. and reduce the excess of qualities to mediocrity. And medicines of the latter of these two kinds are called Dige∣stives and Concoctives, namely, such as cool the hot humours, heat the cold, moisten the dry, attenuate the thick, incrassate the thin, and if there are any other excesses of qualities, redu∣ceth them to mediocrity. So Cholerick humours because they are hot to be allayed; Concocters of chole∣rick hu∣mours. and tempered with cold medicines, and their tenuity if too much, to be reduced to mediocrity, and its power of inflaming to be prohibited. These perform this, Chichory, Endive, Sowthi∣stle, Garden-Endive, Sorrell, Burrage, Bugloss, Violets, Bar∣ley; the greater and lesser cooleing seeds, the juice of Lemmon Pomegranates, Goose-berries, Vinegar, Spirit of the salt of Vi∣triol, and medicines prepared of these. Phlegmatick humours because they are thick and dull, Phlegma∣tick. require attenuating, and cutting medicines; such are the opening roots, Hysop, Bittony, Agrimony, Venus-hair, Vinegar, al∣so Spirit of Vitriol. In a Melancholly humour, Melancho∣ly. attenuating medicines are also useful, but such as moisten withal: Such as are Burrage, Bu∣gloss, Polypody, Caeterach or Spleen-wort, and such like. But because in all these Fevers, Resisting of putre∣faction. corruption of humors is pre∣sent, those things which resist putrefaction are also necessary, such are Vinegar, Juice of Lemmon, Citron, Pomegranates, Sorrel, Spirit of Salt of Vitriol. And those things which are spoken about concoction and cru∣dity of humours, principally take place in continued and a∣cute Fevers, which is manifest from Hippocrates, who 1. Ash. 24. adjoynes, In acute diseases seldom, and about the begin∣nings, purging is to be used, and that with diligent premedi∣tation, and 2 Aphor. 29. In the beginning of diseases if ought
be to he moved, move it; but when it flourishes 'tis best to be quiet, namely, if the matter swell big in acute diseases, present∣ly at the beginning 'tis to be evacuated, but if not, a concoction is to be expected, which nature alone performing, very often u∣seth to expell vitious humours, which if it be not done, the Physician useth to do it: The same crudity and concoction is required in intermitting Fevers, for since their causes are scitua∣ted in the Mesaraick veins, and the Mesaraick veins contain and elaborate blood of their own accord, if peccant humours be any where mingled with that blood, and begin to putrefie, cru∣dity is said to be present: But when those humours are so con∣quer'd by nature, that they may easily be seperated, concoction is performed. Although in intermitting Fevers in every fit some of the pec∣cant matter be evacuated, yet notwithstanding the humour, which is the fuel of such Fevers, is not first taken away before the concoction be performed, and the bad are seperated from the good: That which in quartanes useth to be long in doing; For although each Paroxism some may be expelled, yet as Ga∣len. 2. of the difference of Fevers. cap. the last teacheth, super∣fluities in the part wherein the fewel feeding the Fever is contai∣ned being left behind, cause new fits, and purgation is appoin∣ted in vain before the humour be concocted and rendred fit to be purged, whereof shall be spoken amongst the intermitting Fe∣vers. Preparing of humers. But besides this concoction and preparation of humours, there is yet need of other things, which when the humours are con∣cocted, are to be exhibited: For considering purgation that it may be happily used, the passages ought to be open and the hu∣mours fluid, if the passages are obstructed, and thick sluggish humours be present, the wayes through which the humours ought to pass are to be opened, and the humours to be cut and taken away, CHAP. VIII. Of Sudorificks and Diureticks. BUt because nature for the most part expells the concocted matter by sweats, Causing sweat. so that almost no Fever without them ceaseth and is well cured. The Physician ought to imitate nature, and the body being evacuated, to discuss the remaind∣ers by sweats: The Sudorifiques that at this day are in use, are,
Carduusbenedictus, Scabions, Fumetary, Tormentill, Zedo∣arie, Harts-horn, Elder, Bezoar-stone, Methridate, and such like, but no sudoriferous medicine ought to be administred, if any Crisis by stool, vomit, or Hemerrhodes at the nose be ex∣tant, lest nature should be disturbed in it's work. They are most conveniently exhibited at that time, when nature her self useth to remove humours, which happens either before any pa∣roxysm, or at the end thereof. By Urine also sometimes part of the fevourish matter is evacu∣ated, Urine pro∣voked. and therefore Diureticks after other evacuations are to be appointed, and the most temperate amongst them are to be cho∣sen, which together attenuate the humours, and free the passa∣ges from obstructions, as Maiden-hair, Sparagus, Agrimony, &c. But those things which are cold, may timely be used also, since they correct the hot distemper of the humours and parts. CHAP. IX. Of Diet in putred Fevers. LAstly concerning dyet, Dyet. and first, of meat and drink, not only regarding the use of them, for the comfort and re∣freshment of our strength, but in respect of what is to be permitted, and what prohibited; for when nature is most busi∣ed in concoction and evacuation of matter, she ought not to be called from that work to the concoction of meat, hence Hippo. 1. Aphor. 8. When the violence of the disease is great, dyet is to be used most sparingly, and ibid. Aphor. 11. In the Parox∣ism it self, food is to be taken away; for it affords mischief: and when by circuit the Fever returns in the fits we ought to abstain. In the administration of dyet in Fevers, we are to observe, form, Form of Diet. quantity, quality, and time. The form of dyet is three∣fold, thick, indifferent, and thin. Which of these are most proper for every one, is to be collected by comparing the strength of the sick with the morbifique cause; neither ought we to give more meat then the strength can concoct: and we ought to con∣sider whether the strength do more require food, or the disease forbid it, or the contrary: for by how much the busier nature is in oppugning the morbifique cause, by so much the less thre ought to be burthened with food: She is by so much the more busied in opposing the disease, by how much the paroxism is neerer at hand, hence Hippocrates 1. Aphor. 8. When the di∣sease is in it's vigour, then 'tis necessary to use the thinnest
food, and 1. Aph. 7. When the disease is peracute, there are extream labourings; and at height, the thinnest nutriment is to be taken. But when 'tis not at height, and that we may use more nourishing things, by so much is to varied from the thin∣nest of all, by how much the disease is remitted and abated, and ibid. 10. Those who expect the vigour forthwith to come, ought presently to take a little nourishment. They who expect it af∣terwards much, and should both in the vigour of it, and a little before it, abstain. But before-hand the sick should be more plen∣tifully nourished, that he might be the better able to endure the disease. But how dyet is to be moderated according to the strength, Hippocrates teacheth, 1 Aphor. 9. We ought to con∣jecture by the sick, whether he can hold out to the vigour of the disease by the prescribed dyet or not, or whether he will first faint, and being insufficient with such food, should dye before the disease depart and be overcome. And 1. Aphor. 13. Old men that are not decrepid easily endure to fast, according to these, middle aged men, young men less, children least of all; and amongst them especially such as are endued with the choicest and most acute wits: Custom also and course of life is to be con∣sidered in prescribing of dyet. The quantity of meat also is to be considered by comparing of the disease with the strength of the sick: Quantity. For since that we must never give more food then can be concocted at the time when nature is most busied in opposing the morbifique cause, the least quantity of food is to be taken, which is in the height thereof. Concerning the quality of meat, Quality. since it is to be considered either as it is meat, or as it is medicinal meat, in the former respect those meats are to be chosen that are of easiest concoction, full of good juyce, facile to be distributed, and which hath the least excrements: But if it be considered as Medicinal, First, it ought to be contrary to the Fever, and therefore it should be cold and moist, 1. Aphor. 16. moreover it should be repugnant to the causes, and all excess of qualities in them. The time for food is most proper when 'tis indicated, Time. when the body requires nourishment, which is when the former meat is concocted, and no sign is present, which may prohibit the ta∣king of it, to wit, no combate betwixt nature and the disease; therefore during the fits, we ought to abstain. 1. Aphor. 11. un∣less the strength be much decayed and spent. Care also is to be taken what drink is fittest in Fevers, for al∣though it be easier concocted then meat, Drink. and by it's cooling it
mitigates the heat, and the driness is hindred: Yet we are to be careful that nature be not burthened with it, and the concoction of matter hindred by it, and therefore in intermitting Fevers during the Paroxism, we should abstain from drink as neer as we can: But in continued Fevers, when heat, thirst, and debility of strength do require, you may give more drink; but sithence drink is to be considered, not as drink only, but as medicinal, hence it comes to pass, that at certain times, certain drinks are to be chosen. Drink considered as drink, ought to be given ac∣cording to the rules for meat: But as it is considered as altering, by how much the dry heat is more intense, by so much the more, hotter drinks are to be avoided, and the colder to be cho∣sen. Yet regard is to be taken of the cause, and oftentimes there will be need of attenuating and absterging drinks, and not of cooling only; and the matter being deeper fastened in the part, admits not cooling drink. The drinking of cold water is only useful in acute Fevers, 'tis never proper in intermittent. Fair water is often altered with barley, which is called a decoction, and barley-water. Instead of drink, Juleps are also exhibited, water mixed with Honey, Oxymel, Emulsions, Whey, strong beer, wine. But seeing certain drinks for certain Fevers are most convenient, we may more properly handle them severally amongst the different kinds of Fevers, of which sorts are peculiar for such a particular Fever then in general to treat thereof. The air in all Fevers ought to be pure, cold rather then hot, yet so temper'd, Air. that the drawing in thereof may rather allay the fevourish heat, then meeting with a naked body, cause it to shut its own pores, which hinders the discussion of vapours and sweats, and therefore the sick is to be covered with outward gar∣ments, but such as are light, that so the heat may be drawn to the outmost parts of the body. Sleep ought to be moderate. Rest in putred Fevers is most advantagious: Sleep, rest. Excre∣ments, pas∣sions of the mind. Excrements ought not to be retained beyond measure, but to be ejected in due time. The passions of the mind ought to be at peace, and sadness, and anger are to be avoi∣ded.
CHAP. X. Of the differences of putred Fevers. HItherto we have spoken of putred Fevers in general, The diffe∣rences of putred Fe∣vers. it re∣mains that now we speak of them particularly. First their differences are a little more cleerly to be explained. And they are taken chiefly from the matter putrifying, and the place of putrefaction. As for the matter, Feversarise either from choller, or phlegm, From the matter. blood or melancholly: To which not without reason is added a serous humour, especially that Ichor, which is very evil, easily obnoxious to putrefaction, A serous humour. and causeth the blood and other hu∣mours to putrefie more easily. Whence some are of opinion that Ephemeral Fevers, which commonly are said to arise from Spi∣rits kindled, do all proceed from the ebullition of the serous part of the venous or arterious blood: And much more a Synocha without putrefaction; although the vital Spirits being heat may first allure the heat to the serous humour. The same shew that all Synochaes or Fevers containing, as they are called, which have no periods, as well putred as not putred, do arise from the same aqueous and serous humour, whether putrefying or not putre∣fying; whereof the Tract of Fevers may be seen. Those Fevers which proceed from blood do all keep a certain continuity and equality; and are neither exasperated daily, From blood. Phlegm. Choller. nor each other day, nor the fourth day, but those which do arise from Phlegmatick, chollerick, or melancholy humours, all have their periods, whether they are continued or intermittent. Besides these there are other Fevers, Melancho∣ly. which although they are exasperated, yet have no certain periods, such are those which a∣rise from inflammation, putrefaction, worms, corrupted milk; From other causes. as in Infants, blood out of the Vessels, chyle, and blood im∣perfect, putrefying in the Mesaraicks. The matter whereof putred vapours are bred in Fevers, From the place. is ei∣ther contained within the vessels or without. The vessels which carry the perfect blood, as the vena cava, and the arteries, or the more imperfect, as the Meseraick veins. within the vessels. Whilest blood pu∣trifies in the vena cava, there arise continued Fevers, whereof some are called Synochaes, or containing Fevers, others conti∣nued instead of a genus and periodick continued. If excremen∣titious humours putrefie in the Mesaraicks, intermittent Fevers are stirred up, but if imperfect blood putrifie in the Mesaraick
veins, continued Fevers are raised, but calm ones. Putrifying matter without the veslels, Without the vessels. sending putred va∣pours to the veins and arteries, kindles continued Fevers. Such are first Symptomatical, which proceed from inflammations of certain parts. Moreover calmer Fevers, which proceed from the stubborness of the guts and their obstructions. Thirdly, those that are caused by an Ulcer, Fistula, and all putrefaction. Fourthly, from corrupt milk, as in Infants, from blood putre∣fying without the vessels, also the matter of Catarrhs, whence they are called Catarrhal Fevers. Lastly, there are Fevers called Comitatae, or Companions, which are occasioned from matter putrefying in the veins, Fevers ac∣companied. part whereof when nature either expells out of the body, which hap∣pens in a Diarrhaea, Dysentery, and a Catarrh, or protrudeth into some part, which happens in the Meazles, Small Pox, Stragling pains, Quinsey, Peripneumonie, Phrensie, Erisi∣pelas, oftentimes. Another disease then accompanies the Fe∣ver. CHAP. XI. Of a continued putred primary Fever, and first of a Synocha in particular. NOw concerning putred Fevers in particular, A primary continued Fever. and first we will handle a primary continued Fever: A primary con∣tinued Fever is that which comes not to apurexie before it be plainly taken away; and hath its rise from putred humours contained in the greater branches of the vena cava and arterie. For since that thence putred vapours are continually sent to the heart, a continued heat is also caused, thence until it fully be cured there is no absence of fire, neither doth it return by intervalls, with tremblings and shaking fits. Primary continued Fevers are two-fold, Some without any remission or exacerbation of the heat, continue from the begin∣ning to the end: But there are others, wherein the heat before the Fever be throughly cured, doth never totally depart, yet at certain periods is increased. The former are called fiery Syno∣chaes, and Fevers containing; the other are called Synoches, or continued, instead of a genus. The Fever Synocha putred, A Puered Synocha. is a Fever, which without any slacking or increasing afflicteth from the beginning to the end, arising from putrefaction of the blood in the greater branches of
the vena cava. Although continued Fevers may arise out of vessels of determinate parts, yet such are Symptomatical: And if they are true Synochaes, which have their original from the default of any part, as from the womb offending: Yet that part only affords an occasion, the polluted, putredity being commu∣nicated, that the blood in the greater vessels might corrupt. But there are Fevers risen from determinate parts, for the most part continued Periodicks. So sometimes peccant matter in the first passages collected in the first concoction, which useth to go to some of the humours, which at certain Periods are moved, and hath not as yet received its limits for motion, it useth then to corrupt the humours, and communicate putrefaction to the vena cava, which Fevers for the most part are malignant. A putred Synocha hath its original for the most part from transpiration hindred, and want of ventilation of the blood, The cause. and hot fuliginous retentions, by reason of obstruction of veins, as well in the skin, as also in the internal parts. And the blood ap∣pointed to nourish the body putrifies in these Synochaes, and putrefying, continually sends hot vapours to the heart. For when preter-natural heat is so kindled in the veins, that nature can no longer rule it, it becomes putred and is corrupted. Nor is there any need that the putred blood should be turned into ano∣ther humour presently. For blood of its own nature is apt to putrefaction, and in inflamations we see it changed to quitture, not into choller; though nothing hinder it in the veins but that it might: And especially the Ichor or thin wate∣rish part of the blood is apt to turn to putrefaction, and by rea∣son of the Ichor the blood in the first place is corrupted, which happens, when the vapours which ought to transpire, are retai∣ned in the veins. Yet the whole blood doth not putrifie, but some parts thereof, which so long as they are not seperated from the good blood, crudity is said to be present, which afterwards by concoction are seperated from the good blood, which being done, Nature appoints evacuation, by which the blood returns to its former purity again. A Synocha is three-fold, Acmastick, i. e. when it remains al∣wayes in the same state, namely, Differen∣ces. when so much of the humour daily putrifies as is discussed, this is called also Homotonos. Epacmastick or Anabaticos is when the heat continually increa∣seth, and more of the matter is kindled then can be discussed. Paraemastick is when there is more discussed then corrupted, and thence the heat alwayes decresseth. Furthermore it blood which
putrifies be temperate absolute, 'tis called a sanguinious Synoch a in particular: But if it be hotter, which useth to be called cho∣lerick, the disease is then called Synocha bilosa. The Fever is known first by this, Diagno∣stick signs. that it continues from the beginning to the end without any exasperation and mutation: Moreover because the Pulse is great, vehement, swift, frequent, unequal and inordinate. And in a Synocha proceeding from temperate blood the signs of Plethory are present: The blood to him that toucheth seems much and full of vapours, and is not so troublesome and sharp as in other Fevers, and other signes are present which are observed in a Synocha that is not putred. A putred Synocha is distinguished from a non-putred by certain signs. The heat in a putred is sharper then in a non-putred. In a putred the urine is red, thick and troubled, without any sedi∣ment, and crude, or a little concocted in the beginning; the Pulse affords signes of putrefaction, and all the Symptomes are greater then in a Fever that is not putred. A Synochabilosa happens to those that are troubled with cho∣lerick blood, and the heat is sharper then in a Synocha proceeding from temperate blood, thirst is more troublesome, the urine thinner and sharper, and other signes which are usual in cholerick Fevers are discerned. This Fever is the most simple amongst the putred, Progno∣sticks. and easiest to be cured. And being pure, seldom passeth seven dayes, but the spurious is extended to the fourteenth day, and is terminated sooner or later, as the signes of concoction appear sooner or later. A white urine in a Synocha is evil. The least dangerous of all is that which is called Synochos Paracmasticos, next to that Ac∣masticos: But that is most dangerous which continually increa∣seth, and is called Epacmasticos, which easily degenerates into a disease called Causus. And by how much the fewer the evil Symptomes are, by so much the better hopes; the more they are, the more danger is shewn. The whole cure consists in taking away the cause, Indicati∣ous. and alter∣ing the fevourish heat. Blood therefore as abounding in plenty is to be lessened, the pores of the skin to be opened, the causes of obstructions being taken away. The fevourish heat is to be tem∣pered and allayed, if there be strength, as for the most part there is, thin diet is to be used. Therefore a vein is forthwith to be opened in the right arm, a Clyster or lenitive medicine being given first, if occasion require, and to take away as much blood as the strength will permit. Breathing of a vein. and you may more boldly take away blood in this, then in any o∣ther sort of Fever.
Blood being evacuated, Medicines. that the concoction may be made more facile, we are to use those things which allay the heat, free from obstructions, and resist putrefaction; namely, the juice of Sorrel, Lemmons, Citrons, and Syrrups and Conserves prepa∣red of them, Syrrup of Sorrel simple, Oxymel simple, Oxysau∣harum simple, Spirit of Vitriol, and the four cold seeds with cooling waters are to be administred. Principally we ought to endeavour that the pores of the skin may be freed from obstruction, which for the most part is the cause of this disease, which thing Oxymel and wine mingled with honey, and the honey dissolved, will conveniently perform, since they are easily carried to the outmost parts of the body, and attenuate dull thick humours, and simple Oxymel resists putre∣faction. Concoction being perfected, the Ancients used to drink cold water, and gave so much of it to drink, as might not only extin∣guish the fevourish hear, but that the matter concocted might be evacuated by stool, vomit or sweats. But in our countries, sick people are not so accustomed to drink cold water, and many inconveniences are to be feared by the use thereof. So likewise swimming in cold water, which was usual with the Ancients, doth not agree with our bodies. The concoction being perfected, nature useth for the most part critically to evacuate the corrupted matter, which if it be not done, it ought to be performed by the Physician with purging medicines. Dyet in this Fever ought to be thin, Diet. because both that blood aboundeth, and the disease is short; It should be cooling and moistening, and also to have power of attenuating thick hu∣mours, and deterging viscid ones. CHAP. XII. Of a Causus, or Burning Fever. WHereas amongst continued Fevers there is often men∣tion made of a Causus, we are also here to say some∣thing of it: But a Causus is not any difference of a Fever, but rather a measure expressing the quality of fevourish heat. The word Causus is sometimes taken generally, and not so properly, sometimes specialiter, and more properly: Generally for any sort of Fever whose heat is vehement, in particular for a Fever which hath two Pathognomonicks, great heat, extream and
unextinguishable thirst. A Causus properly and in specie so called, is again twofold, legitimate and spurious: legitimate is that which hath alwayes, and that evidently, those two signes joyned with it: an illegitimate is that wherein those two signes are not so evident. Whence it is manifest that burning Fevers, Burning Fevers. and such as pro∣perly and in specie are so called, are continued Fevers, and arise from choller. And so a Causus or burning Fever properly so cal∣led, is a Fever continued, Bilions, and indeed either Synocha bilosa, which we have newly handled, or a continued tertian, whereof we are to speak next. The Pathognomonick signes as we said before, are two, ve∣hement and burning heat, and unquenchable thirst, although the sick shall drink; Diagno∣sticks. and the more legitimate the Causus is, by so much these signes are greater, yet the thirst is sometimes resisted if a little cough happen, which may draw humors from the neigh∣bouring parts. Concurrent signes there are many, as a dry tongue, rough, black, watching, giddiness of the brain, difficulty of breathing, thick and great, and the sick continually blow, opening their mouth, that the hot spirits may the easier exhale. These Fevers if they are pure, Progno∣sticks. never continue long. For na∣ture cannot long endure such burning and vehement heat; and the Symptomes which accompany it with their vehemency. And for the most part they are terminated the seventh day, some∣times the ninth, eleventh, fourteenth: but the spurious are pro∣tracted longer, and all of them are dangerous according to Hip∣pocrates 4. Aphor. 43. Fevers of what kind soever that have no intermission by the third day, are the stronger, and fuller of dan∣ger. Yet some are more dangerous then others, according to the violence of the heat, and of the Symptomes, and force of the strength, and by how much the greater digression is made from the natural state, by so much the more dangerous is the Fever. Hence if an old man be troubled with a burning Fever, which seldom happens, 'tis deadly, as Galen hath it, 1. Aphor. 14. They lye down in no less danger who are exeedingly burnt in cold air: Who if they have not great strength, neither the signes of concoction appear, it can not be that they should escape, as the same Galen 11. Met. med. cap. 9. writeth. To whom if vehe∣ment Symptomes happen, by so much the more dangerous the disease shall be, whether they are Pathognomonick or superveni∣ent, yet if by the other signes, it be manifest to be a burning Fever, and that thirst be wanting, this also is dangerous, for
it shews the sick either to be in a Delirium, or that the desiring faculty of the stomack faileth. Black urines are also evil, as also thin, crude, and such as have other ill tokens in them. But it is good if the sick can easily endure his sickness, the Symptomes being not without vehemency, if he can easily fetch breath; if he complain of pain in no internal part, if he sleep; if he find benefit by his sleep; if the body be equally hot and soft, if the tongue be not too dry, if the urine be good. But if when the signes of concoction appear, and that there is much strength, in a critical day there happen large Hemorrhodes, or bleeding at the nose, without doubt the sick escapeth: For it is proper if there be any other of the pure burning Fevers, that they should be cured by bleeding. Yet sometimes they are determined by Sweats, looseness of the belly, vomits, and imposthums. But there are many Prognosticks of burning Fevers in Hippocrates in Prognosticis, Porrheticus, and Choacis praenotionibus, and there are many expounded in the Institutions, lib. 3. part. 3. But by what means burning Fevers are to be cured, appears by what hath been spoken of a Synocha bilosa with putrefaction, and those things that shall be said of the cure of the continued Tertian shall make manifest. CHAP. XIII. Of continued Periodick Fevers in general, and of a continued Tertian. ANother kind of continued putred Fevers which they call in particular continued, comprehends those Fevers, Continus periodick Fevers. which indeed continually remain, and have no remission before they are plainly dissolved, yet at certain periods they are exaspe∣rated, whence they are called continued periodick and proportio∣nated Fevers. But as Fevers containing have their original from the blood appointed for nourishing the body; so continued Periodicks, their causes. as also intermittints proceed from an excrementitious humour and Cacochymie. Therefore continued Periodicks agree in this with Fevers containing, that both their causes are contained in the vena cava, but with intermittents in this that both proceed from excrementitious humours. But they differ from Fevers contai∣ning, in that they proceed from alimentary blood; these from an excrementitious humour: From intermittent because the
matter which is the cause of continued Periodicks is generated in the second concoction, and contained in the vena cava: But that matter which is the cause of intermitting Fevers is contai∣ned in the first concoction, or certainly in those parts which are about the liver, which are not appointed for perfect sanguifi∣cation. Namely, the matter of continued Periodick Fevers is generated in the Organs of the second concoction, if for any cause whatsoever it be not rightly performed. For then the pec∣cant humours generated in the second concoction are sent with the blood into the veins, which there stirreth up these continued periodick Fevers. Which matter since it is not only confused with the blood, as in intermitting Fevers, The reason of its con∣tinuity. but from the very first original is mixed therewith throughly. Nature also cannot expell it before con∣coction, and therefore the Fever from the beginning continually lasteth. Yet these Fevers have exasperations at set times, because that from the instruments of the second concoction, fresh mat∣ter which is the cause of these periods is afforded, and indeed for the most part from the liver: Whence also continued Terti∣ans are most frequent. These Fevers are generally known because they never come to apurexie, Signs. yet at certain periods they are increased and remitted. Neither doth cold, trembling, nor shaking fits precede their ex∣asperation, neither doth sweat follow their remission. There are three kinds of these Fevers. For some are exasperated each other day, Differen∣ces. and proceed from Choller, and are called Tertians continued. Others every day which are caused by Phlegm, and are called continued quotidi∣ans. Others the fourth day, which arise from Melancholy, and are called Quartans continued. First a tertian continued is a putred Fever, A Tertian continued. arising from blood with ill juyce and choller putrefying in the vena cava, indeed continued, but afflicting most the third day. The causes of this Fever are all things which can increase store of cholerick Cacochymy in the veins, The cause. and being cumulated there of cholerick Cacochymy in the veins, and being cumulated there can introduce putrefaction; such as are before propounded. This Fever is thus known, Signs. in that it is continued, and the third day it is exasperated. Yet there are present other signes and Symptomes of continued and burning Fevers. But what is to be hoped concerning their event, Progno∣sticks. is manifest from things which are spoken of the Prognosticks of burning Fevers. Concerning the indications for cure, Cure. this Fever if it be pure,
since it is exceeding hot and burning, and the cause thereof hot and dry, it requires extraordinary cooling and moistening, and indeed more then any other Fever. The humour it self indicates evacuation; but crudity for the most part forbids it: but if the Fever be spurious, regard is to∣gether to be had to the humour which is mixed with choller: if the Symptomes need it they are to be resisted likewise. Therefore a vein is to be opened so that the strength will per∣mit it, by which means both some part of the peccant humour may be evacuated, Opening a vein. and the blood cooled and revell'd from the more noble parts. And nature her self sometimes useth to make evacuation by the nose in the beginning of these Fevers, where∣by the Fever is wont to be abated; but the vein should be ope∣ned in the cubit forthwith in the beginning, or certainly in the augmentation, and blood is to be taken in such plenty as the strength of the patient requires. But you are not to appoint purgation unless the matter be turged. Lenitives. Yet 'tis very necessary that the belly and first passages be evacuated before a vein be opened, but the medicines which perform that, ought to be cold and moist not hot; or if they are hot, they should be tempered with the mingling of cold. Afterwards altering, namely, Altera∣tives. cooling and moistening medi∣cines are to be exhibited, both which prepare the humour ap∣pointed by nature for concoction, such as are, Syrrup of Sor∣rel simple, Oxymel simple, compound, Oxysauharum simple, Syrrup of Sorrel, Wood-sorrel, the juice of Lemmon, Pome∣granate, the accidity of Endive, Cichory, Violets, Goose∣berries, the four greater cold seeds, Purcelane, Lettice, th flowers of Water-lillies, Santalum, Water of barley, Sorrele Endive, Cichory, Strawberries, Water-lillies, Purcelane, spec. Diamargariti frigidi, and such like, to which for the re∣sisting of putrefaction and hindring inflamation may be added, Spirit of Vitriol and Salt, Nitre prepared is also commended: If Phlegm be mixed, opening and attenuating things are to be added; such as the roots of Fennel, Sparagus graminis, and medicines prepared of them, In leek colour'd aeruginous choller, John Langius. l. 3. epist. 1. c. 4. commends Chrystal. Topical medicines are also profitable to mitigate the heat, as Epithems, Oyles, and Unguents, made of cooling things, Topicks. which should be applied to the heart, liver, or back. Yet you must be careful that you close not the pores of the skin thereby, and hinder transpiration, and therefore before the height they
are seldom used, unless it be when the heat is equally distributed through the whole body, and it is more commodious if they are applied hot then cold. The matter being concocted, that nature might be strength∣ned, and stimulated to expulsion, and that the matter might be expelled either by stool or sweat, the Ancients used great quantities of cold drinks, as Galen teacheth 9. meth. cap. 5. and 4. de rat. vict. in acut. 12. But if so be that after concoction nature do not institute eva∣cuation, Purgation it is to be done by the Physician, with Syrrup of Ro∣ses and Violets solutive, the pulp of Tamarindes, Manna, Ru∣barb, Trypheta Persica, such as have Scamony in them are not to be admitted; yet sometimes some of Electuarii rosati Mesua, de psyllio and of juice of Roses may be given. For causing Urine in these Fevers an emulsion is profitable, prepared of the four great cold seeds, Diureticks with the whey of Goats milk, or barly and strawberry water, or with a decoction of the roots of Parsley. Sweats also ought to be provoked with medicines proper for that purpose, Sydorificks which hereafter shall be mentioned amongst malig∣nant Fevers. Diet ought to be thin; but according as the height of the disease is neerer or farther off, Dyet. it ought to be thicker or thinner. The meat and drink ought to be cooling and moistening, whence a Ptisan is profitable in these Fevers, the rest should be season∣ed with juice of Lemmon and Pomgranates: The drink should b barley water, or water boiled with the juice of Lemmon or Pomegranates, and suggar or small beer. The air should be cold, and if it be not so by nature, it should be prepared by art. If Phlegm be mingled with choller, and the Fever be a con∣tinued Tertian or burning Notha, blood is to be taken away more sparingly: In the preparation of humours, those things are to be added which attenuate Phlegm. Agarick is to be mixed with the Purgers. CHAP. XIV. Of a continued Quotidian. A Continued Quotidian vulgarly called Latica, because it hath a certain hidden and obscure heat, A continu∣ed Quoti∣dian. is indeed a Fe∣ver continually lasting, yet having every day exasperati∣ons arising from indigested phlegmatick humours in the vena cava.
The cause of this Fever is Phlegm mixed with blood in the vena cava, and there putrifying, Cause. and therefore those fall into these Fevers which are of such an age and nature as that their bo∣dies are moister, as children and infants, as also old men and such as have grosser bodies, and are given to their bellies and to idleness, and dwell in moist places, but not young men and such as are cholerick. The signs of continued periodick Fevers are also manifest in this Fever, only the violence is most about the evening. Signs. The heat first is gentle, a little afterwards more sharp, and some∣times seems to abate, and sometimes to increase, by reason of the thickness of the phlegm which purrisieth. The pulses are not so thick and frequent, the urine is not so fiery and red as in other Fevers but thicker, nor are the other Symptomes so vehe∣ment as in other Fevers. Concerning the event. 1. Progno∣sticks. This Fever by reason of the thick∣ness of the humour is long, and hard to be cured, and there∣fore dangerous. And by how much the thicker the phlegm is by so much the more violent and durable, so that it is not ended before the swetieth or sixtieth day, and the beginning is scarce past before the twentieth. 2. It continueth lesser time where many evacuations happen. That which is pure is also longer then that which is mixed with choller, and by how much the worser Symptomes are present, and the strength weaker, by so much the greater danger there is, which if they are not, health is to be hoped for. 3. By reason of the duration of the Fever, and weakness of the Liver, the sick for the most part fall into Cachexy and Dropsie. As to the cure this Fever is more dangerous in respect of the cause, then of its heat; Cure. and therefore since it depends on phlegm that is to be heat, attenuated, cut, and afterwards being con∣cocted and prepared, evacuated, and regard is to be had of the strength, principally of the stomack and Liver. Therefore in the beginning the stomack and first ways are to be opened and evacuated by Clisters and lenitive medicines, Lenitives. or else the matter inherent in the stomack is to be ejected by vomit. Opening a vein. But although the cause of this Fever be cold, yet because it is mixed with blood and putrifieth, some blood may be taken a∣way by opening of a vein, in case that the urine be thick and red, and that the strength will bear it and the age, that nature may be eased of some part of her burthen. Afterwards preparation & concoction of the matter is to be en∣deavored with attenuating things which do not heat much; Preparing and alter∣ing. there∣fore
in the beginning use Syrrup of Sorrel simple, with honey of roses, Oxymel simple, Syrrup of Hysop, Bittony, with the water or decoction of Maiden-hair, Sparagus, Grass, Fennel, Hysop, and medicines prepared of those plants; also Spirit of Vitriol and Salt. When any signs of concoction have appeared you may exhi∣bite some gentle Purger of phlegm, Purging. of Agarick, the leaves of Senna and such like: Hence you must come to stronger prepa∣ring and purging things, and so the matter which cannot be e∣vacuated at once, is to be prepared, concocted, and evacuated at several times. And because a pure continued Quotidian sel∣dom happens, but that either choller or melancholy is intermix∣ed, we are to look to these humours also, and to adde Cichory, Burrage, Provoke urine and Sweat. Fumitory, Rubarb, and the leaves of Senna. After the greatest part of the matter is evacuated, the re∣mainder is to be emitted by urine and sweat using such medicines as occasion the same. But since that by reason of the duration of the disease the sto∣mack and liver are especially offended, Strengthe∣ning Me∣dicines. things that corroborate these parts are to be administred, troches of Womwood, of Rubarb, of Roses, with the powders of aromatici rosati and di∣axyaloes. The Diet ought to be attenuating, Dyet. cutting, and clensing, the meats therefore ought to be of good juice, easie of concoction, and affording little excrement. Fish are not proper in this Fe∣ver, the flesh should be seasoned with Parsley, Fennel, Time, Hysop, Savory, Rosemary, Cinamon. In the beginning nourish somewhat more plentifully, that the sick may endure to the height of the disease, but when 'tis neer the state abate ali∣ment by degrees. Yet if crudities be in the stomack and first passages by sparing dyet the three first days they may be abated and consumed, afterwards such a dyet as we have mentioned may be observed. In the beginning the sick should abstain from wine, and in its stead use water and honey; yet if by custom it be required, give it small and mixed with water. Small beer is also convenient, when concoction appears, wine is more safely administred, whereby the concoction is assisted, the stomack strengthened, and the humours driven out by urine. Of the Fever Epiala. THe Fever called the Epiala is referred to continued putred Fevers, The Fever Epiala. which it self is indeed continued and quotidian,
yet differs from the other Quotidians in this, that the sick at the same time endure heat and cold, and the heat and cold to∣gether are dispersed through the smallest particles of the whole bo∣dy, as Galen teacheth de inaeq. intemperie. cap. 8. and 2. de diff. Febr. c. 6. Galen in the place newly quoted, draws this Fever from acid and vitrious phlegm puttrefying; Cause. yet in his book of an unequal distemper, cap. 8. he addeth bitter choller, whence he infers that since heat and cold are perceived together in one place, it argues mixture of phlegm and choller; in another place he deter∣mines it to arise from vitreous phlegm, part whereof putrifying, exciteth heat, the other not putrifying causeth trembling and cold. Yet Platerus refers them to intermitting Fevers, and says that Epialaes are generated when intermitting Fevers hap∣pen together in one and the same day, and the cold of the one beginneth before the heat of the other be ended, or moreover when intermitting Fevers concur with continued, and the heat of the continued always remains, but the intermittent Fever coming, a trembling and cold fit is occasioned. The cure of this Fever differs not much from the cure of other Fevers arising from phlegm, The Cure. only that it requires stronger atte∣nuating and cutting medicines, because there is greater frigidi∣ty and crudity in this then in the rest; also though the humour it self seem to require stronger Purgers, yet the weak cannot bear them, and therefore evacuation by degrees is to be appoin∣ted. Of the Syncopal Fever. MOreover to these Fevers belongs a Syncopal Fever, com∣monly called a humorous Fever, Syncopal Fever. in which there is more of pituitous and crude humours then in other Fe∣vers that are phlegmatick; and moreover a debility of the ori∣fice of the stomack is adjoyned, whence the sick easily fall into a Syncope, especially when the Fever begins. This Fever is hard to be cured, since the sick by reason of their extreme weakness and danger of continual soundings, can∣not endure necessary evacuations, The Pro∣gnostick. and especially if the pulse be weak, small and unequal, the Fever is exceeding dangerous. But evacuations are most properly occasioned by frictions, as Galen teacheth in his twelfth of the method of curing, cap. 3. Cure. Clysters and Lenitives also with medicines opening the first passages only and causing no commotion of the other humours.
The first passages being opened and cleansed, we come to pre∣paring and evacuating humours, as in other Fevers petuitous, and medicines to prevent the sounding fits are also to be admini∣stred. The meats should be not much, thin as to substance, easie of concoction, Diet. and generating as little phlegm as may be, and they are to be taken often. The drink should be wine which hath power to nourish, heat and attenuate, and doth not in∣crease phlegm. Hydromel is also good wherein Hysop hath been boiled. CHAP. XV. Of a continued Quartane. LAstly a continued Quartane is a Fever, A conti∣nued quar∣tan. whose heat is in∣deed continued, yet the fourth day 'tis exasperated, it pro∣ceeds from melancholy mixed with blood putrifying in the vena cava. The cause is a melancholy humour putrefying in the vena ca∣va, The cause. hence all things that can generate melancholy and crowd it into the vena cava, and putresie, are the causes of this Fever. It is known by its continued heat, the Diag∣nosticks. raging the fourth day, without trembling fear or shaking fits going before, or sweats following afterwards, the pulse in the beginning is small and slow, afterwards great, full, and swifter then in an intermitting Fever, wherein 'tis most intended in the height. This is the rarest of all Fevers, ogno∣sticks. but dangerous and far more desperate then a continued Quartane, and debilitates nature ex∣ceedingly; it lasteth till the fourtieth day oftentimes, and be∣yond it. Most part of the cure is the same with that of a continued Quartane, Cure. and because the humour, the cause of the Fever is contained in the vena cava, and there mixed with the blood in the beginning, those things that open the first passages being first exhibited, a vein is to be opened, afterwards phlegm is to be concocted and evacuated. Yet you should heat and attenuate more sparingly then in intermittent Fevers, but to moisten more and adde those things which may allay the heat of the putri∣fying humours, such as are in other cases convenient against choller. The humour being prepared, purging is to be used, and a purge should be given the next day after the fit, which at first
should be given the next day after the fit; which at first should be gentle, but if nature order no Crisis, stronger may afterwards be given, Diureticks and Sudorifiques may also be given after concoction, but such as are not so hot, and those given in inter∣mittent Fevers; and when the strength is much debilitated confortatives are to be exhibited, prepared of Burrage, Bugloss, Balm, flowers of Rosemary, Gilliflowers, Confection of Al∣kerms, and such like. Such Diet is to be appointed as in intermittent Quartanes, Diet. yet the diet should be thinner and cool more then in intermittent Fevers, since that the heat is greater and the height neerer the use of the smaller sort of wine, although it may be allowed, yet it must be taken more sparingly then in intermittents, and if the heat be greater, wholly abstain from wine. CHAP. XVI. Of Symptomatical Fevers. BEsides these continued primary Fevers which have hitherto been explained, Symptoma∣tical Fe∣vers. there are yet other continued Fevers called Symptomatical and accidental, which happen upon some other disease which hath gone before, and which follows as a Symptome the disease, and is taken away at the cure of the di∣sease, and so these Fevers follow other diseases which being ta∣ken away, they cease. Whence the Ancients, also as Galen teacheth, 4. Aphor. 73. said those only were fevourish, which were sick without an inflammation or other distemper, but those that did febricitate by reason of an inflammation of the side, lungs or any other part, they did not call them fevourish, but Pleure∣tick, Peripneumoniack, Hepatick, or other such like names. But there is not only one sort of these Fevers, Differen∣ces. yet the princi∣pal and most usual is that which follows an inflamation of some internal part neer the heart, or which hath consent with the heart, when from blood powred into the inflamed part and pu∣trifying, vapours are communicated to the heart, and heat it; which in a Pleurisie, Peripneumony and Angina happens as we are commonly taught. But although it cannot be denied but that from the inflamation of these and other such like parts Symptomatical Fevers may arise, and that the Fevers ensuing the inflammations in accidental wounds do prove it; yet if we diligently consider it, all those Fevers which are commonly cal∣led Symptomatical are not such but primary.
For first putrefaction is kindled in the vena cava, whence a continued primary Fever is stirred up; Fevers ac∣companied. but because nature is burthened with the weight of those peccant humours; she useth to force them as much as it could out of those greater vessels, and from a publique and Kingly seat as it were into lesser veins and smaller parts of the body, the blood with those vitious humours being diffused into those lesser parts causeth inflammation. And it is manifest by this, because a Fever for the most part precedes inflammation it doth not follow it, and oftentimes the matter passeth from one part to another, whence changes of diseases are made. Hence these Fevers are properly called by Platerus Co∣mitatae rather then Symptomatical, and such Febres Gomitatae are not only those which have an inflammation of any part ac∣companied with them, but also those, to which other evils are annexed, namely a Diarrhea, a Dysentery, Spots, Measles, the small Pox, wandring pains, the Gout of the joynts, or running Gout, Catarrhs. For all these evils do arise when na∣ture being oppressed with the weight of its burthen of peccant hu∣mours, it protrudes some part of them out of the vessels. A Fever of this kind is also accompanied, which is an Erysipe∣las, Erysipelas or Rose. called by the Germans Rose; for this Fever doth not pro∣ceed from an inflammation of an external part, but this evil ac∣companies the Fever; for when the thinner and hotter blood burneth in the vessels by what means soever, putrifies, and is corrupted, and acquires a vitious quality, which principally is caused by anger, and fear, nature being stimulated protrudes the same to some external part of the body, whence this evil in∣vadeth with a trembling and quaking, and whilest the matter striving to go outwards, ceaseth on the Glandules under the Arm-pits, and about the groin; some of the humour that is stirred up, sticks there, and pain and swellings are there percei∣ved, till at length it manifests it self in the leg or some other ex∣ternal part which may be known by the heat, pain, and rosie colour. But we do not assent unto Platerus in that he says that all those Fevers are simple and pure continued, and are without any putrefaction. The Urines, that we may pass by other things, do manifest∣ly shew putrefaction, which hath the same tokens of crudity and concoction as in other putred Fevers, and nature sometimes cri∣tically, sometimes Symptomatically, expells the matter offen∣sive to it; for it doth not only expel by insensible transpiration, and by a moist steam, which useth to be in Ephemeraes and Sy∣nochaes which are without putrefaction.
Some of these Fevers whether they arise from an inflammation of the parts, or whether they have that as a companion, Differen∣ces of Fe∣vers. are cal∣led Phlegmonides, which principally proceed from blood; but those which arise from Erysipelas or inflamation, are called Eru∣sipolatodes, and inflame fires. Phlegmo∣nides. Typhodes. Lipyriae. To these belong the Fever that leaves fire as it were behind it, which burneth so exceedingly, that all the interals are as it were burnt, but the external parts grow cold, and that during the whole course of the disease; and this Fever ariseth from an Eri∣sipelas or inflamation of any internal part, but principally of the stomack, and from blood and Spirits meeting in the part infla∣med. The second kind of Symptomatical Fevers which is called Lenta, proceeds not from any inflamation of the bowels, Febre∣lentae. but from some obstruction and hidden putrefaction, that is, from matter without the vessels, spread over the substance of any of the interals, or at least impacted, and putrifying in the capillar veins dispersed neer the substance of the interals, and hath its rise from the substance of the interal decaying; whence there is so great quantity as that when the matter is gotten into larger and wider vessels, vapours cannot be transmitted to the heart, and so a Febris Lenta is stirred up, which therefore is unequal and keeps no certain order. This Fever is the gentlest of all, and molesteth not the sick with any grievous Symptome, so that the sick oftentimes thinks himself well. In the mean while the strength decayes, that the sick can scarce go forward, and the body is no ways refreshed by aliment, but wasteth by degrees, whence sometimes this Fever is accounted with an Hectick, and therefore when there is any suspition of this Fever, in the first place we must diligently search the Hypocondries and Hypogastries, to try whether any tumor be to be discerned in any of them; some signs of putrefaction also will appear in the urine, and discover themselves in the Pulse. This Fever is more durable, and goes beyond the terms of o∣ther Fevers, and often endeth not in fourty days, nor is it gone until the humour fastened to the interal be consumed. The third sort of Symptomatical Fevers is, Fevers from pu∣trefaction of interals. that which ari∣seth from the putrefaction of any interal, from whence putred vapours through the veins inserted might be sent to the heart, heat that, and might stir up a continued Fever, whereby the body by degrees might be extenuated and wither. And this Fe∣ver is sometimes more violent, sometimes more mild, accord∣ing
as the putrefaction is more or less. This often happens in putrefaction of the lungs in such as are Phthisical; so 'tis found that the Caul or Kell, Mesentery, Womb, and other parts are corrupted, and thence a Fever kindled. In like manner from Fistulaes penetrating into the internal parts a Febris lenta being stirred up, it is observed, that some do consume and waste. The fourth kind of Symptomatical Fevers is when either from corrupt milk, From cor∣rupt milk. Putrified blood, Worms. which often happens in Infants, or from blood pu∣trifying somewhere without the vessels, or from worms, putred vapours are communicated to the heart, that is heated, and a Fever irritated. To these may be referred that Fever which ariseth from crudi∣ty, which is familiar amongst little children from their eating of sweet things, which hath with it a tumor and inflammation of the Hypocondries, which the Germans call Das Herngespam, from the abundance of crude humours collected in the stomack and neighbouring parts, which begin to putrefie and are turned into wind. Diagn∣stick signs: Symptomatical Fevers properly so called, are known by this, that they come after diseases of private parts, and the first sort of these Fevers is known from hence, because it follows an inflam∣mation of some certain part: as on the contrary, Fevers called Comitatae, first appear and invade with rigor and trembling, to which afterwards a Fever happens. But those Lentae or slow Fevers are known by their slow heat, wherewith notes of putrefaction in the urine and pulse appear, the sick are weak scarce able to go, the body wasteth by little and little, and the Fever is lengthened for the most part beyond four∣ty days; they are tormented by the use of purging. But when the cause of these Fevers is hidden, 'tis very hardly to be distin∣guished, and therefore the Hypocondries and other internal parts are to be observed with great diligence, and we are to enquire whether any tumor or pain be to be found there. But those which arise from the putrefaction of any part are more easily known, nor indeed can the corruption of the part be hidden, unless it be ignoble. So that Fever which proceeds from corrupt milk or blood is easily known by its signs; as also that which ariseth from crudi∣ty is manifest from their loathing things blowing up and swelling of the Hypocondries. Although these Fevers in respect of themselves for the most part are not dangerous because they are mild, The Pro∣gnostick. yet in regard of their causes on which they depend, we ought to doubt whether
they are dangerous or not, as also whether they are long or short; for those which follow an inflammation of any part are short; since that the inflammation it self cannot be long, but the dan∣ger of them depends on the inflammation. The Febres Lentae are for the most part long, and often con∣tinue more then fourty days. And although not by their vio∣lence yet by their duration they debilitate the strength; they are cured also with difficulty, because their cause pertinaciously inheres in some interal. Those Fevers are very dangerous and seldom curable which come from the corruption and putrefaction of any part; because the part can seldom be cured. But those Fevers which proceed from corrupted mill: and blood, worms or crudity, are often acute and dangerous, and bring with them grievous Symptomes, as Epilepsies, Convul∣sions; yet they last not long, neither are they hard to be cured, but the cause being taken away they cease. The way of cure ought to be aimed at by striking at the cause whereon it depends. The Cure. If therefore a Symptomatical Fever de∣pend on an inflammation of any part, the cure is to be directed to the inflammation it self, which being cured, the Fever cea∣seth. And therefore most remedies which are convenient to asswage inflammations are here useful. Yet in regard of the part affected, the way of cure sometimes differs, the part affected is diligently to be weighed: Whereof it shall be spoken in the cure of particular affects. The Febres Lentae since they proceed from extraordinary ob∣structions of the bowels, require opening, attenuating, and deterging medicines. And such are to be chosen as are appro∣priated to each part, and such as strengthen the tone of the inte∣rals, which for the most part is debilitated, yet by intervalls gentle purgation may be used. Neither are Diureticks to be o∣mitted in their season. Externally also if the part affected will bear it, Emollients and Discutients are to be applied. If the Symptomatical Fever proceed from the corruption and putrefaction of any part, that cure is to be instituted which a∣greeth to Ulcers and Fistulaes of the internal parts. If it be occasioned by corrupt milk or blood, Worms, or crude and corrupt meats we are to endeavour that those causes be taken away conveniently, either by vomit or cleansing and evacuating medicines, and together to resist putrefaction and fevourish heat. In the cure of accompanied Fevers, we are to look no less to
the Fever then that conjunct disease or companion, and the me∣tion of nature is not to be impeded, The cure of accom∣panied Fe∣vers. least the peccant humour retained in the body should cause more danger; and therefore although it be not profitable to hinder an inflammation when 'tis beginning: Yet the humour that is the cause or that evil is also to be evacuated, which is most conveniently done for the most part by breathing of a vein, which together affords evacua∣tion and revulsion. Yet it shall be profitable also to empty the firft passages, since that oftentimes the matter is gather'd toge∣ther in them; and since the matter for the most part is thin, and often makes toward the extremties of the body, and is often full of malignity, 'tis conveniently expelled by sweat. CHAP. XVII. Of intermitting Fevers in general. AFter continued Fevers, intermitting are to be explained. Intermit∣ting Fe∣vers. But although the Ancients did extend the name of inter∣mitting Fevers more largely, and attributed the same to all Fevers which admit of some change of heat, and are some∣times exasperated, sometimes remitted, and so to continued periodicks: yet afterwards use brought it to pass that those Fe∣vers only were called intermittent, which sometimes cease and come to that apurexy or want of fire. The proximate cause of an intermitting Fever is a putred va∣pour, their prox∣imate cause. elevated from the putrefaction of excrementitious hu∣mours, not continually as in continued Fevers, but by certain intervalls sent to the heart, and heating the same contrary to na∣ture. But how it comes to pass, The fire place of Intermit∣ting Fe∣vers. that the putred vapour is not conti∣nually sent to the heart but at certain times is very obscure. For the explanation whereof since the knowledge of the place wherein putrefaction ariseth, doth not a little conduce, and whence the putred vapours are communicated to the heart, which Galen calls the Furnace and Chimney in his 2. of the differences of Fevers, cap. the last, and in his 15. of the method of curing. cap. the fourth, that therefore is first to be explained. But since 'tis beyond the bounds of our Breviary of Institutions to reckon up the various and different opinions of Physicians concerning it, we will here set down that opinion which we think truest. The Chimney or Furnace and place wherein the matter the cause of intermitting Fevers is generated, are the Mesaraick
veins, wherein the matter which sufficeth to irritate each single Paroxism, is generated during the time of its interval. And that many things which happen about intermitting Fevers do prove; namely Loathing, Vomitting, Dolor of the heart, Extension and pain of the Midriffe, Intumescence about the Ventricle, Bitterness about the mouth, Belching, and such like; for in the beginning of intermitting Fevers pure choller is often ejected by vomit in great abundance, which out of the more remote veins could not be evacuated in that manner, and about the cava of the Liver. Fernelius says he hath found the quantity of a pound by weight after the death of a Patient. This choler being cast out the Fever is often cured, which is a sign that it is the cause of the Fever, and that it is collected in those first ways or passages. Which Fomentations also used to the Hypocondries at the beginning of a Paroxysm shews by the mitigation of the trembling and shaking. This matter is gather'd together in the Mesaraick veins a long time before it brings forth a Fever, but when it begins to putre∣fie, grow hot, and be changed, its heat being diffused over the whole body it exciteth a Fever; which when it is dispersed, the fevourish heat and Paroxism ceaseth, and the Fever leaveth so long as till new matter which in like manner putrifieth in its due time, is generated. But although the matter which is the cause of intermitting Fevers be generated in the Mesaraick veins and first passages: the cause of inter∣mitting Fevers conteined in the v∣na cava. Yet the whole doth not reside and continue included in them, but is sent to the vena cava and arteries, both during the fit and out of the same. Nor is it here necessary to seek for occult and blind passages, through which the putred vapours should be sent to the heart during the Paroxism, since there are manifest passages enough; for the branches of the Gate-vein are inserted into the substance of the Liver, and the mouths of these have communion with the vena cava, and the arteries going from the heart are joyned in the stomack, guts, spleen and other parts to the Mesaraick veins. Yet 'tis probable that the fevourish mat∣ter may be communicated to the veins not principally and only in the Paroxism, but moreover some part thereof by that pas∣sage which is from the Meseraick veins to the Liver continually may be carried to them; whence both by Galen. 1. de cris. cap. 7. and other Physicians a Fever is called a passion of a venemous nature. And that is first manifest from the urines, which shew evident notes of crudity and concoction in Intermittents. Hence also it comes to pass that urines during the Paroxisms are lauda∣ble
and like to theirs who are well, since that the peccant humor is then protruded by nature out of the veins towards the circum∣ference of the body, and so the blood in the veins is become pu∣rer, which again in the intervals of fits is polluted by the vitious humour proceeding from the chimney of the Fever. The same is manifest out of those things which happen at the beginning of a fit, and at that time which the Greeks call Episemasian; for then spontaneous lassitudes, stretching, compression of pulses, and other things happen which indicate that the matter which is to stir the Fever begins to be moved and as it were to swell in those common vessels, veins and arteries. That vitious humour accumulated partly in the Mesaraick veins, partly in the vena cava when in time it putrifieth, nature stimulated and irritated oftentimes strives several ways, first by vomit and stool, afterwards by sweats and urine sensibly to eva∣cuate the same, as also through the pores of the skin, and by in∣sensible transpiration it may discuss the same being resolved into vapours and steam. For since that peccant humour is not exact∣ly mingled with the blood but confusedly, nature may easily se∣perate the same from the good blood, and may shake it off each single fit; which being discussed, since putred vapours cannot any more be communicated to the heart, the Fever also ceaseth and apurexie ensueth. But because that as long as the Fever continueth some seeds and sparks are left in the granary and chimney, Causes of the return of fits. and seeing that there is imbecillity in the part, 'tis necessary that the humour flowing to it, although it be good, should be defiled with that pollution and excrement which was left as it were with leaven, and through the debility of the part be corrupted, and so new matter of a future Paroxism be generated. And these fits conti∣nue, and so often return, until that those seeds, that putrefacti∣on, and those sparks are fully taken away from thence, and the weakness of that part restored. Yet it seems probable that the whole matter which is the cause of a Fever doth not putrifie to∣gether in the first Paroxism, but that part which is apt to putre∣faction, in the other fits the rest, until the whole be putrified and consumed. By these things it is manifest both where the matter that is the cause of putred Fevers is generated, Cause of . how it causeth a fit, by what ways it is evacuated, and how the matter which is the cause of a new Paroxism is generated, and so the cause of Paroxisms and the recourse of intermitting Fevers is explained. But what the reason is why these Fevers return at set times, some sooner, some
later, is now another question, and that most intricate, which is easier to ask then answer? But that we may here forbear to re∣cite the opinions of others, which are very many, we will men∣tion only that which seems most probable to us, so far as in this humane dimness of our understanding in so obscure a business we are able to discover. And first, that Fevers keep such certain periods, experience doth manifest; whereby it appeareth, that some Fevers return the third, some the fourth day, and that oftentimes it observes not only the same hour, but minute of in∣vasion although the fits may somtimes anticipate, somtimes re∣tard for certain reasons. But the cause why paroxisms return at certain times, we conceive is to be sought from the diversity of humours: For those effects, as Valleriola saith, in any one sort of things, which perpetually agree to the things, and are made in the like manner, into what body, and at what time soever they happen to come, these are to be referred to the proper substance of that of the which they are made; but to make return through certain days, and to irritate accessions, both agrees perpetually to humors and the recourses in this manner, alwaies at equal in∣tervals (unless a perverting of the order of periods happen from else-where) are made: Therefore it shall be from such or such a nature of humours that the recourse shall be made in the same sort; namely, the causes of periods and intermitting Fevers, are excrementitious humours. Choler, Melancholy; Flegme; and those Fevers which return the third day, proceed from a Chole∣rick humour; those on the fourth from Melancholy; those that come every day, so that they are not double Tertians, proceed from Flegme. Yet the cause of periods cannot be drawn simply from hu∣mours, but as they acquire a peculiar quality from putrefaction or corruption, by reason whereof at a certain time, they wax hot and begin to be moved. For sithence this effect is definite and determinate, which carries it self alike in all individuals, 'tis necessary that it have a certain definite and determinate cause in all individuals that are alike; which since that neither dispo∣sition of parts, nor quantity of humours (for we see that although the store of matter decreaseth, and the fits are become shorter, nevertheless they do return at their usual time) nor manifest quality of humour, thickness, viscidity, tenuity, or some such like, which useth to vary, can be a quality; we must needs fly to a peculiar and proper quality and nature of a humour; which also when it is changed, the form of the Fever it self is changed; for when Choler is turned into Melancholy, the Fe∣ver
which used to come the third day, cometh on the fourth; and this quality also may afterwards remain in the humour, when the putrefaction ceaseth, and the Fever depending thereon. Whence, as Fornelius in his to of Fevers witnesseth, the tor∣ments of the Cholick, Pains of the Joynts, and such like dis∣eases arising after long continued Tertians and Quartans, do likewise keep certain periods, by reason of that disposition which they have received from the corruption or putrefaction of the humours. Yet if any one be willing to determine that the said occult pro∣priety is derived, Order of the fits not from corruption only, but that celestial causes do also concur to its generation, I will not much contend with him; for we see that principally about the Solstices and Aequinoctials, such Fevers, especially the most durable of them, do begin and end. But although Fevers keep certain periods, yet there is a cer∣tain difference in them also; for somtimes the fit returns just at the expected time: somtimes the following paroxisme returns sooner then the former; which form is called proleptick: som∣times the following fit comes later then the former, and that form is called Hysterick; and indeed somtimes through the whole course of the disease, such a form is observed, and often∣times from the beginning of a Fever, until the end of the same the paroxismes anticipate, or come after the expected time: but somtimes in some there is anticipation, in some post pofition, otherwise the fits comes at the same time. For the most part they say, The cause of antici∣pation and coming late. that anticipation happens when the humours by some error in diet are augmented, or are moved by medicines, anger, exercise, and such like causes. But the fits return flower, when the matter is diminished, or thickned: Which indeed when the accustomary paroxisme is changed, that it may be so, as we do not deny; so when the Fever keeps al∣ways some certain form, either proleptick or hysterick, the cause rather seems to be taken from the diversity of the humour; for although Choler, according to its manner, being corrupted, is the cause of a Tertian, Melancholy of a Quartan; yet Choler and Melancholy, according to the diversity of Bodies and Tem∣peraments, do oftentimes vary somthing; Hence also it happens, that although that putred leaven, or occult quality introduced by choler, be the cause of the circuit of a Tertian, Melancholy being brought in of a Quartan: yet according to the difference of a humour, it may happen so, that the effervescence, or ferven∣cy of humours, may come sooner or later by some hours.
Concerning the longitude or brevity of some Paroxisms that depends on the paucity or plenty of matter, The cause of the length of Fits. disposition of the humours and body: For a plentiful quantity of humours is the cause of a longer fit then a small; so a thick humour causeth a longer then a thin, since it cannot be so soon discussed as a thin. If the strength of the body be great, which can more easily dis∣cuss what is offensive, then theirs who are weak; the shorter fit followeth: Also a thinner constitution of body, as being more apt for the discussing of the matter, is the cause of a shorter fit; a thicker, of a longer. And when all the causes which occasion a short paroxism concur, a very short fit is raised: But when all those that produce a long are present, the paroxism is extream long. When certain causes are present which make a short fit, and some are wanting of them, an indifferent betwixt both hap∣pens. And so much of the nature, place, and motion of the proxi∣mate cause, which exciteth intermittent Fevers; The more remote causes of intermit∣ting Fe∣vers. But the more remote causes, and those things which conduce to the generation and corruption of that matter in the Meseraick veins, are meat and drink of evil juice, but yeilding matter for peccant humours answering to their own nature; and an ill disposition of stomack, whereof meats turn into choler, or become sour, an intemperate constitution of Ayr; for although divers humours are generated in different bodies naturally, yet if there be great vehemency of manifest causes, even in bodies of different constitutions, they may produce the same humours and diseases depending on them. As for the difference of intermitting Fevers, Difference. they proceed from the diversity of humours; for there are so many sorts of inter∣mitting Fevers, as there are of humours by which they are pro∣duced; for there are according to the vulgar opinion, three sorts of excrementitious humours, Choler, Flegme, and Melancholy, and so three kinds of intermitting Fevers, Bilious, Pituitous, and Melancholy; which differences we usually call a Tertian in∣termittent, a quotidian intermittent, and a quartane intermit∣tent. And in case those humours are sincere, pure Fevers are generated; if they are mixed, spurious. And that Fever which proceeds from pure Choler, is called a pure Tertian, but that which ariseth from yellow Choler mixt with some other humour, is called a Bastard Tertian. But concerning a quotidian intermittent, Of a quoti∣dian, whe∣ther any be. the matter is not so plain: For Fernelius accounts this the rarest of all other, and scarce one of them happens amongst six hundred; and that those intermittent Fevers which daylie afflict, for the most part he rather
accounts them double Tertians: But Platerus flatly denies a Quotidian Fever, and wholly agreeth with Galen 8. Meth. med. cap. 5. where he appoints only a twofold crudity; the one ni∣trous, the other acid: and they only seem to afford matter for two sorts of Fevers, Cholerick and Melancholy. For although Flegme also, according to preheminency, and most principally, be called a crude humour; yet since it is exceeding cold, it can scarcely putrifie and excite a Fever. But whether there are more circuits of Fevers, Whether there are Quintan Fevers. and whether besides Tertians, Quartans, and if there be any such thing as Quotidians, there are also other Fevers which are extended be∣yond the fifth circuit, is doubtful. Galen saw no such: Never∣theless Hypocrates, and other Physitians, observed Fevers which returned the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth day: But what the cause of this course is, is very obscure. Some seek the cause of such fits out of the diverse constitution of Choler and Melan∣choly; and Andreas Caesalpinus Art. Med. lib. 2. cap. 15. re∣fers Quintans to Choler, Septanes to Melancholy; and deter∣mines such flower returns of Fits to be a kind of renewing of one or more simple accessions; and the Quintan to be a kind of Ter∣tian, wherein the third day is without a paroxism; and a Se∣ptan to be a sort of Quartan, renewing the accession of the fourth day. But most derive the reason of these circuits from the vari∣ous mixture of Melancholy humours with others. But although it be probable that all these Fevers, as keeping longer periods, pro∣ceed from a Melancholy humour; yet a mixture of that humour seems not necessary: Because no humour can be appointed to be mixed with a Melancholy, which can be a cause of a slower peri∣od then it self: for those humours, both Cholerick and Melan∣choly, are not alwaies of the same sort; and moreover, the cor∣ruption also which they suffer, is not alwaies the same; so that it is no wonder that the effect also varies, which proceeding from them is not alwaies the same: And as in epidemical diseases, som∣times rare and wonderful corruptions of humours happen, so in Intermittents, that some such thing may likewise happen, is not altogether absurd. Intermitting Fevers are easily known; Diagno∣stick signs. for they come to Apu∣rexie, and at certain times; and indeed, as Galen 1. ad Glaucan. cap. 5.2. de crisib. cap. 3. & 2. de diff. Febr. cap. 3. teacheth, they return with shaking, horror, or cold, For although that somtimes Fevers do occur which seem intermittent, and invade without any rigour, trembling, or cold; yet really they are not such, but only slow and obscure continued ones; or in case they
are really intermittent, they are not pure; whose Idea Galen propounds but spurious. But these Fevers are less dangerous then continued; Progno∣sticks. and sel∣dome, unless the strength be decayed, or in regard of age, or some other cause, or some errour committed in diet, are mor∣tal, sithence it may be convenient during the apurexie to gather strength, and administer necessary medicines. Concerning the cure of these Fevers in general: Indicati∣ons and Cure Since their cause is collected and generated in the meseraick veins, there pu∣trifies, and thence is diffused over all the body, and at length is discussed by insensible transpiration or sweats: But the cause of the recourse of the Fever, as Galen teacheth, 2. de Febr. cap. the last is a twofold vitious disposition in a body, the one a certain pollution or putrifaction left after the former paroxisme; the other imbecility of the member or part, generating excrementi∣tious humours; what therefore is to be done in each sort of Fe∣ver, easily appears from hence. For sithence the beginning of generation and corruption of humours producing a Fever, is in the first passages, Purging we are to endeavour to purge out that peccant humour, before it corrupts the rest of the blood, and brings weakness, and a vitious dispo∣sition to the parts; but we must proceed warily in those evacua∣tions, since there is not the same reason of all intermitting Fe∣vers: For when that vitious and excrementious humour, the cause of a Fever, in the meseraicks is mixed with blood, crudity also, and concoction, according to their manner are necessary; whereby the vitious humours may be separated from the good, and rendred fit for evacuation: and that often happens in a short time in Fevers full of Choler, and the cholerick humour is other∣wise apt enough to motion: But in a Quartan the humour is more stubborn, and moreover according to Galen 1. ad Glau. cap. 11. no strong medicine is easily to be admitted at the be∣ginning. And Sudorifiques are not at all (or altogether) to be used, Sweats un∣less evacuations have preceded; for if many vitious and excre∣mentitious humours do hitherto abide in the first ways, it may easily come to pass that by reason of hydroticks untimely exhi∣bited, they may be detruded thence to the more noble parts, and may become the cause of various and grievous evils, and such as may bring more danger then the Fever it self. As for breathing of a vein, Letting blood. 'tis not indicated from the prima∣ry cause of intermitting Fevers, which is generated in the mese∣raick veins, where the greatest part abideth: Yet because that
somtimes blood also abounds, which may easily be corrupted and polluted by the vitious humours, and so if it be too plentiful, cannot be well governed by nature when it is weakned by a Fe∣ver; and in the progress of the disease, from thence some of the peccant matter passeth into the vena cava, and is mixed with the blood, it is somtimes needful to open a vein, which nevertheless is not to be appointed presently in the beginning, before the eva∣cuation of the primary passages. If the Fever be not cured by these evacuations, we are to en∣deavour that the causes of the returns of fits may be taken away, and moreover two things remain to be done; namely, that that disposition and weakness of the part generating vitious humours, may be taken away, which is performed by altering medicines, which together correct the fault of the humour, and discuss that pollution, and those seeds which were left out of the putrifacti∣on of humours: and indeed that paroxisms depend on that pol∣lution, and that when it is taken away the Fever ceaseth, ap∣peareth from hence, That whilst that is driven by nature to the circumference of the body, out of the veins, and that Pustules are raised about the lips, nose, and other parts of the face, the Fever ceaseth Wann der Mundt oder die Nase auss schiaget. But 'tis principally taken away by Sudorifiques; yet there are also certain other medicines known both to Physitians and to the vulgar, Febrifuga. which take away feverish fits, and therefore are called Fe∣brilia, Puretagoga, and such as specifically cause, and are called The flight of a Fever, or Febrifuga, which nevertheless cause no sweat, but without doubt some other way take away that seed, and by consequence the paroxism, such as commonly are accoun∣ted the powder of burnt shells of Cockles or Snails or of the Pearl bearing shels, or mother of pearl calcined, of River Crabs, and prin∣cipally their eyes, which are so called prepared, and such like: But how they perform this, is not explained by Authors. That I may speak my own opinion, such like medicines seem by a certain precipitation to take away that force of heating and stirring up a paroxism which is in the humours, to which Opiats seem to be∣long: yet such like cannot be given safely, unless the vitious humours, and those things which may afford the reason of the antecedent cause be first taken away; for otherwise those things which may be expell'd by nature when it is irritated in a paro∣xisme, are left in the body, and afterwards may become the cause of a Chachexie, Dropsie, Jaundies, Cholick pains, and of other grivous evils.
Externally also are applied certain medicines to cure intermit∣ting Fevers, of Cobwebs, oyl of Spiders, and certain vesicatories, Topical Medicines. which without doubt, that which they do, is performed by draw∣ing out, and evacuating of that Feverish corruption and pol∣lution. CHAP. XVIII. Of Intermitting Fevers in particular, and first of an Inter∣mitting Tertian. AFter we have handled intermitting Fevers in general, An inter∣mitting Tertian. we will now go through them in particular; amongst them the most frequent is a Tertian intermitting, which ariseth from Choler putrifying in the meseraick veins. But there is a certain difference of these Fevers; for first, Its differ∣ence. Cho∣ler it self out of which these Fevers are generated, is not of the same kind; for somtimes the choler is like to that natural cho∣ler which afterwards is collected in the Galls bladder; somtimes it is preternatural green and aeruginous, such as somtimes by those that are Feverish, is evacuated by vomit or stool. Moreover, Choler either putrifies alone, or else hath some other humour mixt with it; Flegme or Melancholy that causeth a pure, this a bastard Tertian. They differ also in respect of duration; for if the fits are not extended beyond twelve hours, they are wont to be called pure tertians; but in case the Fit be extended above twelve hours, they are no more called exquisite and pure tertians, but either simply tertians, or spurious tertians; and when the pa∣roxism is extended above twenty four hours, they are called ex∣tense tertians; but this is occasioned either by the thinness or thickness, plenty or paucity of the humour. For by how much the Choler is thinner or lesser, by so much the sooner 'tis discus∣sed, but by how much the thicker, or more mixed with thick humours, or the more plentiful, by so much the longer the pa∣roxism continueth. The causes of this Fever are all those things which can gene∣rate excrementitious choler, namely a hot and dry distemper; The causes genera∣ting, Choler signs of a true Ter∣tian. hot constitution of ayr, cating of hot meats, and drinking of hot drinks, using of hot medicines, watching, fasting, labour, and too much exercise: For although that in the Liver also yellow choler may be generated, yet it is very often generated by the er∣rour of the first concoction, and fault of the meseraick vein; therefore whether much choler be generated in the stomack by rea∣son
of meats, or by default of the stomack, and is carried to the meseraick veins with the chyle, and there is heaped up, and at length putrifieth, a Fever is kindled. If the causes generating Flegme and Melancholy be annexed to those that generate choler, spurious tertians are bred. This Fever presently invadeth, A pure Tertian. if it be pure, with a shaking fit, as it were pricking the flesh; afterwards when the cold fit ceaseth, presently much heat followeth, sharp and biting, and in its vigour is extended equally over the body, whence the sick draw their breath much, and are troubled with thirst. The pulses in the beginning of a fit are little, weak, slow, and thin; but the fit increasing, they become vehement, swift, frequent, and in some measure hard, and void of all inequalities besides Feverish. When the fit comes to the height, and the sick drinks, many vapours are sent through the skin, vomiting of choler followeth, which of∣tentimes useth to happen after the cold fit also, the belly is loosen∣ed, choler is pissed out, or somtimes more then these happen. Af∣terwards a sweating out of hot vapours ensueth over the whole body, and the pulse is swift, great, vehement, such as theirs use to be who are over-heated by exercise. The Urine is of a light red, or deep yellow, and afterwards hath a white cloud or suspen∣sion. The fit lasteth not above twelve hours, and the causes which generate melancholy, have either gone before, or are then present. A bastard tertian is known from the causes which do not ge∣nerate pure choler, A spurious Tertian. but to gather Flegm or Melancholy: The heat is not so sharp as in a pure tertian, but more mild, neither is it presently diffused over the whole body. Neither is this Fe∣ver dissolved by vomitting of yellow choler, or by sweat, but cer∣tain vapours go out in the declination, and if any sweats come forth, they either are not universal, or if they are universal, they cure not the Fever. The Urine is not so fiery as in a pure tertian, and the signs of concoction do not appear so soon in it. The pulse in the beginning is hard, and that hardness increaseth daylie, until the seventh paroxism, then by degrees it becomes softer, and the Urines also appear more concocted. The paro∣xism is often extended to eighteen hours and more: yet som∣times, to wit if the matter be less, and Nature strong, it is like∣wise terminated in twelve hours. It endeth not in seven fits, but often endureth till it comes to fourteen, and somtimes to twenty. But these Fevers are least dangerous amongst all the putred ones 4. Progno∣sticks. Aphor. 43. and such as are pure, do not long continue,
but at seven fits they are accounted at the height, 4. Aphor. 59. Somtimes they are terminated at the third or fourth fit; but spu∣rious tertians, as they are more frequent, so they continue long∣er: for although if the matter be little, and necessary medicines are timely exhibited, they somtimes cease at the fifth or seventh paroxism, yet for the most part they scarce end at fourteen fits, and are often lengthned out to the fortieth day; somtimes they continue six moneths, and end with some disease of the Liver or Spleen, or else are also chrished by them. Although Tertians for the most part are not dangerous, yet somtimes they become pernitious. First, If any errour be com∣mitted by the sick, or the Physitian. Secondly, If the humour which Nature endeavours to expel, should fall upon any princi∣pal part. Thirdly, If the humour be exceeding thin, putred, or filthy. Fourthly, If a thin humour have a thick one mixed with it, and stir the same, and enflame it. Fifthly, If a thick humour poured out by heat, either fall down into some principal part, or cause a dangerous Catarrh, or Asthma, or the Gout, or draw the womb into consent. Sixthly, If the humour acquire a malignant quality. But in the cure of this Fever, as also in others, Indicati∣ons and Cure. regard must be had of the Fever, the cause and nature of it; the Fever indi∣cates cooling and moistning things, the same Choler also, as be∣ing the cause requireth, which also ought to be evacuated: yet if another humour be mixed with it, altering preparing and eva∣cuating medicines, which that humour requires, are to be mix∣ed; and because the abundance of the matter is in the meseraick veins, the vitious humour is to be purged out of them, and if need be, prepared before it infect the good blood: afterwards also it is to be altered, and the disposition of the part generating peccant humours to be corrected. Lastly, We must endeavour that the pollution and putrifaction may be discussed by Sudori∣fiques. First therefore, the first passages are to be cleansed, Purgers. either by Clysters, or lenitive Medicines exhibited of the Syrup of Roses solutive, Manna, Cassia, to which also we may add Rhubarb, Agarick, the leaves of Senna, according as the quality of the peccant humour requires. Vomits also convenient may be giv∣en, especially if the sick be troubled with pain in the heart, loath∣ing, and a desire to vomit: And since the matter consists in the meseraick veins, and that nature her self at the beginning of the paroxism strives to expel it either by vomit or stool, the Physician ought to be observant to it, and to eject the matter, if Nature
endeavour to expel it by stool or vomit; and because the matter for the most part in the first passages is either more abundant, or hath thick humours mixed therewith, there is need not only of lenitives, but those medicines also which we lately mentioned; nay somtimes of some of the Electuary of Fleawort or Fleabane, of the juice of Roses, Rosati Mesuae: Yet care must be taken that we do not draw the humours out of the veins into the first passages. Concerning the opening of a vein, Opening a vein. although Choler residing in the meseraick veins do not require it, yet if there be store of blood, and the peccant humour out of the first region of the bo∣dy have penetrated the vena cava, which may be discerned by the thickness and redness of the Urine, and if the party be strong, a vein may be breathed; and moreover note, that not at the first invading, but afterwards, Phlebotomy is to be used: Yet re∣gard of the Fever is to be had; for if it be a pure Tertian, which useth to be shorter, a vein is to be opened more timely, if it be required, because if it be referred till after the third fit, the dis∣ease comes to its height; but if it be a bastard tertian, you may defer it till after the third paroxism, namely, because more of the morbifique matter is then mixed with the blood in the vena ca∣va; but blood is to be taken away in less quantity in a pure Ter∣tian; because as in continued Fevers that is not the primary indicant, and the strength cannot bear the taking away of a great∣er quantity, blood may be taken away more safely, and in greater abundance in a spurious tertian: But the opening of a vein is most conveniently appointed during the intermission. Afterwards those medicines are to be exhibited which both correct the qualities of the cholerick humour exceeding, Prepara∣tives. whereby it is troublesome to nature, and also the vitious disposition in the part generating excrementitious humours, and such as are con∣trary to that pollution which remains after putrefaction; such are cooling and moistning things, which together have a power of purging the first ways, and of resisting putrifaction; such are Cichory, Sowthistle, Endive, Sorrel, Barley, the four great, and four small cold seeds, the juice of Citron or Limon, and medi∣cines prepared out of these, Syrup of Sorrel, Acetosa simplex, Oxysauharum, Syrup of Cichory, Endive de acitocitate citri, with waters and decoctions of the same, to which in spurious ter∣tians we may adde those things which are proper for Flegme and Melancholy, the roots of Fennel, grass, asparogus, asarabecca, polypodie, carduus benedictus, centurie the lesser, wormwood, scolopendrium, betony, the spirit of vitriol and salt is profitable, cream of Tartar, Tartar vitriolated.
But amongst those medicines there are some which by a certain peculiar force are said to oppugne Tertians; Specificks amongst which notwithstanding for the most part manifest causes may be rendred for it: such are Sowthistle, Camomil, Century the lesser, Plan∣tane, Divels bit. Altering medicines being given, Purgers. if the Fever be more pertina∣cious, somtimes purging and vomiting are convenient, which for the most part are to be administred on the intermitting day; but if it be advertised that the matter during the paroxism doth encline towards the stomack, or tend downwards, it is lawful even when the fit is present to administer vomits, or a gentle purge, yet so that before the beginning of the paroxism the ope∣ration may be past, in case a purge be given. Amongst the vomits, Asarabecca and Broom are principally commended; amongst the purges, Rhubarb; to those that are stronger, the Electuary or Fleawort or Fleabane, Elect. Rosatem, Mesne, and of the juice of Roses may be given in spurious Terti∣ans; Agarick or Senna may be added, in whom it is also neces∣sary to repeat preparatives and purgations. The body being sufficiently purged, Medicines causing of urine. the remainder is to be ta∣ken away by Diureticks: In a pure Tertian an Emulsion of the four great cold seeds is profitable, made with the whey of Goats milk, or the water of Barley, Strawberries, Cichory. In a spurious, a decoction of the roots of Grass, Sparagus, Fennel, Maidenhair, red Parsnips, Bindweed, flowers of Camomil and Wormwood are convenient. But principally the Physitian ought to imitate nature, Sweats. which at the end of the paroxisme useth to move sweats, and should dis∣cuss the Reliques of the vitious humours by fudoriferous medi∣cines given either before or after the paroxism; and indeed in pure Tertians, wherein nature usually causes sweat in the end of the fit, it often sufficeth that the sick drink only Barley water, or the water of Sorrel, or Carduus benedictus may be given with the Syrup of the juice of Citron or Limmon. In spurious, hotter medicines are to be used, such as hereafter shall be mentioned a∣mongst malignant Fevers, which being given some hours before the paroxism, often prevents or cures the same. If the Fever be not cured with these remedies, Corolora∣tives. and that there be any signe of viscous matter, and that the Liver and Spleen are likewise affected, regard thereunto must also be had; and since the Liver for the most part in bastard Tertians is obstructed by thick choler, or choler mixed with thick humours, which pol∣lutes the blood, those things which cleanse the body from choler
are to be used; to which purpose Wormwood is very good to be used, which hath a force of deterging choler, and bringing away the same by stool and urine, as also hath century the lesser, Tro∣ches also of Wormwood, of Rhubarb, Gentian and such like are also profitable; care also must be taken of the Spleen and Sto∣mack, if they are debilitated. There are certain other medicines given somtimes, Febrifuga. which are called Febrifuga, of which 'tis spoken in the fore-going chapter. And besides these, Topical Medicines. there are yet others, which are externally ap∣plyed to the body to cure Fevers; namely, a plaister of cobwebs, with unguento populio, the leaves of Shepherds pouch, nettles, crowfoot, and other vesiccatories. Concerning Diet, Diet. in a pure intermitting Tertian, the same diet useth to be kept for the most part as in a continued Tertian, they are to abstain from honey, sweet things, and all those things which ingender choler, wine is not to be drunk before concoction: but when the notes of concoction have appeared, you may use it, so it be thin and watry; meat is to be given when the paroxism is past, unless Syncope imminent perswade the contrary, Galen 10. Meth. Med. c. 5. In bastard Tertians two things are principally to be observed concerning diet; first, that the disease by too plentiful a diet may not be increased. Secondly, that the strength by too slender a diet may not be debilitated, which should hold out most in a long disease; and therefore the magnitude of the disease, and the greatness of the strength are to be compared one with another; and in case the strength be greater, and the matter harder to be concocted, the thinner diet is to be used, but the larger diet, if the strength be weak, and the matter easier to be concocted. The drink should not only cool and moisten, but also cut, and there∣fore it may be mixed with Hysop and wilde Marjerom, and if water sweetned with honey be exhibited, Vinegar being there∣unto added, that Choler may be thereby corrected.
CHAP. XIX. Of a Quotidian Intermittent. THe second sort of intermitting Fevers is that which pro∣ceeds from Flegm, A Quoti∣dian Fever which because it takes them every day, is called a quotidian. Fernelius writes that this is the rarest of all Fevers, and that which scarce happens once a∣mongst six hundred: Nay there are some who plainly deny it: and although many are affected every day, yet they are sick of a double Tertian, or treble Quartan. The cause of this Fever sithence it is Flegm putrifying in the meseraick veins, all those things may be causes of this Fever, The cause which conduce to the generation of Flegm, namely, weakness of the bowels, especially of the stomack, heat, cold and moist aliment, and too great plenty of them. This Fever is known by the causes generating Flegm which went before, Diagno∣stick signs. and also by the signs of Flegm abounding in the body, explained in lib. 3. of Institutions part. 2. cap. 2, This Fever chiefly comes to invade in the night, only with coldness of the extreme parts, and trembling: The heat after refrigeration slowly invades, so that somtimes heat, somtimes cold is percei∣ved; and the heat at the first doth not seem sharp, but habituous; yet if the hand put thereunto continue some time, it appears a little sharp, and when it is diffused over the whole body, it doth not burn much, so that the sick do not breath extraordinarily, neither are they very thirsty: The face is not very red, but for the most part yellowish, or a little puffed up; the eyes in the be∣ginning are white, thin, and crude; afterwards when the mat∣ter is concocted, they become thick, troubled, and oftentimes also red. In the first paroxisms also they sweat not, but in the progress of the disease they sweat a little; the Pulse also is ex∣ceeding little, thin, and more then in Quartans, but equally slow; the paroxism is extended to eighteen hours, and the inter∣val, which is six hours, is seldome pure and free; nay 'tis often extended to four and twenty hours. But how long this Fever shall continue, Progno∣sticks. may be conjectured by the signs of concoction appearing sooner or later in the Urine, and by the longitude and brevity of the paroxism; for if nature timely aim at some evacuation, it affords hopes of shortness of the disease: But this Fever as being that which ariseth from a pertinacious humour is long, and continueth unto forty days
three moneths or more, and is not without danger; and when the Stomack and Liver are much affected with it, the sick are of∣ten cast into a Dropsie and Cachexy. The cure for the most part is the same with a Quotidian con∣tinued; The Cure for the pituitous humour is to be prepared and evacua∣ted, to wit, the first passages are to be opened with Clisters ac∣commodated to the pituitous humour; breathing a vein is scarce used, but a Vomit is more useful then in any other sort of Fever, because the stomack is principally affected, but 'tis to be occasi∣oned by seed of Radish, Orach, of Dill, flowers of Broom, in those that are strong, with Spurge, and others that are every where known. The Flegmatick humour is to be prepared with convenient medicines; Preparers. the opening roots, Hysop, wilde Marjoram, Betony, Mayden hair, Agrimony, Groundpine, Camomil, and other things convenient for Flegm, Syrup of Sorrel simple and com∣pound, Syrup of the two and of the five Roots, Honey of Roses, Syrup Byzant, simple and compound, of Hysop, Oxymel simple and compound with Squills, spirit of Salt and Vitriol. The matter in the first place being prepared, Purgers. it should be eva∣cuated with Agarick, Mechoachan, Turbith, Troches of Alhan∣dal, Elect. Indo Diaphaenico, Diacarthamo, pills of Hieca, with Agarick, and such like. Sweat and Urine also should be provoked with medicines made of Fennel, Movers of Urine and sweat. Carduus Benedictus, Salsa Parilla, wood of Sassafras, Treacle, and Mithridate; and lastly the Bowels, but especially the Stomack and Liver are to be strengthned. CHAP. XX. Of an Intermitting Quartan. THe third sort of intermitting Fevers which ariseth from a Melancholy humour putrifying in the meseraick veins, A Quar∣tan. and seizeth on the fourth day also, whence it is called a Quartan. The proximate cause of a Quartan Fever is a melancholy humour collected in the meseraick veins about the spleen and ad∣jacent Bowels, The cause and there putrifying, and that somtimes natural by its own nature cold and dry, and somtimes it participates with some adustion; But the more remote causes are, all those things which conduce to the generation of black and melancholy hu∣mours, namely meats and drinks apt to generate this humour; amongst the which is vinegar, of the which Hypocrates 3. vich.
rat. in acut. t. 38. writeth, it attenuateth melancholy humours, raiseth them, and frames many visions in the mind: For Vine∣gar is a Leader or stirrer of Melancholy. The time is princi∣pally in Autumn, especially if a hot Summer have preceded. This Fever is known by its quartane circuit, Signs, and signs of melancholy abounding in the body, and it invadeth with a cer∣tain unequal disturbance of the body, the which a cold shaking fit followeth, which at the first is little, or at leastwise instead thereof there is at the first refrigeration and horrour, in the pro∣gress of the disease the cold paroxism is alwaies greater, and at length most vehement with pain, causing the bones to knock to∣gether. The heat is kindled by degrees, neither is it burning, but somwhat milde. The pulse is thin and slow, and although in the vigour of the paroxism it become swift and frequent, yet in comparison of Tertians it is thin and slow. The Urines at first are thin and white, but in the progress of time higher co∣loured and thicker. Sweats in the beginning are not frequent, but in the progress of the disease plentiful. And thus things are in a pure quartan, but in a bastard one tokens of some humour mixed do appear, and heat, thirst, watch∣ings, and other symptomes are more grievous. This Fever continueth the longest of all other, Progno∣sticks. and oftentimes is not only extended to some moneths, but years; and if it be not gone by the next solstice or aequinectial, after it was first ta∣ken, it lasteth for the most part till the next after, and for the most part goes away in the Spring. 'Tis safe and without dan∣ger, if it be legitimate, and without any disease of any of the bowels: But that which is joyned with black choler is more dan∣gerous, as also that which is with some grievous distemper of some of the intrals, and casteth the sick into a dropsie, the scurvie, or a consumption. As concerning the cure, Indicati∣ons if this Fever proceed from a pure me∣lancholy humour, that since 'tis cold, dry, thick, 'tis to be moist∣ned and attenuated, or if it be also adust, it is in some measure to be cooled, afterwards to be purged with convenient medi∣cines. The causes generating are to be removed, and in case other humours are mixed, regard must be had of them. The Fever it self indicates cooling and moistning; yet regard of the strength must be had, least by the duration of the disease that be impair∣ed, as also of the stomack, spleen, and liver, least they are of∣fended. This Fever is to be handled gentl at the first, Cure neither are
strong medicines to be used at the beginning of cure, sithence the melancholy humour may be exasperated by the use of them, and out of a simple Quartan, a double or treble may easily be raised, Galen 1. Opening a vein. ad Glauc. cap. 11. yet there is least danger in Vomits. The first passages of the Body therefore are first to be evacuated with clisters, lenitive medicines, and vomits also; afterwards in case blood abound therewith, a vein is to be opened; and in case it issue forth black and thick, the greater quantity is to be taken, that by this means both the plenty of blood may be diminished, and that part of the melancholy humour which is poured out in∣to the vena cava may be evacuated; but if the blood coming forth appear to be thin and yellow, 'tis forthwith to be stopped: And indeed where there is store of blood (the first passages being cleansed) a vein may be opened; but if this Fever begin with∣out store of blood, a vein is not to be breathed presently at the beginning, but when some of the peccant humour is drawn into the veins, and mingled with the blood: The Basilick or median vein either may be opened, most commend the opening of the Salvatella; yet they have not as yet rendered any sufficient rea∣son why that should be preferred before others. The blood being evacuated, the peccant matter must be prepa∣red and concocted, Preparers. and likewise that disposition of the body to generate vitious humours is to be corrected: And indeed, in case a Quartan Fever proceed only from natural melancholy, moist∣ning things are to be first used, but heating things should be more moderate; but if adust humours are mixed, there will be use of things moderately cooling, but in the progress of the disease, there will be need of cutting and attenuating medicines: If the pituitous humour be mixed therewith, in the beginning there will be need also of attenuating and cutting things, and it may be more safe to heat a little: Hence are to be administred, Bur∣rage, Bugloss, Violets, Maidenhair, Cichory, Fumitory, Cete∣rach, Hearts-tongue, Germander, Ground-pine, Carduus Bene∣dictus, the Roots of Marsh-mallows, Licoras, Chichory, the opening roots, Polipody, Gentian, Fern, the barks of Tamarisk, Capparum, Roots of Walnut Trees, Flowers and seed of Broom, of the Vine, Ash, Citron, juice of Apples, and compounds of these, and somtimes this or that may be chosen or mixed accor∣ding as the nature of the peccant humour requireth. The concoction and evacuation of the matter must be by in∣tervals repealed, Purging Medicines and when the matter is in some measure prepa∣red, purging medicines are to be prepared of Polipody, Epithy∣num, leaves of Senna, roots of Jalop, black Hellebore, lapidis
Lazuli, and compounds of these Syrup of Apples, Regis Sapor, Electuary called Diacatholicon, Confection of Hameck, with the compound powder of Senna and Diasenna, Tartarious pills, or pills evacuating melancholy of lapis Lazuli, Armoniack, be∣ginning with the more milde or gentle ones. A Vomit also is convenient, by which oftentimes pertinaci∣ous Quartans are cured: So Galen of Treacle ad Pisonem, cap. Vomits 15. the day before the fit, after Supper he gives a vomit, the next day after early, the juice or dilution of Wormwood, and two hours before the paroxism, Treacle; the gentler Vomits are of the decoction of Dill and Radish with Oxymel; the stronger are Asarabecca, and Gratiola, or Hedge-hysop; The strongest were made by the Ancients of black Hellebore; at this day such medi∣cines are made of Antimony. If the Hemorrhodes can be opened, Hemor∣rhodes. there will be much good expected thereby; seeing that the flowing of these, preserves and frees a man from many diseases arising from adust and melancho∣ly humours. The opening and preparing things before menti∣oned, may also cause Urine. Moreover, Sudori∣ficks. for the discussing the reliques of the matter after purging, and that the matter is concocted, sudorifiques are to be exhibited an hour or two before the paroxism. Galen hath two medicines in use for this purpose; the one ex succo Cyraniaco, and Treacle, which is also in use at this day. 'Tis profitable to use the use of Gentian, Carduus benedictus, Antidotus Saxoni∣ca so called, and such like. To these belong those medicines also which may help by a cer∣tain propriety, or hidden quality, Appropri∣ated medi∣cines. whereof notwithstanding a rea∣son may be given for the most part; to wit, such as may dis∣cuss and consume the reliques of the humour, and strengthen the bowels: such are the juice of Wormwood, Vervain, Roots of Masterwort, Plantane. Others also commend other medicines, which for the most part provoke sweat likewise, and may safely be exhibited in due season. But Opiates, and such like, Hindring the fits. which only have power to check the fit, are not alwaies safely to be administred, because they on∣ly stupifie the expulsive faculty, and dull it, and prohibite the endeavours of nature, and hinder the motion of the matter, and the humours offending being detained in the body, may cause other evils. Fruthermore above the wrists, and where the pul∣ses beat, may be applied those things which we have mentioned before amongst the Tertians. In the mean time we should alwaies be careful of the interal,
and endeavour that they may be strengthned, and that the spleen may not be obstructed, swell, or become scirrous and hardned, which often useth to come to pass. Amongst other symptomes, Mitigati∣of cold fits. for the most part cold shaking fits are most troublesome of the patient, which may be mitigated by the giving of Treacle or Mithridate before the paroxism, and a∣nointing of the spine of the back with oyl of Camomil, Dill, Costus, Rue, Pepper, Bayes, with Treacle and Mithridate. Also there should be applied to those parts that principally che∣rish the Fever, Topical things. and which are especially troubled with pain during the time of the fit, plaisters, somentations, and unguents, espe∣cially to the spleen, and those to be made of Marsh mallows, Ta∣marisk, Broom, Dill, Camomil, Armoniack, Bdellium. As concerning diet, it should be meat of good concoction, and easie digestion, and no ways apt to generate melancholy hu∣mours, but rather such as may hinder the increase of them. The meat therefore should be moistning and heating in melancholy, and if an adust humour be mixed therewith, it should be som∣what cooling, yet so, that it may not be destitute or power and and force to attenuate that which is thick; the meats also mixed with Burrage, Bugloss, Fennel, Parsly, Capers, Cinamon, Saffron, and such like. Meats affording thick and viscous juices must wholly be refrained. If a Quartan arise of it self without any preceding disease, at first a little thinner diet is proper, then diet somwhat thicker is to be used, and at last towards the height, a little thinner is to be again administred: But if a Quartan suc∣ceed another disease, at first diet a little thicker is to be taken, and afterwards by degrees towards the height, somwhat to be detract∣ed from that: And in case the sick will endure it, let him fast that day his fit cometh, or at least six hours before the paroxism, let him eat nothing, according to Hypocrat. 1. Aphor. 11. and 19. For meats then given, afford not any nourishment to the body, but to the disease: And many Quartans, as also Terti∣ans are prolonged, not by their own nature, but by errors in diet, especially because the sick either in the fit, or newly before it comes, do not abstain from meat and drink. Their drink should be white wine, thin, mature, and not au∣stere, or Beer that hath worked well, and is not flatulent; and the wine and beer may be mixed with herbs good against the me∣lancholy humour above-named. Fevers which have longer periods, Quintan Fevers. and return on the fifth or seventh day, or afterwards, since they all proceed from a melan∣choly humour, or melancholy declining into a black and adust
humour, or have a black humour mixed, as is manifest from the ation, and other symptomes, there is also the same reason of curing them as of Quartans: yet what the nature of the humour is, ought diligently to be observed. CHAP. XXI. Of Compound Fevers, and Semi-Tertians. BEsides these simple Fevers hitherto mentioned, Fevers compound∣ed. there are yet Compound Fevers, which is, when one Fever is complicate with another. They are divided into confused and expli∣cite. They are commonly called confused, Confused when two Fevers begin and end at the same time, so that they can scarcely be discerned; namely, when several humours confused amongst themselves, pu∣trifie in the same place, and each or every of them preserves its own proper nature; which nevertheless how it might be done, scarce seems possible: Implicite But implicite are those that are so joyned together, as that the nature and symptomes of either of them se∣verally and peculiarly may be known. That complication happens many ways; for first, a non-putred is joyned with a putred, as a hectick with a putred; moreover a putred with a putred, and that several ways; for first, continued are mixed with continued, and intermittent with intermittent; and that either of the same sort, whence there are double Terti∣ans, double and treble Quartans; or different, but that is rarer, as a Tertian intermitting with a Quotidian intermitting, and a Tertian intermitting with a Quartan intermitting, continued Tertians with intermitting, when a Tertian intermitting with continued Quotidian, or an intermitting Quotidian with a con∣tinued Tertian is mixed, which Fevers are called Semi-Ter∣tians. There are three ways of composition of Fevers, Three ways of composi∣tion of Fevers. and three dif∣ferences of compounded Fevers; Subintrante, Coalternate, and Communicant. Subintrante are, when the fit of the one Fever begins before the termination of the other: Coalternate, when one paroxism being-ended, by and by after a short interval, another begins a Communicant are such whereof the paroxisme of the one doth begin forthwith after the end of the other, there being no in∣terval. Compound Fevers are known by the signs of simple Fevers,
and principally by the returns of cold tremblings and shakings af∣ter rest; Signs of compound Fevers. and in case a cold fit happens, and sweat do not follow afterwards, or that one sweat happen after many fits. The pulse also if in a continued Fever it be often contracted, motion of new matter, and of a new paroxism, and so 'tis a token of a compound Fever. But these Fevers are for the most part more dangerous then others, Progno∣sticks. since that they more afflict the patient then simple, and a set time for their paroxisms is for the most part wanting, and especially in case the compound Fevers consist of several humours, and they are more difficult to be cured, seeing those things that are accommodated to one humour, are not fit for another. But their cure depends on the manner of cure of their simples, Cure and to every humour and Fever that is kindled, thereby are to be exhibited their opposite remedies. But that we may say somthing of compound Fevers, we will add somwhat concerning a double and treble Tertian and Quar∣tian, and likewise of a Semitertian A double or triple Tertian is caused by choler putrifying in two or three places in the meseraick veins; A double Tertian. and indeed, if choler putrifie in two places, a double Tertian is made, which afflicteth either every day once, or in one day twice, that the next day af∣ter the sick may be free from the fit: A treble Tertian. But in case it putrifie in three places, a treble Tertian ariseth, which in the space of two days afflicts thrice, one day once, the other day twice. Nay cho∣ler may putrifie in four or five places, and more, and so many, or such Tertians then will ensue. A double Quotidian is caused by Flegme putrifying in two places, A double Quotidi∣an. and invadeth the sick twice in the space of four and twenty hours. A double Quartan is caused by a melancholy humour putri∣fying in two places; A double Quartan and those that are troubled therewith, are one day free from a Fever, and the two next are troubled with it. But such as are troubled with a treble Quartan, are Feverish eve∣ry day; Nay, 'tis not impossible but that those that are trou∣bled with a compound Quartan, should be affected twice in one day. And indeed a double Tertian is often such from the beginning, A treble Quartan but a double or triple Quartan for the most part from the untime∣ly use of medicines, especially of hot sodorifiques, 'tis become such, because the crude matter is only stirred up, but not discussed, but dispersed over more parts. Cure A compound Tertian and Quartan is cured as other Tertians
and Quartans are: yet this is to be taken notice of, that the meats or medicines may be used at fit times in regard of the pa∣roxisme. As for a Semitertian which by the Greeks is called a Semiter∣tian fire, 'tis compounded of a Tertian and a Quotidian, Semiterti∣an. the one continued, the other intermittent, and indeed principally of an intermitting Tertian, and continued Quotidian, and hath its continuity from Flegm, its hoirour from intermitting, as commonly 'tis taught; whence these are also called horrid Fe∣vers. But although I should not deny that humours putrifie to∣gether in the vena cava, and the meseraick veins, and that from thence there may arise complicate Fevers, which have various exacerbations and mutations in their symptomes; yet it seems not absurd to call those Fevers also Semitertians, which by their nature are indeed intermitting Tertians, yet when 'tis joyned with an inflammation of any Intral, a symptomatical continu∣ed Fever is stirred up; for when the Feverish part of the matter is thrust out with the blood into the Guts, Stomack, Liver, and parts adjacent, an inflammation is caused, and thence a conti∣nued symptomatical Fever, which being complicate with an in∣termitting Tertian, constitutes a Semitertian, which in respect of the intermitting Fever is horrid, in regard of the sympto∣matical continued. That which Physitians observations teach us, by whom 'tis found out, by the dissected bodies of such as have died in Semitertians, that there are inflammations about the hollow parts of the Liver, as also in the Stomack, Guts, Mesentery, Kell or Cawl, Spleen; Whence 'tis easie to give a reason of a trembling or shaking fit in this Fever; for it happens somtimes ordinately, according to the nature of the intermit∣tent Fever; somtimes inordinately, when the inflammation seizeth on some new part, or when quitture or purulent matter is made; according to Hippocrates, 2. Aphorism. 4.7. Som∣times malignity happens to be joyned with these Fevers, and then for the most part they are popular, and there are many affected therewith. This Fever is known, Signs: and if it be according as it is common∣ly described, compounded of a continued Quotidian, and an intermitting Tertian, by the signs of each Fever; for a conti∣nued Fever on the one humour, daylie brings a paroxism, but the other every third day, and so in one day there will be two fits, in the other but one. See Galen. 2. de diff. Febr. cap. 7. But if it proceed from an inflammation of any Intral adjoyned, signs of an inflammation are present, and together therewith
the intermittent Fever keeps it likeness; malignity, if it be pre∣sent, Progne∣sticks. is known by its signs. This Fever is altogether dangerous, both in regard of its con∣tinuity, and of its symptomes, as also of its inflammation or malignity. The cure thereof depends either on the cure of an intermitting Tertian, Cure. or a continued Quotidian, or on the cure of a single or double intermitting Fever, and of an inflammation of In∣trals.
The Third Book. Of a Hectick Fever. CHAP. I. Of the Nature of a Hectick Fever. ANd so these things of putred Fevers are handled, A Hectick Fever. and consequently the first sort of Fevers, whose heat ac∣cording to inclination, disposition, or habitude, is in the living parts of the body; It still remains that we speak of Hecticks, wherein the Feverish distemper becomes as it were habitual, and so possesseth the living parts of the body, that although it be fostered by no cause, yet neverthe∣less it can subsist without it. There are two things necessary for the generation of this Fe∣ver, Causes aptness of the subject to receive and entertain preternatural heat, and a continual and vehement action of causes heating and introducing Fevers. An apt habit of body to take this Fever, is a hot and dry body, whether it be natural, or from what cause soever it proceed. These Fevers are generated two ways; Manner of generation. for either they follow other Fevers, whether burning or lasting, when their heat is ve∣hement; or being durable, it possesseth all the parts, and con∣sumes their moisture; or they arise from themselves, and from evident causes, which if they are weaker or lighter, they produce Ephemeraes; if stronger, they bring forth Hecticks. But there are certain degrees of a Hectick Fever: The first is, Differen∣ces. when the rorid humidity is dried. The second, when the fleshy and fatty substance perisheth. The third is, when the heat like∣wise invadeth the : And indeed when the rorid hu∣midity only grows  is not as yet consumed, 'tis called a Hectick without a Consumption; but when that humidity is consumed and dried up, 'tis called a Hectick with wasting or marasmodes. A Hectick also is somtimes simple and alone, somtimes 'tis joyned with putrifaction.
CHAP. II. Of the signs of a Hectick Fever. A Hectick Fever is known by its continual heat, causing no pain, Diagno∣stick signs. as being equal; and Hectick which indeed at the first touch is weak, afterwards it appears sharper: It is per∣ceived more in the Arteries then the other parts: And moreo∣ver, the heat after taking food, within an hour or two is increa∣sed, and the Pulse either is changed, as to greatness or swiftness, yet so, that its ascending appears strong and free, and none of those things precede which forego the fits of putred Fevers most commonly; and this mutation of pulse and heat, endures until the aliment be distributed. The pulse also in this Fever is lit∣tle, Signs of differen∣ces. frequent, and moderately swift; and by how much the more the strength receiveth this Fever, by so much the more the body is consumed, and the strength debilitated, so that the sick can scarce lift up the eye-lids, and together with it in the second place, fatness in Urine swims like cobwebs. Lastly, The same things which appear in an hippocratical face, as 'tis described by Hippocrates, are also discerned in a marasmodes or Hectick, with wasting. A Hectick with a Putred, Signs of a Hectick with a Pu∣tred. and an Intermittent conjunct, is known from hence; That the fit declining, the heat nevertheless, although remiss, some is left thereof, and there is great languish∣ing of the strength, and all the other parts are more temperate, only the parts where the arteries are become hotter, and the pulse loseth not its swiftness and frequency, and the sick takes food, but is not strengthned thereby. A Hectick joyned with a continued putrid Fever, is difficult to be known; yet it may be known from hence, namely, because the dry calidity remains after the end of the declination, or of the whole Fever, or its periods; and the body is more extenuated then otherwise it useth to be, the Urine also becomes oylie, as may appear. It is hard to know a Hectick in the beginning of it; Progno∣sticks. 'tis not so difficult to cure at the first: but that which is neerer to wast∣ing, or a consumption, is easily known, but hardly cured, and at the last it becomes plainly incurable.
CHAP. III. Of the Cure of a Hectick Fever. LAstly concerning the cure: Indicati∣ons and Cure. The hot and dry distemper in∣dicates cooling and moistning, the strength requires pre∣servation, and whatsoever of the humid and solid parts is consumed and dried, is to be restored with moistning things; and indeed moistning things are more safe; but in giving cool∣ing things we must be cautious, lest that the native heat already being weak, should by that means be extinguished. But if a Hectick Fever have a Putred one joyned therewith, the Hectick cannot be cured, unless the other Fever be first taken away. Medicines cooling and moistning are, Violets, Burrage, Medicines Bu∣gloss, Waterlillies, Roses, Endive, Succory, Mallows the four greater cold seeds, Poppy. Out of which several medicines for present use may be prepared. Externally, A Bath of fair water may be used most profitably, External things, of which Galen 10. Meth. Medend. cap. 10. Which that it may moisten the more, Mallows, Violets, Bearsbreech may be added: 'tis convenient also to use a Bath of warm milk. After the Bath, let the body be anointed, but principally the spine of the back, with oyl of Violets, sweet Almonds, Water lillies, Roses; Cool∣ing and moistning medicines may be also applyed both to the Breast and Liver, as also to the Reins. But the greatest hope of cure consisteth in Diet: Diet. The Ayr should be temperate, or moderately cold: Meats should be cool∣ing and moistning, easie of concoction, and of good juice, ha∣ving in them few excrements, and such as is not presently disper∣sed. In the first place Milk is profitable, which as Galen 4. de Simp. Medic. Facult. cap. 17. teacheth, 'tis cold and moist, ea∣sie of concoction, of the best nourishment, and hath great pow∣er of moistning and refreshing the substance of our bodies; Which lest it should be coagulated in the stomack, some Sugar or Salt should be mixed therewith; and it should only be taken in such a quantity as may well be concocted by the stomack. Strengthning and Restorative Broths are also profitable, of which 'tis spoken else-where, as also food of Almonds, Pine, and Pi∣stack nuts, the four greater cold seeds, and of white Poppy. But meats in such as are sick in Hecticks, should be given in small quantity, but often, by reason of the imbecility of their strength. Their drink in our Countries should be Ale or
Beer, or Water and Wine, white and sweet. Their sleep should be somwhat longer. If a Putred be joyned with a Hectick, we must endeavour that the Putred Fever may be first taken away, yet the Hectick not to be neglected, lest that whilst we use re∣medies only for the Putred Fever, the Hectick may be encrea∣sed; if we use means only to cure the Hectick, the Putred may be increased.
The Fourth Book. Of the Plague, and of Pestilential and Ma∣lignant Fevers. CHAP. I. Of the Nature of the Pestilence. HItherto we have finished the essential differences of Fevers; it remains that we now should speak of the accidental. Amongst which, the principal and most necessary to be known, are those that enfold the Pestilence, pestilential Fevers and ma∣lignant. And indeed concerning the Plague, with which, What the Plague is. although not alwaies, yet most commonly a Fever is joyned; That name is most noted to be attributed to the most pernitious and destru∣ctive of all others: But what the nature of that disease is, amongst Authors is much controverted. For first of all, sithence various and several kinds of diseases and symptomes may appear in the Plague: Yet because they are also often perceived without the plague, the nature of the plague is not to be placed in so ma∣ny diseases and symptomes differing in specie, but in some pecu∣liar sort: Nor doth the being epidemical or contagious, con∣stitute the nature of the pestilence, since other diseases also may be universal and contagious. But since that this is granted by all, The plague a disease of the heart that the Plague spreads most, when many are infected together with the same disease, and they die, and others are infected: Hence it may easily ap∣pear, that the plague is primarily a disease of that part on the which life depends chiefly, and the which being hurt, a man is in very great danger of his life, namely the heart, the fountain of life, and store-house of vital heat: For although the humour wherein the venome inhereth may subsist in divers parts (whence the same diseases and symptomes in every pestilence are not the same to appearance) yet in what place soever it subsisteth, it hath
a peculiar antipathy with the heart, and thereby destroyeth a man so suddenly. But from whence that force and quality so mischievous and inimicous to the heart, Whether the nature of the plague con∣sist in pu∣trifaction. hath its original, and dependeth, of that there is a very great controversie amongst Physitians; and in∣deed, some do conceive that the Pestilence only consisteth of pu∣trifaction, and conclude, that by putrifaction the nature of the Pestilence may be consumed. But because they themselves ac∣knowledge that all putred Fevers are not pestilential, they strive variously to determine it in putrifaction, and that they divers ways strive to explain, but all in vain. Whatsoever therefore putrifaction is concluded to be, it sufficeth not to constitute the pestilence; for there are measures and degrees of putrifaction al∣so whatsoever they are, since that they differ only according to magis and minus, they differ not in their kind, neither do they separate the plague from the rest of the putred Fevers. Moreover the Plague hurteth in another kind then a putred Fever doth; for it spreads it self for the most part in a moment, and brings forth pernicious effects, it diffuseth it self in an astonishing man∣ner, and into whatsoever it enters, a very little of the pestilent venome may lie hidden any where a long time, and remain whole, and afterwards be taken into the body, and on a sudden produce such grievous symptomes, and brings forth such effects as are not in the power of the primary qualities, on which the ground of putrifaction depends: Moreover, if the plague should pro∣ceed from putrifaction only, a Fever also would never be without the pestilence: yet since it is observed that a Fever is without the plague, as out of Hippocrates 3. epid. comm. 4.25.55. Galen de simp. med. facult. de terra Armenia. Jac. de partib. in 1. quarti Avicen. cap. de Febre Pestilent. Alex. Benedicto, Fr. Valleriola loc. comm. lib. 3. c. 18. and out of others it is mani∣fest. Lastly, the way of cure is far different from that of other putred Fevers, and the pestilent poyson indicates and requires a∣lexipharmall means, which in other putred Fevers are neither indicated nor have any place. Therefore we have determined that the plague doth consist in a hidden quality, and in its nature wholly adverse to the heart, and that the pestilential poyson is endued with such a quality, which by the effects of it, as we lately said, beyond the primary qualities doth prove. Contagion is joyned with the pestilence, and pestilential poy∣sons have always contagion joyned with them as a proper acci∣dent, because it belongs to all plagues, but not only to the plague.
Therefore we define the pestilence to be a venomous disease of the heart, from venomous matter, Definition of it. and in its whole substance pe∣culiarly adverse to the heart, and gotten by infection, and there∣fore is of it self infectious, and suddenly and joyntly hurting all the actions of the heart, very acute, deadly, introducing de∣structive symptomes of all sorts. But what the specifique nature of this venome is, and what its differences are in divers constitutions pestilential, no man can easily explain. To me it seems probable to be the highest degree of corruption, which indeed the humours in our bodies can pos∣sibly receive; to which through many alterations, mutations, and fermentations it comes, and into which diseases which went before, at length degenerate: Whence it comes to pass, that when the Plague reigns, other sporadick diseases that come not by or∣dinary means, and all benigne diseases for the most part are si∣lent, and those epidemical diseases that reigned before cease. CHAP. II. Of the causes of the Pestilence. COncerning the causes of the Pestilence, A cause or this great corru∣ption, they are twofold; some of them generating the Pesti∣lence, others propagating the same, which are comprehend∣ed under the name of contagion. In the former rank are Ayr, Stars, course of Diet, Poysons, imagination and terror. For first, Ayr. Ayr somtimes contains in it the seeds of the pesti∣lence, which when by drawing in the ayr by our breath, men draw in that therewith, and so the pestilence is stirred up in them, and that when it happens, most grievous pestilential constituti∣ons are occasioned, and is far more pernitious then to those to whom the contagion of the plague is only transferred. Ayr be∣comes pestilential, when there is in it excess of heat and moisture, which dispose bodies to putrifaction; such a constitution of ayr Hippocrates describeth 3. epid. comm. 3. yet the Plague may be bred also without such a constitution of ayr, and that very cor∣ruption it self is not terminated in the primary qualities; but 'tis necessary that certain occult qualities, and that somwhat divine, mentioned by Hippocrates should concur, but it takes its venenosity and pestilential quality first from heaven, whilst that the ayr by a peculiar influence from the stars, whether it be so disposed in the first qualities, that it should putrifie and be cor∣rupted, or in an occult manner also it be so disposed and affected,
that in it poysonous seeds are generated, which in their whole substance are adverse to man. To which thing Astrologers teach, that Saturn doth prin∣cipally act his part. Moreover the Ayr may receive its pestilential seeds from the caverns of the earth, whilst from thence venomous steams exhale, being generated in the ayr long pend up before; to which purpose Earthquakes much conduce, which move venomous steams in that manner, and open ways for their evaporation; so out of a chest which hath been long shut, being opened, the plague cometh forth, as Julius Capito∣linus hath noted in Vero: The same may happen in standing pools and lakes, and corrupted waters in Wells. Lastly, Histo∣ri inform us, that the ayr hath been infected by the carcasses of such as have been slain, and by the corruption of multitudes of dead locusts. Secondly, although the stars by corrupting of the ayr may be the cause of the pestilence whilst they so corrupt it, as that that pestilence which is contained in it, the seeds or sparks being com∣municated to man, they excite the plague in him: yet by it self also, by affecting of mans very body, they may cause the plague, whilst either they dispose the ayr so, that whether by manifest or occult qualities, 'tis rendred not fit for the preserva∣tion of mankind, but corrupteth the humours therein, so that they become of a pestilential nature; or also proximately and immediately by occult influencies, they corrupt mans body, and principally the humours and spirits contained therein; concern∣ing which thing Astrologers are to be advised with. Common Diet. Thirdly, Pestilential venome may be generated from common Diet. That which often happens in a long dearth of provision, in Camps and Sieges, where men are compelled to make use of corrupt and unwholsome meat, by reason whereof ill humours are generated; which being detained in the body, are more corru∣pted, and at length become pestilential; as Histories sufficient∣ly testifie. Fourthly Unguents and venomous powders being spread a∣broad may cause the plague, Poysonous things. being that which by mischievous per∣sons hath been done and committed, as histories again inform us: yet if any one would refer this kind of cause to contagion or infection, Imagina∣tion. we will not contend with him. Fifthly, The cause is imagination, terror, and fear; and ex∣perience hath taught us, that some whilst they have beheld those that were infected with the plague, or dead of it, or seeing some go out of a house that was then infected, by reason of too much
terror and fear, have fallen sick of the plague: I have observed the same to proceed from anger. CHAP. III. Of Contagion. ANd these are the causes, by means whereof the pestilent poyson may be generated in the ayr, or in mans body; yet it often comes to pass, that neither the ayr, nor evil diet, nor any of the rest of these causes have stirred up the pestilence, but otherwise from elsewhere being brought into some place by contagion, and afterwards by contagion also it is diffused into more places. Infection. For although there are other diseases contagious also, yet the plague is the most infectious of all others. Contagion is a production of the like diseased or sickly affect in another body, by pollution sent out from a discased body, but there are three things required to perfect contagion: A contagi∣ous body it self that may infect others, a disease or an affect con∣trary to nature, which is communicated to another, and the body which is infected. First, a contagious body is that which whilst 'tis sick of any disease, diffuseth not the disease it self (for the actident goes not out of the subject) but some of the morbifique cause out of it self, and communicates it to another, and so in this manner excites the same disease in it. For that which is communicated to an∣other from out of a contagious body, is not the disease it self, but a certain body flying out of the diseased body, and received into another, having power of stirring up the same in it. The Greeks call it Noseras apocriscis, and aporroias, and miasmata: The Latines, the pollutions and seeds of contagion; and since that we see that such seeds have not only hurtful qualities in the smallest quantities, and that they easily insinuate themselves into the body, but also they endure a long time, and retain their strength entire, and they are most exactly mixed, and are some way spirituous, Infection how many ways it is spread. and 'tis necessary they should sowe their store of strength by some occult quality. But contagion is not scattered after one manner, for somtimes it goes out by breathing, somtimes through the pores of the skin, or in the form of vapours, or of sweat and filth adhering to the skin, and is communicated to other bodies. And this seed go∣eth out most plentifully from an infected body, when the poyson is too strong for nature, and overcomes it, which happens in those that are dying.
The seeds of contagion are communicated either by immedi∣diate contact, or by some medium and vehicle. This vehicle is twofold; ayr, and some fewel, as they call it: Ayr, when it re∣ceives the seeds of contagion from infected bodies, it can carry them to places nigh, yea and somtimes more remote places. That hath the nature of fewel in it, which can receive the seeds of contagion, and communicate the same to another; which kind of bodies are thin and porous, as Flax, Cotton, Feathers, the hairy skins of animals, and garments made of them, feathers al∣so of birds, and birds themselves; and it is found out for a truth, that those pestilential sparks have often lain hid in the cinders or ashes; and it may come to pass, that any one may carry the sparks of it about him in his garments, and not be in∣fected, and yet they being moved and shaked, may infect an∣other. But the seed of a contagious pestilence when 'tis received into a body, it brings in that disposition with it wherewith that body from out of which it came was afflicted, and that for the most part suddenly, yet somtimes it is found to lie hid some days in the body before it denudates it self. Thirdly, Concerning the body that receives the pestilent treasury, although no man can promise to himself immunity from the pestilent venome, yet it is certain some are more easi∣ly, some more hardly infected. The cause whereof without all doubt consisteth in some peculiar occult quality of the heart, by the power whereof it hath or hath not strength to resist the veno∣mous pestilence; yet because the venomous quality is not trans∣ferred without a subject out of the infected body into another, it will more powerfully insinuate it self if it be received into a body proportionable and like unto that wherein it was generated: whence kinsmen are sooner affected then others. Yet there are also other things that occasion the more facile reception of the pestilence; for such as breath stronger, and such as have wide and open pores of their bodies, easier take in the seeds of the plague, inhering in the Ayr, or any place apt to retain it.
CHAP. IIII. Of the signes of the Plague. MOreover concerning the signs, Diagno∣stick signs that I may say nothing of approaching signs, desiring brevity, but only by what means it may be known we will speak. Indeed the plague when many have been infected, may easily be known; but be∣fore many have been overspread thereby, there is scarce any path∣ognomick signe by which it can certainly be known, that one or a few being affected are sick of the plague; afterwards when more are visited, it is not so difficult to be known, especially when all sporadick diseases for the most part are silent: For first, the plague seizeth on many, and the most it kills. Secondly, 'Tis contagious, and easily given to others, and 'tis more con∣tagious then any other disease. Thirdly, by its violence it de∣stroys the strength, and principally the vital spirits. Whence fourthly, when little, frequent, and unequal pulses are made, palpitation of the heart happens, lipothymie, syncope, and great anguish and perplexity altogether. Fifthly, If the disease be pro∣tracted, and the venome corrupt the humours, evils and sym∣ptomes happen of all kinds, and the whole order of the body is disturbed; Fevers happen, divers wheals or pustules, buboes, carbuncles; yet if there are no pushes, bubo, or carbuncle ap∣pear, we must not therefore conclude that the sick hath not the plague; for it often happens that before they come out, and can be drived out by reason of the debility of nature, the sick die with the violence of the disease. There happens likewise other sym∣ptomes of all sorts; for when the strength of the body is debili∣tated by the vehemency of the poyson, the humours and spirits are corrupted, the excrements are changed, and the urine either becomes crude, or fully corrupted, the sweats are stinking and un∣timely, filthy, foetid, ill coloured excrements proceed from the belly, the qualities of the body are variously changed, and there is nothing at all in burning and malignant Fevers, which may not appear likewise in the pestilence: Progno∣sticks But there is no disease at all to which the Aphorism of Hippocrat. 19. sect. 2. doth more a∣gree: for oftentimes when the plague flatters most, it brings un∣expected death; and on the contrary, those that have seemed desperate, often recover when past hope. But there is the more hopes when tumors come forth suddenly in a place that is not dangerous, and after their coming forth the
symptomes abate, also if the wheals are of a good colour, and with remission of symptomes; if medicines, meat and drink are not vomited up again, if sweats come out with lightsom∣ness to the sick, and other signs are discerned, which use to be pre∣sent in salutary Fevers. But the greatest danger is, when tumors come not enough out, and carbuncles draw near to the heart, or vanish again; if gid∣diness in the head, watchings, a coma, or convulsion fits are pre∣sent, if the sick shall say every thing stinketh, if trembling of the heart, fainting of the spirits be present, if all things are thrown up by vomiting, if the extremities of the body wax cold, if the sweat be cold, if the excrements are of divers colours, black, and stinking, and if the other ill symptomes of malignant Fevers be present. CHAP. V. Of preservation from the Pestilence. BUt because 'tis safer to prevent the Plague, Preserva∣tives. then being pre∣sent to expel it out of the body, we should therefore be care∣ful first to prevent it. The way of preservation (with Gods assistance, which we ought to seek by prayers) consists in two things. The first is, That all those causes that may occasion the sick∣ness may be avoided. Furthermore, that the force of those causes when they cannot be avoided, may be broken, and our bodies rendred less apt to entertain them, and more able to resist them. First therefore if the Plague reign any where, all commerce with the infected is to be avoided, and if any one be certainly infected, he should be separated from the rest with all his hous∣hold-stuff, indeed for many weeks, and the house infected (as hereafter shall be shewed) cleansed; and in case it be doubtful whether any one be sick of it or no, 'tis better to be too cautious then careless. But if the pestilence be now sown in any place, 'tis safest to remove from thence, according to that common verse, Mox longe tarde, cede recede redi. Forthwith far from it go, Returning come back slow. The reasons of which do not prove that he should change his place, the assistance of God being implored, he should often use
medicines against poyson, and fortific the body with those things that resist contagion, as also he should endeavour that his body should be free from all excrements, and preserved in its natural state. And that we may begin a posteriore, Purging. the body is not to be rashly weakned with strong medicines; yet if any vitious humour shall be in the body, lest that the force of the Alexipharmacal me∣dicines should be debilitated, or the venomous poyson should easily take root in the body, it is to be purged by little and little with lenitives; to which purpose the most profitable are pills of Ruffi, so called from the authors name, and by custome called Pestilential pills; out of which also is made the Elixir proprie∣tatis, oyl of Vitriol being thereunto added: Syrup of Roses so∣lutive is also profitable, and Rhubarb, Agarick, and medicines compounded with them, which are every where extant. If blood abound, it may be abated by opening of a vein. The Diet ought to be such, Diet. whereby vitious humours may not be cumulated; and with meats and drinks most principally things good against poyson should be mixed; and also, if as it may easily happen, any of the vitious humours be cumulated, let them be purged by the said medicines. And forasmuch as Fontanels take away excrementitious hu∣mours by little and little, and hence take away the provision for the plague, they also in pestilential times are profitable. Mediocrity also is to be kept in exercise and rest, sleeping and waking, and the passions of the mind, and principally as much as 'tis possible, intentive thoughts of the plague, and fear of the same is to be shaken out of our minds. Besides these, two things more are yet necessary for our pre∣servation from the plague: First to take heed that none of the pestilential seed be attracted; Furthermore, if that happen, we being ignorant thereof, our bodies should be fortified against it. First therefore we should endeavour that the Ayr wherein we live be pure; The Ayr how to be purified. and therefore first publike places are to be cleansed from all filth, and the ayr should be purified with fire, principally of the wood of Juniper, Oak, Pine, Bays, and odoriferous plants being kindled; furthermore, every one should avoid company, and therefore solemn and frequent meetings are justly forbid by the Magistrate. The windows likewise towards places infected should be kept shut, and the ayr (as I newly said) with burnt woods, or with vinegar bezoarted, being poured upon hot bricks, or with suffumigations, or with pyrion powder kindled, should be purified.
No man should go abroad until the Sun be an hour or two high, How every man ought to fortifie himself a∣gainst the Plague. neither fasting, nor unarmed with alexipharmacal things, therefore balls of Amber, Nodules, sweet Limments mixed with Treacle, oyl of Rue, Znezedoaric, Angelica, Citron, Juniper, and such like should be held to the nostrils, and under the tongue con∣venient troches should be held, cordial bags should be applied to the region of the heart. Amulets likewise of poysonous things are commended by ma∣ny, Amulets as Arsnick, powder of a Toad, Quicksilver and such like being prepared, descriptions whereof are every where extant: which whatsoever they do, without question they perform in such manner, that they draw the venomous poyson to themselves, by the similitude of their own substance, and turn it from the heart; as those that are wounded with a Scorpion, with the oyl thereof being externally anointed, are forthwith healed: yet you must take keed that those bags, or mass of such things be not heated by motion, lest the strength of the poyson should be com∣municated to the heart through the pores of the skin. But the greatest hope of health and security, Alexi∣pharnicks. is in medicines that resist poyson, out of which those are to be selected which by long experience have been approved; The simples are, Angelica, Valerian, Tormentil, Carduus Benedictus, Sorrel, Dittany of Crete and white, Rue, Swallow-wort, Scordium, Scabicon, Di∣vels-bit, Burnet, Olsnicium, Fluellin, Vipers-grass, Marigolds, Wormwood, Tansie, Zedoary, Masterwort, Gentian, Juniper berries, Walnuts, Hartshorn, Bolealmanick, Terra sigillata, an Emerald, a Hyacinth. Out of which are various compounds; amongst which those that excel, and are approved by long use, are Mithridate, Trea∣cle and Confectio Liberantis, as also that antidote which is ascribed to King Mithridates, of which Pliny lib. 23. cap. 8. as also Theriaca Diatessaron, to which the moderns have added many more, as the Electuary of Saffron, or of an Egg, as 'tis called, Dioscordium, Tracastory, Antidotus Saxonica, Antidotus Guidonis de Cauliaco, Pulvis Caesaris rubeus, and Gryseus Electuarium Camphoratum Kigleri, and many more, which the Tracts of divers Authors concerning the pestilence afford such as are profitable, as well for preservation from the Plague, as for the cure thereof; so that it becomes us to be more solicitous about the choice of them, then the store of them here: And amongst so great plenty, 'tis more safe nevertheless to depend on those that have been approved by long use and experience, then such as are newly invented, what colour or pretence soever they afford them∣selves.
But because those strong and hot medicines are not pro∣per for women with child, nor children, they should have medi∣cines of Harts-horn, the bone of the heart of a Stag (or Deer) the roots of Tormentil, Pearl, Bole Almenick, Coral, Bezor, and precious stones: And since that there is no small difference amongst Alexipharmacal Medicines according to the qualities they have besides their occult ones, every one of them doth not agree with every age and season: for in a hotter Ayr, medicines that are not so hot are to be used; which must also be observed in those which in regard of their age or constitution of body are hotter, lest that humour should be kindled, and a Fever from thence arise afterwards; or if some are hotter, they should be prepared with Vinegar, or taken with Syrup acetos. Citri, Sorrel great or small, Pomgranates. For there is no depending upon one medicine against poyson, but they are to be varied, lest that nature should be accustomed to it, and thereby can receive little benefit by it. CHAP. VI. Of the Cure of the Pestilence. IF in any disease in the world, certainly in this an exact way of cure is to be used, Cure. since that the smallest fault being com∣mitted by any, may become an irreparable damage: But be∣cause the right reason of Cure depends on indications, and see∣ing that the Plague is an occult disease, and its nature consists in an occult quality, which by its peculiar force is mischievous to the heart, and is very contagious; but that is introduced by a cause endued with the same quality; Hence 'tis manifest, that that occult quality indicates a medicine alexipharmacal contrary to it, and shews that the cause in the body, whether taken by breathing in, or contact, or by what means soever contracted, should be removed and eradicated; But how that ought to be done, is controverted amongst Physitians. For first, since that neither Phlebotomy, Breathing a Vein. nor Purgation are indicated by the pestilence, quatenus 'tis the pestilence, whether they are to be used or not is controverted. First, Concerning the opening of a Vein, since that it nei∣ther cures the disease, nor takes away the venome, nor the cause, 'tis rarely to be used, and in that Pestilence which is occasioned by evil Diet, 'tis wholly to be omitted, as also in that which ari∣seth from a pestilential constitution of Ayr, unless there be very
great store of blood which must be diminished, and its heat mi∣tigated: But if the Plague come by infection, and there be that plenty of blood as may cause us to fear lest that a putred Fever should happen, which may become no less dangerous to the sick then the Plague it self, or that it be observed that the blood flows violently to inconvenient places, and that the strength is rather oppressed by its plenty, then dissipated, you may breath a Vein, yet only bleed what the strength can well bear with; and that should be in the beginning, for when twelve hours or more are passed away, 'tis safer to omit bleeding, because the strength be∣ing debilitated with the violence of the poyson, it cannot well bear it. Concerning the place for breathing of a Vein, such a place is to be chosen, as may help the motion of Nature, not hinder it, and may together divert the pestilent matter from a noble part; Therefore if a Parotis break out behind the ears, or a Bubo under the Arm-pits, or a Carbuncle in the superiour parts, a Vein should be opened in the Arm on the same side; but if a Bubo come in the Groyn, a Vein should be opened in the foot on the same side. But if a Carbuncle should arise in either of the Legs, seeing that useth to cause an inflammation, and great pain, by which the strength is weakned, 'tis convenient to open a Vein in the contrary leg; for neither is the motion of nature hindred by this means, but the matter is drawn from the superiour parts towards the inferiour, and a great flux to the part affected, and the increase of the inflammation is hereby pre∣vented. Moreover Purgation also is not indicated by the pestilence, Purgation. nor can the seeds of the Plague be eradicated by any purging medi∣cine, unless perhaps a great disturbance of nature being made, which must then be joyned with danger: and for as much as Nature for the most part expels the pestilent venome to the out∣parts of the body, this motion of Nature by Purgation is hin∣dred, and the pestilent venome is drawn into the internal parts, and is more mixed with the humours, and the motion of hu∣mours being stirred up, most dangerous, nay deadly vomits and sluxes are occasioned: And therefore not in purging, but in medicines that resist poyson, principally, and next under God the hope of health and safety is to be placed. Wherefore it will be safest for any one that shall think himself to be infected with the Plague, Use of Ale∣xiphar∣micks. having first implored the assistance of almighty God, to fly to those medicines resisting venome, mentioned in the fifth chapter before, and to take some one ex∣perienced and approved medicine; and in case it be vomited up
at the first, then 'tis best to take of it again forthwith; nay, in case it be retained, it will not suffice to take of it but once, but the Alexipharmacal medicine should be repeated thrice in the space of four and twenty hours, and so to continue for two days, until that the force of the poyson shall be broken. The medi∣cine being taken, the sick should forthwith compose themselves to sweat, especially the second time after taking, they should keep out the cold Ayr, and if the strength will bear it, they should continue their sweat for two hours space: The sick should by no means sleep, until he hath sweat twice, and between the sweats should be refreshed with Conserve and Syrup of Roses, Sorrel, acetos. Citri, of Pomgranates, red Gooseberries, with cordial and odoriferous waters applyed to the Nostril, and sprinkled about the Bed-chamber. It shall be profitable also to take warm bread out of the oven, and fill a hollow part of it with Treacle, and apply it to the Navel, or to the Arm-pits, that it may draw the venome to it; The sweat being ended, the body should be rub∣bed and dried with clean warm linnen clothes, being careful that no cold ayr be admitted, and the sheets and coverings of the beds should be changed. After the sweat, the sick should be nourished with meats that afford good juice, and easie of concoction, yet taken but in a small quantity. When the sick hath sweat once, if there be need of opening a vein, let it be done in that manner as is already heretofore ex∣pressed: And when the Alexipharmicks have been taken of two days by the sick, and the body is Cacochymick, or the Plague depend upon some internal default of humours, and that great danger of a Fever be to be feared, it will be convenient to admi∣nister a purge, that some part of the matter putrifying and in∣creasing, the Fever may be abated; so that Nature may over∣come the rest more easily: they should be gentle, as Syrup of Ro∣ses solutive Tamarinds, Rhubarb, Agarick, Pestilential Pills, Tryphera Persica, Syr. Diasercos. Afterwards if it be not needful to cause sweat (which never∣theless ought not to be hindred if it come on a critical day) such medicines are to be continued as hinder putrifaction, resist a ma∣lignant Fever, and extinguish the flames in the bowels and hu∣mours. And then we must be wary how we use Treacle, or any of the other hot medicines, without any respect of the disease, nature, age, and other circumstances; wherefore when the Fever hath set upon the body, such things are not to be exhibited, unless they are mixed with cold things, or else cold things alone may be
given, such as Syrup, acetos. Citri, of Sorrel, Pomgranates, red Gooseberries, rubi Idaei, as also Pearl, Coral, precious stones, Bezoar. But since that Nature for the most part useth to send the most venomous part of the matter to the out-parts of the body, Cure of Buboes. and occasions Buboes and Carbuncles: If the venome perfectly, or most part of it be driven out into a Bubo, which may be known by the remission of the Fever and Symptomes, we must expect ripe∣ning, although not perfectly, as in other tumors, yet it must be helped by all means; for if either a Bubo come not enough out, or be encreased over-much, and still the Fever and symptomes abate not, and the sick no ways mends, we must endeavour that a way may be opened for the letting out the venome. Therefore either vesiccatories must be applyed, or the skin must be scarrified, that the poyson may freely expire, and the pesti∣lent humours fly out; a young chicken also, or pigeon, the fea∣thers about the rump being pull'd off, should to the great advan∣tage of the sick be applyed to it, although no incision be made, and that should be often repeated; or a dryed Toad being moist∣ned with wine, should be applyed: afterwards we must endeavour that the rest of the matter may be brought to maturity by proper medicines described every where up and down; into the place opened by Incision, convenient digestives should be put; and if the incision be not made deep enough, and the quitture be still therein detained, the tumour must be opened with an Incision knife, and the Ulcer mundifyed with proper medicines, and it must not be healed up, until all the venome be come out. But Carbuncles are forthwith to be scarrified, Cure of Carbuncles and that deep enough, that the pestilent and corrupt humour may come forth, afterwards some convenient plaister must be applyed, such as may be of the soot of a chimney, and others, described up and down in Authors: Some apply the plaister de Magnete Arsenicali, 'tis proper to apply a dryed Toad also, being first powd'red, in wine, to the places adjacent, lest the venome should return to the inter∣nal parts; some defensitive of cooling, drying, and binding things must be applyed; some make a circle with a Saphire stone about the Carbuncle, lest the poyson should creep farther, and thereby extinguish the same; and if the Carbuncle be too much encreased, and cause great pain, a vein should be opened under the same, that so the corrupt blood may be evacuated, and to abate the heat, a plaister of Houndstongue is to be applyed. When an Escar shall be generated, it must be taken away with a convenient Unguent, and the Ulcer must be mundified and
cured in due manner; but during the whole time of the cure, twice every seven days a potion of the temperate medicines that resist venome should be drunk, lest any of the malignity should remain in the Body. CHAP. VII. Of the Nature of a Pestilent and Malignant Fever, and of the difference of them from the Plague. FOrasmuch as the highest degree of corruption of humours is in the Pestilence, we must as it were ascend to it by the malignant and pestilent Fevers: of them therefore we will now speak, in what respect these three, the Pestilence, a pestilent and malignant Fever differ. That the pestilence consists in a certain occult quality meerly adverse to mankind, and that it is infectious, The plague pestilent and mali∣gnant Fe∣vers, how they differ. and that a Fever is not of the same essence therewith, but yet commonly accom∣panies it, is already shewed: And therefore the Plague it self al∣so, when it hath a Fever joyned with it, may not without cause in some measure be called a pestilential Fever: yet other Fevers al∣so are called pestilent without the plague, wherein the corrupti∣on of humors hath not yet attained that high degree which may constitute the nature of venomous pestilence, yet they contain in them somwhat like to that venomous and malignant pesti∣lence, and moreover either are not pernitious, or contagious as the plague, if they are both of them, yet they are less destru∣ctive then the plague; for the difference of a pestilential Fever, so called in particular, and of the venomous pestilence (since the nature of them both is unknown) betrays it self in this, by the vehemency and contagiousness of it, which is perceived to be less, not only in sporadick Fevers, but in epidemical pestilenti∣als, then in the plague it self: But concerning malignant Fe∣vers, although they by a general name signifie truly pestilentials, yet in particular those are called malignant, wherein there is a less degree of corruption then in those that are truly pestilential, and wherein the humours which kindle the Fever contain in them some occult quality tending to venenosity; whence there is less destruction and infection, somtimes there is none. And that the matter may be handled in few words, if it ap∣pear by the symptomes in any Fever, that besides putrefaction there is a lso some occult and maligne quality, and yet but few die thereof, whether they are epidemical Fevers, or sporadick, or
contagious, or not contagious; this is the first degree of corru∣ption, and such a Fever in particular is called malignant; but in case many die, and yet others are not infected, or although there be some contagion, and some destruction, and yet neither the contagion nor destructive power have attained to the highest degree, and many continue well in health, 'tis a pestilent Fever in particular. Lastly, if so be many which begin to be visited die, and that most every where are infected, and that the contagion be spread over remote places, 'tis the plague. CHAP. VIII. To what kind of Fevers Pestilent and Malignant ones pertain. MOreover since there are three kinds of Fevers, To what kind of Fe∣vers pesti∣lent and malignant ones be∣long. Epheme∣ral, Putred, and Hectick, and again of putred Fevers, there are some differences: 'tis now enquired to what kind of Fevers malignant and pestilent do belong, or whether ma∣lignancy and pestilency belong to all Fevers, or to some certain kind only. But we have already determined that there are no Ephemeraes nor Hecticks pestilent and malignant, because that in all pesti∣lent and malignant Fevers, there are manifest tokens of corru∣ption or putrefaction of humours, although that malignant and pestilent humour have likewise a manifest antipathy with the spi∣rits, and may stir up a dangerous Fever. But all putred pestilential Fevers are continued, since the force of the venomous putrifaction is such, as that it can easily diffuse it self into all the veins and arteries, and may easily corrupt the humours. But malignant Fevers in particular so called, may also be in∣termittent, as experience sheweth: Neither is it impossible, that even in the first passages of the body, the putrifying humours may acquire some malignity; and seeing that in such Fevers the force of the venome is not so great, nothing hinders but that Nature may appoint certain excretions at appointed periods. Continued pestilent and malignant Fevers, are particularly addicted to no sort of them, but according as putrefaction hap∣pens into this or that sickly preparation, so this or that conti∣nued Fever is stirred up, somtimes a Synocha, somtimes a perio∣dick; whence various symptomes likewise do arise, according to the sickly provision.
Moreover concerning the differences of malignant and pesti∣lential Fevers, The diffe∣rences of pestilent and mali∣gnant Fe∣vers. since that in every such Fever there are found two things, the putrifaction it self, from whence the Fever ariseth, and malignity; in respect of these also, do the Fevers differ. For somtimes equally from putrefaction and malignity, danger is at hand; which Fevers, if the putrifaction and malignity be great, are exceeding dangerous; but if neither the malignancy nor putrefaction be much, the Fevers are not dangerous. Som∣times there is more putrifaction, but the malignancy is not much; and then the Fever comes neerer to the nature of other putred Fevers: but somtimes the putrifaction is not much, but the malignant quality vehement, and such Fevers seem to be milde but they are most fraudulent and dangerous. Concerning the nature of Pestilency and Malignity, al∣though it be occult, yet from its effects we may apprehend a cer∣tain variety, whilst somtimes spots, somtimes Measles, somtimes wheals come forth; somtimes too great sweats, somtimes Catarrhs, Pleurisies and other evils, according to the antipathy which the venome hath with this or that particular part. CHAP. IX. Of the causes of a Pestilent and Malignant Fever. AS for the causes of these Fevers, Cause. because their malignancy is less then theirs of the pestilence, and through this, as it were by degrees, we ascend to the Pestilence, those which are the causes of the Plague, for the most part, are the same with those of malignant and pestilent Fevers; but more mild, as prin∣cipally ayr, heaven, course of diet, and contagion. Namely malignant Fevers in the first place do arise from a sickly provision of the body; for it ariseth from meat that is bad, fit for corruption, and very obnoxious to putrifaction, whereof Galen may be seen, in his book of Meats affording good and bad juice, and the humours may be so corrupted in our bodies, as that they become venomous, of which I have spoken in the Instituti∣ons in the second book, part 2. cap. 12. Furthermore from com∣mon causes likewise, namely unprofitable constitution of Ayr, as also from the influence of Stars. But pestilent Fevers so called in particular, have the same causes, but more grievous, which at length if they are increased, produce the pestilence; whence Fevers malignant and pestilent long con∣tinuing, at length turn to the plague.
CHAP. X. Of the Signs of Malignant and Pestilent Fevers. IN the same manenr is it about the Diagnostick signs: The Dia∣nostick signs of pestilent Fevers. for in a pestilential Fever peculiarly so called, the same signs almost appear as in the plague, only fewer, or more gentle; and such Fevers are not so dangerous nor so infectious as the Plague it self. But as to the signs of their differences, if both malignity and putrifaction be very much, the strength will be much weakned, and grievous, nay the most dangerous symptomes appear: If the putrifaction be very great, the malignancy little, the feverish symptomes which accompany putrifaction are vehement enough, but the strength is not so much debilitated. But if the putrifa∣ction be not great, but the malignant quality vehement, the symptomes which accompany the Fever are gentle enough, but the strength is exceedingly weakned. If the humours only are affected, there appear Buboes, Car∣buncles, Imposthumes, Spots, Pushes, and other tokens of pu∣tred Fevers, if the spirits are much infected, these signes are wanting, neither is the heat great, the strength suddenly lan∣guisheth, and the sick are troubled with faintings, the pulses are unequal, weak, and languishing, and the Fever it self in one two or three days space is terminated by health or death. Lastly, if the heart be much infected, great defect of the strength is present, and the sick do not complain of any great heat. As concerning Malignant Fevers; Of mali∣gnant. they are very difficult to be known at the first, because the malignity often lies hid, and shews not it self, unless when it take strength; wherefore all signs are diligently to be weighed, and if any thing be suspected, it must be seriously pondered; but all the signs of a malignant Fever are greater then those of a Fever; and the symptomes which appear, are more vehement then those which can proceed from a Fever, namely weakness of strength, unquietness, more anxiety then the feverish heat would occasion; the pulse is freqnent, little, weak, or if it seem to be natural, other evil symptomes are pre∣sent, the Urine somtimes is like unto those who are in health; somtimes thin and crude, having in it no sediment, or in case it have any, 'tis more like an excrement then a sediment; som∣times 'tis thick, discoloured, troubled, muddy, having a red and troubled sediment; the heat is more milde then the nature of the
disease, and symptomes seem to afford: the face or countenance is much changed from its lively and natural state; and therefore by these signs pestilent and malignant fevers may be easily known: yet there are other things happen, heaviness to sleep, watchings, diliriums, pains of the head, noises and deafness of the ears, loath∣ing or vomiting, flux of the belly, hemorrhodes of the nose, tumors arise behind the ears, under the arm-pits, and about the groin, also divers specks, and almost no evil which can be ob∣served in other perillous Fevers but may here be discerned. Concerning the prognosticks, and first of pestilential Fevers, Progno∣sticks. there is the same with them for the most part as of the pestilence; for by how much the more grievous the symptomes are, and the strength more debilitated, by so much the more danger is por∣tended; but by how much the milder the symptomes are, and the strength firmer, by so much is there the more hope of health. There is the same reason in malignant Fevers for the most part, and what is to be hoped concerning the event in every such Fever, is manifest out of those things which are spoken in the Institutions, Book 3. part 3. chap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. CHAP. XI. Of the Cure of Malignant and Pestilential Fevers in general. COncerning the cure of pestilent and malignant Fevers, Cure. since there are two things in these Fevers contrary to na∣ture, venome, or malignity, and the Fever; by what means the Fever may be resisted, is manifest from those things that have been said hitherto concerning Fevers: how malignity also may be resisted out of those things which are already spoken concerning the pestilence, is plainly shewed. The greatest difficulty here is in this, to which of them we must have an eye first, and which last, and how the malignity may be taken away without increasing the Fever, and on the contrary, the Fever may be regarded without increasing the ma∣lignity. Which that it may rightly be done, the pestilent ve∣nome and malignity, and the putrifaction and Fever are to be considered and poised together amongst themselves, and regard to be taken whence the greatest danger may arise; and in the first place look to that, yet so, as that the other may not totally be neglected.
Wherefore in a pestilential Fever, The Cure of the plague in particular. Sudorificks Bleeding as being that wherein ma∣lignity most troubleth, presently we should fly to Alexipharmicks and Sudorifiques; yet those are to be rather chosen which are the more temperate, such as were formerly proposed against the pesti∣lence; afterward if need be, a vein should be opened, and that timely, and scarce after the fourth day, before all things shall be disturbed in the body, and the strength be weakned, namely, when blood doth either abound in quantity, so that it distendeth the vessels, or it is a burthen to the strength, or is stirred by some motion, that it may be feared lest it should be carried to some principal part; but if the disease have made some progress, and the strength now labours, the breathing of a vein is more safely omitted then untimely appointed; but in case the strength will not suffer a vein to be opened, cupping with scarrifying is fit to be used to the inferiour parts. But purging at the beginning of these Fevers is not conveni∣ent, Purging. unless such as may purge only the first ways without any manifest agitation of the rest of the humours; but stronger are not convenient, because they stir the humours, and mix the venome with them the more, and often cause dangerous fluxes of the paunch. If the matter tend upwards, Vomits. and there be any nauseousness, vomit is to be provoked by the weaker sort of medicines causing them. Hence we are to come again to the Alexipharmacal medicines, which notwithstanding should be such, as that the humours should not thereby be increased: Therefore those are to be exhibited that are more temperate, and together do resist putrifaction; such are Sorrel, Citrons, Pomgranates, Cinquefoyl, Tormentil, Harts∣horn, the bone of a Harts heart, Bezoar stone, Bolealmenack, Terra Sigillata, and such like, and medicines prepared of these, but principally Bezoar water is often to be administred, as being that which doth forthwith penetrate, which may be so tempered, as that it may resist the Fever and putrifaction; and therefore with such medicines, Syrup of Sorrel, Limmon, Pomgranates, Sorrel, Vesicato∣ries. and young Sorrel, and such like are to be mixed. The matter being diminished, vesiccatories may be applied to the Legs and Wrists, Cure of a malignant Fever in particular. Purging, to the advantage of the sick, since that they draw the venomous matter from the interiour parts to the exteri∣our, without any trouble or weakning of the strength. But if it be a malignant Fever in particular so called, and the putrifaction more then the malignity, the first passages are first to be purged, and not only with lenitive Clisters, but lenitives
also are to be given, as Syrup of Roses solutive, Manna, Cassia, Tamarinds, Agarick, Rhubarb, Tryphera Persica, especially if the matter swell: But we must wholly abstain from the strongest, as Scammony, Coloquintida, Turbith, and such like. And indeed, if the putrefaction presently increaseth, and a more vehe∣ment Fever is thereby kindled, and especially if the humours swell, presently that is to be done, and that before the third day. But these things in general cannot sufficiently determine; these tracts in particular of these Fevers, shew the way more clear∣ly; for such pestilent and malignant Fevers are somtimes propa∣gated by infection, when it is most safe that the pollution in what manner soever taken, should be expell'd by Sudorifiques and A∣lexipharmicks out of the body, and afterwards, if occasion do require, to appoint purgation and Phlebotomie; somtimes like∣wise nature it self expells the matter to the circumference of the body, as it useth to happen in the Measles and small Pox; but then Nature is also troubled in her work, and the matter which is thrust out to the exteriour parts of the body, ought not to be called in again by purging, but 'tis rather to be helped by Sudo∣rifiques and Alexipharmicks in its work; but somtimes the Fever is occasioned by vitious preparation of the humours, or is che∣rished thereby, and the peccant matter in the Stomack, near the Midriff and first passages, manifesteth it self by vomit, pain, heat, bitterness of the mouth, anxiety, and other tokens, which neces∣sarily should be avoided by vomit or purgation. The first passages being opened, and the body evacuated, Bleeding. pre∣sently the opening of a vein is to be appointed, if it be needful, and that before the fourth day. After purging the body and opening a vein, Sudori∣ficks. if occasion re∣quire, 'tis convenient to use some Sudorifique, but such as may not increase the Fever, such as we have already proposed; and although sweat doth not always follow, yet such medicines are to be continued and exhibited daylie, that so the body may by de∣grees be apt to sweat, and that nature at length of its own ac∣cord, in its own time, may expel peccant humours by sweats; but the stronger Sudorifiques at the first, debilitate Natures strength; and since the humours in these Fevers are not alwaies so disposed that they can be discussed by sweats, yet the thinner are dispersed, and the thicker remains behind. Altering preparing medicines. Wherefore pre∣paration and alteration of the humours is to be ordered by those medicines which open, and if occasion require, may cut those humours, and may resist ebullition and putrifaction, extinguish
the heat of the Fever, and resist malignity, and may by degrees dispose nature to sweats; such are Sorrel, Scordium, Carduus Benedictus, Scorzoneca, the seed of Citron, Roots of Tor∣mentil, Cinquefoyl, juice of Citron, Pomgranates, and Syrups of these, Spirit of Vitriol: when the humours are sufficiently prepared, unless Nature expel alone, they are to be evacuated by a convenient passage, but then also lenitive medicines must be used, and purgation scarce to be ordered before the fourteenth day. If Nature tend to evacuation by urine, Causing Urine. it is to be helped by an emulsion of the seeds of Melons, Citron or Limmon, Car∣duus benedictus, with the water of Sorrel, Mayden-hair, and such like. But during the whole time of the sickness, Topical things. as well in ma∣lignant as in pestilent Fevers, medicines are to be applied to the Pulses and heart, such as strengthen the heart, and resist ma∣lignity, which are very where extant; Symptomes also, if any urge and debilitate the strength, are to be taken away and miti∣gated, as in their own place shall be shewed. Concerning Diet, Diet. the meat should be of good juice, and of easie digestion; and to beware that when the strength languisheth Nature be not over-burthened; the meats also should be mixed with such things as resist this Fever, we must abstain from wine, unless swooning fits happen, but 'tis more convenient to use small beer, a decoction also of Harts-horn may well be given, with such a quantity of Spirit of Vitriol as may render it grate∣ful to the taste, to which also some Juleps of Roses and Violets may be added: It allays thirst, likewise opens obstructions drives away putrifaction, and resisteth malignancy; of Aegyptii, as Prosper Alpinus in his fourth book of Medicines Aegypt. chap. the fourth. Pulp. of Tamarinds and Barberries, the fruits being dryed, with the seeds of Fennel or Limmon, they pour them in∣to abundance of fair water, and so prepare a Drink, which they administer to the sick during the whole time of the disease in ma∣lignant and pestilent Fevers, and confide much in the use of this Drink, since that it is found that Tamarinds and the fruit of Barberries do exceedingly resist putrifaction in Fevers.
CHAP. XII. Of a Malignant Fever, with the Measles and Small Pox. ALthough the nature of malignity, Small Pox and Mea∣sles. from whence mali∣gnant Fevers are denominated be occult, and therefore much cannot be spoken of the differences of these Fe∣vers, yet there is not one reason only even of the same, but some variety shews it self by the effects and symptomes, whence also certain differences of malignant Fevers are are appointed, of which we will now speak in particular. First, there happen Feavers wherein pushes or eminent tu∣bercles break forth, and sometimes certain spots shew them∣selves: the Greeks call them Exanthemata, and Ecthmata the Latines Papulas and Pustulas, and at this day they are called the Measles and Small Pox; which names, although they are not used in the same manner by all, yet the most at this day call variolas, parvos varos, little spots or Measles, and they give this name to those pushes full of humours, which for the most par suppurate, which the Germans call die Bi∣atterne and Bocten; but they call those Mobillos, which are spots only in the skin, or rather small tubercles in the skin, which the Germans call die Masserne. Variolae are pustules breaking forth in the skin and parts adjacent, Definition. with a continued Fever occasioned by the fervency of the blood, and sent forth by the expulsive faculty; but Morbilli are little red spots or tubercles coming out in the skin with a continued Fever, bred by the ebullition of the blood, and sent out by the expulsive faculty. Of both kinds there are some differences; for of Variolae, some are greater, some less; some white, others yellow, or of some other colour; some break out forth with, and rise high, and are ripened and encompassed with a red circle, and come forth without any grievous symptomes, and are not dange∣rous; others are yellow, come forth slowly, and presently pitch again, and have a livid circle about them, and are dange∣rous. To the Variolas belong those pustules also which break out of the body, and are about the bigness of Lupines, Differen∣ces. and shining like Christal, out of which a certain waterish substance
issueth; which some therefore call Chrystals, the Germans call them Shaffsblattern, oder Bindvocten, which are less dangerous, and without any manifest Fever for the most part they do appear. Moreover to the Variolaes belong those tubercles coming out here and there in places, and are free from quitture, which the Germans call Steinbocten, and are for the most part the least of all the kinds of Variol. and freest from danger, which befals children often without a Fever, and are presently heal∣ed; so that Infants seldome take their beds for them, To the Poxes or Measles certain small red tubercles do be∣long, which invade with heat, and a cough and other sym∣ptomes of the Pox, yet less dangerous then the pox; the Ge∣mans call them die Rittein, or die Rottein, because they are red; somtimes they come alone, somtimes are mixed with the Pox, and somtimes come after the Pox is healed; which disease Halyaabas calls Rubcolam, lib. 8. Theoric. cap. 14. Moreover there are other breakings out which seem to be referr'd to Poxes, which the Neapolitans call Rossoniam and Rossaliam, as Johannes Philippus Ingrastiat of tumours speaks; by others they are called Purples, and Eruthemata, yet some call the red spots or Patechii, purples: They are red, and as it were fiery spots, because scarce worthy to be cal∣led tumours, coming out over all the body, as it were certain small Eryspelaes at the beginning of the sickness, or on the fourth or fifth day: In the progress of the disease it spreads over all the body, as if it were on fire, or as if one were sick of an universal Erysipelas, which colour, as in the beginning, so in the declination, is turned into spots, which again on the seventh or ninth day vanish, falling away from the skin like scales of Fishes. The subject of spots and pushes is the skin, Subject. and other parts answering to the skin in proportion; for it hath been found in dead bodies, that the superficies of the Intrals, and on their skin without side the Pox have been setled. Concerning the cause of these, Cause. there is difficult and great controversie amongst Physitians; The Arabicks, and those which follow them, attribute the cause of the small Pox and Measles to the uncleanness of the blood, contracted from the menstruous blood in the womb, by the Infant which was there nourished with it; for they say, that this filth being left in the body, doth lie still, like unto leven, until stirred; so that
the whole blood, boyls like new wine, and so whatsoever is in it of impurity, is seperated and sent to the out-side of the bo∣dy; and they therefore say so, because they observed that al∣most all men at some time are troubled with the Pox or Mea∣sles, and those which have had them once or twice, for the most part are free from them ever after. Others are against this opinion, and say, that it proceeds from some occult celestial cause, whose impression, children being more infirm, are apter to take, then those that are strong and in years; neither do they think it probable, that Infants are nourished in the womb with unclean blood, or that this impurity can lie hidden so long in mans body, since 'tis known that not only Infants, but youths, nay such as are well in years, and old men also some times fall sick of the small Pox, which formerly have been sick of Fevers, and troubled with scabs, in whom (in case any impurity had been in the blood, it ought to have been then taken away. But in regard both opinions contain difficulties in them, and both seem to be held up with probable arguments; let us joyn them together; for if the Pox and Measles are epidemical and infectious, 'tis not to be denied but that they then arise from a certain peculiar malignant disposition of ayr,: Then Infants, as being more tender, sooner are infected; although it cannot be denied, that from an external cause, an infirmi∣ty lying hidden within, may be brought forth into action, yet if the power of the malignity be greater, those of ripe years may somtimes be afflicted: But if the Pox or Measles come forth scattered here and there, 'tis probable that they proceed from the impurity of the womb, whereby a vitious disposition of the body is contracted by the party in the in∣fancy especially if there be no fault in the Ayr; for al∣though an infant in the womb be nourished with the purest blood of the mother, yet when it becomes bigger, and want∣eth more nourishment, it cannot be but that it must draw some of the depraved humours which are cumulated in the womb with it. Whence it is known, that Infants have been born sick of the small Pox, or had them come forth presently after they come into the world: Yet 'tis not impossible but that from ill Diet the same vitiousness may be contracted, as from the menstruous blood in the womb, and that may hap∣pen to those that have had the small Pox twice or thrice, al∣though it may likewise happen by reason of the first pollu∣tion
and defilement, of which some reliques were left. The small Pox and Measles alwaies come forth with a Fe∣ver; Whether any and what Fe∣ver may be joyned with the Small Pox and Mea∣sles. for they are stirred up by a certain crisis, and that ebul∣lition not only happens to the subcutanial veins, but also to the greater; whence heat is communicated to the heart, and a Fever is kindled, and that Fever is made a putred Synocha, as may appear by the equal heat, and the matter contained in the Pox; and that which is gentle, often vanisheth within a few days, neither is it regarded by Infants, nor the standers by; but that which is more vehement, if the disease be to determine with safety, will abate when the Pox comes forth; somtimes these Fevers become pestilential, and then many Infants are extinguished. And thus the small Pox and Measles are generated from internal causes; yet external causes likewise do often concur, as humours corrupting in this manner, or lying hidden, have force of moving: The first is Ayr, by reason of the influence of Stars, or causes otherwise so disposed, as that they may cor∣rupt the humours in this manner. Moreover contagion, when a certain sickly effluvium or steam from bodies diseased of the small Pox or Measles, is communicated to another body, and causeth the same disease therein. But of Poxes and pushes there is certain differences, as hath been said, in substance, quantity, and quality. According to substance, some consist of this, some of that humour; ac∣cording to quantity, some are big and many, others small and few: according to quality, some are white, others red, yellow, livid, violet colour, &c. Some come out suddenly, others slowly; some are presently healed and vanish, others continue long; some afflict only the external parts of the body, some the internal also. But when the Pox or Measles are coming, Diagno∣stick signs. there is present pain in the head, eyes, and throat, an itching of the nostrils, sneezing, terror in sleep, fits like epileptical ones, pain on the back, burning and pricking in the skin, difficulty of breathing, a dry cough, trembling of the feet, yawning, retching, pal∣pation of the heart, which actions so hurt, proceeds from the ebullition of the blood, and fuliginous vapours sent from the heart, and dispersed over all the body. Their Urine is often like unto theirs who are in health, the peccant matter being thrust out to the extremities of the body; yet somtimes 'tis troubled by reason of the great ebullition of humours, the he∣morrhodes
of the Nose are frequent, tears use to fall from the eyes of their own accord, or the eyes shew as if they were ready to weep; somtimes vomiting happens, the face and eyes are red, the skin rough, the voice hoarse, and lastly, a Fever by the ebullition of humours is kindled; If these signs therefore for the most part are present, and are encreased on the third or fourth day, and certain red spots appear in the skin, 'tis a sign that the Pox or Measles are at hand; and this suspition is increased if the Pox reign thereabouts. A little afterwards those specks are exalted like grains of Mellet, and afterwards changed into pustules full of quitture, and are become Pox, or are extended abroad, and small tubercles are made, and the Measles are produced. The nature of humours is principally known by the colour, Signs of Causes, and of the part affected. for if the pox proceed from a cholerick humour mixt with blood, they are more red, and do itch more from Flegm, they are whiter, from melancholy blacker: somtimes likewise they are of violet colour, green, lead colour, and with greater cor∣ruption of humours: If they possess not only the skin, but also the internal parts, the Fever is greater, thence comes great difficulty of breathing, straitness of the breast, a greater cough, pain in the stomack and guts most vehement. Small Pox and Measles are numbred amongst acute diseases, Progno∣sticks. and are terminated within fourteen days; they come forth commonly about the fourth day, they increase till the seventh, the height is manifest the eleventh, and from thence to the fourteenth is the declination; but the drying of them conti∣nueth till the twentieth day somtimes. The Fever adjoyned, the magnitude of symptomes, the manner of the Pox, and the strength or the sick shew the event. For if the Fever and all the other symptomes after the coming out of them do abate, if large hemorrhodes of the nose have preceded, if the pustules are great, white and red, soft eminent, not alike, come forth quickly, and are soon ripened, a good event is to be hoped for. On the contrary, the Fever if it be great, and be not mi∣tigated after the coming out of the Pox, and the tubercles are violet colour, green, livid, haad, contiguous, come forth and ripen slowly, and the symptomes which use to be in ma∣lignant Fevers be more grievous, the strength weaker, they portend danger, and either bring death, or some great evils in the eyes, nose, chops, gullet, lungs, guts, liver, reins, and leave fil∣thy pits and scars in the skin.
There is in a manner the same reason of the Measles, which the more milde the Fever and symptomes are, the less danger; but by how much the greater, the more danger is adjoyned with them; they are sooner discerned, neither are they so loth∣som to the sight; red ones likewise, and those that soon ap∣peare are more mild, but those that are green, violet colour, black and come forth slowly are worst. But the worst is, when the Pox or Measles come not throughly out, or do vanish again, for then by the matter left within, or returning in, a greater Fever is kindled, sym∣ptomes become greater, and the sick, for the most part, perish. The chief scope of the cure must be, Indicati∣ons and Cure. that since Nature strives to expel the matter to the remote parts of the body to assist it: the second is, That the pravity of the matter may be corrected: The third, That the strength may be fortified: And lastly, To take care that no part of the body receive any detriment. The endeavours of Nature are furthered if the humours are driven out to the circumference of the body, and the impedi∣ments that may disturb the matter in its coming forth, whe∣ther it be store of matter, or pravity of it, or obstruction of the bowels must be taken away. But because this evil principally invades Infants, Bleeding. breathing of a vein is not necessary, since their age will not tolerate it, but if it happen in an age that will bear it, and the abundance of blood require evacuation, presently at the beginning be∣fore the becoming out of them, a vein is to be opened, that nature being eased of part of its burthen, may the easier expel the remainder. Strong Purges are not to be used, lest nature should be hindred in its endeavour, or a dangerous looseness should be occasioned; yet if the body be bound, it may be relaxed by a lenitive Medicine or Clister, which together allays the heat of the humours, and strengthens the internal parts. Moreover we must observe whether Nature do its office in expelling; Expelling thing. for then there is no need to help it with many me∣dicines, especially heating ones. But if the Pox come out slowly, Nature should be helped with expelling Medicines; yet such things should be mixed therewith, as may strengthen the internal parts, mitigate the heat of the humours, and resist malignity. The expelling Medicines are, Roots and Seeds of Fennel,
Turnip, Carduus benedictus, Columbine, Limmon, the Roots of white Dittany, Burnet, Maidenhair, Marigold flow∣ers, decoction of red Parsnips, Scordium, Scabions, Myrrhe, Figs, Lentiles, and other things that resist malignity. These things cool and resist malignity, Sorrel, Cooling things. young Sor∣rel, Lettice, Waterlillies, Purcelane, Barley, Tormentil, En∣dive, Cichory, Juice of Limmons, Oxysaucharum, Rob of Currans; In giving of which, regard must be had to the malignity and Fever together, and according as need shall re∣quire, the medicines must be chosen or mixed. Medicines of Figs, Lentiles, Lacca, and Tragacanthwere, in use amongst the Arabians, which were likewise used by lat∣ter Physitians; yet if the malignity be great, you may sly to more exquisite resisters of poyson. But principally we must endeavour to beware that the sick take not the fresh ayr, but be rather placed in a hot place, that the pores of the skin may be kept open, and that nothing may hinder Nature in expelling, And we must be careful also, that the eyes, nostrils, How the parts are to be defend∣ed. and in∣ternal parts may not be hurt; and therefore the Lungs are to be fortified and strengthned with medicines of Poppy, Len∣tiles, Violets, Tragacanth Roses, the guts with strengthners, and moderate binders, the eyes, and nose with such like, as their infirmities do shew they have need of. The mouth and chops should be washed with decoction of Plantane, red Ro∣ses, flowers of Pomgranates, Prunellas, Syrup of Pomgranates, and such like. Whilst the wheals are ripening, there will be much itching, but beware of scratching, lest you thereby cause scars in the skin; if the quitture be white, and the pustules not too great, 'tis best to commit the whole business to nature; but if they are great, or many of them joyned together, when by their whiteness, softness, and freeness from pain they shall appear to be ripe enough, they may be opened with a silver or golden needle best. Concerning Diet, Diet. the sick by all means must be kept from the cold ayr, neither must he be kept too hot, lest it make him faint: The manner of Diet as in other acute Fevers, is to be appointed, namely thin; yet to Infants, if their stomacks will bear it, some meat may be given, because their bodies are not diaphoretick, and by reason of their store of innate heat, cannot so well endure fasting: from meats that are salt, acrid,
flat, which may increase an ebullition of humours, we must refrain, and those that moderately cool and bind, and allay the heat of the blood, must be administred. Wine at the first is not convenient, but rather small Beer, or Barley water; but in the progress of the disease, when the symptomes slacken, to those that are accustomed to it, a little of the smallest wine may be granted. There ought to be temperate moderation of the other non-naturals likewise, watchings and sleep, the sick should sleep moderately: In the beginning of the Pox or Measles, there should be gentle frictions of the legs and arms used, whereby the humours might be called out to the circumference of the body. 'Tis in use to put a red cloth to the bed in the sight of the sick, to cause motion of humours to the exteriour parts. The Belly should be kept open with a gentle Clyster, if need require: Lastly, all vehement perturbations of the mind must be avoided, especially anger and fear.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Spotted Fever. MOreover, another sort of malignant Fever is, Patechiae when certain spots like the biting of gnats appear in the skin; There are of divers colours, but principally red, called by Authors Puncticulae, Peticulae, and Patechiae, whence the Fevers are also called Peticulares, Patechiales, Lenticulares. These spots are without all itching, extuberancies, and ul∣ceration, as in Poxes; and these spots in these Fevers appear principally in the back, arms, legs, and breasts, namely in pla∣ces through which the most eminent veins and arteries do pass, but in the face they do seldom appear, because it is alwaies ob∣vious to the external Ayr. These spots have their original from the thinner parts of the putred and corrupt humour, The cause. whence they suddenly come out and vanish; but although they are made by the expulsive faculty, driving this part of the corrupt humour to the extre∣mities of the body; yet that seldom happens critically, because they come out for the most part at the beginning, the matter being not as yet concocted, neither is there any notable eva∣cuation of the matter made by them, nor the sick are not the better for them, but for the most part by how much the more plentifully they come forth, by so much the greater store of corrupt matter is indicated, which notwithstanding as is said already, is not sufficiently evacuated by those spots. There are of those spots several differences; for first, Difference. they differ in colour, some are red, arising from the more temperate blood putrified; others yellow & green, when choler is putrified; others, Pomgranet colour and black, when melancholy, putrifi∣eth. Moreover they differ in quantity, for some come out more plentifully, others more sparingly; some are greater, others less, according to the quantity and thickness of the humour, and strength or weakness of nature: some come out at the be∣ginning, others in the progress of the disease. This Fever is known by the signs of Malignant Fevers in general already set down; and when the spots joyn together, Diagno∣stick signs. they shew malignity more plainly. But what event of these Fevers may be hoped for, is mani∣fest
by the prognosticks of malignant Fevers in general. Progno∣sticks. Con∣cerning the spots themselves, although it be good that the pec∣cant matter be carried to the extremities of the body, yet by these spots they cannot sufficiently be evacuated; therefore al∣though if they are plentiful, they shew that store of matter is present; yet they shake it not of, and therefore they portend danger rather then health: Neither is their paucity always good, and although it signifie no store of matter, yet it also denotes debility of nature: These spots (if they lie hidden) are evil signs; because they shew that the matter which before was coming to the outside of the body, does now tend inwards, and go to the head, heart, or some internal part. Red spots are most safe, yellow and green worse, and pomgranate colour and black most dangerous. Although such as come out at the first appear symptomacal, yet those that break forth the seventh day, or thereabouts, are critical: yet unless other good signs are present, put no confidence in them, because they do not sufficiently evacuate the matter; but if they come out slowly, 'tis evil; for that happens either by reason of the thickness of the matter, into which if the malignity fall, 'tis not easily overcome, or else by reason of density of the skin, which hin∣dreth free transpiration. Lastly concerning the cure, Cure. those things that are spoken a∣bout the cure of malignant Fevers, are here also convenient, namely, the belly is to be loosned either by Clister or lenitive medicine; or if the matter tend upward, and the sick be in∣clinable to vomit, a Vomit must be given. Then if occasion require, Bleeding. a vein is to be opened before the fourth day, or else afterwards to be omitted; but whether the spots now coming forth do hinder the breathing of a vein, is shewed in the Institutions lib. 5. part. 2. sect. 1. cap. 17. But since nature it self strives to protrude the matter we see to the extremities of the body, and 'tis profitable in all ma∣lignant diseases to drive out the matter from the greater to the lesser vessels, and to free the bowels from vitious humours, the endeavours of nature is here to be assisted, Sweats and the matter tending to the outmost parts of the body, is by it to be eva∣cuated; because that otherwise that which is malignant will admit of no concoction. Therefore let the sick be kept in a place moderately hot, and forthwith some Sudorifique medicine, and which also may re∣sist malignity given, such as are before propounded for the
plague and malignant Fevers in general, and for the Measles and small Pox; yet those are to be selected amongst them that may not increase the feverish heat; and the Fever and the malignity are to be weighed together, and of that which most requires it, regard must be taken. Somtimes a looseness happens in this Fever, When a looseness comes, what must be done. which unless it be too great, should not be stopped, but the business should be committed to nature, and in the interim, only with al∣tering medicines, and such as resist malignity, the morbifique cause must be resisted. Afterwards to fortifie nature, Pearls, Coral, Hartshorn, juice of Pomgranates, Citron, Confectio de Hyacintho, Al∣kermes, and such like are to be exhibited. Externally likewise medicines are to be applied to the region of the heart, and to the pulses, Topical medicines. which draw venome from the heart, and resist malignity, and some use an unction ex Hy∣draeolo, and niter to relax the skin, and draw out humours. Neither is it unprofitable to apply vesiccatories to the arms, Vesiccato∣ries. especially if the external parts are cold, and the internal burn, and that pains in the head, deliriums, a lethargy, and other symptomes in the head are present; for so both the humours are called from within outwards, and are likewise refelled from the head.
CHAP. XIV. Of the English Sweat. THere was a kind of Fever malignant, The En∣glish sweat which began in England in the year 1486. and thence it took the name of the English Sweat, and it reigned there about forty years, and killed almost an infinite number of Englishmen: Hence being spread through the Netherlands, Germany, the Low Countries, Holland, Zeland, Brabant in Belgia, Flan∣ders, Dane, Norway, France, it continued until the year 1530. The same Fever was accompanied with Sweats, and was called the Sudatory Fever; for those which were troubled with this Fever, abounded with Sweat, without Bubo, Carbuncle, or puttings forth; the sweat perpetually and in great abun∣dance coming out, until the dissolution of the disease, which hapned within twenty four hours space: Together the sick languished, deficient in mind, with unquietness, troubled at heart, pain in the head, and also with palpitation of the heart, and they had a pulse, thick, frequent, swift, and unequal; and the palpitation of the heart accompanied those that esca∣ped, oftentimes some years, somtimes till death. But the cause of this disease was inherent in the most subtile parts of the blood and spirits, The cause which were together affected, which the shortness of the disease argues, and without doubt the blood and spirits contracted this malignity from some evil disposition of Ayr, and other corruption; whence also this disease in many places in the Low Countries with cloudy ayr, suddenly invaded men, and the birds also were found dead un∣der the Trees, and 'twas observed that they had pustules under their wings like Vetches or Tares: But what manner of cor∣ruption of the Ayr it was, can scarce be explained. For this was a most cruel disease, Progno∣sticks. and within the space of twenty four hours, it either killed men, or left them senseless: and indeed at the first when this disease did invade any City, it troubled them fifty or sixty times, but it scarce troubled them the hundredth time. But the chief business of the cure consisted in the promotion of sweat, Cure. and weakning venome, which nature of its own ac∣cord endeavoured; for all those that did not further the sweats,
nor use cordials, and took fresh ayr, died within four and twenty hours. In occasioning Sweats, the strength must be regarded, which in case it be weak, the sweat must so be moderated, that there∣by it may not be debilitated more, and dejected: for 'tis ob∣served, that by too much causing sweat, and whilst the sick be∣yond their power to suffer, are cover'd in their beds, abundance of men have been stifled: During sweating, the sick should be hindred from sleep. They used to occasion sweat, and infringe the malignity, water or Sorrel, Scabious, Terra Sigillata, Bolearmenick, Dit∣tany, Carduus benedictus, Zedoaric, Tormentil, Waterlillies, Burrage; Species liberantis is also proper, and such like, which use to be applied in malignant Fevers, and the Pox. During the Sweats, the sick should be refreshed with the juice of the Syrup of Citron, Pomgranates, Sorrel, and other things be∣fore mentioned about the plague. Odoraments should also be applied to the Nose. When the sick hath sweat enough, some of the weight of the clothes should be abated by degrees, and the sweat at last diligently wiped off and cleansed.
CHAP. XV. Of the Ungarick Disease. AMongst the malignant Fevers, Of the Hungari∣an disease. there is also a disease cal∣led the Ungarick, because it was first known in Hun∣gary in the year 1556. and thence 'tis thought 'twas spread almost over all Europe, Indeed some think the patechial Fever, and the Ungarick Disease are the same; and 'tis true that spots often happen in that, but not alwaies is it so, and the name of a patechial Fever is extended larger then the Un∣garick disease; for this is a certain kind of malignant Fever, or if it have spots, and is patechial, yet this disease is bred in Camps by reason of evil Diet, whence we think it to be pro∣perly called the Military disease, or the Disease of the Camps, because that not only in former times in Hungary, but else∣where, it wandred up and down in the Camps hitherto, and thence is dispersed up and down. But there is a malignant and infectious Fever called Morbus Ungaricus; 'tis continu∣ed, and hath great store of vitious humours about the stomack and first passages joyned therewith. The proximate cause of this Fever is putrefaction, The causes. the causes and malignant corruption of the humors in the vena cava. But they are cumulated and corrupted by errors of Diet, and first by default of the Ayr, which in Hungary is extream thick and in the night filled with clouds, or if they are discussed, 'tis very thin and in the Summer time most hot; and otherwise, likewise in the Camps 'tis not most profitable; because that in them it is most common to lie un∣der the open canopy, and to draw the vapours which come from the ayr and the rain, and when their clothes are wet, cannot change them, and in winter time are often penn'd up in little hot-houses. Moreover bad diet may be a cause of this disease, wherewith Souldiers (for want of better) are forced to make shift with, and those for the most part which are accu∣stomed to fare better; hence because good chyle cannot be ge∣nerated by evil diet, and the errors of the first concoction cannot be corrected in the second, many filthy humours are collected within the first passages, which with the chyle are carried to the Liver, and thence into the veins, and from that evil chyle bad blood is generated, which even voluntarily tends
to corruption and putrifaction, and at length an unprofitable disposition of ayr coming, it doth not only putrifie, but be∣comes maligne. Whence not only a putred continued Fever, Nature of the Unga∣rick dis∣ease. but also a malignant is stirred up, and one that is also infecti∣ous, which may also infect those that have no ill humours in their bodies, whence the symptomes do somthing differ. And as according to Diet, scituation, and other circumstances, the matter occasioning a disease is not alwaies the same, so there happens differences in the symptomes joyned with the Fever. Nay in the Fever it self there ariseth certain differences in re∣gard of the peccant humour, whence from some arise putred Synochas, from others burning cholerick Fevers: But although great store of peccant matter, as hath been said, occasioned by evil diet, be collected for the most part in the stomack and first passages, yet that is not the containing cause of the Fever, but only symptomatical, stirr'd up by the Feverish heat, especially in the beginning of the disease, that it causeth pain in the heart, anxiety, burning about the midrif, and vomiting, and increaseth and cherisheth the Fever it self. And all other symptomes which appear in other malignant Fevers, may here also be present, Diagno∣stick signs: and for the most part spots and specks appear; but amongst other things, the pain of the head for the most part is exceeding troublesome; thence this disease amonst the vulgar took its name die hauptcranct∣heit. Most that take this disease from ill diet, do complain of pain in the stomack, and under the pointed gristle, where a certain retention and hardness is likewise observed. There is great thirst presently at the beginning, and the tongue dry and rough, a little after they are troubled with deliriums, which are gone again when the matter falls down to the ears, and then deafness ensueth. 'Tis an acute disease, Progno∣sticks and is terminated at most in about fourteen days commonly, yet in some not until twenty days. But what event of this disease may be hoped for, is manifest by what hath been already said concerning malignant Fevers in general; namely, by how much the strength is the greater, and the symptomes lesser, by so much is there the more hopes of recovery; on the contrary, by how much the symptomes are the greater and more, and the strength weaker, by so much the more danger; with some when a looseness happens, 'tis a good crisis, but to most when the matter ascends to the head, and thence down to the ears, and deafness followeth, 'tis an ar∣gument of health.
But as in other malignant Fevers, so likewise in this, the curing must be performed by taking away what feeds it, and resisting the malignant quality, yet the symptomes are not to be neglected. And first concerning the Fever, Purging. and its cause in those that have contracted this disease from ill diet, or in the camps, this thing happens that the vitious humours are not only contain∣ed in the vena cava, as in other Synochas and burning Fe∣vers, but there is great store of humours lies hidden in the stomack, and about the first passages, which is known by the antecedent diet, pain in the stomack, anxiety, heat about the midrif, and vomiting; for then that matter is forthwith to be evacuated, as being such as doth severally exist, separated from the other humours, it will not come to any concoction, but corrupts both meat and medicines being taken, and Sudo∣rifiques and other medicines which are taken, are carried into the more destructive parts of the body, and it increaseth the Fever. But this may be done by purging, Purging amongst the medicines Agarick is principally commended, then also Vomits, by which oftentimes great store of Flegmatick and Cholerick humours, of all kinds are evacuated, which lay hidden about the stomack: But for those which took the disease only by infection, and in whom peccant humours are not collect∣ed in the stomack by reason of ill Diet; there is no need of Vomits or Purgation, but 'tis sufficient only to evacuate the first passages by lenitives. When the first passages shall be freed from peccant humours, Bleeding forthwith the first or second day a vein must be opened, if it be necessary, and the strength of the sick will bear it; but in case some days are slipt over, and the strength be weakned, and the party be troubled with vomiting, or have a looseness, the breathing of a vein is to be omitted. The vein should be opened in the arm, or if the party be weak, in the ancle, which likewise conveniently refels the matter from the head, and in this disease is very profitable. Nature being thus eased of its burthen, Sudori∣fiques. forthwith Sudo∣rifiques, and such medicines as resist malignity are to be given, yet they are so to be temper'd, as that they may not increase the heat of the humours, nor augment the Fever. Here Harts-horn prepared, bezoar stone, Antimonium, Diapho∣reticum, Bezardicum minerale, Terra Sigillata, Pulvis Cae∣saris
rubeus, Montaynanae, Species liberantis, and other such like before mentioned about malignant and pestilent Fevers in general is manifest. If we may use Mithridate, Treacle, and such like, that are hot, by reason of the vehemency of the ma∣lignity, lest the heat should be increased, they are to be allayed with cold waters and vinegar, to which there may convenient∣ly be added spirit of Vitriol and Tartar, but 'tis not suffici∣ent once only to use such medicines to provoke sweat, or twice, but again and daylie to corroborate the spirits, resist maligni∣ty and putrifaction, yet in a lesser quantity then usual, and moreover species Elect. de Gemmis, temperate Cordials, Dia∣margarit. Frigid. Confectio de Hyacintho, Sper. Viniol and Tartar, Bezoar water, and other things before mentioned in the cure of the Plague, and other malignant Fevers. Externally likewise to the heart is to be applied, External things. and to the Pulses Medicines, as also the spirits are to be preserved with odoraments, and the malignity to be resisted; which were also mentioned before in the cure of the Plague, and other mali∣gnant Fevers. Lastly, Diet. the Diet should be the same as in malignant Fevers is expressed, and indeed the aliment to resist putrifaction should be dry; to abate the Fever, cold, and mixed with Cordials, or have cordial qualities: Wine in this Fever is hurtful, and for the most part those that refrain it not, die.
CHAP. XVI. Of a Malignant Fever with the Cramp. THere are likewise other malignant Fevers, A malig∣nant Fe∣ver with the Cramp. which had ac∣companied with them certain other diseases, namely the Cramp, Catarhs, a Cough, and the Squincy; for in the year 1596, and 1597. in the Bishoprick of Collen, West∣phalia, the County Waldestein, Wittenstein, and Hassia, there reigned a disease joyned with a Fever, which they then called die Kriebeltcranctheir, Kriempstsucht, oder Bi∣chende Senche. It seized upon men with a twitching and kind of benum∣medness in the hands and feet, somtimes on one side, somtimes on the other, and somtimes on both: Hence a Convulsion invaded men on a sudden when they were about their daylie employments, and first the fingers and toes were troubled, which Convulsion afterwards came to the arms, knees, shoul∣ders, hips, and indeed the whole body, until the sick would lie down, and roul up their bodies round like a Ball, or else stretch out themselves straight at length: Terrible pains ac∣companied this evil, and great clamours and schrietchings did the sick make; some vomited when it first took them. This disease somtimes continued some days or weeks in the limbs, before it seized on the head, although fitting medicines were administred; which if they were neglected, the head was then presently troubled, and some had Epilepsies, after which fits some lay as it were dead six or eight hours, others were troubled with drowsiness, others with giddiness, which continued till the fourth day, and beyond with some, which either blindness or deafness ensued, or the Palsie: When the fit left them, men were exceeding hungry contrary to nature; afterwards for the most part a looseness followed, and in the most, the hands and feet swell'd or broke out with swellings full of waterish hu∣mours, but sweat never ensued. This disease was infectious, and the infection would continue in the body being taken once, six, seven, or twelve moneths. This disease had its original from pestilential thin hu∣mours first invading the brain and all the nerves; The cause but those malignant humours proceeded from bad diet when there was scarcity of provision.
This disease was grievous, dangerous, and hard to be cured, for such as were stricken with an Epilepsie, were scarce totally cured at all, but at intervals would have some fits, and such as were troubled with deliriums, became stupid. Others eve∣ry yeer in the month of December and January, would be troubled with it. The Cure consisted in evacuating of the peccant humors, and corroborating of the Nerves. First, Cure. therefore the vitious humors are to be purged out of the first passages with Hermo∣dactils, Turbith, Spurge prepared, Diagrydium Electuary, called Diaphenicum, of the juyce of Roses, there being added Caster, Costus, seed of Rue and Commin. Afterwards Medicins against the Convulsion, were given of Piony, Birdly me of the Oak, Caster, Sage, Mans skull ad∣ding thereto medicines resisting malignity, with the root of Swallow-wort, Divels bit, Treacle, Mithridate; and so pur∣ging and altering medicines are to be taken by turns, and con∣tinued: The external parts were anointed and fomented with those medicines which were proper for other Convulsions.
CHAP. XVII. Of a malignant Fever, with a Catarrh, and a Cough, and the Squincy. SOmtimes an Epidemical Catarrh and Cough accompany Malignant Fevers; A malig∣nant Fe∣ver with a Catarrh and a Cough. such a Fever in the year 1510. 1557.  1580. and 1591. and especially in the year 1580. spread o∣ver most parts of Europe under the Northern Equinoctial And that disease was then called a Feverish Catarrh, and a Chatarrish Fever, also a suffocating Fever, der Bien und Schafshusten, Shafteranctheit und hus Nerwehe. This Fever came with heaviness in sleep, pain of the head, a dry cough, pain of the breasts, hoarseness, pain of the stomack, difficulty of breathing, which even when the cough ceased would continue till the fourteenth day. This Fever proceeded from the moistness of the fort-going years; The causes. for when peccant humours were cumulated in the bo∣dy, by reason of that irregularity of the ayr, and at length be∣came putred, and malignant, and adverse to the head and breast; thence a continued Fever was kindled, and with part of the peccant humours gotten into the brain and breasts, a ca∣tarrh and cough was generated. This disease, although most men had it, yet it was not mortal; for almost all men had it, and scarce one of a thou∣sand died therewith. This Fever was cured as other malignant Fevers, Cure. also by re∣garding the putrifaction and malignity, and lastly, in having respect to the head and breast, which were principally troubled with this Catarrh and Cough. Breathing a vein was not then proper, and it was found by experience, that for the most part they all died that were let blood. But lenitive purgers were proper, because the matter did reside in the first wayes; afterwards there was administred such things as might alter the matter in the head and breast, as use to be given for a Catarrh and a Cough, and those things that resisted malignity were not to be neglected. Lastly, A malig∣nant fever with a Squincy. sometimes a Squincy, Pleurisie, Peripneumonia, is joyned with a malignant Fever, and spreads over many places, as it hapned in the year 1348. as Fracastorius relates, and in
the year 1557. as Dodonaeus in chap. 21. of his observations witnesseth, and in the year 1564. likewise. VVhich Fevers for the most part did arise from the contra∣riety of ayr, and principally from its over-moist constrution, even as epidemial dysenteries arose from precedent driness of the ayr, such as hapned in the year 158, and 1626. Those Fevers were cured as others that were malignant. But this is to be noted besides, Cure. that regard must be taken of that part wherein the force of the disease or symptome joyned there∣with resides most, and the disease and symptome which accom∣pany the malignant Fever should be cured in the same manner as is propounded in the cure of particular diseases.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Cure of Symptomatical Fevers. LAstly, Symptomee of Fevers. there often happens in Fevers various symptomes, which are no less troublesome to the sick then the Fe∣vers themselves, and therefore they require cure by them∣selves, and should be taken away, or abated. Such are first pain of the head, too much watching profound sleep, delitiums, convulsions, pepsies, driness of the tongue, thirst, pain of the heart, looseness, faintings and swoonings: All which proceed from the humour that was the cause of the Fever, or from vapours and fumes proceeding from it, and so molesteth this or that part either with its plenty, excess of primary qua∣lities or malignancy. Universal Pugers first used, these symptomes are taken a∣way by revessing, repeling, eissipating that matter from the part affected, to the more remote parts; as need shall require that excess o qualities wherewith they are most troubled, to be altered and corrected, or even the malignity, if there be any, must be oppugne with contrary remedies, and the parts, if occasion requisie, strengthned; or the symptomes themselves must be resisted with proper remedies. All which how to be performed, in particular to explain, is beyond the purpose of our Institutions, but practical books should be advised with concerning it, and especially the cause of each symptome must be diligently sought out; because the same symptome often proceeds from divers causes; and moreover cannot always be be cured with the same Medicine. Glory and Thanksgiving be to God. FINIS.
