S2643 12172886 55476
A SERMON Preached upon The Fast-Day, June the 18th. 1690. By a Presbyter of the Church of England, that Swore in the Sincerity of his Heart, with a full satisfied Conscience, to King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Licensed July 15th. 1690. LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey. 1690.
PSALM LXII. Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1. Truly my soul waiteth upon God: from him cometh my salvation. 2. He onely is my rock and my salvation: he is my defence; I shall not be greatly moved. 3. How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence. 4. They onely consult to cast him down from his excellency, they delight in lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah. THE Book of Psalms is for divers weighty Reasons justly Sacred among Christians, for it contains all the natural necessary Doctrines of Holy Religion, it abounds with Pious Ejaculations proper for a Heavenly Mind in all conditions to offer up to God Almighty; and I doubt not but with some Church-men, is one of the first amongst the Hagiographa, since it's well-compos'd Anthems were duly us'd in the significant, and decent, and glorious Cele∣bration of the Judaic Ceremonial Divine Ser∣vice; indeed it is a Common-Prayer-Book, which a man would not wish to be alter'd (at least not, if exactly translated) like as the Author
of the better part of it was a Princely Person, than whom the twelve Tribes could not have elected a fitter to sit on the Throne of Israel, and Reign over the Lord's Inheritance: But how violent and restless was the Opposition of the Sons of Belial, in favour of Ishbosheth? They despis'd the Holy Oyl pour'd by the in∣spir'd Prophet on the Royal Head of David; they rebell'd against the so openly declar'd Pro∣vidence of God, and for two years made good their Rebellion, till the pretending Prince, un∣happy Son of an abdicated Monarch, impru∣dently provok'd his haughty General to a Fatal Revolt, which brought the body of the Nation to due conformity, for when the main Suppor∣ters of the Faction failed, the malepert under∣dealers in traiterous disobedience, presently hearkened to Reason, plainly discern'd their ne∣cessary Duty, and wisely consulted their valua∣ble Interest, as well as any of the more forward Elders of the House of Judah. It's probable that after this some few unquiet wretches met in close Cabals, laid secret Plots, pursued wicked Devices, struggled with weak Forces to dethrone the new∣chose King of Israel, but Israel's new-chose King was the reverse Image of his Predecessor Saul, was as careful of the Rights and Priviledges of his Liege People, as he formerly had been of the safety of his harmless Flocks; was as ready
to serve the King of Kings, as his Subjects could be to obey him in the due exercise of his Law∣ful Power: this secur'd his new-gain'd Kingdom, this set him free from the fear of being thrown down, headlong from the lofty Pinacle of Glo∣rious Honour, to which he was rais'd by the spe∣cial grace and favour of God, who inspir'd him with a Spirit of Wisdom, and Courage, and Ho∣nesty, which qualified him for that Command∣ing height, and dispos'd the hearts of the People to love, honour, and obey him: it's probable the murmuring Malecontents might sometimes promise themselves strange Success in attempting to overthrow his Righteous Settlement; it's more than probable they hugg'd themselves, when their Treacherous Malice dealing under∣hand with a Foreign Enemy, now and then di∣stress'd his Affairs, and taught his thoughtful Heart mournful Song, a slow-breath'd Tune of heavy Accents; but his Alexipharmacon, his Soveraign Remedy was always at hand, which was this— Truly my soul waiteth upon God, from him cometh my salvation, he is my defence, I shall not be greatly moved: then follows his Complaint, How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of you; as a bowing wall shall ye he, and a tottering fence. They only consult to thrust him down from his excellency, they delight in lies, they bless with their mouth, but they curse
inwardly, — plainly to declare the sense of this place, usefully to apply that part of the History of David's Life, to which they refer, is my pre∣sent purpose: Upon the two first Verses, we need not be beholding to the Critical Remarques of Interpreters, whose Learning may stand us in some stead in the Exposition of the latter — How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? The Greek word here is an ἅπαξ λεγόμενον ex∣tant only in this place, but meets with compre∣hensive large construction, Ye put upon a man, rush upon him, devise mischief, sorrow against him; against a man— a Poetical expression, speak∣ing of himself in the third Person, as if he had said, against me, David, a single, honest, and innocent man: Or, against me, David, who have shewn my self a man, a Champion against the Enemies of my King that was, and Coun∣try,— ye shall be slain all of you, — thus Passively rendred; this is a Prediction, or Imprecation, which had its event, as is to be seen in the Hi∣story of Kings, and the Psalmist's sundry Songs of Deliverance, — as a bowing wall shall ye be, and a tottering fence, which is easily thrown down, and utterly ruin'd. Others translate Actively, Ye do kill, or labour to slay me, like a ruinous Wall or Fence, you hang over me, threatning my utter ruine.— They only consult to thrust him down from his excellency, i. e. me from
my Highness, from my Royal Dignity, so the Dutch Annotators, nay, and Dr. Hammond Pa∣raphrases, to pull me from the Throne, to wrest the Regal Power out of my hand. Since Cri∣ticks of so different a temper suppose David, when he penn'd this Psalm, a crowned Head, I hope I may proceed on that Supposition. The Version, which by being in our Com∣mon-Prayer-Book, is become Infallible, has this expression — Whom God will exalt: With refe∣rence to which I shall consider how God exalted David, and whether God did not so act, as to leave it to the People to have some share in it; They delight in lies, they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly, i. e. with subtle and crafty Devices, Lies, and Calumnies, they seek to over-reach and ruine me, all and every of them, with their mouth congratulate me, wish me well, religiously own my Title, and in open Court swear Allegiance to me, but their hearts wander after the abdicated House of Saul; so that all their Humble Addresses are but cheating Formalities of Court-Flattery, and their pro∣fess'd Loyalty, a Canting term to palliate a cur∣sed Treason. The Words and Phrases of the Text being thus briefly explain'd, I will make no nice division of the same, by which too of∣ten the sense of God's Holy Word is crucified, and the patience of a Pious Auditory abus'd;
but among several weighty things, to the con∣sideration of which they invite, I shall select three as the most weighty, and confine my thoughts to them, and they are so worthy your attention, that if there were no defect in your Orator, you would listen with mighty expecta∣tion, and be fill'd in answerable measure with pleasing satisfaction. The first is, the exaltation of David to the Throne of Israel. The second, the desperate wickedness of the Enemies of the King, their contrivances to de∣throne him, and their palliating their black De∣signs with fair words. The third, David's assurance that he should not be greatly moved, but his Throne secur'd, and their rebellious Attempts punish'd. I will first offer my thoughts concerning the exaltation of David to the Throne of Israel; and 'tis necessary to begin with determining the Right of this; for if David did not ascend the Throne by Lawful means, then he unjustly com∣plains of the endeavours of the party of Ishbo∣sheth to dethrone him: And supposing the means Lawful, yet the nature of those Lawful means must be understood, else we shall not be able to judge concerning their Fact who oppos'd his Authority. Tho' I think none will question but that David ascended the Throne of Israel
by just and lawful means, yet it was two years before the generality of the People could be convinc'd of it. The Solemn Ceremony of Sa∣cred Unction, and the Testimony of a Righte∣ous Prophet that pour'd it down his Princely Temples, was not presently receiv'd as full Evi∣dence, whom God did design for the Jews to be their King; which is a Moral Demonstration to me, that when God indulg'd them a Change of Government, he did not absolutely over∣rule their Choice concerning the Person that should administer it; but retiring from his own more immediate Theocrasie, left the new Regu∣lation to be conducted by the ordinary Methods in use among Men. Was then the Sacred Unction to no end and purpose? Yes, to con∣siderable end and purpose, as may be very easily apprehended, for it satisfied David that God's gracious Providence was engag'd to exalt him: Fill'd now with the pleasing hope, and wrapt with the wondrous expectation of the mighty Blessing, his mind naturally rose to high thoughts, and sallied forth into bold Enterprises befitting a stout Warriour, and a glorious Monarch. There was something Divine in the Message which prepar'd David for the Regal Office, but that which had the immediate happy effect on the People, inclining them to offer him the Go∣vernment, was his true Piety, and successful
Vertue, his fervent Zeal for God's Worship, and his sensible concern for the Nations Safety; they saw no man so forward in regulating the Services of the Temple, no man his equal in Valour, when an uncircumcised Monster defied the Armies of the Living God; this brought off their Affections from the House of Saul, and the not well-known Son of the worthy Jona∣than. Had not such an unparallel'd Rival for Power advanc'd a Claim, it had probably de∣scended on Ishbosheth; but the Jews, who knew not the secret of the Divine Right of Succes∣sion, set by, fore-clos'd, excluded the nearest of Kin, not that they justly feared he had, or would endeavour to introduce a Foreign Enemy, and an Idolatrous Religion, but only (as near as we can guess) because he was not so well qualified to Protect them from their Hostile Neighbours, and to Administer Justice between man and man. Thus David succeeded Saul; not the eldest of his Loyns, no, nor his Son, but by Marriage of his Daughter. A special act of Providence open'd the way, and he ever after walked evenly, and made the best on't. The Jews either had forgot his being anointed, or never knew its meaning; but his Prodigious Victories were fresh in memory, he won Suffrages among the Tribes by ten thousands, i. e. as fast as he slew
Philistines. Nor was his Skill in Musick to be lightly esteemed, which often introduc'd him into the Presence, to his Advantage, though not without his Danger. Providence had the greatest hand in his Exaltation, yet the Peo∣ple's Choice was as free as it was good, and was as good as Heaven and Earth could make it. Change but some Names, and here you have the very Account of His Excellent Ma∣jesty King William's Accession to the Throne of England, with all its Dependencies. The wary, invidious, and injurious Jealousie of contriving States-men obscured his first years, with-held from him the due Honours of his Ancestors, and from his Country an useful Protection. David was not heard of, till Israel wanted a Champion to answer the proud Challenge of a big-fighting Lubber: Nor the Prince of Orange, the Subject of Publick Discourse, till his mad Opposers had ruined themselves, and betray'd their Nation. Divine Providence, and not Humane Fore-sight restored him to his Rights, and by him delivered a harrass'd People from the Lust of a faithless and bloody prevailing Invader. The Consecrating David by the Prophet Samuel was not a more immediate Call for him to signalize himself, as became a Candidate for Empire, than the Humble Invitation of our
Spiritual Guides, as well as Civil Patriots, was to the Prince to hasten to the Redemption of our devoted Lives and Liberties. For why? Samuel's knowledge of the mind of God, by whatever means it was revealed to him, could not be more certain and unquestionable, than our Reverend Prelates knowledge of the same, gathered from the plainest Revelation that ever was made in the Holy Scripture. There they learned that Rulers were constituted for the encouragement of good men, and for a terror to bad. There they learned to suffer with Pa∣tience hard measure from the hands of their unbelieving Authoritative Masters, but not to Sacrifice their Lives to the Lust of Arbitrary Usurpation, when Wisdom and Courage might as well preserve them. If an Invitation from such Persons, and thus grounded, was not equal to a Vision, or a Voice from Heaven, by which Deliverers were raised up among the Jews, why then the Gospel is a Cloud, and the Mi∣nistration under the Law was Sun-shine. As David was not only by receiving the Sacred Unction made to expect a Crown, but also from that time forward safely guarded, by a constant, signal, watchful Providence. So our Illustrious Deliverer, after his receiving a well-deliberated, Just, and Religious Address from the Flower of our Gentry, and the most Ve∣nerable
of the Clergy, was conducted by a special Providence, which loudly proclaim'd all along, that it was God who had raised him up, to restore our Israel, to deliver our Bodies from the Tyranny of Men, and our Souls from the Doctrines of Devils. The Wisdom of God infatuated the Counsels of his most Formidable Enemy, tempted that proud Son of Violence to slight the Design, which could not so well have been pursued, till his Forces were diverted; and when the Grand Disturber of Christendom was set down before Philipsburgh, the Power of God with astonishing Wonders steer'd the Protestant Prince's doubtful Course through all the dangers of the Deep: For the Storm which his first putting to Sea met with, some wretched Worshippers of Saints and Angels thanked the Virgin Mary, but really and truly God of his free Mercy sent it, which prevented the Happy Expedition no farther, than what serv'd to make the Violaters of our Laws and Liberties more imprudent and secure: And when afterwards a favourable brisk Gale had carried the Fleet beyond their Port, a contrary Wind was presently commissioned for a few hours, as if for no
other end but safely to land our Preservers. In the time of Saul, God was with David, and strengthed his Arm, so that his Sword made Prodigious Slaughter among the Phi∣listines. But in conducting the Prince to the Throne, whereon he is now righteously seated, Providence scattered the Enemy like Chaff before the Wind, and gave him a Victory which pleased him better than all he had won with the Sword, viz. a Victory without Blood. Thus far God was (if I may so speak) miraculously alone in the Advancement of the Prince toward the height of earthly Ho∣nour; and when the Eyes of the Oppressed Nation were fully open, he left it to them to Chuse their King, in the room of their unhappy misled Abdicator, and they were not disobedient to his Providence. To speak the truth of this whole matter briefly, it is manifest from what we read in Scripture concerning David, and what our Eyes have seen, and our Ears have heard relating to the Prince of Orange, that both the one and the other of them, were by the wonderful Providence of God called forth from their Private ways of Living, in
order to be made Kings, and the free Choice of their several People made them so. I come now to speak of the Second thing which I propounded from the Text, as most fit to be reflected on, that is, the desperate Wickedness of the Enemies of the King, their Contrivances to Dethrone, and their palliating their black Designs with fair Words. And here first I'le mention what Evidence we have of the Fact, and then touch some Circumstances which aggravate the Enormi∣ty of it. The Royal Psalmist gives us, sometimes with mournful Eloquence, being in the day of his Distress; sometimes with joyful Ac∣cents, being happily escap'd from Danger, large and passionate Accounts of the bold Attempts, and treacherous Contrivances of his Enemies: They mark'd his steps, thinking evil against him; i. e. they narrowly ob∣serv'd his conduct of Affairs, seeking occa∣sion to complain of his Male-administration. They wrested his word, and cast iniquity upon him; when no fault could be found, they put false colours upon things, and reproach∣ed him. They cursed him, they belied him, their teeth became spears, and their tongue a
sharp sword; i. e. they cursed him with so bitter Imprecations, they belied him with such abominable false Suggestions, that the plain signification of inartificial Words can∣not express it, and Metaphorical Language perhaps not sufficiently help us to guess at. They derided him, derided him for his very trust in the Lord; they consulted, they only consulted; i. e. they made it their chief aim with Hand and Heart, they endeavoured to cast him from the Throne, though God had exalted him, and the People had submitted unto him; and they that did this were many, and were strong, too many, and too strong for him; but that, He that hath God his hel∣per need not be afraid, though ten thousands of the strongest of the sons of men set themselves against him: though they palliate their De∣signs while they are in contrivance with fair words, and as often as they are disappointed forswear their unsuccessful Villany. Thus much, and more to the same purpose, is to be read in the Book of Psalms. The Historical part of the Old Testament has not very many instances, nor perhaps fully answering every Circumstance of so severe an Indictment; but I suppose that
was, because the Historical part is but a com∣pendious Extract out of Voluminous Re∣cords in the Archives of the Jews; and yet in the Royal Chronicle we have an Account of Absalom's Rebellion, of his insinuating Arts to steal the Affections of the People; his engaging (if I may use a Prolepsis) the Jewish Matchiavil to his Rebellion; but Matchiavil learned of Ahithophel, I therefore discharge my Allusion; Ahithophel is Name enough to brand a subtil Rebel. We read farther, how Shimei let loose a railing Tongue, and lifted up violent Hands against the di∣stressed King. And also how Sheba the Son of Bichri had likely to have shook the Throne more fatally than Absalom. Thus you have an Account of the matter of Fact charg'd against David's Enemies, their Fact admits aggravation from several Topicks — Is this the Man whom God rais'd up for the Uprightness of his Heart, when he rejected Saul for disobedience? Is this the Man, whose surprizing Valour fell'd a tall Monument of Pride down to the ground, before whom the whole Army of Israel trembled? Is this the Man whose Success and Triumphs became the theme of every
gladsom, honest Heart, when they thought upon the Dangers which they dreaded, and the Deliverance which they did not expect? Is this the Man, whom the People chose af∣ter Experience of his Merit, to Administer the Government, which they so much ad∣mir'd, that they preferred it before the Theo∣cracy it self; it might perhaps have been better for them, to have remained under God's Prophets a while longer; but when they would not be satisfied without a King, they could not have made a better Choice than David; yet even against David, David thus useful to his Country, David thus be∣loved of his God, the Flatterers of an Am∣bitious Son, and the unseasonable Abettors of Saul's House arose, and palliated, as they could, their vile purposes with fair words. Having thus spoke to the Second Head, I'le proceed, as I have begun, and joyn the Parallel. With equal wickedness as the rebellious Jews against David, unreasonable, unruly men, have consulted to cast down from his ex∣cellency, that's the word in our Translation, from his Throne, our Just and Lawful King, King William, whence otherwise were ne∣cessary
Impositions complain'd of, and the repayment of a Debt exclaim'd against, the Loan of which preserv'd our whole? Whence otherwise was his Royal Name cal∣led into uncharitable Parties, when he came to save the Nation? Whence else proceeded the many Forgeries of their Success, who were ever better at Forging than Fighting? Whence else flow'd remembrances to his Health, who forsook when he could not de∣stroy us, by Men, who had not a good word for him in the day of his Power? Whence else have disputing Tongues with the worst part of Ecclesiastical Skill raised a Dust to hide the fair and full appearance of a plain and necessary Duty? Is this the Man, whom glorious Providence in a wonderful manner brought from a Private Retirement, to vindicate Oppressed States and Soveraign∣ties? In a word, Is this the Man, whom the most Honourable, and the most Wealthy, the most Honest, and the most Brave, the most Learned, and the most Pious, invited hither, or approved the Invitation, to save from Devastation, and from Fire, our Land, our Laws, our Liberties, our Bibles, our Lives—Good God! what desperate Wicked∣ness
is this, that People obliged equal to their wishes, but much beyond their expectation, should entertain an unthankful rebellious thought against their successful Preserver and Defender of these near Concerns? What Villany is it beyond the reach of words to brand with sufficient Reproach that unquiet Ahithophel, Shimei's, and Sheba's, should con∣sult, and strive to throw him down whom God by amazing Miracles advanced to Roy∣alty, who succeeded on the Throne over us, both by an Hereditary Right, and an uncor∣rupted Election? What black and new-in∣vented sin is this (deserving Punishment, I will not name, since his God-like Mercy can remit) that they who have acknowledg'd the Hereditary Right of King William, and elected his particular for their King, in the vacancy of the Throne, by the majority of their Representatives, and taken their Cor∣poral Oath, many of them, to defend him, should defie their Oaths, and give their Con∣science the Lie, in Passion for a Tyrannous Bigott, whom they always resisted after they had made him King, and never began to love, till they had lent their helping hand to make him none. David's Enemies gave him great
and frequent occasion of Complaint, but no Affliction of his was so circumstanced as that related in the 55 Psalm, where he mourn∣fully Expostulates thus. It was not an Ene∣my that reproached me, then I could have born it; neither was it he that hated me, that did magnifie himself against me, then I would have hid my self from him: But it was thou, O man, my equal, my guide, and my acquaintance, we took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company. How may a Pa∣rallel-complaint be taken up, by him that is, how much soever oppos'd, both in Right and Fact our King? It was not an open Enemy only, not one alone that profess'd to hate me, that magnified himself against me; this would not have so much surprized me, nor so nearly have affected my mind; it was not a Babylonish Idolater, nor a Gothick Barba∣rian, nor such a senseless Picture of Huma∣nity as Juverna draws upon cold Boggs, that consulted to thrust me away, whom God hath exalted; but it was thou, of late the Reformation's chief Support and Hope, whose labouring, over-loaded, and only not yielding strength I hastened to relieve, but O my Soul, now while I build up, thou pul∣lest
down. David concludes with Prophe∣tick Rage, Let, &c. our Liege Lord with winning Mercy, be forgiven — may his Mer∣cy prevail over all his Enemies, over him their hatred never, it never shall; for to him and David one and the same assurance remains fast; Truly my soul waiteth upon God, from him cometh my salvation, he is my defence, I shall not be greatly moved; and this is the third and last Head to be considered. And first, with respect only to the Royal Psalmist, and then to his Parallel. Assurance is not always well grounded; nothing is more usual than to see the confi∣dent frustrated of their pleasing expectati∣ons, and betray'd into sudden and surprizing Misery: But David's assurance was just, rea∣sonably, and safely relied upon; it had for its support, not partial self-love, which con∣strues all things in its own favour; nor proud contempt, which lessens the real strength of an Enemy till the Battel is joyn'd, and then finds it powerfully increas'd: not unactive security, which ruines the very Favourites of Providence, notwithstanding their vast Advantages. David's Assurance was upheld by these two mighty Pillars, the Power and
the Promise of God, the fram of Nature does not stand firmer; his Royal Breast har∣bour'd no partial self-love, for he speaks of himself in words of the lowest Humility, and admires the Divine Goodness, which took him from the Sheep-folds, from following the Ewes great with young, to feed Israel his Peo∣ple, and Jacob his Inheritance: reflecting on the uncertain state of his own Affairs, he fear'd his Enemies, complain'd of their num∣ber, and their strength, he was not unactive and secure; for though he trusted not in his Bow, yet he drew the feather'd Arrow to the head, and bravely laid about him with his Sword, the Sword he won from the Mon∣strous Philistine, and with it lopt off the proud Head of its Master, but he piously own'd his Salvation to have come from the assistance of the Lord of Hosts. How weak soever a man is in himself, and his Friends, yet he must needs be safe if God Almighty condescend to be his Protector, and to fight his Battels. Unto David God often promi∣sed his Protection, upon Conditions, which no man more diligently made it his business to perform than he; well might he therefore upon the examination of his own Heart, and
consciousness of his Righteousness and trust in God, rest satisfied, that after all the sub∣tile contrivances, and bold efforts of his Ad∣versaries, he should not be greatly moved; if troubled, yet not over-power'd; if di∣stressed, yet not ruined; if assaulted, yet not dethron'd: Well might he, reflecting on the unjust and impious daring of his Adversaries, conclude, Surely men of low degree are va∣nity, and men of high degree are a lie. Our Righteous King sits on the English with like assurance, as David on the Throne of Israel, beloved of all, even beyond the Lines of the Reformation, though no self-lover; as well acquainted with the Strength and Treachery of one Enemy, as with the Cow∣ardize and Treachery of another, a vigilant Observer, and an indefatigable Providitator against both. But after all his Warlike Pro∣visions, after all his Powerful Alliances, the bravery of his Worthies, and the Courage of his Army, and the steadiness of his own stout Heart and Hand, he places his grand Satisfaction in the Justness of his Cause, and fixes his Trust and Confidence in the Bles∣sing of God Almighty, therefore has he ap∣pointed a Monthly Fast to be observed, as
his Proclamation informs us, in a most So∣lemn and Devout manner for Supplicating Almighty God for the Pardon of our sins, and for imploring his Blessing and Protection in the Preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and the Prosperity of his Arms in Ireland, and the Naval Forces. What can I advance more on this Argument, than is already set before you, in that excellent Form of Prayer which we have this day used. St. Matthew says of our Saviour, That coming to a certain place in his own Country, he could do no mighty works there, because of the peoples unbelief. Oh let it not be said of our Gra∣cious Soveraign, that he has Victoriously led Armies of several Nations, and done Won∣ders for the Protestant Interest abroad, but could not compleat the Settlement of these now his three Kingdoms, because of our cry∣ing sins here at home, our Heats and Animo∣sities, our careless way of Living, our un∣charitable way of Censuring; our Disputes and Cavils, our Discontents and Murmurings, our secret Luxury, and our publick Railing, our gainsaying Authority, and worshipping Names given to Change when they become obstinate in an Error. Remove from us, O
God, these and all other our Offences, where∣by we have dishonoured thee, not duly ho∣noured our Soveraigns, King William and Queen Mary, troubled the Peace of the State, hindred the Success of our Land and Naval Forces, wronged our Brethren, or abused our selves, so shall we have hope in thy Mercy; incline us to be hearty in worship∣ping thee, to be careful that our Lives be henceforth reform'd as well as our Profession; so though our Enemies rage, yet they shall imagine but a vain thing; so though they set themselves together against us, yet shall they not prevail, but we shall be saved both we and our King. I cannot but add a word upon occasion of the Happy Success of our Forces in Ireland, under the Conduct of our Lawful King Wil∣liam, whose Subjects we are by the justest and wisest Act that ever the Representatives of English-men made. Blessed be the Lord God of Heaven, who hath heard the Prayers of all the truly Loyal and Honest Men in the Kingdom, who hath given them their Hearts desire, and hath not denied them the request of their Lips, in
covering their valiant and forward King's Head in the Day of Battel, in protecting his Life, in which their Safety was bound up, (which Life was in eminent danger, and ve∣ry near being took away, as if to shew us how unworthy we are of him, and to affect us with a true sense of the many Deliveran∣ces which Almighty God, the God of Hosts, by his Warlike Hand worketh for us,) in scattering the Troops of that unhappy man's profligate Adherents, who fights now only for a Power to destroy us; in blasting the pernicious Hopes and cursed Prayers of un∣reasonable, unconstant, unquiet, discontent∣ed Men, who might have every thing pro∣per to make them easie, could they but be so, without the Power to Lord it over the Faith of their Brethren; in frustrating a se∣dulously-labour'd Bloody, Foreign Invasion, by secret vile Practises brought about from the most barbarous Tyrant, that ever own'd the Name of Christian. May these ineffable Mercies of the Di∣vine Providence, which so carefully, and tenderly watcheth over the Kingdom of Eng∣land, as also over other Reformed Churches, and Injur'd States, be ever marvellous in our
Eyes, so marvellous, as to cause us, when we cannot comprehend them, to endeavour to express a quick, lively, becoming, and pious sense of them, in all Humble Obedi∣ence to the Commands of our God in Scrip∣ture, in all Loyalty to our King, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, in due com∣pliance to those Laws, according to every Capacity wherein they concern us,—by which Laws, (the best of Laws I believe) may He, the best of Kings undoubtedly, long Reign over us, and let all the People, who fear God, Honour King William, and say Amen.
Postscript. THE Scandalous neglect of the due Observance of the late enjoyn'd Monthly Fast prompted a Person of Honour, and good Affection to our Ancient English Government, as it is now happily settled under King William and Queen Mary, to recommend to the Author of this Sermon, the Penning and Preaching a Discourse suit∣able to the Solemnity. In the late Reign 'twas not an Angry Mo∣narch could restrain the Clergy from thank∣fully Commemorating (as it well became them) the Fifth of November's Deliverance: But a late enjoyn'd Fast, to beg Pardon of our sins, that they might not hinder the hap∣py course of King William's Victories, by which our Laws and Lives have been rescued from Violence, and are from Violence de∣fended, has been not only not Observ'd, but also in some places, with contemptuous fro∣wardness a great deal worse used, than shall be mentioned, unless the Proof be required, by such as did it without shame, and would without shame deny it.
To the Printing this honest, tho' mean and plain Discourse, the Author was obstinately averse, alledging some excuses, which were allow'd, even by them, that loved him too much, and importuned him dangerously; yet at last he chose, unask'd, to Print, being over∣ruled by an Accident, which, tho' he does not publish, he is willing to declare to any Per∣son, that may perchance discover his Name, and accuse him, as a pragmatical, medling Fellow, beyond what his particular Station in the World, might be reasonably construed to warrant. He thinks it reasonable that every Writer be oblig'd to set his Name to what he Prints, that so the Publick may have satisfaction, if injur'd; but he uses a liberty commonly ta∣ken, both because the Book-seller promises to get the Trifle Licensed, and also, for that, as he does not seek to be commended (of which indeed there's no danger) so neither is he fond of hard censure, which yet he does not much suspect from the Friends of the pre∣sent Settlement, and in point of deserving, has no need to fear from the Jacobite-People, who are certainly the worst of Christians, and of Philosophers the most absurd, — of
Philosophers the most absurd, for they have, now this long time debauch'd their Reason, by giving Credit to false News concerning the late King's Northern Forces, Foreign Aids, and Irish numbers; by believing the French King's Irresistibility, Heaven defend them from taking up Infallibility, which the Popes may chance to Iay down, if the Succession goes on in one or two good Choices more. I call them the worst of Christians, the For∣midable French Fleet now in our Seas, evinces it. When we have weather'd the Storm, (which a Providential Wind in greatest part diverted) and of which, blessed be God, there is now no great danger, it is to be ho∣ped, that the unnatural raisers of it will re∣cover their Senses, and outwardly at least ab∣hor their unsuccessful Villany, or else be forc'd to be so far Loyal as inability to do great mischief amounts to. If any man should seem to wonder at this piece of Zeal from a Clergy-man against the faults of some of his Brethren, he bids this Reply be made. He has been often in the Company of Men of Quality, great Learning, and fair Estates, amongst whom he has often heard the Clergy censur'd, for an unhappy, un∣quiet
Order, who have been in very great part, in all times Authors of the Troubles and Calamities of the Nation; he thereupon resolv'd, if ever it fell in his way, to offer one word on behalf of the Settlement, con∣ducive (as far as he is able) to the Security of the same, which he is glad that some Eminent Clergy-men with better Abilities, do honestly frequently endeavour; and he wishes that more would do so, were it but for this reason, That the Lord's peculiar In∣heritance (as they call themselves) may no longer stink in the nostrils of the People. FINIS. Some Books Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey, London. INstitutio Grammaticae ad Juventutis captum summo studio & arti∣ficio concinnata. In qua artis Ratio, & genuina Notio accuratè dis∣quiritur atque enucleatim enodatur. Per A. M. M. A. In Octavo. The Map of Man's Misery: Or, The Poor Man's Pocket-Book. Being a Perpetual Almanack of Spiritual Meditations, or Compleat Directory for one endless Week. Containing many useful Instructi∣ons and Prayers, plainly shewing every Christian so to walk, that he may please God. Twelves. Man's whole Duty, and God's wonderful intreaty of him there∣unto: Set forth from 2 Cor. 5.20. By Daniel Burgesse, Minister of the Word of Reconcillation. Twelves. Advice to Parents and Children: Being the sum of several Ser∣mons, by the same Author. In Twelves.
